==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis
Ab-initio simulations of bond
dynamics in solvated metal
complexes
Author
Mikkel Theis Hansen (s163976)
Supervisor
Postdoc Asmus Ougaard Dohn
Department of Physics, DTU
Co-supervisor
Sr. Researcher Kristoﬀer Haldrup
Department of Physics, DTU
June 30th, 2021
==PAGE:2==
I
Abstract
This thesis investigates the coordination and bond characteristics of the exotic
[AgPt2(P2O5H2)4]−3 complex (shorthand Ag-PtPOP) and related species using
density-functional-theory (DFT) based Born-Oppenheimer-molecular dynamics (BOMD) sim-
ulations in both vacuum and aqueous solution using the quantum-mechanical/molecular-
mechanical (QMMM) simulation framework. The DFT calculations are carried out in the
GPAW DFT code using the BLYP functional, LCAO-mode, D3 dispersion correction and
maximum-overlap-method to treat excited states. Geometric relaxations, Kohn-Sham or-
bitals from QMMM simulations and analysis of potential energy surfaces (PES) suggest that
Ag-PtPOP in the ground state in both vacuum and solution exhibits a side-on, bi-dental
coordination between the Ag-atom and two oxygen atoms on the side of the PtPOP com-
plex. While it was not possible to calculate a PES for the excited state complex in solution,
geometric relaxations, Kohn-Sham orbitals and tentative results from QMMM excited state
simulations indicate that the axial exciplex is binding, and that the side-coordinated Ag-
atom dissociates upon excitation. Geometric relaxations of the axial exciplex yield a Pt-Pt
bond distance of 2.97 ˚A, longer than in previous experimental and simulation-based studies,
while the Ag-Pt bond of 2.75 ˚A is in between results from previous studies. Analysis of PESs
of the axial complex suggest a stabilizing eﬀect of solvation, increasing the bond energy of
the ground state Ag-Pt bond from 1.18 eV to 1.29 eV, while the energy diﬀerence between
ground and excited states in vacuum was found to be 0.6 eV, indicative of a more strongly
binding exciplex. Further studies should attempt to calculate potential energy surfaces for
the exciplex while in solution using both continuous and explicit solvent models, and con-
tinue QMMM simulations of the exciplex to further the understanding of the Ag-Pt bond.
In particular, the strength of the axial exciplex Ag-Pt bond and the eﬀect of explicitly mod-
elled solvent molecules on the formation of the bond should be investigated. Conclusively,
this work presents an optimistic outlook on continued simulation based studies of the elu-
sive like-charged d8-d10 bonding between silver and platinum, potentially leading us to new
fundamental knowledge of chemical bonding and complexation.
==PAGE:3==
II
Resum´e
Denne afhandling undersøger koordinationen og bindingskarakteristika for det eksotiske
[AgPt2(P2O5H2)4]−3 kompleks (forkortet Ag-PtPOP) og lignende konﬁgurationer ved hjælp
af densitets-funktional-teori (DFT) baserede Born-Oppenheimer-molekylær-dynamik simu-
leringer i b˚ade vakuum og vandig opløsning inden for rammerne af den kvantemekanisk
/molekylærmekaniske (Engelsk: QMMM) metode. DFT beregningerne er udført i GPAW DFT
kodesystem med BLYP funktionalet, LCAO-modus, D3 dispersionskorrektion og den s˚akaldte
’maximum-overlap’-metode til beregning af exciterede tilstande. Geometriske strukturbereg-
ninger, Kohn-Sham orbitaler fra QMMM simuleringer og analyse af potentialenergioverﬂader
(Engelsk: PES) antyder, at sølvatomet i Ag-PtPOP i grundtilstanden i b˚ade vakuum og
opløsning koordinerer via en bi-dental binding til to oxygen-atomer p˚a siden af PtPOP kom-
plekset. Mens det var ikke muligt at beregne PES for exciterede tilstande i opløsning, s˚a
tyder resultater fra geometriske strukturberegnigner, inspektion af Kohn-Sham orbitaler og
foreløbige resultater fra QMMM beregninger af exciterede tilstande p˚a, at det aksielle exciplex
er bindende, og at sølvatomet dissocierer fra sin side-koordinerede position ved excitering.
Geometriske strukturberegninger af det aksielle exciplex i vakuum angiver Pt-Pt afstanden til
at være 2.97 ˚A, længere end tidliger eksperimentelle og simuleringsbaserede resultater, mens
Ag-Pt afstanden blev fundet til 2.75 ˚A, som ligger mellem resultater fra de tidligere studier.
Analyse af potentialenergioverﬂaderne af de aksielle komplekser tyder p˚a, at opløsning har
en stabiliserende eﬀekt, som øger bindingsenergien af Ag-Pt bindingen i grundtilstanden fra
1.18 eV til 1.29 eV, mens energiforskellen i bindingen er 0.6 eV fra grundtilstand til exciteret
tilstand, hvilket tyder p˚a stærkere binding i exciplekset. Videre undersøgelser bør forsøge at
beregne potentialenergioverﬂader af exciplekset i opløsning i b˚ade kontinuerte og eksplicitte
solventmodeller, og fortsætte QMMM simuleringerne af exciplekset for at fremme forst˚aelse
af Ag-Pt bindingen. Her anbefales et særligt fokus p˚a styrken af bindingen og p˚a eﬀekten
af den eksplicitte solventbeskrivelse p˚a bindingsdannelsen. Samlet set præsenterer det fore-
liggende arbejde et optimistisk syn p˚a fremtidige simuleringsbaserede studier af den ﬂygtige
d8-d10 binding mellem sølv og platin, som kan lede os til ny grundlæggende viden om kemisk
binding og kompleksdannelse.
==PAGE:4==
III
CONTENTS
Contents
Abstract
I
Resum´e
II
1
Introduction and background
1
1.1
The bi-metallic complex PtPOP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
The Ag-PtPOP complexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
The advent of ultra-fast atomic studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Density functional theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5
Ab-initio molecular dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6
QMMM simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.7
Outline of thesis and overview of contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2
Simulation methods and tools
13
2.1
Tools for DFT - ASE and GPAW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.1.1
Selection of functionals and basis sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Excited state DFT - The maximum overlap method . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
The D3 dispersion correction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
QMMM implementation in GPAW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Initial and preparational studies
19
3.1
Convergence study of energy and bond distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Timing study and selection of parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Excitation and convergence with Gaussian smearing MOM . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Vacuum MD of PtPOP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4
Results - Studies in vacuum
27
4.1
Geometric relaxations - structure comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.1
Energies of Ag-PtPOP species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.2
Bond lengths of Ag-PtPOP species . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Excited state molecular dynamics of Ag-PtPOP in vacuum . . . . . . . . . .
30
==PAGE:5==
IV
CONTENTS
5
Results - QMMM simulations
32
5.1
QMMM ground state simulation of axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3 . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
QMMM ground state simulation of side [Ag,H+PtPOP]−2
. . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Excited state QMMM molecular dynamics of Ag-PtPOP . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6
Discussion of results
40
6.1
Potential energy surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.1.1
Technical details of PES calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.1.2
Fitting the PES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.3
Visualization of the PES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Analysis of the QMMM MD with Ag-Pt bond constraint . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
Bond strengths and thermal kinetic energy of the solvent . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7
Conclusion and outlook
52
8
Appendix
55
==PAGE:6==
1
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
1
Introduction and background
The following sections provide an introduction to the work carried out in this thesis, namely
the complexes to be studied and the tools to be used. First, background information on the
platinum complex PtPOP and the related Ag-PtPOP is presented, focusing mainly on their
structure and structural dynamics.
In particular, disagreements in the current literature
on the structure of Ag-PtPOP are highlighted and used to motivate further investigations.
The second part of the introduction serves as a brief introduction to ab-initio simulation
methods and how they can be used to investigate PtPOP and Ag-PtPOP in both vacuum
and solution. Finally, an outline of the thesis is presented, providing an overview of the
thesis, its motivations and contributions.
1.1
The bi-metallic complex PtPOP
Since the late 1970s [1], the bi-metallic Pt(II) µ-diphosphito complex [Pt2(P2O5H2)4]−4,
named PtPOP, has attracted the attention of the scientiﬁc community, who were ﬁrst drawn
to its green luminescence and later to its photophysical properties and potential as a catalyst
[2, 3]. Figure 1 shows three diﬀerent PtPOP complexes, the regular PtPOP (A) along with
two conﬁgurations of Ag-PtPOP (B,C). In all three, the platinum (II) centres both bond
to four phosphorous atoms in a square planar conﬁguration, creating a ligand scaﬀolding
consisting of two phosphorous rings.
In the ground state, the electrons populate an anti-bonding dσ∗HOMO, resulting in a
weak, low bonding order Pt-Pt bond, which hardly perturbs the square planar coordination.
Upon excitation to a binding pσ-orbital, the Pt-Pt bond is strengthened, causing a contraction
of the Pt-Pt distance, which is counterbalanced by a build up of stress in the the bridging
ligands [2, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Figure 2 shows a suggested molecular orbital diagrams for PtPOP in
the left-most diagram A) and the excitation from anti-bonding dσ∗to a binding pσ-orbital.
The Pt-Pt bond length is previously measured using X-ray scattering and femtosec-
ond spectroscopy methods to be dgs
PtPt = 2.9 −3.0 ˚A in the ground state, contracting to
des
PtPt = 2.7−2.8 ˚A upon excitation [7, 8]. Promotion of an electron from the dσ∗-orbital cre-
ates an excited singlet state S1 (lifetime τS1 ∼10−30 ps)[8], which by symmetry is forbidden
to perform inter-system crossing (ISC) to the excited triplet state T1 (lifetime τT1 ∼10 µs)
[9]. The triplet state is believed to be the catalytically active state [5], capable of extracting
hydrogen from metal hydrides, dehydrogenate secondary alcohols and abstract hydrogen and
==PAGE:7==
2
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Figure 1: PtPOP and the proposed structures for Ag-PtPOP. The Pt-centres coordinate
to the P-atoms in a square planar constellation. In the axial conﬁguration, the Ag-atom
coordinates along the Pt-Pt axis, whereas the side structure suggested by Kruppa entails a
coordination to several O-atoms on the side. Here, the three closest O-atoms are labelled 10,
17 and 27 respectively for later reference.
halogen atoms [4, 3, 2]. Following excitation, the singlet state has been observed in fem-
tosecond spectroscopy to perform vibrational cooling by harmonic Pt-Pt stretch oscillation
at frequency T es = 224 fs [8].
1.2
The Ag-PtPOP complexes
Following the ﬁrst studies of PtPOP in the late 1980s, discoveries were made of metal-PtPOP
exciplexes, for example Au-PtPOP or Tl-PtPOP, where the added metal atoms were found to
aﬀect luminescence measurements [10, 11]. Exciplexes is shorthand for excited complex, and
it was postulated that these Tl-PtPOP and Au-PtPOP exciplexes in fact exhibited binding
of like-charged metal d8 and d10 atoms, in these cases Tl-Pt and Au-Pt bonds, which was
a novel discovery. Both Clodfelter and Pettijohn argued that the metal-atoms were coor-
dinating axially in the exciplexes, since the excited state of the Pt-atoms facilitated good
orbital mixing with the Tl or Au-atoms. Figure 2 A) shows the dσ∗and pσ-orbitals of the
Pt-atoms in the excited state, which Clodfelter argues mixes to higher bond order with the
isoenergetic ﬁlled 6s-orbital and unﬁlled 6pz-orbitals of the Tl-atom. Pettijohn agrees, and
==PAGE:8==
3
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Figure 2: Suggested molecular orbital diagram of species A) and B) from ﬁgure 1 reproduced
with permission from P. Lenzen in unpublished work. The Ag-atom mixes its 5s-orbital
between the anti-bonding dσ∗and bonding pσ orbital of the PtPOP complex, changing the
bond dynamics along this axis. Molecular orbital diagram for the side coordinated structure
not shown due to uncertainty on the nature of the bonding.
postulates a similar binding scheme for the Au-PtPOP exciplex. The right side of ﬁgure 2
shows this binding scheme applied to the exciplex Ag-PtPOP, mixing the Pt-orbitals with the
5s-orbital of the Ag-atom, recreated from yet unpublished work by P. Lenzen in the research
group with which this project is aﬃliated. Christensen et al. (2010) [12] follow this scheme,
and use X-ray scattering data from an aqeuous solution of Ag and PtPOP to support the
argument that the Ag-atom coordinates along the Pt-Pt axis (’Axial’ conﬁguration, see ﬁgure
1 B). Christensen et al ﬁnd the exciplex to have a Ag-Pt distance of 2.47 ˚A, and a lengthened
Pt-Pt bond distance of 2.84±0.08 ˚A compared to the regular excited PtPOP complex, which
was previously found to have a Pt-Pt distance of 2.75±0.03 ˚A[7]. A lengthening of the Pt-Pt
distance would be expected from a transfer of electron density from the Pt-Pt bond towards
the Ag-Pt bond. In any case, both distances are shorter than the ground state PtPOP com-
plex Pt-Pt distance of 2.9 −3.0 ˚A, in agreement with the increased bond order predicted by
the MO-diagrams. Kong et. al (2012) [13] employed TF-DFT calculations to optimize the
axial structure in both gas phase and aqueous solution, and found Pt-Pt distances of 2.82
==PAGE:9==
4
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
˚A and 2.79 ˚A for the Ag-PtPOP exciplex in gas phase and aqueous solution respectively,
which is largely in agreement with the experimental data from [7, 12]. Their Ag-Pt distances
however, were found to be 2.88 ˚A and 2.87 ˚A in gas phase and aqueous solution respectively,
both much longer than Christensens reported 2.47 ˚A from 2010 [12]. Drawing the HOMO
and LUMO orbitals of the Ag-PtPOP exciplex, they showed the formation of the bonding
pσ-bond between the two platinum atoms responsible for the contraction, while the Ag-Pt
bond extracts electron density from the Pt-Pt bond, breaking the previous symmetry and
forming a stronger bond. While Kong in fact draw the orbitals for the ground state Ag-
PtPOP complex, they do not comment on its properties nor if they ﬁnd evidence of binding
between the Ag and Pt atoms.
Kruppa et al. (2016) [14] investigate [Ag,H+PtPOP]−2 among other PtPOP species in gas
phase using electrospray mass ionization spectrometry and UV photo-induced dissociation
and ﬁnd no bathochromic shift of the spectral band from the Pt-Pt bond in the ground state,
meaning there is no shift of electronic density away from the Pt-Pt bond. This would imply
that there is no axial Ag-Pt in the ground state. Instead, they use TF-DFT to ﬁnd that a
side coordinated Ag, see ﬁgure 1 C, has a minimal energy, and is therefore the most likely
ground state conﬁguration. Upon photo-excitation, they ﬁnd evidence of Ag disassociation,
which stands in contrast to the exciplex formations observed by Clodfelter, Pettijohn and
Christensen (2010). From TF-DFT calculations of the side coordinated structure, Kruppa
and colleagues observe a bi-dental O-Ag-O bond on the side of the complex with bond lengths
of 2.27 −2.29 ˚A, while a third O is situated close at a distance of 2.73 ˚A, see respectively
O10, O17 and O27 on ﬁgure 1 C. Additionally, they report a Pt-Pt distance of 3.03 ˚A, largely
unchanged from the 3.05 ˚A of the regular PtPOP ground state complex. Figure 3 shows the
plane spanned by these three O-atoms and the corresponding vector from their average posi-
tion to the side coordinated Ag-atom. This distance, shorthand ’Ag-O’ distance, will be used
to characterize the distance from the Ag-atom to the ligand oxygen atoms in later sections.
Kruppa also note that [PtPOP]−4 is unstable in gas phase, whereas the protonated
[2H+PtPOP]−2 and [Ag,H+PtPOP]−2 complexes are more stable.
The species discussed
by Christensen et al (2010) is the unprotonated [Ag+PtPOP]−3.
It is possible that the
species observed by Christensen was in fact protonated, prompting investigations of both the
unprotonated −3-charge and protonated −2-charge species in this work. Finally, Kruppa
==PAGE:10==
5
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Figure 3: Illustration of the ’O-plane’ and the corresponding Ag-O-plane distance, which
characterizes the Ag-atom’s distance to the presumed bi-dental or tri-dental Ag-O bonds
responsible for the side coordinated complexation proposed by Kruppa.
The distance is
measured as the distance from the Ag-atom to the mean position of the three O-atoms
labelled O10, O17 and O27.
and colleagues call for ”systematic investigation of solvent eﬀects”, as they only investigate
the compounds in gas phase.
Thus, we have on one side a history of supporting evidence for bonding M-PtPOP exci-
plexes, which favor axial coordination, and on the other side Kruppas ﬁndings supporting a
side conﬁguration of the Ag-atom in the ground state, which disassociates upon excitation.
Whether the Ag is coordinated axially or on the side matters not just for sake of correct
cataloging; knowing the structure allows for much better interpretation of derived experi-
ments such as X-ray scattering and spectroscopy. If the Ag is in fact coordinated axially,
investigations of the Ag-Pt bond could be a great addition to the understanding of transition
metal bonding, a greatly interesting topic as expressed excitedly by Clodfelter and Pettijohn
in their original papers. If excitation does not facilitate bonding, the molecular orbital di-
agrams shown in ﬁgure 2 must be reevaluated and possibly revised. The work presented in
this thesis is strongly motivated to advance this discussion: When does Ag bind to PtPOP,
==PAGE:11==
6
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
in which conﬁguration and what is the eﬀect of solvation? If binding does in fact occur, what
can it teach us about the exotic like-charged bonding between d8 and d10 metal atoms and
complexation in general? To answer these questions and more, we will delve into the ﬁeld of
molecular dynamics simulations as will be introduced next.
1.3
The advent of ultra-fast atomic studies
Atomic dynamics, which happen on a femtosecond time scale (1 fs = 10−15 s) are, suﬃce
to say, incredible fast, and diﬃcult to investigate. The ﬁrst experiments with femtosecond
resolution were performed in the late 1980s by A. H. Zewail, who was awarded the 1999
Nobel prize in chemistry for his eﬀorts.
This was the advent of ultra-fast spectroscopy,
which has since then allowed observations of chemical bond formation and other forms of
atomic dynamics in their native tempo. Interpretation of such ultra-fast spectroscopic data,
is however, a challenge, as complex inverse problems usually are, leading to industrious
and continuous eﬀorts to develop computational simulations, which can assist data analysis.
Simulations provide insights into underlying physical mechanisms, and are thus an important
tool for not only theoretical developments, but also for analysis of experiments. One family
of accurate simulation methodologies are ab-initio simulations, a term ﬁrst coined by chemist
Robert Parr [15]. In his ﬁrst use of the term, ab-initio calculations are calculations using only
physical constants rather than higher order material parameters as input, and encompass a
wide variety of highly accurate computational frameworks such as Hartree-Fock, coupled
cluster and density functional theory (DFT), the latter of which will be used in this project.
1.4
Density functional theory
DFT has been used for decades, in particular in the ﬁeld of solid state physics, to yield
powerful insights into atomic structures, their energies and other properties. Since the 1990s,
DFT has struck a balance between accuracy and speed, leading it to become one of, if not the
most widely used electronic structure calculation method. DFT is central to the simulations
carried out in this work, and thus a brief introduction is in order. The time-dependent,
non-relativistic Schr¨odinger equation governing a system’s wave-function Ψ reads as:
iℏ∂
∂t|Ψ⟩= H|Ψ⟩, =
h
ˆTn + ˆHe
i
|Ψ⟩
(1.4.1)
==PAGE:12==
7
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
where the Hamiltonian H consists of a kinetic term for the nuclei ˆTn and the electronic
Hamiltonian He. In a system of M nuclei and N electrons, the electronic Hamiltonian is
(setting the electron mass, Coulomb’s constant, Planck’s constant and elementary charge to
unity, and letting Zi refer to the mass of nucleus i):
ˆHe =
h
ˆTe + Vne + Vee + Vnn
i
=
" N
X
i=1

−1
2∇2
i

−
N
X
i=1
M
X
j=1
Zi
|ri −Rj| +
N
X
i>j
1
|ri −rj| +
M
X
i>j
ZiZi
|Ri −Rj|
#
,
(1.4.2)
and describes the kinetic, electron-nuclear, electron-electron and nuclear-nuclear energy terms
respectively, the latter of which is a constant in the adiabatic approximation, which we shall
return to. DFT calculates the electron density of an auxiliary system consisting of non-
interacting single-electrons.
This system of non-interacting electrons is governed by the
Kohn-Sham equations:

−1
2∇2
i + Veff(r)

φi(r) = εiφi(r),
(1.4.3)
resulting in an electron density given by:
ρ(r) =
X
i
fi|φi(r)|2,
(1.4.4)
where fi are the orbital occupation numbers. The eﬀective potential Veff in equation (1.4.3)
ensures that the resulting electron densities of the two systems are identical, and is expressed
as:
Veff(r) = Vne(r) +
Z
ρ(r′)
|r −r′|dr′ + VXC(ρ(r)),
(1.4.5)
describing the nucleonic potential from (1.4.2), the Coulombic Hartree repulsion term and
the so-called ’exchange-correlation-potential’ VXC, which depends only on the electronic den-
sity. Exchange describes the Pauli repulsion between electron arising from their fermionic
nature, while correlation refers to the repulsion associated with Coulombic forces as well as
an energy discrepancy between the kinetic operators of the many-body Schr¨odinger and aux-
iliary system. The electron density yielded by the Kohn-Sham equations will, given we have
an exact version of the exchange-correlation potential, uniquely determine the wave function
and thus properties of the original system according to the Hohenberg Kohn theorems. In a
DFT calculation, one starts with an initial guess of the density, calculate the eﬀective poten-
tial and then the associated Kohn-Sham orbitals, which again yield a density. This iterative
==PAGE:13==
8
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
process is continued until self-consistency, altogether known as a self-consistent-ﬁeld-cycle
(SCF-cycle). Since the accuracy between the densities of the original and auxiliary system
depend on the exchange-correlation potential and its functional derivative, the exchange-
correlation-functional, they are essential the accuracy of the calculation. They are also the
only unknowns of the calculation, meaning one has to select and choose a functional ﬁtting
for the type of system to be studied. The discussion and selection of appropriate exchange-
correlation-functional for this project is presented in section 2.1.1.
There is some merit to a discussion on whether DFT is truly an ab-initio method or not.
While some functionals are devised purely from theoretical ideas and fundamental physical
constants, some functionals are ﬁne-tuned or ﬁtted to experimental parameters, which accord-
ing to Parr’s original deﬁnition should technically rule out DFT as a true ab-initio-method.
Hybrid functionals such as the widely used B3-LYP include exact Hartree-Fock exchange in
ratios ﬁtted to values from large databases of molecular data, which deﬁnitely breaks with
the ab-initio idea. Over time, the deﬁnition of ab-initio has become less strict. In fact,
some would argue that ab-initio methods are deﬁned by that fact that their equations and
dynamics are governed directly by the Schr¨odinger equation with only minimal assumptions
imposed on the intractable many-body terms [16, p. 13]. In this sense, one can argue DFT is
in fact an ab-initio method despite usage of the non-interacting auxiliary system, as the only
approximations made to the actual physics are through the exchange-correlation-functional.
It then depends on the functional and its construction whether DFT can be classiﬁed as
ab-inito. In section 2.1.1, we will discuss and select the functional to be used in this work
and record a verdict.
1.5
Ab-initio molecular dynamics
In line with the more relaxed use of the term, ﬁrst principle, or ab-initio molecular dynam-
ics describe frameworks for simulations of atomic interactions based very explicitly on the
Schr¨odinger equation. In the adiabatic picture, where electrons immediately occupy station-
ary states according to the slow movements of heavy nuclei, the ansatz for the systems’ wave
function separates [16, Eq. 1.4]:
Ψ(R, r, t) =
X
n
Θn(R, t)Φn(R, r),
(1.5.1)
==PAGE:14==
9
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
where Θ and Φ are the wave functions describing the nuclei-subsystem and electrons re-
spectively, and the sum over n sums over the adiabatic basis consisting of solutions to the
time-independent Schr¨odinger equation:
ˆHe(R)Φn(R, r) = En(R)Φn(R, r),
(1.5.2)
where ˆHe is the electronic Hamiltonian encountered in equation (1.4.2). The adiabatic as-
sumption is evident from the time-dependency of Θ, which is excluded in the stationary
electronic wave-function Φ.
The Born-Oppenheimer assumption eliminates an electronic
correction to the nuclear energy [16, Eq 1.14], in which case we conﬁne Ψ in (1.5.1) to just
a single adiabatic state n. Now, the ﬁnal Newtonian equations of motion for nucleus m take
the following form using the Hellman-Feynman theorem relating the derivative of the total
energy to the expectation value of the system’s Hamiltonian [16, Eq. 1.21-1.23]:
Mm
d2Rm(t)
dt2
= −∇En(R) = −
*
Φn(R)

∂ˆHe(R)
∂Rm
 Φn(R)
+
−∂Vnn(R)
∂Rm
.
(1.5.3)
Numerical integration of the equation above allows propagation of atomic dynamics in time,
which is what is known as ab-initio molecular dynamics, and in this case, where we are
applying the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, as ab-initio Born-Oppenheimer molecular
dynamics (BOMD). For each step of the simulation, we are computing the energy En and its
gradient using a DFT calculation. The solution to the stationary problem, where the left hand
side of (1.5.3) i.e. the forces −∇En(R) = 0, is known as a geometric structure relaxation
and is used to ﬁnd the minimal energy structure of atomic and molecular conﬁgurations.
Despite being among the faster ab-initio methods, using DFT calculations to study the
eﬀects of solvation in large systems including thousands of solvation molecules is simply
computationally infeasible, meaning simulating dynamics of solvated complexes requires a
more sophisticated framework or additional approximations.
1.6
QMMM simulations
One such framework is quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics (QMMM), which is an in-
stance of BOMD. It was introduced in 1976 by Warshel and Levitt [17], who were later
awarded the Nobel prize for their work, and combines the accuracy of ab-initio quantum
mechanical calculations and the speed of molecular mechanics (a term from the quantum
==PAGE:15==
10
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
chemistry community describing classical force-ﬁeld dynamics of molecules), allowing simu-
lations of large, complex systems, for example complexes in solution. The basic principle of
QMMM is to focus computational eﬀort where it is needed, for example describing a solvated
complex with DFT and the solvent explicitly as point charges. This allows incorporation of
solvation eﬀects while avoiding the scaling of DFT being applied to all molecules in the large
simulation cell. The simulation is thus separated in a quantum mechanical (QM) region,
where DFT is applied, and a molecular mechanical (MM) region, where a simpler calculation
methodology is used. The energy of the system is then the energy of the QM and MM regions
as well as an interaction term:
Etotal = EQM + EMM + EQMMM,
(1.6.1)
where each of the energy terms E describe their respective parts of the system. In the QM
region, EQM is the energy associated with the electronic Hamiltonian ˆHe of equation (1.4.2),
while EMM depends on the choice of model describing the MM-region, which we shall return
to. The interaction energy EQMMM accounts for the interactions between the QM and MM
systems, which in the widely used electrostatic embedding methodology takes the form [18]:
EQMMM = −
NMM
X
m=1
qm
Z
ρ(r)
|r −Pm|dr +
NMM
X
m=1
NQM
X
n=1
qmZn
|Rn −Pm| + ENES,
(1.6.2)
with qm being the point charges of the MM system, Pm their spatial coordinates and Zn
and Rn the atomic number and coordinate of the nuclei in the QM system. The QMMM
interaction term thus consists of a Coulombic interaction between the QM electron density
and MM point charges, a Coulombic interaction between QM nuclei and MM point charges
and the remaining term ENES accounting for non-electrostatic (NES) eﬀects such as disper-
sion and Pauli repulsion. ENES is oftentimes incorporated as a Lennard-Jones pair potential
[18], with parameters calculated from the element number, hybridization and connectivity
[19]. Sometimes, parameters are tuned and ﬁtted, which is a topic beyond the scope of this
project[18]. Parameters in this work are taken directly from the UFF database[19].
1.7
Outline of thesis and overview of contributions
Figure 4 shows the four parts of the work carried out progressing towards QMMM simulations
of Ag-PtPOP in aqueous solution, which to the knowledge of this author has not been
reported on before now. In the PhD thesis by Levi in 2018 [20], QMMM simulations of the
==PAGE:16==
11
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
regular PtPOP complex are presented and used to guide analysis of experimental X-ray data
as well as elucidate details on the potential energy surfaces and vibrational relaxation of the
complex.
Figure 4: Overview of the work presented in this thesis split into four parts. Sections 1-4
showing work leading up to the main contributions of this project in section 5, which are the
QMMM simulations of Ag-PtPOP in solvation, highlighed in green.
Building on the methods presented in Levi’s thesis and inspired by the article of Chris-
tensen and colleagues in 2010 on Ag-PtPOP [12] as well as older papers by Clodfelter and
Pettijohn [10, 11], this thesis aims to further our understanding of the exotic bond dynamics
of metal-PtPOP in solvation using Ag-PtPOP as example. The following section presents
the tools used in simulations, including the ASE and GPAW frameworks for performing DFT
calculations, the choice of basis sets and exchange-correlation functional, tools for excited
state DFT calculations and the D3 dispersion correction. In section 3, we carry out conver-
gence studies of varying simulation parameters, trying to make a selection striking a good
balance between accuracy and speed. In section 4, we perform geometric relaxations of a
series of diﬀerent Ag-PtPOP species in both ground and excited states to investigate which
conﬁguration is the most stable. Section 4 also presents molecular dynamics runs in vacuum
of axial and side-coordinated Ag-PtPOP, revealing further evidence that the Ag-atom dis-
==PAGE:17==
12
1
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
sociates from its side-on coordination site. In section 5, we reach the essential contributions
of this project: QMMM simulations of Ag-PtPOP in aqueous solution. In section 6, poten-
tial energy surfaces are calculated and analysed to help interpret the results of the QMMM
simulations. Taken together, the main contributions of this work can be highlighted as:
• DFT based geometric relaxations of Ag-PtPOP in vacuum, allowing stability and struc-
ture comparisons of the axial and side-coordinated complexes in both ground and ex-
cited states
• Analysis of Kohn-Sham orbitals, potential energy surfaces and QMMM simulation data
to reveal strength and structure of the Ag-PtPOP complexation bonds
• Outline concrete next steps for further investigations of the axial exciplex bond in
solvation and eﬀect of the explicitly treated solvent on the bond
==PAGE:18==
13
2
SIMULATION METHODS AND TOOLS
2
Simulation methods and tools
Following the outline and introduction to the work presented in this thesis, this section serves
to introduce the methods and tools used to carry out the simulations. First, the environments
ASE and GPAW, which are the backbone of the simulations, are introduced after which follows
a justiﬁcation of selected exchange-correlation functional and basis sets. The D3 correction
and maximum-overlap method are then introduced to treat dispersion and excited states in
DFT calculations. Lastly, the implementation of QMMM in GPAW is described along with
a graphical overview of the simulation cell, its calculators and interactions.
2.1
Tools for DFT - ASE and GPAW
The computations in this thesis are carried out in the atomic-simulation-environment (ASE)
[21] using the grid-based projector augmented wave (GPAW) [22] implentation of Bl¨ochl’s 1994
projected augmented wave (PAW) method [23]. ASE is a python based environment designed
for ﬂexible manipulation and customizable setup generation of atomic structures. It is used
to prepare to correct conﬁgurations before GPAW takes over for the computational calcula-
tions. The implementation of PAW in GPAW resembles pseudopotential methods, which aim
to reduce the complexity of describing wildly ﬂuctuating and steep potentials near the atomic
cores, by introducing projector functionals on a real-space grid, which allow calculation of the
core potentials on coarse grids. This allows for better scalability and parallelization as well
as systematic convergence properties, for example by simply increasing the grid density [24].
Essentially, GPAW augments the Kohn Sham potentials inside augmentation zones close to the
atomic cores, producing smoothed potentials which match the original potentials outside the
zone, see ﬁgure 5. GPAW oﬀers fast and parallelized calculations, which are necessary to per-
form computationally expensive QMMM BOMD, and supports many other tools important
to the work presented in this project, which will be introduced in the following.
2.1.1
Selection of functionals and basis sets
While the original development of GPAW was focused on solid state physics, as reﬂected by
the fact that the plane wave and ﬁnite diﬀerence methods are standard in GPAW, other basis
types have been developed and implemented. One such method is the linear combinations
of atomic orbitals (LCAO) method, which is often used in quantum chemistry communities
and for molecular dynamics in particular. Using LCAO as compared to the more accurate
==PAGE:19==
14
2
SIMULATION METHODS AND TOOLS
Figure 5: Illustration of the real-space grid GPAW implementation of the PAW method, where
ﬂuctuating potentials around atoms are smoothed, represented on a coarse grid, but match
the original Kohn Sham potentialss outside of the augmentation zone. Reproduced qualita-
tively from Figure 5.2 in [20].
ﬁnite-diﬀerences or plane wave methods reduces the necessary computational eﬀorts needed
for DFT calculations due its lower number of degrees of freedom [24]. This does however
come at a cost of slightly reduced accuracy, in particular with respect to energies [25]. This
thesis studies the structure and dynamics of the large complex PtPOP in pico-second dy-
namics, meaning any reduction in computational cost will be greatly beneﬁcial. As LCAO
predictions of geometric structure remain very accurate compared to the other two methods,
the pros of using LCAO in the present work outweigh the cons for our purposes. In GPAW,
the LCAO basis functions are still evaluated on a real space grid, meaning we still beneﬁt
from many of the beneﬁts of GPAW, such as the systematic convergence.
A key ingredient to any DFT calculation is the choice of exchange-correlation functional.
Over the years, a multitude of diﬀerent functionals have been created, some designed from
pure theoretical ideas and ab-initio physical constants [26]. Others include a few free param-
eters ﬁtted to higher-order material parameters, such as the BLYP functional. BLYP has
a single free parameter that has been ﬁtted to exact Hartree-Fock calculations of exchange
in noble gases. The GGA functional B-LYP uses the B88 [27] exchange and LYP correla-
==PAGE:20==
15
2
SIMULATION METHODS AND TOOLS
tion functional [28]. Compared to hybrid functionals such as B3-LYP, who incorporate some
amount of Hartree-Fock exchange, B-LYP is faster and has previously been used successfully
with LCAO to simulate QMMM BOMD of PtPOP [20, 18]. To the ab-initio purist, the choice
of the BLYP functional invalidates the DFT calculations as a true ab-inito calculation, since
it includes a free parameter, which has been ﬁtted. Additionaly, the QMMM framework we
are employing is most certainly not treating the solvent in accordance with ab-initio princi-
ples, which ultimately means the verdict on whether our selected DFT functional is ab-initio
is made somewhat redundant. Nonetheless, the author of this thesis will argue that the cal-
culations are at least semi ab-initio1, even in the view of the purist, as we are avoiding hybrid
functionals, the parameters used to ﬁt the BLYP functional are themselves ab-initio, and we
are treating the QM-region without severe assumptions imposed on the Schr¨odinger equation.
After choosing our exchange-correlation functional, we must specify the type of basis set
used in the LCAO basis. LCAO basis sets are orbital-like wave-functions expressed as a
product of spherical harmonics and radial functions [25]. One wave-function is generated
for each valence state of the atom, and depending on the needed accuracy, one includes a
single, double or triple radial function in the basis function. Usually, another basis function
is added to describe the lowest unoccupied angular momentum quantum number, named the
polarization function. LCAO basis sets are thus named (sz) for a single-zeta basis or (dzp)
for a double-zeta-polarized basis set, which are then generated for each element. The original
paper implementing LCAO in GPAW [25] state that (dzp) is suﬃcient for most calculations,
while Levi in 2018 [20] similarly show via convergence studies that (dzp) is suﬃcient in their
work on QMMM simulations of PtPOP. For these reasons, we will use a (dzp) basis for our
calculations in the simulations going forward.
2.2
Excited state DFT - The maximum overlap method
The Kohn Sham equations describing the one-electron systems generate and ﬁll orbitals ac-
cording to the aufbau principle, giving rise to the common misunderstanding that DFT only
works for ground state calculations. This is in fact not the case, as both time dependent
DFT, δ-SCF and maximum-overlap (MOM) [29] methods have all produced accurate results
of excited states and their behaviour [30, 31, 32]. In the case of δ-SCF and MOM, who both
beneﬁt from being signiﬁcantly cheaper than full ﬂedged TD-DFT [32], calculation of the
1Enough to justify the title at least.
==PAGE:21==
16
2
SIMULATION METHODS AND TOOLS
excited state is done by guiding the SCF-calculation away from variational collapse to the
ground state using constraints on the orbital occupation numbers fi in equation (1.4.4). δ-
SCF simply constrains the occupation numbers of the SCF calculation [33], eﬀectively forcing
an excitation, while MOM takes an initial conﬁguration of occupation numbers and guides
the future occupations from a principle of maximum overlap. As the orbitals are updated
every iteration of an SCF, the occupations are chosen based on maximum overlap with pre-
vious orbitals, minimizing the risk of a collapse to the ground state. In case of degenerate, or
narrowly spaced unoccupied orbitals, both methods suﬀer from convergence issues, as MOM
will have diﬃculty converging in case of similar orbitals, and the constraints of δ-SCF fail
to account for degeneracy. To resolve this, Maurer et al (2011) [34] implemented a Gaussian
’smearing’ of the δ-SCF constraints to prevent convergence issues. The Gaussian is centered
around the targeted orbitals, and scaled such that well separated conﬁgurations are unaf-
fected. The Gaussian smearing is likely very useful in the case of transition metal complexes,
as the large number of orbitals can be prone to degeneracy. The Gaussian smearing has been
implemented for both δ-SCF and MOM in GPAW [20, 35]. In this work, we will use MOM to
relax and simulate the excited state dynamics, and incorporate Gaussian smearing in case of
convergence issues caused by degeneracy.
2.3
The D3 dispersion correction
One shortcoming of DFT is its description of dispersion. Dispersion forces, or London dis-
persion forces, are the forces arising from ﬂuctuations in electronic densities, which in turn
aﬀect other nearby densities. While London-dispersion is only part of what is called Van der
Waal forces, the terms dispersion and Van der Waal forces are loosely interchangable - in
any case for the purposes of our work in this thesis where we will not concern ourselves with
the Van der Waal forces arising from permanent dipoles. Most GGA functionals attempt
to incorporate dispersion through their gradient terms, but most often underestimate the
eﬀects as the gradient terms are still too local to accurately describe dispersion. To improve
upon this, Grimme et al (2010) [36] have developed the D3 correction, which has been im-
plemented for an array of commonly used functionals. The D3 correction models dispersion
as a sum of a r−6 and r−8 term scaled with ab-initio parameters obtained from TF-DFT
calculations[36]. It makes adjustments to the forces and energies, but not the wave-functions
themselves, as the corrections does not inﬂuence the electronic structure of the system. Like-
wise, the parameters of the correction have not taken electronic structure into account, as
==PAGE:22==
17
2
SIMULATION METHODS AND TOOLS
the loss of accuracy is deemed ”small in the majority of practical applications”, although
the authors also state that it might have an eﬀect on ”chemically unusual cases”, which
our Ag-PtPOP complexes certainly classify as. Not taking electronic structure into account
essentially means that the corrections are calculated from ground state conﬁgurations, mean-
ing the correction does not account for the diﬀerences between a ground and excited state
electronic conﬁguration. As both platinum and silver are large atoms, dispersion forces are
not unlikely to be inﬂuential on the complex structure, which is why it has been included in
the simulations. Later on, we shall see that the correction indeed aﬀects mainly the energy,
but also the structure of the complexes. Note that the D3 correction applies only internally
in the QM-region, whereas the ENES and its Lennard-Jones dispersion term in the QMMM
calculator accounts for dispersion between the QM and MM region, see ﬁgure 6.
2.4
QMMM implementation in GPAW
QMMM has been implemented in GPAW to facilitate interaction between the QM and MM
calculations and simulate complexes in solution. PtPOP was investigated in the implemen-
tation paper by Dohn et al (2017) [37], and found that bond length and oscillation frequency
of the Pt-Pt bond deviated only a few % from experimental values over a half a nanosecond
molecular dynamics simulation. As in the implementation paper, we will in this work also
use the TIP4P potential [38] to describe the solvent in the MM-system. The TIP4P po-
tential uses four sites to represent each water molecule and improves upon the point charge
approximation of the electronic density of water compared to the 3-site TIP3P potential
[39], and is among the best performing water models [40].
As the TIP4P calculator de-
scribes each water molecule as a set of four point charges with no intramolecular forces,
the OH bonds must be kept rigid to prevent the water from falling apart. This is done
using constraints implemented in GPAW. The EIQMMM (Explicit interaction QMMM) calcu-
lator facilitates communication between the TIP4P-potential calculator of the MM-region
and the DFT calculator in the QM-region. As mentioned previously, the non-electrostatic
itneractions will be modelled as Lennard-Jones potential, with parameters taken from the
UFF-database [19]. When running molecular dynamics, an algorithm is used to perform the
integration of equation (1.5.3), which in its essence is just Newtons second law. In ASE, the
Langevin integrator simulates connection to a heat bath, stabilizing the temperature of the
system. This means kinetic energy of the structure is dissipated via friction to the heat bath,
which can be used for equilibration, where potential energy of an un-equilibrated system
==PAGE:23==
18
2
SIMULATION METHODS AND TOOLS
must be dissipated. Conversely, the VelocityVerlet integrator preserves the total energy
of the system, meaning for example that kinetic oscillations or other structural changes will
not be damped over time. Selection of the integrator, and thus thermostat, depends on the
goal of the simulation. Equilibration of a large solvation cage must be done in connection
to a heat bath, whereas studies of intra-molecular oscillations requires the kinetic energy
to remain in the system. For QMMM-calculations, it is necessary to include counter-ions
to balance the charge of the cell to neutral because the MM-region has periodic boundary
conditions [18, 41]. This is done by placing 2, 3 or 4 K-ions, depending on the charge of the
investigated complex, in the simulation cell at locations which will aﬀect the dynamics at
little at possible. This means placing them as far away from the QM-region as possible while
still keeping the ions away from the edges of the cell such that interactions across periodic
boundary conditions are minimized as well. Figure 6 shows an overview of the simulation
cell, showing the smaller QM-region, the larger MM-region and respective calculators and
interaction terms as presented in the sections above. In particular, it shows dashed purple
lines indicating an area of Hookean potential that is set up to prevent counter-ions from
drifting close to the QM-region. The potentials have the form:
EHookean(r) = 1
2k (r −r0)2 ,
(2.4.1)
where k = 1000 kcal/mol is the spring constant denoting the strength of the force. If r0 ̸= 0,
the potential is ﬂat bottomed, meaning the atoms are free to move within a radius of r0
before any force is applied. The potentials applied to the counter-ions are inverse, meaning
the force is repulsive, conﬁning the counter-ions to a radius of r0 = 12 ˚A of their initial
position to keep them away from both the simulation cell walls as well as the QM-region.
Another Hookean constraint with r0 = 4 ˚A is applied to one of the ligand P-atoms to stop the
complex from drifting too far from the center of the QM-region. Water molecules are allowed
to drift inside the QM-cell, although they will still be described by the MM-region calculator.
Having selected ASE and GPAW to perform the DFT calculations using the BLYP functional
in a LCAO setting, and having introduced tools to calculate excited states and account for
dispersion and solvation eﬀects, namely the MOM-tool, D3 correction and QMMM method-
ology, we are ready to progress with preparational studies before the real simulations are
performed. These initial studies of convergence and basic properties are presented in the
following section, and serve to tune our parameters and tools to ensure proper performance
later on.
==PAGE:24==
19
3
INITIAL AND PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
Figure 6: Overview of QMMM simulation cell, calculators and interactions. The two regions,
their atoms and molecules are not shown to scale. Note in particular the opaque grey area
representing the DFT calculated electron density, the area of repulsive force on the counter-
ions and the fact that water molecules are allowed inside the QM-region despite term ’vacuum’
used to deﬁne the size of the QM-cell.
3
Initial and preparational studies
Before carrying out DFT calculations, one must ﬁnd an appropriate set of simulation pa-
rameters to strike the desired balance between accuracy and speed. Basically, this involves
iterating through a range for each relevant parameter and looking at the convergence of a
desired measure of accuracy such as the energy or speciﬁc bonds of a structure. This section
will ﬁrst report on preparational convergence studies of system energy and characteristic
bond lengths versus grid spacing and cell vacuum. Later, we will look at the MOM-tool and
associated Gaussian smearing when we try to excite the standard PtPOP molecule and relax
it.
3.1
Convergence study of energy and bond distances
For our simulations in GPAW, the main parameters are the grid spacing, cell vacuum and
basis set. The selection of the (dzp) is motivated in section 2.1.1, which leaves the grid
==PAGE:25==
20
3
INITIAL AND PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
spacing and vacuum to be investigated. Figure 7 shows the energy of the PtPOP complex as
a function of grid spacing and cell vacuum size. The energy converges without ﬂuctuations,
but is not fully converged even at the very low grid spacing of 0.10 ˚A. The energy converges
more convincingly with respect to the cell vacuum size, showing deviations from the converged
value of less than 0.1% at 4 ˚A vacuum. Running molecular dynamics is computationally very
demanding, increasing proportionally to the number of grid points, selecting grid spacing
below 0.10 ˚A will be infeasible for our purposes (see also below).
Figure 7: Energy convergence versus grid spacing and cell vacuum size. Left: (Vacuum = 12
˚A) Slow convergence of the energy of the PtPOP complex even at very dense grid spacing.
Right: (Grid 0.14 ˚A) Convergence to less than 1% and no ﬂuctuations after 4 ˚A.
Studying structural dynamics means we are interested in not only the energy of the
complex, but also bond lengths and other structural properties. Figure 8 presents the Pt-Pt
distance as well as characteristic atomic distances of the Ag-PtPOP complexes, as presented
in ﬁgure 1, as a function of grid spacing. The axially coordinated Ag-atom clearly aﬀects
the Pt-Pt bond, decreasing the distance from around 3.025 ˚A to 2.830 ˚A (−6.4%), whereas
the side coordinated Ag does not aﬀect the Pt-Pt bond, as Kruppa (2012) [14] also found.
The 3.025 ˚A Pt-Pt distance of the regular PtPOP complex agrees with previously reported
distances [7, 8]. The fact that both Ag-PtPOP structures converge means that there is a
potential energy minimum, which indicates that the Ag in fact binds to the complex, even in
the ground state. More speciﬁc to convergence studies, all three bond lengths are arguably
converged even at the coarse 0.20 ˚A grid.
Characteristic distances, Ag-Pt for the axial
==PAGE:26==
21
3
INITIAL AND PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
conﬁguration and Ag-O bonds for the side conﬁgurations, are shown in the right side plot of
ﬁgure 8, showing very reasonable convergence (∼1%) at 0.20 ˚A. The convergence is done by
loading a previously optimized structure, using ASEs rattle to displace all atoms randomly
in space and then performing a geometric relaxation using the FIRE optimizer running until
all forces are below 0.05 eV/˚A. The displacements are drawn randomly from a 0-centered
Gaussian with width 0.03 ˚A. The Ag and nearest Pt atom are displaced a further 0.15 ˚A away
from the complex center along the Pt-Pt axis to remove the atoms from their bond length
equilibria. The random displacements are the same for all parameters in a convergence run.
Figure 8: Left: (Vacuum = 4 ˚A) Pt-Pt distances for regular PtPOP, axial Ag-PtPOP and
side Ag-PtPOP versus grid spacing. Convergence to less than 1% at 0.20 ˚A. Right: (Vacuum
= 4 ˚A) Characteristic distances versus grid spacing. Convergence at values lower than 0.20
˚A.
3.2
Timing study and selection of parameters
In today’s age of highly eﬃcient and available computer resources as well as parallelization,
one might be inclined to choose a dense grid of perhaps 0.10 ˚A and large 8 ˚A vacuum to
ensure proper convergence, in particular of the system energy. To assess the eﬀect of such a
parameter selection, as compared to a more modest 0.18 ˚A/4 ˚A conﬁguration, ﬁgure 9 shows
the time needed for a single SCF-cycle when calculating the potential energy of a PtPOP
complex in vacuum. The left side shows the time in a 3D-plot with vacuum size and grid
spacing as the two parameter axis, and the right plot show the same time data but plotted
==PAGE:27==
22
3
INITIAL AND PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
versus total number of grid points in the simulation cell. The time needed for calculation
increases approximately linearly with total number of grid points. Deviations from a single
line is due to some variation in which nodes the parallelized calculation is attributed to. A
pairing of 0.18 ˚A and 2.4 ˚A vacuum results in a calculation taking 1.35 s, while the 0.12
˚A and 8.0 ˚A pairing takes 9.37 s, almost 7 times as long. For QMMM simulations, where
thousands of iterations are run, it is important to secure any time saving possible.
Figure 9: SCF-cycle times for calculating potential energy of the PtPOP complex in vacuum.
Left: 3D plot showing times directly as function of grid spacing and vacuum. Right: Same
time data, but plotted versus total number of grid points, showing a linear scaling.
The default setting in GPAW is 0.18 ˚A, as was the setting used in QMMM simulations of
PtPOP in the work by Levi [20]. At 0.18 ˚A, we saw the energy converged to within 2%
and the characteristic bond distances converged to well within 1% at 4 ˚A minimum vacuum.
Together, they strike a good balance between accuracy and speed, as seen in ﬁgure 9, and
will be used going forward unless stated otherwise. Since the energy did not converge at any
reasonable grid spacing, comparison and interpretation of energy levels should be done with
some caution. Figure 10 shows the BLYP (dzp) basis functions for Ag as used by GPAW
in the DFT calculations, showing that the 4 ˚A vacuum in fact cuts of a small part of some
basis functions and a larger part of the large 5p (sz) orbital. Despite of this, we will choose
to adopt a 4 ˚A vacuum standard to improve the speed of the calculations, and increase it if
necessary, in which case it will be stated explicitly.
==PAGE:28==
23
3
INITIAL AND PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
Figure 10: Numerical values of the (dzp) basis functions for Ag for the BLYP functional.
Note the Bohr-radius rBohr = 0.53 ˚A as ﬁrst axis units. Shown as a dark blue vertical line,
a 4 ˚A minimum vacuum is cutting out parts of the basis functions, in particular the singly
polarized 5p-orbital which requires close to 6 ˚A of vacuum, but still contains most of the
basis functions.
3.3
Excitation and convergence with Gaussian smearing MOM
The maximum overlap method requires a speciﬁed width for the Gaussian smearing that is
used to help convergence in case of degenerate orbitals. Figure 11 shows the convergence
of the energy and Pt-Pt distance of the PtPOP complex in excited state after a geometric
relaxation using the FIRE optimizer in ASE along with the MOM-tool from GPAW. Both the
energy and bond distance are converged at a Gaussian smearing width of 0.05 and do not
diverge again as the smearing width closes to 0. This essentially means that the smearing is
not necessary for the excited state PtPOP calculation to converge, which is conﬁrmed after
inspection of the resulting orbital energies. For calculations of Ag-PtPOP, it is possible that
the smearing will be needed, in which case the standard width of the MOM-tool of 0.01 will
be used. The MOM-tool also supports an incremental increase in the smearing with if the
SCF-cycle has diﬃculty converging. Thus, it is possible to start with a smearing value of
==PAGE:29==
24
3
INITIAL AND PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
0.01 and then increasing it incrementally, say 0.02 after a certain number of SCF-iterations,
say 300, up to a maximum of iterations to attempt convergence, for example 1200.
We
note that the Pt-Pt distance converges to 2.83 ˚A, which is longer than the 2.75 ± 0.03 ˚A
distance reported by Christensen et al in 2009 [7]. While the contraction is not as strong
as Christensen ﬁnd it to be, it is nonetheless a contraction from the 3.025 ˚A found for the
ground state complex as presented above in ﬁgure 7.
Figure 11: Left: Convergence of the Pt-Pt distance in the same relaxations. Right: Energy
convergence as function of Gaussian width in maximum overlap excited state geometric
relaxation of PtPOP.
3.4
Vacuum MD of PtPOP
Following geometric relaxations, the next step is to ensure correct behavior over time in
simple molecular dynamics, in particular energy drift over time. Figure 12 shows the energy
of the standard PtPOP complex over time in a molecular dynamics simulation carried out
of a regular PtPOP complex in vacuum using the standard settings established above. The
complex is initialized in the relaxed ground state geometry, excited using the MOM-tool at
time t = 0 and then allowed to evolve using the energy conserving VelocityVerlet dynamics
integrator. The default convergence settings are seen to cause an unwanted energy drift over
time, which is not seen with the tighter convergence criteria imposed in the red trajectory.
Speciﬁcally, the default GPAW calculator does not have a convergence criteria for the forces,
==PAGE:30==
25
3
INITIAL AND PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
where the tighter convergence criteria require forces to be below 10−4 eV/˚A. These criteria
will be used going forward to prevent energy drift over time.
Figure 12: Total energy of the PtPOP complex during ∼4 ps of simulation for two diﬀerent
presets of convergence criteria for the GPAW calculator. The default settings are not tight
enough to prevent the energy drifting over time.
Figure 13 shows the behavior of the Pt-Pt bond and system energies over time during
the same PtPOP in vacuum simulation.
In the left hand side plot, the Pt-Pt distance
is seen to start at 3.04 ˚A, contract past the excited state distance of 2.84 ˚A due to the
kinetic energy built up during the contraction, and then start oscillating with a period of
approximately 252 ± 5 fs around the excited state minimum energy distance found in the
geometric relaxation. The period of oscillation is found as the maximum component of the
Fourier transformed signal, which is comparable to the 224 fs found by [8], although larger.
The amplitude dampens over time, but the kinetic energy does not change its mean value,
although its oscillation becomes less well deﬁned. This is indicative of vibrations coupling to
other vibrational modes in the complex, for example the ligand scaﬀolding, thus maintaining
the mean value, but perturbing the otherwise well deﬁned period of oscillation.
Studies of geometric relaxations of both PtPOP and Ag-PtPOP and vacuum molecular
dynamics of PtPOP have proven that a grid spacing of 0.18 ˚A, 4 ˚A of minimum vacuum
and enforcing a 10−4 eV/˚A convergence criteria on the forces ensures decent convergence of
the system energy, good convergence of atomic distances and stability of the energy during
==PAGE:31==
26
3
INITIAL AND PREPARATIONAL STUDIES
Figure 13: Left: Pt-Pt bond dynamics over time during the MD run. After excitation from
the ground state geometry, the bond distance starts oscillating at a frequency of 252 ± 5 fs
around a mean of 2.84 ˚A, which is the excited state distance found previously in the geometry
relaxation. Right: Energies of the complex over time. The total energy does not drift over
time as a result of the tighter convergence criteria.
a MD simulation.
Some characteristic atomic distances such as the ground state Pt-Pt
distance of the PtPOP complex were found to agree nicely with previous reporting, while
other distances such as the excited state Pt-Pt distance or the Ag-Pt distance of the axial Ag-
PtPOP complex were both longer than previously reported. In initial molecular dynamics
simulations of excited PtPOP in vacuum, the period of oscillation of the Pt-Pt bond was
found to deviate slightly from previously reported data. Despite of slight deviations, these
preparational studies have conﬁrmed the eﬃcacy of BLYP LCAO DFT calculations with the
selected parameters of both PtPOP and Ag-PtPOP in vacuum, meaning it is reasonable to
continue towards QMMM simulations of Ag-PtPOP, which are presented in the following
section along with other main results.
==PAGE:32==
27
4
RESULTS - STUDIES IN VACUUM
4
Results - Studies in vacuum
Following initial and preparational studies, our parameters and tools are now tuned to start
investigating the main questions of this thesis: When does Ag bind to PtPOP, in which
conﬁguration and what is the eﬀect of solvation? To answer this, we will begin by looking at
the energies and characteristic bond lengths of diﬀerent Ag-PtPOP species after geometric
relaxation. From these relaxed structures, we will progress to look at molecular dynamics of
Ag-PtPOP in vacuum before progressing to simulations in aquatic solution using QMMM.
4.1
Geometric relaxations - structure comparisons
Geometric relaxations involve minimization of the potential energy of an atomic structure
using an optimizer. Essentially, we look to ﬁnd the stationary solution to equation (1.5.3),
thus ﬁnding a structurally stable conﬁguration. The relaxations are carried out for PtPOP,
axially coordinated Ag-PtPOP and side coordinated Ag-PtPOP with diﬀerent combinations
of charge, protonation and D3-correction in both ground and excited states in vacuum. Due to
convergence diﬃculties for the excited states of both axial and side coordinated Ag-PtPOP,
a 0.14 ˚A grid spacing and 7 ˚A of vacuum have been used for all relaxations. This is an
immediate change from the 0.18 ˚A grid spacing and 4 ˚A minimum vacuum found to perform
convincingly just previously, when analysing not only ground and excited state PtPOP, but
also ground state Ag-PtPOP.
4.1.1
Energies of Ag-PtPOP species
Figure 14 shows the energies of the diﬀerent species after relaxation. Notably, the D3 cor-
rection (shown in light blue) consistently lowers the species energy with approximately −4
eV, while the underlying D3 geometry (shown in blue) yields almost exactly the same ener-
gies as the non-D3 geometry (shown in green) despite slight diﬀerences in structure, as we
shall see in ﬁgures 15 and 16. Figure 14 is separated into two plots to distinguish between
the non-protonated and protonated species, since the energies cannot be directly compared
due to the diﬀerence in number of atoms and electrons. The utilized LCAO functional pro-
duce more accurate structural properties than energies [25], meaning small diﬀerences in
energy should not be read too much into. As a general trend however, the side coordinated
species tend to have lower and thus more stable energies than their axial counterparts, when
we look at the ground state complexes. A direct comparison of the energies between side
==PAGE:33==
28
4
RESULTS - STUDIES IN VACUUM
coordinated [Ag+PtPOP]−3 and [Ag,H+PtPOP]−2 is not valid as explained, but the non-
protonated species with an extra electron does yield a lower energy than its higher charged
counterpart, perhaps indicative of the increased stability of the protonated species as pro-
posed by Kruppa [14]. In any case, these vacuum species do in fact appear to have slightly
lower energies than their axial counterparts as found by Kruppa [14]. As expected, the ex-
cited state conﬁgurations have higher energy levels and in fact show little variation between
the diﬀerent species. Note that the non-protonated [Ag+PtPOP]−2 was unable to converge
at all, reaching the max limit of 1200 iterations in the SCF without converging, while the
protonated [Ag,H+PtPOP]−2 was unable to converge without the D3 correction, also reach-
ing 1200 iterations in the SCF without converging. This is indicative that the excited state
side coordinating species are unstable, which supports Kruppas proposal that the Ag-atom
dissociates upon excitation.
4.1.2
Bond lengths of Ag-PtPOP species
Figure 15 shows the Pt-Pt bond distance for our selection of Ag-PtPOP species as well as
the standard PtPOP conﬁgurations. This time, the plot separates ground state and excited
state species in left and right panes, as the number of atoms and electrons does not invalidate
cross-species comparison of bond lengths. First we see that the ground state axial species as
well as the side [-2] conﬁguration have substantially lower Pt-Pt distances than the standard
PtPOP and other side Ag-PtPOP species as seen in the initial studies and ﬁgure 8 (left).
Conversely, among the excited states, the standard and side coordinated species agree on
shorter Pt-Pt distances around 2.85 ˚A, while the axial conﬁgurations have notably longer
distances at around 2.97 ˚A, which is almost 0.2 ˚A longer than values reported by [12, 13].
The axial species have longer Pt-Pt bonds after excitation, while the opposite holds for the
standard PtPOP and side coordinated species. An analysis based on the molecular orbital
diagrams in ﬁgure 2 would see this as a sign that the standard and side coordinated species
excite the bonding σ-orbital between the Pt atoms, which causes a contraction, while the
formation of a stronger axial Ag-Pt bond in exciplex extracts electron density from the Pt-Pt
bond, causing a stretch. Secondly, we note that the D3 correction results in slightly longer
Pt-Pt bond lengths for the ground state species except the axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3 species. In
the excited states, both axial conﬁgurations have lower Pt-Pt distances with D3, while the
others are again slightly longer with D3, showing that the correction impacts both the energy
and geometry of the complexes.
==PAGE:34==
29
4
RESULTS - STUDIES IN VACUUM
Figure 14: Energies of Ag-PtPOP species. For the calculations with D3, deep blue shows
energy of underlying geometric structure, while the light blue shows the extra correction
arising from dispersion eﬀects. Left: Non-protonated species showing lower energies in the
ground state for the side coordinated conﬁgurations. Excited state energies similar across
both species that managed to converge. Right: Protonated species also showing lower energies
for side-conﬁgurations in the ground state and comparable energies for the excited states.
Looking at the other relevant bond characteristics, ﬁgure 16 shows on the left side the
Ag-Pt bond distance for the axial species, while the right side shows the distance from the
Ag-atom to the center of the positions of the three O-atoms situated closest to the silver, see
ﬁgure 1 (C). The Ag-Pt bond is elongated from 2.63 ˚A to around 2.75 ˚A upon excitation,
which is considerably longer than the 2.47 ˚A reported by Christensen in 2010 [12], but
shorter than the 2.87 ˚A reported by [13]. The axial species thus elongate both the Pt-Pt
bond as well as the Ag-Pt bond upon excitation, which is interesting if it is in fact that
case that the exciplex binds Ag stronger than the ground state complex. Looking at the
side coordinated conﬁgurations in the right hand side of ﬁgure 16, we see slightly longer
Ag-O-plane distances in the ground states compared to the Kruppa [14] structure, and large
==PAGE:35==
30
4
RESULTS - STUDIES IN VACUUM
Figure 15: Pt-Pt bond distances for ground and excited state species of both PtPOP and
Ag-PtPOP. Standard PtPOP and the side coordinated Ag-PtPOP species contract upon
excitation, while the axial species elongate the Pt-Pt bond.
increases in bond lengths after excitation, which would suggest dissociation as reported by
Kruppa in 2016. The species not able to converge are perhaps indicative of this dissociation,
as we will investigate further in later sections.
4.2
Excited state molecular dynamics of Ag-PtPOP in vacuum
The geometric relaxed structures yield energies and bond lengths at a potential energy min-
imum.
Molecular dynamics runs in vacuum, exciting the ground state structure at time
t = 0 will give us a chance to see the dynamics of the complex as the structure evolves
after excitation. Figure 17 shows the Pt-Pt and Ag-Pt bond of the axial, non-protonated
[Ag+PtPOP]−3 complex in a vacuum MD along with the Ag-Pt bond distances in the ground
and excited states found in the relaxations above. The Pt-Pt and Ag-Pt bonds both oscillate
irregularly with the latter oscillating around a mean of 2.88 ˚A, which is a bit further out
than the 2.75 ˚A found as the minimum energy Ag-Pt distance in the geometric relaxation.
While the Ag does not look to dissociate, the large amplitude oscillation and the large mean
distance would indicate that forces involved in the transition from ground to excited state
==PAGE:36==
31
4
RESULTS - STUDIES IN VACUUM
Figure 16: Characteristic bond lengths for the axial and side coordinated Ag-PtPOP species
in geometric relaxations. Upon excitation, the axial species elongate the Ag-Pt bond just as
their Pt-Pt bonds were. The side-coordinated species show either lengthened bond lengths
or inability to converge. Both are signs indicative of dissociation.
structure are strong compared to the bond strength of the Ag-Pt bond in the excited state.
Once the complex is solvated, and the water molecules in the QMMM simulations act upon
the Ag-atom, we shall see if the bond is strong enough to be unaﬀected by the solvent.
Similarly, ﬁgure 18 shows the vacuum MD of side coordinated [Ag+PtPOP]−3 excited
at time t = 0, where the left plot shows the MD with the D3 correction disabled and vice
versa for the right side plot. The minus three charge species is chosen as it is much less
prone to convergence errors, as seen in the preceding sections. First, we note the Pt-Pt
bond oscillating at a well deﬁned frequency of 294 ± 6 fs, which is larger than the 254 fs
found previously, but is otherwise stable. Perhaps the ligand scaﬀolding is aﬀected by the
presence of the Ag-atom, leading to a perturbed oscillation frequency. Secondly, we note
the non-D3 MD has the Ag-atom stay closer to the Ag-O distance found in its respective
geometric relaxation, while the MD with D3 correction enabled shows an Ag-atom moving
further away from the complex before moving back. The D3 correction has shown to lower
the energies of the complexes, meaning the fact that the Ag-atom ventures further away
==PAGE:37==
32
5
RESULTS - QMMM SIMULATIONS
Figure 17: Bond lengths of the axial [Ag-PtPOP]−3 complex during the molecular dynamics
run in vacuum showing oscillations with irregular amplitude, but no signs of dissociation.
The Ag atom oscillates further out than the Ag-Pt distance found in the geometric relaxation
as indicated by the teal line.
from the complex with the correction enabled is surprising. Perhaps this is an instance of
the changed electronic structure having an eﬀect of the impact of the D3 correction, but
concluding this would require further investigation. Nonetheless, while the Ag-atoms do not
look to dissociate in either case, at a Ag-O-plane distance of more than 2 ˚A, the individual
Ag-O distances are longer than 3 ˚A, which is very large for typical atomic bond distances. So
while these MD runs do not show outright dissociation, introduction of the aqueous solvent
is not unlikely to have a strong eﬀect on these bonds.
5
Results - QMMM simulations
Using the tools and method presented in section 2.4, we now solvate the Ag-PtPOP com-
plex to investigate the eﬀect of solvation.
As part of QMMM simulations, the complex
and surrounding water molecules must ﬁrst be equilibrated [18]. This is done by attaching
the Langevin integrator object, which applies friction to the atomic movements, simulating
connection to a heat bath and allowing dissipation of energy in accordance with Langevin dy-
namics. To equilibrate the solute and solvent, we will ﬁrst solvate the ground state complex
==PAGE:38==
33
5
RESULTS - QMMM SIMULATIONS
Figure 18: Vacuum MD of the side coordinated [Ag+PtPOP]−3 species. Left: MD without
the D3 correction showing immediate elongation of the Ag-O-plane distance towards the
2.32 ˚A found in the excited state geometric relaxation. Right: MD with the D3 correction
showing an Ag-atom less inclined to stay near the much closer 1.92 ˚A Ag-O-plane distance.
Calculated with grid spacing 0.15 ˚A and 7 ˚A cell vacuum to ensure convergence.
and let the simulation run until the temperature is stable.
5.1
QMMM ground state simulation of axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3
Figure 19 shows on the left the characteristic atomic distances of the axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3
complex, which encounters a convergence error after 1200 fs due to the total dissociation of
the Ag-atom. The Clodfelter, Pettijohn and Christensen papers [10, 11, 12] are focused on the
exciplexes, and Christensens results in particular ﬁnd evidence of association upon excitation,
which means we are not sure the ground state complex is stable in solution. However, the
DFT calculations by Kong [13], the fact that DFT calculations in this work on the ground
state structures converged and provided structures comparable to previous studies as well
as yet unpublished analysis of experimental results in the research group, with which this
project is associated, all suggest that an axial ground state Ag-PtPOP complex should exist
- even in solution. The dissociation observed in ﬁgure 19 does not, however, indicate that
this ground state complex is at all stable in solution, and the dissociation makes it impossible
==PAGE:39==
34
5
RESULTS - QMMM SIMULATIONS
to equilibrate.
Figure 19: QMMM MD simulation of axially coordinated [Ag-PtPOP]−3 in the ground state
showing (left) dissociation of the Ag-atom from the 2.63 ˚A Ag-Pt distance found in the
geometric relaxation, ultimately leading to inter-atomic distances longer than 4 ˚A before the
convergence fails. Right: Closest water molecule to the Ag-atom is initially 3.5 ˚A away,
moving closer to a distance of 2.3 ˚A after 1000 fs. Temperature is set to 300 K
Figure 20 shows the Kohn-Sham HOMO orbital of the complex at diﬀerent times during
the equilibration, drawn as 0.05
q
electron density
volume
isosurfaces with red and blue indicating posi-
tive and negative parts of the wave function respectively. In vacuum and immediately after
solvating the complex, we notice a lack of electron density along the Ag-Pt-Pt axis. After 200
fs, we see a node between the platinum atoms suggesting the presence of the anti-bonding
dσ∗orbital introduced in the molecular orbital diagram in ﬁgure 2. The right side of ﬁgure
19 shows the proximity of the closest water molecule to the Ag-atom. In the ﬁrst femtosec-
onds, the solvent is still more than 3 ˚A away, which is why the HOMO orbital resembles the
vacuum HOMO and then changes after 200 fs as the solvent gets closer and starts aﬀecting
the complex. At 1200 fs, we see that the HOMO orbital no longer shows evidence of a Ag-Pt
bond, the Ag atom has completely dissociated and returned to a more atomic looking dz2
orbital, while the PtPOP complex HOMO orbital very much resembles the orbital presented
in Kong’s [13] ﬁgure 4a.
==PAGE:40==
35
5
RESULTS - QMMM SIMULATIONS
Figure 20: Isosurface 0.05
q
electron density
volume
HOMO orbitals of the axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3 complex
at diﬀerent stages of simulation. After the solvent closes in on the Ag-atom, an electron
density between the Ag and Pt atom is seen, but is no longer present at 1200 fs, where the
Ag-atom has completely dissociated.
It has been attempted to run the same QMMM simulation, but at T = 150 K, which did
not prevent dissociation, although it occurred after ∼3500 fs rather than the ∼1200 fs in the
case of the T = 300 K case, see Appendix B. The lower temperature directly aﬀects the kinetic
energy of the water molecules, which must be responsible for the dissociation since it was
not present in the vacuum simulations. The fact that a lower temperature prolongs the time
it takes before dissociation occurs further conﬁrms this. Nonetheless, it was not enough to
prevent it from occurring eventually. In another attempt to force equilibration, a simulation
==PAGE:41==
36
5
RESULTS - QMMM SIMULATIONS
has been run with an imposed Hookean constraint on the Ag-Pt bond as seen previously in
equation (2.4.1) with r0 = 3.2 ˚A to prevent it from dissociating. Using the constraint, the
Ag-atom stabilizes around 3.2 ˚A and the temperature stabilizes as well around 300 K, which
means equilibration, see Appendix B. This run will also be discussed further in section 6.2.
5.2
QMMM ground state simulation of side [Ag,H+PtPOP]−2
Kruppa proposes [Ag,H+PtPOP]−2 as the most stable, which is why it is chosen for this
ground state QMMM simulation.
Figure 21 shows the characteristic bond distances, in
particular the Ag-O-plane distance as shown in ﬁgure 3, which again shows dissociation of
the Ag-atom. First moving away from the 1.07 ˚A Ag-O distance found in the geometric
relaxation, the Ag-atom moves to a semi-stable distance of 3 ˚A, where it sits for almost a
picosecond before ultimately dissociating completely and the SCF fails.
Figure 21: QMMM MD simulation of side coordinated [Ag,H+PtPOP]−2 in the ground state
showing (left) dissociation of the Ag-atom from the 1.07 ˚A Ag-O-plane distance found in the
geometric relaxation, stabilizing at around 3 ˚A for less than a picosecond before removing
itself completely from the complex. Right: Closest water molecule to the Ag-atom is initially
a little more than 3 ˚A away, moving closer to a distance between 2.5 and 2.8 ˚A before
convergence error at 2300 fs. Temperature is set to 300 K
Figure 22 shows the HOMO Kohn-Sham orbitals of the side [Ag,H+PtPOP]−2 at diﬀerent
stages of simulation. In vacuum and immediately after solvation, where the surrounding water
molecules are still far away, as seen in the right side of ﬁgure 21, the HOMO orbitals are
almost identical. At the semi-stable state at 1400 fs, the Ag-atom appears to form a bi-dental
==PAGE:42==
37
5
RESULTS - QMMM SIMULATIONS
anti-bonding coordination to the O-atoms of PtPOP, where the electron density around the
Ag-atom looks like an atomic dxy orbital or similar. As the silver detaches completely, it
returns to a dz2-like atomic orbital as seen in the axial case as well. The dissociation of the
Ag in the ground state is not expected based on Kruppas ﬁndings, although these did not
account for solvation eﬀects. While Kruppa calls for an investigation of solvation eﬀects, it
is not necessarily the case that solvation is the sole cause of the dissociation and instability
observed here in the QMMM simulation attempt. Other explanations will be discussed in
the outlook and discussion section later on after inspecting the potential energy surfaces.
Figure
22:
Isosurface
0.05
q
electron density
volume
HOMO
orbitals
of
the
side
coordinated
[Ag,H+PtPOP]−2 complex at diﬀerent stages of simulation.
At the somewhat stabilized
stage between 800 fs and 1500 fs, the Ag-atom forms what appears to be a bi-dental anti-
bonding coordination to the O-atoms before dissociating completely at 2300 fs and returning
to an atomic dz2-like orbital conﬁguration.
==PAGE:43==
38
5
RESULTS - QMMM SIMULATIONS
5.3
Excited state QMMM molecular dynamics of Ag-PtPOP
While the ground state QMMM simulations attempting equilibration resulted in dissocia-
tion and thus failed equilibration of both the axial and side coordinated Ag-PtPOP, the fact
that it is the axial exciplexes, who have been studied and found evidence of [10, 11, 12]
means there is a chance QMMM simulations of the axial exciplexes could be equilibrated
and studied. While the natural progression would be to ﬁrst equilibrate the ground state
complex and then excite it, it is possible to try to equilibrate the axial exciplex instead.
Unfortunately, attempts to carry out these equilibrations have not been successful using our
standard simulation parameters. The self-consistent-ﬁeld cycles of the DFT calculations stop
converging after between 20 fs and a couple hundred femtoseconds, in contrast to the vacuum
MD simulations, which ran without issues for several picoseconds, see section 4.2. Appendix
B presents attempts of two of the most succesful attempts with standard simulation parame-
ters, namely excitation after ∼800 fs of ground state simulation and excitation after 10 ps of
equilibration with an applied Hookean constraint on the Ag-Pt bond. Both failed after not
converging after 1200 iterations in the SCF cycle using an initial Gaussian smearing width
of 0.01, increasing in increments of 0.02 after each unsuccessful 300 iterations. The run with
an applied Hookean constraint is looked at in more detail in section 6.2.
As was the case for the geometric relaxations, increasing the grid density and vacuum
size improves the convergence, in particular of the excited states. In QMMM-simulations
involving thousands of SCF-cycles, this comes at very high computational cost however.
Figure 23 shows a QMMM MD simulation of axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3 initialized in its excited
state, in the excited state conﬁguration from the geometric relaxation, with 0.14 ˚A grid
spacing and 7 ˚A of vacuum. The data in ﬁgure 23 represent 9 days of simulation, and has
not yet encountered convergence issues after more than 600 fs of simulation, which is further
than any other attempt to simulate excited state QMMM with the standard convergence
parameters managed to run without issues (apart from the QMMM with the extra Hookean
constraint, which is discussed in section 6.2). It is of course not certain that the MD will not
run into convergence problems, but the experience from the geometric relaxations indicate
that the denser grid spacing and increased vacuum are in fact necessary for stable simulation
of the excited states. The atomic distances in ﬁgure 23 show no signs of dissociation yet,
but rather oscillation around the Ag-Pt distancee determined by the geometric relaxation.
Going forward, this simulation should be continued, as it constitutes a promising candidate
==PAGE:44==
39
5
RESULTS - QMMM SIMULATIONS
for simulation the dynamics of the exciplex in solution.
Figure 23: QMMM MD of axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3 in excited state initialized in its geometry
from geometric relaxation. Grid spacing at 0.14 ˚A and 7 ˚A of vacuum appear to improve the
convergence of the simulation, but at a substantially increased computational cost, explaining
the simulation not lasting many picoseconds, as would be ideal.
The side-coordinated Ag-PtPOP also dissociated in the ground state QMMM MD simu-
lation. The geometric relaxations revealed that the excited states had Ag-O-distances above
3 ˚A if they even converged at all. The potential energy surfaces to be analysed in the fol-
lowing section also reveal that the Ag-atom does not appear to bind to the O-atoms on the
PtPOP complex in the excited state. As the ground state QMMM MD already showed dis-
sociation, QMMM MD simulations of excited state side-coordinated Ag-PtPOP species were
not prioritized, as these would also likely show dissociation.
==PAGE:45==
40
6
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
6
Discussion of results
Having looked at the outcomes of molecular dynamics runs in both vacuum and solution,
we now turn to analyse the results more in-depth. First, we shall look at potential energy
surfaces of the Ag-PtPOP bonds in diﬀerent cases to understand the bond characteristics
and the dissociation seen in the results sections above. Afterwards, we look at the QMMM
run with a Hookean constraint imposed on the Ag-Pt bond to extract another measure of
the energy diﬀerence between the ground and excited state.
6.1
Potential energy surfaces
A potential energy surface (PES) describes the energy landscape that the atoms are moving
in and provide information on the bond type and its strength. To calculate a PES, one
calculates the energy of the full system, in this case the Ag-PtPOP dimer, and subtracts the
sum of monomer energies:
PES = Edimer −
X
Emonomer = EAg−PtPOP −(EPtPOP + EAg) .
(6.1.1)
Plotting this energy diﬀerence along a coordinate of dissociation will show the energy dif-
ference attributable to the bond. A PES is best calculated along normal coordinates, which
specify normal modes of the system Hessian and thus vibrational modes of the system in
question [42]. For the axial case, we are interested in the Ag-Pt bond, and thus translation
of the Ag atom along the Ag-Pt-Pt axis, which due to the mass of the Ag and Pt atoms is
likely to closely resemble a normal mode. In the case of the side coordinated species, either
the characteristic Ag-O-plane distance or the bi-dental O17,O27-Ag bond as seen in ﬁgure
22 would be appropriate, although somewhat less convincing proposals for normal modes.
The displacement of the Ag-atom away from the bi-dental bond was eventually chosen as
dissociation coordinate based on the orbitals in ﬁgure 22, and because the trajectory was seen
to yield more stable geometries and form more convincingly shaped potentials compared to
translations away from the O-plane center (see below). Figure 24 shows vectors indicating
the direction of translation for each dissociation coordinate.
6.1.1
Technical details of PES calculations
The translations mentioned above are carried out using atomic manipulations using ASE-tools
to translate along the dissociation coordinate using unit vectors. To ensure identical simu-
==PAGE:46==
41
6
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
Figure 24: Left: The PES of axial Ag-PtPOP is calculated along the Ag-Pt axis. Right:
For the side coordinated species, the PES trajectory is chosen along the bi-dental bond
of the Ag-atom and O atoms 17 and 27. This trajectory yielded more stable convergence
and corresponds better to the orbitals seen in ﬁgure 22, and is therefor chosen as the PES
dissociation coordinate instead of the aforementioned Ag-O-plane bond.
lation conditions for all geometries in the PES, an identical simulation cell must be used for
all geometries for a given PES. In this case, we initialized a large cell based on the maximum
translational distance and then applied that to all other conﬁgurations before calculating
their potential energy. Likewise, it is important to ensure that calculations of both dimer
and monomers have the same number of basis set functions, as this could otherwise lead to
energy discrepancies [43]. In GPAW, this is done by specifying the setups-argument to the
calculator. For the monomers, the rest of the system is treated as ’ghost’ atoms [43], where
their basis functions are included, but the atoms do not otherwise aﬀect the calculation.
For all calculations, a grid spacing of 0.14 ˚A was used to improve upon the energy accuracy
and a vacuum of 7 ˚A to ensure proper inclusion of all Ag basis functions, see ﬁgure 10. All
the same, many geometries, in particular in excited state, were prone to convergence issues,
leading to a limited range of r for some PES. In the case of the axial, excited state PES
in vacuum, r values smaller than 2 ˚A caused an AssertionError in the calculation of the
==PAGE:47==
42
6
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
PtPOP monomer SCF calculation. Values of r larger than 3.5 ˚A and 3.2 ˚A for the axial vac-
uum ground state and excited states lead to SCF-convergence errors, reaching 300 iterations
without converging, in the dimer calculation, which is symptomatic of DFTs diﬃculty when
describing dissociating transition metals [44].
Similarly, the side-coordinated vacuum PES of the excited state was unable to converge
the SCF for its dimer calculation for values of r > 1.6˚A. It was also unable to converge the
Ag-atom SCF in less than 300 iterations at r = 0.4 ˚A, forcing an omission of the data point
in the plots below. Curiously, it was able to converge for r = 0.2, 0.3, which goes to show the
sensitive nature of the calculations when applied to these systems. Additionally, the data
point at r = 5 ˚A for the side-coordinated CSM PES (introduced below) has been omitted
due to a convergence error in the Ag-SCF, just as the points at r = 2.2 ˚A and 2.6 ˚A have
been omitted from the excited state axial vacuum PES due to convergence failures of the
dimer-scf, see ﬁgure 25.
A main motivation for this project is to investigate the eﬀect of solvation on the complex-
ation of Ag-PtPOP. Ideally, these energy surfaces would have been calculated in the QMMM
framework, which treats the solvent explicitly, locking the atoms of the QM region in place
and then equilibrating the surrounding solvent until an averaged potential energy can be
extracted from the QM system. It was not possible to construct and sample from these
simulations before the deadline of this project, which is why the continuum solvent model
(CSM) is introduced. The continuum solvent model is developed by [45] and implemented
in GPAW [46]. In contrast to the QMMM framework and TIP4P potential, CSM treats the
solvent as a polarizable continuum of varying permittivity. It is possible that CSM will not
produce exactly the eﬀects that an explicit solvent description would, but the two models
produce very similar orbitals, see Appendix A. Unfortunately, the MOM-tool for calculating
excited states is not yet compatible with the CSM calculator, meaning we only have PES for
solvated ground state Ag-PtPOP. Resolving this compatibility issue is an obvious next step
for further studies, as the solvated exciplex PES will be of great interest.
Degenerate energy levels and half-ﬁlled d-orbitals pose diﬃculties for DFT calculations
[44, 47], and thus poses a problem when calculating a PES of a transition metal along a
dissociation coordinate. While there are suggestions on how to remedy the problem [47],
==PAGE:48==
43
6
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
neither is the solution implemented in GPAW nor is the proposed solution appropriate for
our simulations of large complexes. As we shall see, the problem with SCF-cycles incapable
of converging is particularly prominent in the vacuum setting where there is no solvent to
stabilize. The calculations of the isolated Ag-atoms that do converge are also most likely
shifted [44], which we shall also look into below.
6.1.2
Fitting the PES
The PES of a covalent bond will exhibit a characteristic harmonic shape at inter-atomic
distances smaller than the bond length, while it will become anharmonic and ultimately
asymptotic towards 0 along the dissociation coordinate. We are interested in ﬁtting a model
to the PES to probe the nature of the bond and its strength.
A Morse-potential is an
anharmonic potential, maintaining harmonic properties for small inter-atomic distances while
accounting for bond-breaking and dissociation at larger distances by tending asymptotically
towards 0 (or in our case k) at large inter-atomic distances:
Morse(r) = D (1 −exp [−a(r −rm)])2 + k,
(6.1.2)
where a and rm denotes scaling and translation of the bond distance r, D is a positive scalar
denoting the depth of the potential well i.e. the bond strengt, and k is the vertical translation
accounting for shifted energies as mentioned above and as will be discussed below:
EBond = Dfit
(6.1.3)
The eﬀect should be more pronounced in the vacuum setting, where the solvent is not
there to stabilize the Ag-atom. The horizontal translation can be interpreted as taking the
physical size of the atoms into account, which will be particularly important in the axial
case, where both the Pt and Ag atoms are large. In the case of the bi-dental trajectory, the
Ag-atom is translated away from the center of the two O-atoms, which means it can get very
close before colliding with them, if at all as seen in ﬁgure 24. We thus expect large values of
k in the vacuum setting and larger values of rm for the axial PES’.
6.1.3
Visualization of the PES
Figure 25 shows the PES of both axial and side species of Ag-PtPOP in both vacuum and in
solution, where the solvent is described by the CSM. First taking a look at the axial vacuum
==PAGE:49==
44
6
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
PES in the top pane, we see very ﬂat potentials for both the ground and excited state above
the potential minima, which explains the large amplitude ﬂuctuations observed in the vacuum
MDs in ﬁgure 17: The kinetic energy infused upon excitation allows travelling far in the ﬂat
potential. Using the ﬁtted Morse-potentials, we obtain the bond strengths using equation
(6.1.3), yielding ground and excited state bond strengths of 1.18 eV and 1.77 eV respectively.
This is a diﬀerence of ∆E(Axial,vacuum) = 0.6 eV, which indicates stronger bonding in the
exciplex. Looking at the CSM PES shown in cyan, we notice that the vertical energy shift is
much smaller, likely a result of the solvent stabilizing the energy calculations of the isolated
Ag-atom as expected. The bond strength is found to be 1.28 eV, slightly stronger than the
vacuum ground state, but weaker than the exciplex bond in vacuum.
Using ∆E(Axial,
vacuum) = 0.6 eV, this puts the solvated exciplex bond energy at E(ES, CMS) = 1.88 eV,
an order of magnitude smaller than a typical covalent bond. All three PES agree on 2.63 ˚A
as the minimum energy Ag-Pt distance, which is in agreement with the geometric relaxation
results in the case of the ground states. The geometric relaxation yielded a Ag-Pt distance
of 2.75 ˚A in the excited state. There is no apparent reason for this discrepancy, as inspection
of both orbital occupations reveal that both structures are converged to an excited state.
==PAGE:50==
45
6
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
Figure 25: Potential energy surfaces of (top) the axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3 species and (bottom)
the side coordinated [Ag,H+PtPOP]−2. Convergence issues limits the ranges for the vac-
uum, and in particular the excited state PES. Fitted Morse potentials shown in black allow
approximation of the bond strengths.
The bottom of ﬁgure 25 shows the PES for the side-coordinated Ag-PtPOP species. The
ground state in both vacuum and CSM are well described by the ﬁtted Morse-potentials,
while the excited state vacuum PES stops converging before reaching its minimum. The
ﬁtted potential extrapolates the data points and does not produce a ’well-like’ shape, again
suggesting that there is in fact no proper bonding in the side-coordinated exciplex, as was
==PAGE:51==
46
6
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
also suggested by the geometric relaxation results. The bond strengths of the two ground
states are 3.49 eV and 1.71 eV for the vacuum and solvated species. Interestingly, the CSM
does not increase the bond strength as we saw in the axial case, and the ground state vacuum
conﬁguration exhibits a bond strength more than twice as strong as its axial counterpart.
Additionally, the minimum distance is shifted from 1.35 ˚A to 1.42 ˚A upon solvation, again
indicating that the coordination is weakened slightly. The ﬁt to the excited state does not
allow an evaluation of the bond strength as there is likely no bond at all. Until the MOM-tool
and CSM are made compatible, it remains to be seen if the solvated exciplex exhibits bonding
characteristics. As expected, the side-coordinates PES begin their harmonic behavior closer
to 0 than their axial counterparts, reﬂecting smaller values of rm.
Figure 26: Monomer Ag-atom energies for the axial and side PES in both vacuum and CSM
settings. CSM produce higher energies, explaining the smaller k values of the Morse ﬁts on
the PES data in ﬁgure 25.
As an atom dissociates, the PES must tend to 0, as the dimer interactions are diminished
to the point of being indistinguishable from the monomers. Looking at the PES data, the
vacuum PES are obviously not approaching 0 for large values of their respective dissociation
coordinates, whereas the CSM PES are much closer. This is reﬂected in the ﬁtted values of
k being below −7 eV for all vacuum PES and larger than −2 eV for the CSM ones. Figure
26 shows the free energies of the isolated Ag-atoms for the ground state PES trajectories.
While the energies are quite constant over the entire range of the dissociative coordinates,
justifying the use of the extra ﬁt-parameter k, the energy diﬀerence between the vacuum and
==PAGE:52==
47
6
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
CSM are not large enough to explain the diﬀerence in k-values from the ﬁts. Thus the CSM
also aﬀects the energy of the dimer and PtPOP monomer, meaning the entire energy shift is
not attributable to DFT’s poor description of isolated transition metal atoms. Figure 33 in
appendix C shows the PES Morse potential ﬁts translated using the ﬁtted D and k-values,
so they have their asymptotic limits in 0, making direct visual comparison easier. Taken
together, the table below presents the extrapolated bond energies for the diﬀerent species:
Species and setting
EGS [eV]
EES [eV]
Axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3 - Vacuum
1.18
1.88
Axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3 - CSM
1.29
Not determined
Side [Ag,H+PtPOP]−2 - Vacuum
3.49
None
Side [Ag,H+PtPOP]−2 - CSM
1.71
Not determined
In solution, the strongest bond that the Ag-atom can partake in is the side-coordinated
bond. While we do not have results from the excited state CSM PES, the results from the
geometric relaxations, QMMM simulations and vacuum PES all indicate dissociation of the
side coordinated Ag-atom upon excitation, while the axial exciplex does in fact bond. Thus,
the PES analysis suggest that the Ag-atom coordinates on the side in the ground state, but
prefers axial coordination after excitation.
6.2
Analysis of the QMMM MD with Ag-Pt bond constraint
In an attempt to force equilibration of axial Ag-PtPOP, a Hookean constraint of the same
form as equation 2.4.1 with r0 = 3.2 ˚A has been imposed on the Ag-Pt bond. In this attempt,
the Ag-atom does not dissociate, and the temperature does in fact stabilize, see appendix
B. Figure 27 (top) shows the Ag-Pt and Pt-Pt bonds during the simulation, which runs for
more than 10 ps in the ground state without convergence issues. The Ag-atom does not
settle at the bond distance found in the geometric relaxations, however, but continuously
tries to remove itself from the complex, only to be restrained by the constraint. Nonetheless,
after equilibrating for approximately 11 ps, we excite the complex, in hopes the stronger
exciplex bond will attract the Ag-atom. The simulation continues to run for ∼2 ps, before
the SCF-cycle is unable to converge after 1200 iterations using an initial Gaussian smearing
of 0.01 and increasing in increments of 0.03 each 300 unsuccessful iterations. Looking at the
==PAGE:53==
48
6
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
output ﬁle, the orbital energies and their occupations in the fourth last iteration are:
Orbital energies [eV]:
[−13.60, −13.29, −10.73, −10.41] ,
Orbital occupations:
[2, 1, 1, 0] ,
showing well separated orbital energies. In the third to last iteration, however, the occu-
pations have changed to [2, 1, 2, 2, 1, 0], which is perhaps the cause of the convergence issue
in the ﬁnal iteration. Since the orbitals are well separated, the misalignment of occupations
is unlikely due to issues of degeneracy, but rather a wrongful evaluation of the orbital overlap
by the MOM-tool. This is a further indication of the sensitive nature of these exciplexes,
making them very diﬃcult to simulate for extended periods of time. In any case, before the
simulation, the temperature has stabilized, meaning that this trajectory can be used in the
future for calculating QMMM PES, although this is postponed to further studies and next
steps.
==PAGE:54==
49
6
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
Figure 27: Atomic bonds of the QMMM MD simulation of axial Ag-PtPOP. Top: Full
trajectory of showing timings of application of the Hookean constraint and excitation. While
preventing dissociation, the Ag-atom is continuously pushing against the Hookean constraint.
Bottom: Closer look at the time of excitation. Looking before and after excitation and only
looking at distances above 3.2 ˚A, the 90th %-ile Ag-Pt distances indicate that the excitation
in fact binds stronger.
The bottom plot in ﬁgure 27 shows the atomic bonds around the time of excitation. It
==PAGE:55==
50
6
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
would appear that the Ag-atom does not escape as far from the Pt-atom after excitation as
before. The indigo lines show the 90th percentile of the Ag-Pt distances recorded above 3.2
˚A, and are 3.264 ˚A and 3.237 before and after excitation respectively. Since the Hookean
constraint is ﬂat bottomed, only applying force at distances above 3.2 ˚A, the diﬀerence in
energy associated with these two displacements would be:
∆E(Axial,QMMM,Hookean) = EHookean(des) −EHookean(dgs)
= 1
2k
 d2
es −d2
gs

= 1
21000 kcal/mol
 (3.237 ˚A −3.2 ˚A)2 −(3.264 ˚A −3.2 ˚A)2
= −0.059 eV.
(6.2.1)
The fact that this energy diﬀerence is negative indicates that the exciplex bond is stronger, as
the Ag-atom does not push as hard against the constraint. The magnitude of the diﬀerence
is an order of magnitude lower than the ∆E(Axial,vacuum) = 0.60 eV that was extrapolated
in the analysis of vacuum PES, even looking at r = 3.2 ˚A where the PES energy diﬀerence
is slightly lower, see Appendix C. The PES analysis also revealed that the axial PES are ﬂat
around 3.2 ˚A, which means that the Hookean potential should dominate the energy diﬀerence
between 3.264 ˚A and 3.237 ˚A and thus that ∆E(Axial, QMMM, Hookean) is attributable
to change in bond energy. Without more information on the excited state PES of solvated
Ag-PtPOP, it is not possible to conclude which measure is correct, but both determine the
exciplex to bond more strongly, in line with expectations from previous literature [12].
6.3
Bond strengths and thermal kinetic energy of the solvent
In the QMMM simulations, we saw dissociation of the ground states for both the axial and
side-coordinated species, which boast bond strengths determined from ﬁtting their respective
CSM PES of 1.28 eV and 1.71 eV. The simulations were run simulating connection to a heath
bath at room temperature, where the thermal kinetic energy average is kbT = 26 meV, almost
two orders of magnitude smaller than the bond strengths. Figure 28 shows a histogram of
10000 samples of the thermal kinetic energies at room temperature for water molecules,
calculated from equation [48, Eq. 6.61] and the classical Ekin = 1
2mv2 relation.
Even the upper percentiles of the distribution, no molecules appear to possess enough ki-
netic energy to dissociate the Ag-atom. This could indicate that the CSM predicts stronger
==PAGE:56==
51
6
DISCUSSION OF RESULTS
Figure 28: Distribution of H2O thermal kinetic energy at 300 K determined from sampling
equation [48, Eq. 6.61]. ∼20% of the samples have energies above 0.059 eV.
bonding than the QMMM framework, which would explain the low value of ∆E(Axial,
QMMM, vacuum). To support this, we saw that a QMMM simulation cooled to 150 K took
much longer to dissociate the Ag-atom, where only 2% instead of 20% of the water molecules
possess energies above 0.059 eV 2. To investigate this, further studies should attempt calcula-
tion of not only the excited state PES using CSM, but PES calculated from sampled potential
energies from QMMM simulations. In any case, since the bond strengths calculated from the
CSM PES should rule out dissociation by kinetic interactions with the solvent, it is evident
that further investigations are needed to resolve the question of dissociation mechanic and
bond characteristics.
2Taken as a characteristic bond strength, as ∆E(Axial, QMMM, Hookean) designates a diﬀerence in
bond strength and not a bond strength in and of itself.
==PAGE:57==
52
7
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
7
Conclusion and outlook
We have used DFT calculations in LCAO-mode with the BLYP functional to calculate geo-
metric relaxations, vacuum BOMD simulations, QMMM BOMD simulations in aqueous so-
lution and potential energy surfaces of diﬀerent species of Ag-PtPOP in order to investigate
under which conditions the Ag-atom bonds to the PtPOP complex, in which coordination and
what eﬀect solvation has on complexation. In particular, the literature disagrees on the coor-
dination site of the Ag-atom, motivating investigation of both axially and side-coordinating
Ag-PtPOP.
Geometric relaxations in vacuum yield lower energies for the side-coordinated complex
in the ground state compared to its axial counterpart as was also found by Kruppa and
colleagues in 2016 [14], while the exciplex favored axial coordination. The side-coordinated
species appears to dissociate upon excitation, as evident from convergence diﬃculties and
Ag-O bond lengths exceeding 3 ˚A after excitation. The side-coordinated Ag-atom did not
aﬀect the Pt-Pt bond, reproducing the same bond lengths as the standard PtPOP complex.
The axial complex was in geometric relaxations found to have a 2.85 ˚A Pt-Pt bond length,
elongating to 2.97 ˚A upon excitation, which is 0.2 ˚A longer than previous results from Chris-
tensen and Kong [12, 13]. The axial Ag-Pt bond was found to be 2.63 ˚A in the ground
state, extending to 2.75 ˚A after excitation, which falls between the experimental results of
Christensen and TD-DFT calculations of Kong. Carried out in vacuum, the geometric re-
laxations suggest that the Ag-atom coordinates on the side in the ground state, dissociates
after excitation and is then able to coordinate axially.
In vacuum, 3 picosecond BOMD simulations of Ag-PtPOP likewise indicated exciplex
bonding of the axially coordinated Ag-PtPOP species with the Ag-atom oscillating around
a mean distance slightly further away than the distance determined from the geometric re-
laxations. For the side-coordinated species, excitation resulted in very long bond lengths
between the Ag-atom and the ligand oxygen atoms of the PtPOP complex, indicative of
dissociation despite the atom not completely drifting away. In QMMM BOMD simulations
in the ground state, both species exhibited dissociation of their respective Ag-atoms. Before
dissociation, Kohn-Sham orbitals of the axial species showed remarkable resemblance to the
orbitals presented by Kong [13], while the orbitals of the side-coordinated species appeared
to form a bi-dental anti-bonding coordination to two oxygen atoms on the ligand scaﬀolding,
==PAGE:58==
53
7
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
similar to the scheme proposed by Kruppa [14]. Excited state QMMM BOMD simulations
were halted by convergence issues, prompting usage of a more dense grid spacing and ex-
tended vacuum in the QM-region, which helped convergence in the geometric relaxations.
Due to the increase in computational eﬀort needed for the accurate simulations, it was not
possible to simulate longer than a picosecond before the deadline of this project, meaning
the verdict is still out on whether the increased density and vacuum resolve the convergence
errors and whether the Ag-atom eventually dissociates or not. To force equilibration, another
QMMM BOMD simulation was run with an imposed constraint on the Ag-Pt bond to pre-
vent dissociation. This simulation did stabilize and equilibrate, but even after excitation, the
Ag-atom did not appear to form a bond with the PtPOP complex, but rather keep pushing
against the Hookean constraint. From inspection of the Ag-atom’s traversing of the Hookean
constraint potential, it was inferred that the exciplex bond potential is ∆E(Axial, QMMM,
Hookean) = 0.059 eV below that of the ground state, indicating a stronger binding in the
exciplex, although only a small amount comparable to a weak hydrogen-bond.
Potential energy surfaces (PES) of both the axial and side-coordinated species in vacuum
and solvation using CSM, a continuous solvent model of the water solvent, were calculated.
Analysis and ﬁtting of Morse potentials to the resulting data revealed bond strengths of both
species between 1.18 eV and 3.49 eV, an order of magnitude below typical covalent bonds. In
the ground state, the side-coordinated species exhibited stronger bonding of the Ag-atom in
both vacuum and solvent compared to its axial counterpart. The side-coordinated exciplex
PES did not exhibit bonding characteristics, providing further evidence that the Ag-atom
dissociates upon excitation. The PES of the axial exciplex in vacuum suggested binding, with
a 0.6 eV stronger bond than its ground state counterpart. Taken together, the PES analysis
suggests a side-on coordination of the Ag-atom in the ground state in both vacuum and
solution, with dissociation upon excitation after which the Ag-atom can coordinate along the
Pt-Pt axis to form an axial exciplex. Due to compatibility issues of the CSM and MOM-tool
used to calculate excited state DFT, it was not possible to calculate excited state PES’ in
solution, which constitute an obvious next step to cement the conclusion that the solvated
axial exciplex in fact exhibits bonding characteristics.
Immediate and obvious next steps as part of further research thus include calculating
the excited state PES of especially axial Ag-PtPOP in the CSM by making the MOM-tool
==PAGE:59==
54
7
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
and CSM compatible. To observe the exciplex dynamics in solution, it is also obvious to
continue the QMMM MD simulation in ﬁgure 23, as this trajectory is currently promising to
run without convergence issues. Once this trajectory is equilibrated, it can be used alongside
the equilibrated ground state QMMM simulation with the imposed Hookean constraint to
calculate QMMM based PES’ of the solvated complexes. These would be ideal to investigate
the diﬀerence between the continuous and explicit solvent models as well as explain the
dissociation mechanic observed in the ground state QMMM simulations. In particular, it
remains unclear if the thermal kinetics of the surrounding solvent is responsible for the
dissociation, as they appear to have too low energy to cause it. If they do not, this opens the
discussion of the nature of this elusive Ag-Pt bond, and how we can remedy our simulation
models in order to describe it. The trajectory of these studies will ultimately lead us back to
the studies by Clodfelter, Pettijohn, Sweeney and Gray in the 1980s and 1990s [10, 11, 4, 3]
and to the questions of how like-charged d8 and d10 metals bond to each other, potentially
shedding new light on our fundamental understanding of chemical bonding.
==PAGE:60==
55
8
APPENDIX
8
Appendix
Appendix A - Orbital comparison between continuous and explicit
solvent models
Using the CSM is not sure to reproduce the same solvation eﬀects as the explicit description
in the QMMM framework using the TIP4P potential. A full investigation of the diﬀerences
between the two models is beyond the scope of this work, but ﬁgure 29 shows orbitals of
axial Ag-PtPOP, showing very similar orbitals, which are again similar to the ones produced
by Kong in 2012[13]. This supports using the CSM as stand-in model when calculating the
PES.
Figure 29: Comparison of isosurface 0.05
q
electron density
volume
HOMO orbitals produced by the (left)
CSM and (rigth) explicit QMMM TIP4P model. Both models produce the characteristic anti-
bonding nodal plane of the Pt-Pt bond, show electron density between Ag and the nearest
Pt, while the Ag-atom still maintains some degree of atomic orbital shape within the electron
cloud.
==PAGE:61==
56
8
APPENDIX
Appendix B - Other QMMM MD attempts
This appendix hosts supplementary graphs to section 5, which presents the results of QMMM
MD simulations of Ag-PtPOP. Figure 30 shows a MD simulation where the Langevin in-
tegrator simulates attachment to a heat bath at 150 K, substantially cooler than the room
temperature, which is used in otherwise. The TIP4P potential does not freeze the water
solvent, meaning the low temperature only serves to diminish the thermal kinetic energy
of the surrounding solvent. The Ag-atom still dissociates, but remains attached for almost
three times as long as in the room temperature MD run. It is unclear whether attributable
to the Ag-atom itself or the surrounding solvent, but it is clear that low temperature has
a somewhat stabilizing eﬀect on the bond. However, since the silver still dissociates, it is
unlikely that thermal kinetics are the sole reason for the dissociation.
Figure 30: QMMM MD simulation of axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3 cooled to 150K. While the Ag-
atom still dissociated after 3 ps, it remains attached to the complex noticeably longer than
the room temperature simulation.
Figure 31 shows the temperature, derived from the kinetic energy, of the almost 13 ps
QMMM MD of axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3 with the applied Hookean constraint on the Ag-Pt bond.
After application of the constraint, the Ag atom is kept from dissociating, which promotes a
stabilization of the temperature, indicative of equilibration. The initial spike in temperature
shows the eﬀect of unequilibrated conﬁgurations on the system energy. For the ﬁrst ∼800
==PAGE:62==
57
8
APPENDIX
fs, the temperature is set to 150 K to discourage dissociation.
Figure 31: Temperature of the QMMM MD simulation of axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3. The temper-
ature stabilizes just below 300 K as the Ag-atom settles around the boundary of the Hookean
constraint, which prevents it from dissociating.
Figure 32 shows a QMMM MD of axial Ag-PtPOP without the Hookean Ag-Pt bond
constraint simulated with standard simulation parameters i.e. 0.18 ˚A grid spacing and 4 ˚A
vacuum as determined in the convergence studies. The complex is excited just after 800 fs,
and continues to run for around 500 fs until the SCF-cycle is unable to converge in 1200
iterations.
==PAGE:63==
58
8
APPENDIX
Figure 32: QMMM MD simulation of axial [Ag+PtPOP]−3, which is excited after ∼800 fs.
Convergence stalls after 500 fs of excited state simulation.
Appendix C - Translated PES Morse potential ﬁts
Using the ﬁt parameters, we can plot the PES translated such that they have their asymp-
tomatic limits in 0:
Figure 33 shows the translated ﬁtted potentials, visualizing the diﬀerences in bond strength
as explained in section 6.1.3. Among the side coordinated species, the vacuum PES presents
the strongest binding, which is the opposite in the case of the axial complex, where the CSM
predicts slightly stronger binding. The excited state side coordinated PES tends asymp-
tomatically to 0 without a minimum, indicating that there is no Ag-O bond in the excited
state. The vacuum excited state PES of the axial complex binds 0.6 eV stronger than its
ground state counterpart, providing further evidence of a more strongly binding exciplex in
solution.
==PAGE:64==
59
8
APPENDIX
Figure 33: Fitted Morse potential to the PES data presented in section 6.1.3, translated
using the ﬁtted parameter k, such that the potentials asymptotically approaches 0 for large
value of the dissociation coordinate, which allows direct visual comparison of the potentials.
==PAGE:65==
60
REFERENCES
References
[1]
R. P. Sperline, M. K. Dickson, and D. M. Roundhill. “New route to the directed syn-
thesis of mixed metal chain oligomers. Identiﬁcation of a platinum complex having an
intense emission in the visible spectrum in aqueous solution”. In: J. Chem. Soc., Chem.
Commun. (2 1977), pp. 62–63. doi: 10.1039/C39770000062.
[2]
A. Vicek H. B. Gray S. Z´alis. “Electronic structures and photophysics of d8-d8 com-
plexes”. In: Coordination Chem. Reviews 345 (2017), pp. 297–317. doi: doi.org/10.
1016/j.ccr.2017.01.008.
[3]
R. J. Sweeney, E. L. Harvey, and H. B. Gray. “Photoreactions of tetrakis (-pyrophosphito)
diplatinate(II) with alcohols and hydrocarbons”. In: Coordination Chemistry Reviews
105 (1990), pp. 23–34. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-8545(90)80016-M.
[4]
H. B. Gray D. M. Roundhill and C. M. Che. “Pyrophosphito-Bridged Diplatinum
Chemistry”. In: Amer. Chem. Soc. 22 (2 1989), pp. 55–61. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1021/ar00158a002.
[5]
A. V. Volkov I. V. Novozhilova and P. Coppens. “Theoretical Analysis of the Triplet
Excited State of the PtPOP Ion and Comparison with Time-Resolved X-ray and Spec-
troscopic Results”. In: J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125 (2003), pp. 1079–1087. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/(ISSN)1522-2667.
[6]
N. Yasuda et al. “Excited-state Structure of a Platinum Complex by X-ray Analysis”.
In: Chemistry Letters 31.11 (2002), pp. 1132–1133. doi: 10.1246/cl.2002.1132.
[7]
M. Christensen et al. “Time-Resolved X-ray Scattering of an Electronically Excited
State in Solution. Structure of the 3A2u State of Tetrakis--pyrophosphitodiplatinate(II)”.
In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 131.2 (2009), pp. 502–508. doi: 10.1021/
ja804485d.
[8]
R. M. van der Veen et al. “Vibrational Relaxation and Intersystem Crossing of Binuclear
Metal Complexes in Solution”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 133.2
(2011), pp. 305–315. doi: 10.1021/ja106769w.
[9]
A. E. Stiegman et al. “Electronic spectroscopy of d8-d8 diplatinum complexes. 1A2u,
3Eu, and 3,1B2u excited states of tetrakis(diphosphonato)diplatinate(4-), Pt2(P2O5H2)−4
4 ”.
In: Inorganic Chemistry 26.7 (1987), pp. 1112–1116. doi: 10.1021/ic00254a029.
==PAGE:66==
61
REFERENCES
[10]
S. A. Clodfelter et al. “Luminescent metal-metal-bonded exciplexes involving tetrakis
(µ-diphosphito) diplatinate(II) and thallium(I)”. In: Journal of the American Chemical
Society 116.25 (1994), pp. 11379–11386. doi: 10.1021/ja00104a018.
[11]
C. N. Pettijohn et al. “Luminescent excimers and exciplexes of Pt(II) compounds”.
In: Coordination Chemistry Reviews 171.1 (1998), pp. 85–92. doi: 10.1016/s0010-
8545(98)90015-7.
[12]
M. Christensen et al. “Structure of a short-lived excited state trinuclear Ag-Pt-Pt
complex in aqueous solution by time resolved X-ray scattering”. In: Physical Chemistry
Chemical Physics 12.26 (2010), pp. 6921–6923. doi: 10.1039/c002070b.
[13]
Q. Kong et al. “Theoretical study of the triplet excited state of PtPOP and the exci-
plexes M-PtPOP (M=Tl, Ag) in solution and comparison with ultrafast X-ray scatter-
ing results”. In: Chemical Physics 393.1 (2012), pp. 117–122. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemphys.2011.11.034.
[14]
S. E. Kruppa et al. “Fragmentation pathways of dianionic [Pt2(P2O5H2)4 +X,Y]−2-(X,Y
= H, K, Ag) species in an ion trap induced by collisions and UV photoexcitation”. In:
Int. Jour. of Mass Spectrometry 395 (2016), pp. 7–19. doi: doi.org/10.1016/j.ijms.
2015.11.007.
[15]
R. G. Parr, D. P. Craig, and I. G. Ross. “Molecular Orbital Calculations of the Lower
Excited Electronic Levels of Benzene, Conﬁguration Interaction Included”. In: J. Chem.
Phys. 18 (1950), p. 1561. doi: 10.1063/1.1747540.
[16]
J. Kohanoﬀ. Electronic Structure Calculations for Solids and Molecules. Cambridge
University Press, 2006. isbn: 978-0-521-81591-8.
[17]
A. Warshel and Levitt M. “Theoretical studies of enzymic reactions: Dielectric, elec-
trostatic and steric stabilization of the carbonium ion in the reaction of lysozyme”. In:
Journal of Molecular Biology 103.2 (1976), pp. 227–249. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0022-2836(76)90311-9.
[18]
A. O. Dohn. “Multiscale electrostatic embedding simulations for modeling structure
and dynamics of molecules in solution: A tutorial review”. In: International Journal of
Quantum Chemistry 120.21 (2020), e26343. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/qua.
26343.
==PAGE:67==
62
REFERENCES
[19]
A. K. Rappe et al. “UFF, a full periodic table force ﬁeld for molecular mechanics and
molecular dynamics simulations”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 114.25
(1992), pp. 10024–10035. doi: 10.1021/ja00051a040.
[20]
G. Levi. “Photoinduced Molecular Dynamics in Solution”. PhD thesis. 2018.
[21]
A. H. Larsen et al. “The atomic simulation environment—a Python library for working
with atoms”. In: Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29.27 (June 2017), p. 273002.
doi: 10.1088/1361-648x/aa680e.
[22]
J. J. Mortensen, L. B. Hansen, and K. W. Jacobsen. “Real-space grid implementation of
the projector augmented wave method”. In: Phys. Rev. B 71 (3 Jan. 2005), p. 035109.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.71.035109.
[23]
P. E. Bl¨ochl. “Projector augmented-wave method”. In: Phys. Rev. B 50 (24 Aug. 1994).
[24]
J. Enkovaara et al. “Electronic structure calculations with GPAW: a real-space imple-
mentation of the projector augmented-wave method”. In: Journal of physics. Condensed
matter : an Institute of Physics journal 22 25 (2010), p. 253202. doi: doi.org/10.
1088/0953-8984/22/25/253202.
[25]
A. H. Larsen et al. “Localized atomic basis set in the projector augmented wave
method”. In: Phys. Rev. B 80 (19 2009), p. 195112. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.80.
195112.
[26]
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof. “Generalized gradient approximation made
simple”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 77 (1996). doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.77.3865.
[27]
A. D. Becke. “Density-functional exchange-energy approximation with correct asymp-
totic behavior”. In: Phys. Rev. A 38 (6 Sept. 1988), pp. 3098–3100. doi: 10.1103/
PhysRevA.38.3098.
[28]
C. Lee, W. Yang, and R. G. Parr. “Development of the Colle-Salvetti correlation-energy
formula into a functional of the electron density”. In: Phys. Rev. B 37 (2 1988), pp. 785–
789. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.37.785.
[29]
A. T. B. Gilbert, N.A. Besley, and P. M. W. Gill. “Self-Consistent Field Calculations
of Excited States Using the Maximum Overlap Method (MOM)”. In: The Journal of
Physical Chemistry A 112.50 (2008), pp. 13164–13171. doi: 10.1021/jp801738f.
==PAGE:68==
63
REFERENCES
[30]
E. A. Briggs and N. A. Besley. “Density Functional Theory Based Analysis of Photoin-
duced Electron Transfer in a Triazacryptand Based K+ Sensor”. In: The Journal of
Physical Chemistry A 119.12 (2015), pp. 2902–2907. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpca.5b01124.
[31]
T. Kowalczyk, S. R. Yost, and T. Van Voorhis. “Assessment of the SCF density func-
tional theory approach for electronic excitations in organic dyes”. In: The Journal of
Chemical Physics 134.5 (2011), p. 054128. doi: 10.1063/1.3530801.
[32]
M. Hanson-Heine, M. W. George, and N. A. Besley. “Calculating excited state proper-
ties using Kohn-Sham density functional theory”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics
138.6 (2013), p. 064101. doi: 10.1063/1.4789813.
[33]
O. Gunnarsson and B. I. Lundqvist. “Exchange and correlation in atoms, molecules,
and solids by the spin-density-functional formalism”. In: Phys. Rev. B 13 (10 May
1976), pp. 4274–4298. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.13.4274.
[34]
R. J. Maurer and K. Reuter. “Assessing computationally eﬃcient isomerization dynam-
ics: SCF density-functional theory study of azobenzene molecular switching”. In: The
Journal of Chemical Physics 135.22 (2011), p. 224303. doi: 10.1063/1.3664305.
[35]
A. V. Ivanov et al. Method for Calculating Excited Electronic States Using Density
Functionals and Direct Orbital Optimization with Real Space Grid or Plane Wave Basis
Set. 2021. arXiv: 2102.06542 [physics.comp-ph].
[36]
S. Grimme et al. “A consistent and accurate ab initio parametrization of density func-
tional dispersion correction (DFT-D) for the 94 elements H-Pu”. In: The Journal of
Chemical Physics 132.15 (2010), p. 154104. doi: 10.1063/1.3382344.
[37]
J. J. Mortensen A. O. Dohn E. ¨O. J´onsson et al. “Grid-Based Projector Augmented
Wave (GPAW) Implementation of Quantum Mechanics/Molecular Mechanics (QM/MM)
Electrostatic Embedding and Application to a Solvated Diplatinum Complex”. In: J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 13 (12 2017), pp. 6010–6022. doi: doi.org/10.1021/acs.
jctc.7b00621.
[38]
W. L. Jorgensen. “Quantum and statistical mechanical studies of liquids. 10. Transfer-
able intermolecular potential functions for water, alcohols, and ethers. Application to
liquid water”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 103.2 (1981), pp. 335–340.
doi: 10.1021/ja00392a016.
==PAGE:69==
64
REFERENCES
[39]
J. Zielkiewicz. “Structural properties of water: Comparison of the SPC, SPCE, TIP4P,
and TIP5P models of water”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 123.10 (2005),
p. 104501. doi: 10.1063/1.2018637.
[40]
C. Vega et al. “What ice can teach us about water interactions: a critical comparison of
the performance of diﬀerent water models”. In: Faraday Discuss. 141 (2009), pp. 251–
276. issn: 1364-5498. doi: 10.1039/b805531a. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
b805531a.
[41]
M. P. Allen and D. J. Tildesley. Computer Simulation of Liquids. Oxford University
Press, 2017. isbn: 978-0-198-80319-5.
[42]
J. H. Jensen. Molecular modeling basics. CRC Press, 2010. isbn: 978-1-4200-7527-4.
[43]
Ghost atoms and basis set superposition errors. https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/gpaw/
documentation/lcao/lcao.html#ghost-atoms-and-basis-set-superposition-
errors. Accessed: 2021-06-26.
[44]
Calculation of atomization energies. https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/gpaw/tutorials/
H2/atomization.html. Accessed: 2021-06-27.
[45]
A. Held and M. Walter. “Simpliﬁed continuum solvent model with a smooth cav-
ity based on volumetric data”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 141.17 (2014),
p. 174108. doi: 10.1063/1.4900838.
[46]
Continuum solvent model (CSM). https://wiki.fysik.dtu.dk/gpaw/tutorials/
continuum_solvent_model/continuum_solvent_model.html#gpaw.solvation.
calculator.SolvationGPAW. Accessed: 2021-06-26.
[47]
E. R. Johnson, R. M. Dickson, and A. D. Becke. “Density functionals and transition-
metal atoms”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 126.18 (2007), p. 184104. doi:
10.1063/1.2723118.
[48]
H. Gould and J. Tobochnik. Statistical and Thermal Physics. Princeton University
Press, 2010. isbn: 978-0-691-13744-5.
