==PAGE:1==
Reaction of vegetation to an external
stressor under ambient and under
expected future conditions
Ásdís Vídalín Kristjánsdóttir
M.Sc. Thesis
July 2021
==PAGE:2==
Reaction of vegetation to an external stressor under ambient and under expected future
conditions
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
16th of July 2021
Author:
Ásdís Vídalín Kristjánsdóttir (student no. s181789)
Supervisors:
Stefan Trapp, Professor, Environmental Engineering, DTU
Teis Nørgaard Mikkelsen, Associate Professor, Environmental Engineering, DTU
Credits :
30 ECTS
Copyright:
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be produced or
transmitted in any form or by any means without prior written permission.
Cover photo:
©Ásdís Vídalín Kristjánsdóttir
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The modern climate is changing rapidly, mostly because of human activities. The global
temperature has risen approximately 1◦C since the industrial revolution began (1760). Some
of the indicators of the changing global climate are e.g. increasing temperatures, change
in precipitation, and increasing ﬂood and drought events. This comes with the increasing
risk of water driven soil erosion in many drylands. Food security is also under a threat,
and has already been affected, with the changing temperatures and precipitation patterns.
Over 800 million hectares of land throughout the world are salt-affected, and majority of this
salt-affected land has arisen from natural causes. Sodium chloride (NaCl) is the most soluble
and abundant salt. Plants, like humans, can handle low dosage of salt as they need it to grow,
however when high concentration of salt is in the soil a drought-like environment is created.
Through osmosis, plants take in water through the roots, but when salt saturated water is in
the soil, the water can get subtracted from the plant.
In this study, the reaction from willow plants when being exposed to a stressor (NaCl), along
with future environmental conditions (elevated temperature), were studied. The willow tree
acute toxicity test was used for the two experiments using hydroponic solution. Firstly, where
willow cuttings were exposed with a stressor (NaCl); secondly where the willow cuttings
were exposed with both a stressor (NaCl) and temperature was elevated as well. Three
different concentrations of salt were used, namely 500 mg/L, 1000 mg/L, and 5000 mg/L
along with a control. The experiments took place in the phytotron at Risø Environmental Risk
Assessment Facility. Two measuring methods were used to measure the transpiration from
the willows; by weighting the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks unit (plant, liquid, Erlenmeyer ﬂask) with a
scale, and by measuring using LI-600, equipment that can measure e.g. stomatal conductance.
The results showed that salt (NaCl) does have an effect on the willow trees. That could be
observed from the growth, transpiration rate, and water use efﬁciency. With the highest
concentration of salt, the plants started decaying. Elevated temperature and stressor showed
increase in growth and stronger effects in the transpiration rate. Thus, the combination of
evaluated temperature and salt showed to have worse effect on the plants than only salt,
which also had negative effects.
Keywords: Willow, Toxicity test, Salt, Evapotranspiration, Stomatal Conductance, Transpiration,
Plant uptake, Salt, Porometer.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was conducted by Ásdís Vídalín Kristjánsdóttir (s181789), from 25th of January
2021 to 16th of July 2021, in partial fulﬁllment of the requirements to obtain a Master of
Science degree in Environmental Engineering, from the study line Environmental Chemistry.
It corresponded to 30 ECTs. The experiments were carried out at DTU Risø Campus where the
willow toxicity test was ran. The supervisors for this project were Professor Stefan Trapp, and
Associate Professor Teis Nørgaard Mikkelsen, both from the department of Environmental
Engineering, DTU.
The author was assigned a project where willow trees were ﬁrstly exposed to salt (NaCl), and
secondly exposed to salt and elevated temperature. All laboratory work was done at DTU
Risø. Microsoft Excel was used for data processing, which included all calculations, statistics
treatment, and plots.
Ásdís Vídalín Kristjánsdóttir
DTU Environment, 16th of July 2021
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Environmental Engineering
Kongens Lyngby
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
I want to express my gratitude to my helpful and excellent supervisors Stefan Trapp and
Teis Nørgaard Mikkelsen, without their great help via Zoom meetings, physical meetings,
and for their quick e-mail replies when I was alone in Risø carrying out the experiments. I
want to thank Flemming Møller, ﬁeld technician, for all his help at Risø Environmental Risk
Assessment Facility.
I am grateful for all the friends who I have gained in this adventure. And specially, I would
like to thank my parents whom have never stopped to believe in me and have always given
me all their love and needed support.
The thesis is dedicated to my family and friends who have given me constant support and
encouragement in all my academic career. Without you this journey would not have been as enjoyable
and fun as it was. You are the best.
==PAGE:6==
List of Abbreviations
CI
Conﬁdence Interval
CO2
Carbon Dioxide
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
EC
Electrical Conductivity
FMP
Fresh Matter Production
NaCl
Sodium Chloride
NRT
Normalized Relative Transpiration
PAR
Photosynthetic Active Radiation
RERAF
Risø Environmental Risk Assessment Facility
SE
Standard Error
WUE
Water Use Efﬁciency
==PAGE:7==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Climate change in the world leading to droughts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Environmental effects of salinity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Aims and Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Materials and Methods
4
2.1
Plant Material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Willow Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Risø Environmental Risk Assessment Facility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Chemicals and Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
LI-600 Porometer/Fluorometer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
Data analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Results
15
3.1
First period: 19th of April - 7th of May 2021
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.1
The Willow Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.2
Comparison of two measuring methods for transpiration . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Second period: 10th - 19th of May 2021 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.1
The Willow Experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Comparison of two measuring methods for transpiration . . . . . . . .
25
4
Discussion
27
4.1
Interpretation of the results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
Comparison of result to other ﬁndings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Short comments on limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5
Conclusion(s)
40
Appendix
i
A Details on nutrition solution
i
B
Properties of Sodium Chloride
ii
C Salt used in the experiments
iii
D Determination of NaCl
iv
E
LI-600
v
F
t-distribution table
vii
G Average data from parameters
viii
i
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
1
In order for the cuttings to always get the same amount of light, their position
was marked on an ark. Same Erlenmeyer ﬂask is always placed in the same
position.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
The LI-600 equipment seen from two sides, the top and front.
. . . . . . . . .
8
3
Overview of the cuvette of LI-600 ©LI-COR, [1].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Average transpiration per hour (g/h) over time, ﬁrst period. Notice same
values on y-axis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Normalized relative transpiration (NRT) (g/L) over 15 days (360 hrs) in the
ﬁrst period. Notice that the y-axis goes up to 140%.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
6
The effect NaCl has on growth and fresh matter production (FMP) can be seen.
The average values from each treatment were plotted, where chamber 3 was
ambient condition (20◦C), and chamber 4 was elevated temperature (26◦C). .
17
7
Average water use efﬁciency and average accumulated transpiration from the
ﬁrst period. Results from both chambers are presented, where chamber 3 was
ambient (20◦C), and chamber 4 was elevated temperature (26◦C). . . . . . . .
18
8
Both measuring methods, transpiration weighted from Erlenmeyer ﬂasks and
measured with LI-600, plotted together over the NaCl concentrations. Notice
same values on y-axis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
9
Correlation plot of the transpiration measured from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks
against the transpiration measured with the LI-600, ﬁrst period.
Notice
different values on y-axes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
10
Stomatal conductivity from the LI-600 against the measured transpiration from
the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks. The average values from each treatment was plotted.
Notice different values on y-axis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
11
Average transpiration per hour (g/h) over time, second period. Notice same
values on y-axis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
12
Normalized relative transpiration (NRT) (g/L) over 7 days (168 hrs) in the
second period. Notice that the y-axis goes up to 140% for both chambers. . . .
22
13
The effect of salinity on the growth and fresh matter production of the Willows
from the second period. The average values from each treatment were plotted.
23
14
Average water use efﬁciency (WUE) and average accumulated transpiration
from the second period. Results from both chambers are presented, where
chamber 3 is ambient (20◦C), and chamber 4 is elevated temperature (26◦C). .
24
15
Both measuring methods, transpiration weighted from Erlenmeyer ﬂasks and
measured with LI-600, plotted together over the NaCl concentrations. Notice
same values on y-axis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
16
Correlation plot of the transpiration measured from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks
against the transpiration measured with the LI-600, second period. Notice
different values of y-axes.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
17
Stomatal conductivity from the LI-600 against the measured transpiration from
the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks. The average values from each treatment was plotted.
Notice different values on y-axis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
18
Values from the introduction video from LI-COR. The stomatal conductance is
measured higher for higher temperatures since the stomatal are transpiring
more [2]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
ii
==PAGE:9==
19
Shows the bottle of the nutrient, and how it was mixed. The nutrient was
given to the Willows in the beginning and also the Controls were only given
the nutrient mix ©Ásdís Vídalín Kristjánsdóttir.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
20
The table salt used in the experiments. This table salt contained iodine (I)
©Ásdís Vídalín Kristjánsdóttir.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
21
EC vs NaCl concentration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
22
Table for t-distribution ©C.Dougherty [3]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
iii
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
1
The average photosynthetic active radiation (PAR) in the chambers used in the
experiments, with associated 95% conﬁdence intervals. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Details on the environmental settings in the two chambers used in the experiments.
Chamber 3 uses ambient conditions, whereas chamber 4 uses elevated temperature
conditions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Example of how the t-test is checked. Here the t-test for growth in chamber 3
in ﬁrst period is presented. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
The properties of Sodium Chloride (NaCl) from [4]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
5
Average growth (gww), average fresh matter production (%ww), average water
use efﬁciency (g/L), and average accumulated transpiration (g) with associated
95% conﬁdence intervals across all replications in the willow experiment. The
calculations are from the whole ﬁrst period, based on the wet weight. . . . . .
viii
6
Average growth (gww), average fresh matter production (%ww), average water
use efﬁciency (g/L), and average accumulated transpiration (g) with associated
95% conﬁdence intervals across all replications in the willow experiment. The
calculations are from the whole second period, based on the wet weight. . . .
ix
iv
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
1.1
Climate change in the world leading to droughts
Earth’s climate has changed throughout history including ice ages and their retreat for the
past 650.000 years. After the end of the last ice age, around 11.500 years ago, the modern
climate started to evolve [5]. Climate change is a scary and stressful event happening
globally. Multiple factors have been observed as indicators of the changing global climate, e.g.
increasing temperatures including extreme heat events, changes in precipitation, rise in sea
level, increasing acidity of the ocean, as well as increasing ﬂood and drought events [6]. The
reason for this change in later centuries is primarily due to human activity, which all started
with the industrial revolution (1760-1840), when factories and mass manufacturing started.
Since the industrial revolution began, the earth’s temperature has risen by approximately
1◦C because of human activities. It is given that global temperature is rising by 0.2 ± 0.1◦C
yearly, meaning it would reach 1.5◦C increase around 2040 [7]. It took the planet more than
10.000 years to warm 5◦C and emerge from the last ice age, which gives an average rate of
0.05◦C per century. For the 21st century, the predicted rate of warming is a few degrees per
century, or about 100 times faster [6]. Climate change and global warming has emerged as a
signiﬁcant global concern, surpassing geographical national boundaries [8]. These changes
are expected to increase the risk of water driven soil erosion in many drylands resulting in a
decline in soil organic carbon in some dryland areas [9]. With changing temperatures and
precipitation patterns, along with some extreme events happening more frequently, climate
change has already affected food security [9].
1.2
Environmental effects of salinity
More than 800 million hectares (ha) of land throughout the world are salt-affected, either
by salinity (397 million ha) or the associated condition of sodicity (434 million ha) [10].
This amount accounts for over 6% of the world’s total land area [11] or 10% of the world’s
croplands [12]. The majority of this salt-affected land has arisen from natural causes, such
as salt accumulation over long periods in arid and semiarid zones. The most soluble and
abundant salt released is sodium chloride (NaCl), and another reason of salt accumulation
in the soil, is because of the deposition of oceanic salts carried in rain and wind [13]. The
reason why a signiﬁcant proportion of recently cultivated agricultural land has become saline
1
==PAGE:12==
is because of irrigation or land cleaning [11]. Rainwater, that is close to the coast, contains
6-50 mg NaCl/kg [13] which then precipitates to the soil close to the shore. The roads are
salted in the winters to keep them from freezing, as the ice melts the run-off water to the soils
is saturated with salt [14]. Plants can handle small amounts of salt as they need nutrients
in order to grow, and salt is one of those nutrients [15]. However, even though the soil is
very moist, with a high concentration of salt in it, it can results in a drought-like environment
for the plants. The reason for that is due to when salt dissolves in water, the two ions in
salt, sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl−) separate and when entering the plants through the
root system they can harm the plants [16]. The process, where plants take water through
their roots, is called osmosis. Osmosis is when diffusion of solvent molecules go through a
permeable membrane from a region of high water potential to a region of low water potential.
Salt saturated water can sometimes pull water out of the plant [17, 18], then the plant growth
reduces with increase of salinity in their resource (in soil and/or water). It varies between
plant species and how quickly increased salinity has on the reduction of growth rate [19].
When the salinity rich water is in the transpiration stream of the plant, the salt deposits in
the leaves as the water evaporates, thus the salt builds up in the leaves with time leaving the
older leaves with higher concentration of salt compared to the younger ones [20]. One way
of trying to cope with this accumulation is by shedding older leaves, however this strategy
restrains the plant to grow [12].
1.3
Aims and Objectives
In this report, the reaction from plants, willow trees (Salix viminalis, a species within the willow
plants (Salix spp.)), when being exposed to a stressor (NaCl) along with future environmental
conditions (elevated temperature) were studied. For that the willow tree acute toxicity test
was used [21, 22] where the willow cuttings were grown in hydroponic solution in phytotron
at RERAF. This test has been used to see if and how plants work for phytoremidation
purposes, how ecotoxicity is. Most used equipment’s were Erlenmeyer ﬂasks, scale, and
LI-600 Porometer/Fluorometer (LI-COR, USA).
The project can be divided into three separate studies with a common focus:
1. Comparison of transpiration of willow trees (Salix spp.) by measuring the whole
plant using balance (Erlenmeyer ﬂasks) and for individual leaves measured using the
equipment LI-600.
2
==PAGE:13==
2. Examine the effect of a stressor, salt (NaCl), on the measured parameters. The salt
(NaCl) concentration will be on the range 0 - 5000 mg/L.
3. Examine the effect of a future environmental conditions (temperature) on the plants
and how the measured reaction of the plant (the toxicity) will change.
All parts of the aims were done at the same time, by using two chambers in the phytotron,
and always when measuring was done, both measuring techniques were used.
3
==PAGE:14==
2
Materials and Methods
In this study an experiment was performed twice over two separated periods. The ﬁrst time
period was from the 19th of April - 7th of May 2021 and the second time period from the 10th
- 19th of May 2021. In both periods the same procedure was held, with the exception that
tap water was used in the ﬁrst period to blend the NaCl solution, while deionized water
was used in the second period. The deionized water has had almost all of its mineral ions
removed, such as cations (e.g. sodium calcium iron, and copper), and anions (e.g. chloride
and sulfate).
2.1
Plant Material
Willow plants, Salix spp., are deciduous trees and bushes which have the ability to grow
fast under different temperature, light, pH, and nutrient conditions - making them the ideal
test plants. Furthermore, throughout the stem the willows have minimal differences in the
genetic material making it easy to grow the cuttings [23, 24]. The willow species used in
this research is Salix viminalis, or the Basket willow. They can survive for a long time under
ﬂooded conditions [25, 26], thus willows can be grown hydroponically.
At Risø Environmental Risk Assessment Facility (RERAF), in DTU Risø Campus, there is a
willow forest grown for experiments. From this willow forest the cuttings for this experiment
are sampled. Each cutting varies in length between 30-40 cm, whereas the diameter is between
1-2 cm. Then the willow cuttings are placed in a bucked with tap water covering third of the
bucket. The buds, on the stems, are checked and pointed upward to ensure that the cuttings
are placed correctly in the buckets, in order for the roots to grow correctly. The bucket is
placed in chamber with constant light, and a temperature of 15-17◦C, for the roots and leaves
to develop. The cutting are pre-grown for around 2-3 weeks, or until at least 10 leaves have
developed and some strong roots [21].
2.2
Willow Experiment
In order to measure the acute toxicity of substrate, here different NaCl concentrations, and
water uptake by the willow cuttings, the willow toxicity test was performed [22]. The test is
usually performed in hydroponic solution since it is easier to interpret the results, than when
using soil [21, 22, 24]. The hydroponic test uses transpiration as an indicator of the toxic
4
==PAGE:15==
effects on cuttings, since it is an established method to measure toxicity to a plant [22, 23, 27].
Transpiration has a close relation to growth and photosynthesis of the plant, thus being a
excellent parameter for measuring the toxic effects on the plant, but easier and faster to
measure, as the change of mass in a soil/plant system is 300 times larger by transpiration
than it is by growth (dry weight) [22]. Therefor transpiration is an established method to
measure toxicity of a plant [22, 23].
(a) The set-up in the chamber. An ark was used to
mark where each Erlenmeyer ﬂask was positioned on
the table, in order for the plant to always get the same
amount of light.
(b) Here the set-up can be seen when the experiment
was conducted. Each ﬂask is numbered and sealed with
aluminium foil.
Figure 1: In order for the cuttings to always get the same amount of light, their position was marked
on an ark. Same Erlenmeyer ﬂask is always placed in the same position.
To execute the willow toxicity test, the willow cuttings were put into Erlenmeyer ﬂasks. Since
the willows have a pressurized ventilation system which supplies the roots with plenty of
oxygen [25], it is known that they can thrive in a closed system [22]. The roots of the cuttings
are submerged in the solution, when positioned in the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks [22].
Before the treatment with NaCl solution is conducted the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks are ﬁlled with
approximately 500 mL of nutrient solution, in which the cuttings are kept in for 2-3 days, and
sealed with aluminium foil to minimize the evaporation of the liquid. That is done in order
to see if the cuttings are healthy, it is estimated that healthy 3-4 week old willow cuttings
transpire on average around 5 g/day [21]. The mixing of the nutrient solution can be seen
in subsection 2.4 and Appendix A, and mixing of the NaCl solution can also been seen in
subsection 2.4. All 32 ﬂasks, 16 plants are used in each chamber where 4 replicates of each
treatment is used, is numbered and located in the chambers in order to always place the same
plant in the same spot under artiﬁcial light throughout the entire experiment, marked on the
paper as can be seen in Figure 1. Photosynthetic active radiation (PAR) was measured at each
5
==PAGE:16==
ﬂasks location using LI-COR LI-250A light meter (LI-COR, USA), the average PAR value for
each treatment is presented in Table 1.
Table 1: The average photosynthetic active radiation (PAR) in the chambers used in the experiments,
with associated 95% conﬁdence intervals.
Avg. PAR (µmol photons/s·m2)
Control
500 mg/L
100 mg/L
5000 mg/L
Chamber 3
579 ± 30
597 ± 29
592 ± 26
565 ± 23
Chamber 4
440 ± 8
476 ± 24
491 ± 32
468 ± 33
Thereafter, approximately 500 mL of the NaCl concentrations are added into the Erlenmeyer
ﬂasks together with the cuttings, except the control that are ﬁlled with water; tap water in the
ﬁrst period while deionized water was used on the second period. The NaCl concentrations
used in the experiments are 0 mg/L (control), 500 mg/L, 1000 mg/L, and 5000 mg/L four
replicates for each. Throughout the experiment, it is ensured that no cuttings experience
water stress [21]. The plant-ﬂask-system unit is weighted every other day for approximately
1-2 weeks in order to document the changes in weight, and thus calculate the change in
transpiration by which the toxic effect can be quantiﬁed from. In the end of the test the toxic
effect can be seen as well by calculating the difference in growth of the cuttings [21, 28].
2.3
Risø Environmental Risk Assessment Facility
All cuttings are cultivated in Risø Environmental Risk Assessment Facility (RERAF) phytotron
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). RERAF consists of six identical physically
separated gas-tight growth chambers, where in this experiment two chambers are used,
namely chamber 3 and 4. Each chamber is 4 m × 6 m × 3.1 m (W × L × H) and is equipped
with individual control, where the environmental condition, such as light level, temperature,
humidity, concentration of CO2 and O3 (ozone) parameters which can be accurately controlled
[29, 30]. Two fans ensured air mixing within each chamber, placed on opposite sides. In front
of one of the wind turbines is a humidiﬁer which generates humidity. The artiﬁcial light was
supplied by lamps, 28 high-pressure mercury lambs and 14 halogen lamps (1000 W and 400
W respectively), which could be controlled individually by turning them on or off, which can
be used to simulate sunrise and sunset. In this experiment a full daylight was kept the whole
day (24 hrs). Further details on RERAF are given by Alemayehu et al. (2014) [31] and Frenck
et al. (2011) [32] [29, 30].
6
==PAGE:17==
For this experiment, the conditions are considered as a mimic of ﬁeld average conditions,
today and then future conditions. The parameters can be seen in Table 2. The only variation
in the parameters is the temperature, other parameters, as humidity, CO2 and light, are kept
the same.
Table 2: Details on the environmental settings in the two chambers used in the experiments. Chamber
3 uses ambient conditions, whereas chamber 4 uses elevated temperature conditions.
Temperature
Humidity
CO2
Light hours
(◦C)
(%)
(ppm)
(hr)
Ambient (chamber 3)
20
60
400
24
Elevated temperature (chamber 4)
26
60
400
24
2.4
Chemicals and Solutions
In the experiments, two types of solutions were used, nutrition solution and NaCl solution.
The nutrition solution was mixed in the ratio 1 mL nutrient liquid with 1 L deionized water,
a more detailed description can be found in Appendix A. For the NaCl solution table salt
was mixed with water. In the ﬁrst period tap water was used, whereas in the second period
deionized water was used. The calculations for the three concentrations can be seen in the
equations here below Appendix C:
Stock solution: 10 000 mg of NaCl are mixed into 2 L of water => 5000 mg/L.
First dilution: 400 mL of the stock solution was diluted with water and ﬁlled up to 2 L.
5000 mg/L · 0.4 L = 2000 mg => 2000 mg/2 L = 1000 mg/L
Second dilution: 200 mL of the stock solution was diluted with water and ﬁlled up to 2
L.
5000 mg/L · 0.2 L = 1000 mg => 1000 mg/2 L = 500 mg/L
The controls were given only water, and in the same way as for the NaCl concentrations tap
water was used in the ﬁrst period, whereas in the second period deionized water was used.
2.5
LI-600 Porometer/Fluorometer
The LI-600 Porometer/Fluorometer (LI-COR, USA) is an straightforward equipment which
consists of both porometer and ﬂuorometer, the equipment can be seen in Figure 2. It is small,
7
==PAGE:18==
light weight, and nimble since it is made to be used with only one hand. Its dimensions are
32.4 cm × 16.9 cm × 6.2 × (L × W × H). The equipment can measure two aspects of leaf
photosynthesis in different ways, by using the porometer or by using the ﬂuorometer. The
porometer computes stomatal conductance (gsw) by using mass balance for water vapour ﬂux
from the leaf. While by using the ﬂuorometer, the quantum yield of photosystem II is probed
by using optical techniques [1]. In this experiment, only the porometer was used.
(a) The LI-600 seen from the users view, the black wrist
strap is put around the wrist to decrease the risk of
dropping it. The control screen is easy to use.
(b) The LI-600 seen from the front, the cuvette is seen
open in this picture.
Figure 2: The LI-600 equipment seen from two sides, the top and front.
The porometer measures the area of the stomatal opening of a leaf by the amount of a
gas passing through a given area of it. The porometer is an open system and uses a leaf
cuvette to measure, the cuvette can be seen in Figure 2b. From the difference in H2O in an
air-stream ﬂowing through the leaf cuvette, the transpiration (E) is computed. By measuring
the transpiration, the leaf cuvette can compute the stomatal conductance (gsw). While the
LI-600 is measuring the stomatal conductance, it uses non-contact infrared thermometer to
measure the leaf temperature (Tlea f ) [1]. A clariﬁcation of how the leaf curvette works can be
seen in Figure 3.
For this experiments the Auto Mode was used to take the measurements on the LI-600, which
are point-measurements. A measurement for one leaf takes around 5-15 seconds and all logs
are saved in the same data ﬁle. The data ﬁle transferred to a computer through a LI-COR
LI-600 software. It was important to try take the measurement at same place on the leaf every
time measurements are made, as stomatal behaviour is not uniform across a leaf. There might
even be different for adjacent stomata [33].
8
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3: Overview of the cuvette of LI-600 ©LI-COR, [1].
Derivation of Equations
In the equations below, the theoretical derivation for the stomatal conductivity is derived
from the mass balance of water vapour, the equations are from the [1]. The LI-600 calculates
the stomatal conductivity and presents it as a number in the data ﬁle.
At steady-state the mass balance of water vapour, in an open system, is given by Equation 1.
s · E = u0 · Wsam −ui · Wre f
(1)
where s is leaf area (m2), E is transpiration (mol m−2 s−1), ui (µmol s−1) is ﬂow rate into the
leaf cuvette, and u0 (µmol s−1) is ﬂow rate out of the leaf cuvette, ﬁnally, Wre f , Wsam are water
vapour mole fractions into and out of the leave cuvette (mol H2O mol air−1).
Flow rate out of the leaf cuvette, u0, is given by the equation:
u0 = ui + s · E
(2)
If Equation 2 is substituted into Equation 1 it can be rewritten to Equation 3.
9
==PAGE:20==
s · E = (ui + s · E) · Wsam −ui · Wre f
(3)
Then if Equation 3 is solved for transpiration (E) it gives:
E = (ui · (Wsam −Wre f ))
s · (1 −Wsam)
(4)
The equation for total conductance to water vapour is given by Equation 5.
gtw =
E ·

1 −
(Wlea f +Wsam)
2

(Wlea f −Wsam)
(5)
where gtw is total conductance to water vapour (mol H2O m−1 s−1), and Wlea f is the calculated
molar concentration of water vapour within the leaf inter-cellular air-space (mol H2O mol
air−1). Wlea f is calculated form measured leaf temperature and pressure (the equations for
leaf temperature and pressure are not derived here).
Total conductance (gtw) consists of stomatal conductance (gsw) and boundary layer (gbw). In
order to calculate the stomatal conductance (gsw), which is what the porometer gives us, the
contribution from the boundary layer (gbw) must be removed from the total conductance, as
seen in Equation 6:
gsw =
1
1
gtw −
1
gbw
(6)
where the equation for gbw is the following:
gbw = ( f low2 × −6.755 · 10−5) + (0.0292302 × f low)
(7)
and where gsw is the one-sided stomatal conductance to water vapour, gbw is the one-sided
boundary layer conductance, both in (mol H2O m−2 s−1) and the ﬂow is the cuvette ﬂow rate
(µmol s−1) [1].
10
==PAGE:21==
2.6
Data analysis
The following section provides the main calculation methods of the study, along with the
statistical analysis tools used for data treatment.
Normalized Relative Transpiration
Transpiration (weight loss over time) of the plants collected in the willow toxicity test is
used to determine the NaCl toxicity, and to calculate the normalized relative transpiration
(NRT). The transpiration is closely connected to growth [14], except it is quicker to give
results. In order to measure the transpiration, the plants do not need to be removed for the
Erlenmeyer ﬂask [28]. Since transpiration is inhibited by contaminants, it is expected that
healthy trees grow more than the sick trees. By calculating the NRT, the transpiration rates
can be compared. NRT is calculated by dividing the change of transpiration of exposed trees
by the change of the controls. [28, 34].
NRT is calculated by comparing the change of transpiration of each individual tree to the
change of a set of control trees, where the toxicity exposed trees show decrease in transpiration.
A NRT value <10% indicates a lethal effect [35]. The NRT is is calculated with Equation 8 by
[22].
NRT(C, t)(%) =
1
n · ∑n
i=1 Ti(C, t)/Ti(C, 0)
1
m · ∑m
j=1 Tj(0, t)/Tj(0, 0) × 100
(8)
where C is the concentration (mg/L), t is the time period, T is the absolute transpiration (g/h),
n is the number of replicates for the concentration the NRT is calculated for, m is the number
of controls, i is the replicates and j is the controls. For the willow tree toxicity test, the time 0
is the last transpiration measured before addition of the salt.
The NRT of a control is always 100%, and values below 100% are therefore caused by an
inhibiting effect from the toxicity [34].
Water Use Efﬁciency
Water use efﬁciency is referred as the amount of water vapour lost when the stomata is open
to let CO2 in [36]. The WUE can be expressed in two ways. First, as the WUE of productivity
which is the cost in water loss for the plant during the production of gain in carbon or biomass.
11
==PAGE:22==
Second, as WUE of photosynthesis which is the the carbon gain in photosynthesis per unit of
water lost in transpiration [37, 38].
In this study, Equation 9 is used to calculate WUE. It shows how efﬁcient the plant was able
to use water fro growth. WUE was calculated as overall growth divided over the whole
period by accumulated transpiration, results giving high numbers indicate efﬁcient use of
the water for growth. To convert the grams from the transpiration to liters, density of 1 kg/L
is used, as it is known that density of 1 L water with 5 g of NaCl is near 1 kg/L.
WUE = ∆G
∆E
(9)
where WUE is the water use efﬁciency (g/L), ∆G is the growth change between the ﬁrst
and ﬁnal day of exposure (gww), and ∆E is the accumulated transpiration (g) over the whole
period.
Matching units for transpiration comparison
The transpiration from the LI-600 is in the unit mmol/m−2s−1 and in order to compare it to
the transpiration measured form the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks, a unit change needed to be calculated.
It was estimated that the average area of the leaves is 7 cm2 (7 cm length × 1 cm width). In
order to know from how many leaves the plant is transpiring, the number of leaves on the
plants was estimated from counting the leaves on each plant from a photos that the author
took of the plants every time the weighting measurement from the Erlenmeyer was done.
Then, by using the equation here below, the unit from the LI-600 can be converted to g/h,
and thus compared to the transpiration from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks.
mmol
m2 · s · 0.0180
g
mmol · 0.0007 m2
2.78 × 10−4 s
h
· no. o f leaves = g
h
(10)
Determination of NaCl
Electrical conductivity (EC) was measured using conductivity meter Multi 3630 IDS (WTW,
Germany). A linear calibration curve between the electrical conductivity and the NaCl
concentrations in solutions were established, the plots, and regression equations can be seen
in Appendix D.
12
==PAGE:23==
Statistical Analysis
All statistics in this study are carried out in Microsoft Excel by using the statistical tools and
functions embedded in Microsoft Excel. The main statistics that are used are T-test, 95%
standard errors, and linear regressions.
The T-test is a test for difference in means. It is either a two-tailed or a one-tailed test and
is used to determine if the means of two sets of data differ signiﬁcantly from on another. It
can be performed in three ways, they are paired, equal variance and unequal variance. The
P-value of a T-test indicates how consistent the data set is with the null hypothesis with a 95%
conﬁdence level. The null hypothesis is rejected if the p-value is <0.05, indicating that the
two populations have statistically different variances. A one-tailed test represents the mean
of one sample is signiﬁcantly lower than the mean of the other sample [39]. In this study, for
the T-test, one-tailed was conducted. Where the one-tailed was used when comprehending if
one data group was higher or lower than another data group.
When the t-test is calculated with one-tailed, the relation between the controls and all the
other concentrations are checked, and the other concentrations internally to each other, see
example in Table 3.
Table 3: Example of how the t-test is checked. Here the t-test for growth in chamber 3 in ﬁrst period is
presented.
Control & 500 mg/L
Control & 1000 mg/L
Control & 5000 mg/L
0.0017
0.0001
0.0004
500 mg/L & 1000 mg/L
500 mg/L & 5000 mg/L
1000 mg/L & 5000 mg/L
0.0141
0.0088
0.1256
The standard error (SE) explains the spread of values in the data-set with a given level of
conﬁdence, where the following equation constitutes the conﬁdence interval (CI):
x −tn−1,α/2 ·
s
√n ≤µ ≤x + tn−1,α/2 ·
s
√n
(11)
where x is the mean of the samples, s is the standard deviation, µ is the mean of the samples,
tn−1,α/2 is the t-distribution with n-1 degrees of freedom and a signiﬁcance level (α) of 0.05,
and n is the size of the sample. The standard error is calculated using Excel with t-distribution
values for α=0.05, the t-distribution table can be seen in Appendix F.
13
==PAGE:24==
For least square regression a regression line was achieved giving the the coefﬁcient of
determination, R2. Which was calculated in Excel and presented in the graphs. The coefﬁcient
of determination is the correlation coefﬁcient (r) squared.
14
==PAGE:25==
3
Results
In this chapter the results from the ﬁndings of the experiments will be presented. The results
are subdivided into two time periods in which the experimentation was conducted.
3.1
First period: 19th of April - 7th of May 2021
In the following section the results, which were conducted in the ﬁrst period, are presented
along with statistical evaluation of the results. Worth recalling, the NaCl concentrations was
mixed with tap water in this period.
3.1.1
The Willow Experiment
Transpiration
The transpiration data collected from the experiment were analysed to determine whether
some of the cuttings tested were unhealthy for other reasons than salt poisoning. The ﬁrst
indicator for NaCl poisoning was the effect on transpiration rates. In Figure 4, the average
transpiration per hour for all concentrations can be seen. The ﬁrst values in the graphs
indicate how the willow cuttings were transpiring, when in nutrient solution, before treated
with NaCl concentrations.
The experiment ran for 360 hours. In both plots, the control stabilises after being transferred
from nutrient solution to tap water.
Chamber 3: The drop in transpiration from 0-96 hours was due to the toxicity from the NaCl.
The concentrations, and control, become stable throughout the time.
(a) Chamber 3, ambient conditions (20◦C), ﬁrst period.
(b) Chamber 4, elevated temperature (26◦C), ﬁrst
period.
Figure 4: Average transpiration per hour (g/h) over time, ﬁrst period. Notice same values on y-axis.
15
==PAGE:26==
Chamber 4: The same pattern can be seen in chamber 4 as for chamber 3, thus there was
a drop in transpiration after the ﬁrst 96 hours after the NaCl solution was added in the
beginning. The transpiration was overall higher in chamber 4 which could be due to higher
temperature.
NRT
The NRT of the treated willows can be seen in Figure 5 as a function of time. Figure 5a shows
results for chamber 3 at 20◦C, whereas Figure 5b shows results for chamber 4 at 26◦C.
Chamber 3: NRT decreases clearly with increased NaCl concentration. NRT for willows
exposed to all NaCl concentrations are found to be signiﬁcantly different from the control
(P<0.05, one-tailed t-test). The NaCl concentration of 5000 mg/L had a substantial inhibiting
effect on the willow cuttings transpiration after 96 hours of exposure, or 58% inhibition. All
concentrations stabilise after approximately 192 hours of exposure. The ﬁnal NRT values for
the NaCl concentrations was 61%, 42%, and 20% for NaCl concentrations 500 mg/L, 1000
mg/L and, 5000 mg/L, respectively.
(a) Chamber 3, ambient conditions (20◦C), ﬁrst period.
(b) Chamber 4, elevated temperature (26◦C), ﬁrst
period.
Figure 5: Normalized relative transpiration (NRT) (g/L) over 15 days (360 hrs) in the ﬁrst period.
Notice that the y-axis goes up to 140%.
Chamber 4: Equation 8 explained how NRT was calculated, and from the equation it was
known that NRT value was calculated relative to control, thus lower transpiration in control
relative to the rest, will result in increasing NRT values. Which explains the high NRT values
in the ﬁrst 192 hours of the exposure. No dramatic changes could be seen in the NRT for
any of the concentration except the 5000 mg NaCl/L. No signiﬁcant difference was found
between the control and 500 mg NaCl/L (P=0.27, one-tailed t-test), and control and 1000 mg
NaCl/L (P=0.45, one-tailed t-test). NRT value in the end of the experiment was 87%, 79%,
16
==PAGE:27==
and 27% for the NaCl concentrations, respectively, 500 mg/L, 1000 mg/L, and 5000 mg/L.
Growth and Fresh Matter Production
In Figure 6 the average growth and the average fresh matter production (FMP) are presented.
It is noteworthy that the results from chambers 3 and 4 are in contrast, as the values from
chamber 4 were unexpected. More detailed table with all the values and the 95% conﬁdence
interval can be found in Appendix G.
Chamber 3: The trend for both the average growth and average FMP was decreasing with
increasing NaCl concentration, as can be seen in Figure 6. Negative growth indicates necrosis
or wilting, resulting in a decrease in weight, which happens at 5000 mg/L. For both the
average growth and the average FMP; all NaCl concentrations show signiﬁcant difference
(P<0.05, one-tailed t-test) with the exception of when NaCl concentrations 1000 mg/L and
5000 mg/L were compared, which showed no notable differences where the P-values were
0.13 for growth and 0.09 for FMP, by using the one-tailed t-test.
(a) The average of the growth (g) from each NaCl
treatment over the ﬁrst period. The average values
from each treatment were plotted.
(b) The average fresh matter production (%) from each
NaCl treatment over the ﬁrst period.
Figure 6: The effect NaCl has on growth and fresh matter production (FMP) can be seen. The average
values from each treatment were plotted, where chamber 3 was ambient condition (20◦C), and chamber
4 was elevated temperature (26◦C).
Chamber 4: The average growth increased with increasing concentration, with the exception
of NaCl concentration 5000 mg/L where the value were lower than the other concentrations,
but higher than the control. The same goes for the FMP, where there was an increase in the
production with increasing NaCl concentrations, with the exception of the 5000 mg NaCl/L
which was lower than the other concentrations, but higher than the controls. The average
growth was found to be signiﬁcantly different (P<0.05, one-tailed t-test) when comparing all
NaCl concentrations, with the exception when control and 5000 mg/L (P=0.28, one-tailed
17
==PAGE:28==
t-test), and 500 mg/L and 1000 mg/L (P=0.08, one-tailed t-test) were tested with one-tailed
t-test, then no signiﬁcant difference was found. FMP for all concentrations are found to be
notably different from one another (P<0.05, one-tailed t-test), with the exception from the
comparison between 500 mg/L and 1000 mg/L (P=0.27, one-tailed t-test).
WUE and accumulated Transpiration
Another interesting result, that can say something about increasing temperature, uptake and
toxicity was the average accumulated transpiration from the cuttings in each concentration
and water use efﬁciency (WUE). Also, there was found to be a close relation between
growth and WUE. In Figure 7 both average WUE and average accumulated transpiration are
presented along with 95% conﬁdence interval for the values, for both chambers.
Chamber 3: There was a signiﬁcant difference between all NaCl concentrations, and between
controls and NaCl concentrations (P<0.05, one-tailed t-test) from the results from WUE, except
when comparing 1000 mg/L and 5000 mg/L there was no signiﬁcant difference (P=0.08,
one-tailed t-test). When looking at the accumulated transpiration, signiﬁcant difference
(P<0.05, one-tailed t-test) was found between all NaCl concentrations, with one exception
when comparing 1000 mg/L and 5000 mg/L no signiﬁcant difference was found (P=0.07,
one-tailed t-test).
(a) Average water use efﬁciency (g/L) for both
chambers, ﬁrst period.
(b) Average accumulated transpiration (g) for both
chambers, ﬁrst period.
Figure 7: Average water use efﬁciency and average accumulated transpiration from the ﬁrst period.
Results from both chambers are presented, where chamber 3 was ambient (20◦C), and chamber 4 was
elevated temperature (26◦C).
Chamber 4: The same trend can be seen here for the average WUE as for the average growth
and average FMP. The results show increasing values with increasing NaCl concentrations.
For 5000 mg NaCl/L, the values are lower than for the other two concentrations, but higher
18
==PAGE:29==
than the control. This was not the case for the accumulated transpiration where the control
hast he highest accumulation, drops down between the control and 500 mg/L but increase
for the higher concentrations. There was found to be signiﬁcant difference (P<0.05, one-tailed
t-test) between all NaCl concentrations, with the exception between 1000 mg/L and 5000
mg/L (P=0.13, one-tailed t-test) where no signiﬁcant difference was found.
3.1.2
Comparison of two measuring methods for transpiration
In this section a comparison between the weighted transpiration from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks
and the measured transpiration with the LI-600 was studied.
The two measuring methods were compared to each other, by plotting them together for each
NaCl concentration, seen in Figure 8. In Figure 9 a correlation plot between the transpiration
from the LI-600, on the y-axis, and the transpiration from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks, on the x-axis,
was shown, along with a regression line. It can be seen that the measurements from the
Erlenmeyer ﬂasks are precise, since all the values are close and in some cases overlapping.
Chamber 3: It can be seen that all the weighted transpiration from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks
are overlapping for all NaCl concentrations, thus the measurements are accurate. The
measurements with the LI-600 are overlapping in some cases. There was a 40% correlation
between these two measurement method, as can be seen in Figure 9a, which was not ideal.
(a) Chamber 3, ambient conditions (20◦C), ﬁrst period.
(b) Chamber 4, evaluated conditions (26◦C), ﬁrst
period.
Figure 8: Both measuring methods, transpiration weighted from Erlenmeyer ﬂasks and measured with
LI-600, plotted together over the NaCl concentrations. Notice same values on y-axis.
Chamber 4: The weighted transpiration from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks are overlapping for all
NaCl concentrations, with the exception of one outlier measured in the 500 mg NaCl/L, thus
the measurements are precise. The measurements with the LI-600 are overlapping in some
19
==PAGE:30==
(a) Chamber 3, ambient conditions (20◦C), ﬁrst period.
(b) Chamber 4, evaluated conditions (26◦C), ﬁrst
period.
Figure 9: Correlation plot of the transpiration measured from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks against the
transpiration measured with the LI-600, ﬁrst period. Notice different values on y-axes.
cases, with exception for one outlier measured in the 1000 mg NaCl/L. The correlation graph
shows a good correlation of the two measuring methods, or 54% correlation, see Figure 9b.
In Figure 10 the correlation between stomatal conductance (gsw), from the LI-600, against
transpiration from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks was presented for the whole ﬁrst period. From both
chambers it can be seen that there was good relation between low stomatal conductance (the
lower the number, the stomata was closing for water vapour to exit) and low transpiration.
For chamber 3, the correlation was 65% (R2=0.6535), and for chamber 4 the correlation was
79% (R2=0.7854).
(a) Chamber 3, ambient conditions (20◦C), ﬁrst period.
(b) Chamber 4, evaluated conditions (26◦C), ﬁrst
period.
Figure 10: Stomatal conductivity from the LI-600 against the measured transpiration from the
Erlenmeyer ﬂasks. The average values from each treatment was plotted. Notice different values on
y-axis.
20
==PAGE:31==
3.2
Second period: 10th - 19th of May 2021
In the following section the results conducted in the second period of the experiment are
presented along with statistical evaluation of the results. It is worth recalling that the NaCl
concentrations was mixed with deionized water in this period.
3.2.1
The Willow Experiment
Transpiration
In Figure 11, the average transpiration per hour for all the concentrations can be seen. The
ﬁrst values in the graphs indicate how the willow cuttings were transpiring, when in nutrient
solution, before treated with NaCl concentrations. The experiment ran for a total of 168 hours.
In both plots, the control stabilizes after being transferred from nutrient solution to tap water.
Chamber 3: The transpiration lowered as NaCl concentrations were given to the plants. The
controls were stable since there were no ions in the deionized water to harm the cuttings.
From the controls, the transpiration decreased from 1.08 g/h to 0.88 g/h after 120 h, while
the willow cuttings exposed to 500 mg/L and 1000 mg/L had little effect on the transpiration
from the cuttings. On the other hand, the cuttings exposed to 5000 mg/L decreased down to
0.27 g/h from 2.19 g/h.
(a) Chamber 3, ambient conditions (20◦C), second
period.
(b) Chamber 4, elevated temperature (26◦C), second
period.
Figure 11: Average transpiration per hour (g/h) over time, second period. Notice same values on
y-axis.
Chamber 4: The transpiration lowered as NaCl concentrations were given to the plants. The
controls were stable since there were no ions in the deionized water to harm the cuttings,
decreasing from 2.13 g/h to 1.58 g/h. The two concentrations, 500 mg/L and 1000 mg/L,
21
==PAGE:32==
did not impact the cuttings greatly. The 5000 mg/L impacts the controls greatly as the
transpiration decreases from 2.26 g/h down to 0.23 g/h.
NRT
The NRT was calculated from the exposed willows to NaCl and are presented in Figure 12
as a function of time. Figure 12a shows for Chamber 3 at 20◦C and Figure 12b shows for
Chamber 4 at 26◦C.
Chamber 3: NRT decreases with increased NaCl concentration. Between all NaCl concentrations
and controls, a notable difference was found (P<0.05, one-tailed t-test). Like in the ﬁrst period,
the concentration of 5000 mg NaCl/L was found to have the larges inhibiting effect on the
willows transpiration. After 96 hours of exposure, the inhibition was 64%. The ﬁnal NRT
values for the NaCl concentrations was 70%, 42%, and 13% for NaCl concentrations 500
mg/L, 1000 mg/L, and 5000 mg/L, respectively.
(a) Chamber 3, ambient conditions (20◦C), second
period.
(b) Chamber 4, elevated temperature (26◦C), second
period.
Figure 12: Normalized relative transpiration (NRT) (g/L) over 7 days (168 hrs) in the second period.
Notice that the y-axis goes up to 140% for both chambers.
Chamber 4: Similar to the chamber 4 plot in the ﬁrst period, Figure 5b, the NRT for chamber
4 in the second period showed no drastic change, with the exception for the concentration of
5000 mg NaCl/L. The NRT for 5000 mg NaCl/L showed a steady decrease throughout the
period. The willow cuttings exposed to 500 mg NaCl/L and 1000 mg NaCl/L, were found to
have no signiﬁcant difference with the control (P=0.27, and P=0.45 respectively, one-tailed
t-test). Between the control and the 5000 mg NaCl/L was found to be signiﬁcant different
(P<0.05, one-tailed t-test). The ﬁnal NRT values after 168 hours were 91%, 63%, and 13% for
the NaCl concentrations, respectively, 500 mg/L, 1000 mg/L, and 5000 mg/L.
Growth and Fresh Matter Production
22
==PAGE:33==
The average growth and average FMP are shown in Figure 13. It can be seen that both result
in the same trend, thus with increasing NaCl concentration both growth and FMP decrease,
where negative growth indicates necrosis or wilting, resulting in a decrease in average growth
and average FMP
Chamber 3: Negative results were obtained with NaCl concentration 5000 mg/L, and 1000
mg/L had a average growth of 0.10 g and average FMP of 0.38% over the period. The average
growth showed a signiﬁcant differences between all treatments (P<0.05, one-tailed t-test),
with exception when the controls and 500 mg/L were compared, there was no signiﬁcant
difference (P=0.08, one-tailed t-test). T-test comparison between the NaCl concentrations for
the average FMP are all signiﬁcantly difference (P<0.05, one-tailed t-test) with the exception
of when control and 500 mg/L are compared, there was no signiﬁcant difference (P=0.2,
one-tailed t-test). It is worth mentioning that for the average FMP, there was a tendency for
no difference when comparing the control and 1000 mg/L since the P-value was P=0.053
(one-tailed, t-test).
(a) The average of the growth (g) from each NaCl
treatment over the second period. The average values
from each treatment were plotted.
(b) The average fresh matter production (%) from each
NaCl treatment over the second period.
Figure 13: The effect of salinity on the growth and fresh matter production of the Willows from the
second period. The average values from each treatment were plotted.
Chamber 4: The same trend was observed for chamber 4, where both average growth and
average FMP were decreasing with increasing NaCl concentration. The willows treated
with 5000 mg/L showed a negative average growth, indicating necrosis or wilting. The
average growth showed signiﬁcant difference between all treatments (P<0.05, one-tailed
t-test) except when two treatments were compared, namely control and 500 mg/L (P=0.44,
one-tailed t-test), and 500 mg/L and 1000 mg/L (P=0.08, one-tailed t-test), no signiﬁcant
different showed. On the other hand, average FMP showed no signiﬁcant difference when
23
==PAGE:34==
the NaCl concentrations were compared using one-tailed t-test (P<0.05, one-tailed t-test) with
the exception of when the control and 500 mg/L were compared, there was no signiﬁcant
difference (P=0.98, one-tailed t-test).
WUE and accumulated Transpiration
The WUE and accumulated transpiration are presented in Figure 14 for both chambers. As in
the ﬁrst period there was a clear relation between average WUE and average growth, with
the exception for the WUE in NaCl concentration 500 mg/L, in chamber 4, which shows
slightly more efﬁciency than the control. The WUE and accumulated transpiration show the
same trend in the calculations.
Chamber 3: For the average WUE, there was a signiﬁcant difference between all NaCl
concentrations (P<0.05, one-tailed t-test) with the exception when control and 500 mg/L are
compared, then there was no signiﬁcant difference (P=0.16, one-tailed t-test). While for the
accumulated transpiration there was signiﬁcant difference (P<0.05, one-tailed t-test) when
control and 5000 mg/L, 500 mg/L and 5000 mg/L, and 1000 mg/L and 5000 mg/L are
compared. For the other three comparisons, between the control and 500 mg/L (P=0.26,
one-tailed t-test), control and 1000 mg/L (P=0.13, one-tailed t-test), and 500 mg/L and 1000
mg/L (P=0.48, one-tailed t-test) no signiﬁcant differences were showed.
(a) Average water use efﬁciency (g/L) for both
chambers, second period.
(b) Average accumulated transpiration (g) for both
chambers, second period.
Figure 14: Average water use efﬁciency (WUE) and average accumulated transpiration from the
second period. Results from both chambers are presented, where chamber 3 is ambient (20◦C), and
chamber 4 is elevated temperature (26◦C).
Chamber 4: When looking at the t-tests for the WUE it showed that signiﬁcant difference was
found between all NaCl concentrations (P<0.05, one-tailed t-test), except between control and
500 mg/L (P=0.39), and 500 mg/L and 1000 mg/L (P=0.07, one-tailed t-test). The same trend
24
==PAGE:35==
was for the accumulated transpiration in chamber 4 as in chamber 3. Three comparisons
were found to be notably different (P<0.05, one-tailed t-test), that was between control and
5000 mg/L, 500 mg/L and 5000 mg/L, and 1000 mg/L and 5000 mg/L. While between
the other three treatments; control and 500 mg/L (0.14, one-tailed t-test), control and 1000
mg/L (P=0.12, one-tailed t-test), and 500 mg/L and 1000 mg/L (P=0.48, one-tailed t-test), no
noteworthy difference was found.
3.2.2
Comparison of two measuring methods for transpiration
In this section the comparison between the two measuring methods are presented. One being
the weighting of the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks to see the transpiration form the willow cuttings, the
other being the measuring with the LI-600.
A comparison of the two methods are plotted over the NaCl concentrations in Figure 15.
Then a correlation plot was made between the two methods, with the transpiration from the
Erlenmeyer ﬂasks on the x-axis, since in Figure 15 it was observed that the Erlenmeyer ﬂask
measurements were consistent, along with the regression line.
(a) Chamber 3, ambient conditions (20◦C), second
period.
(b) Chamber 4, evaluated conditions (26◦C), second
period.
Figure 15: Both measuring methods, transpiration weighted from Erlenmeyer ﬂasks and measured
with LI-600, plotted together over the NaCl concentrations. Notice same values on y-axis.
Chamber 3: The values from the two methods are similar and overlapping. By looking
at the correlation graph in Figure 16a the regression line shows that 67% (r=0.82) of the
LI-600 measurements was in correlation with the Erlenmeyer ﬂask measurements. That was
considered a great result since the correlation coefﬁcient was above 0.8.
Chamber 4: Same happens here as in chamber 3, the values between the two measuring
methods are similar and overlapping. The weighted transpiration with the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks
25
==PAGE:36==
and the measured transpiration with the LI-600 collapse for all NaCl concentrations. The
correlation graph in Figure 16b the regression line shows that 56% (r=0.75) of the values are
interact. That was considered good results as the correlation coefﬁcient was placed between
0.6 and 0.8.
(a) Chamber 3, ambient conditions (20◦C), second
period.
(b) Chamber 4, evaluated conditions (26◦C), second
period.
Figure 16: Correlation plot of the transpiration measured from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks against the
transpiration measured with the LI-600, second period. Notice different values of y-axes.
The correlation between the stomatal conductance (gsw) and weighted transpiration form the
Erlenmeyer ﬂasks can be seen in Figure 17, with regression line. The correlation between the
two was not considered good, since it was 48% for chamber 3, and 32% for chamber 4. Still it
can be seen that both chambers present results that with higher transpiration the stomata
was more open, resulting in more water vapour to exit the leaves.
(a) Chamber 3, ambient conditions (20◦C), second
period.
(b) Chamber 4, evaluated conditions (26◦C), second
period.
Figure 17: Stomatal conductivity from the LI-600 against the measured transpiration from the
Erlenmeyer ﬂasks. The average values from each treatment was plotted. Notice different values on
y-axis.
26
==PAGE:37==
4
Discussion
The following section reﬂects on the acquired results on difference measuring methods,
willow cuttings treated with salinity, and willow cuttings treated with salinity and future
temperature.
4.1
Interpretation of the results
In this section, the author will interpret the results in the order of the aims presented in
subsection 1.3.
Comparison of two measuring methods for transpiration
Here the results from comparing the two ways to measure the transpiration from the willow
trees are interpreted. As seen in Figures 8, 9, 15, and 16, the two methods, weighting the
Erlenmeyer ﬂasks and measuring with the LI-600, give similar results for daily transpiration.
Regarding the scatter plots and the regression line, the author considers coefﬁcient of
determination (R2) values ≥50% (correlation coefﬁcient r=0.7) good. That is because between
the two measuring methods more than 50% of the values are in correlation, and since the
measuring with the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks is as exact as possible, 50% correlation is considered
good.
The regression line from chamber 3 in the ﬁrst period shows that the correlation between the
two measuring methods was only 40% (r=0.63). This correlation, by looking at the graph,
Figure 8a, can be estimated at moderate, since the values are scattered and not close to the
regression line. When looking at the values in Figure 9a (chamber 3 in the ﬁrst period),
from each method individually, the values from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks overlapped each
other, showing that measuring by weighting the Erlenmeyer ﬂask units was accurate. On
the other hand, when looking at the values received from the LI-600, the values were more
scattered. The correlation between the two methods in chamber 4 in the ﬁrst period showed
a good correlation of 54% (r=0.73) (seen in Figure 8b), the values cluster each other, and
are close to the regression line. By looking only at the values from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks in
Figure 9, it was seen that in the values from the 500 mg NaCl/g there was one outlier. Same
goes for the values from the LI-600, one outlier was obtained from the values in 1000 mg
NaCl/g. Looking at the correlation without these two outliers, the regression line shows 70%
27
==PAGE:38==
(r=0.84) correlations between the two measuring methods, which is considered as excellent
correlation, as the correlation coefﬁcient is above 0.8, which is considered excellent value
when comparing the two measuring methods. The author was new to the equipment and
thus had to learn how to manoeuvre it, accidents of measuring the leaf veins or locating the
cuvette on an unfavourable location on the leaf would happen and the results could have
been affected by accidents like that.
The correlation from the second period for both chambers was good, 67% (r=0.82) and 36%
(r=0.6) for chambers 3 and 4, respectively. When looking at the graphs in Figure 16 values
from both chambers are close to the regression line. No outliers are considered to have been
measured. The values from the LI-600 in chamber 4 scattered more than the values from
LI-600 in chamber 3. This difference could be because relatively few values were obtained
from the period, or only three values for each concentration. That makes the correlation
based on fewer values, thus each value has more effect to the regression line.
The stomatal conductance (gsw) was measured with the LI-600 and compared to the measured
transpiration by weighting the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks. That was done to see if there would be
a relation between the stomatal opening and how much water vapour was released by the
transpiration, as shown in Figures 10 and 17. The correlations from both chambers in the
ﬁrst period are excellent, or 65% (r=0.81) and 79% (r=0.89) for chambers 3 and 4, respectively,
meaning that the more open the stomata, the higher was the transpiration from the leaves.
For the second period, the results were not as good. The correlation graph showed a low
correlation between the stomatal conductivity and transpiration. The regression line showed
that only 48% (r=0.69) and 32% (r=0.56) correlate for chambers 3 and 4, respectively. The low
correlations could be due to few values obtained in the second period or only three values
for each concentration. Even if the two outliers measured in chamber 4 are taken out, the
new correlation would only be 44% (r=0.66), which was considered a good correlation, as the
correlation coefﬁcient is between 0.6-0.8, which is considered good value, even tough only
44% of the values are in correlation.
Effect of a stressor, NaCl, on the measured parameters
Here the results form chamber 3 in both periods is addressed. Chamber 3 was ambient, thus
had 20◦C. It is considered that change in transpiration and growth are the main indicators
used in the assessment of toxicity.
28
==PAGE:39==
In chamber 3, the effect of NaCl on the willows was studied. It could be seen by looking at
the average NRT, average WUE, average growth, average FMP, and average accumulated
transpiration that with a higher concentration of NaCl, the higher effect it had on the willow
cuttings. It was clear that salinity has a strong impact on the growth of the willow cuttings,
as can be seen in Figures 6a and 13a. The same goes for the other analysing methods (Figures
6b, 7, 13b, and 14). In all measurements it was clear that the control was healthy, the control
cuttings show good average growth, the average FMP was high, the average WUE was good,
and the average accumulated transpiration was good. All measurements showed decrease
with increasing NaCl concentration.
Worth recalling, in the ﬁrst period the cuttings were given tap water, thus the NaCl solutions
were mixed with tap water. While in the second period the cuttings were treated with NaCl
solutions mixed with deionized water. This could lead to lower values in results from the
second period, since the cuttings do not have any extra nutrition to absorb from the water,
except the NaCl for the cuttings treated with the NaCl solutions.
Transpiration
Transpiration from a plant is considered a measure of its health - the higher the transpiration,
the more healthy the plant is. It was clear from the results that salt has an inhibiting effect on
the willows, as the trend was the same for both chambers over both periods.
The average transpiration rate, Figure 4 and 11, was helpful to get an overview of the
differences in transpiration rates caused by NaCl on the willows. In both periods, the
transpiration rate from the control was around 1 g/hour initially. The controls transpire
more than the concentrations exposed plants, except initially for the second period, where it
transpired least.
In the ﬁrst period the control fell down to 0.46 g/hour after 96 hours. The reason for that
was considered to be that tap water was used to mix the NaCl concentrations, and thus the
control got pure tap water. Tap water contains some minerals in it that could lead to lower
transpiration than deionized water does. The control in the second period started at 1.08
g/hour, slightly decreased over the period (down to 0.88 g/hour), ending in 1.04 g/hour.
This would be considered as the control was stable over the whole period. Both periods
showed that lower concentration of NaCl did not cause a big reduction in transpiration rate.
Highest concentration, 5000 mg NaCl/L had strong effect on the transpiration rate ending in
29
==PAGE:40==
0.08 g/hour in the ﬁrst period, and 0.27 g/hour in the second period.
The average accumulated transpiration, shown in Figure 7b and 14b, showed clearly that
NaCl has toxic effects on willows. The accumulation decreases as the concentration increases.
The accumulated transpiration for the controls was almost the same for both periods, or
166.6 g for the ﬁrst period, and 161.5 g for the second period. The accumulation for the other
concentration varied between the periods. In the ﬁrst period it was generally lower than in
the second period. That could be due to the difference in water used in the experiments.
NRT should be investigated as the difference in transpiration rates could have been caused
by healthier plants in the low concentration group in the beginning of the experiment.
NRT
As showed in Figure 5 and 12, the NRT decreased with increasing NaCl concentrations. The
NRT for the NaCl concentration 500 mg/L never fell under 50% in both periods, meaning
that 500 mg/L only inhibited <50% of the transpiration from the willows over the whole both
periods. Meaning the willows exposed to 500 mg NaCl/L could thrive, as seen in Figure 6a
and 13a for the growth. For the other two NaCl concentrations, the effect of salt showed fast,
and the plants exposed inhibited almost as much at the ﬁrst measuring point (96 and 48 hours
for the ﬁrst period and the second period, respectively). The NRT had fallen down to 59%,
and 42% for NaCl concentrations 500 mg/L and 1000 mg/L, respectively, in the ﬁrst period;
and down to 56%, and 36% for NaCl concentrations 500 mg/L and 1000 mg/L, respectively,
in the second period. The 5000 mg NaCl/L had the strongest effect on the NRT, with the ﬁnal
values 20% and 13%, which inhibits the transpiration of the willows greatly.
Growth
As shown in Figure 6a and 13a the average growth was decreasing with increasing NaCl
concentration, showing that NaCl has an effect on growth. Negative growth seen from 5000
mg NaCl/L indicates necrosis or wilting for the plants. A difference in the growth can be
seen between the periods. This difference was most likely reasoned on that the cuttings in
the ﬁrst period got tap water mixed NaCl solution (and the control only tap water), while the
cuttings in the second period were treated with NaCl solution mixed with deionized water
(and the control only deionized water). The plants do not have any nutrition to absorb from
the deionized water, and thus they grow less.
The average FMP gave the same trend in results as the growth, seen in Figure 6b and 13b. The
30
==PAGE:41==
FMP was calculated from wet weight, and showed the control growing by 23% over the ﬁrst
period, seen in Figure 6b. There was a decrease in the FMP over the ﬁrst period with increase
in concentrations. The FMP for 5000 mg NaCl/L was negative 0.69%, implementing that the
plants were decaying. The average FMP for the controls in the second period showed 9%
growth over the period, as seen in Figure 13b. There was a decrease in the production with
increased NaCl concentration. Where the production for 5000 mg/L was negative 6% over
the period, indicating necrosis or wilting. Regarding the difference between the production
from both periods, the same implements as for the growth. The ﬁrst period had tap water,
while the second period had deionized water.
Water Use Efﬁciency
High values from WUE indicate efﬁcient use of water for growth. The values received
were presented in g growth/g accumulated transpiration. The average WUE was expected
to be highest for the controls, which was the case.
The difference between the NaCl
concentrations in the second period was not tremendous. Salts absorb and bind tightly
with water, preventing roots from absorbing water. The salt can even pull water from the
plant, creating a drought-like condition. This was seen for the average WUE in both periods.
From Figure 7a and 14a the highest NaCl concentration has a major effect on the water uptake
of the plants, where it was negative. The difference in the values between the periods, like
for the growth, and FMP, was possibly due to the fact that the cuttings in the ﬁrst period
were treated with NaCl solution mixed with tap water, while in the second period they were
treated with NaCl solution mixed with deionized water.
Effect of a future environmental conditions (temperature) on the plants
The effect on elevated temperature, and exposure to salinity, was studied in chamber 4 with
26◦C. It was expected that elevated temperature, compared to ambient conditions, would
generally lead to higher transpiration from the plants, as the stomata would be more open,
which would facilitate heat and water leaving the plant. The elevated temperature was
expected to result in a higher water uptake by the plants, leading to a higher toxic effect from
the salt.
Transpiration
The transpiration rate, as seen in Figure 4 and 11, was overall higher for plants treated with
the higher temperature from the ambition treatment. The values from the ﬁrst period behaved
31
==PAGE:42==
the same from both chambers, there was a drop for all treatments from 0 hr to 96 hr - when the
hydroponic solution was change from nutrition solution to NaCl solution. There was minor
difference in transpiration rate between the controls and two concentrations, namely 500 mg
NaCl/L, and 1000 mg NaCl/L. Clearly there was more impact on the transpiration rate from
NaCl concentration 5000 mg/L were it decrease to 0.11 g/h in the end, which was higher
than the transpiration rate from the ambient conditions, which was 0.08 g/h. All values from
chamber 4, elevated condition, were higher than from the chamber with ambient condition,
like was asserted. The second period conducted the same way as both chambers from the
ﬁrst period. Thus, the values from chamber 4 with elevated conditions were generally higher
than from chamber 3 with ambient conditions. With the exception for NaCl concentration
5000 mg/L which decreased to 0.27 g/h for chamber 3, ambient conditions, compared to 0.23
g/h for chamber 4, elevated conditions.
NRT
More transpiration caused by elevated temperature lead to more uptake of salt in the exposed
plants and therefore more toxicity - which means that a high transpiration in the controls
would result in low NRT for the exposed plants. In the ﬁrst period the NRT, Figure 5, showed
that NaCl concentrations 500 mg/L and 1000 mg/L had no negative effect on the willows,
the end values being 87%, and 89%, respectively. The 5000 mg NaCl/L showed continuously
decrease in NRT throughout the period, and had not stabilized in the end, with ﬁnal values
27% or inhibiting 73% of the transpiration. In the second period, Figure 12, the lowest NaCl
concentration had no negative effect on the transpiration of the cuttings, with end values at
91% or inhibiting 9% of the transpiration. The 1000 mg NaCl/L had rather small effect on the
transpiration, or 37%, where the end value for NRT was 63%. The highest dosage of NaCl
had impact immediately after 48 hours inhibiting 63% of the transpiration from the cuttings,
and in the end of the period the NRT was 13%.
Growth
The average growth for elevated temperature, as shown in Figure 13a, was higher for all
concentrations in the second period. For higher temperature, the plant takes up more water
which would lead to lower growth. That was not seen from the results in the second period.
The reason for this could be that the WUE was lower for chamber 4 (elevated temperature)
from the second period. The ﬁrst period, Figure 6a, showed unexpected values for chamber
4 (elevated temperature). The growth increased with increasing concentrations, with the
32
==PAGE:43==
exception for 5000 mg NaCl/L. There the growth was lower than for the other two NaCl
concentrations, but higher than the growth was for the control. No explanation could be
found for this behaviour. Negative values from the highest concentration implements that
the cuttings are decaying.
The average FMP gave the same trend in results as the average growth, seen in Figure 6b
and 13b. The results from chamber 4 (elevated temperature) from the second period showed
slight increase in production for the lowest NaCl concentration (500 gm/L) compared to the
control, values 5.75%, and 5.84% for control and 500 mg NaCl/L, respectively. The other
two NaCl concentrations showed the same decrease as the growth. The ﬁrst period, showed
increased production with increasing NaCl concentration, which were unexpected results.
The highest NaCl concentrations showed different behave, as it showed lower production
than the other two concentrations, still the production was higher compared to the control.
No explanation could be found for this unexpected behaviour.
Water Use Efﬁciency
The WUE for the elevated temperature (chamber 4, 26◦C) was expected to be below the
WUE of the ambient chamber (chamber 3, 20◦C). That was because the trees in the elevated
chamber were expected to transpire more. This was the case for the second period, as
was seen in Figure 14a. The growth was lower and the accumulated transpiration higher,
leading to lower WUE. In the ﬁrst period the WUE increased in the elevated chamber even
though the transpiration decreased, as was seen in Figure 7a. The growth on the other-hand,
as mentioned here above, increased for the all NaCl concentrations. These results were
unexpected. Especially since the growth decreased drastically when exposed to 5000 mg
NaCl/L compared to the other two NaCl concentrations. Also the 5000 mg NaCl/L in
chamber 4, in the ﬁrst period, showed high growth compared to all other growth values for
5000 mg NaCl/L. In all the other cases 5000 mg NaCl/L resulted in negative values, meaning
the plants were decaying.
33
==PAGE:44==
4.2
Comparison of result to other ﬁndings
Here the results from this study will be compared to other ﬁndings.
Comparison of two measuring methods for transpiration
The equipment LI-600 is a new equipment on the market, as it was released in the summer of
2020. Thus no reports could be fond where the LI-600 was used in comparison with weighted
transpiration by measuring it by scale from the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks. In an introduction video
from LI-COR regarding the LI-600 they present values measured with the LI-600, they can
be seen in Figure 18. The stomatal conductance is measured higher in the video as the leaf
temperature is higher than measured in this experiment. The leaf temperature was on average
25.5◦C in chamber 3, and 27.5◦C in chamber 4. With higher temperature (leaf and air) the
stomatal are more open and transpiring more, thus the stomatal conductance (gsw) is higher.
Figure 18: Values from the introduction video from LI-COR. The stomatal conductance is measured
higher for higher temperatures since the stomatal are transpiring more [2].
Rasmussen (2021) [40] compared LI-600 Porometer/Fluorometer with LI-6800 Portable
Photosynthesis System, which both measure stomatal conductance. Rasmussen (2021) [40]
saw that one thing that could effect the values from LI-600 was that the cuvette covered only
small amount of stomatal (0.44 cm2) compared to the LI-6800 (2-6 cm2). Thus, the LI-600
maybe does not give the exact values. The results from this experiment show though that the
LI-600 gives rather good values, and is only 5-15 sec to give data.
Effect of a stressor, NaCl, on the measured parameters
Plant response to salinity follows very clear trends. Generally, there is a decrease in growth
and yield associated with increased salinity, along with a reduction in photosynthesis and
stomatal conductance [41].
34
==PAGE:45==
Trapp et al. (2008) [28] found that with increased NaCl concentration the growth of willow
cuttings decreased. It also showed the NRT decreasing with higher exposure dosage of NaCl,
which was the same pattern as was seen in this experiment. Trapp et al. (2008) [28] exposed
the willow cuttings to more NaCl concentrations, or namely 0.1 g/L, 0.2 g/L, 0.4 g/L, 0.8 g/L,
1 g/L, 1.5 g/L, 2 g/L, 3 g/L, 5 g/L, 7 g/L, 10 g/L, and 20 g/L. Thus, it is easy to compare
results since the author of this experiment used 0.5 g/L, 1 g/L, and 5 g/L.
Yu et al. (2015) [42] found that salinity stress imposed serious limitations to growth and
physiological activities to Bermudagrass.
Fung et al. (1998) [41] found high levels of salt (1.0% NaCl) to rapidly reduce growth on
the plant used in the experiment (poplars), as well as the immediate effect on pre-drawn
leaf water potential, photosynthesis and stomatal resistance. Even at moderate levels (0.5%
NaCl), the growth was inﬂuenced. The effect from 0.5% was not as rapidly expressed for
some variables as from 1.0%. The same effect could be seen in this experiment, where lower
concentrations had less effect on growth, FMP, WUE and accumulated transpiration.
Hangs et al. (2011) [43] determined the relative growth response of numerous willow verities,
both native and exotic, grown in saline soils. The majority of the native and exotic willow
varieties tested in Hangs et al. (2011) experiment were sensitive to increasing soil salinity;
several varieties showed no reduction in growth. Hangs et al. (2011) found out that saline
areas can often be the biggest nutrient-rich locations in a ﬁeld, and for the salt tolerant
varieties, provide a growth advantage. It was conﬁrmed in the study that willows are
generally believed to have moderate (ECe ≤5 dS/m) tolerance to soil salinity. It stated that S.
viminalis (Basket willow, like used in this experiment) have greater salt tolerance than other
willows. In this experiment, it could be seen that the willow cuttings could handle 500 mg
NaCl/L. That was seen as the NRT values for 500 mg NaCl/L had the lowest end value at
61%, meaning that the cuttings transpiration were only inhibited by <40%.
Jespersen (2018) [44] saw that salt had an inhibiting effect on the willow plants used, the
transpiration decreases when the salt concentration increases.
Overall, it can be seen that the results from this experiment were in harmony with other
ﬁndings. It is known that decrease growth leads to decreasing in FMP, increase in WUE since
the transpiration is higher.
35
==PAGE:46==
Effect of a future environmental conditions (temperature) on the plants
Increase in temperature has not been researched as much a increased in CO2.
Adams et al. (1998) [45] wrote that temperature increases has been found to have both
positive and negative effect on crops harvest. In general it is found to reduce harvest as well
as the quality of many crops (e.g. cereal and feed grains). In comparison with this study,
this is in conﬂict. Since the plants in this study showed increase in growth and accumulated
transpiration with higher temperature.
Yu et al. (2007) [46] found that with increase of temperature, the transpiration of plants
generally increase. Which is the same as was found in this study.
Ort and Long (2014) [47] found that elevated temperature in the warmer months can increase
leaf-to-air water vapour pressure deﬁcit, thus increasing transpiration and decreasing water
use efﬁciency (WUE). This was seen in this study for the second period, but not for the ﬁrst
period as the values were unexpected.
Jespersen (2018) [44] found that transpiration from the control could clearly show the effect
of the climate. The highest transpiration was from the plants in the chamber with elevated
temperature. The study found that NRT dropped dramatically for plants treated with elevated
temperature, after ca 20 hr after addition of NaCl concentrations. Immediately at the ﬁrst
measuring point the inﬂuence of the NaCl for the plants exposed to the high concentration.
It was seen that more transpiration caused by the climate effect (both elevated temperature
and CO2) led to more uptake of NaCl in the exposed plants, thus more toxicity. Only for the
plants in the low concentration group, in that experiment, the toxicity had more effect than
in the ambient conditions. Some problems with the total transpiration was seen, where the
transpiration from the ambient condition transpired more than the chamber with elevated
temperature. This was not the case in this experiment. The WUE in Jespersen (2018) was not
lower for the elevated temperature treatment compared to the control, as was expected. Thus,
the NaCl toxicity was more poisoning for the plants in ambient conditions than the elevated
temperature conditions. This was not found to be the case in this study, since the WUE was
lower in the chamber with elevated temperature conditions compared to the chamber with
ambient conditions (results from the second period). The results for WUE from the ﬁrst
period were unexpected.
Kvalheim and Haugland (2019) [23] studied effect of Copper (Cu) and Cadmium (Cd) on
36
==PAGE:47==
willows with elevated temperature among other experiments. A decrease in transpiration
rate was seen for all concentrations of exposure and in the control when treated with elevated
temperature. The NRT had the same pattern as in this study. The highest concentration of
toxicity was shown to have largest inhibiting effect on transpiration from the willows. The
NRT for the lowest concentrating showed NRT above 100% for the ﬁrst 72 hr, indicating initial
Cu induced stimulation of transpiration. This was similar to what the NaCl concentration
of 500 mg/L showed in this experiment for elevated temperature. When looked at the
accumulated transpiration it was found to be higher in the chamber with elevated temperature,
which was also the case in this experiment. At last, the WUE was overall lower in the chamber
with higher temperature compared to the ambient conditions. That was also found to be true
in this study, with the exception for the unexpected results from the ﬁrst period.
4.3
Short comments on limitations
When the experiments was performed, some limitations and uncertainties were stumbled
upon.
The willow tree toxicity test was done hydroponically. It would have resembled natural
conditions better if the experiment had been carried out in soil. The hydroponic test is
considered worst-case scenario, where the plants have unrestricted bioavailability compared
to soil experiments which has a great inﬂuence on the uptake [24].
Regarding the set up of the experiments in the chambers in RERAF. There was the uncertainty
that the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks were always put down on the exactly same placement every time.
Even though location circles were marked on the table, there was the possibility to put the
ﬂask more to the right or left. Then the cuttings would get emitted to slightly different light
concentration (PAR).
The aluminium foil used to cover the Erlenmeyer ﬂask opening was unlikely 100% isolating.
There was a possibility that some water vapour was transpired passed the plants, not through
the plants.
The table salt used in the experiment contained iodine (I) which could have had some
inﬂuence on the ions in the water. It would have been better to use NaCl Reagent ≥99.9%.
The salt solution was mixed in 2 L pitcher and stirred with ruler. This could have let to some
discrepancy, since the author had to mix the salt solution often. Each ﬂask got ca 500 mL of
37
==PAGE:48==
solution, meaning that 2 L was enough for 4 ﬂasks. Then a new batch of stock solution was
made in order to mix the dilutions. Thus, a better tool to stir the solution could be used, so it
would be more efﬁcient.
The humidity could have been tracked better in the experiments. Humidity can have impact
on how the cuttings transpire. The humidity was measured couple of times in the ﬁrst period,
and relative humidity was 10% lower in chamber 3 (approximately 40%) then in chamber 4
(approximately 50%). The humidity was set to be 60%. In the second period the measured
humidity in the chambers was closer, or in both chambers approximately 55% which was still
lower then it was set to be. This could have impacted the data. This uncertainty can apply to
all parameters (temperature and light).
There is an uncertainty if the cuttings are healthy. There is a possibility for fungus attack or
some insects (e.g. larvae and aphids) to make themselves at home in the cuttings. When the
cuttings are pre-grown it would be good to have fewer cuttings in more buckets to prevent
all the cuttings to get fungus or disease. A close look needs to be taken of the cuttings, if
larvae or aphids are seen they need to be taken away immediately.
In the ﬁrst period, the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks were reﬁlled with tap water since the cuttings had
transpired almost 400 mL of water in the controls. In order to treat all cuttings equally, all
were reﬁlled. This could have led to the concentrations to decrease in the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks.
Also the tap water that was reﬁlled with could have been lower in temperature than the
solution in the Erlenmeyer ﬂasks, which could have unintentionally disturbed the plant. This
could also have been the case when the cuttings were moved from nutrition solution to NaCl
solution.
When using the LI-600, some uncertainties arose. It would be most consistent to measure
the same leaf of the plant at the exact same point every time, as a slight change in position
might have large impacts on the measurements, as some stomata are omitted and new ones
are included. It can not be guarantied this was the case, as the aperture on LI-600 is 0.44
cm2. That is why it could be better to use LI-6800 Portable Photosynthesis System which also
measures stomatal conductance. The LI-6800 has larger aperture (2-6 cm2), however it takes
LI-6800 minimum 1.5 minuets to reach a steady state compared to each measurement being
5-15 seconds for the LI-600
Some limitations in comparison of the results could have been gained, as in the ﬁrst period
38
==PAGE:49==
tap water was used while in the second period deionized water was used. This comparison
was not planed, however it was interesting to see how differently the plants behaved in the
different waters.
39
==PAGE:50==
5
Conclusion(s)
The results from this study showed that it was more accurate to measure the transpiration
by weighting the Erlenmeyer ﬂask-unit than using one-point measurement with the LI-600.
However, the correlation curve showed that with precision when taking the measurements
with the LI-600 it can be 70% correlation, meaning that it gives excellent results on how the
transpiration is behaving.
From the willow tree acute toxicity test, it was observed that the NaCl was harmful to
the willow plants, as increasing concentration led to decreasing transpiration rate for both
periods. The concentration of 5000 mg NaCl/L was most inhibiting for the plants, both in
ambient conditions and elevated temperature conditions. This could be seen with the NRT
values from both periods, as well as from the growth and accumulated transpiration.
The elevated temperature showed the same pattern for the transpiration rate as from the
chamber with ambient conditions. The elevated temperature showed more drastic inhibition
from the NaCl concentrations on the transpiration rate. By examining the NRT, it could
be determined that the highest NaCl concentrations (5000 mg/L) had the biggest impact
inhibiting affect for both conditions. The WUE was expected to be higher for the controls
and lower NaCl concentrations compared to the higher concentrations, and the WUE was
expected to be lower in the elevated temperature conditions compared tot he ambient
conditions. This was found to be true. The accumulated transpiration was higher from
the elevated temperature
The difference between using deionized water (second period) and tap water (ﬁrst period) is
quite distinct. It was clear that the tap water had some nutrient for the plants to absorb, and
thus grow.
Overall, it was clear that the NaCl had effect on the water uptake by the willows (by inhibiting
the water uptake), and thus the transpiration and growth. By elevating the temperature along
with NaCl treatment, it had an important effect on the toxicity towards the willows. Thus,
the combination of evaluated temperature and salt showed to have worse effect on the plants
than only salt, which also had negative effects.
For further experiments with the LI-600, it could be possible to take more measurements on
each leaf, take the average of the measurements, and compare to the transpiration from the
Erlenmeyer ﬂasks.
40
==PAGE:51==
References
[1] LI-COR, Inc., Using the LI-600 Porometer/Fluorometer; Instruction Manual.
Lincoln,
NE,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.licor.com/documents/
tz1rf7zer2b8h138w6hrl2kgqxndnsjc
[2] E. LI-COR Biosciences, “LI-600 Porometer/Fluorometer Measurement Video,” 2021,
last accessed on 10.07.2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
-uPW_0U5mJ4
[3] C. Dougherty, Introduction to econometrics, 2nd ed.
Oxford University Press, 2002.
[4] National Center for Biotechnology Information, “PubChem Compound Summary for
CID 5234, Sodium Chloride,” 2021, last accessed on 02.03.2021. [Online]. Available:
https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Sodium-chloride
[5] Global Climate Change: Evidence, “NASA Global Climate Change and Global Warming:
Climate Change: How Do We Know?” last accessed on 02.07.2021. [Online]. Available:
https://climate.nasa.gov/evidence/
[6] A. Dessler, Introduction to Modern Climate Change, 2nd ed.
Cambridge University Press,
2015.
[7] IPCC,
Global Warming of 1.5◦C - An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global
warming of 1.5◦C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change,
sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty.
In
Press,
2018.
[Online].
Available: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2019/06/SR15_Full_
Report_High_Res.pdf
[8] S. Chauhan, R. S. Khandelwal, K. V. Prabhu, S. K. Sinha, and R. Khanna-Chopra,
“Evaluation of Usefulness of Daily Mean Temperature Studies on Impact of Climate
Change,” Journal of Agronomy and Crop Science, vol. 191, no. 2, pp. 88–94, 2005. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-037X.2004.00122.x
[9] IPCC, Climate Change and Land - An IPCC Special Report on climate change, desertiﬁcation,
land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas ﬂuxes in
41
==PAGE:52==
terrestrial ecosystems.
In Press, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/
assets/uploads/2019/11/SRCCL-Full-Report-Compiled-191128.pdf
[10] FAO, “FAO Soil Portal:
Salt-affected soils,”
2005. [Online]. Available:
http:
//www.fao.org/soils-portal/soil-management/management-of-some-problem-soils/
salt-affected-soils/more-information-on-salt-affected-soils/en/
[11] R. Munns, “Genes and salt tolerance: bringing them together,” New Phytologist, vol. 167,
no. 3, pp. 645–663, 2005. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8137.2005.
01487.x
[12] M. C. Shannon, “Adaptation of Plants to Salinity,” in Advances in Agronomy, D. L.
Sparks, Ed.
Academic Press, 1997, vol. 60, pp. 75–120. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2113(08)60601-X
[13] R. Munns and M. Tester, “Mechanisms of Salinity Tolerance,” Annual Review of Plant
Biology, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 651–681, 2008, pMID: 18444910. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.arplant.59.032607.092911
[14] W. Larcher, Physiological Plant Ecology: Ecophysiology and Stress Physiology of Functional
Groups, 3rd ed.
Springer-Verlag New York Berlin Heidelberg, 1995.
[15] T. Lacoma, “Sciencing:
What Happens When You Put Saltwater on Plants?”
2018, last accessed on 01.07.2021. [Online]. Available:
https://sciencing.com/
happens-put-saltwater-plants-6587256.html
[16] Dr. Leonard Perry, “University of Vermont Extension: Salt Damage to Plants,” last
accessed on 01.07.2021. [Online]. Available: http://www.uvm.edu/pss/ppp/articles/
salt1.htm
[17] N. E. Marcar, T. Theiveyanathan, and D. P. Stevens, Treated Wastewater in Agriculture.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2010. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781444328561.ch8
[18] M.
Wachman,
“Sciencing:
Does
Salt
Affect
Photosynthesis?”
2019,
last
accessed
on
01.07.2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://sciencing.com/
salt-affect-photosynthesis-6175809.html
42
==PAGE:53==
[19] E. Maas and G. Hoffman, “Crop Salt Tolerance - Current Assessment,” Journal of the
Irrigation and Drainage Division, vol. 103, no. 2, pp. 115–134, 1977. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1061/JRCEA4.0001137
[20] R. Munns,
“Comparative physiology of salt and water stress,”
Plant, Cell &
Environment,
vol. 25,
no. 2,
pp. 239–250,
2002. [Online]. Available:
https:
//doi.org/10.1046/j.0016-8025.2001.00808.x
[21] S. Trapp,
“The Willow Tree Acute Toxicity Test,”
2017. [Online]. Available:
https://homepage.env.dtu.dk/stt/Willow%20test%20manual2.pdf
[22] S. Trapp, K. C. Zambrano, K. O. Kusk, and U. Karlson, “A Phytotoxicity Test Using
Transpiration of Willows,” Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, vol. 39,
no. 2, pp. 154–160, 2000. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s002440010091
[23] I. Kvalheim and M. T. Haugland, “Copper and cadmium phytotoxicity to salix viminalis
(willow) and lepidium satvium (cress),” Master’s thesis, Technical University of
Denmark, Denmark, 2019.
[24] L. P. W. Clausen and S. Trapp, “Toxicity of 56 substances to trees,” Environmental
Science and Pollution Research, vol. 24, no. 22, pp. 18 035–18 047, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-017-9398-2
[25] W. Grosse, K. Jovy, and H. Tiebel, “Inﬂuence of plants on redox potential and methane
production in water-saturated soil,” Hydrobiologia, vol. 340, pp. 93–99, 1996. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00012739
[26] M. Jackson and P. Attwood, “Roots of willow (Salix viminalis L.) show marked tolerance
to oxygen shortage in ﬂooded soils and in solution culture,” Plant and Soil, vol. 187, pp.
37 – 45, 1996. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00011655
[27] P. L. Thompson, L. A. Ramer, A. P. Guffey, and J. L. Schnoor, “Decreased transpiration
in poplar trees exposed to 2, 4, 6-trinitrotoluene,” Environmental Toxicology and
Chemistry: An International Journal, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 902–906, 1998. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.5620170519
[28] S. Trapp, D. Feiﬁcova, N. F. Rasmussen, and P. Bauer-Gottwein, “Plant uptake
of NaCl in relation to enzyme kinetics and toxic effects,” Environmental and
43
==PAGE:54==
Experimental Botany, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 2008. [Online]. Available:
https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.2008.05.001
[29] S. K. Clausen, G. Frenck, L. Linden, T. N. Mikkelsen, C. Lunde, and R. B. Jørgensen,
“Effects of Single and Multifactor Treatments with Elevated Temperature, CO2 and Ozone
on Oilseed Rape and Barley,” Journal of Agronomy and Crop Science, vol. 197, no. 6, pp.
442–453, 2011. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-037X.2011.00478.x
[30] C. H. Ingvordsen, G. Backes, M. F. Lyngkjaer, P. Peltonen-Sainio, J. D. Jensen, M. Jalli,
A. Jahoor, M. Rasmussen, T. N. Mikkelsen, A. Stockmarr et al., “Signiﬁcant decrease in
yield under future climate conditions: Stability and production of 138 spring barley
accessions,” European Journal of Agronomy, vol. 63, pp. 105–113, 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2014.12.003
[31] F. R. Alemayehu, G. Frenck, L. van der Linden, T. N. Mikkelsen, and R. B. Jørgensen,
“Can barley (Hordeum vulgare L. s.l.) adapt to fast climate changes? A controlled selection
experiment,” Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 151–161, 2014.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10722-013-0021-1
[32] G. Frenck, L. van der Linden, T. N. Mikkelsen, H. Brix, and R. B. Jørgensen, “Increased
[CO2] does not compensate for negative effects on yield caused by higher temperature
and [O3] in Brassica napus L.” European Journal of Agronomy, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 127–134,
2011. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2011.05.004
[33] K. A. Mott and T. N. Buckley, “Patchy stomatal conductance: emergent collective
behaviour of stomata,” Trends in Plant Science, vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 258–262, 2000. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/S1360-1385(00)01648-4
[34] S. Trapp, G. Ciucani, and M. Sismilich, “Toxicity of tributyltin to willow trees,”
Environmental Science and Pollution Research, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 327–330, 2004. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02979647
[35] L. P. W. Clausen, U. G. Karlson, and S. Trapp, “Phytotoxicity of Sodium Fluoride and
Uptake of Fluoride in Willow Trees,” International Journal of Phytoremediation, vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 369–376, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/15226514.2014.910166
44
==PAGE:55==
[36] G. I. Ågren and F. O. Andersson, Terrestrial Ecosystem Ecology: Principles and Applications,
1st ed.
Cambridge University Press, 2011, ch. 6: Plant production, p. 88–123. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511894572.010
[37] F. S. Chapin III, P. A. Matson, and P. M. Vitousek, Principles of Terrestrial Ecosystem Ecology,
2nd ed.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2011, ch. 5: Carbon Inputs to Ecosystems,
pp. 123–156. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-9504-9
[38] H. Lambers and R. S. Oliveira, Plant Physiological Ecology.
Springer International
Publishing, 2019, ch. 5:
Plant Water Relations, pp. 187–263. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-29639-1_5
[39] Microsoft,
“Excel
functions
(by
category),”
2020,
last
accessed
on
28.06.2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/ofﬁce/
excel-functions-by-category-5f91f4e9-7b42-46d2-9bd1-63f26a86c0eb
[40] S. M. Rasmussen, “Investigation of aerosol uptake by vegetation at the leaf level,”
Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark, 2021.
[41] L. Fung, S. Wang, A. Altman, and A. Hütterman, “Effect of NaCl on growth,
photosynthesis,
ion
and
water
relations
of
four
poplar
genotypes,”
Forest
Ecology and Management, vol. 107, no. 1, pp. 135–146, 1998. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-1127(97)00328-9
[42] J. Yu, L. Sun, N. Fan, Z. Yang, and B. Huang, “Physiological factors involved in
positive effects of elevated carbon dioxide concentration on bermudagrass tolerance to
salinity stress,” Environmental and Experimental Botany, vol. 115, pp. 20–27, 2015. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envexpbot.2015.02.003
[43] R. D. Hangs, J. J. Schoenau, K. C. J. Van Rees, and H. Steppuhn, “Examining the salt
tolerance of willow (Salix spp.) bioenergy species for use on salt-affected agricultural
lands,” Canadian Journal of Plant Science, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 509–517, 2011. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.4141/cjps10135
[44] C. M. Jespersen, “Effects of global change on uptake and toxicity of chemicals in plants,”
Master’s thesis, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark, 2018.
45
==PAGE:56==
[45] R. M. Adams, B. H. Hurd, S. Lenhart, and N. Leary, “Effects of global climate change on
agriculture: an interpretative review,” Climate research, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 19–30, 1998.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3354/cr011019
[46] X.-Z. Yu,
S. Trapp,
P.-H. Zhou,
and L. Chen,
“Effect of Temperature on
the Uptake and Metabolism of Cyanide by Weeping Willows,”
International
Journal of Phytoremediation, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 243–255, 2007. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/15226510701376141
[47] D. R. Ort and S. P. Long, “Limits on Yields in the Corn Belt,” Science, vol. 344, no. 6183,
pp. 484–485, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1253884
[48] Adcanced Hydroponics of Holland, “Dutch Formula Grow,” 2012, last accessed
on
25.06.2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://advancedhydro.com/products/2/
dutch-formula-grow
46
==PAGE:57==
Appendices
A
Details on nutrition solution
The nutrition solution was mixed whit deionized water and nutrient liquid. The nutrient
liquid is called "Dutch Formula 1 GROW, Figure 19a, from producer Advanced Hydroponics
of Holland. The solution was mixed into 10 L plastic container, seen in Figure 19c. The ratio
of Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium in Formula 1 is N + P + K % => 2 + 4 + 7 and the
mixing ratio of nutrient liquid versus deionized water was 1 mL:1 L. The author used 2 L
pitcher, as can be seen in the foreground of Figure 19c, to measure the deionized water and a
3 mL needle to measure the nutrient liquid. The nutrient liquid was poured into a beaker.
When all liquid was in the plastic container the solution was well shaken to get it as well
mixed as possible.
"The Dutch Formula GROW creates the ultimate conditions for corp production during the next
stage.[...] By mixing the mineral components of Dutch Formula with water, you will get a rich and
balanced nutrition for your plants. The Dutch Formula is suitable for all kinds of growing media."
taken from Adcanced Hydroponics of Holland (2012)[48]
(a) The nutrient liquid bottle
front
(b) The nutrient liquid bottle back
(c) The set up how the nutrition
solution was done
Figure 19: Shows the bottle of the nutrient, and how it was mixed. The nutrient was given to the
Willows in the beginning and also the Controls were only given the nutrient mix ©Ásdís Vídalín
Kristjánsdóttir.
i
==PAGE:58==
B
Properties of Sodium Chloride
The properties of Sodium Chloride can be seen in Table 4 [4].
Table 4: The properties of Sodium Chloride (NaCl) from [4].
Name of compound
Sodium Chloride
Chemical formula
NaCl
CAS no.
7647-14-5
Molecular weight
58.44 g/mol
Density
2.17 g/cm3 at 25◦C/4◦C
Boiling point
1465◦C
Melting point
800.7◦C
Vapor pressure
1 mmHg at 865◦C
Solubility
36.0 g/100 g of water at 25◦C
pH
6.7 - 7.3
Colour / Form
Colorless, transparent crystals or white, crystalline powder
ii
==PAGE:59==
C
Salt used in the experiments
Here in Figure 20 below the salt used in this experiment can be seen, as well as the ingredients
in it.
(a) Seen from the front.
(b) Ingredients.
Figure 20: The table salt used in the experiments. This table salt contained iodine (I) ©Ásdís Vídalín
Kristjánsdóttir.
iii
==PAGE:60==
D
Determination of NaCl
A linear calibration curve between EC and NaCl concentration in solution can be seen in the
ﬁgure below. The regression for 21.5-21.8◦C was
C(gNaCl/L) = 0.0017x + 0.836(R2 = 0.9978)
C(gNaCl/L) = 0.0016x + 0.8399(R2 = 0.9988)
C(gNaCl/L) = 0.0017x + 0.836(R2 = 0.9978)
C(gNaCl/L) = 0.0017x + 0.836(R2 = 0.9978)
Tt can be seen by the controls that tab water was used, since the electrical conductivity meter
measures some conductivity as the value is not zero; as it should be if deionized water would
have been used.
A linear calibration curve between the electrical conductivity in the end and initial NaCl
concentration in solution was established.
(a) Chamber 3, ﬁrst period.
(b) Chamber 4, ﬁrst period.
(c) Chamber 3, second period.
(d) Chamber 4, second period.
Figure 21: EC vs NaCl concentration.
iv
==PAGE:61==
E
LI-600
Properties of the LI-600, both general and for the porometer.
General [1]:
Measurement time:
Porometer: 5 to 15 seconds typically, depending on species, leaf surface characteristic,
and leaf conditions
Operationg conditions:
Temperature: O to 50◦C
Pressure: 5o ti 110 kPa
Humidity: 0 to 86%; non-condensing
Weight: 0.68 kg (porometer only); 0,73 kg with ﬂuorometer
Dimensions: 32.4 cm × 16.9 cm × 6.2 cm (L × W × H)
Display:
Dimensions: 6.8 cm diagonally
Resolution: 400 × 200 pixels; sunlight readable monochrome
Data ﬁles: Plain text data compatible with any spreadsheet application or data analysis
program
Output: .CSV format
Porometer [1]:
Aperture: 0.75 cm diameter
Flow rates:
Low: 75 µmol s−1
Medium: 100 µmol s−1
High: 150 µmol s−1
RH sensor accuracy: ±2% RH
Reference temperature: ±0.2◦C
Leaf temperature sensor accuracy: ±0.5◦C
v
==PAGE:62==
Inlet ﬂow measurement: ±1% of reading from 75 µmol s−1 to 150 µmol s−1
Exhaust ﬂow measurement: ±5% of full scale up to 150 µmol s−1
Parameters: gsw mol m−2 s−1; gbw mol m−2 s−1; gtw mol m−2 s−1; E mmol m−2 s−1
VPcham kPa; VPre f kPa; VPlea f kPa; VPD H2Ore f mmol mol−1; H2Osamp mmol mol−1;
H2Olea f mmol mol−1
vi
==PAGE:63==
F
t-distribution table
Here can be seen the t-distribution table, which was used in order to ﬁnd the t-value using
α=0.05 (for two-tailed test) or 0.025 (for one-tailed test).
Figure 22: Table for t-distribution ©C.Dougherty [3].
vii
==PAGE:64==
G
Average data from parameters
The average growth, average fresh matter production, average water use efﬁciency, and average accumulated transpiration and the
95% conﬁdence interval, from both periods.
First period
Table 5: Average growth (gww), average fresh matter production (%ww), average water use efﬁciency (g/L), and average accumulated transpiration
(g) with associated 95% conﬁdence intervals across all replications in the willow experiment. The calculations are from the whole ﬁrst period, based
on the wet weight.
Average growth (g)
Control
500 mg/L
1000 mg/L
5000 mg/L
Chamber 3
8.45 ± 2.37
3.37 ± 2.53
0.51 ± 1.60
-0.22 ± 0.59
Chamber 4
4.42 ± 3.43
9.77 ± 5.07
12.75 ± 2.93
5.16 ± 1.57
Average fresh matter production (%)
Control
500 mg/L
1000 mg/L
5000 mg/L
Chamber 3
18.72 ± 7.37
7.86 ± 5.77
1.70 ± 4.36
-0.71 ± 2.03
Chamber 4
6.39 ± 5.55
22.75 ± 8.00
24.92 ± 6.88
13.24 ± 6.58
Average water use efﬁciency (g/L)
Control
500 mg/L
1000 mg/L
5000 mg/L
Chamber 3
51.36 ± 13.44
29.65 ± 19.33
7.76 ± 20.99
-5.34 ± 14.36
Chamber 4
17.80 ± 9.80
55.73 ± 5.44
66.21 ± 10.49
74.67 ± 18.26
Average accumulated transpiration (g)
Control
500 mg/L
1000 mg/L
5000 mg/L
Chamber 3
166.59 ± 50.12
113.23 ± 43.76
83.89 ± 30.87
46.79 ± 11.07
Chamber 4
247.79 ± 96.28
147.48 ± 84.72
195.49 ± 70.59
70.86 ± 31.99
viii
==PAGE:65==
Second period
Table 6: Average growth (gww), average fresh matter production (%ww), average water use efﬁciency (g/L), and average accumulated transpiration
(g) with associated 95% conﬁdence intervals across all replications in the willow experiment. The calculations are from the whole second period,
based on the wet weight.
Average growth (g)
Control
500 mg/L
1000 mg/L
5000 mg/L
Chamber 3
2.93 ± 1.81
1.70 ± 1.73
0.10 ± 0.95
-5.55 ± 2.74
Chamber 4
3.36 ± 1.96
3.17 ± 3.52
1.07 ± 0.92
-7.52 ± 9.57
Average fresh matter production (%)
Control
500 mg/L
1000 mg/L
5000 mg/L
Chamber 3
8.20 ± 8.24
3.9 ± 2.94
0.38 ± 2.05
-6.48 ± 3.80
Chamber 4
5.39 ± 3.93
5.44 ± 4.99
1.64 ± 2.15
-9.41 ± 7.08
Average water use efﬁciency (g/L)
Control
500 mg/L
1000 mg/L
5000 mg/L
Chamber 3
18.83 ± 12.89
12.64 ± 12.78
1.14 ± 7.21
-78.19 ± 57.17
Chamber 4
12.46 ± 5.06
13.64 ± 11.56
6.02 ± 6.58
-112.92 ± 85.38
Average accumulated transpiration (g)
Control
500 mg/L
1000 mg/L
5000 mg/L
Chamber 3
161.46 ± 62.14
142.98 ± 61.82
133.87 ± 28.51
77.48 ± 36.33
Chamber 4
268.39 ± 80.97
209.90 ± 130.06
213.12 ± 109.70
69.53 ± 66.72
ix
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
DTU Environment
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
