==PAGE:1==
CROP TYPE CLASSIFICATION
FROM MULTI-TEMPORAL RADAR AND OPTICAL IMAGES
USING DEEP LEARNING METHODS
by
Paul Senty
This thesis is submitted for the degree of
Master of Science in Earth and Space Physics and Engineering,
Earth observation
Supervisors:
John Peter Merryman Boncori
Head of Microwaves and Remote Sensing at National Space Institute
Kenneth Grogan
Head of Remote Sensing Analytics at DHI GRAS
Pantelis Kouris
Software Developer and Data Scientist at DHI GRAS
DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET (DTU)
July, 2021
© Paul Senty, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Introduction
3
1
Methods
5
1.1
Pixel-level classiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.1
Decision trees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.1.2
Random forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.2
Convolutional neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.1
Generalities about CNNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.2
U-Net . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.2.3
Convolutional LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.3
Considerations on model training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.3.1
Training-validation splits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.3.2
Loss functions and metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.3.3
Over-ﬁtting and dropout
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Dataset
15
2.1
Area of interest and crop types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 data products
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3
Cloud ﬁlling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
Pixel-level algorithms
23
3.1
Decision tree
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Random forests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Convolutional models
29
4.1
Data sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
U-Net design
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
U-Net results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Temporal and spectral decoupling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Result analysis
40
5.1
Feature importance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Misclassiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Comparison with recent scientiﬁc papers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.4
Conﬁdence metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
1
==PAGE:3==
5.5
Detection of errors in the reference crop type labels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
Conclusions
54
References
56
2
==PAGE:4==
Introduction
The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) (European Union’s agricultural policy), implements a
system of subsidies for farmers. It aims at sustainably improving agricultural productivity while
providing a good standard of living to farmers. Public transfers currently make up around 57%
of farm households income [1]. These vital subsidies for farmers require agriculture monitoring:
collecting crop production statistics, mapping soil productivity, and ensuring that farmers comply
with the policies. As agricultural land represents 39% of the surface of Europe, the monitoring
of such a wide area strongly beneﬁted from the rise of Earth observation satellites. In 2018, the
European Commission allowed the use of the satellites to replace farm-checks [2]. This report
is dedicated to a crucial part of agricultural monitoring: creating maps of crop-types to identify
ﬁelds boundaries and checking whether the information provided by farmers is consistent with the
satellites’ observations.
Many studies have been conducted using either optical or radar data to perform crop classiﬁ-
cation (or land-cover classiﬁcation) [3], [4], [5]. Both of these data sources have their strengths
and drawbacks. Indeed, while optical satellites provide information only in the absence of clouds
and during daytime, radar can acquire in all weather, day and night but the resulting images are
usually less informative than optical data. Orynbaikyzy et al. [6] showed the superiority of using
both radar and optical data over using only one of them. However, that article analyses the data on
a parcel-level: instead of considering every pixel, it averages the values of all the pixels belonging
to ﬁeld (hence supposing that the ﬁeld boundaries are perfectly known) and determines the most
likely crop-type for this parcel.
Among pixel-level models, we diﬀerentiate two categories of models:
• standard machine learning methods which we will refer to as "pixel-level classiﬁers". These
models use the data available for each pixel independently and predict which crop-type that
pixel belongs to.
• the more advanced "convolutional models".
Here, the model processes images instead
of single pixels and the task of classifying every pixel of the image is called semantic
segmentation. These methods are the state of the art in image analysis.
Semantic segmentation with multi-source (both radar and optical) imagery has already been
attempted: Kussul et al., in 2017 [7], made the ﬁrst attempt to apply a convolutional model to multi-
source imagery for crop classiﬁcation. Their study showed that convolutional models outperformed
random forests and standard neural networks.
In this report, we investigate the feasibility of mapping the main crop types of Denmark with a
variety of models. Trying diﬀerent models enables us to ﬁnd the right trade-oﬀbetween accuracy
3
==PAGE:5==
and complexity. We will compare the results with a state-of-the-art model which was also applied
to Denmark [8].
In the ﬁrst chapter, we explain the principles of the diﬀerent methods which have been imple-
mented (both pixel-level classiﬁers and convolutional neural networks) as well as some concepts
needed to understand how a machine learning model is trained. Then, the area of interest, the data
and the pre-processing of optical data are presented. The third chapter is dedicated to the pixel-level
classiﬁers while the fourth chapter is dedicated to convolutional models. Finally, we analyze the
results of the diﬀerent methods to estimate their performance and limits. We also attempt to detect
the agricultural ﬁelds whose crop types are not correctly labeled in the reference data.
4
==PAGE:6==
Chapter 1
Methods
Various models can be used for classiﬁcation and segmentation, but we choose to limit ourselves on
a few powerful machine learning techniques of increasing complexity and sophistication. The ﬁrst
section of this chapter covers some principles of random forests which are among the most powerful
machine learning algorithms currently available. In the second section, we introduce convolutional
neural networks and especially two state-of-the-art architectures widely used in computer vision:
the U-Net and the convolutional LSTM layer (ConvLSTM). Finally, in the third section, we present
some elements needed to understand how deep neural networks function such as what do models
seek to optimize? or how to ensure that the model will generalize to new data samples?.
1.1
Pixel-level classiﬁcation
This section is dedicated to some "traditional" machine learning classiﬁers, as opposed to deep
learning, decision trees and random forests. These algorithms are interesting to study for their
simplicity and their ability to ﬁt complicated data. But their main asset is their interpretability: one
can understand how they arrived at a speciﬁc prediction.
1.1.1
Decision trees
Decision trees are very versatile machine learning algorithms that can be used both for classiﬁcation
and regression tasks, capable of ﬁtting complex data [9].
A decision tree looks like ﬁgure 3.1. To predict the species of a new iris ﬂower, we start at the
node at the top and check if the petal length is lower than 2.45cm. If it is, we predict that this iris
ﬂower is a setosa. Otherwise, we compare the petal width of 1.75cm to decide.
"Gini" in ﬁgure 1.1 refers to the Gini impurity:
gini = 1 −
X
i∈classes
( value[i]
samples)2
where "samples" counts the number of samples a node applies to and "value" counts the number of
instances of each class among these samples. The higher the gini impurity is, the more confusions
between species are present in the prediction.
5
==PAGE:7==
Figure 1.1: Example of a decision tree determining the species of 150 Iris ﬂower (Iris setosa, Iris
virginica or Iris versicolor) from their petal length and width, ﬁgure 6-1 of [9]
The parameters of the decision trees are the chosen feature (petal length and petal width in the
previous example) as well as the corresponding threshold (2.45cm and 1.75cm). These values are
learned by the Classiﬁcation and Regression Tree (CART) algorithm which tries, at every node, to
choose the feature and the threshold which minimizes the weighted sum of the gini impurities of
its child nodes (ﬁgure 1.2):
samplesleft × ginileft + samplesright × giniright
The decision tree model needs to be informed on when to stop, otherwise it would indeﬁnitely split
every node until only one sample belong to each leaf. Thus, a maximum depth or a maximum
number of leaves are usually deﬁned.
Figure 1.2: Node split of a decision tree
If a decision tree is deep, it will tend to ﬁt the data too closely, these trees poorly predict the class
of new data samples (we say that it generalizes poorly, see subsection 1.3.3 on over-ﬁtting). Thus,
decision trees are rarely used alone for a complex task: instead of making deeper decision trees,
one usually trains many decision trees to make a prediction. This principle is based on the concept
of the wisdom of the crowd, that a large group of people is collectively smarter than individual
experts.
6
==PAGE:8==
1.1.2
Random forests
Random forests are among the most powerful machine learning algorithms available today. It is
an ensemble model: it aggregates the predictions of a group of predictors. That prediction is, in
most cases, more accurate than the predictions of individual predictors. For random forests, these
predictors are decision trees. Each decision tree is trained on a random subset of the training set,
hence the name "random" forest. An extra randomness is introduced when training the decision
trees: instead of looking for the best feature when splitting a node, the random forest algorithm
looks for the best feature in a random subset of features (a diﬀerent subset at every node).
The prediction of the random forest is the majority vote (ﬁgure 1.3).
Figure 1.3: Illustration of a random forest voting system
A very useful functionality of random forests is feature importance: it helps to understand
which features are the most useful for a classiﬁcation task. It is computed by looking at how much
the tree nodes reduce impurity on average. The node importance i(node) is computed as follows
([10]):
i(node) = wnode × gininode −(wleft × ginileft + wright × giniright)
where left and right refer to the two child nodes of "node", gini is the Gini impurity, and w is the
number of samples in the node’s set divided by the total number of samples in the training set. The
feature importance of a feature f is then derived as the normalized sum of the importance of the
nodes which split on this feature:
feature importance(f) =
P
nodes that split on feature f i(node)
P
all nodes i(node)
7
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Convolutional neural networks
The ﬁrst convolutional neural network (CNN) revolutionized the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence:
AlexNet, in 2012, won the ImageNet contest and strongly outperformed all previous algorithms
[11]. Since then, most computer visions problems rely on CNNs.
In this section, we present the fundamental blocks which make up a CNN before diving into
two state-of-the-art CNN architecture:
• U-Net which was originally developed for medical image segmentation and is now the most
common architecture for image segmentation.
• the more recent convolutional LSTM layers which can eﬀectively process both spatial and
temporal data at once.
1.2.1
Generalities about CNNs
Convolutional neural networks are mainly composed of three types of layers: convolutional layers,
pooling layers and fully connected layers. Fully connected layers are the most well-known type
of layer. It comprises a series of neurons which are all connected to the inputs (the inputs are
either the data for the ﬁrst layer, or the outputs of the previous neurons). Figure 1.4 shows the
computation of one single neuron’s output of one layer hw(x) from the previous layer’s outputs x.
The weights w are the parameters of the model, they are updated during the training of the model
based on their contribution to the inaccuracy of the predictions. This updating method is called
backpropagation (we will not explain this algorithm, but here is an excellent guide to understand
it: [12]). The activation function’s role is to include some non-linearity so that the model can
ﬁt complex functions. Many activation functions have been tried for neural network but the most
common one is called ReLU (Rectiﬁed Linear Unit) and is deﬁned as:
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
where x is the output of a neuron. An alternative to ReLu which has the advantage of having a
strictly positive derivative is "Leaky ReLU":
Leaky ReLU(x) = max(0.01x, x)
Convolutional layers are suited for image processing. Their primary advantage over fully-
connected layers is their ability to analyze the texture in images and the spatial organization of
pixels to infer simple spatial features (edges, circles, corners) which are combined to recognize
some complex objects such as a face, a car, etc. A convolutional layer is a group of independent
ﬁlters. Each ﬁlter slides over the image to create a new image (called feature map) from all the
previous layer’s feature maps (ﬁgure 1.5). The output of a convolutional layer is 3-dimensional:
height and width being the spatial dimensions of the image and the depth is the number of feature
maps (or, equivalently, the number of ﬁlters).
The max-pooling layer reduces the size of the feature maps (ﬁgure 1.6). It is very useful in
CNNs for two reasons:
• ﬁrst it reduces the number of parameters and speeds up the computation and the training.
8
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.4: Computation of a neuron value from the layer’s inputs
Figure 1.5: Convolution of a single feature map from a previous layer (on the left) with a ﬁlter
(the middle matrix) to produce a new feature map (on the right). As there are usually several
feature maps for each convolutional layer, the previous layer and the ﬁlter are 3-dimensional, and
not 2-dimensional like the ﬁgure. Credits: Pallawi - Towards Data Science
• by reducing the spatial dimensions, the model can store higher-level / more abstract informa-
tion and process images at another scale.
9
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.6: Max-pooling layer applied to a feature map, credits: Sandeep Jain - GeeksforGeeks
1.2.2
U-Net
A U-Net is a so-called "fully-convolutional network" (FCN) as it includes only convolutional and
pooling layers. It was originally designed for biomedical image segmentation. It consists of two
parts:
• a contracting path composed of convolutional and pooling layers which encodes spatial
features
• an expanding path where pooling layers are replaced by upsampling layers. During this
part, higher-level features from the expanding path are concatenated with higher-resolution
features from the contracting path
The term U-net derives from the symmetry of the two paths (ﬁgure 1.7).
In the case of multi-label classiﬁcation, the U-Net usually ends with a convolutional layer with
nclasses ﬁlters, where nclasses is the number of classes. The nclasses resulting features maps contain the
score s of each class for every pixel. These scores are then normalized with an activation function
f so that P
k∈classes f(sk) = 1. That way, the outputs of the network can be interpreted as the
probabilities that a pixel belongs to each class. The softmax function is usually chosen as the ﬁnal
activation function f, it is deﬁned as:
pk = f(s)k =
esk
Pnclasses
j=1
esj for k = 1, 2, ..., nclasses
Afterwards, the model predicts the crop-type of each pixel as follows:
crop-type = argmaxk=1,...nclassespk
1.2.3
Convolutional LSTM
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are neural networks especially suited to study sequences and
temporal behaviour while convolutional neural networks thrive in the extraction of visual features.
Crop mapping from multi-temporal images relies on both spatial and temporal information, which
10
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.7: Example of a U-Net structure
makes the fusion of RNNs and CNNs particularly interesting to study. ConvLSTMs is a type of
network which eﬀectively processes sequences of images (it is widely used to process videos).
LSTM stands for Long Short-Term Memory. This recurrent neural network architecture was
ﬁrst proposed in 1997 by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber. Contrary to simpler types of RNNs, a
LSTM can store both the short-term memory derived from the previous cell (the short-term state
is denoted h(t)) and the long-term memory over the whole image sequence (the long-term state, or
cell state, is denoted c(t)).
The central layer is the one which outputs ˜c(t) in ﬁgure 1.8, this is where the current inputs xt
and the previous short-term state are combined and processed. All the other states control the ﬂow
of information which circulates in the long-term and short-term memories.
This ﬂow of information is controlled by three gates (their values are computed from the input
xt and the previous short-term state ht−1):
• the forget gate ft which controls the part of the long-term state that should be erased.
• the input gate it which controls which information from ˜c(t) should be added to the long-term
state.
• the output gate ot which controls which part of the long-term state should be stored in the
short-term memory and transmitted to the next cell or outputted.
The short-term state is also the output of the network.
There are two possibilities, either
the model returns a sequence and all the short-term states ht=1,...T are outputted, or only the last
short-term state hT is outputted.
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 1.8: LSTM cell, sigmoid and tanh are two types of activation function, "×" represents
element-wise multiplications and "+" indicates element-wise summations, credits: Fernando López
- Towards Data Science
ConvLSTM layer is simply a LSTM where the parameters of the gates are ﬁlters like the ones
presented in ﬁgure 1.5.
1.3
Considerations on model training
Some central concepts are covered in this section: the way a dataset is split before training a neural
network, how to evaluate the performance of a model and how to ensure that it can correctly handle
some new data once the model is trained.
1.3.1
Training-validation splits
In a machine-learning project, the dataset usually divided into three subsets:
• the training subset which is used to train the model.
• the validation subset which is used to monitor the model performance on data that the
model has not yet encountered and tune the hyper-parameters, usually only the model which
performs best on the validation subset is kept.
• the test set to determine the performance of the model. As the validation subset is used to
select the best model, there might be a bias if that model performs especially well on that
subset but isn’t as accurate elsewhere. Therefore, it is preferable to deﬁne a third subset for
a better evaluation of the model’s performance on new data.
1.3.2
Loss functions and metrics
The loss function (or cost function) C is the most important hyper-parameter of a neural network
as it states which quantity should be minimized. It is a measure of the inaccuracy of the prediction.
12
==PAGE:14==
All the weights and the way they are updated depend on it, indeed weights of neurons networks are
incrementally modiﬁed as follows:
w := w −α ∂C
∂w′(w)
where w is one weight of the neural network, α is the learning rate, which determines how quick
the model is adapted, and ∂C
∂w′ is the cost function’s partial derivative in function of the weight’s
value. Diﬀerent cost functions are used with multi-label segmentation (segmentation with more
than 2 classes):
• Categorical cross entropy is the most common one, the corresponding formula for one pixel
is C = −log(p(class = label)) where p(class = label) is the probability, estimated by the
neural network, that this pixel belongs to the class of the reference label. The major drawback
of this loss function is that it does not consider the probability estimates for the other classes.
As a result, it performs poorly in the case of class imbalance (when some classes are way
more recurrent than others).
A value that is used to compare models and that increases with their accuracy is called metric.
The metric usually used with categorical entropy is categorical accuracy, which is computed
as the number of correctly predicted pixels divided by the number of pixels in the image.
• Intersection-over-union (or Jaccard similarity score) is ﬁrst computed for each class sepa-
rately. For class "1" for instance, the intersection-over-union is the ratio between:
– the number of pixels that belong to class "1" that were correctly predicted by the model
– and the number of pixels that belong to class "1" or that were classiﬁed as "1" by the
model (ﬁgure 1.9).
Figure 1.9: Intersection-over-union, credits: Oleksii Sheremet - Towards Data Science
The intersection-over-union of each class is then averaged.
That metric is called mean
intersection-over-union.
The corresponding loss is called the Jaccard index: J = 1 −
mean IoU.
1.3.3
Over-ﬁtting and dropout
During a model’s training, the weights are updated to ﬁt the training data as closely as possible.
One epoch is completed when every sample in the training dataset has been used to update the
model weights. Dozens of epochs are usually necessary to train complicated models. If the model
is trained for too long, it risks memorizing the training data instead of learning a function which
would generalize to diﬀerent data samples. This phenomenon is called over-ﬁtting and is a major
13
==PAGE:15==
issue in machine learning. The most successful method for neural networks is called dropout, it
was deﬁned by Hinton in 2012 [13] and revolutionized deep learning which strongly suﬀered from
over-ﬁtting. Dropout replaces some neuron outputs’ values by zero with a ﬁxed probability (usually
between 20% and 50%). The model will learn to be accurate even when part of the neurons is
missing. It reduces the dependencies between neurons, makes the model more versatile and the
resulting models generalize better to data outside of the training dataset.
14
==PAGE:16==
Chapter 2
Dataset
2.1
Area of interest and crop types
As part of the common agricultural policy (CAP), farmers need to reference the geometry of their
ﬁeld and what speciﬁc type of crop they grow. Over a large area of interest in Denmark (red square
in ﬁgure 2.1) containing around 60,000 ﬁelds (grassland excluded), we group the ﬁeld parcels into
13 classes. Each class contains at least 200 ﬁelds in the entire area.
Figure 2.1: Area of study and labels, the red square corresponds to area of study, the orange
rectangle is the training area while the blue rectangle is the validation area
Apart from the crop-types, two other classes were created: "background" which contains forests,
urban areas, water and everything which is not an agricultural ﬁeld, and "other crops" which is an
aggregation of less recurrent crop types (less than 200 ﬁeld parcels over the area of interest). The
distribution of the diﬀerent crop-types is displayed in ﬁgure 2.2.
15
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.2: Number of ﬁeld parcels in the area of interest for each crop type
2.2
Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 data products
Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 are Earth observation satellites, launched by the European Space Agency
(ESA) between 2014 and 2016. Sentinel-1 provides all-weather radar imagery, while Sentinel-2
provides high-resolution optical imagery. They both acquire diﬀerent channels at once:
• Sentinel-1 can transmit and receive electromagnetic signals both in vertical and horizontal
polarization which leads to 4 possible combinations: HH, VV, HV and VH where the ﬁrst
letter refers to the polarization of the emitting signal and the second letter refers to the
polarization of the received signal.
• Sentinel-2 carries a multi-spectral imager with 10 spectral bands (table 2.1).
Both satellites provide free access to their data.
Multi-spectral optical imagery is rich in information: it shows the world as the human eye would
see it (red, green and blue channels) as well as other bands in the infrared spectrum. However,
visible and infrared cannot penetrate clouds and, as they measure reﬂected solar light, they only
function in the daytime. This limits the number of acquisitions that can be processed over a season.
They also are aﬀected by atmospheric conditions but ESA provides already corrected reﬂectances
(top of the atmosphere reﬂectances are converted into surface reﬂectances [14]).
Radars sensors operate at completely diﬀerent wavelengths: Sentinel-1 satellites emit signals
with wavelengths around 5.6 cm. As they emit their own light and as radar signals penetrate clouds,
they can acquire both day and night and under all weather conditions. These sensors are sensitive
to the roughness of the ground, its water content and they can partially penetrate in vegetation,
16
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.1: Sentinel-2 bands and wavelength range [15], NIR stands for Near InfraRed and SWIR
for Short-Wave InfraRed
which provides information that the optical imagery could not get. One of the major drawbacks of
radar imagery is the high variations between adjacent pixels, which create a grainy texture. These
variations are caused by the coherent sums of the signals reﬂected by diﬀerent scattering targets
inside a same resolution cell, these signals can interfere positively or negatively creating the salt
and pepper aspect visible in ﬁgure 2.3.
(a) Sentinel-2 surface reﬂectances of red, green and
blue channels
(b) Sentinel-1 VV backscatter image
Figure 2.3: Examples of Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2 data products over the town of Løvel in Denmark
in June 2020
Among the Sentinel-2 acquisitions of our area of interest between March and August 2020, we
kept only those which presented a cloud cover percentage lower than 5% over the test area, and we
tried to have acquisitions at diﬀerent stages of the growing season. Figure 2.4 displays the dates
17
==PAGE:19==
of the 7 optical acquisitions, spreading between April 7th and August 15th, that we will use in this
study.
Figure 2.4: Dates of radar and optical acquisitions
The 20-meters resolution bands of Sentinel-2 were interpolated to a 10 meters resolution (or
pixel spacing) to harmonize the data raster dimensions.
Regarding radar acquisitions, all the acquisitions (26) of the area of interest between April and
August 2020 with the relative orbit number 117 were downloaded. We used the Sentinel-1 product
types referred to as "IW GRD", for "interferometric wide", which is the acquisition mode, and
"ground range detected", which means that the observed radar data has been detected and projected
on the ground [16]. The pixel-spacing of these data products is 10 meters, as for the optical data.
We therefore have a big raster where each pixel represents an area on the ground of 10×10
meters and with 122 channels:
• 52 radar channels - one VV and one VH channel for each one of the 26 radar acquisitions
• 70 optical channels - bands 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 8A, 11, 12 for each optical acquisition
While no further processing of the data was done on the radar data before training the machine
learning models, the optical data still contains a few clouds. The main issue with leaving clouds in
the data is that most models will consider them as actual ground data and might develop biases. For
instance, if clouds are more present over maize than wheat, a model might learn to identify areas
covered by clouds as maize. So, we choose to remove and replace the clouds by approximation of the
ground images. Next section delves into the method we implemented to reconstruct the optical data.
2.3
Cloud ﬁlling
The Sentinel-2 data contains, along with the spectral bands, a cloud mask that we will use to detect
the data we want to remove. Filling the missing data with realistic reﬂectance values is more
complicated.
To do so, we use the method deﬁned by S. V. Skakun and R. M. Basarab [17] using self-
organizing maps (SOMs) for the restoration of missing data in a time-series of satellite imagery.
18
==PAGE:20==
Self-organizing maps is a type of neural network that produces a simpliﬁed and discretized repre-
sentation of a multidimensional input space. In this case, the input space will be the time-series of
reﬂectances of one spectral band. A grid is initialized, each point on the grid (the points are called
neurons) is mapped to a vector (called weights) of the same dimension as the input space. During
the training of the model, the weights are updated to ﬁt the distribution of the multidimensional data
(ﬁgure 2.5 illustrates this process brieﬂy but see the following article on Medium for more details
on the training procedure: [18]). We only train on pixels that do not have any missing data in their
reﬂectance time-series (pixels which are never covered by clouds). At the end of the training, each
point of the grid is representative of a cloud-free time series of reﬂectances and, if enough points
on the grids were deﬁned, the grid reﬂects the diversity of the whole dataset.
Figure 2.5: Self-organizing map training, credits: Dan Stowell, Wikipedia Commons
One self-organizing map is trained for each spectral band independently. The missing values
are then restored using the trained maps. Let (x1, x2, ...xT) be a time-series of reﬂectances of one
pixel with missing data, where T is the number of optical acquisitions and xi=1,...T is the surface
reﬂectance of one spectral band. We determine the neuron (point of the grid) which is most similar
to x as follows:
neuron winner = argminneuron
X
i such that xi̸=NaN
(xi −wi
neuron)2
where wneuron are the weights associated with the neuron. This method is illustrated in ﬁgure 2.6.
Figure 2.7 shows an example of a pixel covered by clouds at the time of the ﬁrst acquisition and
the value inferred by the green band SOM.
19
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.6: "A procedure to restore missing values in input data using SOM", ﬁgure 1 of [19]
Figure 2.7: Green band time-series of a pixel covered by clouds during the ﬁrst acquisition
As the self-organizing operates pixel by pixel, the results appear slightly noisy (ﬁgures 2.8 and
2.9). Hopefully, only 5.6% of pixels over the area of interest have missing data, otherwise the
poorer quality of the reconstructed data could become an issue. Despite that noisy aspect, the
results still seem convincing and realistic.
20
==PAGE:22==
(a) With cloud mask
(b) After reconstruction of missing data
Figure 2.8: Cloud ﬁlling with self-organizing maps - May 7th, 2020
21
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.9: Cloud ﬁlling with self-organizing maps, June 16th, 2020
22
==PAGE:24==
Chapter 3
Pixel-level algorithms
3.1
Decision tree
We now have a data raster containing 122 radar and optical channels and a label for each pixel
indicating the crop-type. In the next two chapters, we will deﬁne machine learning models which
will try to learn the dependencies between the 122 channels and the crop-type. We will ﬁrst focus
on algorithms which only take as input the values of the channels at one pixel (and therefore do not
have information on the neighboring pixels).
One of the simplest pixel-level models is the decision tree (section 1.1). Decision trees have a
varying depth and number of leaves. To easily visualize how a decision tree uses the satellite data
to make predictions, we trained a very shallow decision tree, with only 4 leaves (a maximum of 4
classes can be predicted, while there are 15 classes). This example is purely explanatory.
23
==PAGE:25==
Figure 3.1: Decision tree visualization. The ﬁrst line of each internal vertex (which can be seen
as a subset of the training set) shows the channel and the threshold used for the decision. The gini
index is a measure of impurity (the higher, the more heterogeneous the set is). "Samples" informs
on the proportion of training samples that belong to this subset. Value is the proportion of each
class in the subset (in the same order as 2.2), the values sum to 1. Finally, "class" indicates the
most common class in that subset.
This decision tree only uses three channels out of 122:
• The near-infrared (NIR) band (band 8) on April 22nd: it labels strong reﬂectances in that
band as grassland.
• The short-wave infrared band 1 (band 11) on June 16nd: if that value is small, the model
classiﬁes the pixel as "background".
Healthy vegetation indeed has a particularly high
reﬂectance compared to water or urban features in this region of the electromagnetic spectrum
(we brieﬂy discuss the reﬂectance of vegetation for diﬀerent wavelengths in section 5.1).
• The short-wave infrared band 2 (band 12) on June 16nd to diﬀerentiate maize from spring
barley.
This model already achieved a categorical accuracy of 58% on the validation data set. This
may appear to be a fair result already, but one needs to be cautious because of the class imbalance
of the dataset: over 45% of the validation dataset is background so a model which always predicts
background already 45% accuracy.
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.2: Crop-type reference label (top) and prediction (bottom) of the decision tree classiﬁer
from ﬁgure 3.1
Most of the ﬁelds belonging to the 4 classes previously mentioned are successfully identiﬁed
by the model (ﬁgure 3.2). This is impressive from a such a simple model using only 3 channels and
with 3 parameters (the three thresholds). Still, as we can see both in the leaves of the tree (ﬁgure
3.1) and in ﬁgure 3.2, a lot of impurity remains. To increase the ability of the model to ﬁt the data,
more parameters need to be included. First, we need to make deeper decision trees, so that they
can attempt to predict every class. The corresponding results are presented in the ﬁrst column of
table 3.1. We notice that with 32 leaves, the categorical accuracy improved from 58% previously
to 65%, and improved again when the tree was extended to 64 leaves. As the number of parameters
was increased, the model has more possibilities to use all the data available to diﬀerentiate between
classes. But making even deeper decision trees would overﬁt the data. Instead, by combining the
predictions of many decision trees, we create a random forest whose prediction is more robust and
generalizes better than deep decision trees.
3.2
Random forests
Random forests combine the crop-type predictions of several decision trees. We can mainly play
with two parameters: the number of decision trees and their depths (or the maximum number
of leaves). Both parameters contribute positively to the accuracy in table 3.1. The gap between
a decision tree (column 1) and 10 decision tree classiﬁers in very important, highlighting the
eﬃciency of ensemble models. Yet, the gap between 10 and 100 decision trees is lower. Likewise,
the gap between 64 and 128 leaves is lower than between 32 and 64.
As a random forest with 100 classiﬁers of 128 leaves is already long to train and as the categorical
25
==PAGE:27==
Max leaves
Number of trees
1
10
100
32
65
70
72
64
70
75
76
128
70
76
77
Table 3.1: Decision trees (ﬁrst column) and random forests categorical accuracy over the validation
set in percent (%) depending on the number of decision trees and their maximum number of leaves
accuracy seem to saturate, we did not train bigger forests. Figure 3.3 shows the predictions of a
decision tree and a random forest in an area presenting diverse crop types. The random forest
performs better than a single decision tree in its better ability to identify winter rape and to
diﬀerentiate winter rye and winter barley. Some confusion between these two crop types remains
in the random forest predictions.
The main issue of random forests is their inability to identify less common crop-types, like
spring oats in ﬁgure 3.3. This is reﬂected in the intersection over union for the diﬀerent classes
(ﬁgure 3.4).
Figure 3.4 shows that a random forest performs well at diﬀerentiating the most common classes
but is poor at predicting the less common ones. This results from the way a decision tree is trained,
it tries to reduce the impurity at each node. As the least common crop-type have little eﬀect in the
impurities of every leaf, they rarely have a dedicated leaf in the decision tree and the confusion
between these classes and the most common crop-types are neglected and out-shadowed by the
common crop-types.
By comparing ﬁgures 3.4 and 4.6(a), it appears that convolutional neural networks perform
better than random forest for every single crop-type. As a result, the next sections will focus on
these more advanced models, and methods to reduce class imbalance will be deﬁned. Yet, similar
concepts (such as oversampling) could also have been applied to both decision trees and random
forests. The random forests presented in this chapter, despite their poor predictions for the minority
classes, suﬃce to understand which features are useful to diﬀerentiate between classes and see
whether the fusion of radar and optical data beneﬁts to the model (these questions are addressed in
sections 5.1 and 5.2).
26
==PAGE:28==
(a) Labels
(b) Decision tree with 128 leaves
(c) Random forest of 100 classiﬁers with a maximum
of 128 leaves
Figure 3.3: Crop-type labels and predictions by a decision tree and a random forest of 100 classiﬁers
27
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.4: Intersection-over-union of diﬀerent classes in the test set from a random forest model
of 100 trees with a maximum of 128 leaves
28
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 4
Convolutional models
According to a meta-analysis of pixel-based processes for land-cover classiﬁcation [20], "inclusion
of texture information yielded the greatest improvement in overall accuracy of land-cover classiﬁ-
cation with an average increase of 12.1%". This shows the importance of using the spatial context
when working with images. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) were a revolution in computer
vision because of their ability to extract features and textures from images.
4.1
Data sampling
To train a CNN, it is necessary to break the data into patches, which are small square parts of the
images. These patches are stacked, and a group of patches forms a batch. Batches are inputted to the
neural network, and the model makes predictions from them before model updating its parameters
according to the "distance" between the predicted crop types and the actual crop types (that distance
is called loss function, section 1.3).
Figure 4.1 shows one patch, its size is (32, 32, 122), 32 by 32 pixels corresponds to its
spatial dimensions while 122 is the number of channels.
Batches have the following shape:
(batch_size, patch_size, patch_size, n_channels) where batch_size is the number of patches in a
batch, patch_size2 is the number of pixels of one patch and n_channels is the number of optical and
radar channels.
Patches are extracted from the whole training area with a moving window. There is usually a
degree of overlap: once a patch has been extracted, the moving window is translated by a number
of pixels lower than the patch size.
When training the data, the most common strategy is to feed, during each training epoch, every
patch once and only once. This method maintains the class distribution of the dataset, but the
model will be biased towards the majority classes (background, grassland, spring barley).
To avoid the issue related to class imbalance that we encountered with random forests, we use
a strategy which artiﬁcially balance the dataset. It is a so-called oversampling method and consists
in sampling the minority classes more often than the majority classes. It is more complicated
with semantic segmentation as there are multiple labels for one patch and, instead of deﬁning only
the rarity of a class, we must deﬁne the rarity of a patch depending on the diﬀerent crop-types it
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.1: A few bands of patch of size 32 by 32 pixels (320×320m2) and the corresponding
crop-type label
includes. A probability of being sampled is attributed to each patch. This probability depends on
the frequency of the diﬀerent crop-types present on each patch:
psampling(patch) =
X
(i,j)∈pixels in patch
1
occurence[class(i, j)]
where occurence[k] represents the number of pixels in the training set whose corresponding crop
type is k.
We can see in ﬁgure 4.2 (a) and (b) that this method reduces the imbalance of the data. Yet, we
do not get a distribution like ﬁgure 4.2 (c), where the class imbalance is completely removed. The
reason for the remaining imbalance is that most patches contain multiple labels: if an uncommon
crop is sampled (like beans in ﬁgure 4.1), it is likely to also contain some background, grassland
or other common crops. Figure 4.1) (c) was obtained by applying the precedent formula to single
pixels (or, equivalently, patches of size (1,1)).
Even though the model will encounter more samples of the rare classes, the diversity of these
classes remains unchanged. Over an epoch, the model will train on multiple replicates of the same
patch. This can induce some overﬁtting and biases, which would have a detrimental impact on
the generalization of the model. To partly compensate that, we use a so-called data augmentation
method: the diversity of the training dataset is artiﬁcially increased by adding slightly modiﬁed
copies of the available data.
30
==PAGE:32==
(a) Uniform patch sampling
(b) Weighted patch sampling
(c) Weighted pixel sampling
Figure 4.2: Eﬀect of the weighted sampling on the class imbalance during training
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.3: From left to right: the ﬁrst image shows the original RGB (red-green-blue) channels
of an area acquired on June 16th. The two other images result from the random augmentations
process, the middle ﬁgure results from a ﬂip, a rotation and contrast increase and the last ﬁgure has
probably been re-scaled and rotated
Patches are ﬂipped horizontally, vertically, transposed or rotated. Their contrast and brightness
can be randomly adjusted, and they can also be scaled and re-sampled (ﬁgure 4.3). Each of these
augmentations can be applied, with a certain probability, to the patch when it is fed into the model.
4.2
U-Net design
We deﬁned a U-Net structure which takes as inputs patches of dimension (32, 32, 122): 122 chan-
nels and 320 × 320 m2 and outputs tensors of shape (32, 32, 15) where every value corresponds to
a probability estimate that one pixel belongs to one of the 15 classes/crop types.
We trained the U-Net architecture presented in section 1.2 but a visualization of the activations
of diﬀerent layers in the expanding part showed that the architecture was not adapted to the problem.
Indeed, the model learned not to use the information from the low-resolution / high-level features
during the expanding path (ﬁgure 4.4). We concluded that, for this speciﬁc crop-mapping task,
higher-level features were less valuable for the network than higher-resolution features.
The major advantage of the U-Net is to process information at diﬀerent scales and to infer ab-
stract information. While deep networks are needed to recognize complex forms like a human body
from an ensemble of edges and simple geometric shapes, the relative simplicity of a ﬁeld shape
might not need the storage of high-level/abstract features. The rupture in the ﬂow of information
after two-pooling layer might indicate that low-level features are suﬃcient to classify crops.
As a result, we trained a shallower U-Net (ﬁgure 4.5). We didn’t observe any reduction of the
model performance but the training and prediction times were signiﬁcantly reduced (almost 3 times
less parameters).
As far as hyperparmaters are concerned,
• All ﬁlters’ sizes are 3 by 3.
32
==PAGE:34==
• Each convolutional layer is followed by a dropout layer, with a probability of dropout of 30%
(see Methods chapter for details).
• Each layer is also followed by a batch normalization layer, this a layer which rescales the
layer output between 0 and 1. It is commonly used to increase the model stability.
• The number of ﬁlters of convolutional layers varies from 64 to 256 (ﬁgure 4.5).
• The "Leaky ReLU" activation function slightly outperformed "ReLU" (see their deﬁnition in
section 1.2), probably because of the dying ReLU problem: as the derivative of the ReLU
function is equal to 0 over the interval ] −∞, 0[, if a neuron (before activation) only outputs
negative values, its weights will never be updated and the neuron becomes indeﬁnitely
inactive. LeakyReLU avoids this issue as its derivative is always strictly positive, at the
expense of a longer computation time.
4.3
U-Net results
The U-Net was ﬁrst trained using cross-entropy as a loss function. Cross-entropy do not consider
each class individually, which leads to a quite low accuracy for the minority classes. A good
accuracy over the classes was preferred over a high overall accuracy, and the mean intersection-
over-union was more eﬃcient for this purpose (see section 1.3 for details on loss functions). Figure
4.6 shows the intersection-over-union (IoU) scores in two cases:
• without oversampling (each patch is sampled once and only once after each epoch) and with
cross-entropy as a loss function
• with oversampling (as deﬁned in the section 4.1) and with the mean intersection-over-union
loss function
While the IoU scores of the most common classes are almost unaﬀected by oversampling, the IoU
scores of the minority classes have signiﬁcantly increased.
The U-Net outputs are considerably more accurate than the random forests’ predictions:
• the intersection over union of rare classes being signiﬁcantly higher, compare ﬁgures 3.4 and
4.6
• the categorical accuracies are respectively 84% and 83% without and with oversampling on
the validation set, compared with 77% for the random forest.
Part of this improvement in the categorical accuracy results from the higher performance of neu-
ral networks over random forests, and another part comes from the ability to recognize patterns and
texture which wasn’t possible with pixel-level algorithms. By curiosity, we trained the same U-Net
model by replacing all the 3 by 3 ﬁlters by 1 by 1 ﬁlters. Under these conditions, the U-Net cannot
recognize features in the image. It turns out that the model reached better accuracies that the random
forest model, but lower than the original U-Net: 80% categorical accuracy on the test validation set.
33
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.4: Concatenation of the activations and the interruption of information ﬂow from higher-
level features
Figure 4.5: Updated U-Net
34
==PAGE:36==
(a) IoU of the diﬀerent crop types derived from the
predictions a U-Net trained without oversampling and
with the cross-entropy loss function.
Corresponding overall accuracy: 84%
(b) IoU of the diﬀerent crop types derived from the pre-
dictions a U-Net trained with oversampling and with
the mean intersection-over-union loss function.
Corresponding overall accuracy: 83%
Figure 4.6: Intersection over unions of the diﬀerent crop classes with and without oversampling
over the test set
For every pixel, the U-Net outputs the probability of each class, contrary to random forests
which only outputs the most likely class. We will use these probabilities to detect errors in the
reference labels (sections 5.4 and 5.5). Figure 3.3 displays the prediction of the U-Net where we
assigned to each pixel the class of maximum probability:
prediction(i, j) = argmaxk=0,...14(pi,j(class = k)
where pi,j is the output of the U-Net on the pixel at the position (i, j) (p is a list of the probabilities
estimates that this pixel belongs to each class). As the U-Net processes spatial information, its
predictions are more structured and less noisy than pixel-level algorithms predictions (ﬁgures 3.3
and 4.7 display the RF and U-Net predictions over the same area). Aside from being more accurate,
they make more convincing crop-type maps.
4.4
Temporal and spectral decoupling
In the previous sections, the 122 optical and radar channels were stacked with no information on
their acquisition time or their spectral band. To the human brain, it seems reasonable to separate
the acquisitions taken at diﬀerent times to study the evolution of the spectral bands with time.
Hence, dividing the channels into groups of spectral bands acquired at the same time and order
these groups in a chronological order appears to be a more suited way to deal with the data.
As mentioned before, the analysis has been done using 7 Sentinel-2 acquisitions. We hence
create data of shape (7, 32, 32, 12) where the ﬁrst dimension corresponds to the acquisition and
35
==PAGE:37==
(a) Labels
(b) Prediction
Figure 4.7: Crop-type labels and predictions by a U-Net
36
==PAGE:38==
the last dimension refers to the channel (10 optical and infrared spectral bands and 2 radar channels).
We deﬁne a model which consists of a series of three ConvLSTMs (ﬁgure 4.8). Each ConvL-
STM returns a sequence of outputs: (hi,1, ...hi,7), where i refers to the ConvLSTM number (for
1 to 3) and the shape of hi,1 is (32, 32, n_ﬁlters). This sequence of outputs of shape (7, 32, 32,
n_ﬁlters) becomes the input of the next ConvLSTM. For the two ﬁrst ConvLSTMS, n_ﬁlters = 256
and n_ﬁlters = 15 for the last ConvLSTM to match the number of classes.
Figure 4.8: ConvLSTM architecture, x is the input, c the cell-state, h the output and the images on
the right are the predictions computed as argmax(h3,t) where t refers to the time-step number
Regarding the hyper-parameters of this model, the ﬁlters’ size of the three ConvLSTMs is (3,3),
and the same loss function as the U-Net (mean intersection-over-union) and the same oversampling
method were used. The third ConvLSTM ends up with a softmax activation function which outputs
the probability of the pixels to belong to one class, hence the ﬁnal output of the model is (7, 32, 32,
n_classes).
Figure 4.9 shows how the prediction gradually improves with the number of time-steps pro-
cessed and how it gets closer to the labels. This gradual improvement of the prediction is quantiﬁed
in ﬁgure 4.10, which displays the overall categorical accuracy on the validation dataset for the seven
predictions. While that curve seems quite linear for the 5 ﬁrst acquisitions, the increase in accuracy
with one additional acquisition drops after the ﬁfth acquisition.
First, it appears logical that the impact of one additional acquisition should decrease with the
number of acquisitions already processed. With only 7 acquisitions, it is tough to quantify which
37
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.9: Evolution of the prediction with the number of acquisitions processed
dates of the seasons are more informative. In the beginning of the season, when the crops are not
grown yet, we would intuit the data to be less informative than later in spring.
Rußwurm and Körner [5] showed that the structure of ConvLSTMs and especially the input
gate could ﬂag clouds and that the model would learn not to use the corresponding pixels and leave
the memory unchanged. Thus, this ConvLSTM architecture could use more cloudy data and would
not require any cloud ﬁlling algorithm. It would be interesting to try this method. We suspect
that the model accuracy would not signiﬁcantly improve, but plotting a dense time-series with the
same axes as ﬁgure 4.10 could lead to a better understanding of what the neural network uses to
make predictions, and which development stages are the most valuable to diﬀerentiate between two
similar crop types.
The ConvLSTM model does not output particularly better predictions than the U-Net but
requires signiﬁcantly more parameters and is longer to train. A 2020 Stanford project concluded with
the same observations [21]. It appears that grouping the data by acquisition date and ConvLSTM’s
ability to control the ﬂow of information isn’t very useful to produce crop-type predictions. The
U-Net has access to all this spatial and temporal information, and probably links the feature maps
them intelligently without a need to order them. Even though a more advanced ConvLSTM model
or another set of parameters could prove the previous analysis on the non-superiority of ConvLSTM
models wrong, we choose to focus the result analysis results on the U-Net predictions.
Yet, ConvLSTMs are way more adaptive than U-Net: let’s suppose that we want to use the same
algorithm on another area or at the same model. For a U-Net, the same number of features needs
to inputted (26 radar acquisitions and 26 radar acquisitions) while a ConvLSTM model would be
able to make predictions from any number of optical acquisitions.
38
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.10: Evolution of ConvLSTM network performance with the number of acquisitions
39
==PAGE:41==
Chapter 5
Result analysis
5.1
Feature importance
All the models presented in this report were trained on all the optical bands and radar channels
available. Yet, these channels provide diﬀerent information and some of them might be more useful
than others. In this section, we try to understand which features (optical bands and radar channels)
are the most important for the classiﬁcation task.
Random forests have a very interesting function: feature importance (section 1.1.2). Based on
the reduction of the impurity at each node, the importance of all input channels is evaluated and
grouped by spectral bands. Radar channels were temporally excluded from the analysis to focus on
optical bands.
Spectral band
Resolution (m)
Feature importance (%)
Band 2 - Blue
10
8.5
Band 3 - Green
10
5.4
Band 4 - Red
10
9.1
Band 5 - Vegetation red edge
20
8.1
Band 6 - Vegetation red edge
20
7.6
Band 7 - Vegetation red edge
20
6.7
Band 8 - NIR
10
11.6
Band 8A - NIR narrow
20
7.5
Band 11 - SWIR
20
14.2
Band 12 - SWIR
20
21.3
Table 5.1: Mean spectral bands importance
The feature importance values of table 5.1 were computed by averaging the feature importance
of 5 random forests with 100 classiﬁers each. This averaging was an attempt to compensate for the
high ﬂuctuations of the feature importance between one random forest and another.
40
==PAGE:42==
Bands 8 (NIR) and 4 (red) are among the most commonly used bands in remote sensing applied
to agriculture. They are used for the derivation of the Normalized Diﬀerence Vegetation Index
(NDVI).
NDVI = Band 8 (NIR) −Band 4 (Red)
Band 8 (NIR) + Band 4 (Red)
This index increases the contrast between soil and vegetation. Green plants absorb solar radiation
from 400 to 700 nm, which includes the red band, while they have evolved to re-emit most the
infrared radiation as the corresponding photon energy is too small to synthesize organic molecules.
Thus, vegetation presents a notable diﬀerence between Near InfraRed (NIR) and red bands re-
ﬂectances (ﬁgure 5.2). The NIR reﬂectance also depends on the concentration of chlorophyll in
the vegetation and thus informs on the health of the plant. A healthy plant will absorb more red
and blue photons, create more chlorophyll and reﬂect more infrared energy (ﬁgure 5.1). It comes
as no surprise that bands 8 and 4 are the most important features after the short-wave infrared bands.
Figure 5.1: Internal leaf structure and radiation, Credits: NASA, JeﬀCarn [22]
We might expect the high-resolution bands to be more used than the lower resolution ones for
the classiﬁcation task. Yet, the bands which are the most important for the random forest classiﬁers,
the Short-Wave InfraRed (SWIR) bands, have a 20m resolution. These bands are also often used
for agricultural remote sensing. Unlike the near-infrared, the SWIR reﬂectance varies with the
vegetation water content. Bands 11 and 12 are often used to calculate the Normalized Diﬀerence
Water Index (NDWI).
NDWI = Band 8 (NIR) −Band 11 or 12 (SWIR)
Band 8 (NIR) + Band 11 or 12 (SWIR)
As bands 11 and 12 inform on water content and on the vegetation density and structure, it is
reasonable to think that time-series of these bands are useful for crop-type classiﬁcation.
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.2: Reﬂectance spectrum of vegetation, Credits: Humboldt State University [23]
Deep neural networks are "black boxes" and it is diﬃcult to understand how they perform
classiﬁcations. Yet, there is a way to indirectly derive feature importance. Figure 5.3 illustrates the
corresponding process, called permutation feature importance. The channels corresponding to one
spectral band are replaced by channels of the same spectral band but at another location, randomly
chosen. The altered data is then inputted in an already trained U-Net and its accuracy is estimated.
If the spectral band is not used by the model, there will not be any eﬀect on the accuracy. The more
useful a spectral band is, the higher the drop in accuracy will be.
Figure 5.3: Permutation feature importance process
42
==PAGE:44==
Figure 5.4 shows the drop in accuracy after permutation. This was estimated on 256 patches of
size 32 by 32. Because of the randomness of the process, the results strongly vary from one run to
another. The results of ﬁgure 5.4 are the average accuracy over 10 permutation runs.
Similarly to the random forest results, the SWIR bands (band 11 and 12) are the most important.
Yet, there are some noticeable diﬀerences with the random forest feature importance:
• The vegetation red-edge now shows a high importance, this is the region of rapid change in
reﬂectance of vegetation (ﬁgure 5.2)
• The red band, band 4 stays the most important visible band but it seems less used than in the
random forest classiﬁer
• Band 8A now appears more important than the band 8. These bands are quite similar, they
share almost the same central wavelength and the spectral range of band 8A is included in
band 8’s range. Band 8A provides more precise spectral information and is less corrupted by
atmospheric water vapor but has of lower resolution. The ability of the U-Net to analyze the
structure of the data both spatially and over spectral bands might result in a lower need for
high resolution.
Figure 5.4: Categorical accuracy in percent after permutation of one spectral band, a lower
categorical accuracy implies a greater spectral-band importance. The blue line is the original
accuracy, before permutation.
The interpretation of feature importance results is made diﬃcult by the high correlations between
neighboring channels such as red and vegetation red-edge spectral bands or NIR and SWIR bands.
43
==PAGE:45==
Indeed, if two bands contain the same information, the fact that a trained model uses one band more
than the other doesn’t mean that the ﬁrst one is necessarily more important. Figure 5.5 shows the
correlation matrix between the spectral bands.
Figure 5.5: Correlation between spectral bands
Until now, the radar data were excluded from the analysis as its nature is quite diﬀerent from
optical data. We will see in this paragraph that they are individually less informative, and that
the strength of radar data derives from its higher temporal resolution.
In our case, 26 radar
acquisitions were used as opposed to only 7 optical acquisitions. Table 5.1 feature importance
were re-normalized to sum to 1, but they previously summed to 75.1% as the sum of radar feature
importance was 24.9%. We can derive the mean importance of a radar channel and an optical
channel:
• There are 52 radar channels, hence the average feature importance of a radar channel is
0.249
52
= 0.48%.
• The average feature importance of an optical channel is 0.751
70
= 1.07%.
These results are consistent with Orynbaikyzy & al’s work [6]: "single optical features are more
informative than single SAR [radar] features". This paper, conducted at a parcel level, concludes
that dense time-series of radar data can reach higher accuracies than optical time series and that
the fusion of radar and optical surpasses both individual sources.
44
==PAGE:46==
Moreover, radar and optical data provide diﬀerent information which would help discriminate
crop types: while optical data is mainly sensitive to the chlorophyll content of the plants, radar data
provides information on to plant structure and moisture.
5.2
Misclassiﬁcation
Until now, we have compared the models using two metrics: accuracy and intersection-over-union
of diﬀerent classes. We can further interpret the results by counting the number of pixels belonging
to a class c1 but misclassiﬁed as c2. We deﬁne the following matrix, which we will refer to as the
normalized confusion matrix:
M(c1, c2) = Card[(true label = c1) ∩(predicted label = c2)]
Card(true label = c1)
Card refers to the cardinality (number of elements) of a set.
The normalized confusion matrix is displayed in ﬁgure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Normalized confusion matrix from the U-Net predictions
The highest values are on the diagonal, these diagonal elements correspond to the accuracy
scores for each crop-type deﬁned as
TP
TP+FN where TP refers to true positive and FN to false
negatives.
45
==PAGE:47==
Crop-type
Accuracy score (%)
IoU score (%)
Background
79
76
Grassland
86
60
Spring barley
92
81
Winter wheat
94
88
Maize
98
82
Winter rye
89
81
Winter barley
95
86
Winter rape
98
87
Spring oats
79
62
Potatoes
93
53
Other crops
30
28
Beans
92
85
Winter triticale
88
48
Peas
50
33
Sugar beet
64
40
Table 5.2: Accuracy and Intersection-over-Union (IoU) scores per crop type from the U-Net
predictions computed on the test set
Here are some observations from these accuracy scores (table 5.2):
• Common crop-types have, on average, higher accuracy scores than less common classes
• Some classes such as potatoes, winter triticale, sugar beet present big gaps between their
accuracy and their intersection-over-unions scores. This is the sign of a high number of false
positive. Potato ﬁelds, for example, are well identiﬁed by the model which explains its high
accuracy score. However, peas or sugar beet ﬁelds are also often labeled as potato ﬁelds.
These misclassiﬁcations are taken into account in the potato IoU score. We will discuss the
main confusions later in this section.
• "Other crops" has, by far, the lowest accuracy score as we might expect from the complexity
and diversity of this class.
• The background class, despite its complexity, obtained very good scores. The model, instead
of learning to recognize a house, a road or a forest, might classify as background everything
which does not change over the season. Unfortunately, this is only a supposition and it is
complicated to know how the model really proceeds.
For visualization purposes, we removed the diagonal values from the confusion matrix, see
ﬁgure 5.7. The confusions appear more clearly on that second ﬁgure.
It is important to note that, as the confusion matrix has been normalized and as there is a high
class imbalance, the most common confusions are the ones located on the ﬁrst rows of ﬁgure 5.7.
• The main confusion is between grassland and background. Like natural landscapes, grassland
ﬁelds do not present high variations throughout the year; the model struggles to diﬀerentiate
them from land areas which contain permanent grass but are not farmland.
46
==PAGE:48==
Figure 5.7: Normalized confusion matrix without diagonal elements
• Winter triticale is a hybrid of winter wheat and winter rye (Triticum and Secale are the Latin
names for wheat and rye) which explain why a great deal of winter wheat and winter rye are
labeled as winter triticale.
• Other confusions include spring barley and spring oats, peas and potatoes, maize and sugar
beet.
• The "other crops" class is rarely identiﬁed, the model seems to avoid that class and instead
would classify very rare crop-types as maize, grassland or potatoes. Some of the rare crop-
types included in "other crops" must appear similar to maize or potatoes. The model seems
unable to handle such a complex and diverse category.
Confusion matrices can also help to understand where the fusion of radar and optical data
surpasses the use of optical images only. By subtracting a confusion matrix of a random forest
model trained only on optical data from a random forest model (with the same parameters) which
was trained on the fusion of radar and optical data, we obtain ﬁgure 5.8. Only part of the ma-
trix was displayed, but both random forest classiﬁers performed poorly for less common crop-types.
Globally, the model using both radar and optical data outperformed the one which used only
optical data: 80% against 77.5% overall accuracy. Figure 5.8 shows that the increase in accuracy
results mainly from the reduction of the confusions between two pairs of classes: winter rye / winter
47
==PAGE:49==
Figure 5.8: Diﬀerence between the confusion matrices of a random forest trained on both optical
and radar data and another random forest only on optical data. Positive (resp. negative) out-of-
diagonal values mean that there were more confusion in the predictions from the optical-and-radar
model (resp. optical only).
wheat and background / grassland. It is probably the fact that radar time-series are denser, which
enabled the model to diﬀerentiate these two pairs by providing more occasions to diﬀerentiate
these tricky pairs of classes. For instance, exploited permanent grasslands need to be cut once a
year by farmers contrary to natural grasslands. It would be easier to observe a change in exploited
grasslands with denser time series. But radar data must also provide additional information to
the optical data, for instance on the density of the vegetation or the size of the cereals (on which
depends the intensity of the back-scatter) to diﬀerentiate between pairs of crops with similar spectral
signatures.
5.3
Comparison with recent scientiﬁc papers
This section will focus on the comparison of the U-Net predictions with another crop classiﬁcation
study conducted in 2019 by Nima Teimouri, Mads Dyrmann and Rasmus Nyholm Jørgensen [8].
The area of interest was also located in Denmark and similar crop-type classes were deﬁned, which
enables a meaningful comparison.
Table 5.3 summaries the IoU scores computed on the test sets of both the U-Net presented in
this report and the neural network deﬁned by Teimouri et al [8] (the test areas are diﬀerent).
The U-Net deﬁned in the previous section is more lightweight than the model deﬁned in that
48
==PAGE:50==
article, which is a combination of a U-Net and two ConvLSTMs. However, they did not use optical
data but only dense time-series of Sentinel-1 acquisitions coupled with metadata on the look angle
and the date and time of the radar acquisitions. Their model was trained on a larger area (254,000
hectares against 60,000 hectares) and used data augmentation. They did not rely on upsampling
but a particular kind of loss function to address class imbalance: "since some classes are harder to
recognize than others, focal loss is added to make easily recognizable pixels contribute less to the
loss than hard-to-recognize pixels".
Crop-type
IoU score (%), this report
IoU score (%), 2019 paper
Background
76
77
Grassland
60
29
Spring barley
81
82
Winter wheat
88
85
Maize
82
75
Winter rye
81
74
Winter barley
86
79
Winter rape
87
90
Spring oats
62
51
Potatoes
53
74
Winter triticale
48
40
Peas
33
45
Sugar beet
40
79
Mean IoU
62.6
62.8
Table 5.3: Comparison of this report results with [8]
Even though we cannot easily ﬁnd the sources of the diﬀerences for each of the crop types, we
can notice that:
• The mean IoU scores are very similar, the models’ performance are comparable.
• The 2019 paper’s model performs better on sugar beet and potatoes. This better performance
probably derives from the higher number of ﬁelds of both categories that they trained on,
resulting in a better generalization of these categories.
• The slight superiority of the U-Net for the most common classes might be explained by the
additional information which optical data provides.
The similarity of the results from this paper with the performance of the U-Net and the ConvL-
STM deﬁned in the previous chapter might be a clue that the model architecture or hyperparameters
have a low inﬂuence on the results.
From our experience throughout this project, the quality
and quantity of data seem to almost entirely deﬁne the performance of a convolutional model: a
good overall accuracy will be reached provided that the model trains on an area wide enough for
generalization and enough feature maps to diﬀerentiate crop-types. The only other crucial element
might be the presence of a method to compensate for the class imbalance.
49
==PAGE:51==
5.4
Conﬁdence metric
A major drawback of machine learning classiﬁers is their inability to inform when they are uncertain
on which class to assign, or when a class doesn’t belong to any of the labels deﬁned. We deﬁned
the "other crops" class, hoping that the model would put in this category all unidentiﬁed crops.
Unfortunately, the contrary occurred and the model classiﬁed many of the rare crops as potato or
maize ﬁelds.
In this section, we attempt to deﬁne a metric which will inform on the level of conﬁdence of
the model in its own prediction. This metric must be independent of the true labels, so that it can
be estimated in an area where the labels are not available or contain errors. To deﬁne that metric,
we will use the probability outputs (after the softmax function) of the deep learning models. If the
maximum probability output of the U-Net for one pixel is 99%, we say that the conﬁdence of the
model is higher than if it is 30%. In practice, when trying to make a prediction, we use overlapping
patches which cover the whole test set multiple times (ﬁgure 5.9).
Figure 5.9: Overlapping patches
We assign a class to each pixel by combining these overlapping patches:
majority vote = argmaxk∈[1,15](
X
patches
p(class = k))
where p is the softmax output, the estimation of the probability of each class (see section 1.2 for
details), "patches" refers to the patches which contain the pixel which we try to classify and "class"
takes its value between 1 and 15 corresponding to background, grassland, spring barley, ..., sugar
beet.
We deﬁne the conﬁdence metric as:
Conﬁdence =
P
patches p(class = majority vote)
number of overlapping patches
50
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.10 shows that this metric indeed correlates positively with the accuracy.
Figure 5.10: Average accuracy for diﬀerent levels of conﬁdence
Figure 5.11 shows the typical conﬁdence pattern in a misclassiﬁed ﬁeld. This metric is very
valuable for the interpretation of the U-Net (or ConvLSTM) predictions.
Figure 5.11: Example of a grassland ﬁeld wrongly classiﬁed as spring oats, and the corresponding
conﬁdence metric (image source: Google Satellite)
51
==PAGE:53==
5.5
Detection of errors in the reference crop type labels
The main downstream use of crop-classiﬁcation mapping is the detection of errors in the reference
labels. To identify the ﬁelds containing errors, we deﬁne the following metric:
agreement =
P
patches p(class = reference label)
number of overlapping patches
Disagreements between the majority vote and the reference label in the test area are associated
with low agreement values, they can be divided into two categories:
• misclassiﬁcations of the neural network, this type of error was discussed in the "misclassiﬁ-
cation" section; the model usually presents a low conﬁdence over the ﬁelds which belong in
that category.
• a minority of ﬁelds are wrongly labeled in the reference data. While they also presents low
agreement values, the conﬁdence is not necessary low over these areas. We therefore ﬂag
ﬁelds with high conﬁdence and low agreement values as potential errors in the reference data
(ﬁgure 5.12).
Figure 5.12: Field which is likely to be incorrectly labeled as winter rye. The conﬁdence metric
and the agreement p(class = label) share the same colorbar.
52
==PAGE:54==
Additionally, our knowledge on the usual confusions between pairs of crop-types can also help
to determine the category of error (ﬁgure 5.6).
As we have seen that errors in the reference data are associated with low agreement and high
conﬁdence values, conﬁdence
agreement will take particularly high values over wrongly annotated ﬁelds (ﬁgure
5.13). If the majority vote and the reference label are the same class, its value is equal to 1.
Figure 5.13: conﬁdence
agreement at the same location as ﬁgure 5.12
53
==PAGE:55==
Conclusions
In this report, diﬀerent machine learning methods of increasing complexity were used to label the
crop type of each 10 meters by 10 meters pixel over an area in Denmark.
Thirteen crop-type classes were considered: grassland, spring barley, winter wheat, maize,
winter rye, winter barley, winter rape, spring oats, potatoes, winter triticale, beans, peas, and sugar
beet. The classiﬁcation relied on multi-temporal optical and radar data. Some optical images
contained clouds, the pixels covered by clouds were restored with a self-organizing map. This
optical and radar data was ﬁrst used to train decision trees. Despite their simplicity, decision trees
could correctly label the most common classes but struggled to predict the less common crop types.
To improve the accuracy of the predictions without overﬁtting the data, decision tree classiﬁers
were grouped into random forest models which still had a low accuracy on less common classes
but resulted in a better overall performance.
Convolutional models outperformed random forests for both common and less common crop-
types. The ﬁrst convolutional model we experimented on was a U-Net, one of the most powerful
neural network architectures for image segmentation. After looking into its activations, we realized
that the U-Net architecture could be simpliﬁed, and the number of parameters reduced, without
aﬀecting the quality of the results.
Because of the extreme class imbalance of the data, the
prediction accuracy over sugar beet or peas ﬁelds was still lower than over ﬁelds of wheat or barley.
Oversampling and data augmentation successfully lessened this asymmetry.
Another convolutional neural network made of ConvLSTMs analyzed the data in another format:
the data was grouped by acquisition date. Contrary to the U-Net architecture, which only processed
a stack of images, this model analyzed time-series of images. While interesting insights have been
derived on how additional data improved the performance of the model, the resulting predictions
are not more accurate than the U-Net predictions. Yet, this ConvLSTM model is more adaptable
to diﬀerent seasons or other areas than the rigid U-Net architecture.
The importance of diﬀerent spectral bands for the models was evaluated and compared. It
appears that the short-wave infrared bands are the most valuable bands for the crop classiﬁcation
task. The errors in the models’ predictions were also studied to understand which classes the model
struggled to diﬀerentiate. For example, triticale is an hybrid of wheat and rye and the models tend
to be confused with these three types of grass. Then, a comparison with a state-of-the-art model
conﬁrmed the quality of our results.
Finally, we deﬁned two metrics (the conﬁdence and agreement metrics) that we use to diﬀer-
entiate errors in the model predictions from potential errors in the reference label. This method,
which separates the two types of disagreements between model predictions and reference maps,
could be an eﬃcient tool for fraud detection.
54
==PAGE:56==
Even though radar data is usually less informative that optical data, the fusion of radar and
optical data has proved itself beneﬁcial. Indeed, models trained on multi-source data yielded better
results than the ones trained on either radar or optical data.
Concerning the parcel-level and pixel-level dichotomy, pixel-level classiﬁers’ primary advantage
is to detect errors in the crop-type reference labels at a sub-parcel scale or to correct the parcel
boundaries. While parcel-level algorithms only output one set of probability values (or a prediction)
per ﬁeld, convolutional models provide visual information which help to interpret results.
Among pixel-level algorithms, we have seen that convolutional neural networks strongly outper-
form random forests. Neural networks have another the advantage over random forests: they output
probability estimates that a pixel belongs to each crop type, this information is more valuable than
a single prediction. Indeed, we have seen that these probabilities can identify incorrectly labeled
ﬁelds.
55
==PAGE:57==
Bibliography
[1] Alan Matthews, "Measuring farmers’ dependence on public payments", http://capreform.eu/
measuring-farmers-dependence-on-public-payments/
[2] European Commission,
"Modernising the CAP: satellite data authorised to replace
on-farm
checks",
https://ec.europa.eu/info/news/modernising-cap-satellite-data-authorised-
replace-farm-checks-2018-may-25_en
[3] Jia, Xiaowei, et al. "Incremental dual-memory lstm in land cover prediction." Proceedings of
the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining.
2017.
[4] Sharma, Atharva, Xiuwen Liu, and Xiaojun Yang. "Land cover classiﬁcation from multi-
temporal, multi-spectral remotely sensed imagery using patch-based recurrent neural networks."
Neural Networks 105 (2018): 346-355.
[5] Rußwurm, Marc, and Marco Körner. "Multi-temporal land cover classiﬁcation with sequential
recurrent encoders." ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information 7.4 (2018): 129.
[6] Orynbaikyzy, Aiym, et al. "Crop type classiﬁcation using fusion of sentinel-1 and sentinel-2
data: Assessing the impact of feature selection, optical data availability, and parcel sizes on the
accuracies." Remote Sensing 12.17 (2020): 2779.
[7] Kussul, Nataliia, et al. "Deep learning classiﬁcation of land cover and crop types using remote
sensing data." IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters 14.5 (2017): 778-782.
[8] Teimouri, Nima, Mads Dyrmann, and Rasmus Nyholm Jørgensen. "A novel spatio-temporal
FCN-LSTM network for recognizing various crop types using multi-temporal radar images."
Remote Sensing 11.8 (2019): 990.
[9] Géron, Aurélien. "Hands-on machine learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow:
Concepts, tools, and techniques to build intelligent systems." O’Reilly Media, 2019.
[10] Stacey Ronaghan, "The Mathematics of Decision Trees, Random Forest and Feature Impor-
tance", https://towardsdatascience.com/the-mathematics-of-decision-trees-random-forest-and-
feature-importance-in-scikit-learn-and-spark-f2861df67e3
[11] Alom, Md Zahangir, et al. "The history began from alexnet: A comprehensive survey on deep
learning approaches." arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.01164 (2018).
56
==PAGE:58==
[12] Simeon
Kostadinov,
"Understanding
Backpropagation
Algorithm",
https:
//towardsdatascience.com/understanding-backpropagation-algorithm-7bb3aa2f95fd
[13] Hinton, Geoﬀrey E., et al. "Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature
detectors." arXiv preprint arXiv:1207.0580 (2012).
[14] European Space Agency, "Level-2 MSI products", https://sentinel.esa.int/web/sentinel/
user-guides/sentinel-2-msi/processing-levels/level-2
[15] Cerasoli, Soﬁa, et al. "On estimating the gross primary productivity of Mediterranean grass-
lands under diﬀerentfertilization regimes using vegetationindices and hyperspectral reﬂectance."
Biogeosciences 15.17 (2018): 5455-5471.
[16] European
Space
Agency,
"Level-1
GRD
Products",
https://sentinels.copernicus.
eu/web/sentinel/technical-guides/sentinel-1-sar/products-algorithms/level-1-algorithms/
ground-range-detected
[17] S. V. Skakun and R. M. Basarab, “Reconstruction of missing data in time-series of optical
satellite images using self-organizing Kohonen maps,” J. Autom. Inform. Sci., vol. 46, no. 12,
pp. 19–26, 2014.
[18] Abhinav
Ralhan,
"Self
Organizing
maps",
https://medium.com/@abhinavr8/
self-organizing-maps-ﬀ5853a118d4
[19] Kussul, Nataliia, et al. "Regional scale crop mapping using multi-temporal satellite imagery."
The International Archives of Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sci-
ences 40.7 (2015): 45.
[20] Khatami, Reza, Giorgos Mountrakis, and Stephen V. Stehman. "A meta-analysis of remote
sensing research on supervised pixel-based land-cover image classiﬁcation processes: General
guidelines for practitioners and future research." Remote Sensing of Environment 177 (2016):
89-100.
[21] Zou, Joanna, Walter T. Dado, and Ryan Pan. "Early Crop Type Image Segmentation from
Satellite Radar Imagery."
[22] Nasa
Science,
"Reﬂected
Near-Infrared
Waves",
https://science.nasa.gov/ems/08_
nearinfraredwaves
[23] Humboldt State University, "Vegetation Spectral Reﬂectance Curves", http://gsp.humboldt.
edu/OLM_2017/courses/GSP_216_Online/lesson2-1/vegetation.html
57
