==PAGE:1==
Modelling Deadlocks Using
Logic of Action
- Master Thesis -
Emilie Kvist Lildholdt, s153971
Kongens Lyngby 2021
M.Sc.-2021-30-06
==PAGE:2==
Signature:
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
In this thesis we present the multi-agent modal µ-calculus and show how it
can be used to model deadlocks. First, we introduce multi-agent systems
with goal based agents in which the agents act concurrently. Afterwards,
the deadlock problem is presented in relation to such multi-agent systems,
and the dierent characteristics of a deadlock are investigated. We dis-
cover that it is not necessary for every agent to be implied for a deadlock
to occur. We then present the Coman conditions and discuss their rele-
vance when identifying deadlocks; especially the fourth condition, circular
wait, is examined. Finally, we look into other deadlock related problems
and deadlock handling strategies. Hereafter, logic of action is introduced,
and four dierent logics within this class are presented. These logics are
Hennessy-Milner logic, computation tree logic, alternating-time tempo-
ral logic and modal µ-calculus. We then examine the ability for these
logics to model deadlocks. As it turns out, none of the logics are su-
ciently expressive, and so a new logic, the multi-agent modal µ-calculus
is proposed. This logic is constructed as a multi-agent extension of modal
µ-calculus, and it is interpreted over a structure similar to the concurrent
game structure of alternating-time temporal logic. The ability for the new
logic to model deadlocks with and without all agents implied is illustrated
through six propositions and an extensive example. Finally, we propose
an axiomatisation of the multi-agent modal µ-calculus as a combination
of the axiomatic systems of modal µ-calculus and alternating-time tem-
poral logic. We prove that the proposed system is sound and discuss its
completeness.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was written at DTU Compute and fulls the requirements
for acquiring the degree Master of Science in Engineering. The process
has been supervised by associate professor Nina Gierasimczuk from DTU
compute.
This thesis was handed in on the 30th of June 2021.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would rst and foremost like to thank my supervisor Nina Gierasimczuk.
When I came to her with the idea for this thesis, she immediately ran
with it and started considering all of the dierent directions it could take
us in. She has throughout the process continuously inspired me with new
and interesting ways of attacking the subject, and she has been a great
guide when I could not decide on which road to take.
I would also like to present a thank you to all of the ingenious people
whose work I have studied whilst writing this thesis. Their books and
papers within the elds of concurrent programming, multi-agent systems
and logic have expanded my knowledge substantially.
Finally, I would like to express my appreciation for all the brilliant minds
who have taught me at the Technical University of Denmark throughout
the years. If not for their teachings, this thesis would have never come to
be.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Multi Agent Systems and Concurrency
5
2.1
Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Goal Based Agents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Single Agent Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Transition Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Plan Spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Multi-Agent Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.1
Concurrent Actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Multi-Agent Planning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4.1
Multi-Agent Transition Systems . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4.2
The Interleaving Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4.3
Termination in Multi-Agent Systems . . . . . . . .
19
2.5
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6
Safety and Liveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Deadlocks
22
3.1
Deadlocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.1
Partial Deadlocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
3.1.2
Deadlocks and Termination . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Coman Conditions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.1
Deciencies of Deadlock Characterisations . . . . .
30
3.3
Deadlock Related Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.1
Livelock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3.2
Starvation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
Deadlock Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4.1
Prevention . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.4.2
Avoidance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.3
Detect and Recover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.4.4
Ignore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4
Logic of Action
36
4.1
Hennessy-Milner Logic (HML) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.1.1
Model and Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Computation Tree Logic (CTL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.1
Model and Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
Alternating-time Temporal Logic (ATL) . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3.1
Model and Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4
Modal µ-Calculus (Lµ) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4.1
Model and Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4.2
Fixed Point Operators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Deadlocks in Logic of Action
47
5.1
Dening Deadlocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.2
Deadlocks in HML . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.3
Deadlocks in CTL and ATL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.4
Deadlocks in Modal µ-Calculus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.5
Towards Modelling Deadlocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Modelling Deadlocks with Multi Agent Modal µ-Calculus 54
6.1
Multi-Agent Modal µ-Calculus (MAµ) . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.1.1
Model and Semantics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.2
Deadlocks in MAµ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.2.1
Example (MAµ In Action)
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.3
Coman Conditions in MAµ
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
6.3.1
Mutual Exclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
6.3.2
Wait For . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
6.3.3
No Preemption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
==PAGE:8==
CONTENTS
vi
6.3.4
Circular Wait . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6.4
Towards Axiomatisation of MAµ . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
7
Axiomatisation of MAµ
76
7.1
Axiomatisation of Modal µ-Calculus
. . . . . . . . . . . .
76
7.2
Axiomatisation of ATL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7.3
Axiomatisation of MAµ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
7.3.1
Soundness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
7.3.2
Discussing Completeness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
8
Conclusion
88
8.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A Deadlock Proofs
90
A.1 Proof of Proposition 6.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
A.2 Proof of Proposition 6.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
A.3 Proof of Proposition 6.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
B Soundness Proofs
94
B.1
Proof of Proposition 7.7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
B.2
Proof of Proposition 7.8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
B.3
Proof of Proposition 7.9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
B.4
Proof of Proposition 7.10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
B.5
Proof of Proposition 7.12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
B.6
Proof of Proposition 7.13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
B.7
Proof of Proposition 7.14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
B.8
Proof of Proposition 7.16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
Bibliography
99
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Imagine that you are a law abiding citizen driving down a road nearing
an intersection. When you get there, you see that three other cars have
reached the intersection at exactly the same time as you. All four cars
have thus come to a halt on each of the four roads meeting at the inter-
section. Since you are familiar with the laws of trac, you know that you
have to wait for the car on your right before you are allowed to continue
your journey. However, the car on your right is not moving. As it turns
out, the people in the other three cars are as well behaved as you, and
so you are all waiting on the car to your right. As none of you are keen
on breaking the law, you simply sit in your car and wait. And wait. And
wait for all eternity.
This example is a classic case of a deadlock. Every person is unable to
continue, as they are all waiting on someone else to go rst. The same
issue arises when two people meet face to face in a narrow corridor and
neither can continue forwards, or when a newly graduated student needs
experience to apply for a job, but can only get experience from working.
Luckily for us, we humans are well adapted in handling such situations;
we communicate and collaborate to x the situation so that we may con-
tinue with our daily activities. In the real world, one of the cars in the
intersection would at some point venture onwards, one of the people in
the corridor would back out allowing the other one to pass, and the stu-
dent would eventually get a job despite her lack of experience.
However, while xing a deadlock situation seems simple for us, it is not
necessarily a simple task for a computer.
At any one time while using a computer, multiple processes are being
executed. These processes can be in charge of anything from running an
application such as Google Chrome to controlling the operating system
of the computer. Each of these processes are dened by some activities
they are responsible for and by the actions they can perform.
On modern day computers it is rarely so that only one process is running
==PAGE:10==
2
at a time; a user may open many applications at once, while numerous
processes are running in the background. A computer is hence executing
a large number of processes at the same time, and we say that these pro-
cesses are being executed concurrently.
In an environment where multiple processes are being executed, they may
compete for resources. Resources can be hardware components such as
printers or disks, or software components such as write access to a le or
a memory space. [18]
Say that a process, Process A, requests a resource which is not available,
because it is being used by Process B. Process A will then have to wait
until Process B is done using the resource. However, much like in the in-
tersection example, it may be the case that Process B is itself in a waiting
state, because it is waiting for some other resource. Process B will thus
not be able to release the resource that Process A needs. If the resource
that Process B needs is never released, Process B will never give up its
resource, and Process A will have to wait forever for it. In this case,
Process A is deadlocked, as it will never be able to continue with its job.
The above scenario would not be trivial for a computer to handle. The
processes cannot simply communicate and come to an agreement on what
to do.
One could think that the engineer implementing the processes
could simply implement a way of handling such a scenario, but as we will
come to see in this thesis, there are multiple dierent deadlock scenarios,
and deadlock handling policies are often too costly or infeasible to apply.
Also in multi-agent systems, deadlocks may occur. When multiple agents,
be that software agents or robots, are interacting in a multi-agent sys-
tem, they may block each other. Consider an Amazon storage facility.
In such a facility, robots are programmed to collect ordered goods, and
they thus move around between each other. At some point it may be
that two robots are blocking the way of each other and neither will move
away as they have not been programmed to do so; they have only been
programmed to follow their predetermined path. These two agents are
thus in a deadlock. [10]
When considering deadlocks between agents in multi-agent systems, it
strongly resembles deadlocks between processes in a computer; each agent
has some actions it performs and some resources it uses. The agents per-
form their actions concurrently and may at times hold resources that
other agents need. The part where the agents dier from the processes
==PAGE:11==
3
is that agents do not necessarily have a predetermined sequence of ac-
tions that it performs, but rather a wider spectrum of actions they can
choose from. In many multi-agent systems, it would thus be possible for
the agents to backtrack, i.e., to undo their actions. If this is possible, the
deadlock problem cannot arise; as an example, the robots in the storage
facility would be able to move backwards away from each other, thereby
releasing the deadlock.
However, within the eld of Articial Intelligence we have the eld of
planning. Planning is concerned with agents devising plans for how to
achieve some goal. A plan is a sequence of actions, that an agent can
follow in order to achieve its goal. Hence, when an agent is following a
plan it is indeed executing a predetermined sequence of actions. In this
case, the risk of deadlock is present in the multi-agent system, as we will
come to see later in this thesis. [16]
Deadlock is in general a result of some actions being performed; the cars
are driving, the agents are moving around, and the processes are tak-
ing hold of resources. The deadlock occurs when the eects of the actions
performed are incompatible; when the actions of one agent blocks another
from executing its actions, or when one agent actively takes something
that another agent needs.
Logic of action is the class of logic concerned with modelling action. There
are many logics within this class, and they provide a means to reason
about executability or eects of actions [3].
An intriguing question is
whether this class of logics can be used to model deadlocks, either by
using one of the logics, or by combining the logics into something more
expressible.
This thesis will investigate logic of action in relation to deadlocks. The
deadlock problem will be examined, and the ability for four logics within
logic of action to model deadlocks will be discussed. Finally, two logics
within logic of action will be combined into a new logic capable of mod-
elling deadlocks.
This thesis contains seven chapters, in which the following will be done.
Chapter 2 will introduce the concepts of agency and planning in both
single- and multi-agent systems. Concurrent actions and their con-
sequences within multi-agent systems will be presented, and the
==PAGE:12==
4
concept of resources will be discussed.
Chapter 3 will present the deadlock problem. The distinction between
full and partial deadlocks will be claried, and other deadlock re-
lated problems will be investigated. The necessary conditions for
deadlocks, the Coman conditions, will be presented and discussed.
Finally, we will present some known strategies for handling dead-
locks.
Chapter 4 will present the syntax and semantics of four logics of ac-
tion; Hennessy-Milner logic, computation tree logic, alternating-
time temporal logic, and modal µ-calculus.
Chapter 5 will discuss how the logics presented in chapter 4 fare in regard
to modelling deadlocks, both full and partial.
Chapter 6 will dene the syntax and semantics of the multi-agent modal
µ-calculus (MAµ); an extension of the modal µ-calculus. Proofs
of how this logic can model deadlocks will be presented, and an
extensive example of how to evaluate formulas of MAµ will be given.
It will furthermore be discussed how the Coman conditions present
themselves in this new model.
Chapter 7 will present complete axiomatisations of the modal µ-calculus
and alternating-time temporal logic, and we will then combine these
into an axiomatic system for MAµ.
Soundness of the proposed
system will be proven, and completeness will be discussed.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Multi Agent Systems and
Concurrency
A multi-agent system consists of multiple interacting intelligent agents,
who perceive and interact with the environment and with each other to
solve tasks and achieve their goals. In order to achieve their goals, the
agents devise individual plans consisting of a series of actions, and they
execute these plans simultaneously. In this case, we say that the agents
are executing their actions concurrently.
2.1
Agents
The Oxford English Dictionary denes an agent as "a person or thing
that takes an active role or produces a specied eect" [2]. In the domain
of Articial Intelligence agents are further specied to be able to per-
ceive their environment through sensors and act upon that environment
through actuators.
In computer science, an agent is most often a piece of software, but given
the above denition, it can also refer to robots or even living beings such
as people or animals.
Agents perceive their environment through sensors; for a robot sensors
can be cameras or microphones and for a human being they are simply
the biological senses. Based on what an agent perceives, it will select
which actions to perform. How the agent makes its choice is related to
the concept of rationality.
Denition 2.1 (Rational Agents) For each possible sequence of per-
ceptions, a rational agent should select an action that is expected to maxi-
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Agents
6
mize its performance measure, given the evidence provided by the sequence
of perceptions and whatever built-in knowledge the agent has. [16]
A rational agent thus always seeks to maximize some performance mea-
sure that denes its criterion of success. An example of such a perfor-
mance measure could be the distance to the destination of a self-driving
car, or the score on a test for a university student. We will henceforth
when talking about agents assume them to be rational.
There are dierent basic types of agents, among them reex agents, goal-
based agents, and utility agents. Reex agents choose their actions solely
based on their perception of the environment. An example is a self driving
car, which is only programmed with the basic rule if there is something
in front of me, I break. Goal-based agents choose their actions based on
some goal; they choose the action that, in their estimation, brings them
closer to their desired outcome. Utility agents are also goal-based, but
they are more nuanced; they do not just measure whether the goal is
reached, but also how.
An example of a goal-based agent is a robotic vacuum cleaner, which has
the simple goal: clean the room. If this agent was a utility agent, its goal
would be something a bit more elaborate, for instance: clean the room in
the fastest way possible. [16]
2.1.1
Goal Based Agents
When considering goal-based agents, it is interesting to examine this no-
tion of a goal a bit further. A goal can be dened as "the object of an
agent's ambition or eort; an aim or desired result" [2]. The goal of an
agent is thus something that the agent wants to achieve. An example
could be opening a locked door. This goal can be achieved by performing
the actions of unlocking the door and pressing down the door handle.
However, it may be the case that the goal of an agent is recurring; it will
continue to present itself again and again. As an example, consider the
act of eating. A hungry person's goal is to be full, and the act of eating
will achieve this goal. After a couple of hours however, the person will
again become hungry, and becoming full will be a goal yet again.
In order to realise a goal, an agent will, as previously mentioned, perform
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Single Agent Planning
7
actions that will each bring it closer to the goal. Which actions an agent
can perform depends on the environment in which the agent resides and
the abilities of the agent itself.
To illustrate the above concepts, consider the following single agent varia-
tion over the classic Dining Philosophers problem as formulated by Hoare
in [13].
Example 2.1 (A Single Right Handed Dining Philosopher) A
philosopher is sitting at a table. In front of her is a plate with food and
two forks; one to the right of the plate, and one to the left. The (not so
brilliant) philosopher needs both forks to eat from the plate. The philoso-
pher is expected to spend her time thinking, and when she gets hungry,
she may eat. The philosopher is right handed and when she wants to eat
she will thus always pick up the right fork rst, then pick up the left fork,
eat the food, then put down the right fork, and nally put down the left
fork. After having eaten, the philosopher will sit and think until she is
hungry again.
Example 2.1 describes a goal-based agent with a recurring goal. When
the philosopher is hungry, she will perform actions leading toward the
goal. The goal is to be full, and it will keep on reappearing every time
the philosopher gets hungry.
In the real world it may be the case that an agent can perform multiple
actions at once; that the agent can multitask. However, we will restrict
our attention to agents that can only perform one action at a time.
2.2
Single Agent Planning
The eld of planning is concerned with agents devising plans in order to
achieve their goals. Such a plan consists of a sequence of actions leading
to a goal. Performing the actions of a plan in the dened order is referred
to as executing the plan.
When an agent is performing actions, the actions often change the envi-
ronment, and the agent keeping track of these changes is crucial. After
all, the point of a plan is to keep on making changes until the goal is sat-
ised. To this end, the notion of a state is introduced. While executing a
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Single Agent Planning
8
plan, the agent will always be in some state, that is, the current situation
that the agent nds itself in. The state is usually described either by the
sequence of actions performed to get there, or by some characteristics of
the agent such as the resources that the agent holds at this point, the
current position of the agent, or any other such agent specic values.
When executing a plan, an agent is assumed to always have a state from
which any possible execution will start, i.e., an initial state. The state of
the agent is then changed as a response to the actions being performed.
To illustrate this concept, consider example 2.1: the initial state is when
the philosopher does not have any forks in hand and is hungry. Another
state is when the philosopher holds both forks and is hungry, and per-
forming the eat action in this state would lead to the state where the
philosopher holds both forks and is not hungry.
When working with goal-based agents, it is necessary to include the no-
tion of a goal state; a state in which the goal condition is satised. An
example of such a state could in the case of example 2.1 be when the
philosopher have eaten, i.e., is full, and has put down both forks. There
may of course in a particular scenario be more than one goal state, so
we will consider a goal as a set of goal states. We say that an agent has
reached its goal when it is in one of its goal states. [16]
2.2.1
Transition Systems
All of the above concepts can be modelled with the use of a graph struc-
ture; the so called labelled transition system.
Denition 2.2 (Labelled Transition System)
T = (S, A, R, L)
s ∈S is a state.
a ∈A is an action symbol representing a single agent action.
R ⊆S × S is a set of relations of state transitions.
L is a labelling function, L : A →R, which assigns labels to state transi-
tions in R.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Single Agent Planning
9
We will henceforth refer to a labelled transition system simply as a tran-
sition system, and we will write s a−→s′ for the transition (s, s′) ∈R with
L(s, s′) = a.
In a transition system, the individual states represent the states that the
agent can be in, and the labelled transitions represent the actions that the
agent can perform. We can thus model an agent's plan using a transition
system. In order to formally dene a plan, we need the notion of a path.
Denition 2.3 (Path) Let T = (S, A, R, L) be a transition system.
A path in T is any sequence σ = s0, s1, s2, ... of states in S such that for
each si, 0 ≤i there exists a transition (si, si+1) ∈R.
A plan is as mentioned a sequence of actions that leads the agent from
the initial state to some goal state. As goals can be recurring, such a plan
can either be terminating or non-terminating. We dene a plan formally.
Denition 2.4 (Plan) Let T = (S, A, R, L) be a transition system, and
let σ = s0, s1, s2, ... be some path in T such that s0 is the initial state in
T .
Then a plan, λ, is a sequence of actions (a1, a2, ...) such that either:
λ contains a nite number n of actions and s0
a1
−→s1
a2
−→... an
−→sg where
sg is a goal state (λ is terminating).
λ contains an innite number of actions such that s0
a1
−→s1
a2
−→... and
from any state si on the path there will be some future state sg which is
a goal state (λ is non-terminating).
We will furthermore narrow this denition down to an optimal plan.
Denition 2.5 (Optimal Plan) Let T = (S, A, R, L) be a transition
system, and let λ be a plan in T .
Then λ is optimal if it is the shortest possible sequence of actions leading
the agent from the initial state to the goal state(s).
As an example, consider the following simplication of example 2.1: The
philosopher starts o being hungry, and the goal is for her to be full so she
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Single Agent Planning
10
needs to eat. The philosopher thus comes up with the following optimal
plan: (pick up right fork, pick up left fork, eat). This plan can
be modelled by the transition system seen in gure 2.1; s0 is the initial
state in which the philosopher is hungry, and state s3 is the goal state
in which the philosopher is full. The edges of the transition system are
labelled with the action leading from the one state to the other. As the
plan contains a nite number of actions, it is terminating.
Figure 2.1: Transition System of The Right Handed Philosopher Eating
Consider now the full version of example 2.1. The plan of the philosopher
in this example can be modelled by the transition system seen in gure
2.2, where we again have the initial state s0, in which the philosopher is
hungry. The goal state is now s5, in which she is full and has put down
both forks.
However, after having eaten the philosopher will start to
think, and she will again become hungry. We are thus back in the initial
state, and the philosopher can again perform the actions leading to the
goal state s5. As the plan thus contains an innite number of actions, it
is non-terminating.
Figure 2.2: Transition System of The Right Handed Philosopher
2.2.2
Plan Spaces
When planning for a desired outcome, it may be the case that the agent
discovers multiple optimal ways of reaching its goal. Hence, there may be
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Single Agent Planning
11
more than one optimal plan that the agent can execute in order to end
up in a goal state. It can then be useful to instead consider the collection
of these plans; the so called plan space.
Denition 2.6 (Plan Space) The plan space of an agent is the set of
all the agent's optimal plans.
The plan space of an agent thus contain multiple possible executions.
Example 2.1 illustrates an agent with only a single plan in its plan space.
This is due to the actions of the right handed philosopher always being
performed in the specically dened order; the philosopher does not have
any choice in regard to which action she can perform at a given time.
To illustrate a plan space containing more than one plan, consider the
following example.
Example 2.2 (A Single Ambidextrous Dining Philosopher) The
setup is similar to that of example 2.1, except that here the philosopher is
able to use her right and left hand equally well. Hence, when she wants to
eat she will pick up either the right or the left fork, then pick up the other
fork, eat, then put down the left or right fork, and nally put down the
last fork. In order for the philosopher to achieve her goal, she can thus
execute any of the following four plans:
λ1: (pick up right fork, pick up left fork, eat, put down right fork, put
down left fork)
λ2: (pick up left fork, pick up right fork, eat, put down right fork, put
down left fork)
λ3: (pick up right fork, pick up left fork, eat, put down left fork, put down
right fork)
λ4: (pick up left fork, pick up right fork, eat, put down left fork, put down
right fork).
The plan space of the ambidextrous philosopher is Λ = {λ1, λ2, λ3, λ4}.
In example 2.2 the philosopher has some exibility in regard to the order
in which the actions are performed, and the plan space of the philosopher
thus contains multiple dierent plans.
A plan space can again be modelled using a transition system, and we
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Single Agent Planning
12
can construct this system by combining the plans of the agent.
To illustrate this, consider again example 2.2; the ambidextrous philoso-
pher has four dierent optimal plans that achieve her goal. The transition
systems of these four plans separately can be seen in gure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Transition Systems of the Plans of the Philosopher
The transition system of the philosopher's plan space can then be con-
structed by combining the four plans into one. The resulting transition
system can be seen in gure 2.4. Considering the transition system of the
plan space we see that the agent now has multiple optimal plans it can
follow from the initial state to its goal. It thus has multiple plans it can
execute. For simplicity we assume that either all plans in a plan space
are terminating, or all plans in a plan space are non-terminating.
We will in this thesis focus our attention to agents with plan spaces con-
taining optimal plans. We will not focus on how the plans were created,
but simply assume that they were.
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Multi-Agent Systems
13
Figure 2.4: Transition System of the Plan Space of the Philosopher
2.3
Multi-Agent Systems
A multi-agent system is a system in which multiple agents act and possibly
interact.
Examples of multi-agent systems are many; it could be a chess game, a
computer game with multiple actors, a storage facility with robots moving
around the goods, a house with multiple robotic vacuum cleaners, or even
just a room full of people mingling.
We will restrict our attention to multi-agent systems with goal-based
agents acting out their plans. In such a system, the agents execute plans
in order to achieve their own goals with the assistance or hindrance of
other agents [16]. In a house with robotic vacuum cleaners, each vacuum
cleaner is tasked with cleaning a part of the house, and they would each
perform actions to achieve their own individual goal. The vacuum cleaners
would in this particular system try not to hinder each other but rather
work together so that the house would be clean. On the other hand, in a
game of chess or Go each player wants to win, and the players thus work
against each other to achieve their individual goals.
Now, one can once again talk about the state of the system. Contrary
to the state of a single agent system, the state of a multi-agent system is
dened by the current situation that all the agents are in. The agents in
the system each execute their own individual plans, and the actions that
an agent can perform in a certain state depends on the abilities of that
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Multi-Agent Systems
14
specic agent in that specic state.
Since we are considering multi-agent systems with goal-based agents, the
notion of a goal state is still relevant. Given that the agents each have
their own goals, the states in which the goal of one agent is satised
may not be the same states that satisfy the goal of another agent. The
set of goal states for the agents in a multi-agent system will thus dier
depending on the agent. [15]
2.3.1
Concurrent Actions
When the agents of a multi-agent system are performing actions, they
most commonly act in parallel, meaning that they do not take turns.
This is of course not true for games such as chess or Go.
When the
agents act in parallel their actions are executed simultaneously, and the
resulting changes to the environment are thus based on the eects of the
combination of all the actions performed rather than on the eects of one
single action. When agents are performing actions at the same time, we
say that the actions are performed concurrently.
An example of a multi-agent system in which the agents perform concur-
rent actions could be two dining philosophers sitting next to each other
with each their own plate and set of forks. These two philosophers can
perform actions at the same time; philosopher one can eat while philoso-
pher two picks up her right fork, or philosopher one can think while
philosopher two eats.
In a multi-agent system, the agents are executing their plans within an
environment which is shared between all the agents, and, as mentioned,
when performing actions, the agents most often change the environment
they are in. In a single agent system, this is not an issue since the agent is
the only one changing the environment, and so it will always be in control
of the changes. However, in a multi-agent system, the changes that re-
sult from the actions of one agent may directly aect another agent, and
agents in a multi-agent system may hence experience changes to their en-
vironment which they are not themselves in control of. Thus when agents
share an environment, the actions of one agent may possibly result in the
other agents no longer being able to execute the plans they thought pos-
sible. [15]
When the agents are performing actions concurrently, it may furthermore
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Multi-Agent Planning
15
be the case that the eects of two agents' actions are incompatible; it is
simply not possible for both agent to perform the action simultaneously.
In the real world, actions of course take time to perform. The act of
writing a letter takes longer than the act of opening a door, but writing
a letter is signicantly faster than running a marathon. For simplicity,
we assume that when two agents are performing an action concurrently,
each action is executed at the same moment and takes the same amount
of time. We will say that an action is performed in a tick. [16]
2.4
Multi-Agent Planning
Within a multi-agent system with goal-based agents, each agent has some-
thing it wants to achieve. Whether the agent needs to collaborate with
other agents to achieve its goal, or it is possible for it to achieve its goal
without the help of others, the agent will devise plans that result in the
goal being satised. Each agent in a multi-agent system thus have their
own plan space containing the optimal plans that they can execute in
order to reach their goal. [20]
When viewed individually, the plan space of each agent in the multi-agent
system does not dier from the plan spaces dened in previous sections.
However, when considering a multi-agent system, it is no longer sucient
to consider the individual plans, because the plans are all executed in the
same environment. The actions of one agent may make it so that some
parts of another agent's plan cannot be executed, and so the individual
plans of the agents may collapse as the agents start acting. It is therefore
benecial to view the plans as a whole; as a multi-agent plan. A common
way to do so, is to stop considering single agent actions, and only consider
concurrent multi-agent actions.
Denition 2.7 (Multi-Agent Action) A multi-agent action is a tuple
(a1, a2, ..., ak) where each element ai corresponds to an action performed
by agent i in a multi-agent system with k agents. [16]
To illustrate how this works, consider the following example.
==PAGE:24==
2.4 Multi-Agent Planning
16
Example 2.3 (Two Philosophers) Consider the case where the right
handed philosopher from example 2.1 and the ambidextrous philosopher
from example 2.2 are seated at the same table. They each have their own
plate and their own set of forks, and they both wish to continuously eat and
think. They can perform actions in the order dened in their respective
examples.
Now considering these two philosophers as one multi-agent
system results in the initial state being that both philosophers are sitting
hungry at the table without any forks in hand, and the action leading from
this state to the next is either that both philosophers pick up their right
fork or that the right handed philosopher picks up her right fork and the
ambidextrous philosopher picks up her left fork. We are thus no longer
considering the action where just one of the philosophers picks up a fork.
2.4.1
Multi-Agent Transition Systems
As with single agent plans, it is helpful to illustrate multi-agent plans with
a graph, and we therefore introduce the labelled multi-agent transition
system.
Denition 2.8 (Labelled Multi-Agent Transition System)
Tma = (S, A, R, L)
s ∈S is a state.
a ∈A is an action symbol representing a multi-agent action.
R ⊆S × S is a set of relations of state transitions.
L is a labelling function, L : A →R, which assigns labels to state transi-
tions in R.
The multi-agent plan that follows from example 2.3 can be seen in gure
2.5. Here each transition is labelled with the multi-agent action leading
from one state to the other. The rst action in the label is the action
of the right handed philosopher while the second action is the action of
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Multi-Agent Planning
17
Figure 2.5: The Ambidextrous and the Right Handed Philosopher
the ambidextrous philosopher.
In this example, it is rather simple to
see how the two individual philosophers can be placed within one multi-
agent system, and how their individual plan spaces combine into one
multi-agent plan. However, when the actions that the agents in a multi-
agent system perform have consequences that aects the other agents, the
multi-agent plans become more complicated. In such cases, the process of
creating a simple multi-agent transition system may be impossible, and
more complex models are needed.
2.4.2
The Interleaving Model
Another common way of considering concurrent actions is through the
interleaving model, where the state changes of the multi-agent system
are imposed by a single action being performed by one of the agents. The
system can thus be modelled by a transition system as dened in 2.2 in-
stead of by a multi-agent transition system.
In the interleaving model, the state changes resulting from a concurrent
execution of actions are instead modelled as performing the actions se-
quentially. This is due to the fundamental property, that if the actions of
the system in reality are performed overlapping in time, the states that
the system passes through are also passed through by one of the inter-
leavings. [6]
==PAGE:26==
2.4 Multi-Agent Planning
18
To illustrate this, consider the following example.
Example 2.4 (Interleavings) Consider again two dining philosophers,
Philosopher A and Philosopher B, sitting next to each other with each
their own plate and set of forks. Say that both philosophers pick up their
right fork and then their left fork. When considering the concurrent exe-
cution of the actions the execution will be: both philosophers pick up their
right fork - both philosophers pick up their left fork. The states that the
system passes through are thus
s0: None of the philosophers are holding a fork;
s1: The philosophers both hold a fork in their right hand;
s2: The philosophers both hold a fork in each hand.
However, when considering the interleavings of the actions there are mul-
tiple possible executions, as the actions are performed sequentially. The
interleavings of the actions are:
1: Philosopher A picks up her right fork, Philosopher B picks up her right
fork, Philosopher A picks up her left fork, Philosopher B picks up her left
fork;
2: Philosopher B picks up her right fork, Philosopher A picks up her right
fork, Philosopher B picks up her left fork, Philosopher A picks up her left
fork;
3: Philosopher A picks up her right fork, Philosopher A picks up her left
fork, Philosopher B picks up her right fork, Philosopher B picks up her
left fork;
4: Philosopher B picks up her right fork, Philosopher B picks up her left
fork, Philosopher A picks up her right fork, Philosopher A picks up her
left fork;
5: Philosopher A picks up her right fork, Philosopher B picks up her right
fork, Philosopher B picks up her left fork, Philosopher A picks up her left
fork;
6: Philosopher B picks up her right fork, Philosopher A picks up her right
fork, Philosopher A picks up her left fork, Philosopher B picks up her left
fork;
Thus, when considering these interleavings, it is clear to see that executing
either interleaving 1, 2, 5 or 6 would indeed result in the system passing
through the three states of the concurrent execution.
As the above example illustrates it is thus possible to consider the con-
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Resources
19
current execution of actions as executing the actions sequentially, since
the states that the system passes through will also be part of the corre-
sponding interleaving model.
2.4.3
Termination in Multi-Agent Systems
The agents of a multi-agent system each have their own goal and plans
of how to reach this goal. Depending on the agent, these plans are either
terminating or non-terminating as dened in 2.4.
If the plans of the agents in the system are terminating, the system will
have some states from which the execution of actions will stop; the system
will have end states.
However, it is not certain that the execution of
actions will stop in the same state for all agents. It may be that one
agent reaches its goal far earlier than the other agents in the system, and
in this case, the execution of the concurrent actions will continue until
the other agents have also reached their goal. The goal state for the agent
will thus not be an end state even though the agent will never perform
any more actions.
If the plans of the agents in the system are non-terminating, the system
will not have any end states. There will thus be actions to perform from
every state of the system.
For simplicity, we assume that either all agents in a multi-agent system
have terminating plans, or all agents have non-terminating plans.
2.5
Resources
Resources are, in short, anything in a system that can be utilised by
the agents.
In the case of example 2.1, one could say that the forks
and the plate are all resources, since these can all be used by the dining
philosopher.
Resources can either be shared or not. If a resource is shared, it means
that multiple agents may use the resource at the same time. In the case
of example 2.1, the plate is a shared resource, since multiple philosophers
could in principle eat from the same plate. If a resource is not shared, it
==PAGE:28==
2.5 Resources
20
means that only one agent may use it at a given time. An example of a
resource which is not shared is a fork in example 2.1, as two philosophers
cannot eat with the same fork at the same time.
Many dierent agents may wish to use the resources of a system at some
point, and they will do this by rst requesting the resource, then obtaining
and using the resource, and then nally free the resource again. The last
step is generally considered as a requirement; when an agent is using a
resource it will always at some point be done with the resource and release
it again. If an agent is requesting a free resource, it will be possible for it
to obtain the resource without any further ado, but if an agent requests
a resource which cannot be shared, and that resource is currently being
used by another agent, then the agent will have to wait before it can
obtain the resource. [18]
This can be nicely illustrated by extending example 2.1.
Example 2.5 (Two Right Handed Dining Philosophers) Two
philosophers are sitting at a table. In front of each of them is a plate with
food. Two forks are placed between the two philosophers as illustrated in
gure 2.6. Again, a philosopher needs a fork in each hand to eat from
the plate. The philosophers are right handed, and so they will both be
performing the actions pick up right fork, pick up left fork, eat, put down
right fork, put down left fork in that order. Now, the philosophers will have
to share the two forks, and so if philosopher one picks up the two forks in
order to eat, philosopher two will have to sit and wait until philosopher
one is done eating and has put down the forks. Only then can philosopher
two pick up the forks and eat, provided of course that philosopher one does
not beat her to it once again.
Another example of a multi-agent system with resources is robots moving
around in a storage facility. In this example the resources of the system
are less apparent. The robots move around, but they do not use any
objects.
Or do they?
When considering an area with agents moving
around, it is common to view each placement or tile in the area as a
resource. By doing so, one can easily see that each tile is a resource that
cannot be shared, as two robots cannot be at the same place at the same
time. This is of course domain specic; there may be other scenarios,
other multi-agent systems, in which two agents are allowed to be at the
same place at the same time.
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Safety and Liveness
21
Figure 2.6: Two Dining Philosophers
2.6
Safety and Liveness
In a multi-agent system, we are often interested in knowing whether
"something bad" happens while the agents are executing their plans.
Properties such as that an agent is blocked at some point during the
execution, or that a resource can at some point never again be reached
is valuable information regarding the system. It is thus useful to be able
to categorise properties that express correct and continuous progress of
the agents in the system. When considering multi-agent systems in which
agents perform concurrent actions, one is concerned with the safety and
liveness properties of the system.
Safety properties express that a system does nothing wrong. Hence safety
properties are conditions that must always hold, so that the system does
not do anything bad. Safety properties can be properties such as "two
agents can never use the same resource at the same time", "the system
cannot deadlock" and "the nal state is correct".
Liveness properties express that a system always makes progress. Hence
liveness properties are conditions that must eventually be satised in the
system.
Liveness properties can be properties such as "for some non-
shareable resource, whenever an agent obtains the resource, it will always
also release the resource again" and "the system eventually terminates".
[6]
==PAGE:30==
Chapter 3
Deadlocks
When multiple agents perform actions at the same time, it is sometimes
the case that the agents block each other; an agent may get in the way of
another or use a resource that another agent needs. When this happens
it may be possible for the other agent to simply choose another action
to perform, such as moving in another direction or grabbing another re-
source, but sometimes the other agent has nowhere else to go and nothing
else to do, which means that it will have to wait. But what happens if the
agent is never allowed to continue, because the resource it needs is held
by another agent, which will never give it up? This situation is referred
to as a deadlock.
3.1
Deadlocks
A deadlock is dened in the Oxford English Dictionary as a condition or
situation in which it is impossible to proceed or act [2].
In a multi-agent system, a deadlock is a situation in which one or more
agents are not making any progress towards their goal, because they are
waiting on each other to release resources. A deadlock is thus a state in
the system, from which some agents will continue to be in a waiting state
and will never reach their goal. [18]
A deadlock can occur in multiple dierent systems; whether one is con-
cerned with a game of Go, robots in a storage facility or cars in trac,
the risk of a deadlock is present.
To illustrate the concept of a deadlock, example 2.5 is extended.
Example 3.1 (Two Right Handed Philosophers Deadlocking) .
Consider the same setting as in example 2.5; two right handed philoso-
phers, Philosopher A and Philosopher B, are sitting at a table as illus-
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Deadlocks
23
trated in gure 2.6. When the philosophers wish to eat they will pick up
a fork with each hand (right hand rst), eat and then put down the forks
again (right fork rst). The philosophers will always perform the action
in that order, but when they perform the action is up to them; a philoso-
pher can pick up the right fork, wait for one or more ticks, and then pick
up the left fork. Now, both philosophers wish to eat, and they therefore
both pick up their right fork. As they are sitting face to face, they are able
to perform this action simultaneously. Both philosophers now each have
a fork in their right hand and wish to pick up their left fork, but since
the other philosopher has the other fork, this action is not possible. Both
philosophers refuse to put down their fork as they have not yet eaten, and
so they will both simply sit and wait for the other philosopher to put down
her fork. Since this will never happen, the philosophers are condemned to
sit and wait for all eternity; the philosophers are in a deadlock.
In the above example neither of the two philosophers can make any
progress, because they each have a plan that they follow, and in that
plan, the next thing to do is to pick up the second fork. This can be
illustrated nicely using a multi-agent transition system as dened in 2.8;
the transition system modelling the above example can be seen in gure
3.1.
In the transition system, the state s6, in which the two philosophers have
both picked up their right fork and are thus deadlocked, is marked red.
That this state is a deadlock state is even more clear when looking at
the transition system; in all states, there is at least one transition which
leads from the state to another state, except for state s6. Here, there is
no transition from s6 to a dierent state; both philosophers have only the
one option of waiting.
When all agents in a system are deadlocked we will dene it as a full
deadlock.
Denition 3.1 (Full Deadlock) Let Σ = {1, .., k} be the set of agents
in a multi-agent system and let Gi be the set of goal states of agent i.
A full deadlock is a state sd so that in every transition from sd and in every
transition on any path from sd, all agents in Σ have only wait actions.
Furthermore, there is no path from sd leading to a state sg ∈Gi for any
agent i ∈Σ.
==PAGE:32==
3.1 Deadlocks
24
Figure 3.1: Two Dining Philosophers Deadlocking
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Deadlocks
25
Figure 3.2: Three Robotic Vacuum Cleaners
3.1.1
Partial Deadlocks
Example 3.1 illustrates a deadlock in which all agents in the system are
involved; a full deadlock. However, it may be the case that a deadlock
involves only some and not all of the agents in the system.
The way that only some of the agents in a system may be deadlocked is
if the agents in the deadlock do not block the other agents of the system
because the resources that the deadlocked agents use are of no interest
to the other agents. In the dining philosopher example there cannot be
a deadlock in which only some of the philosophers are involved, but in
other multi-agent systems there may be deadlocks of this kind. Say that
a storage facility have robots moving around goods, and that two robots
at some point block each other from moving. In this case the rest of the
robots in the facility are still free to move on with their jobs even though
there is a deadlock in the system. Another example t for illustrating a
deadlock including only some of the agents is the following.
Example 3.2 (Three Robotic Vacuum Cleaners) Consider three
robotic vacuum cleaners in a room as illustrated in gure 3.2. The vacuum
cleaners are programmed to move around indenitely as illustrated on the
right board in the gure.
With each tick, every vacuum cleaner moves exactly one tile. However,
if two agents try to move to the same tile at the same time, only (and
exactly) one of them will succeed. The other agent will in that case have to
perform a wait action. Similarly, if an agent tries to move to a tile which
is already occupied, the agent will not be allowed, and will thus again have
to perform a wait action.
==PAGE:34==
3.1 Deadlocks
26
Figure 3.3: Deadlock With All Robotic Vacuum Cleaners
Figure 3.4: Deadlock With Two Robotic Vacuum Cleaners
By simply looking at the situation described in the example, we see that
all three vacuum cleaners are at risk of deadlocking, as can be seen in
gure 3.3, and that vacuum cleaner 1 and 2 are furthermore at risk of
deadlocking as can be seen in gure 3.4. In gure 3.4, only vacuum cleaner
1 and 2 are deadlocked, while 3 is free to move along with its job.
The above example can be illustrated with the transition system seen in
gure 3.5.
When comparing the deadlock situations to the transition system in
gure 3.2, we see that the two deadlock situations correspond to state s3
and states s5 −s8 respectively. In state s3 the vacuum cleaners are placed
as seen in gure 3.3, and none of them can move any further. This is also
clear from the transition system as state s3 does not have any outgoing
transitions leading to a dierent state; the three vacuum cleaners can only
perform wait actions. s3 is thus a full deadlock. In state s5 the vacuum
cleaners are placed as seen on the leftmost board in gure 3.4, and vacuum
cleaner 1 and 2 cannot move any further. However, vacuum cleaner 3 can
still move on to the positions seen on the other boards in gure 3.4. This
deadlock situation is less clear when looking at the transition system.
From state s5 there is an outgoing transition leading to state s6, and
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Deadlocks
27
Figure 3.5: Transition System of Three Robotic Vacuum Cleaners
==PAGE:36==
3.1 Deadlocks
28
so s5 cannot immediately be identied as a deadlock state.
However,
examining the transition system further, we see that every transition on
any path from s5 contains wait actions for vacuum cleaner 1 and 2. Thus
it is clear that vacuum cleaner 1 and 2 will never be able to perform any
action but wait.
When only some agents in a system are deadlocked we will dene it as a
partial deadlock.
Denition 3.2 (Partial Deadlock) Let Σ = {1, .., k} be the set of agents
in a multi-agent system and let Gi be the set of goal states of agent i.
A partial deadlock is a state sd so that in every transition from sd and in
every transition on any path from sd, some set C ⊂Σ of agents have only
wait actions. Furthermore, there is no path from sd leading to a state
sg ∈Gi for any agent i ∈C.
3.1.2
Deadlocks and Termination
Whether the agents in a system have terminating or non-terminating
plans, the denitions of a full and a partial deadlock still hold.
If the goal of the agent is recurring it should always be possible for the
agent to follow a path to its goal, and a state will thus still be a deadlock
state for the agent if it can forever only wait and can never reach one of
its goal states.
If the agents are executing terminating plans there may be states from
which some agent will forever only have wait actions, but this may simply
be because the agent has already reached its goal and is waiting for the
other agents to reach theirs. In this case it is important to not faultily cat-
egorise the states after the agent has reached its goal as deadlock states.
However, since a goal state for an agent is a state in which the agent has
reached its goal, one can argue that when considering terminating plans,
all states following the goal state of an agent will still be goal states for
that agent. Hence in the case of terminating plans, the denition of a full
and a partial deadlock still hold, since an agent who has reached its goal
may forever only have wait actions, but it will always have a path to a
goal state.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Coman Conditions
29
3.2
Coman Conditions
Deadlocks can, as mentioned, occur in many dierent systems. However,
in order for a deadlock to occur in a system, some specic conditions need
to be present. In [9], Coman et al. identied these conditions as:
 Mutual exclusion: Some agents are holding resources which cannot
be shared, such as a tile on the oor or a fork.
 Wait for: Some agents are holding a resource while requesting an-
other. This could be an agent standing on a tile and requesting
access to the neighbouring tile, or holding one fork and requesting
a second.
 No preemption: A resource cannot be forcibly removed from the
agent holding it until the agent is done using the resource. Hence,
no "controller" can make an agent put down a fork before the agent
has used the fork, or move a robot away from its current position.
 Circular wait: Agents are waiting on each other in a circular chain,
such that each agent is requesting a resource which is being held
by the next agent in the chain. Hence, agent a1 is waiting on agent
a2, which is waiting on agent a3, ... , which is waiting on agent an
which is waiting on agent a1.
These conditions, known as the Coman conditions, together eectively
dene a deadlock, and the conjunction of these is thus a necessary and
sucient condition for a deadlock to occur [9].
To illustrate how the Coman conditions are present in a deadlock, con-
sider again example 3.1 (Two Right Handed Philosopher Deadlocking).
We see that when the two philosophers deadlock, all of the four Coman
conditions are present. Mutual exclusion is present since the philosophers
are holding the forks which are resources that cannot be shared. Wait for
is present, since the philosophers have picked up one fork and are request-
ing another fork while holding on to the one they have. No preemption
is present, since the philosophers will not put down their forks before
having used them. Finally, circular wait is present, since Philosopher A
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Coman Conditions
30
is waiting on Philosopher B to put down her fork, and Philosopher B is
waiting on Philosopher A to put down her fork.
3.2.1
Deciencies of Deadlock Characterisations
Though the Coman conditions are widely accepted within the eld of
concurrent programming, there are some details surrounding the condi-
tions worth discussing.
First o, and this is perhaps not so much about the Coman conditions as
it is about the general notion of a deadlock, when deadlocks are discussed
it is most often the full deadlock. The general notion is that a system is
deadlocked when the system cannot make any progress, which indicates
that none of the agents in the system may proceed. This becomes espe-
cially clear when looking at how deadlocks are modelled using dierent
logics as we will discuss in chapter 5. This idea of a deadlock only being a
full deadlock limits the investigation into deadlocks and their properties.
Secondly, the Coman conditions are build upon the idea that resources
are always released after they have been used as described in section 2.5.
This may be true in many cases, but when considering multi-agent sys-
tems one can easily come up with examples of systems not satisfying
this requirement. Consider example 3.1 (Two Right Handed Philosopher
Deadlocking). This example could easily be rewritten so that Philoso-
pher A will pick up her forks and eat and then afterwards simply hold
on to the forks until she is hungry again. Thus the resources, i.e. the
forks, would never again be released. In this scenario the fourth Coman
condition; circular wait, no longer needs to hold for a deadlock to occur.
If Philosopher A picks up the forks and holds on to them forever she will
never be deadlocked as she can always eat. However Philosopher B will
be deadlocked waiting on Philosopher A to release her resources; we thus
have a deadlock without a circular wait.
We will thus henceforth accept the premise that all resources will always
be released when an agent is done using it; the robotic vacuum cleaners
will always eventually move from one tile to another, and the philosophers
will put down the forks after they have eaten.
Finally, the circular wait condition is also only a necessary condition for a
full deadlock. When also considering partial deadlocks, agents may dead-
lock without circular wait being present. An example of such a scenario
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Deadlock Related Issues
31
is the following.
Example 3.3 (Three Doors) Three agents are in a room with three
doors and three keys; a blue, a green and a red. Agent 1 needs to open its
door using the blue and the green key, agent 2 needs to open its door using
the green and the red key, and agent 3 needs to open its door using only
the red key. Behind agent 3's door is another door that agent 3 needs to
open using both the red and the green key. Say agent 1 holds the blue key,
agent 2 holds the green key and agent 3 holds the red key. In this state,
agents 1 and 2 are deadlocked, but agent 3 may open its rst door. After
having done so, all three agents are deadlocked.
In this example we have a state in which agent 1 and 2 are deadlocked,
but there is no circular wait; agent 1 is waiting on agent 2 and agent 2
is waiting on agent 3. Agent 3 is not deadlocked as it can open its rst
door, but it will still never give up the red key, as it will deadlock before
it is done using it.
3.3
Deadlock Related Issues
3.3.1
Livelock
A deadlock is a state in which each agent in a group of agents is waiting
for some other agent, and where no agents in the group are making any
progress. A livelock is a functional equivalent to a deadlock, where the
states of the agents involved constantly keep on changing with regard
to one another, but none of the agents are progressing. Livelock thus
occurs when two or more agents continually repeat the same interaction
in response to changes in the other agent without doing any useful work.
These agents are not in a waiting state, but are still performing actions.
[18]
As an example, consider two people meeting in a narrow corridor.
A
deadlock would be if the two people walk up to each other and stop, and
neither of them would move away, since they are both waiting on the
other to move rst. Conversely, a livelock would be the classic "no, you
==PAGE:40==
3.3 Deadlock Related Issues
32
Figure 3.6: The Ko situation
rst"-scenario, where the two people walk up to each other, and both of
them move aside at the same time and keep doing so for all eternity.
Another classic example of a livelock is the Ko situation in the game of
Go [1]. In this situation, the two players continue to capture a single
stone from each other thereby alternating between two board positions
indenitely. The situation can be seen in gure 3.6. The players thus keep
repeating the same move over and over, and the game never progresses.
3.3.2
Starvation
Another problem closely related to deadlock and livelock is starvation.
Starvation is a situation in which some agent continuously requests a
resource, but never obtains it. The agent will always have the chance of
obtaining the resource, but it will never actually obtain it. The reason
for this happening could simply be that another agent always grabs the
resource right before the other agent does. The result of starvation is
equivalent to a deadlock; the starving agent will never progress. [18]
As an example, consider the dining philosophers in example 3.1. The two
philosophers will continuously try to get the forks in order to eat, and
once they are done eating, they will put down the forks again. There
will hence always be a chance for either of the philosophers to obtain
the forks, but it may be the case that one of the philosophers will again
and again be the one to take the two forks, which results in the other
philosopher never being able to eat. This is a starvation situation.
==PAGE:41==
3.4 Deadlock Handling
33
3.4
Deadlock Handling
There are some established ways to handle deadlocks in systems. The
common ways to do so is to either detect them when they happen and
resolve them, to prevent or avoid deadlocks from happening altogether,
or to simply ignore them. [17]
3.4.1
Prevention
One deadlock handling strategy is to prevent deadlocks from ever hap-
pening in a system. In order to prevent deadlocks, one needs to make
sure that at least one of the four Coman conditions does not hold.
A way to remove mutual exclusion is to design the system so that it does
not contain any resources that cannot be shared. This solution is most
often not feasible, as the system often needs certain resources which per
denition cannot be shared.
Some ways to remove hold and wait are to ensure that all resources that
an agent may use are requested by the agent before the agent starts ex-
ecuting its plans, or to only allow agents to request resources when they
hold none. However, these solutions enhance the risk of low utilisation
and starvation.
A way to remove no preemption is to allow the system to forcefully release
the resources of an agent if the agent is waiting for a resource that is not
immediately available. Alternatively, the system can check if the agent
holding the required resources is in a waiting state, and if so, forcefully
take the resources from that agent, and give them to the requesting agent.
However, this would not work for all kinds of resources, as some resources
are not made to be forcefully emptied.
Finally, a way to remove circular wait is to impose a total ordering on re-
sources, and enforce that agents can only request resources with a higher
order than the ones they already have. This solution requires that such
an ordering can be imposed in a reasonable way, and it is thus not feasible
in every scenario. [17]
==PAGE:42==
3.4 Deadlock Handling
34
3.4.2
Avoidance
Another strategy for handling deadlocks is to avoid them while execut-
ing. The way to do this is for the system to keep a detailed overview of
resource allocation, both past, present and future, and carefully plan the
requests of each agent. This can be done by using a deadlock avoidance
algorithm. One such algorithm is the Banker's algorithm developed by
Dijkstra, which keeps an overview of the maximum allocation of all re-
sources, and then tests for possible deadlocks for all pending activities
before deciding whether allocation of some resource should be allowed.
Another algorithm is the Resource-Allocation-Graph algorithm, which
dynamically examines the resource-allocation state dened by the num-
ber of available and allocated resources and the maximum demand of the
agents to ensure that no deadlocks occur. [17]
3.4.3
Detect and Recover
Instead of trying to not end up in a deadlock situation, a system can also
use the deadlock handling strategy detect and recover, in which deadlocks
are allowed but monitored. When a deadlock happens, the system then
automatically resolves the deadlock.
In order to detect when a deadlock has occurred, an algorithm needs to
dynamically examine the state of the system. This can be done in many
ways, some of them being to maintain a wait-for graph for the system
and check this graph for cycles, or to maintain an overview of available,
allocated and requested resources and investigate all possible allocation
sequences.
After a deadlock has been detected, another algorithm resolves the dead-
lock. This can be done by termination, i.e., stopping some of the agents
in the circular wait, or by resource preemption, i.e., selecting some agent
and forcefully release its resources. [17]
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Deadlock Handling
35
3.4.4
Ignore
A nal way of handling deadlocks is to pretend they do not occur. How-
ever strange this sounds, this is actually common practice in most operat-
ing systems, as the risk of deadlock is often so small, and the consequences
of a deadlock are so negligible that the cost of implementing a deadlock
handling policy is greater than the gain. Thus if a deadlock does occur,
the result is that the system will deteriorate and eventually stop function-
ing, and one would then have to manually restart the implicated agents.
[17]
==PAGE:44==
Chapter 4
Logic of Action
Logic of action, like so many other classes of logic, started out as a eld
in philosophy. The concept of action is and has always been of interest,
especially because of its importance for epistemology and ethics. Today
actions are still examined in many scientic elds, among other the elds
of computer science and Articial Intelligence.
Computers perform actions in the form of executing programs, and ar-
ticial agents perform actions such as moving, communicating, and, in
general, interacting with their environment. Being able to reason about
and formally describe such actions is the foundation of logic of action.
Logic of action spans over multiple logics, some of which are concerned
with single agent actions, and some with multi-agent actions. Examples of
the rst kind are Hennessy-Milner logic, which is used to reason about ex-
ecution of actions in computer programs, linear-time temporal logic and
computation tree logic, which are able to express changes in a system
over time, and modal µ-calculus, which extends Hennessy-Milner logic
with the least and greatest xed point operators. Examples of the latter
kind are coalition logic, which expresses which conditions coalitions can
enforce, and alternating-time temporal logic, which expresses how groups
of agents have the ability to change the system over time. [3]
In the following sections, some of the logics within the logic of action class
will be described.
4.1
Hennessy-Milner Logic (HML)
Hennessy-Milner logic (HML) was introduced in [12] in 1980 by Matthew
Hennessy and Robin Milner. The logic was developed in order to reason
about the behaviour of programs, here determined by the actions that
the program executes. HML thus contain modalities to express which
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Hennessy-Milner Logic (HML)
37
sequences of actions can and cannot be executed by the program.
Denition 4.1 (HML Syntax) Let φ, φ1 and φ2 be HML formulas and
a be an action symbol. The syntax of HML can be dened recursively as:
φ := ⊤| ¬φ | φ1 ∨φ2 | ⟨a⟩φ | [a]φ
From the syntax one can naturally derive falsity (⊥) and all the other
boolean connectives.
If we let A = {a1, ..., an} be the full set of actions available in the system,
we will sometimes write [A]φ instead of [a1]φ∧[a2]φ∧...∧[an]φ and write
⟨A⟩φ instead of ⟨a1⟩φ ∧⟨a2⟩φ ∧.. ∧⟨an⟩φ. [12]
4.1.1
Model and Semantics
HML is interpreted over labelled transition systems as dened in 2.2.
We let (T , s) |= φ denote that the formula φ holds in state s in the model
T .
Given a labelled transition system T and some state s ∈S, one can dene
the truth values of HML formulas as:
(T , s) |= ⊤is true for all s ∈S
(T , s) |= ¬φ i s ⊭φ
(T , s) |= φ1 ∨φ2 i (T , s) |= φ1 or (T , s) |= φ2
(T , s) |= ⟨a⟩φ i there exists a transition (s, s′) ∈R so that L(s, s′) = a
and (T , s′) |= φ
(T , s) |= [a]φ i for all transitions (s, s′) ∈R where L(s, s′) = a it holds
that (T , s′) |= φ
The ⟨a⟩φ and [a]φ modalities of HML are to be interpreted as "after
executing the action a, φ will possibly hold" and "after executing the
action a, φ will denitely hold" respectively [12]. These modalities thus
==PAGE:46==
4.2 Computation Tree Logic (CTL)
38
enable us to express whether or not an action can be executed in a certain
state. To see this, consider the following formulas.
(T , s) |= ⟨a⟩⊤
expresses that action a can be executed in state s.
(T , s) |= ⟨a⟩([b]⊥∧[c]⊥)
expresses that it is possible from state s to execute action a and get to a
state in which neither action b nor action c can be executed.
(T , s) |= [a]⟨b⟩[c]⊥
expresses that when executing action a in state s one will get to a state
where it is possible to execute action b and get to a state where action c
cannot be executed.
4.2
Computation Tree Logic (CTL)
Computation tree logic (CTL) was introduced in [8] in 1981 by Edmund
Clarke and E. Allen Emerson. CTL is a branching time logic used to
reason about state changes over time. Considering branching time means
considering multiple possible futures; there is not just one possible path to
follow but rather many [4]. CTL allows explicit universal and existential
quantication over paths, which means it can express properties that hold
on some or on every path, and so whether or not some future conditions
will possibly or denitely hold.
Contrary to HML, CTL in its original form does not contain a notion of
action, and so it does not have modalities expressing the execution of an
action. CTL is instead focused on the eects of the actions executed.
Denition 4.2 (CTL Syntax) Let φ, φ1 and φ2 be CTL formulas and
p be a proposition. The syntax of CTL can be dened recursively as:
φ := p | ¬φ | φ1 ∨φ2 | ∀Xφ | ∃Xφ | ∀[φ1Uφ2] | ∃[φ1Uφ2]
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Computation Tree Logic (CTL)
39
From the syntax one can derive all the other boolean connectives as well
as the following formulas:
∀Fφ ≡∀[⊤Uφ]
∃Fφ ≡∃[⊤Uφ]
∀Gφ ≡∀¬F¬φ
∃Gφ ≡∃¬F¬φ
[8]
4.2.1
Model and Semantics
CTL is interpreted over Kripke structures.
Denition 4.3 (Kripke Structure)
M = (S, V, R)
s ∈S is a state.
V is a valuation function, which maps propositions p to the set of states
s ∈S where p is true.
R ⊆S × S is a set of relations of state transitions.
We let (M, s) |= φ denote that the formula φ holds in state s in the model
M.
Given a Kripke structure M and a state s ∈S, one denes the semantics
of CTL as:
(M, s) |= p i s ∈V (p)
(M, s) |= ¬φ i s ⊭φ
(M, s) |= φ1 ∨φ2 i (M, s) |= φ1 or (M, s) |= φ2
(M, s) |= ∃Xφ i for some transition (s, s′) ∈R it holds that (M, s′) |= φ
==PAGE:48==
4.2 Computation Tree Logic (CTL)
40
(M, s) |= ∀Xφ i for all transitions (s, s′) ∈R it holds that (M, s′) |= φ
(M, s) |= ∃Fφ i for some path s0, s1, s2, ... where s0 = s there exists
some i ≥1 so that (M, si) |= φ
(M, s) |= ∀Fφ i for any path s0, s1, s2, ... where s0 = s there exists
some i ≥1 so that (M, si) |= φ
(M, s) |= ∃Gφ i for some path s0, s1, s2, ... where s0 = s it holds that
for all i ≥0, (M, si) |= φ
(M, s) |= ∀Gφ i for any path s0, s1, s2, ... where s0 = s it holds that
for all i ≥0, (M, si) |= φ
(M, s) |= ∃[φ1Uφ2] i for some path s0, s1, s2, ... where s0 = s there
exists some i ≥1 such that (M, si) |= φ2 and for all j < i it holds that
(M, sj) |= φ1
(M, s) |= ∀[φ1Uφ2] i for any path s0, s1, s2, ... where s0 = s there ex-
ists some i ≥1 such that (M, si) |= φ2 and for all j < i it holds that
(M, sj) |= φ1
Hence, the ∀and ∃path quantiers of CTL should be interpreted as "on
every path" and "on some path", respectively, and the Xφ, Fφ, Gφ, and
φ1Uφ2 modalities should be interpreted as "in the next state, φ holds",
"in some future state, φ holds", "φ holds always from here", and "φ1
holds at least until φ2 holds (and φ2 will eventually hold)", respectively
[8]. These modalities thus enables us to express conditions that will hold
sometime in some future. To see this, consider the following examples.
(M, s) |= ∀Fp
expresses that on any path one can take from the state s, one will even-
tually reach a state in which proposition p is true.
(M, s) |= ∃G(p ∨q)
expresses that there exists some path from the state s, on which there
will only be states in which either p or q is true.
(M, s) |= ∃X∀[pUq]
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Alternating-time Temporal Logic (ATL)
41
expresses that there exists some path from the state s, on which it will be
the case that in the next state, no matter which path one chooses from
there, p will be true, and p will continue to be true until q becomes true.
4.3
Alternating-time Temporal Logic (ATL)
Alternating-time temporal logic (ATL) was introduced in [5] in 2002 by
Alur et al. ATL is like CTL a branching time logic, but ATL focuses on
multi-agent behaviour. Instead of using the path quantiers from CTL,
ATL introduces a new path quantier which allows us to reason about
the futures that some coalition of the agents of a system can enforce. As
in CTL, ATL contains modalities to express when some propositions will
become true, but it does not contain modalities that enables us to reason
about the actions getting us there. However, while the Kripke structure of
CTL does not have a notion of actions, the structure on which formulas of
ATL are interpreted does include the actions of the agents in the system.
Denition 4.4 (ATL Syntax) Let φ, φ1 and φ2 be ATL formulas, let
p be a proposition, let Σ denote the set of agents, and let A ⊆Σ be a
coalition of agents. The syntax of ATL can be dened recursively as:
φ := p | ¬φ | φ1 ∨φ2 | ⟨⟨A⟩⟩Xφ | ⟨⟨A⟩⟩[φ1Uφ2]
From the syntax one can derive all the other boolean connectives as well
as the following formulas:
⟨⟨A⟩⟩Fφ ≡⟨⟨A⟩⟩[⊤Uφ]
⟨⟨A⟩⟩Gφ ≡⟨⟨A⟩⟩¬F¬φ
[[A]]φ ≡¬⟨⟨A⟩⟩¬φ
[5]
For simplicity we write ⟨⟨1, 2⟩⟩instead of ⟨⟨{1, 2}⟩⟩
4.3.1
Model and Semantics
ATL formulas are interpreted over concurrent game structures.
==PAGE:50==
4.3 Alternating-time Temporal Logic (ATL)
42
Denition 4.5 (Concurrent Game Structure)
G = (k, S, Π, π, D, δ)
k is the number of agents identied by 1, ..., k. We let Σ = {1, ..., k}.
s ∈S is a state.
p ∈Π is a proposition.
π is the valuation function specifying which propositions are true in s:
π(s) ⊆Π.
D is the move function that for a state s species all possible combi-
nations of the actions that each agent can perform in s. D(s) will hence
be a set of move vectors (a1, a2, ..., ak), so that agent 1 performs a1, agent
2 performs a2, etc. For an agent i and a state s, di(s) is the number of
moves available to agent i in s. For any agent i, di(s) ≥1 in every state s.
δ is the transition function that for a state s and a move vector (a1, a2, ..., ak)
∈D(s) species the resulting state s′.
In order to dene the semantics of ATL, the notions of a strategy and an
outcome are needed.
A strategy for an agent a ∈Σ is a function fa that for every nite prex λ
of a path determines a move fa(λ) for agent a. Said dierently, a strategy
of agent a is simply a selection of a "next move" based on the previous
moves of the agents in play. Every agent will thus have multiple strategies
in one concurrent game structure. A strategy fa induces a set of paths
or executions, that agent a can enforce.
The outcome of a set of strategies FA = {fa | a ∈A} from a state
s is the set of paths that the agents in A ⊆Σ enforce when following
their strategy in FA. Said dierently, the outcome of a set of strategies is
a set of paths or executions that the agents in A can cooperate to enforce.
We let (G, s) |= φ denote that the formula φ holds in state s in the
model G.
Let λ denote a path and let λ[i] denote the i'th state on that path.
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Alternating-time Temporal Logic (ATL)
43
Given a concurrent game structure G and a state s ∈S, one denes the
semantics of ATL as:
(G, s) |= p for p ∈Π i p ∈π(s)
(G, s) |= ¬φ i (G, s) ⊭φ
(G, s) |= φ1 ∨φ2 i (G, s) |= φ1 or (G, s) |= φ2
(G, s) |= ⟨⟨A⟩⟩Xφ i there exists a set FA of strategies, so that for all
executions λ in the outcome of FA from s, we have (G, λ[1]) |= φ
(G, s) |= ⟨⟨A⟩⟩Fφ i there exists a set FA of strategies, so that for all
executions λ in the outcome of FA from s, we have (G, λ[i]) |= φ for some
i ≥1
(G, s) |= ⟨⟨A⟩⟩Gφ i there exists a set FA of strategies, so that for all
executions λ in the outcome of FA from s, we have (G, λ[i]) |= φ for all
i ≥0
(G, s) |= ⟨⟨A⟩⟩[φ1Uφ2] i there exists a set FA of strategies, so that for
all executions λ in the outcome of FA from s, we have (G, λ[i]) |= φ2 for
some i ≥1, and (G, λ[j]) |= φ1 for all j < i
The ATL path quantier ⟨⟨A⟩⟩should be interpreted as "on any path
that the coalition A can enforce". Hence the formula ⟨⟨A⟩⟩φ means that
the coalition A has a collective strategy so that φ holds on every path
enabled by that collective strategy. The ATL path quantier is an ex-
tension of the CTL path quantiers, and one can thus express the CTL
quantiers using the ATL quantier:
∀= ⟨⟨∅⟩⟩and ∃= ⟨⟨Σ⟩⟩
Intuitively, the above says that all paths can be enforced without any
agents cooperating, and some path can be enforced with all agents coop-
erating. [5]
Thus, using ATL it is possible to reason about the conditions that will
hold in the futures that some set of agents can enforce. Consider the
following examples.
(G, s) |= ⟨⟨1⟩⟩Xp
==PAGE:52==
4.4 Modal µ-Calculus (Lµ)
44
expresses that agent 1 alone can from state s enforce that in the next
state, p will be true.
(G, s) |= ⟨⟨1, 2⟩⟩G¬p
expresses that from state s the coalition consisting of agent 1 and agent
2 can enforce that for all eternity, p will be false.
(G, s) |= ⟨⟨∅⟩⟩Fp
expresses that on any path from s, p will eventually be true.
4.4
Modal µ-Calculus (Lµ)
The modal µ-calculus (Lµ) was introduced in [14] in 1983 by Dexter
Kozen. Lµ is like HML used to reason about executions of actions, but
Lµ extends HML by introducing the least xed point operator µ and
its dual the greatest xed point operator ν. These operators enable us
to reason about sequences of actions of arbitrary length using recursion.
Many temporal logics, including CTL, can be encoded using modal µ-
calculus.
Denition 4.6 (Lµ Syntax) Let φ, φ1 and φ2 be formulas of Lµ, let p
be a proposition, let Z be a variable name, and let a be an action symbol.
The syntax of Lµ can then be dened recursively as:
φ := p | Z | ¬φ | φ1 ∧φ2 | φ1 ∨φ2 | ⟨a⟩φ | [a]φ | µZ.φ | νZ.φ
From the syntax one can derive the normal boolean connectives. [7]
4.4.1
Model and Semantics
Formulas of Lµ are interpreted over labelled transitions system as dened
in denition 2.2.
For the sake of brevity we will dene the semantics of Lµ in terms of
==PAGE:53==
4.4 Modal µ-Calculus (Lµ)
45
the valuation function ∥φ ∥T
D mapping formulas of Lµ to the set of states
in which the formula holds. If s ∈∥φ ∥T
D we write (T , D, s) |= φ.
Given a labelled transition system T , an interpretation Dprop : Prop →S,
and an interpretation D : V ar →S, which maps variables to a subset of
S, one can dene the valuation function ∥φ ∥T
D: φ →2S as:
∥p ∥T
D= Dprop(p)
∥Z ∥T
D= D(Z)
∥¬φ ∥T
D= S\ ∥φ ∥T
D
∥φ1 ∧φ2 ∥T
D=∥φ1 ∥T
D ∩∥φ2 ∥T
D
∥φ1 ∨φ2 ∥T
D=∥φ1 ∥T
D ∪∥φ2 ∥T
D
∥[a]φ ∥T
D= {s | ∀s′ such that s a−→s′ =⇒s′ ∈∥φ ∥T
D}
∥⟨a⟩φ ∥T
D= {s | ∃s′ such that s a−→s′ ∧s′ ∈∥φ ∥T
D}
∥µZ.φ ∥T
D= ∩{S′ ⊆S|S′ ⊇∥φ ∥T
D[Z:=S′]}
∥νZ.φ ∥T
D= ∪{S′ ⊆S|S′ ⊆∥φ ∥T
D[Z:=S′]}
The interpretation of the [a] and ⟨a⟩modalities is as in HML.
The interpretation of the valuation of the xed point operators µ and ν
requires a more extensive examination, which will be performed in the
following section. [7]
4.4.2
Fixed Point Operators
A xed point of a function f is an element in the functions domain, which
is mapped to itself by the function. Hence, if f(c) = c then c is a xed
point of f. As an example, take the function f(x) = x2 −3x + 4. Here 2
is a xed point of f since f(2) = 2.
There are in general two dierent ways of explaining xpoint logics;
through recursion or through looping.
==PAGE:54==
4.4 Modal µ-Calculus (Lµ)
46
Modal µ-calculus provides a semantics for recursion. This allows us to
talk about sequences of actions of arbitrary length, and thus to express
the usual operators of temporal logics such as CTL. The way that this
works is that one denes some property X = φ(X) as a recursive equa-
tion and then nds a solution to that equation. This solution will be a
xed point of the function φ(X). An example of such a property could be
X = φ∧[A]X expressing that some formula φ is true, and wherever we go
next, the property will hold again. A solution to that equation is a set of
states in which the property holds. However, we know that equations like
the above do not necessarily have one unique solution, and so the least
xed point operator µ is dened as the smallest solution to the equation,
and the greatest xed point operator ν is dened as the biggest solution
to the equation.
Another way to look at the xed point operators is as a means to describe
future conditions that require either nite or possibly innite looping to
get to. Thus, the least xed point operator µ expresses conditions that
are eventually going to happen (nite looping), while the greatest xed
point operator ν expresses conditions that must always hold (possibly
innite looping).[7]
In conclusion, the least and greatest xed point operators of modal µ-
calculus is used to express conditions that will hold at some arbitrary
future point in time.
To see how this works in practice, consider the
following examples.
(T , D, s) |= µX.

[a]⊥∨⟨b⟩X

expresses that from state s, either action a cannot be executed, or exe-
cuting a b action from s will possibly lead to a state where this is again
the case. Furthermore, one can only execute a nite number of b actions
before a cannot be executed. Said dierently, the formula expresses that
there exists some b path on which eventually action a cannot be executed.
(T , D, s) |= νX.

⟨a⟩⊤∧[b]X

expresses that in state s, action a can be executed, and executing a b
action in s will lead to a state where this is again the case. Furthermore,
one can execute a possibly innite number of b actions from s. Said in
other words, the formula expresses that in every state on every b path,
action a can be executed.
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 5
Deadlocks in Logic of
Action
Deadlocks occur because agents in a multi-agent system are performing
actions that end up blocking other agents. As logic of action can be used
to reason about actions and eects of actions, it would be interesting to
investigate if and how some of these logics can be used to model deadlocks.
In this chapter, we thus discuss the ability for the logics described in
the previous chapter to do so. These logics all have dierent expressive
qualities and are interpreted over dierent structures, and so their ability
to express deadlocks may vary.
5.1
Dening Deadlocks
Let us rst recap the general properties of deadlocks.
There are two dierent types of deadlocks; full deadlocks involving all
agents in the system, and partial deadlocks involving only some of the
agents in the system. The denitions of these two deadlock types are
given in 3.1 and 3.2 respectively. For some agent in a multi-agent system,
a deadlock is, simply put, a state from which the agent will forever only
be able to perform wait actions.
For a logic to be able to express deadlocks there are thus some specic
things it should be possible for it to do:
 The structure should support concurrent multi-agent actions.
 The language should contain modalities to reason about the multi-
agent actions.
 The language should contain modalities to reason about changes
over dierent periods of time.
==PAGE:56==
5.2 Deadlocks in HML
48
How the dierent logics fare in regard to this will be investigated in the
following sections.
5.2
Deadlocks in HML
Hennessy-Milner logic (HML) is used to reason about executable actions,
and the logic thus seems useful when one wishes to reason about dead-
locks as a result of actions performed by agents. However, when con-
cerning ourselves with systems in which multiple agents perform actions
concurrently, HML lacks expressiveness.
As described in section 4.1, formulas of HML are interpreted over labelled
transition systems. Such transition systems are, as we have seen, only able
to model multi-agent behaviour as the interleavings of the actions of the
involved agents. HML formulas can express which sequences of actions
can be performed in a system, but as concurrent behaviour is modelled
using the interleaving model, the formulas of HML do not contain a no-
tion of which agent performs the actions, only what action is performed.
When HML is used to model that a system is deadlocked, it is often done
by expressing that the agents are not able to perform any actions. That
is, that the agents are deadlocked in state s in the labelled transition
system T would be expressed using the HML formula:
(T , s) |= [A]⊥
where A is the full set of actions.
The above is, however, not quite enough given our denition of deadlock.
Considering the denition of a full deadlock we wish to express that the
agents are only able to perform "wait" actions in state s. This could be
expressed as:
(T , s) |= [A \ {ϵ}]⊥
where A is again the full set of actions, and ϵ is the wait action.
This formula is closer to expressing that the agents are in a full deadlock,
but it still just expresses that the agents are only able to perform a wait
action when in state s.
We also need to express that the agents will
forever only be able to perform wait actions, and this is in HML only
expressible by the innite formula:
(T , s) |= [A \ {ϵ}]⊥∧[ϵ][A \ {ϵ}]⊥∧[ϵ][ϵ][A \ {ϵ}]⊥∧...
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Deadlocks in CTL and ATL
49
Since innite formulas are not part of our language, this is not feasible.
Furthermore, even if we allowed for innite formulas, HML is dependent
on the interleavings of the concurrently executed actions, and it would
thus still lack the ability to express that some agents in a system are in
a waiting state, let alone which agents. It would hence not be possible to
express that a state is a partial deadlock.
In order to express deadlocks in HML, we would thus rst need to extend
the logic so that it could express sequences of actions of arbitrary length.
Such an extension is the modal µ-calculus, as described in 4.4, and the
ability for this logic to express deadlocks will be examined later in this
chapter.
The issue of HML being dependent on the interleaving model could be
remedied with some multi-agent extension; one could possibly allow for
multi-agent actions, and then interpret the formulas over labelled multi-
agent transition systems as given in denition 2.8. However, not every
multi-agent system can be modelled by the multi-agent transition sys-
tems, and so this solution is not feasible.
5.3
Deadlocks in CTL and ATL
Computation tree logic (CTL) and Alternating-time temporal logic (ATL)
are both used to reason about changes in a system over time. Whereas
HML focuses on the actions that the agent can perform, CTL and ATL are
used to reason about the eects of those actions. While CTL is focused
on single agent behaviour, ATL is used for reasoning about multi-agent
behaviour, and, more specically, which conditions coalitions of agents
can enforce. The structure on which ATL formulas are interpreted on
thus contain the notion of multi-agent actions, which makes this logic
especially interesting in regard to deadlocks.
Formulas of CTL are, as described in section 4.2, interpreted over Kripke
structures. As with the labelled transition system, concurrent behaviour
is thus usually expressed using the interleaving model, which again results
in the formulas of CTL lacking the access to which agent is performing
which action.
Meanwhile, formulas of ATL are, as described in section 4.3, interpreted
over concurrent game structures (CGS), which contain the move function
==PAGE:58==
5.3 Deadlocks in CTL and ATL
50
determining the legal concurrent moves for each states. The output of
the move function are move vectors, and each move vector represents a
multi-agent action.
However, even though the structure for ATL contains a notion of multi-
agent actions, the logic itself does not contain modalities to reason about
these actions, as both the ATL and the CTL formulas only express con-
ditions that hold in the states of the structure.
Usually when one talks about deadlocks in CTL or ATL, a deadlock is,
like in HML, considered to be a state in the structure in which no actions
can be performed by any agent. That the state s in the Kripke structure
M is a deadlock state would thus be expressed in CTL as:
(M, s) |= ∀X⊥
whereas that a state s in the CGS G is a deadlock state would be expressed
in ATL as:
(G, s) |= ⟨⟨∅⟩⟩X⊥
However, when considering our denition of a full deadlock; a state from
which the agents will forever have only wait actions, it is clear that this
is not easily expressed using CTL or ATL formulas, as we are missing the
action modalities.
Nevertheless, CTL and ATL are due to their temporal operators popular
in regard to expressing liveness and safety properties of systems.
Since the liveness properties are concerned with expressing that some-
thing eventually happens, one can in general express liveness using the
combination of the ∀path quantier (⟨⟨∅⟩⟩in ATL) and the F modal-
ity. As an example, say that we have the liveness property that φ will
eventually be true. This can be expressed in CTL as ∀Fφ and in ATL as
⟨⟨∅⟩⟩Fφ.
Likewise, since safety properties are concerned with expressing that some-
thing is always the case, one can express these using a combination of the
∀/⟨⟨∅⟩⟩path quantier and the G modality. As an example, say we have
that φ always holds. This safety property can be expressed in CTL as
∀Gφ and in ATL as ⟨⟨∅⟩⟩Gφ.
Given the above discussion on the usefulness of CTL and ATL in regard
to modelling deadlocks, it is clear that the absence of action modalities is
a hindrance. However, in the CGS we actually have multi-agent actions
in the form of move vectors, and so it seems like a useful structure when
modelling concurrent behaviour. More specically, a state s in a CGS
==PAGE:59==
5.4 Deadlocks in Modal µ-Calculus
51
would be a partial deadlock, if some subset of the agents would only have
wait actions in every move vector in D(s) and if no matter which path
one chooses from s, the same subset of the agents would continue to have
only wait actions in the move vectors of the states they pass through. It
thus seems that combining the CGS with a language able to reason about
the move vectors could be a way to go.
5.4
Deadlocks in Modal µ-Calculus
The modal µ-calculus Lµ extends HML with recursion by introducing the
least xed point operator µ and the greatest xed point operator ν. This
means that Lµ allows us to reason about sequences of action executions
of arbitrary length, and given that this was one of the downfalls of HML,
it is worth examining how this helps in regard to expressing deadlocks.
Like HML, formulas of Lµ are interpreted over labelled transition systems,
and concurrent behaviour is thus again modelled using the interleaving
model.
As was the case with HML, a deadlock state is most often described as a
state from which no actions are possible, and the formula expressing this
in Lµ is identical to the HML formula. However, since we are actually
interested in expressing that some subset of the agents have only wait
actions to perform, and that they will continue to have only wait actions,
we need to express more than what was possible using HML.
Enter, modal µ-calculus. Given that Lµ extends HML with recursion, it
is now possible to express the system being in a full deadlock. That the
system is in a full deadlock in state s in the labelled transition system T
can thus be expressed using Lµ as:
(T , D, s) |= νZ.

[A \ {ϵ}]⊥∧[ϵ]Z

where A is the full set of actions, and ϵ is the wait action. This formula
exactly describes that in state s the only possible action is to wait, and
executing this action will lead to a state where, again, the only possible
action is to wait ad innitum.
Aside from Lµ's ability to express full deadlocks, it is also possible to
express liveness and safety properties.
==PAGE:60==
5.5 Towards Modelling Deadlocks
52
The least xed point operator µ of Lµ can be used to express liveness
properties of a system. An example of this is the formula
µX.

φ ∨⟨a⟩X

which expresses that there is a path where after a nite number of a
actions, φ holds.
Similarly, the greatest xed point operator ν of Lµ can be used to express
safety properties of a system. An example of this is the formula
νZ.

φ ∧[a]Z

which expresses that in each state which is reachable by executing a
actions, φ holds.
Even though Lµ is able to use recursion to express full deadlocks, there is
still the issue of the concurrent behaviour. Since the labelled transition
system is by default a single agent model and concurrent actions are only
expressed by using the interleaving model, the above formula does not give
any information as to which agents are in a waiting state. Furthermore,
there may be states in which some, but not all agents are deadlocked,
and these will not be visible through the interleaved transition system. A
partial deadlock would thus not be expressible in Lµ.
It seems that though the modal µ-calculus is very expressive in regard
to deadlocks, as well as liveness and safety properties, the fact that the
model over which the formulas are interpreted does not have a notion
of concurrent actions results in the overall logic not being suciently
expressive.
5.5
Towards Modelling Deadlocks
We have investigated the ability for some logics of action to model dead-
locks, and we have seen that neither of them suciently captures when
and between which agents a deadlock happens in a system. To summarise
their abilities, the four logics are shown in table 5.1. We see that some
of the examined logics have some good qualities; the concurrent game
structure of ATL seems a good t for a structure modelling concurrent
actions, and the modal µ-calculus with its action modalities paired with
==PAGE:61==
5.5 Towards Modelling Deadlocks
53
Multi-Agent Actions
Action Modalities
Time Modalities
HML
×
✓
×
CTL
×
×
✓
ATL
✓
×
✓
Lµ
×
✓
✓
Table 5.1: Ability to Model Deadlocks
recursion is expressive enough to reason about actions over time.
The following chapter will present an extension to the modal µ-calculus
which takes advantage of the expressiveness of the logic while reformu-
lating the semantics to be interpreted over a variation of the concurrent
game structure.
==PAGE:62==
Chapter 6
Modelling Deadlocks with
Multi Agent Modal
µ-Calculus
After examining the already existing logics' ability to express deadlocks,
it is clear that they have some useful qualities, but that neither of them
completely captures the concept of a deadlock. Some of the logics are
missing the notion of multi agency, while others do not have the appropri-
ate action or temporal operators. However, one logic in particular seemed
a good candidate; the modal µ-calculus. This logic is able to express con-
ditions about an arbitrary point in the future, and given that a deadlock
is exactly some point from which some subset of agents will forever be
in a waiting state, this is especially convenient. The modal µ-calculus,
however, only contains modalities to reason about actions performed by
single agents, and the formulas of modal µ-calculus is furthermore in-
terpreted over labelled transition systems, which do not have a notion of
multi-agent actions. To remedy this, we thus propose a multi-agent exten-
sion to the modal µ-calculus; the multi-agent modal µ-calculus (MAµ),
which is interpreted over a variation of the concurrent game structure;
the concurrent action structure.
6.1
Multi-Agent Modal µ-Calculus (MAµ)
Multi-agent modal µ-calculus (MAµ) is dened as a simple extension to
the language of modal µ-calculus. To be able to reason about multi-agent
actions it is necessary to alter the action modalities of modal µ-calculus,
and so we dene the syntax of MAµ by introducing the agent quantier
|C|.
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Multi-Agent Modal µ-Calculus (MAµ)
55
Denition 6.1 (MAµ Syntax) Let φ, φ1 and φ2 be formulas of MAµ,
let p be a proposition, let X and Z be variable names, let a be an action
symbol, let Σ denote the full set of agents and let C ⊆Σ be a set of agents.
We dene the syntax of MAµ as:
φ := p | Z | ¬φ | φ1 ∧φ2 | φ1 ∨φ2 | |C|⟨a⟩φ | |C|[a]φ | µX.φ | νZ.φ
For simplicity we write |1, 2|[a] instead of |{1, 2}|[a].
6.1.1
Model and Semantics
As seen in section 5, the concurrent game structure dened in 4.5 is
a model capable of expressing multi-agent actions in the form of move
vectors. However, in [5] the concurrent game structure is dened without
an explicit set of actions.
As will be seen later in this section, a set
of dened possible actions is necessary, as we will need to conjunct over
these actions. Furthermore, the valuation function of the concurrent game
structure maps states to propositions; we want it to map propositions to
states. We thus need to redene the concurrent game structure a bit, and
the resulting model is the concurrent action structure.
Denition 6.2 (Concurrent Action Structure)
A = (k, S, A, Π, π, D, δ)
k is the number of agents identied by 1, ..., k. We let Σ = {1, · · · , k}.
s ∈S is a state.
a ∈A is an action. A always contains ϵ, which represents the wait action.
p ∈Π is a proposition.
π is the valuation function mapping a proposition p ∈Π to the set of
states in which p is true.
==PAGE:64==
6.1 Multi-Agent Modal µ-Calculus (MAµ)
56
D is the move function that for a state s species all possible combi-
nations of the actions that each agent can perform in s. D(s) will hence
be a set of move vectors (a1, a2, ..., ak), so that agent 1 performs action
a1, agent 2 performs action a2, etc. For an agent i and a state s, di(s) is
the number of moves available to agent i in s. For any agent i, di(s) ≥1
in every state s.
δ is the transition function that for a state s and a move vector (a1, a2, ..., ak)
∈D(s) species the resulting state s′.
Formulas of MAµ are interpreted over concurrent action structures.
Given a concurrent action structure A, and an interpretation D : V ar →
S, one can dene the valuation function ∥φ ∥A
D: φ →2S, which deter-
mines the set of states in which the formula φ holds as:
∥p ∥A
D= π(p)
∥Z ∥A
D= D(Z)
∥¬φ ∥A
D= S \ ∥φ ∥A
D
∥φ1 ∧φ2 ∥A
D=∥φ1 ∥A
D ∩∥φ2 ∥A
D
∥φ1 ∨φ2 ∥A
D=∥φ1 ∥A
D ∪∥φ2 ∥A
D
∥|C|[a]φ ∥A
D= {s | for each i ∈C, ∀v = (a1, a2, · · · , ak) ∈D(s), if ai =
a ∧δ(s, v) = s′ then s′ ∈∥φ ∥A
D}
∥|C|⟨a⟩φ ∥A
D= {s | for each i ∈C, ∃v = (a1, a2, · · · , ak) ∈D(s) such that ai =
a ∧δ(s, v) = s′ ∧s′ ∈∥φ ∥A
D}
∥µX.φ ∥A
D= ∩{S′ ⊆S | S′ ⊇∥φ ∥A
D[X:=S′]}
∥νZ.φ ∥A
D= ∪{S′ ⊆S | S′ ⊆∥φ ∥A
D[Z:=S′]}
The interpretation of the valuation of the altered formulas |C|[a]φ and
|C|⟨a⟩φ is as follows.
|C|[a]φ holds in a state s if for each agent i in C it is the case that for all
==PAGE:65==
6.1 Multi-Agent Modal µ-Calculus (MAµ)
57
move vectors v = (a1, a2, · · · , ak) ∈D(s) in which ai = a, it holds that if
δ(s, v) = s′ then s′ ∈∥φ ∥A
D.
|C|⟨a⟩φ holds in a state s if for each agent i in C there exists a move
vector v = (a1, a2, · · · , ak) ∈D(s) in which ai = a so that δ(s, v) = s′
and s′ ∈∥φ ∥A
D.
The interpretation of the valuation of the remaining formulas is the same
as for standard modal µ-calculus, as can be seen in section 4.4.
If s ∈∥φ ∥A
D we write (A, D, s) |= φ.
Duality of action modalities
In standard Hennessy-Milner logic, and thus also in standard modal µ-
calculus, the two operators [a] and ⟨a⟩are each others duals. We have
[a]φ ≡¬⟨a⟩¬φ and ⟨a⟩φ ≡¬[a]¬φ. However, after the extension, this is
no longer the case.
|C|[a]φ holds in a state when all move vectors from that state that has
an a action as the action of at least one of the agents i ∈C leads to a
state in which φ holds. That is, if just one of these vectors leads to a
state where φ does not hold, the formula is false. This means, that if it
is possible for either one of the agents i ∈C to perform an a action and
end up in a state in which φ does not hold, then |C|[a]φ is false. We thus
have that
|C|[a]φ ≡¬(
_
i∈C
|i|⟨a⟩¬φ)
|C|⟨a⟩φ holds in a state if there for every agent i ∈C exists at least
one move vector from that state in which the action of the agent is a
and that move vector leads to a state in which φ holds. That is, if just
one of the agents i ∈C does not have the option of performing action a
from the state, or if all move vectors in which some agent i ∈C has the
action a leads to a state where φ does not hold, then the formula is false.
This means, that if it for either one of the agents i ∈C is the case that
whenever it performs an a action, it ends up in a state where φ does not
hold, or that it is not possible for the agent to perform an a action, then
|C|⟨a⟩φ is false. We thus have that
|C|⟨a⟩φ ≡¬(
_
i∈C
|i|[a]¬φ)
==PAGE:66==
6.2 Deadlocks in MAµ
58
6.2
Deadlocks in MAµ
With the denition of MAµ, it is now possible to express deadlock con-
ditions for both some and all agents in a multi-agent system. We will in
this section state and prove propositions concerning deadlocks in MAµ.
The rst thing one should be able to express is the existence of a full
deadlock, and this is indeed possible using MAµ.
Proposition 6.3 Let A be a concurrent action structure with k agents,
let D be an interpretation and let s be a state in A.
If it holds that
(A, D, s) |= νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

(6.1)
then s is a full deadlock.
Proof. Assume for contradiction that 6.1 holds but s is not a full dead-
lock. Then some agent is not deadlocked. That would mean for some
agent i ∈Σ that either
1: there exists a move vector v1 = (a1, ..., ak) ∈D(s) such that ai ̸= ϵ, or
2: there exists a path from s to a state s′ in which there exists a move
vector v2 = (a1, ..., ak) ∈D(s′) such that ai ̸= ϵ.
If case 1 applies then there is some state s′′ such that δ(s, v1) = s′′, and
since ⊥is not true in any state, we have
(A, D, s′′) ⊭⊥
Thus since agent i can perform action a ̸= ϵ and end up in s′′, we have
that
(A, D, s) ⊭
^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥
and hence by the semantics of ∧also that
(A, D, s) ⊭νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

==PAGE:67==
6.2 Deadlocks in MAµ
59
We thus have a contradiction.
If case 2 applies then there is some state s′′ such that δ(s′, v2) = s′′, and
since ⊥is not true in any state, we have
(A, D, s′′) ⊭⊥
Thus since agent i can perform action a ̸= ϵ and end up in s′′, we have
that
(A, D, s′) ⊭
^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥
Since there is a path from s to s′ we get that
(A, D, s) ⊭νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

We thus again have a contradiction.
□
One should furthermore be able to express that no agents are deadlocked;
that all agents will at some point have some action they can perform. This
is also expressible using MAµ.
Proposition 6.4 Let A be a concurrent action structure with k agents,
let D be an interpretation and let s be a state in A.
If it holds that
(A, D, s) |=
^
i∈Σ

µX.

_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|i|⟨a⟩⊤∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

(6.2)
then s is a state in which no agents are deadlocked.
Proof. Assume for contradiction that 6.2 holds but s is not a state in
which no agents are deadlocked. Then some agent is deadlocked. That
would mean for some agent i ∈Σ that
1: every move vector vj = (aj1, ..., ajk) ∈D(s) has aji = ϵ, and
2: in every state s′ to which there exists a path from s, every move vector
vj = (aj1, ..., ajk) ∈D(s′) has aji = ϵ.
By 1 we have that
(A, D, s) ⊭
_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|i|⟨a⟩⊤
==PAGE:68==
6.2 Deadlocks in MAµ
60
for agent i since agent i cannot perform any action but ϵ from s.
By 2 we have for all states s′ reachable from s that
(A, D, s′) ⊭
_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|i|⟨a⟩⊤
for agent i since agent i cannot perform any action but ϵ from s′.
By 1 and 2 we thus have that
(A, D, s) ⊭µX.

_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|i|⟨a⟩⊤∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

for agent i since from s we can never eventually reach a state in which
W
a∈A\{ϵ} |i|⟨a⟩⊤holds. Hence we have by the semantics of ∧that
(A, D, s) ⊭
^
i∈Σ

µX.

_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|i|⟨a⟩⊤∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

We thus have a contradiction.
□
It should also be possible to express the existence of a partial deadlock,
and this can also be done using MAµ.
Proposition 6.5 Let A be a concurrent action structure with k = 4
agents, let D be an interpretation and let s be a state in A.
If it holds that
(A, D, s) |= νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|2, 4|[a]⊥∧
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]Z

(6.3)
then s is a state where agents 2 and 4 are deadlocked.
Proof. See appendix A.1.
□
Now that we can express that some state is a full or a partial deadlock
or not a deadlock state at all, it should also be possible to express that
such a state may or will eventually occur. We can do this by expanding
the above formulas.
Thus, it becomes expressible that the system may at some point run into
a full deadlock.
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Deadlocks in MAµ
61
Proposition 6.6 Let A be a concurrent action structure with k agents,
let D be an interpretation and let s be a state in A.
If it holds that
(A, D, s) |= µX.

νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

∨
^
i∈Σ
 _
a∈A
|i|⟨a⟩X

(6.4)
then s is a state in which a full deadlock may eventually happen.
Proof. Assume for contradiction that 6.4 holds but s is not a state in
which a full deadlock may eventually happen. Then a full deadlock will
denitely not happen. That would mean that either
1: the system will go on indenitely and will never reach a state in which
all agents are deadlocked, or
2: for some agent i ∈Σ it is the case that on any path from s there
will forever continue to be states in which there exist a move vector v =
(a1, ..., ak) such that ai ̸= ϵ.
If case 1 applies we have instantly by the semantics of µ that
(A, D, s) ⊭µX.

νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

since we can only perform a nite number of transitions before reaching
a state in which all agents are deadlocked. We thus have a contradiction.
If case 2 applies, then we have that on any path from any state t reachable
from s there will eventually be a state s′ in which there exist a move vector
v = (a1, ..., ak) ∈D(s′) such that ai ̸= ϵ. There is thus some state s′′
such that δ(s′, v) = s′′, and since ⊥is not true in any state, we have
(A, D, s′′) ⊭⊥
Thus since agent i can perform action a ̸= ϵ in s′ and end up in s′′, we
have that
(A, D, s′) ⊭
^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥
Since there is a path from t to s′ we get that
(A, D, t) ⊭νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

==PAGE:70==
6.2 Deadlocks in MAµ
62
for all states t reachable from s.
We will from s thus always end up
in a state where νZ.
 V
a∈A\{ϵ} |Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

does not hold. When
considering the recursive call V
i∈Σ
 W
a∈A |i|⟨a⟩X

in 6.4 we see that it
should be possible for all agents to follow a path from s which eventually
leads to a state satisfying νZ.
 V
a∈A\{ϵ} |Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

. Since this is
not possible for all agents we have that
(A, D, s) ⊭µX.

νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

We thus have a contradiction.
□
Furthermore, we can express that a full deadlock will denitely happen
at some point.
Proposition 6.7 Let A be a concurrent action structure with k agents,
let D be an interpretation and let s be a state in A.
If it holds that
(A, D, s) |= µX.

νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

(6.5)
then s is a state in which a full deadlock will denitely eventually happen.
Proof. See appendix A.2.
□
Finally, using MAµ we can also express that a deadlock will never occur.
Proposition 6.8 Let A be a concurrent action structure with k agents,
let D be an interpretation and let s be a state in A.
If it holds that
(A, D, s) |= νZ.
 ^
i∈Σ

µX.

_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|i|⟨a⟩⊤∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

∧
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]Z

(6.6)
then s is a state in which there is no risk of deadlock between any agents
in the future.
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Deadlocks in MAµ
63
Proof. See appendix A.3.
□
The above propositions show how the logic MAµ in general can be used to
express deadlock conditions, but to better illustrate how the logic works
and how the formulas are evaluated, consider the following example.
6.2.1
Example (MAµ In Action)
Consider the setup from example 3.2 (Three Robotic Vacuum Cleaners).
We will henceforth use agent i to denote vacuum cleaner i. The situation
described in example 3.2 can be modelled using the following concurrent
action model:
A1 = (k, S, A, Π, π, D, δ)
where
k = 3
S = {s0, s1, s2, s3, s4, s5, s6, s7}
A = {ϵ, U, D, L, R} (ϵ=wait, U=up, D=down, L=left, R=right)
Π = {(i, 1, 1), (i, 1, 2), (i, 1, 3), (i, 2, 1), (i, 2, 2), (i, 2, 3), (i, 3, 1), (i, 3, 2), (i, 3, 3)}
where i = 1, ..., k
D(s0) = {(ϵ, L, U), (D, L, ϵ)}
D(s1) = {(ϵ, U, ϵ)}
D(s2) = {(ϵ, R, ϵ)}
D(s3) = {(ϵ, ϵ, ϵ)}
D(s4) = {(L, U, ϵ)}
D(s5) = {(ϵ, ϵ, U)}
D(s6) = {(ϵ, ϵ, U)}
D(s7) = {(ϵ, ϵ, D)}
D(s8) = {(ϵ, ϵ, D)}
δ(s0, (ϵ, L, U)) = s1
δ(s0, (D, L, ϵ)) = s4
δ(s1, (ϵ, U, ϵ)) = s2
δ(s2, (ϵ, R, ϵ)) = s3
δ(s3, (ϵ, ϵ, ϵ)) = s3
δ(s4, (L, U, ϵ)) = s5
δ(s5, (ϵ, ϵ, U)) = s6
δ(s6, (ϵ, ϵ, U)) = s7
==PAGE:72==
6.2 Deadlocks in MAµ
64
δ(s7, (ϵ, ϵ, D)) = s8
δ(s8, (ϵ, ϵ, D)) = s5
A proposition (i, x, y) in Π describes that agent i is at location (x, y)
relative to the coordinates seen in gure 6.1. In the textual description,
the valuation π of the propositions in Π have been left out for simplicity.
However, A1 can be seen as a graph in gure 6.2, and here each state
contains the propositions which are true in that state.
Figure 6.1: Three Robotic Vacuum Cleaners
We are now interested in using MAµ for investigating if and when dead-
locks will occur in this situation.
To recap, we know from just looking at the situation that all three agents
are in risk of deadlocking as can be seen in gure 3.3, and that agents 1
and 2 are furthermore in risk of deadlocking as can be seen in gure 3.4.
We see that the two deadlocking situations correspond to state s3 and
states s5 −s8 in A1, respectively.
We can describe these deadlock properties using MAµ, as can be seen in
the following.
First o, we have that the system is not deadlock free, and so it holds
that:
(A1, D, s0) ⊭νZ.
 ^
i∈Σ

µX.

_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|i|⟨a⟩⊤∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

∧
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]Z

Moreover, when the execution starts there is a risk that all agents will
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Deadlocks in MAµ
65
Figure 6.2: A1 as a graph
==PAGE:74==
6.2 Deadlocks in MAµ
66
deadlock, and so we have:
(A1, D, s0) |= µX.

νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

∨
^
i∈Σ
 _
a∈A
|i|⟨a⟩X

While in s0 there is a risk of all agents deadlocking, in state s1 this is no
longer a risk; a deadlock between all agents is a certainty. We thus have:
(A1, D, s1) |= µX.

νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

Similarly, in s4 there is no longer a risk of all agents deadlocking, as agent
3 will denitely not deadlock, which can be expressed as:
(A1, D, s4) |= νZ.

µX.

_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|3|⟨a⟩⊤∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

∧
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]Z

We also see that when the agents begin their execution, agents 1 and 2
will denitely end up in a deadlock, no matter which actions the agents
of the system perform. We hence have that:
(A1, D, s0) |= µX.

νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|1, 2|[a]⊥∧
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]Z

∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

Contrary to agents 1 and 2, at the beginning of the execution, agent 3
has the possibility of avoiding the deadlock, and so we have that:
(A1, D, s0) |= µX.

νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|3|[a]⊥∧
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]Z

∨
^
i∈Σ
 _
a∈A
|i|⟨a⟩X

Finally, we know that state s3 is a deadlock state for all agents, and we
thus have:
(A1, D, s3) |= νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

Likewise, we have that s5 is a deadlock state for agents 1 and 2, and so
we have:
(A1, D, s5) |= νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|1, 2|[a]⊥∧
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]Z

==PAGE:75==
6.2 Deadlocks in MAµ
67
Evaluating Formulas Of MAµ
To show how the above formulas can be evaluated in the model, we will
perform the evaluation process for some of the formulas.
Consider the formula
νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

(6.7)
expressing that all agents are deadlocked, which we claim to be true in
state s3. To determine whether this is in fact correct, it is necessary to
nd the set of states in which the formula holds. We do this by executing
the following process.
We rst write up the equation
Z =
^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z
and nd a solution for this equation.
There may of course be multi-
ple solutions, but as we are interested in the possibly innite looping of
the formula (as determined by the ν operator), we are searching for the
greatest solution to the equation. That is, we are interested in nding the
biggest set of states for which the equation holds.
We thus start o letting Z be the full state space, so Z = {s0, ..., s8}, and
then we evaluate the right side of the equation with this Z.
Let us split the right side into two parts
p1
z
}|
{
^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z
| {z }
p2
Now p1 does not contain the variable Z, so the evaluation here is straight
forward. p1 holds in all states where for all agents it is the case that per-
forming any action except the wait action ϵ will certainly lead to falsity,
i.e. all agents can only perform ϵ actions. We see that this only holds in
state s3.
p2 does contain the variable Z, so to evaluate this, we need to substitute
Z = {s0, ..., s8} into the formula. p2 hence holds in all states where for
all agents it is the case that performing a wait action (which is the only
possible action for them qua p1) will lead them to one of the states in the
==PAGE:76==
6.2 Deadlocks in MAµ
68
set {s0, ..., s8}. This is of course true for every state in the model.
Finally, since p1 and p2 are connected by a conjunction, the evaluation of
the right side is the intersection of their separate evaluations. We thus
have that the right side evaluates to the set {s3}∩{s0, ..., s8} = {s3}, and
Z = {s0, ..., s8} is thus not a solution to the equation.
As we did not nd the solution, we now need a second step. We thus let
Z be the evaluation of the right side in the rst step, that is Z = {s3}.
Again, we have that p1 evaluates to {s3}, but now we see that p2 evalu-
ates to {s2, s3} since the only states in the model where every agent can
perform any action and end up in s3 are exactly the states s2 and s3.
Finally, we compute the intersection of the two parts and get {s3} ∩
{s2, s3} = {s3}. We thus have that Z = {s3} is a solution to the equa-
tion. Furthermore, since we followed the above procedure where we rst
set Z = {s0, ..., s8}, Z = {s3} is also the greatest solution to the equation,
and so the set of states in which formula 6.7 holds is {s3}.
Consider another formula
µX.

νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

∨
^
i∈Σ
 _
a∈A
|i|⟨a⟩X

(6.8)
expressing that a deadlock between all agents may happen, which we
claim to be true in state s0. We now again wish to nd the set of states
in which the formula holds.
We again want to write up the equation, but as this formula contain
nested xed points, it becomes less straight forward. The trick is to rst
evaluate the nested formula, and then afterwards use the found solution
in the outer formula. It just so happens that the nested formula is exactly
formula 6.7, and so we will simply use the solution to this in the following.
We thus obtain the equation:
X = [formula 6.7] ∨
^
i∈Σ
 _
a∈A
|i|⟨a⟩X

As we are now interested in the nite looping of the formula (as deter-
mined by the µ operator), we are searching for the smallest solution, i.e.
the smallest set of states for which the equation holds.
We thus set X to be the empty set, so X = ∅.
==PAGE:77==
6.3 Coman Conditions in MAµ
69
X
[formula 6.7] ∨V
i∈Σ
 W
a∈A |i|⟨a⟩X

Solution?
∅
{s3} ∪∅= {s3}
No
{s3}
{s3} ∪{s2, s3} = {s2, s3}
No
{s2, s3}
{s3} ∪{s1, s2, s3} = {s1, s2, s3}
No
{s1, s2, s3}
{s3} ∪{s0, s1, s2, s3} = {s0, s1, s2, s3}
No
{s0, s1, s2, s3}
{s3} ∪{s0, s1, s2, s3} = {s0, s1, s2, s3}
Yes
Table 6.1: Evaluation Steps
To evaluate the right side of the equation, we split it into two parts
[formula 6.7]
|
{z
}
p1
∨
p2
z
}|
{
^
i∈Σ
 _
a∈A
|i|⟨a⟩X

We know that p1 evaluates to {s3}.
Now to evaluate p2 we substitute X = ∅into the formula. p2 hence holds
in all states where every agent has at least one action with which it is
possible to go to no state. This is of course not true for any states.
Finally, since p1 and p2 are connected by a disjunction, the evaluation of
the right side is the union of their separate evaluations. We thus have
that the right side evaluates to the set {s3}∪∅= {s3}, and X = ∅is thus
not a solution to the equation.
As we did not nd the solution, we need more steps. For simplicity, all of
the steps are shown in table 6.1. Table 6.1 shows that X = {s0, s1, s2, s3}
is a solution to the equation. Furthermore, since we followed the above
procedure where we rst set X = ∅, X = {s0, s1, s2, s3} is also the small-
est solution to the equation, and so the set of states in which formula 6.8
holds is {s0, s1, s2, s3}.
6.3
Coman Conditions in MAµ
The previous section showed how the multi-agent modal µ-calculus can
be used to express both full and partial deadlocks within multi-agent
systems when the system is modelled in the concurrent action structure.
==PAGE:78==
6.3 Coman Conditions in MAµ
70
However, deadlocks do not, as discussed in chapter 3, occur in just any
multi-agent system; certain conditions need to be present for a deadlock
to happen. How these conditions present themselves in MAµ and the
concurrent action structure will be investigated in the following sections.
Furthermore, in order to prevent deadlocks, one has to make sure that at
least one of the Coman conditions does not hold. As the Coman con-
ditions are expressed in various ways in the concurrent action structure,
applying deadlock prevention in a multi-agent system would change dif-
ferent aspects of the model for this system. How the model changes when
applying deadlock prevention will also be investigated in the following
sections.
6.3.1
Mutual Exclusion
When examining a state in a concurrent action structure and its re-
lated formulas in MAµ, it is not obvious whether mutual exclusion is
in fact present in the multi-agent system modelled by the concurrent ac-
tion structure. This is because the mutual exclusion condition is only
expressed through the move function.
When constructing the move function one takes into account the share-
ability of the resources of the system, as this aects how the move func-
tion operates. For instance, in A1 in example 6.2.1 we have that D(s0) =
{(ϵ, L, U), (D, L, ϵ)} which means that in s0 it is only possible for either
agent 1 or agent 3 to make a move. This is exactly due to the fact that
the resource that the two agents want; the tile that they wish to move to,
is a resource that cannot be shared, and this has been taken into account
when the move function for A1 was dened. It is thus not possible to
immediately determine if mutual exclusion is present in a state; in order
to do so, one would need to know the reasoning behind the move function.
Removing Mutual Exclusion
A way to remove mutual exclusion from the system is to make it so that
all resources in the system become shareable. The change in the corre-
sponding model is that the move function is altered, so that the agents
==PAGE:79==
6.3 Coman Conditions in MAµ
71
are now able to perform actions that were previously not possible because
the actions required the same resource.
To see this, consider example 6.2.1. In A1 we have that D(s0) = {(ϵ, L, U),
(D, L, ϵ)}, but if mutual exclusion was removed from this system we would
have that D(s0) = {(D, L, U)} since it would now be possible for agents
1 and 3 to move to the same tile at the same time, and so none of the
agents would wait.
6.3.2
Wait For
As with mutual exclusion, the wait for condition is not immediately ap-
parent in a state in a concurrent action model. The process of agents
requesting resources is not explicitly stated in the model, and so determin-
ing whether an agent is currently holding one resource while requesting
another is again something that requires more knowledge about the con-
struction of the model. As with mutual exclusion, the wait for condition
is present through the move function of the concurrent action structure.
To see this, consider the dining philosopher example as described in 2.5
and 3.1.
The wait for condition occurs exactly when a philosopher is
holding her right fork and requesting her left fork. From the state where
a philosopher is holding her right fork there is one move vector expressing
that the request was successful, and one move vector expressing that the
request was unsuccessful; there is one move vector in which the action of
the philosopher is "pick up left fork", and one move vector in which the
action is "ϵ". Thus requesting a resource can be expressed in a concurrent
action structure as a successful and an unsuccessful move vector of the
action of actually obtaining the resource. This is however only true when
the resource being requested is free. If it is not free, as in the case where
both philosophers are holding their right fork and are requesting their
left, there will be no move vector in which a philosopher performs the
action "pick up left fork". There will hence not be any successful move
vector, but only the unsuccessful.
Thus the presence of the wait for condition is, like mutual exclusion, not
immediately apparent but embedded in the denition of the move function
of the concurrent action structure, and evaluating whether this condition
is present in a given state thus also require additional knowledge about
the move function denition.
==PAGE:80==
6.3 Coman Conditions in MAµ
72
Removing Wait For
To remove wait for from the system, one can enforce that an agent can
only hold one resource at a time. The change in the corresponding con-
current action structure is again that the move function is altered. All
move vectors in which a second (or third or fourth) resource is taken by
an agent are now no longer legal, and are therefore no longer part of the
model.
To illustrate this, consider again the dining philosophers from example
2.5. In this system, there is a state in which one philosopher holds her
right fork, and from this state there is a move vector in which the philoso-
pher has the action "pick up left fork". If wait for was removed from the
system, this move vector would be gone as the action would no longer be
legal. It is clear as mentioned in section 3.4 that this strategy is not fea-
sible for every multi-agent system; if the wait for condition is removed in
this way from the dining philosopher case, the philosophers would never
eat.
6.3.3
No Preemption
That the no preemption condition is present in a state in a concurrent
action structure is again not obvious, but contrary to the mutual exclusion
and wait for conditions, no preemption is not expressed through the move
function.
That a resource cannot forcibly be removed from an agent before that
agent is done using it is a condition which is more general than the rst
two conditions, as it is not dependent on the state of the agents but rather
on how the agents may transition between states.
If a resource could be forcibly removed from an agent it would mean
that an agent could transition from a state in which it has a resource to a
state in which it no longer has that resource without actively releasing the
resource itself. Such a transition is not possible in the examples we have
considered so far; a philosopher can only transition from a state where
she has a fork to a state where she does not have a fork by performing
the action "put down the fork", and the robotic vacuum cleaner can only
leave a tile by actively moving to another.
==PAGE:81==
6.3 Coman Conditions in MAµ
73
The no preemption condition is thus expressed through the transition
function of the concurrent action model, as this function determines which
state results from all agents performing the actions of a certain move
vector. To evaluate whether no preemption is present in a multi-agent
system modelled by a concurrent action structure, one would thus have
to dive into the denition of the transition function.
Removing No Preemption
In order to remove no preemption, one can allow for an external actor
to remove resources from agents before the agent is done using it if the
actor so sees t. This change would result in a change in the transition
function of the concurrent action structure. The transition function would
now allow there to be transitions going from a state where some agent a
has a resource, to a state where agent a no longer has that resource, by
executing some move vector, in which agent a does not itself release the
resource.
Consider again example 6.2.1. If preemption was allowed in this system,
the transition in A1 going from state s2 to state s3 could be changed
so that it goes from s2 to s0, as this would simply correspond to some
external actor forcibly moving agents 1, 2 and 3 back to their initial
positions.
6.3.4
Circular Wait
Given that three of the four Coman conditions are actually not express-
ible within the concurrent action structure, it begs the question; what is
it then that we express when constructing formulas in MAµ describing
a deadlock? The tempting answer is that these formulas express exactly
the nal Coman condition; circular wait.
As we might have expected, it is indeed the case that if for some state s
in the model A it holds that
(A, D, s) |= νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

(6.9)
==PAGE:82==
6.3 Coman Conditions in MAµ
74
then circular wait is indeed present in s.
Assume for contradiction that 6.9 holds but there is no circular wait in
s. Then the waiting condition is a chain of all k agents so that agent 1 is
waiting on agent 2, which is waiting on agent 3, ..., which is waiting on
agent k. But since agent k is deadlocked, it has to be waiting on some
other agent. However, it is not possible for agent k to be waiting on any
agent 1, ..., k −1 without there being a circular wait. We thus have a
contradiction.
However, as discussed in section 3.2.1, circular wait is only necessarily
present when there is a full deadlock. The above thus only applies to full
deadlocks, and so if it holds that
(A, D, s) |= νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|C|[a]⊥∧
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]Z

it does not necessarily mean that circular wait is present in s, as can be
seen in example 3.3 (Three Doors).
Removing Circular Wait
A way to remove circular wait from the system is to impose a total order-
ing on the resources so that an agent can only request resources higher
up in the order than the one(s) it already has.
If such an ordering is imposed, it is indeed the case that
νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

cannot hold in any state in the system. The reason for this is that if all
agents in the system are deadlocked, they are all waiting on some other
agent to release a resource they are requesting.
However if we again
consider agents 1, ..., k such that agent 1 is waiting on agent 2, which
is waiting on agent 3, ..., which is waiting on agent k then we have that
agent k cannot possibly be requesting the resources that agents 1, ..., k−1
are holding. Thus agent k is not deadlocked, as it is either not currently
requesting any resources or it is requesting resources that no other agent
is holding.
==PAGE:83==
6.4 Towards Axiomatisation of MAµ
75
6.4
Towards Axiomatisation of MAµ
In order to be able to express dierent kinds of deadlocks in multi-agent
systems, the multi-agent modal µ-calculus and the concurrent action
structure were introduced.
The language together with the model al-
lows us to express both full and partial deadlocks in more detail than
previously done.
A natural next step is to investigate whether a sound and complete ax-
iomisation can be produced for the multi-agent modal µ-calculus.
==PAGE:84==
Chapter 7
Axiomatisation of MAµ
Providing an axiomatisation of the multi-agent modal µ-calculus can help
us gain a better understanding of the logic, and investigating the sound-
ness and completeness of the proposed axiomatic system further strength-
ens this understanding.
The following chapter contains a presentation of two complete axiomati-
sations of logics related to MAµ. We then adapt the axiomatic systems so
that they can serve as an axiomatisation of MAµ and prove that this sys-
tem is sound. Finally, we discuss the completeness of the new axiomatic
system in relation to the underlying systems.
7.1
Axiomatisation of Modal µ-Calculus
When Kozen introduced the modal µ-calculus in [14] he also presented a
deductive system. There has since been proposed other axiomatisations
for modal µ-calculus, but we will restrict our attention to the original
system.
The axiomatic system proposed by Kozen is equivalent to the following
system presented in [7].
Denition 7.1 (Axiomatic System for Modal µ-Calculus (AXµ))
.
Let a be an action symbol and let φ and ψ be formulas of modal µ-calculus.
The axiomatic system for modal µ-calculus consists of the following ax-
ioms and inference rules.
(A1) All propositional tautologies
(A2) [a](φ →ψ) →[a]φ →[a]ψ
==PAGE:85==
7.2 Axiomatisation of ATL
77
(A3) φ(µX.φ(X)) →µX.φ(X)
(R1)
φ, φ→ψ
ψ
(R2)
φ
[a]φ
(R3)
φ(ψ)→ψ
µX.φ(X)→ψ
It can furthermore be useful to include the derived axiom and rule for the
greatest xed point operator ν.
(A4) νX.φ(X) →φ(νX.φ(X))
(R4)
ψ→φ(ψ)
ψ→νX.φ(X)
In the original paper [14], Kozen was not able to prove that the above
axiomatisation of modal µ-calculus was complete. The question of com-
pleteness remained unsolved for more than a decade until Walukiewicz in
[19] presented a proof establishing that the axiomatic system proposed
by Kozen is indeed complete.
7.2
Axiomatisation of ATL
In the paper by Alur et al. presenting the alternating-time temporal logic
[5] no axiomatisation of the logic is included.
However, the following
axiomatic system was later proposed by Goranko and van Drimmelen in
[11].
Denition 7.2 (Axiomatic System for ATL (AXATL)) .
Let Σ be the full set of agents and let A, A1, A2 ⊆Σ. Furthermore, let φ,
ψ and θ be formulas of ATL. The axiomatic system for ATL consists of
the following axioms and inference rules.
(A1) All propositional tautologies
==PAGE:86==
7.3 Axiomatisation of MAµ
78
(A2) ¬⟨⟨A⟩⟩X⊥
(A3) ⟨⟨A⟩⟩X⊤
(A4) ¬⟨⟨∅⟩⟩X¬φ →⟨⟨Σ⟩⟩Xφ
(A5) ⟨⟨A1⟩⟩Xφ ∧⟨⟨A2⟩⟩Xψ →⟨⟨A1 ∪A2⟩⟩X(φ ∧ψ)
for disjoint A1 and A2
(A6) ⟨⟨A⟩⟩Gφ ↔φ ∧⟨⟨A⟩⟩X⟨⟨A⟩⟩Gφ
(A7) ⟨⟨∅⟩⟩G(θ →(φ ∧⟨⟨A⟩⟩Xθ)) →⟨⟨∅⟩⟩G(θ →⟨⟨A⟩⟩Gφ)
(A8) ⟨⟨A⟩⟩φUψ ↔ψ ∨(φ ∧⟨⟨A⟩⟩X⟨⟨A⟩⟩φUψ)
(A9) ⟨⟨∅⟩⟩G((ψ ∨(φ ∧⟨⟨A⟩⟩Xθ)) →θ) →⟨⟨∅⟩⟩G(⟨⟨A⟩⟩φUψ →θ)
(R1)
φ, φ→ψ
ψ
(R2)
φ→ψ
⟨⟨A⟩⟩Xφ→⟨⟨A⟩⟩Xψ
(R3)
φ
⟨⟨∅⟩⟩Gφ
Together with the axiomatisation of ATL, Goranko and van Drimmelen
presented proof that the above axiomatisation of ATL is indeed complete.
[11]
7.3
Axiomatisation of MAµ
As MAµ is build upon a combination of the modal µ-calculus and ATL,
a natural starting point when trying to nd an axiomatisation of MAµ is
to investigate whether the axiomatic systems of these languages can be
adapted to serve as an axiomatisation for MAµ.
In this section we will thus try to adapt the systems presented in sections
7.1 and 7.2 respectively, and investigate if any one or a combination of
these may serve as an axiomatisation for MAµ.
First, we rewrite the axiomatisation of modal µ-calculus, AXµ, presented
in 7.1. Since the only dierence between modal µ-calculus and multi-agent
==PAGE:87==
7.3 Axiomatisation of MAµ
79
modal µ-calculus is the agent quantier attached to the action modalities,
the change needed is to add an appropriate agent quantier to the action
modalities in the axiomatisation. The result is the following system.
Denition 7.3 (Adapted AXµ (AXMAµ1)) .
Let a be some action, let Σ be the full set of agents and let C ⊆Σ.
Furthermore, let φ and ψ be formulas of MAµ. The following collection
of axioms and inference rules is a candidate for an axiomatic system for
MAµ.
(A1) All propositional tautologies
(A2) |C|[a](φ →ψ) →|C|[a]φ →|C|[a]ψ
(A3) φ(µX.φ(X)) →µX.φ(X)
(A4) νZ.φ(Z) →φ(νZ.φ(Z))
(R1)
φ, φ→ψ
ψ
(R2)
φ
|C|[a]φ
(R3)
φ(ψ)→ψ
µX.φ(X)→ψ
(R4)
ψ→φ(ψ)
ψ→νZ.φ(Z)
The only dierence between AXµ and AXMAµ1 is axiom A2 and rule R2.
In both cases the agent quantier |C| was added to the action modalities,
since the axiom and rule should be applicable to any set of agents.
The system AXµ is created for the modal µ-calculus, and the formulas
are thus interpreted over labelled transition systems. This poses a prob-
lem if one wishes to use the system as an axiomatic system for MAµ,
as MAµ is interpreted over concurrent action structures. If one were to
use this system one would thus have to present a transformation from a
concurrent action structure to a labelled transition system.
A dierent approach is to look at the axiomatisation of ATL, AXATL,
presented in 7.2. As the formulas of ATL are interpreted over (almost)
==PAGE:88==
7.3 Axiomatisation of MAµ
80
the same structure as the formulas of MAµ, the collection of adapted
axioms of AXATL may be a better candidate for an axiom system for
MAµ.
Rewriting the axiomatisation of ATL requires a bit more eort than
rewriting AXµ, as the coalition path quantier of ATL is not present
in MAµ. We will therefore rst discuss some of the axioms of AXATL
and determine how these can be adapted.
Axioms A1-A3 are easily adapted.
Axiom A4 expresses that if it is not always the case that in the next state
¬φ holds, then there is some path on which the next state implies φ. This
axiom can fairly easily be adapted to MAµ as this is equivalent to saying
that if it is not the case that when all agents in a set of agents perform
some action they end up in as state where ¬φ holds, then some agent in
the set will when performing that action have the possibility of ending
up in a state where φ holds.
Axiom A5 expresses that if two disjoint coalitions of agents can enforce
that in the next state φ or ψ holds, then the union of these coalitions can
enforce that in the next state φ ∧ψ holds. This axiom is more dicult
to translate into something that might be used for MAµ, as this notion
of coalitions "enforcing" outcomes is not part of MAµ. One could see
the corresponding axiom for MAµ being that if whichever action the set
C1 of agents take results in a state where φ holds, and whichever action
the set C2 of agents take results in a state where ψ holds, then whichever
action the agents in the union of C1 and C2 take will result in a state
where φ ∧ψ holds. Although valid, this axiom is a bit trivial since the
semantics of MAµ is structured so that if V
a∈A |C|[a]φ holds for C ⊂Σ,
then V
a∈A |Σ|[a]φ holds. As there is no direct equivalent to axiom A5 of
AXATL it will be left out of the adaptation.
Axioms A6 and A8 express xed point properties, and when overlooking
the coalition path quantier, these actually correspond directly to axioms
A3 and A4 of AXMAµ1.
Finally, axioms A7 and A9 express properties for the greatest and the
least xed points respectively, and these correspond directly to the infer-
ence rules R3 and R4 of AXMAµ1.
When adapting the axioms and rules of inference of AXATL, we get the
following system.
==PAGE:89==
7.3 Axiomatisation of MAµ
81
Denition 7.4 (Adapted AXATL (AXMAµ2)) .
Let a be an action symbol, let Σ be the full set of agents and let C ⊆Σ.
Furthermore, let φ and ψ be formulas of MAµ. The following collection
of axioms and inference rules is a candidate for an axiomatic system for
MAµ.
(A1) All propositional tautologies
(A2) ¬|C|⟨a⟩⊥
(A3) |C|[a]⊤
(A4) ¬|C|[a]¬φ →W
i∈C |i|⟨a⟩φ
(A6) νZ.φ(Z) →φ(νZ.φ(Z))
(A7) ψ →φ(ψ) →ψ →νZ.φ(Z)
(A8) φ(µX.φ(X)) →µX.φ(X)
(A9) φ(ψ) →ψ →µX.φ(X) →ψ
(R1)
φ, φ→ψ
ψ
(R2)
φ→ψ
|C|[a]φ→|C|[a]ψ
(R3)
φ
νZ.φ(Z)
By adapting AXµ and AXATL, we see that the two resulting axiomatic
systems are actually very similar to each other and contain only small
dierences. The merge of these two systems might thus be exactly what
we need.
Denition 7.5 (Axiomatic System for MAµ (AXMAµ)) .
Let a be some action, let Σ be the full set of agents and let C ⊆Σ.
Furthermore, let φ and ψ be formulas of MAµ. The axiomatic system for
MAµ consists of the following axioms and inference rules.
(A1) All propositional tautologies
==PAGE:90==
7.3 Axiomatisation of MAµ
82
(A2) ¬|C|⟨a⟩⊥
(A3) |C|[a]⊤
(A4) |C|[a](φ →ψ) →|C|[a]φ →|C|[a]ψ
(A5) ¬|C|[a]¬φ →W
i∈C |i|⟨a⟩φ
(A6) φ(µX.φ(X)) →µX.φ(X)
(A7) νZ.φ(Z) →φ(νZ.φ(Z))
(R1)
φ, φ→ψ
ψ
(R2)
φ→ψ
|C|[a]φ→|C|[a]ψ
(R3)
φ
|C|[a]φ
(R4)
φ
νZ.φ(Z)
(R5)
φ(ψ)→ψ
µX.φ(X)→ψ
(R6)
ψ→φ(ψ)
ψ→νZ.φ(Z)
Whether the above system is sound and complete for MAµ with respect
to the concurrent action structure will be investigated in the following
sections.
7.3.1
Soundness
To prove that the proposed axiomatic system AXMAµ is sound for MAµ
with respect to the concurrent action structure, one needs to prove that
every axiom and inference rule of AXMAµ is valid in every concurrent
action structure.
Due to the familiarity with axiom A1 and rule R1
(modus ponens) these will be considered valid and will not be proven.
Proposition 7.6 |= ¬|C|⟨a⟩⊥
==PAGE:91==
7.3 Axiomatisation of MAµ
83
Proof. We take an arbitrary concurrent action structure A, a set of
agents C, an action a and a state s in A.
We need to show that (A, s) |= ¬|C|⟨a⟩⊥.
Assume that it is not true. Then we know that (A, s) |= |C|⟨a⟩⊥. By
the semantics of |C|⟨a⟩there thus exists for each agent i ∈C some move
vector v = (a1, a2, ..., ak) in D(s) in which ai = a. Furthermore, there
exists a state s′ such that δ(s, v) = s′ and (A, s′) |= ⊥. As ⊥does not
hold in any state, we have a contradiction, and (A, s) |= ¬|C|⟨a⟩⊥.
Since A and s were chosen arbitrarily we have |= ¬|C|⟨a⟩⊥.
□
Proposition 7.7 |= |C|[a]⊤
Proof. See appendix B.1.
□
Proposition 7.8 |= |C|[a](φ →ψ) →|C|[a]φ →|C|[a]ψ
Proof. See appendix B.2.
□
Proposition 7.9 |= ¬|C|[a]¬φ →W
i∈C |i|⟨a⟩φ
Proof. See appendix B.3.
□
Proposition 7.10 |= φ(µX.φ(X)) →µX.φ(X)
See appendix B.4.
□
Proposition 7.11 |= νZ.φ(Z) →φ(νZ.φ(Z))
Proof. We take an arbitrary concurrent action structure A and a state
s in A.
We need to show that (A, s) |= νZ.φ(Z) →φ(νZ.φ(Z)).
We have two cases.
==PAGE:92==
7.3 Axiomatisation of MAµ
84
1: (A, s) ⊭νZ.φ(Z).
2: (A, s) |= νZ.φ(Z).
If case 1 applies we have by the semantics of →that (A, s) |= νZ.φ(Z) →
φ(νZ.φ(Z)).
If case 2 applies we have that (A, s) |= φ and from s one can make a pos-
sibly innite number of transitions so that in all the states passed, φ will
hold. Take some v ∈D(s) so that δ(s, v) = s′ and (A, s′) |= φ. From s′ it
will still be possible to make a possibly innite number of transitions so
that in all states passed, φ holds. We hence have that (A, s′) |= νZ.φ(Z).
Thus from s we can make one transition and get to a state from which
we can make a possibly innite number of transitions, and in all states
passed, φ will hold. We hence get that (A, s) |= φ(νZ.φ(Z)), and we thus
have that (A, s) |= νZ.φ(Z) →φ(νZ.φ(Z)).
Since A and s were chosen arbitrarily, we have that |= νZ.φ(Z) →
φ(νZ.φ(Z)).
□
Proposition 7.12 For all models A, if A |= φ →ψ then A |= |C|[a]φ →
|C|[a]ψ
Proof. See appendix B.5.
□
Proposition 7.13 For all models A, if A |= φ then A |= |C|[a]φ
Proof. See appendix B.6.
□
Proposition 7.14 For all models A, if A |= φ then A |= νZ.φ(Z)
Proof. See appendix B.7.
□
Proposition 7.15 For all models A, if A |= φ(ψ) →ψ then A |=
µX.φ(X) →ψ
Proof. We take an arbitrary concurrent action structure A such that
A |= φ(ψ) →ψ (if A ⊭φ(ψ) →ψ the proposition is true since it is an
==PAGE:93==
7.3 Axiomatisation of MAµ
85
implication).
We need to show that A |= µX.φ(X) →ψ.
Since A |= φ(ψ) →ψ we have for all s ∈S that (A, s) |= φ(ψ) →ψ.
We now x an arbitrary state s and show that (A, s) |= µX.φ(X) →ψ.
If (A, s) ⊭µX.φ(X) then (A, s) |= µX.φ(X) →ψ holds by the semantics
of →.
If (A, s) |= µX.φ(X) then (A, s) |= φ and we can make an arbitrary
but nite number of transitions so that φ will continue to hold and at
some point we will reach a nal state s′ in which some base formula ψ
of φ holds.
Thus s′ |= ψ.
There will then necessarily be some state
s′′ such that δ(s′′, v) = s′ for some v ∈D(s′′).
We thus know that
s′′ |= φ and after performing some transition, ψ holds, and so we have
(A, s′′) |= φ(ψ). Given that (A, s′′) |= φ(ψ) →ψ we get by the semantics
of →that (A, s′′) |= ψ. This argument cascades up to s, and we thus get
that (A, s) |= ψ, and hence that (A, s) |= µX.φ(X) →ψ.
Since A and s were chosen arbitrarily we have that if A |= φ(ψ) →ψ
then A |= µX.φ(X) →ψ.
□
Proposition 7.16 For all models A, if A |= ψ →φ(ψ) then A |= ψ →
νZ.φ(Z)
Proof. See appendix B.8.
□
Given the above propositions we can prove the nal proposition.
Proposition 7.17 The axiomatic system AXMAµ is sound for MAµ
with respect to the concurrent action structure.
Proof. Follows from propositions 7.6-7.16.
□
7.3.2
Discussing Completeness
The axiomatic system AXMAµ is build from two systems proved to be
complete. However, whether the system is still complete after the adap-
tations is a question we will discuss in this section.
==PAGE:94==
7.3 Axiomatisation of MAµ
86
We will rst consider AXMAµ1. The only dierence between AXMAµ1 and
AXµ is a slight modication of axiom A4 and rule R3; the agent quanti-
er |C| has been added to the action modality [a]. This agent quantier
quanties over some set C ⊆Σ, and so the axiom and rule holds for any
set of agents. It is thus fair to assume that axiom A4 and rule R3 of
AXMAµ1 does not loose any expressibility with respect to AXµ.
Given that AXMAµ1 is a direct translation of the complete system AXµ,
one could think that AXMAµ1 could serve as a complete axiomatisation of
MAµ. However, completeness of AXµ is proved with respect to labelled
transition systems (LTS) and not concurrent action structures (CAS),
and so completeness of AXMAµ1 is not necessarily given. To prove that
AXMAµ1 is also complete with respect to the CAS, one would have to
show that there exists a transformation from a CAS to a LTS so that the
formulas expressible in the CAS are the same as the ones expressible in
the LTS. The question is then, whether such a transformation exists. The
two structures are quite similar; considering the move vectors of the CAS
simply as transitions between states, the only signicant dierence is that
the transitions of CAS contain multi-agent actions while the transitions
of LTS contain single-agent actions. This dierence is however quite sig-
nicant. In order to transform a CAS into a LTS one would have to either
consider interleavings or non-deterministic actions. The transformation
does thus not at rst glance seem like something that would ensure that
the formulas expressible in the CAS are the same as the ones expressible
in the LTS. Furthermore, MAµ is strictly more expressive than modal µ-
calculus, and so that AXMAµ1 is complete for MAµ is thus not certain.
We will now consider AXMAµ2.
Given that AXATL is complete with
respect to the concurrent game structure (CGS) which is similar to the
CAS, one could think that the translation of AXATL, AXMAµ2, is com-
plete for MAµ. However, the adaptation of AXATL into AXMAµ2 is quite
elaborate as the languages of ATL and MAµ dier a lot; the whole notion
of coalitions and collective strategies is not part of MAµ. Furthermore,
one axiom of AXATL is left out of AXMAµ2. This thus indicates that
completeness of AXATL cannot simply be "transferred" to AXMAµ2, and
also that something may be missing in order for AXMAµ2 to be complete
for MAµ. This is what led us to introduce the combination of AXMAµ1
and AXMAµ2.
The combination of the two systems makes the resulting axiomatic sys-
tem AXMAµ more extensive that either of the two, and since AXMAµ is
==PAGE:95==
7.3 Axiomatisation of MAµ
87
sound for MAµ with respect to the concurrent action structure, it seems
reasonable to include all the axioms and rules. Furthermore, there is a
signicant overlap between AXMAµ1 and AXMAµ2, and so this speaks
to the overlapping axioms and rules denitely being part of a complete
axiomatisation of MAµ. However even though the axioms and inference
rules included in AXMAµ seems reasonable, there may still be some ax-
ioms or rules missing in order for AXMAµ to be complete.
Whether or not AXMAµ is complete for MAµ with respect to the con-
current action structure thus remains an open question. Even though
the underlying systems of AXMAµ are complete for modal µ-calculus and
ATL respectively, the completeness is not necessarily transferable; the
structure and the language of MAµ diers too much from the structure
or language of modal µ-calculus and ATL.
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis was to investigate how deadlocks can be mod-
elled using logic of action. To this end, the deadlock problem has been
investigated thoroughly, and multiple logics within logic of action have
been examined.
It has been claried how deadlocks may occur between agents in a multi-
agent system as a result of the agents executing plans and performing
concurrent actions.
Furthermore, dierent characteristics of deadlocks
have been investigated, and their relevance has been discussed. Finally,
deadlocks have been categorised into two types; full and partial.
Four logics within logic of action have been presented, and the ability for
these to model deadlocks have been examined. As none of the logics were
in themselves expressive enough to model deadlocks given the established
denition, a new logic, MAµ, was dened.
MAµ has been dened as an extension of the modal µ-calculus which is
interpreted over a variation of the concurrent game structure; the con-
current action structure. The ability for MAµ to model deadlocks has
been demonstrated and proved. Furthermore, it has been discussed how
the conditions for deadlocks present themselves in the new logic.
Finally, an axiomatic system for MAµ has been developed as a com-
bination of the axiomatic system for modal µ-calculus and the system
for alternating-time temporal logic. The axiomatisation has been proven
sound, and completeness has been discussed in relation to the complete-
ness of the underlying systems.
Considering the above we can conclude that we have successfully modelled
deadlocks using logic of action, and hence that the this thesis has served
its purpose. However, the thesis leaves us with many open questions that
could be investigated in the future.
==PAGE:97==
8.1 Future Work
89
8.1
Future Work
One interesting subject to investigate further is the question of complete-
ness of the axiomatisation of MAµ. The proofs of completeness for the
axiomatisation of modal µ-calculus and ATL are presented in [19] and
[11] respectively, and one might look further into these and see if they
might be modied to serve as a proof of the axiomatic system for MAµ.
Furthermore, it would be interesting to develop algorithms for model
checking formulas of MAµ and investigate the complexities of these.
Another exciting subject is the Coman conditions and their relevance
in regard to deadlocks. Investigating in more depth what happens to a
system when removing the Coman conditions, and how this becomes
apparent in the formulas of MAµ and the concurrent action structure
could shed light on the importance of the conditions.
In particular, designing a system in which preemption is allowed and
modelling this system using MAµ would be interesting. By allowing pre-
emption, the transition function of the concurrent action structure would
suddenly become non-deterministic, and the consequences of this could
be worth investigating.
One could also design a system where no circular wait could occur by
implementing a total ordering on the resources. How and whether MAµ
can then be used to model partial deadlocks could then be investigated.
It would furthermore be worthwhile to examine the ability for MAµ to
model other deadlock related problems such as livelock and starvation.
In order to do so, one would have to determine the specic characteristics
related to these situations.
Finally, as we have in this thesis looked solely into how to express dead-
locks in an already existing model, and not how these models are con-
structed, one could spend some time investigating this construction pro-
cess. That is, one could look into how the agents in a multi-agent system
make their plans, and how these plans are then translated into a usable
model.
==PAGE:98==
Appendix A
Deadlock Proofs
A.1
Proof of Proposition 6.5
Proof. Assume for contradiction that 6.3 holds but s is not a state in
which agents 2 and 4 are deadlocked. Then either agent 2 or agent 4 is
not deadlocked. That would mean that either
1: there exists a move vector v1 = (a1, ..., ak) ∈D(s) such that either
a2 ̸= ϵ or a4 ̸= ϵ, or
2: there exists a path from s to a state s′ in which there exists a move
vector v2 = (a1, ..., ak) ∈D(s′) such that a2 ̸= ϵ or a4 ̸= ϵ.
If case 1 applies then there is some state s′′ such that δ(s, v1) = s′′, and
since ⊥is not true in any state, we have
(A, D, s′′) ⊭⊥
Thus since agent 2 or agent 4 can perform action a ̸= ϵ and end up in s′′,
we have that
(A, D, s) ⊭
^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|2, 4|[a]⊥
and hence by the semantics of ∧also that
(A, D, s) ⊭νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|2, 4|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

We thus have a contradiction.
If case 2 applies then there is some state s′′ such that δ(s′, v2) = s′′, and
since ⊥is not true in any state, we have
(A, D, s′′) ⊭⊥
Thus since agent 2 or agent 4 can perform action a ̸= ϵ and end up in s′′,
we have that
(A, D, s′) ⊭
^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|2, 4|[a]⊥
==PAGE:99==
A.2 Proof of Proposition 6.7
91
Since there is a path from s to s′ we get that
(A, D, s) ⊭νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|2, 4|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

We thus again have a contradiction.
□
A.2
Proof of Proposition 6.7
Proof. Assume for contradiction that 6.5 holds but s is not a state in
which a full deadlock will denitely eventually happen. Then some agent
may never deadlock. That would mean that either
1: the system can go on indenitely and will never reach a state in which
all agents are deadlocked, or
2: there exists a path from s on which for some agent i ∈Σ there will
forever continue to be states in which there exist a move vector v =
(a1, ..., ak) such that ai ̸= ϵ.
If case 1 applies we have instantly by the semantics of µ that
(A, D, s) ⊭µX.

νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

since we can only perform a nite number of transitions before reaching
a state in which all agents are deadlocked. We thus have a contradiction.
If case 2 applies, then we have that there is some state s′ reachable from s
where on any path from any state t reachable from s′ there will eventually
be a state s′′ in which there exists a move vector v = (a1, ..., ak) ∈D(s′′)
such that ai ̸= ϵ. There is thus some state s′′′ such that δ(s′′, v) = s′′′,
and since ⊥is not true in any state, we have
(A, D, s′′′) ⊭⊥
Thus since agent i can perform action a ̸= ϵ from s′′ and end up in s′′′,
we have that
(A, D, s′′) ⊭
^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥
Since there is a path from t to s′′ we get that
(A, D, t) ⊭νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

==PAGE:100==
A.3 Proof of Proposition 6.8
92
for all states t reachable from s′. We will from s′ thus always end up in a
state where νZ.
 V
a∈A\{ϵ} |Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

does not hold, and we thus
have by the semantics of ν that
(A, D, s′) ⊭νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

Since there is a path from s to s′ it is hence possible from s to end up
in a state where νZ.
 V
a∈A\{ϵ} |Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

does not hold. When
considering the recursive call V
a∈A |Σ|[a]X in 6.5 we see that it should
never be possible for any agent to follow a path from s which never leads to
a state satisfying νZ.
 V
a∈A\{ϵ} |Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

. Since this is possible
we have that
(A, D, s) ⊭µX.

νZ.

^
a∈A\{ϵ}
|Σ|[a]⊥∧|Σ|[ϵ]Z

∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

We thus have a contradiction.
□
A.3
Proof of Proposition 6.8
Proof. Assume for contradiction that 6.6 holds but s is not a state in
which there is no risk of deadlock between any agents in the future. Then
there is some agent that may deadlock at some point. That would mean
for some agent i ∈Σ that
1: there exists a path from s to a state s′ such that every move vector
vj = (aj1, ..., ajk) ∈D(s′) has aji = ϵ, and
2: in every state s′′ to which there exists a path from s′, every move
vector vj = (aj1, ..., ajk) ∈D(s′′) has aji = ϵ.
By 1 we have that
(A, D, s′) ⊭
_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|i|⟨a⟩⊤
for agent i since agent i cannot perform any action but ϵ from s′.
By 2 we have for all states s′′ reachable from s′ that
(A, D, s′′) ⊭
_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|i|⟨a⟩⊤
==PAGE:101==
A.3 Proof of Proposition 6.8
93
for agent i since agent i cannot perform any action but ϵ from s′′.
By 1 and 2 we thus have that
(A, D, s′) ⊭µX.

_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|i|⟨a⟩⊤∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

for agent i since from s′ we can never reach a state in which W
a∈A\{ϵ} |i|⟨a⟩⊤
holds. Hence we have by the semantics of ∧that
(A, D, s′) ⊭
^
i∈Σ

µX.

_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|i|⟨a⟩⊤∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

Since there is a path from s to s′ we get that
(A, D, s) ⊭νZ.
 ^
i∈Σ

µX.

_
a∈A\{ϵ}
|i|⟨a⟩⊤∨
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]X

∧
^
a∈A
|Σ|[a]Z

We thus have a contradiction.
□
==PAGE:102==
Appendix B
Soundness Proofs
B.1
Proof of Proposition 7.7
Proof. We take an arbitrary concurrent action structure A, a set of
agents C, an action a and a state s in A.
We need to show that (A, s) |= |C|[a]⊤.
We have two cases.
1: There does not exist any move vectors in D(s) where ai = a for any
agents i ∈C.
2: There exists at least one such move vector.
In case 1 we have immediately by the semantics of |C|[a] that (A, s) |=
|C|[a]⊤.
In case 2 we have that there exists for at least one agent i ∈C some move
vector v = (a1, a2, ..., ak) in D(s) in which ai = a. Furthermore, there
exists a state s′ such that δ(s, v) = s′ and (A, s′) |= ⊤. As ⊤holds in
every state, (A, s) |= |C|[a]⊤holds.
Since A and s were chosen arbitrarily we have |= |C|[a]⊤.
□
B.2
Proof of Proposition 7.8
Proof. We take an arbitrary concurrent action structure A, a set of
agents C, an action a and a state s in A.
We need to show that (A, s) |= |C|[a](φ →ψ) →|C|[a]φ →|C|[a]ψ.
Since
|C|[a](φ →ψ) →|C|[a]φ →|C|[a]ψ ≡|C|[a](φ →ψ) ∧|C|[a]φ →|C|[a]ψ
we can instead show that (A, s) |= (|C|[a](φ →ψ) ∧|C|[a]φ) →|C|[a]ψ.
We have two cases.
==PAGE:103==
B.3 Proof of Proposition 7.9
95
1: (A, s) ⊭|C|[a](φ →ψ) ∧|C|[a]φ.
2: (A, s) |= |C|[a](φ →ψ) ∧|C|[a]φ.
In case 1 we have by the semantics of →that (A, s) |= (|C|[a](φ →
ψ) ∧|C|[a]φ) →|C|[a]ψ.
In case 2 we have by the semantics of ∧that (A, s) |= |C|[a](φ →ψ) and
(A, s) |= |C|[a]φ. We then have by the semantics of |C|[a] that for all
agents i ∈C it is the case that for all move vectors v = (a1, a2, ..., ak)
in D(s) in which ai = a there exists a state s′ such that δ(s, v) = s′ and
(A, s′) |= φ and (A, s′) |= (φ →ψ). By the semantics of →we have
that (A, s′) |= ψ. Thus, by the semantics of |C|[a] we have that (A, s) |=
|C|[a]ψ, and hence that (A, s) |= (|C|[a](φ →ψ) ∧|C|[a]φ) →|C|[a]ψ.
Since A and s were chosen arbitrarily we have |= |C|[a](φ →ψ) →
|C|[a]φ →|C|[a]ψ.
□
B.3
Proof of Proposition 7.9
Proof. We take an arbitrary concurrent action structure A, a set of
agents C, an action a and a state s in A.
We need to show that (A, s) |= ¬|C|[a]¬φ →W
i∈C |i|⟨a⟩φ.
We have two cases.
1: (A, s) ⊭¬|C|[a]¬φ.
2: (A, s) |= ¬|C|[a]¬φ.
In case 1 we have by the semantics of →that (A, s) |= ¬|C|[a]¬φ →
W
i∈C |i|⟨a⟩φ.
In case 2 we have that (A, s) ⊭|C|[a]¬φ.
By the semantics of |C|[a]
we hence have that for at least one agent i ∈C there exist at least
one move vector v = (a1, a2, ..., ak) in D(s) in which ai = a, for which
δ(s, v) = s′ and (A, s′) |= φ. By the semantics of |C|⟨a⟩we thus have
that (A, s) |= |i|⟨a⟩φ.
As i is just some arbitrary agent in C and by
the semantics of ∨, we get (A, s) |= W
i∈C |i|⟨a⟩φ, and hence, (A, s) |=
¬|C|[a]¬φ →W
i∈C |i|⟨a⟩φ.
Since A and s were chosen arbitrarily we have |= ¬|C|[a]¬φ →W
i∈C |i|⟨a⟩φ.
.
□
==PAGE:104==
B.4 Proof of Proposition 7.10
96
B.4
Proof of Proposition 7.10
Proof. We take an arbitrary concurrent action structure A and a state
s in A.
We need to show that (A, s) |= φ(µX.φ(X)) →µX.φ(X).
We have two cases.
1: (A, s) ⊭φ(µX.φ(X)).
2: (A, s) |= φ(µX.φ(X)).
If case 1 applies we have by the semantics of →that (A, s) |= φ(µX.φ(X)) →
µX.φ(X).
If case 2 applies we have that (A, s) |= φ and there is some v ∈D(s)
so that δ(s, v) = s′ and (A, s′) |= φ.
Furthermore, from s′ one can
make an arbitrary but nite number of transitions so that in all the
states passed, φ will hold, and at some point we will reach a state in
which some base formula ψ of φ holds.
Hence, (A, s′) |= µX.φ(X).
Thus from s we can make 1 plus an arbitrary but nite number of
transitions before reaching the state in which ψ holds. Since an arbi-
trary but nite number plus 1 is still an arbitrary but nite number, we
have by the semantics of µ that (A, s) |= µX.φ(X). We thus have that
(A, s) |= φ(µX.φ(X)) →µX.φ(X).
Since A and s were chosen arbitrarily, we have that |= φ(µX.φ(X)) →
µX.φ(X).
□
B.5
Proof of Proposition 7.12
Proof. We take an arbitrary concurrent action structure A such that
A |= φ →ψ (if A ⊭φ →ψ the proposition is true since it is an implica-
tion).
We need to show that A |= |C|[a]φ →|C|[a]ψ.
Since A |= φ →ψ we have for all s ∈S that (A, s) |= φ →ψ.
We now x an arbitrary state s and show that (A, s) |= |C|[a]φ →|C|[a]ψ.
If (A, s) ⊭|C|[a]φ then (A, s) |= |C|[a]φ →|C|[a]ψ holds by the semantics
of →.
If (A, s) |= |C|[a]φ then by the semantics of |C|[a] we have that for all
agents i ∈C it is the case that for all move vectors v = (a1, a2, ..., ak)
==PAGE:105==
B.6 Proof of Proposition 7.13
97
in D(s) in which ai = a there exists a state s′ such that δ(s, v) = s′ and
(A, s′) |= φ. As we know that (A, s′) |= φ →ψ, we have that (A, s′) |= ψ
by the semantics of →. Thus, by the semantics of |C|[a] we have that
(A, s) |= |C|[a]ψ and hence that (A, s) |= |C|[a]φ →|C|[a]ψ.
Since A and s were chosen arbitrarily we have that if A |= φ →ψ then
A |= |C|[a]φ →|C|[a]ψ.
□
B.6
Proof of Proposition 7.13
Proof. We take an arbitrary concurrent action structure A such that
A |= φ (if A ⊭φ the proposition is true since it is an implication).
We need to show that A |= |C|[a]φ.
Since A |= φ we have for all s ∈S that (A, s) |= φ.
It thus follows
trivially from the semantics of |C|[a] that (A, s) |= |C|[a]φ for all states
s ∈S.
Since A was chosen arbitrarily we have that if A |= φ then A |= |C|[a]φ.
.
□
B.7
Proof of Proposition 7.14
Proof. We take an arbitrary concurrent action structure A such that
A |= φ (if A ⊭φ the proposition is true since it is an implication).
We need to show that A |= νZ.φ(Z).
Since A |= φ we have for all s ∈S that (A, s) |= φ.
We now x an arbitrary state s and show that (A, s) |= νZ.φ(Z).
By the semantics of ν the formula νZ.φ(Z) holds in a state s if one can
make a possibly innite number of transitions from s, and in all the states
passed, the formula φ will be true. As φ is true in every state in the model,
this holds for the state s, and we thus have that (A, s) |= νZ.φ(Z).
Since A and s were chosen arbitrarily we have that if A |= φ then A |=
νZ.φ(Z).
□
==PAGE:106==
B.8 Proof of Proposition 7.16
98
B.8
Proof of Proposition 7.16
Proof. We take an arbitrary concurrent action structure A such that
A |= ψ →φ(ψ) (if A ⊭ψ →φ(ψ) the proposition is true since it is an
implication).
We need to show that A |= ψ →νZ.φ(Z).
Since A |= ψ →φ(ψ) we have for all s ∈S that (A, s) |= ψ →φ(ψ).
We now x an arbitrary state s and show that (A, s) |= ψ →νZ.φ(Z).
If (A, s) ⊭ψ then (A, s) |= ψ →νZ.φ(Z) holds by the semantics of →.
If (A, s) |= ψ then given that (A, s) |= ψ →φ(ψ) we get by the semantics
of →that (A, s) |= φ(ψ). This means that (A, s) |= φ and after per-
forming some transition, ψ holds. Thus there exists a state s′ such that
δ(s, v) = s′ for some v ∈D(s) and (A, s′) |= ψ. The same argument as
above now applies, and this cascades possibly ad innitum. Hence we get
that in s, φ holds and we can make a possibly innite number of transi-
tions so that φ holds in every state we pass through. We thus get that
(A, s) |= νZ.φ(Z), and hence that (A, s) |= ψ →νZ.φ(Z).
Since A and s were chosen arbitrarily we have that if A |= ψ →φ(ψ)
then A |= ψ →νZ.φ(Z).
□
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[1] Sensei's
library:
Ko.
https://senseis.xmp.net/?Ko#:~:
text=Ko%20is%20a%20Japanese%20go,ko%20rule%20resolves%
20the%20situation. Accessed: 21-05-2021.
[2] Oxford english dictionary.
https://www.lexico.com/.
Accessed:
29-06-2021.
[3] Logic of action (sep).
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/
logic-action, . Accessed: 30-04-2021.
[4] Temporal logic (sep).
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/
logic-temporal, . Accessed: 06-05-2021.
[5] R. Alur, T. A. Henzinger, and O. Kupferman. Alternating-time tem-
poral logic. J. ACM, 49(5):672713, Sept. 2002.
[6] G. R. Andrews.
Foundations of Multithreaded, Parallel, and Dis-
tributed Programming. 1st edition, 1999.
[7] J. Bradeld and C. Stirling. Modal mu-calculi. In Handbook of Modal
Logic, volume 3, pages 721756. 2007.
[8] E. M. Clarke and E. A. Emerson. Design and synthesis of synchro-
nization skeletons using branching-time temporal logic. In Logic of
Programs, Workshop, page 5271, 1981.
[9] E. G. Coman, M. Elphick, and A. Shoshani. System deadlocks.
ACM Comput. Surv., 3(2):6778, June 1971.
==PAGE:108==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
100
[10] D. Duhaut, E. Carrillo, and S. Saint-Aimé. Avoiding deadlock in
multi-agent systems. International Conference on Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, pages 16421647, Oct. 2007.
[11] V. Goranko and G. van Drimmelen. Complete axiomatization and
decidability of alternating-time temporal logic. Theor. Comput. Sci.,
353(1):93117, Mar. 2006.
[12] M. Hennessy and R. Milner. On observing nondeterminism and con-
currency. In Proceedings of the 7th Colloquium on Automata, Lan-
guages and Programming, page 299309, 1980.
[13] C. A. R. Hoare.
Communicating sequential processes.
Commun.
ACM, 21(8):666677, Aug. 1978.
[14] D. Kozen. Results on the propositional µ-calculus. In Proceedings
of the 9th Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming,
page 348359, 1982.
[15] B. Parasumanna Gokulan and D. Srinivasan.
An Introduction to
Multi-Agent Systems, volume 310, pages 127. july 2010.
[16] S. J. Russell and P. Norvig. Articial Intelligence: A Modern Ap-
proach. 3rd edition, 2009.
[17] A. Silberschatz, P. B. Galvin, and G. Gagne. Operating System Con-
cepts. 7th edition, 2008.
[18] A. S. Tanenbaum. Modern Operating Systems. 3rd edition, 2008.
[19] I. Walukiewicz. Completeness of kozen's axiomatisation of the propo-
sitional µ-calculus. Inf. Comput., 157(12):142182, Feb. 2000.
[20] M. Weerdt and B. Clement. Introduction to planning in multiagent
systems. Multiagent and Grid Systems, 5:345355, Dec. 2009.
