==PAGE:1==
Green Microalgae Cultivation on Resource 
Residuals for Daphnia Production 
Stanley Arthur Gorzelnik 
Academic Supervisors: 
Assistant Professor Borja Valverde Pérez 
Department of Environmental Engineering 
Associate Professor Marja Koski 
National Institute of Aquatic Resources  
Professor Irini Angelidaki 
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering 
Postdoctoral Researcher Xinyu Zhu 
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering 
Submitted: 
June 30, 2021 
Master’s Thesis
==PAGE:2==
0.0 Abstract 
Conventional wastewater treatment has a difficult time removing inorganic constituents, particularly 
nitrogen and phosphorus which are primarily responsible for eutrophication. These two elements are also 
valuable resources. Microalgae assimilates these elements into its biomass and can create valuable 
products however is difficult to separate from water. Daphnia magna are efficient filter feeders and graze 
on microalgae at high rates.  Daphnia magna are also high value fish feed. This study evaluated cleaning 
aquaculture wastewater using two microalgae strains, Chlorella vulgaris and Scenedesmus dimorphus 
then biologically harvesting them. It also investigated the effects of solids residence time (equal to 
hydraulic residence time) and the nitrogen to phosphorus ratio on the water treatment process. 
Biochemical profiles for the microalgae strains and D. magna were developed. High wastewater nutrient 
transfer efficiencies were observed through both steps in the process. All phosphorus was recovered, and 
50-70% of nitrogen was recovered. Chlorella vulgaris was out competed by predators native to
aquaculture wastewater when the HRT was lowered or the wastewater was phosphorus dosed. Biomass
normalized nitrogen uptake rates ranged from 1.03x10-3 to 7.46x10-3 mg-P/mg-algaedry weight for
phosphorus and 1.76x10-2 to 3.24x10-3 mg-N/mg-algaedry weight for nitrogen. Aquaculture wastewater was
phosphorus limited and missing a key trace element or micronutrient. Shortening HRT increased nitrogen
removal as did phosphorus dosing. Algae culture densities were about 460 mgdry weight/L. Microalgae total
protein content was 19-24% with high arginine proportions. Daphnia magna total protein content was 20-
30% with no remarkable amino acid trends.
2
==PAGE:3==
0.1 Graphical Abstract 
Figure 1: Biocircular economy concept. Fish release nutrients assimilated into microalgae filtered from the water by D. magna, 
which are then fed to fish restarting the cycle producing a high value product from resource residuals while cleaning water. 
Figure 2: Experimental summary. Prior to the thesis, three microalgae species were screened for growth on pretreated 
aquaculture wastewater: Chlorella vulgaris, Scenedesmus dimorphus, and Haematococcus pluvialis.  Once screened for growth, 
these species were cultured in batch reactors to gauge nutrient removal. For the thesis, operating stability was investigated in 
continuous photobioreactors. Then, biological harvesting suitability of the microalgae strains was investigated using Daphnia 
magna.  
3
==PAGE:4==
1.0 Introduction 
Modern food production relies on the availability of finite resources such as water, nutrients, and land, 
which are currently degraded faster than their regeneration rates 1. Additionally, the global population is 
expected to reach 10 billion by 2050, from its current 7 billion2.  Increases in population have continued to 
pressure traditional agricultural methods. To meet food security as well as supply goals the Food and 
Agricultural Organization of the United Nations projects that total food production will need to increase by 
more than 70%3. However, food production capabilities are projected to be negatively impacted by 
pollinator decline, arable land degradation, pollution, climate change, as well as genetic and biodiversity 
losses4,5. The food supply urgently needs more efficient and sustainable production techniques and 
management methods.   
Fish and aquatic animals are critical to providing high quality protein and micronutrients to large parts of 
the world. The demand for fish is increasing as well; in 1960 only 9.9 kilograms of fish were consumed per 
person annually, while in 2010 annual fish consumption was 19.2 kilograms per person6.  Today, fish are 
the only important food source where the majority is still harvested in the wild rather than grown or raised7. 
Wild fish capture has remained stable however, and 60% of global fish stocks are fully exploited8.  The 
only means available to meet the increasing demand for fish and aquatic products is aquaculture9.  
Aquaculture is also the fastest growing food production sector and in 2018 was estimated to supply 82 
million tons of the 179 million tons of global fish production, with a $250 billion value10. Global farmed 
fish production now exceeds global beef production7. Considering the major contribution of aquaculture to 
global food security, it is important to make the industry as sustainable as possible.  
The primary direct environmental impact of aquaculture is the release of nutrient loaded effluent to 
receiving waters, particularly phosphorus and nitrogen loads which contribute to anthropogenic 
eutrophication. The excessive nutrient loads, particularly phosphorous in freshwater and nitrogen in 
maritime waters, can trigger algae blooms. In nature, these algae blooms can be toxic, like cyanobacteria. 
However, the more devastating effect of algae comes from its circadian respiration cycle.  During the night, 
algae consume oxygen potentially limiting oxygen availability for higher trophic levels to respire. Once the 
algae die and settle, bacteria degrading their biomass consume oxygen near the sediments turning water 
anoxic and releasing more phosphorus previously bound in the sediment through microbial mobilization 
processes. The released phosphorus can trigger further algae blooms, forming a positive feedback loop 
where algae die, degrade, consume oxygen, and release more phosphorus triggering additional algal growth. 
Algae blooms also reduce light penetration preventing aquatic macrophytes from growing. In addition to 
removing dissolved oxygen at night, removing macrophytes leaves fewer fish and potentially reduces the 
number of fish species. As biochemical flows are the limiting step in global food supply5 but can be 
environmentally harmful it seems natural to link the solutions to these problems. 
Traditional wastewater treatment is very effective at removing organics, but has difficulties dealing with 
inorganic nutrients such as phosphate, nitrate, nitrite, and ammonia11.  Small-scale systems, such as 
aquaculture, have even fewer options in meeting discharge guidelines12,13, particularly in higher latitudes 
where nutrient removal is impacted by temperature12,14,15.  Finally, nitrogen and phosphorus are valuable 
resources16.  Emphasizing the potential value in recovering nitrogen and phosphorus shifts the focus from 
regulatory driven pollution abatement to trying to extract the maximum value from an available opportunity.  
The problem then shifts from how to economically remove waste products (and spending money in the 
process) to how best to optimize resource extraction (therefore making money); meeting sanitation 
guidelines becomes a byproduct of the resource recovery process. 
4
==PAGE:5==
Resource recovery using microalgae is a promising potential approach. Eukaryotic microalgae are 
photoautotrophic organisms that can grow in a wide range of climates and assimilate nitrogen and 
phosphorus into their biomass. Microalgae use nitrogen for protein synthesis and phosphorus for nucleic 
acids and phospholipids17. Using microalgae to treat wastewater uses natural growth processes to remove 
dissolved inorganic nutrients.  As autotrophs, microalgae also fix dissolved carbon dioxide into their 
biomass providing a small climate benefit. Microalgae have the potential to treat wastewater to lower 
nutrient levels than current treatment processes11,12,18–20. Additionally, there are drawbacks associated with 
traditional wastewater nutrient removal. The most used phosphorus removal systems are based on 
precipitation with metal salts which can require pH adjustment and creates sludge issues12. Microalgae can 
preclude sludge production and other issues with less common phosphorus removal technologies. 
Traditional nitrogen removal relies on converting soluble nitrogen into nitrogen gas however, nitrous oxide, 
a major greenhouse gas,21 can also be released22. By incorporating nitrogen into biomass microalgae only 
require one treatment stage which requires less energy and avoid some nitrous oxide release23. Additionally, 
while nitrifyingi filters are well-established in recirculated aquaculture, denitrifying filters are relatively 
new24. Denitrifyingii filters also lose nitrogen to air, fixing nitrogen back from the air accounts for 1.4% of 
world carbon dioxide emissions and consumes 1% of total energy production25 it may be more sustainable 
to extract the nitrogen from microalgae. 
The key disadvantage of using microalgae to treat wastewater is harvesting the microalgae from the 
wastewater26. Growing and releasing microalgae without harvesting accelerates eutrophication. Traditional 
harvesting practices have significant drawbacks particularly cost and resource consumption (either as 
energy or chemical flocculants) which compromise the sustainability and feasibility of the microalgae value 
chain27. Biological harvesting systems have been studied and used to varying success in natural water bodies 
to alleviate eutrophication symptoms28–31. This technique is known as bio-manipulation. The premise is that 
cladoceraniii zooplankton graze on algae31. Fish and larvae consume zooplankton lending a natural way to 
recover and cycle nutrients up through trophic levels. Zooplankton fed with algae grown on synthetic media 
as live fish feed are also currently viable products; D. magna in particular have had extensive economic 
analysis based on this linear production model32–34. Aquaculture presents a way this linear production model 
could be turned into a circular one. Fish are fed and then excrete waste products, which can be used to grow 
algae, which is then fed to zooplankton, and then fed back to fish restarting the cycle. Linking aquaculture 
wastewater treatment to high value fish feed production then presents a natural way to recover nutrients 
and promote a circular bioeconomy. Little work has been done on this circular model of using residual 
grown algae to raise live fish feed. 
This thesis attempts to promote a sustainable future in the fastest growing food production sector by: 1) 
studying the factors governing microalgae growth, nutrient recovery, and biochemical composition in 
continuously operated photobioreactors as an end-of-pipe or post biofilter treatment for aquaculture 
effluents; and 2) determine the viability and obstacles of biological microalgae harvesting methods for 
microalgae grown on residual nutrients. This thesis built on a research course where three microalgae 
strains: Chlorella vulgaris, Scenedesmus dimorphus, and Haematococcus pluvialis were screened for 
growth and biomass productivity on aquaculture biofilter effluent using a microplate method. That research 
course also assessed two of the strains for nutrient removal using batch reactors.  This thesis includes 
assessing nutrient removal one strain using batch reactors. A more thorough description of that research 
course as well as detailed data is given in the supplementary information. Key insights from the course used 
 
i Biological oxidation of ammonia to nitrite and then nitrite to nitrate 
ii Biological oxidation of nitrate to nitrogen gas 
iii Cladoceran are a crustacean order, commonly called “water fleas,” with a global footprint 
5
==PAGE:6==
in this thesis were maximum exponential growth rates on the wastewater for each algae species, diatom 
growth in the wastewater, rapid complete phosphorus removal, approximately 76±9% nitrogen removal 
independent of microalgae species, and a hypothesized missing micronutrient or trace element. This thesis 
uses that foundation and assesses a laboratory scale continuous process which could build to a full-scale 
process, explores two optimization strategies for that process, explores microalgae feed product viability, 
and examines a novel industrial harvesting mechanism. 
 
2.0 Methods  
Previously completed preliminary tests established relevant operating conditions such as duration of 
exponential growth. Duration of exponential growth was used as a starting point for set solids retention 
time. These investigations are detailed in supplementary information. A monitoring schedule is included at 
the end of this section in Table 4. 
 
2.1 Photobioreactors and treatments 
The aquaculture water came from the Løjstrup Dambrug smolt station, a recirculated aquaculture system 
producing Oncorhynchus mykissiv at a 15-50 kg/m3 packing density and 95% water recycle rate. Water from 
was collected after passing both the drum and biofilters. After collection, the water was mixed for 
homogenization then kept under darkness at 4°C until use. The wastewater soluble inorganic nitrogen to 
phosphorus ratio on a mass basis (N:P) was 16.29:0.53 (≈30.73:1), specific constituents are characterized 
in Table 1, and its pH was 7.30.  Chlorella vulgaris (K-1801) from the Norwegian Culture Collection of 
Algae was grown on BG-11 media35 and S. dimorphus isolated at Pir Mehr Ali Shah Arid Agriculture 
University was grown on MWC media36 to activate them. Once growing exponentially (activation), 
C. vulgaris and S. dimorphus were cultured on aquaculture biofilter effluent in 1L continuously operated 
glass photobioreactors bottom aerated with 20L/hour of atmospheric air. A breathable membrane was put 
overtop the photobioreactors to lessen cross contamination potential. The reactors were covered in a black 
shroud to shield ambient light and a mercury halide quartz bulb (OSRAM, Germany) continuously supplied 
800 ± 200 μmol/(m2*s) photosynthetically active photon flux density (PPFD). The photobioreactors were 
kept in a temperature-controlled room and the water in the photobioreactor varied between 20-24°C during 
experimental duration. Photobioreactor hydraulic retention times (HRT), which are equivalent to solids 
retention times in this system, were developed from duration of exponential growth and nutrient removal 
in batch reactors. The HRT was controlled at two intervals: 5 and 3 days. Flowrates were continuously 
verified using the drawdown in photobioreactor influent. After running the photobioreactors for 34 days 
they were sterilized with sulfuric acid and bleach. Then the reactors were then reset from stock solutions 
and the influent N:P was regulated with potassium phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) to 16.86:2.16 
(≈7.75:1).  The N:P ratio was modulated to more closely match previously suggested species-specific N:P 
ratios: 6.77-18.97 for C. vulgaris and 3.16-14.45 for S. dimorphus37,38 to see the effects on nutrient removal, 
reactor stability, and biomass quality. This is summarized in Figure 3. The reactors were the sterilized, reset 
from stock solutions, and run at HRT3.  
This forms treatments, HRT5, HRT5 with phosphorus dosing (HRT5 p), and HRT3. Between each 
treatment photobioreactors were sterilized with sulfuric acid and bleach. Additional details on flow rates, 
laboratory organism handling, and media preparation are given in the supplementary information. 
 
iv Commonly known as “rainbow trout” in English or Regnbueørred in Danish 
6
==PAGE:7==
Microplate and batch reactor screening suggested that a key trace element or micronutrient was missing 
from the wastewater as successively seeded microplates and batch reactors displayed lowered exponential 
growth rates. At the end of the HRT5 with phosphorus dosing experiment, micronutrients and trace 
elements made from Sigma-Aldrich stocks were added into the photobioreactor as well as influent 
wastewater in the concentrations and volumes listed in Table 2 to test this. Micronutrients and trace 
elements listed in standard media35,36,39 were used as the key point was not to isolate the specific 
micronutrient or trace element missing but to show that one was. 
Table 1: Aquaculture Effluent Characteristics. The aquaculture effluent characteristics and the phosphorus dosed aquaculture 
effluent characteristics. Some samples were diluted changing the detection limits.  Non-detects in diluted samples were excluded. 
 
*This is taken as nitrate. 
 
Figure 3: Photobioreactors. (a) Image of the experimental set up, and (b) simplified graphical representation of experimental set 
up. Three total treatments were tested: HRT5, HRT5 p, and HRT3. The 1L glass photobioreactors were operated in continuous 800 
± 200 μmol/(m2*s) light with 20 L/hour bottom aeration supplied in a 20-24°C temperature-controlled room. 
(a) 
(b) 
7
==PAGE:8==
Table 2: Micronutrients and Trace Elements. Volume listed is the volume added to the photobioreactor which was the same 
amount as was added to the wastewater reservoirs feeding the photobioreactors. 
 
 
2.2 Daphnia magna cultivation 
To understand the suitability of D. magna as a biological harvesting agent, D. magna were fed for 14 days 
from each of the photobioreactor operating conditions as well as a control algae grown on media. Female 
reproduction and juvenile growth were response measurements. For each microalgae species, three 1L and 
three ½L beakers mimicking batch reactors were filled with Elendt M7 media40. One 350 mL beaker was 
filled with the wastewater. Size exclusion allowed 100 D. magna neonates under 24 hours old to be counted 
and placed in each of the nine beakers containing 1L media. Five adult D. magna, defined as carrying eggs, 
were counted and placed in each of the nine beakers containing 500 mL media. An adult and neonate 
consortium were placed in the 350 mL beaker. The beakers were run for 14 days except for the 350 mL 
wastewater beaker, which was run for 129 days. The length and weight of D. magna used for seeding are 
summarized in Table 3.  The cultures were kept in a temperature controlled room with a light:dark cycle of 
16:8 h using a light shield and a cool white emitting diode lights at 6,500 luxv with 19±2°C water 
temperature. The stock cultures and control group were fed with Raphidocelis subcapitata (formerly known 
as Selenastrum capricornutum and Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata) grown following ISO 6341 
procedures39. The other groups were fed with the microalgae grown in the photobioreactors after three 
HRTs (15 and 9 days) passed to allow the photobioreactors to stabilize.  Correlations were developed for 
each algal species and experimental condition between total suspended solids (TSS) and optical density 
measured at 670 nm (OD670). These correlations were used to calculate the volume of photobioreactor water 
needed to feed the daphnids a target 0.6 mg-C/L back calculated based on the Redfield ratio41 and are given 
in the supplementary information. If the microalgae fed to the daphnids was not completely consumed, 
based on visual observation, in two of three batch reactors in the experimental group, feeding would be 
skipped until that criterion was met. The experimental set up is depicted in Figure 4. Feed schedules are 
given in the supplementary information. 
 
v 75-80 μmol/(m2*s) PPFD 
Substance
Conc [mg/L] Volume [mL]
MgCl2·6H2O
12.0
0.5
CaCl·2H2O
18.0
0.5
MgSO4·7H2O
15.0
0.5
FeCl3·6H2O
0.128
2.5
Na2EDTA(C10H16N2O8)·2H2O
0.200
2.5
H3BO3
0.185
0.5
MnCl2·4H2O
0.415
0.5
ZnCl2
0.003
0.5
CoCl2·6H2O
0.0015
0.5
CuCl2·2H2O
0.00001
0.5
Na2MoO4·2H2O
0.007
0.5
8
==PAGE:9==
Table 3. Laboratory D. magna characteristics. The laboratory D. magna used to seed each experiment were measured prior to 
use. 
 
 
Figure 4: D. magna biological harvesting set up.  C. vulgaris and S. dimorphus are represented by green and yellow respectively. 
The 350 mL wastewater beaker was kept separately. 
2.3 Analytical Methods 
The weekly, as well as the pre- and post-experimental period, sampling schedules are shown in the 
supplementary information. Prior to sampling, the photobioreactors were mixed for 5-10 minutes to 
homogenize them using hand supplied air. TSS was measured according to APHA Standard 2450D42 on 
Advantec filters (Japan) with 0.3 μm pore size. Optical Density (OD) and in vivo fluorescence (IVF) were 
both measured on a 24-well Costar Multiple Well Plate (Corning, USA) in triplicate in a Synergy™ Mx 
Monochromator-Based Multi-Mode Microplate Reader from BioTek Instruments, Inc (USA). Nutrient 
samples were taken from the TSS measurement filtrate and then re-filtered through 0.2 μm pore filters. 
These samples were analyzed once weekly and kept frozen under darkness at -20°C until being analyzed. 
The nutrient samples were measured using segmented flow analysis on a San++ Automated Wet Chemistry 
Analyzer with RØZ series 1052 autosampler from Skalar Analytical B.V (the Netherlands). Microalgae and 
D. magna nutrient quotas were determined by the difference between influent and effluent concentrations 
adjusted for evaporation. Luminosity reported in lux was measured using a Uni-T UT383 luxmeter (China). 
Neonates Adults Neonates Adults
Mean
1.21
2.97
18.62
221.55
Median
1.18
2.97
18.62
221.55
Standard 
Deviation
0.18
0.48
0.35
12.94
Minimum
0.90
1.90
18.37
212.40
Maximum
1.77
4.48
18.87
230.70
Range
0.87
2.59
0.50
18.30
Kurtosis
1.11
0.67
NA
NA
Skewness
1.07
0.22
NA
NA
n
82
98
2
2
Lengths [mm]
Weights [μg]
9
==PAGE:10==
Luminosity reported in photomoles was measured using a LI-COR LI-189 photometer (USA). All 
luminosity measurements were taken at the water surface. pH and temperature were measured in situ using 
a Hach HQ40D Portable Multimeter (USA).  The multimeter probes were cleaned with rodalon between 
reactors to minimize cross contamination. D. magna weights were determined in duplicate by washing 150 
adults and 300 neonates under 24 hours old in deionized water then following the TSS procedure42 except 
dividing by the individuals instead of volume. 
Microalgae were imaged with a Zeiss Axioskop microscope (Germany) with Leica DFC320 camera 
(Germany). Image-Pro Plus version 7.0.1.658 by Cybermetrics Inc. (USA) was used for measuring. All 
measurements were made from the outside edge of the cell wall. Cells where the outer cell wall edges were 
indiscernible were skipped.  Cells undergoing mitosis were not measured. Cells in clusters were measured 
individually.  C. vulgaris is shaped like a prolate ellipsoid approximately spherical, so the widest diameter 
was measured. S. dimorphus was measured from tip to tip lengthwise and at the widest width. Examples 
are given in Figure 5Error! Reference source not found..  
 
(a)                                                     (b)                                                         (c) 
Figure 5: Example Cell Measurements. Example measurements of (a) C. vulgaris diameter (b) S. dimorphus length (c) and S. 
dimorphus width. All measurements are in micrometers. 
D. magna were imaged using a Leica MZ6 microscope (Germany) equipped with a QImaging Go-5 camera 
(UK) and measured using QCapture Pro software version 6.0.0.605 (UK). Measurements were taken from 
the center of the eye to the base of the tail43.  Figure 6 shows some example measurements.  Thirty to fifty 
neonates and adults were measured prior to each experiment and thirty to fifty adults per beaker that had 
been seeded with neonates were measured at the end of each experiment. All D. magna were counted at the 
end of each experiment. 
 
Figure 6: D. magna measurement examples. Representative adult D. magna measurement examples. 
Microalgae and D. magna harvested biomass was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 minutes. Microalgae 
supernatant was discarded.  D. magna were still swimming and not pelleted after that cycle, so their 
10
==PAGE:11==
supernatant was preserved to prevent biomass loss. Samples were then frozen at -20°C until analysis. Next, 
samples were frozen at -40°C overnight and lyophilized. Then the biomass was hydrolyzed with microwave 
assistance. In short, 10-15 mg of biomass were covered with 300 μL of 6N HCl, flushed with argon, and 
heated to 130°C at 5°C/min then held there for 30 minutes in a microwave (3000 SOLV, Anton-Paar, USA). 
Evaporated HCl was replaced. Once cooled, the hydrolyzed samples were then analyzed using liquid 
chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS, 1290 Infinity II 6470 QQQ, Agilent 
Technologies). An InfinityLab Poroshell 120 HILIC-Z (100 mm × 2.1 mm, 2.7 μm, Agilent Technologies) 
column had mobile phases of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 3.0) ultra-pure water as the first elutant and 
20 mM ammonium formate (pH 3.0) acetonitrile as the second elutant. The first eluent was increased from 
0 to 30% in 10 minutes with a column flow speed of 0.8 mL/min and a column temperature of 30°C. The 
tandem mass spectrometer had a gas flow of 7.0 L/min, 300°C temperature, sheath gas flow of and 11 
L/min, and 400°C temperature. A positive electrospray ionization, nebulizer at 45 psi operated with 
dynamic multiple reaction monitoring was employed. Sigma-Aldrich (Germany) calibration and quality 
control standards were used. Total protein was calculated by adding the individual amino acids then 
dividing by the biomass. 
Algae and D. magna harvested biomass was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 minutes. Algae supernatant was 
discarded. D. magna were still swimming and not pelleted after that cycle, so their supernatant was 
preserved to prevent biomass loss. Samples were then frozen at -20°C until analysis. Next, samples were 
frozen at -40°C overnight and were vacuum lyophilized. Lipids were measured as fatty acid methyl esters 
by in situ transesterification44.  Ten to fifteen mg of lyophilized biomass was submerged in 200 μL of a 2:1 
mixture of chloroform to methanol (vol:vol).  Next, 300 μL of 0.6M HCl and methanol solution was added, 
then internal standards (C8-24 except 13, Methyl-Docosapentaenoic acid, and Methyl-Docosahexaenoic 
acid) from Sigma Aldrich were added. Samples were incubated for 1 hour at 85°C for 1 hour and cooled 
for 15 minutes before adding 100 mL n-Hexane and analyzed on a GS-MS. Chromatographic separation 
occurred on a 30 m x 0.250 mm I.D. x 0.25 µm film thickness DB-225MS capillary column (Agilent 
Technologies). A 1 µl sample was injected in 10:1 split mode at 270°C. The initial column temperature was 
set to 80°C for 5 min and heated at 3°C/min to 240°C. The total run time was 58 minutes using 1.0 mL/min 
Helium as a carrier gas. The detector was an Agilent 5975C electron impact (70 eV) triple-axis mass-
selective detector (USA). The mass-selective detector temperatures were 230°C for the EI source and 150°C 
for the quadrupole with the transfer line held at 250°C. The spectra were observed in selected ion 
monitoring mode.  
 
2.7 Calculations 
Population differences were tested using Tukey-Kramer honest statistical difference tests (Tukey-Kramer 
HSD) at α = 0.05. Tukey-Kramer HSD is a conservative metric when sample sizes are unequal and corrects 
family error rates for multiple hypothesis tests. The aspect ratio for S. dimorphus is the cell length divided 
by the width. D. magna weight has been established as linearly correlated with length43. Likewise, D. magna 
grow exponentially until reproduction. Uptake rates were calculated by taking the influent photobio- or 
batch reactor concentration and subtracting the effluent or ending concentrations. Uptake rates were 
normalized by dividing through by biomass when known. The photobioreactor mass balance was developed 
by using the concentration difference across the reactor for the time examined.  The batch reactor mass 
balance was developed by taking the initial mass in the reactor, adding the soluble nutrients, and using the 
Redfield ratio41 as an estimation on the nutrients in the algae based on the actual TSS measured from that 
feed day. This corrects for observed divergences between OD670 and TSS. Using the Redfield ratio provides 
an approximation because the biochemical composition is unknown and changes through the experiment45. 
11
==PAGE:12==
For instance, it is reported that microalgae phosphorus content can vary from 0.03% to 3% of dry biomass 
and nitrogen between 3% and 12%46. Without performing total nitrogen and total phosphorus analysis this 
was a compromise.  
Daphnia magna specific growth rates were using the equation below. In short, a regression between length 
and weight was created. Then the D. magna were assumed to grow exponentially until reproduction. After 
reproduction it was assumed that energy no longer went to growth.  
𝜇D = ln(W)
t
 
Where μD is the D. magna specific growth rate, W is the total weight calculated from the length regression, 
and t is time until first brood. The weight was based on the final beaker counts where there were assumed 
to be 100 adults with measured length and the rest neonates. The initial starting weight of 100 neonates was 
subtracted from the end weight as that weight was seeded in and not grown.  This will underestimate the 
specific growth rate because at the end there is likely to be over 100 adults. 
Table 4: Monitoring Schedule. The weekly monitoring schedule used during different experimental phases. While 
photobioreactors are listed being monitored on alternate days during stabilization they were monitored daily during stablization for 
the first series of experiments.  
 
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
Influent
Photobioreactors
NH4, NO2, NO3, 
PO4, TSS, OD670, 
IVF670,440
NH4, NO2, NO3, 
PO4, TSS, OD670, 
IVF670,440
NH4, NO2, NO3, 
PO4, TSS, OD670, 
IVF670,440
NH4, NO2, NO3, 
PO4, TSS, OD670, 
IVF670,440, 
morphology, cell 
size, pH, 
temperature
Influent
Photobioreactors
NH4, NO2, NO3, 
PO4, TSS, OD670, 
IVF670,440
NH4, NO2, NO3, 
PO4, TSS, OD670, 
IVF670,440
NH4, NO2, NO3, 
PO4, TSS, OD670, 
IVF670,440
NH4, NO2, NO3, 
PO4, TSS, OD670, 
IVF670,440
NH4, NO2, NO3, 
PO4, TSS, OD670, 
IVF670,440
NH4, NO2, NO3, 
PO4, TSS, OD670, 
IVF670,440, 
harvest 
biomass, 
morphology, cell 
size, pH, 
temperature
NH4, NO2, NO3, 
PO4, TSS, OD670, 
IVF670,440
D. magna 
Reactors
Color, turbidity, 
colonized brood 
pouch, first 
brood, mortality
Color, turbidity, 
colonized brood 
pouch, first 
brood, mortality
Color, turbidity, 
colonized brood 
pouch, first 
brood, mortality
Color, turbidity, 
colonized brood 
pouch, first 
brood, mortality
Color, turbidity, 
colonized brood 
pouch, first 
brood, mortality
Luminosity, 
temperature, 
color, turbidity, 
colonized brood 
pouch, first 
brood, 
morbidity, 
mortality
Color, turbidity, 
colonized brood 
pouch, first 
brood, 
morbidity, 
mortality
Influent
Photobioreactors
D. magna 
Reactors
Photobioreactor
D. magna 
Reactors
Microalgae cell size, morphology, pH, harvest biomass
Count, length, TSS, NH4, NO2, NO3, PO4, TSS, harvest biomass
Measurements during photobioreactor stabalization
Representative total influent samples will be used to characterize NH4, NO2, NO3, PO4, pH
Measurements during D. magna  experiments
Measurements before experiments photobioreactor stabalization
Measurements after experiments photobioreactor stabalization
Representative total influent samples will be used to characterize NH4, NO2, NO3, PO4
Microscope, pH
Microalgae cell size, morphology, pH
Count, length
12
==PAGE:13==
3.0 Results and Discussion 
 
3.1 Photobioreactor Results 
Figure 7 shows TSS against OD670 as well as nitrogen flows for all experimental conditions. In all cases, 
phosphorus was completely removed. Nitrogen removal was stable for C. vulgaris, however it varied in a 
time dependent fashion for S. dimorphus. S. dimorphus TSS was variable when resources were limited. Cell 
morphology was tied to nutrient removal speculated to be caused by reproduction rate; it is shown in Table 
6. Total protein content of residual grown microalgae was 19-21% and is relatively low47,48.  
C. vulgaris was only able to operate during HRT5. When the influent N:P ratio was lowered and during 
HRT3, diatoms, ciliates, and other creatures (pictured in the supplementary information) proliferated in the 
C. vulgaris photobioreactor preventing operation and inhibiting nutrient removal. The diatoms, ciliates, and 
other creatures were observed in the influent wastewater and most likely came from the smolt station itself. 
Diatoms have previously been found in Scandinavian wastewater49,50, and some favor lower N:P ratios51 
than C. vulgaris. Diatoms, ciliates, and other creatures were occasionally observed within S. dimorphus 
cultivation as well however, they were unable to proliferate. It is speculated that C. vulgaris is less resilient 
against ciliates, rotifers, and other grazers due to its smaller cellular size when compared with S. 
dimorphus50,52. This explanation may be plausible however, it is not wholly satisfactory.  Taking C. vulgaris 
as a sphere with 8 μm diameter, the volume and surface area would be approximately 270 μm3 and 200 
μm2, respectively.  Taking S. dimorphus as a cylinder with height 13 and radius 2 would give 165 μm3 and 
190 μm2, respectively. These conditions were chosen to approximate starting culture size in this experiment 
and seem to suggest there may be an alternate reason for microalgae predator proliferation. The shape 
approximations may be inappropriate and repeated calculations rapidly propagates error however, it seems 
that the size and volume of these two species are close enough that geometry alone is an insufficient 
explanation for observed predation differences. Alternative explanations provided include increased colony 
formation as well as size53–55, chemical constituents such as toxins56, gelatinous substances53,54, and 
filamentous structures57. Predator mouth shape may also play a role. During HRT5 however, C. vulgaris 
operated more consistently than S. dimorphus in terms of nitrogen removal and biomass.  
In all experiments phosphorus was completely removed. This suggests that phosphorous was a limiting 
nutrient in all experiments and falls within prior suggested N:P ratios for C. vulgaris and 
S. dimorphus37,45,46,50,51,58. Interestingly, total biomass in the phosphorus dosed experiment started higher 
then declined to below non-dosed HRT5 experiment levels at the equivalent experimental duration. This 
helps reinforce speculation of a missing trace element or micronutrient first observed by monotonically 
slowing maximum growth rates in successively seeded microplates and batch reactors. A limited trace 
element being consumed may help explain the higher initial biomass leading to a biomass decline. 
Additionally, as experimental duration increased, correlations between TSS and OD670 started to diverge; 
this could be due to changing pigmentation from a missing element59. The timeline of nitrate removal and 
nitrite increases in Figure 7 for S. dimorphus also points to this.  Nitrate reduction to nitrite is catalyzed by 
the enzyme nitrate reductase60–62. Nitrate reductase is a molybdenum–iron–sulfur protein63. Iron is also key 
in photosynthetic processes62,64,65. Iron deficiency could help explain both these observations. While there 
are other trace elements that could explain this, especially manganese65, the dual and large role of iron 
suggests it. Once the mixture of trace elements was added to both the photobioreactor and the influent 
water, the photobioreactor reversed a trend of slowly declining biomass increased by ≈12% or 50 mg/L and 
was one of the few times complete nitrogen removal was observed. 
13
==PAGE:14==
Table 5 shows the nutrient uptake rates normalized by microalgae biomass dry weight for each experimental 
period.  In HRT5, C. vulgaris assimilated more nitrogen normalized to biomass than S. dimorphus, which 
supports C. vulgaris having a higher ideal N:P ratio. This agrees with some studies,46,50 although the 
opposite conclusion also has support66. The observation that algae composition changes throughout growth 
and in response to external stimulus is decades old67 and forms the basis for many common algae biorefinery 
strategies such as nitrogen starvation to trigger lipids accumulation58,68,69. It is likely that the rate at which 
environmental factors affect the species-specific ideal N:P ratio are also species specific, so in specific 
environmental ranges C. vulgaris might have a lower N:P requirement than S. dimorphus. Interestingly, 
phosphorus dosing only slightly increased nitrogen assimilation in S. dimorphus until micronutrients and 
trace elements were added.  
Table 5: Biomass normalized nutrient uptake rates. Change in concentration was divided by biomass to account for different 
algae culture densities. C. vulgaris is shown in green and S. dimorphus in yellow.  
 
When the HRT was lowered, the normalized uptake rate between S. dimorphus and C. vulgaris approaches 
each other. This helps to show phosphorus limitation. As reported by Bradley et al18, longer HRT resulted 
in higher levels of effluent nitrogen although the longer HRT operated less stably, unlike Bradley. This is 
most likely due to the effects of limiting elements in the longer HRT. Ammonium nitrogen was always 
preferentially assimilated in agreement with previous studies60,61, because of the lower energy requirements 
for its use. Scenedesmus dimorphus dry weight densities between 3 and 5 HRT were similar. Nitrogen 
uptake was boosted by having a continuous photoperiod61. 
Cell morphological changes were correlated with nitrogen removal; higher nitrogen removal showed 
smaller cell sizes. Smaller average cell sizes could be from successful reproduction while increasing size 
could signal a halt in reproduction. Increased cell sizes could represent carbon and lipids accumulation, 
under stressed conditions. Generally, decreases in nutrient concentrations decrease growth and trigger lipid 
accumulation47. 
HRT5 p
HRT3
C. vulgaris S. dimorphus S. dimorphus S. dimorphus
Average
1.03E-03
1.08E-03
7.46E-03
1.13E-03
Stdev
1.27E-04
2.30E-04
1.41E-03
2.36E-04
Average
2.28E-02
1.76E-02
3.24E-02
2.29E-02
Stdev
4.73E-03
7.86E-03
7.04E-03
5.88E-03
P
N
HRT5
14
==PAGE:15==
Table 6: Cell Morphological changes. Rows with different letters show that the preponderance of evidence indicates that the rows 
are statistically different. Rows with the same letter have no statistical difference. All experiments were considered simultaneously 
so the “A” for 5HRT is the same as the 3HRT. TE is when trace elements were added.  
 
 
15
==PAGE:16==
 
Figure 7: TSS and Nitrogen flows in photobioreactors. (a) HRT5 C. vulgaris (b) HRT5 S. dimorphus (c) HRT5 with phosphorus 
dosing S. dimorphus (d) HRT3 S. dimorphus. All error bars represent standard deviation. Where the x-axis is red, reactors were 
operated as batch, yellow represents continuous operation before feeding the D. magna, and green represents the time when 
D. magna were fed. The start of D. magna feeding is marked with a dashed vertical yellow line. Black stars represent days when 
microalgae were measured under a microscope. In  HRT5, batch operation was also separated from continuous operation with a 
yellow dashed line.
(a) 
(d) 
(c) 
(b) 
16
==PAGE:17==
The total protein content of the algae species grown on residual resource streams was approximately 10% 
lower than R. subcapitata grown on media during this experiment and lower than expected47,48. Total protein 
content for each algae and experimental condition is shown in Table 7. Dosing with phosphorus increased 
the total protein content as did lowering the HRT. This is likely because dosing with phosphorus and 
lowering the HRT serve to help remove limiting nutrients.  
Table 7: Total Protein Content.  
 
Total protein could have been lowered by the light regime. High light intensity generally serves to increase 
biomass production until a threshold is reached (typically 300-500 μmol/(m2*s) depending on the species)70, 
lower protein content, and increase lipids production48,71,72.  Limiting nutrients also serve to lower the 
protein content47. Continuous lighting has been observed to lower growth rates and yields compared to high 
light:dark photoperiods61,70,73 however, biomass is lost during nightly respiration61,70. Total protein reported 
here is artificially lower because it was obtained by adding individual amino acids and the hydrolysis 
method used degrades tryptophan and cysteine.  
The amino acid profile shows significantly more arginine accumulation in HRT5 for both C. vulgaris and 
S. dimorphus. The full profile is given in Figure 8. Among the proteinogenic amino acids, arginine has the 
highest nitrogen to carbon ratio and is a major storage and transport form for organic nitrogen74. In some 
species, arginine represents 40–50% of the total nitrogen reserve explaining its elevated presence74. When 
phosphorus dosed and when the HRT was lowered, arginine as a proportion of amino acids returned to a 
profile similar to algae raised on media. There are 10 essential amino acids for fish that must be supplied 
by the diet: methionine, arginine, threonine, tryptophan, histidine, isoleucine, lysine, leucine, valine, and 
phenylalanine. Of these, lysine and methionine are often the most limiting75. Not much is known on 
essential amino acids in D. magna although it is suggested that they are similar to insects76. Other studies 
conjecture feeding increases around aspartate, cysteine, glutamate and glutamine77.  The algae raised on 
wastewater appears to have an acceptable although not optimal amino acids profile and acceptable but low 
total protein and low methionine. The lipids profile showed volatile lipids such as methyl-docosahexaenoic 
acid related to docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), were completely lost during the extraction however, high 
amounts of methyl-archidate (related to eicosapentaenoic acid - EPA) were found. EPA is the primary 
limiting polyunsaturated fatty acid for D. magna growth and reproduction78.  This is an encouraging 
preliminary result as ω-3 (such as EPA) and ω-6 fatty acids are essential for zooplankton and fish79,80. 
Using both C. vulgaris and S. dimorphus worked for nutrient removal and D. magna feed however, using 
both simultaneously instead of monocultures may result in improved performance50.  Moving this process 
upstream in the recirculated aquaculture system may improve performance as the micronutrient may be 
removed by preceding steps however, this warrants investigation to downstream effects.  There is much 
room for further process optimization such as screening more microalgae species, ideally native strains 
adapted to cold light or low temperatures with a high N:P requirement.
Species
Condition Total Protein
R. subcapitata Control
30%
5HRT
19%
5HRTp
21%
3HRT
24%
C. vulgaris
5HRT
19%
S. dimorphus
17
==PAGE:18==
 
Figure 8: Microalgae amino acids profiles. The legend read left to right corresponds to reading the chart from bottom to top.  For example, leucine is the left most legend entry 
and the bottom entry on the chart. 
 
 
18
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Daphnia magna Results 
Daphnia magna grew and reproduced on the wastewater for 139 days on the control diet demonstrating 
they could survive a microalgae process failure in an integrated system. Daphnia magna also were able to 
grow and reproduce on wastewater residual resource grown microalgae. The D. magna in the control group 
released more nutrients than the experimental D. magna. No significant TSS generation was observed in 
any beakers. TSS generation was not statistically different between any treatment and amounted to 12 mg/L 
with 4 mg/L as the standard deviation.  The D. magna fed media grown microalgae were able to reproduce 
significantly more and grew to longer lengths than D. magna fed microalgae grown on resource residuals 
(p<0.0001).  Reproduction and growth may require different nutrients.  There was a statistical difference 
within S. dimorphus in end length during HRT3 and HRT5p however, the difference in mean length was 
0.1 mm implying no practical difference. There was no difference in end length for C. vulgaris and 
S. dimorphus in HRT5. Daphnia lengths in all experiments were within the expected range for D. magna 
adults81. The total protein content was low but in expected ranges82; the residual fed D. magna had lower 
total protein contents but there were no real differences in amino acid profiles which are shown in Figure 
11. Glycine is lower in the media fed D. magna but not significantly. 
The shorter end lengths of the D. magna fed on residual grown microalgae compared to the control could 
indicate a population which contains more males, as they are smaller in size than the females81. Male 
presence is generally associated with some environmental stress81,83. Supporting this, some S. dimorphus 
beakers were observed to contain ephippiavi because ephippia are in most cases produced sexually instead 
of the favored parthenogenetic reproduction 81,83. Ephippia, as shown in Figure 9, were only observed in 
S. dimorphus fed D. magna. Ephippia production has been shown to favorably occur in D. pulex fed a diet 
of S. obliquus, thus decreasing the number of produced offspring84 corresponding to results seen in this 
study. In this case, it could be the D. magna were not fed enough. Due to divergences between TSS and 
OD670 in later experimental stages and the once daily feed schedule, their food supply was overestimated. 
End D. magna counts are shown in Table 9. In both the HRT5 and HRT5 P experiments, no significant 
difference was seen in the reproduction rate in the adult seeded beakers between diets but a significantly 
lower reproductive rate of the neonate seeded beakers was observed. In HRT3 the S. dimorphus fed adult 
seeded beakers showed a significantly lower reproductive rate than controls. In the beakers seeded with 
neonates, the controls reproduced significantly more than the residual microalgae fed beakers.  This does 
not appear to be a property of microalgae raised on residuals but rather the specific conditions and 
microalgae strains used as a recent study85 observed residual grown microalgae outperforming media grown 
microalgae. Of note, when analyzing within each experiment, the beakers which had a higher end count 
also had a longer final length compared to the beakers containing daphnia with ephippia. Ephippia are a 
sign of sexual reproduction (males present) and of harsher environmental conditions83.  
Table 8. Daphnia magna total protein content by experimental condition. 
 
 
vi An extra shell layer which appears over eggs during times of duress that protects the eggs until more favorable 
conditions prevail.  
Species
Condition Total Protein
R. subcapitata Control
41%
5HRT
20%
5HRTp
29%
C. vulgaris
5HRT
30%
S. dimorphus
19
==PAGE:20==
Table 9: End D. magna counts.  
 
Table 10: D. magna days till reproduction. There were no statistical differences between groups. 
 
Residual fed D. magna were able to assimilate all phosphorus and approximately 90% of nitrogen into their 
biomass. In this experiment controls released slight quantities of nitrogen. D. magna grown on residual 
resource have released some phosphorus and no nitrogen86 as well as some nitrogen and no phosphorus85. 
These three contradictory results could imply that as microalgae nutrient content increases D. magna 
excretion increases. This is supported by comparing Table 8 and Table 12. There could be a trade off 
20
==PAGE:21==
between higher effluent quality and overall D. magna health that may be hard to balance consistently 
without proper planning. Environmental factors could also affect the ideal feed biochemical composition.  
 
Figure 9: Ephippium in a D. magna fed S. dimorphus. These generally appear under stressed conditions. 
 
Figure 10 Final D. magna lengths. The plot above is a combined outlier box plot and comparison circles plot based on Tukey 
HSD. Circles are drawn at the mean of the group and if they overlap there is no statistical difference.  The preponderance of 
evidence points to a statistically significant different in the length between the neonate end length of the D. magna fed S. dimorphus 
in 3HRT and 5HRTP. 
Reproduction and growth of daphnia both require specific fatty acids87. The lower reproductive rate and 
smaller adult length in the experimental conditions could potentially be from a lack of a specific sterol or 
poly unsaturated fatty acid (PUFA), both having been previously implicated in increased clutch size, 
increased growth rate, and decreased mortality85,87–90.  
The fatty acid analysis indicates volatilization of some fatty acids and an incorrect measurement.  It is 
possible results indicate a potential missing fatty acid in the microalgae grown in the photobioreactors. In 
Neonate end length (mm) 
21
==PAGE:22==
one study, icreasing the water temperature of the algal cultures resulted in a changed biochemical 
composition (decreased total fatty acids, PUFAs, and phosphorus) and with subsequent feeding to daphnia 
resulted in a decreased growth rate and number of egg-bearing females91. The temperature intervals were 
16°C, 24°C, and 32°C. The water temperature of the photobioreactors in this study was 20-24°C. This could 
be an indication that the residual grown algae was limited in some fatty acids required for increased 
D. magna growth and reproduction. Specific growth rates calculated are given in Table 11.  These are 
highly encouraging results but could be tempered because reproduction was checked for daily which may 
not provide enough detail to discern differences.   
Table 11: Specific growth rates. 
 
 
Algae diet
Average Growth 
rate 1/day
St dev 
1/day
Chlorella
0.304
0.022
Scenedesmus
0.287
0.016
Control
0.284
0.008
Scenedesmus
0.281
0.057
Control
0.305
0.050
Scenedesmus
0.281
0.010
Control
0.283
0.014
Growth rates
5HRT
5HRT P
3HRT
22
==PAGE:23==
 
 
Figure 11: Daphnia amino acids profiles.   
23
==PAGE:24==
 
3.3 Mass balance 
The D. magna did not release many of the nutrients they took in demonstrating the viability of this project 
for an integrated resource recovery system. High transfer efficiencies of wastewater nutrients to algae, 
and efficient trophic transfer from algae to D. magna are critical for commercialization. High efficiency 
lowers production costs and reduces resource inputs as well as cleaning the wastewater. 
 The stylized mass balance end state is displayed in Figure 12.  The closed mass balance for each 
experimental condition is shown in Table 12.   
 
Figure 12: Stylized system mass balance. The aquaculture farm (A), the photobioreactor (B) that assimilates the nutrients and 
the D. magna (C).  Arrows outside the dashed green system boarders represent cut points where recovered nutrients could be 
harvested. 
Table 12: Ending mass balance for each experimental condition.  
 
3.4 Implementation 
Size exclusion makes harvesting D. magna a simple proposition. Having multiple removeable catches 
(either as boxes or moveable screens) in a flow through reactor screened large enough for microalgae to 
pass through but small enough to catch daphnia would work to ensure that the water is filtered enough by 
24
==PAGE:25==
the end box system. Studies would need to be done on total length and residence times required in this 
system based on the D. magna feeding rate.  The integrated system could also look into a harvesting species 
consortium and a microalgae consortium instead of monocultures.  
5.0 Conclusion and perspective 
This work has demonstrated encouraging results for residual grown microalgae. Two strains of microalgae 
can survive and grow on aquaculture wastewater as well as remove nutrients supporting eutrophication. 
Biologically harvesting the microalgae is a viable way to produce high value fish feed without 
compromising the treatment process. The system removed and recovered phosphorus from wastewater 
better than conventional methods without the energy or chemical expense usually associated with it. This 
can enable higher aquaculture packing densities or production helping to feed an increasingly hungry world. 
There remains much room for optimization including screening more algae species, process integration 
with existing recirculated aquaculture systems, using a microalgae and/or harvester consortium instead of 
monocultures, and making harvesting a continuous instead of batch process. In addition to these broad 
concerns, site specific concerns such as investigating limiting agents, process optimization through 
simultaneous trace element and phosphorus dosing, using ponds instead of photobioreactors, annual 
photoperiod/light intensity investigations, aeration studies, and many others also exist. 
 
References 
1. 
van Vuuren, D. P., Bouwman, A. F. & Beusen, A. H. W. Phosphorus demand for the 1970–2100 
period: A scenario analysis of resource depletion. Global Environmental Change 20, (2010). 
2. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The state of food and agriculture. 2017, 
Leveraging food systems for inclusive rural transformation. (2017). 
3. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Livestock in the balance The State Of 
Food and Agriculture. (2009). 
4. 
Goddek, S., Joyce, A., Kotzen, B. & Burnell Editors, G. M. Aquaponics Food Production Systems 
Combined Aquaculture and Hydroponic Production Technologies for the Future. 
5. 
Steffen, W. et al. Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet. 
Science 347, (2015). 
6. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. 
The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture: Opportunities and Challenges. (2014). 
7. 
Chisti, Y. Society and Microalgae. in Microalgae in Health and Disease Prevention (eds. Levine, 
I. & Fleurence, J.) (Elsevier, 2018). doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-811405-6.00002-5. 
8. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The State of World Fisheries and 
Aquaculture. (2020). 
9. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. 
The state of world fisheries and aquaculture 2018 : meeting the sustainable development goals. 
(2018). 
25
==PAGE:26==
10. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The State of World Fisheries and 
Aquaculture 2020. The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2020 (FAO, 2020). 
doi:10.4060/ca9229en. 
11. 
Wang, Y. et al. Perspectives on the feasibility of using microalgae for industrial wastewater 
treatment. Bioresource Technology vol. 222 485–497 (2016). 
12. 
Bunce, J. T., Ndam, E., Ofiteru, I. D., Moore, A. & Graham, D. W. A Review of Phosphorus 
Removal Technologies and Their Applicability to Small-Scale Domestic Wastewater Treatment 
Systems. Frontiers in Environmental Science 6, (2018). 
13. 
EPA. Clean Water Act Section 303(d). Federal Register (2017). 
14. 
Shen, C. et al. Treating carbon-limited wastewater by DWTR and woodchip augmented floating 
constructed wetlands. Chemosphere (2021) doi:10.1016/j.chemosphere.2021.131331. 
15. 
Smyth, K., Vendramelli, R., Dankewich, D. & Yuan, Q. Seasonal variations in cold climate 
nutrient removal: A comparison of facultative and aerated lagoons. Journal of Environmental 
Management 214, (2018). 
16. 
Gilbert, N. The Disappearing Nutrient. Nature 461, 716–718 (2009). 
17. 
Rao, P. H., Kumar, R. R. & Mohan, N. Phycoremediation: Role of Algae in Waste Management. 
in (2019). doi:10.1007/978-981-13-7904-8_3. 
18. 
Bradley, I. M., Sevillano-Rivera, M. C., Pinto, A. J. & Guest, J. S. Impact of solids residence time 
on community structure and nutrient dynamics of mixed phototrophic wastewater treatment 
systems. Water Research 150, (2019). 
19. 
Bott, C. & Parker, D. Nutrient Management Volume II: Removal Technology Performance & 
Reliability WERF Nutrient Removal Challenge project NUTR1R06k. (2011). 
20. 
EPA. A compilation of cost data associated with the impacts and control of nutrient pollution. vol. 
3 (US EPA, 2015). 
21. 
Harrison, J., Roy, J., Dor, F. & Henderson, R. WHO guidelines for indoor air quality: selected 
pollutants. (World Health Organization, 2010). 
22. 
Kampschreur, M. J., Temmink, H., Kleerebezem, R., Jetten, M. S. M. & van Loosdrecht, M. C. M. 
Nitrous oxide emission during wastewater treatment. Water Research 43, (2009). 
23. 
Mohsenpour, S. F., Hennige, S., Willoughby, N., Adeloye, A. & Gutierrez, T. Integrating micro-
algae into wastewater treatment: A review. Science of The Total Environment 752, (2021). 
24. 
van Rijn, J., Tal, Y. & Schreier, H. J. Denitrification in recirculating systems: Theory and 
applications. Aquacultural Engineering 34, (2006). 
25. 
Kyriakou, V., Garagounis, I., Vourros, A., Vasileiou, E. & Stoukides, M. An Electrochemical 
Haber-Bosch Process. Joule 4, (2020). 
26. 
Cai, W. et al. Algae granulation for nutrients uptake and algae harvesting during wastewater 
treatment. Chemosphere 214, (2019). 
26
==PAGE:27==
27. 
Molina Grima, E., Belarbi, E.-H., Acién Fernández, F. G., Robles Medina, A. & Chisti, Y. 
Recovery of microalgal biomass and metabolites: process options and economics. Biotechnology 
Advances 20, (2003). 
28. 
Boros, G. et al. Between-lake variation in the elemental composition of roach (Rutilus rutilus L.). 
Aquatic Ecology 46, (2012). 
29. 
Bormans, M., Maršálek, B. & Jančula, D. Controlling internal phosphorus loading in lakes by 
physical methods to reduce cyanobacterial blooms: a review. Aquatic Ecology 50, (2016). 
30. 
Shapiro, J. & Wright, D. Lake restoration by biomanipulation: Round Lake, Minnesota, the first 
two years. Freshwater Biology 14, (1984). 
31. 
Salonen, K. et al. Development of Lake Vesijärvi through four decades of remediation efforts. 
Hydrobiologia 847, 4601–4619 (2020). 
32. 
Jepsen, P. M., Syberg, K., Drillet, G. & Hansen, B. W. Planktonic Crustacean Culture—live 
Planktonic Crustaceans as live feed for finfish and shrimps in aquaculture. Fisheries and 
Aquaculture 9, (2020). 
33. 
Vu, M. T. T., Jepsen, P. M., Jørgensen, N. O. G., Hansen, B. W. & Nielsen, S. L. Testing the yield 
of a pilot‐scale bubble column photobioreactor for cultivation of the microalga Rhodomonas salina 
as feed for intensive calanoid copepod cultures. Aquaculture Research 50, (2019). 
34. 
Jepsen, P. M., van Someren Gréve, H., Jørgensen, K. N., Kjær, K. G. W. & Hansen, B. W. 
Evaluation of high-density tank cultivation of the live-feed cyclopoid copepod Apocyclops royi 
(Lindberg 1940). Aquaculture 533, (2021). 
35. 
Allen, M. M. SIMPLE CONDITIONS FOR GROWTH OF UNICELLULAR BLUE-GREEN 
ALGAE ON PLATES. Journal of Phycology 4, (1968). 
36. 
Guillard, R. R. L. & Lorenzen, C. J. YELLOW-GREEN ALGAE WITH CHLOROPHYLLIDE C 
1, 2. Journal of Phycology 8, (1972). 
37. 
Beuckels, A., Smolders, E. & Muylaert, K. Nitrogen availability influences phosphorus removal in 
microalgae-based wastewater treatment. Water Research 77, 98–106 (2015). 
38. 
Valverde-Pérez, B., Ramin, E., Smets, B. F. & Plósz, B. G. EBP2R - An innovative enhanced 
biological nutrient recovery activated sludge system to produce growth medium for green 
microalgae cultivation. Water Research 68, 821–830 (2015). 
39. 
ISO (International Organization for Standardization). Water Quality – Determination of the 
Inhibition of the Mobility of Daphnia Magna Straus (Cladocera, Crustacea) – Acute Toxicity Test. 
vol. 6341 (ISO, 2012). 
40. 
Test No. 202: Daphnia sp. Acute Immobilisation Test. (OECD, 2004). 
doi:10.1787/9789264069947-en. 
41. 
Redfield, A. On the proportions of organic derivations in sea water and their relation to the 
composition of plankton. in In James Johnstone Memorial Volume 177–192 (University Press of 
Liverpool, 1934). 
27
==PAGE:28==
42. 
Standard methods for the examination of water and wastewater. (American Public Health 
Association, 2017). 
43. 
Duckworth, J., Jager, T. & Ashauer, R. Automated, high-throughput measurement of size and 
growth curves of small organisms in well plates. Scientific Reports 9, (2019). 
44. 
Metcalfe, L. D., Schmitz, A. A. & Pelka, J. R. Rapid Preparation of Fatty Acid Esters from Lipids 
for Gas Chromatographic Analysis. Analytical Chemistry 38, (1966). 
45. 
Laurens, L. M. L. et al. Strain, biochemistry, and cultivation-dependent measurement variability of 
algal biomass composition. Analytical Biochemistry 452, (2014). 
46. 
Beuckels, A., Smolders, E. & Muylaert, K. Nitrogen availability influences phosphorus removal in 
microalgae-based wastewater treatment. Water Research 77, (2015). 
47. 
Yaakob, M. A., Mohamed, R. M. S. R., Al-Gheethi, A., Aswathnarayana Gokare, R. & Ambati, R. 
R. Influence of Nitrogen and Phosphorus on Microalgal Growth, Biomass, Lipid, and Fatty Acid 
Production: An Overview. Cells vol. 10 (2021). 
48. 
Seyfabadi, J., Ramezanpour, Z. & Amini Khoeyi, Z. Protein, fatty acid, and pigment content of 
Chlorella vulgaris under different light regimes. Journal of Applied Phycology 23, (2011). 
49. 
Krustok, I. et al. Characterization of algal and microbial community growth in a wastewater 
treating batch photo-bioreactor inoculated with lake water. Algal Research 11, (2015). 
50. 
Wágner, D. S. et al. Optimal influent N-to-P ratio for stable microalgal cultivation in water 
treatment and nutrient recovery. Chemosphere 262, (2021). 
51. 
Garcia, N. S. et al. High Variability in Cellular Stoichiometry of Carbon, Nitrogen, and 
Phosphorus Within Classes of Marine Eukaryotic Phytoplankton Under Sufficient Nutrient 
Conditions. Frontiers in Microbiology 9, (2018). 
52. 
Algae for Biofuels and Energy. (Springer Netherlands, 2013). doi:10.1007/978-94-007-5479-9. 
53. 
Mayeli, S. M., Nandini, S. & Sarma, S. S. S. The efficacy of Scenedesmus morphology as a 
defense mechanism against grazing by selected species of rotifers and cladocerans. Aquatic 
Ecology 38, (2005). 
54. 
Donk, E., Lürling, M. & Lampert, W. Consumer-induced changes in phytoplankton: inducibility, 
costs, benefits, and the impact on grazers. in The ecology and evolution of inducible defenses 89–
103 (1999). 
55. 
Hessen, D. & Donk, E. Morphological changes in Scenedesmus induced by substances released 
from Daphnia. Archiv fur Hydrobiologie 127, undefined (1993). 
56. 
Watanabe, M. F., Park, H.-D. & Watanabe, M. Compositions of Microcystis species and 
heptapeptide toxins. SIL Proceedings, 1922-2010 25, (1994). 
57. 
Lynch, M. Aphanizomenon blooms: Alternate control and cultivation by Daphnia pulex. Am. Soc. 
Limnol. Oceanogr. Spec. Symp. 3, (1980). 
58. 
Mujtaba, G., Choi, W., Lee, C.-G. & Lee, K. Lipid production by Chlorella vulgaris after a shift 
from nutrient-rich to nitrogen starvation conditions. Bioresource Technology 123, (2012). 
28
==PAGE:29==
59. 
Balaji Prasath, B., Elsawah, A. M., Liyuan, Z. & Poon, K. Modeling and optimization of the effect 
of abiotic stressors on the productivity of the biomass, chlorophyll and lutein in microalgae 
Chlorella pyrenoidosa. Journal of Agriculture and Food Research 5, (2021). 
60. 
Hellebust, J. & Ahmad, I. Regulation of nitrogen assimilation in green microalgae. Biological 
oceanography 6, 241–255 (1989). 
61. 
Syrett, P. Nitrogen metabolism of microalgae. Canadian Bulletin of Fisheries and Aquatic Science 
210, 182–210 (1981). 
62. 
Sanz-Luque, E., Chamizo-Ampudia, A., Llamas, A., Galvan, A. & Fernandez, E. Understanding 
nitrate assimilation and its regulation in microalgae. Frontiers in Plant Science 6, (2015). 
63. 
Environmental Microbiology. (Elsevier, 2009). doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-370519-8.X0001-6. 
64. 
Wang, X.-X. et al. Assessment and mechanisms of microalgae growth inhibition by phosphonates: 
Effects of intrinsic toxicity and complexation. Water Research 186, (2020). 
65. 
RAVEN, J. A. Predictions of Mn and Fe use efficiencies of phototrophic growth as a function of 
light availability for growth and of C assimilation pathway. New Phytologist 116, (1990). 
66. 
Marcilhac, C. et al. Control of nitrogen behaviour by phosphate concentration during microalgal-
bacterial cultivation using digestate. Bioresource Technology 175, (2015). 
67. 
Spoehr, H. A. & Milner, H. W. THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION OF CHLORELLA; EFFECT 
OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS. Plant Physiology 24, (1949). 
68. 
Chu, F. et al. Enhanced Lipid Accumulation through a Regulated Metabolic Pathway of 
Phosphorus Luxury Uptake in the Microalga Chlorella vulgaris under Nitrogen Starvation and 
Phosphorus Repletion. ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 8, (2020). 
69. 
Anand, J. & Arumugam, M. Enhanced lipid accumulation and biomass yield of Scenedesmus 
quadricauda under nitrogen starved condition. Bioresource Technology 188, (2015). 
70. 
Su, Y. Revisiting carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus metabolisms in microalgae for wastewater 
treatment. Science of The Total Environment 762, (2021). 
71. 
Metsoviti, M. N., Papapolymerou, G., Karapanagiotidis, I. T. & Katsoulas, N. Effect of Light 
Intensity and Quality on Growth Rate and Composition of Chlorella vulgaris. Plants 9, (2019). 
72. 
Danesi, E. D. G., Rangel-Yagui, C. O., Carvalho, J. C. M. & Sato, S. Effect of reducing the light 
intensity on the growth and production of chlorophyll by Spirulina platensis. Biomass and 
Bioenergy 26, (2004). 
73. 
de Winter, L., Klok, A. J., Cuaresma Franco, M., Barbosa, M. J. & Wijffels, R. H. The 
synchronized cell cycle of Neochloris oleoabundans and its influence on biomass composition 
under constant light conditions. Algal Research 2, (2013). 
74. 
Winter, G., Todd, C. D., Trovato, M., Forlani, G. & Funck, D. Physiological implications of 
arginine metabolism in plants. Frontiers in Plant Science 6, (2015). 
75. 
Tacon, A. The nutrition and feeding of farmed fish and shrimp. A training manual 3. Feeding 
methods. (Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, 1988). 
29
==PAGE:30==
76. 
Fink, P., Pflitsch, C. & Marin, K. Dietary Essential Amino Acids Affect the Reproduction of the 
Keystone Herbivore Daphnia pulex. PLoS ONE 6, (2011). 
77. 
Lari, E., Steinkey, D., Steinkey, R. J. & Pyle, G. G. Daphnia magna increase feeding activity in the 
presence of four amino acids. Journal of Plankton Research 40, (2018). 
78. 
Becker, C. & Boersma, M. Differential effects of phosphorus and fatty acids on Daphnia magna 
growth and reproduction. Limnology and Oceanography 50, (2005). 
79. 
Marshall, R., McKinley, S. & Pearce, C. M. Effects of nutrition on larval growth and survival in 
bivalves. Reviews in Aquaculture 2, (2010). 
80. 
de Pauw, N., Morales, J. & Persoone, G. Mass culture of microalgae in aquaculture systems: 
progress and constraints. Hydrobiologia 116, 121–134 (1984). 
81. 
Ebert, D. Ecology, epidemiology, and evolution of parasitism in Daphnia. (National Library of 
Medicine, 2005). 
82. 
M. M. El-feky, M. & Abo-Taleb, H. Effect of feeding with different types of nutrients on intensive 
culture of the water flea, Daphnia magna Straus, 1820. Egyptian Journal of Aquatic Biology and 
Fisheries 24, (2020). 
83. 
Kleiven, O. T., Larsson, P. & Hobaek, A. Sexual reproduction in Daphnia magna requires three 
stimuli. Oikos 197–206 (1992). 
84. 
Koch, U., Martin-Creuzburg, D., Grossart, H. & Straile, D. Differences in the amino acid content 
of four green algae and their impact on the reproductive mode of Daphnia pulex. Fundamental and 
Applied Limnology-Archiv fur Hydrobiologie 181, 327–336 (2012). 
85. 
Hyman, M., Wang, Q., Wilson, A. E., Adhikari, S. & Higgins, B. T. Production of Daphnia 
zooplankton on wastewater-grown algae for sustainable conversion of waste nutrients to fish feed. 
Journal of Cleaner Production 310, (2021). 
86. 
Stevčić, Č., Pulkkinen, K. & Pirhonen, J. Efficiency of Daphnia magna in removal of green 
microalgae cultivated in Nordic recirculating aquaculture system wastewater. Algal Research 52, 
(2020). 
87. 
Martin-Creuzburg, D. & von Elert, E. Good food versus bad food: the role of sterols and 
polyunsaturated fatty acids in determining growth and reproduction of Daphnia magna. Aquatic 
Ecology 43, (2009). 
88. 
Martin-Creuzburg, D., Wacker, A. & von Elert, E. Life history consequences of sterol availability 
in the aquatic keystone species Daphnia. Oecologia 144, (2005). 
89. 
Müller-Navarra, D. C., Brett, M. T., Liston, A. M. & Goldman, C. R. A highly unsaturated fatty 
acid predicts carbon transfer between primary producers and consumers. Nature 403, (2000). 
90. 
Becker, C. & Boersma, M. Differential effects of phosphorus and fatty acids on Daphnia magna 
growth and reproduction. Limnology and Oceanography 50, (2005). 
91. 
Sikora, A. B., Dawidowicz, P. & von Elert, E. Daphnia fed algal food grown at elevated 
temperature have reduced fitness. Journal of Limnology 73, (2014). 
  
30
