==PAGE:1==
Teis Kloster Skogland
Charging flexibility from
electric vehicles via
autonomous chargers in a workplace.
Master Thesis, July, 2021
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Teis Kloster Skogland
Charging flexibility from
electric vehicles via
autonomous chargers in a workplace.
Lade fleksibilitet fra elbiler
via autonome ladere på en arbejdsplads.
Master Thesis, July, 2021
Supervisors:
Mattia Marinelli, Associate Professor at DTU
Kristian Sevdari, PhD Student at DTU
Lisa Calearo, PhD Student at DTU
Simone Striani, Research Assistant at DTU
Co­supervisors:
Venkatachalam Lakshmanan, Research Scientist at SINTEF
Kenta Suzuki, Nissan Motor Co., Ltd. Research Division EV System Laboratory.
Yokosuka, Kanagawa.
==PAGE:4==
Charging flexibility from electric vehicles via autonomous chargers in a workplace
Author:
Teis Kloster Skogland
Supervisors:
Mattia Marinelli, Kristian Sevdari, Lisa Calearo, Simone Striani, Venkatachalam Laksh­
manan, Kenta Suzuki
Department of Electrical Engineering
Centre for Electric Power and Energy (CEE)
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej 325
DK­2800 Kgs.Lyngby
Denmark
www.elektro.dtu.dk/cee
Tel: (+45) 45 25 35 00
Fax: (+45) 45 88 61 11
E­mail: cee@elektro.dtu.dk
Release date:
01.July 2020
Class:
1 (Public)
Edition:
1. edition
Comments:
This report is part of the requirements to achieve a
Master of Science in the Joint Nordic Master Programme
in Innovative Sustainable Energy Engineering ­
System Integration of Wind Power at Technical University of Denmark
and Norwegian University of Science and Technology.
Rights:
© Teis Kloster Skogland 2021
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
As a part of the ongoing project Autonomously Controlled Distributed Chargers (ACDC),
This thesis have designed an autonomous charging controller, with a distributed control
architecture incorporating virtual aggregator capabilities.
In order to limit global warming, as stated by the Paris agreement 2015, decarbonising
of the energy sector is key. Large scale electrification, and reduction of fossil fuel bases
energy production is needed. To enable high penetration of uncontrollable renewable
energy sources, demand side flexibility is needed. Sector coupling is also suggested as a
solution. This could be done by integrating the transportation sector into the power sector.
The idea is to use the storage capacity from Electric vehicles (EV) to benefit the electrical
power system.
Electrification of the transportation sector is also necessary. To enable high penetration
levels of EVs, it is important to integrate them to the grid in such a way that they could be
of benefit to the system, instead of increasing peak loads and becoming a burden. The
way of doing this is by use of smart charging.
This thesis have been focused on designing an autonomous charging controller, by use
of a distributed control architecture. The model is capable of coordinating the charging
of 18 EVs connected via nine chargers, with two outlets each, which is typically found in
a workplace parking lot. The model uses historical EV data from 18 Nissan LEAFs. The
idea is that by use of a distributed control architecture will enable high penetration of EVs
in a cost­effective and simple manner. The controller could operate independently, but
also contribute with flexibility by responding to demand­response signals, such as power
limitation, and load balancing. A virtual aggregator is incorporated in every charger which
distributes a dynamic power signal. This signal can be changed to provide flexibility to
the grid operator, or to provide behind­the­meter services.
The model have been developed in MATLAB Simulink. The model utilises historical EV
data consisting of arrival time, departure time and State of Charge (SOC). The model
autonomously coordinates charging of the 18 EVs, while keeping the power within desired
limits.
To analyse the results, a total of 3 different cases with smart charging have been anal­
ysed, in addition to a base case utilising uncontrolled, dumb charging. By distributing the
demand throughout the day, and with times of surplus power, the smart charger reduces
peak loads. The result show that smart charging can reduce the required charging power
by a factor of three, compared to dumb charging, and still deliver satisfying results when
considering the total charged energy, and the SOC for every EV. From an economic per­
spective, taking this power difference into consideration could make the total investment
of smart chargers cheaper compared to dumb chargers.
ii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Teis Kloster Skogland, MSc Innovative Sustainable Energy Engineering ­ System Inte­
gration of Wind Power,NTNU DTU
Although this thesis have been completed during a world wide pandemic, I look back full
of gratitude for the people I have met, and the experiences I’ve been enriched with during
these times of at uncertainty.
I am very grateful for the opportunity and the support from my supervisors, Mattia Marinelli,
Kristian Sevdari, Lisa Calearo, Simone Striani, Venkatachalam Lakshmanan and Kenta
Suzuki helping me through this MSc thesis. They have provided unconditional support
and kind words throughout the entire five month period.
I would also like to thank my family, friends and loved ones for believing in me.
iii
==PAGE:7==
iv
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Paradigm shift
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Overall Thesis Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Report outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
EV charging framework
6
2.1
EV stock increase and charging infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Distribution grid loading and EV adverse effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Uncontrolled and controlled charging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Control architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3
Methodology
15
3.1
Model inputs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
System modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.3
Overview of the autonomous charging model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Results ­ EV charging simulations
24
4.1
Introduction to cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.2
Case 0, uncontrolled charging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.3
Case 1, controlled charging without priority
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.4
Case 2, controlled charging with priority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.5
Case 3, controlled charging with priority, PV production and office con­
sumption
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.6
Economical assessment of the distributed approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5
Conclusion
37
5.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Bibliography
39
A A
41
A.1 Spike explanation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.2 Connection queue logic explanation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
v
==PAGE:9==
vi
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
According to the Paris Agreement from 2015, countries are legally obliged to limit global
warming to well below the 2° target [1]. More recently in 2019, this has been further
confirmed by the European Commission (EC), after they launched the European Green
Deal, which sets out how to make Europe carbon neutral by 2050 [2]. This is looked
upon as our times biggest challenge. To achieve carbon neutrality, decarbonisation of the
energy sector is key. Today most of the energy comes from fossil fuels sources, such as
coal, oil and natural gas. These are utilised in many different sectors, such as industry,
transportation, heating, electricity and more. The most prominent solutions to decarbonise
the energy and transport sector are electrification and renewable energy sources (RES).
It is expected that the annual share of electricity in the final energy consumption mix for
all energy applications will increase from 19% in 2016 to 49% in 2050, as displayed in
Figure 1.1 [3]. In Terawatt­hours (TWh), this corresponds to approximately 22 000 TWh
today, out of 110 000 TWh in total, too 48 000 TWh out of 97 500 TWh.
Figure 1.1: Breakdown of total final energy consumption by energy carrier in 2016 and
REmap Case 2050, EJ = exajoule [3].
One of the reasons for electrification to grow is that electricity is one of, if not the most effi­
cient energy carrier today. It has a wide range of end­use applications, and can be gener­
ated from renewable energy sources (RES), such as hydro power, biomass, photovoltaics
(PV) and wind power. Here, the electrification needs to go in parallel with decarbonising
1
==PAGE:11==
the power sector. Doing the first without the second will only shift the emissions from one
sector to another, even though with the increased efficiency of electricity as a fuel source
this could still decrease total energy consumption and overall emissions. However, the
society demands energy as people are not likely to accept a decrease in living standards.
Thus, RESs are key to keep welfare level high, and emissions low. In 2016 only 24%
of the worlds electricity mix was produced from RES. To fulfil the share of 86% RES in
2050, a radical increase in renewable production is required. More specifically from to­
day’s 5280 TWh, to 41 280 TWh. In first quarter of 2020, global RES share of electricity
increased to 28% from 26% in 2019 [4]. Another sector with great challenges is global
transportation, which accounts for around 25% of the worlds CO2 emissions, with cars
and trucks accounting for 75% of these [5]. More than 20 countries have electrification
targets or are planning to ban purchases of new internal combustion engine (ICE) vehi­
cles, within the next decade [6], [7], [8]. Most of these cars will be replaced by electric
vehicles (EVs) or plug­in hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV), and in 2025 global EV stock
is expected to exceed 50 million, and furthermore almost 140 million vehicles by 2030
[9]. Successfully reducing fossil fuel consumption in the transportation sector will not only
reduce CO2 emissions, but also reduce air pollution and noise [10], [11]. More EVs will
naturally increase the overall demand for electricity, and could also increase loads during
peak hours [12]. This comes on top of the ongoing electrification of other sectors, phase
out of fossil power plants, and a tenfold increase in renewable energy sources (RES),
which are naturally intermittent [13].
1.1
Paradigm shift
Historically the power system has been a centralised system, where power flows from
producer to consumer, as shown in Figure 1.2.
Figure 1.2: The traditional power system [14].
2
==PAGE:12==
The transmission system operator (TSO) is responsible for balancing the power system
(production matching consumption) at all times. Here, traditionally by use of large gen­
erating units.In addition, the TSO is also responsible for the electrical grid and for the
transmission of the the energy. The grid is interconnected but split into a transmission
system and a distribution system. The high voltage system (over 100kV) is owned by
the TSO, while the medium, and low voltage systems are owned by distribution system
operator (DSO). Construction and maintenance of electrical grids are expensive and in
Europe, the distribution business is still regulated as a natural monopoly, even though the
sector was privatised and liberalised during the 1990s [15].
The Danish energy system has changed from a centralised to a distributed system in the
past decades [16]. Central large­scale fossil fuelled power plants have been replaced
by distributed energy sources such as wind power plants, PV and combined heat and
power plants. Denmark with its high penetration of RES, makes a good example of a
future power system. In addition, the Danish island of Bornholm resembles a Danish
distribution system where multiple smart grid themed projects related to the topic of EV
integration and demand response have been, and are carried out. From the ACES [17],
ECOgrid 2.0 [18], and now the ongoing ACDC­research project which this thesis is a part
of [19].
The phase out of controllable fossil power plants and increase in non­controllable RES
creates a control­vacuum. This calls for controllable demand side flexibility, and EV de­
mand response is part of that. A centralised control approach of the vast number of smaller
units that could provide flexibility, would require a complex and expensive information and
communication technology (ICT) infrastructure [20].
Figure 1.3: The future smart grid paradigm [14].
3
==PAGE:13==
Therefore a distributed control approach seems more promising towards distributed en­
ergy technologies coordination. Furthermore, sector coupling is suggested as part of the
solution [3]. This could be coming from power­to­heat, power­to­hydrogen, and electri­
fication of the transport sector, that could be shifted, increased or reduced in a period
of time to provide demand­side flexibility. More specifically by reshaping load profiles to
match generation from RES, reduce peak loads and adapt to price signals.
According to user patterns for several countries, personal vehicles are on average utilised
less than 3% of the day [21]. As EV penetration increases, unexploited storage resources
emerge, which could potentially reduce the non­controllable solar and wind power issue.
Nevertheless, EVs do come with a self­inflicted adverse effects, for example grid loading
that could cause congestion issues [12]. Therefore, it is important to coordinate charging
to reduce potential negative impacts.
Furthermore, to enable demand side flexibility from EVs, coordinated charging infrastruc­
ture is key. And as EV penetration increases, so does the need for charging infrastructure.
One of the focus areas of the EC is sustainable mobility, and they expect 1 million public
charging stations to be needed by 2025. If we assume 40% EV penetration by 2030,
Denmark alone, with 380,000 EVs in 2025 and 1 million EVs 2030, would require an
infrastructure investment of 1.1 billion DKK in 2025, and 3.4 billion DKK to cover the ex­
penses needed to deliver the needed energy [22]. If the installation of chargers is done in
a smart way, 1 million EVs could provide large flexibility to the power system, and support
the integration of RES.
1.2
Overall Thesis Objectives
Thesis work will focus on coordinated and autonomous charging control of EVs for the
provision of behind the meter services of an aggregation of EVs in a workplace parking lot.
Grid services include responding to demand­response signals with the aim of providing
services such as power limitation, PV production matching or frequency control. Another
aspect to be investigated is the assessment of grid services flexibility of EVs based on
different constraints such as SOC, battery capacity and charging availability. A techno­
economic analysis for different investigated cases and the recommendation following the
investigated charging modes will complement the work.
The thesis is part of to the ongoing ACDC (Autonomously Controlled Distributed Charg­
ers) project. The proposed control approach at ACDC distinguishes from the centralised
approach, as there will not be a single centralised charging control unit receiving and dis­
tributing the signals [23]. On the contrary there will be a distributed approach with every
charging unit incorporating virtual aggregator capabilities, which could switch between
acting as the leading or the following unit. This way redundancy would be preserved,
along with other advantages and disadvantages which will be outlined at chapter 2. The
investigation will be limited to the context of a workplace parking lot. The thesis is also
limited to unidirectional smart chargers.
Other elements to be considered are individual constrains such as system control re­
sponse time, state of charge (SoC), battery capacity, charging availability, maximum
charging rate, and grid constrains. These constrains are both effected by technical limi­
tations, and user behaviour.
The techno­economic analysis will investigate how the different operational modes
could be both beneficial and challenging. Could this control approach fulfil frequency
market requirements? A recommendation of charging strategy will follow the investiga­
4
==PAGE:14==
tion along with analysis of the charging modes. Thus, the research questions can be
summarised as follows:
• How is it possible to design a coordinated and autonomous charging con­
troller? The goal is to design a realistic coordinated and autonomous charging
control that could provide behind the meter services such as power limitation, load
balancing by use of a virtual aggregator responding to demand­response signals.
The virtual aggregator would also autonomously coordinate the responds from other
inputs such as PV electricity production, and priority between the EVs themselves
and between chargers to provide the desired charging operation.
– Which are the main inputs, outputs and processes to consider?
• How feasible is the smart charger utilisation on a workplace parking lot? As­
sess the smart charger deployment and controlling techniques to fulfilment of energy
demands and system safety.
• What is this flexibility for an EV aggregation in a workplace parking lot?
• How can different operational models be designed?
– What are the inputs, outputs and main processes?
• Could this control approach fulfil frequency market requirements?
1.3
Report outline
The thesis is organised in 5 chapters. It starts with a description of EV charging framework
and grid constrains. Next step is explaining the methodology for the design and imple­
mentation of the Simulink model. Finally the results from the different cases investigated
are presented along with a techno­economical analysis and some suggested future work.
• Chapter 2 starts with an introduction to EV charging control architecture and grid
constrains. In addition to an introduction of the distributed approach.
• Chapter 3 starts with explaining the design of the EV charging model. It also gives
an schematic overview of the system and finally the realised model in Simulink along
with the description of the implemented logic.
• Chapter 4 shows the historical EV driving pattern. The different charging control
cases are introduced and results from the simulations are shown.
• Chapter 5 concludes the thesis by summarising the most important findings, an­
swering the questions raised in Chapter 1, and suggests the future work.
5
==PAGE:15==
2
EV charging framework
This chapter introduces the EV charging infrastructure and the behaviour accompanying
the charging process. Most of the charging process is thought to happen on the low­
voltage levels, hence it is prior to experience a higher overloading as described 2.5. It
concludes with a description of different control approaches for smart chargers.
2.1
EV stock increase and charging infrastructure
The transportation sector is going from fully reliant on petroleum, towards a massive elec­
trification. As mentioned in section 1.1, EV penetration is expected to increase almost
exponentially, and as shown in the left side in figure 2.1, from 2010 and until today, it
has already started. From less than 1% of the European passenger vehicle fleet in 2020,
to between 10% to 20% in 2030. Running vehicles on electricity instead of petrol, will
shift demand from petrol stations to charging stations. A massive investment in charging
infrastructure is required, however deciding the charging technology and location is still a
challenge for investors and policy makers.
Figure 2.1: Projections of EV stock in Europa [24]
6
==PAGE:16==
HV line
HV-MV
MV-LV
MV line
LV line
Central generation
Home charging
<20 kW
Office and public
charging
20-50 kW
Fast charging
50-350+ kW
Charging hubs
(total capacity of tens MWs)
Distributed generation
End consumers
Figure 2.2: EV charging area of impacts on the power system [24]
For sparse populated areas, such as the Nordic regions, a higher share of EV charging is
expected to occur at home. Especially in semi­urban and district areas, because higher
share of residents have their own parking space, with access to power. People resident in
more urban areas, are more likely to park on public roads without access to private charg­
ers. For example, in the greater Copenhagen area 53% of households in Lyngby­Taarbæk
municipality have access to parking on own property, compared to 12% of households in
Frederiksberg municipality [19]. A significant part of the EV stock is therefore dependent
on public or office chargers. A common attribute to home, office and public chargers is
that they are all located at the low­voltage distribution grid side, as seen on the right side
in figure 2.2.
This is often far away from where large central generating units are located, thus more
power need to be transported through the grid, which again could lead to premature up­
grade of existing transformers and cables. The exact amount of power needed is hard
to predict, but an estimate, depending on total vehicle driving distance per capita and its
average energy consumption per capita, for some countries, is provided in Figure 2.3.
An rough idea of the demand increase as an effect of electrification of the transport sec­
tion lies between 10­30%. Two outliers, Singapore and Norway have an estimated lower
demand increase around 5%. For Singapore it is assumed that the reason is due to the
small geographical size of the country, and therefore short driving distance. For Norway
it is more likely related to the fact that electricity consumption already accounts for the
greater part of the total energy consumption. Although the 10­30% total electricity de­
mand may not sound that much, the problem is usually not with the amount of energy
that the grid can transport over time, but rather the peak load sustained by the grid during
high demand periods. A typical load profile dependent on charger location can be seen
in figure 2.7.
7
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3: Charging demand increase as a percentage of the total demand per country,
assuming 100% electrified passenger car fleet [24]
2.2
Distribution grid loading and EV adverse effects
Historically the electricity systems have been built to handle peak loads during the high
demand season in a year. Usually, in the afternoon between 17:00 to 20:00 during the
coldest winter months. Transformers and cables are the components that tends to get
overloaded. Transformers have a long lifetime, often 25­35 years, but some more than
40­50 if not severely loaded [25]. A requisite for long lifetime of transformers is making
sure they are not being overloaded, as even short periods of overloading tends to reduce
their lifetime. 30 years is a long period in times when technology rapidly evolves and
demand changes. For these two reasons, when deciding the size of a new transformers,
it is common practice to over­size it.
In the distribution grid, the grid is less stiff at the outermost radials of the low voltage
electrical system, and keeping voltage levels within limits are more difficult. The harbour
town of Tejn, on Bornholm is a good example. More specifically terminal 4379 as seen
in figure 2.4 next to the capital letter B. In [12], station 29 of Tejn is analysed. Further,
the grid layout of Tejn can be seen in figure 2.4. In the above mentioned paper, the
authors show that EV charging could pose problems in term of congestion issues when
considering very high EV penetration. The main problem related to one­phase charging
is voltage unbalances. Despite the chargers being distributed evenly across the three
phases, charging patterns still affects it. The resultant voltage analysis of terminal 4379
in Tejn can be seen in figure 2.5. Under­voltage outliers are observed from 50% EV
penetration and above, but are still within the EU standard, which is the reference voltage
level ±10%.
8
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.4: Tejn grid layout [12]
Figure 2.5: Phase­to­neutral voltages for junction 4379 for EV penetration levels between
0 and 100% [12]
In conclusion, the authors describe that even though the energy consumption is the same,
when considering three­phase charging, charging power is tripled, but simultaneous charg­
ing time is lower. Therefore the combined peak only increases 50%. This can be seen in
9
==PAGE:19==
figure 2.6. The system is also more balanced. This indicates that in three­phase charg­
ing, problems tend to relate more to transformer and cable congestion when compared to
single­phase charging. Result of three­phase charging shows that only 100% EV penetra­
tion actually initiates problems in terms of congestion. However, authors at [12] consider
only home charging, but point out that in the future, with more workplace and public charg­
ers this could affect the total charging profile. An estimate of future charging profiles and
their share of EV charging in 2020, 2030 and 2040 depending on location can be seen in
Figure 2.7. The share of workplace and public charging is expected to increase, while the
share home charging is expected to decrease. The trend is expected to continue towards
2040 [26].
Figure 2.6: Comparison single­phase and three­phase charging with 100% EV penetra­
tion: on the left the share of EVs charging, on the right active power during one­day period
[12].
In an investigation done in [24], the distribution transformer is overloaded at 26% EV
penetration, during a winter evening. Given the following assumptions: previously peak
load corresponded to 90% of rated power, a PV penetration level of 32%, 70% of EV
charging share occurs every night, 30% twice a week, annual household demand 3100
kWh, charger size of 7.7kW, and PV size 6m2, also assuming the charging profile location
share in figure 2.7.
10
==PAGE:20==
Location
24h profile
2020
2030
2040
Home
85%
60%
50%
Work
10%
20%
30%
Public
Fast
5%
10%
20%
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
0
2
4
6
8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
12%
25%
20%
Figure 2.7: Predicted charging profiles and their added share in demand for different
locations in 2020, 2030 and 2040 [24].
2.3
Uncontrolled and controlled charging
When discussing EV charging we normally distinguish between uncontrolled and con­
trolled charging. Uncontrolled charging, also known as ”dumb” charging, is when EVs
charge at maximum power as soon as connected to the grid. Nowadays it is normal to
have a passive (dumb) charging strategy. The most common passive strategy is to charge
at night. The incentive for this from an EV owner perspective is a lower electricity price
during night time. There are several companies providing EV home charging solutions
with smart charging capabilities, an overview of models and capabilities is given in [27].
However, EV owners who do not have the luxury to charge at home, or company owned
EVs, rely on other options such as public chargers or workplace chargers.
Smart charging allows EV owners and grid operators to optimise charging to get economic
and technical benefits. This could be achieved by e.g. schedule charging to reduce peak
consumption, price or CO2 emissions. Ideally this should be coordinated autonomously,
without the need for other inputs than the desired SOC and departure time. This the­
sis focuses on autonomous controlled unidirectional charging in a workplace parking lot
utilising a distributed control architecture.
Unidirectional charging is by far the most common way EV charging is adopted. Unidi­
rectional charging delivers power from the grid, to the EV battery, when plugged into the
socket. One­phase charging usually ranges between 6 ­ 16 or 32 Amps, or 1.4 ­ 3.7 or
7.4kW, depending on the size of the fuse. Three­phase charging range can go all the
way up to 11, or 22 kW depending on the fuse size, assuming that the EV is capable of
delivering this power to the battery. Figure 2.8 shows a technical categorisation of EV
11
==PAGE:21==
chargers, which are moving from grid connection to grid integration.
Figure 2.8: EVSE ­ electric vehicle supply equipment CPO ­ charge point operator. Charg­
ers grid integration levels­ definitions after focus group survey [28].
This thesis is considering Level 1 ­ V1G and Level 2 ­ V1G/H to enable high EV penetration
integration. Now the question arise of which control architecture one should aim for. There
are pros and cons with a centralised, decentralised and distributed control architecture,
which are discussed in the next section.
2.4
Control architecture
There are several definitions of centralised, decentralised or distributed control architec­
tures. This leads to difficulties when comparing and describing control strategies and it
is therefore important to distinguish one term from another. A definition based on control
architecture is proposed in [29]. The definitions are suggested as the following.
• Centralised: One central control element collecting information from remote sites
and deciding set­points for remote actuation
• Distributed: Multiple control elements organised in a common architecture jointly
responsible for decomposing objectives and deciding actuation.
• Decentralised: A central (common) control objective is decomposed and delegated
to independent local control elements; the local control elements only use local mea­
surements and actuators.
12
==PAGE:22==
HV
MV
LV
Load
PV
Transformer
centralized
decentralized
vertical
horizontal
distributed
Control
center
control interaction
interaction in other control layers
control element
Figure 2.9: Illustration of different control architectures. ”The graphic does not account
data acquisition subsystems. Large, solid arrows describe interactions within the control
layer that are classified while small arrows denote interactions in other local control layers
which are out of scope for the classification. The control center represents central control
of the system operator (e.g. the SCADA/EMS/DMS functionality).” [29].
Advantages and drawbacks of centralised control, distributed control and decentralised,
or local control have been outlined in several papers, and a summary is provided in Table
2.1 below [20], [23], [30]. Although most of these characteristics still apply, the area is
developing rapidly. In 2019/2020, for the first time in Norway, demand was automatically
activated in the mFRR­market. A total of 7.95MW from panel heaters, EVs and industrial
loads was delivered [31].
As elaborated in Table 2.1, there are pros and cons with every control architecture. How­
ever, distributed control approach is the most attractive solution for high levels of EVs
integration, with the aim of keeping the system cost­effective, reliable and simple, .
This thesis will utilise a control based on a distributed manner, where chargers individually
maximise the charging rate of the EV connected, subject to the allocated power limit at the
point of common coupling (POCC), or a reference power allocated by a virtual aggregator.
More specifically how this can be realised is further elaborated in chapter 3.
13
==PAGE:23==
Table 2.1: Comparison of control approach.
Control
architecture
Advantages
Drawbacks
Monitoring from single
observation point.
A complex and expensive communication
infrastructure is required.
Better utilization of network capacity.
A central controller and a backup.
Better anchillary services provision.
Complexity increases with number of EVs.
Well known architecture.
Large amount of data to process.
Compatible with current market setup.
Possible privacy violation.
Centralized
Operational transparency.
Limited resilience to cyber attacks.
Increased privacy.
Suboptimal solution.
Decreased communication cost.
Limited operational transparency.
Increased autonomy and scalability.
Non­mature architecture.
Distributed
Compatible with market setup
Limited resilience to cyber attacks.
Scalable and autonomous.
Uncertainty in the final result.
Improved fault tolerance.
Limited ancillary service provision.
Less communication infrastructure
is required.
Necessity of predicting of forecasting
the reaction of consumer.
Charge control remain in the user.
Avalanche effects of simultaneous
reactions may happen.
Decentralized
Higher consumer acceptance.
Non­compatible with current
market setup.
14
==PAGE:24==
3
Methodology
The main objective of the thesis is to design a coordinated and autonomous charging
controller. This is important to be able to assess the flexibility that an aggregation of EVs
could provide in a workplace parking lot. Furthermore it is also important do define the
characteristics of the system, such as assumptions, inputs, outputs and processes in the
model to reflect a realistic model that the novel control architecture can be verified.
3.1
Model inputs
3.1.1
EV driving patterns
A secondary dataset was provided containing driving pattern focused on EV availability
in a parking lot. The data consisted of arrival time, state of charge (SOC), and departure
time for 20 EVs for 24 hours as shown in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: AT ­ Arrival time, DT ­ Departure time. EV driving patterns
EV
EV1
EV2
EV3
EV4
EV5
EV6
EV7
EV8
EV9
EV10
SOC [%]
25
17
33
59
58
67
50
58
67
92
AT1
08:47
09:31
08:24
12:22
08:36
08:24
07:47
08:15
07:56
10:40
AT2
14:41
10:40
17::02
12:53
AT3
16:24
AT4
DT1
18:08
12:29
08:52
03:10
20:29
19:25
12:15
18:10
18:03
16:23
DT2
18:00
17:40
16:07
16:06
DT3
21:34
17:18
DT4
DT5
EV
EV11
EV12
EV13
EV14
EV15
EV16
EV17
EV18
EV19
EV20
SOC [%]
42
33
33
75
67
17
42
83
92
50
AT1
07:25
07:35
06:46
08:31
08:55
06:28
08:01
08:56
06:37
09:52
AT2
08:51
11:41
14:35
AT3
14:38
AT4
15:11
DT1
17:01
19:55
05:52
17:12
22:16
09:15
21:49
19:17
11:50
18:04
DT2
08:31
17:06
17:06
DT3
14:15
DT4
14:39
DT5
20:26
It was assumed that the SOC, was recorded when the EVs arrived for the first time, and
that during the time parked, the SOC would not be reduced. Based on the data, some
EVs leave and return several times during the day, for simplicity, and since only 1 SOC
was provided, it is assumed that the EV returns with the SOC it had when it left. All EVs
are assumed to be a Nissan Leaf with a 24kWh battery. Another two of the EVs arrived
with the SOC goal already fulfilled, EV10 and EV19, but was decided to be included.
The dataset was analysed to derive an aggregated load profile, shown in figure 4.1. A
theoretical total energy charged was calculated, given the constrains of 1 phase charging,
and 18 available chargers. This was to enable comparison with other cases investigated.
15
==PAGE:25==
In the realised model, each EV has a reserved charging spot in the parking lot, which
it keeps during the day, even if it leaves and returns several times. The assigning of
charging spots is not optimised for maximum delivered energy at the end of the day, and
could lead to two EVs parked at the same charger, while both two sockets at another
charger remain unused. However this may reflect the unpredictable user behaviour of
those who not know about the simultaneous charging constraint.
3.1.2
PV production and Office load profile from Risø Campus
Historical PV production from Risø Campus was provided along with the buildings load
profile. This raw data was collected from the Smart­meter at campus. The original PV
production was based on a 10 kW system from Risø Campus. The PV size was artificially
increased and can be seen in figure 3.1 along with the office consumption.
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
5
10
15
20
25
Power [kW]
PV production [kW]
O/ce consumption [kW]
Figure 3.1: PV production and office consumption at Risø Campus
The PV production was increased by a factor of 2.5 to better replicate a future scenario
where PV plants are sized to cover the office consumption during a normal day. In this
way the model could also be tested to only charge when there is a production surplus.
3.1.3
Early stage schematic
An early stage schematic of the novel control architecture of the EV smart charger is
shown in figure 3.2. Step by step the model was developed in Simulink to include the
charger control logic, EV model representation, sequential connection logic, virtual ag­
gregator capabilities and priority. A more detailed explanation of every expansion, and its
intended function will be outlined in the following sections.
3.2
System modelling
An overview of the system is shown in figure 3.3. From the bottom left, the distribution
grid and the local transformer is delivering power to the distribution board, as in a normal
16
==PAGE:26==
P_measured
PV_generation
P_reference
Virtual
Aggregator
-
+
+
Signal
(
)
User
availability
+
+
+
+
Priority
x
x
K_p
Power
output
+
+
K_i
+
+
Time 
span
x
x
SOC
Building
demand
Charger
Figure 3.2: Caption
building. From the bottom­right inputs such as workplace loads, charger demand and PV
production also goes through the distribution board, and is recorded by the smart­meter.
The smart­meter distributes information about the load from what is now named point of
common coupling (POCC). The POCC can be thought of as the connection points for
electrical loads, or a bus bar. This signal goes into the Virtual Aggregator (VA). Inside
the VA, the load from the POCC, Pmeasured, is subtracted from the Preference as shown in
equation 3.4. Preference is a signal that represent a dynamic power threshold. PreferenceP
is determined based on the characteristics of the electrical system, such as fuse size, and
desired mode of operation. The VA distributes a signal, ∆P to the charging controller. The
∆P can be thought off as the measured error, in terms of control theory. Both the VA and
the charger are physically in the same unit, inside the charger unit at the parking lot. The
charger outputs a control signal to the EV, which then the onboard charger follows, and
the EV receives its charge. The mode of operation, known as modes, can be determined
by the user or DSO. This could be to only charge when price is low, only charge surplus
PV production, or demand response such as limiting the total consumption on the POCC.
In other words, flexibility.
3.2.1
Virtual aggregator
The VA can be thought of as the coordinator for the chargers. It is connected to the cloud,
and receives signals hereafter. In this model, only one VA is distributing the ∆P. A more
redundant system could be realised by including a VA in every charger, where every VA
could take the role as coordinator, if the current coordinating VA breaks down. The most
important feature of the VA, related to control of the power is, as described in section 3.3
to calculate, and distribute the ∆P.
17
==PAGE:27==
Smart meter
RCD-Type B
Distribution grid and 
Transformer
Distribution board
Virtual 
Aggregator
Power flow
Charging 
Controller
Power flow
Workplace loads
P_trafo
Information flow 
Power flow     
Controll flow   
Cloud structure  
Wifi communication
Price signal
EVs
P_workplace
Current
Voltage
Charging current
Power / current limit 
User
-Initial SOC
-Departure time
Promt user before 
charging begins:
Transformer congestions
Legend
PV
Transmission 
system operator
Distribution 
system operator
Market operator
?P
Figure 3.3: Overview of the system
The VA also incorporate capabilities of PV production matching, through measurement
from the smart meter. In the future, it could be possible with predicted production match­
ing. In this thesis, only historical data from office load, and PV is used to showcase the
aggregated response from the EVs. In the model, a signal can be sent to the VA to change
Preference to effectively limit the load of the chargers at the POCC to e.g. 75% or 50%.
In a bigger picture, if the TSO requires congestion management, a signal from the TSO
can be sent to an aggregation of VAs in an area, which again controls an aggregation
of chargers to limit, or increase its consumption. However, currently this requires that a
larger quantity of chargers are connected, because to participate in the manual frequeny
restoration reserve (mFRR) market, current market regulations requires minimum bids in
MW­range [32]. The mFRR market is a manually activated frequency reserve capacity
market. A TSO is required to have some reserves in case of a faults where large produc­
tion units disconnects unintentionally. Large consumers or power plants can offer their
services, usually reducing loads, or increasing production, which the TSO can activate in
case of a larger frequency deviation.
3.2.2
Priority
Based on the current SOC of the EV, SOCi,t, and time of departure, TOD, priority is given
to the EV, as shown in equation 3.1.
Priority = SOCi,t
TOD
(3.1)
Priority gives it a status of either high, medium, or low, and charging power is decided
thereafter. This is not to be confused with the connection logic, which is a separate func­
18
==PAGE:28==
tionality. If an EV leaves and returns several times during a day, the priority is calculated
based on the nearest departure time to come, hereby securing a higher SOC when depart­
ing. Priority calculations are compared with some threshold values, plus a safety margin
to decide a high, medium or low charging output.
In the case of two EVs parked at the same charger, with a combined averaged low SOC,
higher priority will be given to this charger as well. This to ensure that in the mentioned
event, the unfortunate second EV will have an increased chance of receiving charge.
3.2.3
EV battery model
All EVs are modelled as a Nissan Leaf with a 24kWh battery. The most important function
this block in figure 3.4 intends to realise is the SOC. In addition, it gives a signal if the
SOC goal is achieved.
Figure 3.4: EV battery model
In general, SOC of an electric battery can be defined as the remaining battery charge, and
is derived as a ratio between currently available energy and maximum available energy,
when fully charged. Simplified, it can be expressed in the following way:
SOC = kWhavailable
kWhmax
∗100%
(3.2)
Some manufacturers tend to limit the usable capacity of the battery, i.e. only allowing
utilisation of 95% of the battery. The reason for this is related to preventing battery degra­
dation. A battery requires DC power supply to charge, thus every EV have an on­board
19
==PAGE:29==
rectifier. Most electric motors found in EVs, requires AC. Therefore it also need an in­
verter. Usually these are combined in a single unit. In Simulink, the SOC is realised
independently for every EV in the following way, described in equation 3.3.
SOCi,t = SOCi,0 +
∫t
0
Pi,tdt ∗ηi,ch
(3.3)
The current SOC is dependent on the accumulated power, Pi,t, and the initial SOC,
SOCi,0. To simplify, charging losses are neglected, thus ηi,ch = 100%. It is of note that
charging efficiency in a Nissan Leaf normally range between 85% ­ 90% [33], depending
on temperature, SOC, charging power, etc.
A schematic of EV infrastructure is shown in figure 3.5. Two sockets are available in
each charger. Nine chargers in total gives a possibility of 18 EVs plugged in simultane­
ously. This enables more EVs to be connected at the same time, and potential flexibility
increases. It could also reduce the need to manually go to the parking lot switch plugs dur­
ing a normal work day. However, power can only be delivered to one of the two sockets
concurrently. The chargers are connected through a 63A fuse to the POCC. The building
load and PV panels are on separate fuses. Measurements from the smart meter is trans­
mitted to the virtual aggregator (VA) in a 10 seconds cycle, displayed as a ”Measurement
delay” [34]. The EVs are assumed to have a 2 second delay within, related to the on­
board converter and its software. There is also a transport delay from the POCC to the
different positions of the chargers relative to distance. The transport delay is in the range
of 1 ­ 1.4 second with 0.5 second intervals, where charger number 1 have the shortest
delay, and charger number 9 has the longest delay.
Figure 3.5: Technical schematic of EV infrastructure
3.3
Overview of the autonomous charging model
With data from 18 EVs, a charging model with 9 chargers was developed. The aim of the
model was to incorporate virtual aggregator capabilities enabled by one way communica­
20
==PAGE:30==
tion. A simplified simulation model is shown in figure 3.6.
Chargeri
Backup virtual 
aggregator
Charger1
Chargeri controller
EVi
EVi
EV1
EV2
Charger1 controller
Point of common coupling
Virtual aggregator
10s
1.0s
Preference
Pmeasured
+               
_       ?P
PriorityEV2
kW
SOC1,t
x  
x
kWh
Time span
+
              
+      
SOC2,t
SOC1,t=0
SOC2,t=0
  +     
+                            
Time span
x  
x
kWh
SOCi,t
x  
x
kWh
Time span
+
              
+      
SOCi,t=0
SOCi,t
SOCi,t=0
 +              
+       
Time span
x  
x
kWh
x  
x 
x
2.0s
2.0s
2.0s
2.0s
kW
PID1
PriorityEV1
PriorityEVi
x  
x 
x
PIDi
PriorityEVi
Connection logic
Chargeri demand
Charger1 demand
1.05s
PV production
Office demand
Charger1 demand
Chargeri demand
+  
- 
- 
-
Legend:
User input
EV
POCC
Charger
Charger controller
Virtual aggregator
Decision logic
Rest of the 
chargers
Figure 3.6: Simplified simulation model
Starting from the left, the smart­meter sample values at the POCC, and stream out values
every 10 seconds. The virtual aggregator broadcasts the control signal ∆P which most of
the time be the error term formed by the reference power subtracted the measured power
at the POCC, as shown in equation 3.4. A broadcast delay range between 1 ­ 1.4 seconds,
dependent on the distance from the VA to each charger. The ∆P goes into a proportional­
integral­derivative (PID) controller, which effectively controls the output charging power.
∆P = Preference −Pmeasured
(3.4)
The chargers output power are also effected by the individual priority level. Priority is
based on current SOC of the EV, SOCi,t, and departure time. Next, depending on which
EV arrived first, the charging starts. The connection logic will be explained in detail in
section 3.3.1.
21
==PAGE:31==
3.3.1
Sequential connection logic
EV parks
Connects to 
plug
Only EV 
connected to 
charger?
Available capacity?
Start charging
No
Yes
Yes
No
First charger in 
queue? 
Delay
Yes
  &
Yes
SOC fulfilled?
Stop charging, 
disconnect
Reduce Delta_P 
temporarily
Yes
No
SOC
 
    
Departure time
EV queue
Charger queue
Handshake
Figure 3.7: EV connection sequential logic
A sequential connection logic was designed in Simulink to demonstrate the desired func­
tionality of the smart charger. Figure 3.7 shows the steps of the decision making logic
from an EV arriving at the parking lot, until the SOC goal is reached, or the EV leaves.
For simplicity it is assumed that all EVs plug in when they arrive, and handshake goes
without faults, illustrated by the grey blocks. Blue boxes represent states where the pro­
cess is waiting for inputs to continue. Yellow cylinder indicate information from the cloud,
22
==PAGE:32==
via the VA to the charger, prompted from the users. In a real application battery capacity
would also be prompted, but here, we are only considering 24kWh batteries. Naturally,
the first EV that arrives and connects to a charger is prioritised. The second EV to con­
nect to the same charger will have to wait for the first EV to reach its SOC goal, before
receiving any power.
When an EV plugs in, a signal is sent to the VA. In response, the VA temporarily reduces
∆P for 10 seconds. The reduction is subject to the number of chargers already connected,
Chconnected, as shown in equation 3.5. This ensures a reduction in the right proportion.
∆Ptemporarily =
3.6
Chconnected
(3.5)
The reason for a 10 second reduction is due to the smart­meter duty cycle. The VA is
receiving 10 seconds delayed discrete measurements, and this reduced visibility from the
POCC, from the charger controllers perspective.
Next, the logic checks if there is available capacity at the POCC. If yes, it will start charging.
If no, then the charger will be queued. When there is available capacity, the charger first
in queue will start charging. To prohibit several chargers to start charging momentarily,
the charger second in line, will wait some time, before it moves forward in the queue.
3.3.2
Charger
Since we are considering AC 1­phase charging between 6 ­ 16A, or 1.38 ­ 3.68 kW a
flat charging curve is assumed. Effects caused by low battery temperature, or high SOC
are neglected. These assumptions are fair considering the low charging power investi­
gated. ∆P is the signal the charger receives from the VA. The charger control unit, a PID
controller, have been tuned by trial and error. The aim was to achieve a fast charging
controller, without compromising stability. In general a faster response is considered an
advantage. However the plant, in this case the EV on­board converter, will have some
limitations outside of the chargers control when it comes to adjusting charging power.
According to the standard IEC 61851, the signal on the communication line, named Con­
trol Pilot line, is used to limit the allowed upper charging current [35]. This is done with
Pulse Width Modulation (PWM), that is adjusted by changing the duty cycle of the signal.
For sake of simplicity a PWM signal is not incorporated in the model. The current can
be limited between the minimum current, 6A and in granular steps of 0.6A up to rated
current, which is limited to 16A in this case. This is achieved by using a quantizer block.
The PWM signal is only limiting the maximum current allowed, but it is the characteristics
of the on­board converter, and the software controlling it, which dictates the actual current
drawn, and the rate of which it is happening. The model accounts for this by a 2 second
”EV delay”, as displayed in figure 3.4.
More chargers connected would synchronise, and their aggregated output power, with
an aggressively tuned controller could lead to stationary oscillations. The reason they
synchronise is the constant 10 second cycle the smart­meter distributes the current load
on the POCC.
23
==PAGE:33==
4
Results ­ EV charging simulations
Based on the provided historical driving pattern, a cumulative sum of the EVs that are
connected (if the amount of chargers was equivalent to the amount of vehicles) is shown
in the upper part of Figure 4.1. The lower part is showing connection of chargers, after
EVs have been assigned a charger in pairs of two with the configuration considered in
this thesis. As aforementioned in section 3.1, the process of deciding the EVs pairs to
a charger is not optimised for best result, i.e. largest total energy charged, but rather to
reflect a more realistic scenario. The Simulink model is identical for all cases, except for
the differences described in section 4.1. The aim was to opt for the most autonomous
solution, rather than the most optimal results, such as SOC goal fulfilment and never
breaking the Ampere limit.
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
5
10
15
20
EVs connected
EVs connected at parking lot in a day
Case 0
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
5
10
Chargers connected
Chargers connected at parking lot in a day
Case 0
Figure 4.1: Historical EV data; individual, and in pairs of two.
There are mainly two resultant parameters the charging control have been evaluated after.
The first was the ability to stay within the Ampere limit, to not blow the fuse. For this model
it was 63 Amps. The second parameter was how close the increased SOC of all EVs are
to reaching the 90% SOC goal. This is accumulated to a total energy charged, and the
final results are presented in table 4.1. After a short description of the different cases, the
results are presented in the following order: First, result related to staying within the power
limit is presented. Second the resultant SOC for the EVs are shown. Third a comparison
of the total energy charged for the different cases.
24
==PAGE:34==
4.1
Introduction to cases
A total of four cases have been investigated. An overview of the different cases, and what
distinguishes one from another is described below. All cases have been simulated for 24
hours, except case 0, which is not simulated, but calculated based on the EV driving data
from section 3.1.
• Case 0: The base case, also known as case 0, is a theoretical calculation of how
the load profile would look, displayed in figure 4.2, assuming uncontrolled charging.
• Case 1: Case 1 is utilising controlled charging, but without priority, displayed in
figure 4.3.
• Case 2: Case 2 is utilising controlled charging, with priority.
• Case 3: Case 3 is similar to case 2, but now behind the meter production and
consumption are added, PV and office consumption, respectively.
Case 1, 2 and 3, are also divided into three different scenarios. The scenarios differ by
adjusting the Preference, i.e. adjusting the dynamic power threshold.
• a: Preference is kept at 100%
• b: Preference is kept at 75%
• a: Preference is kept at 50%
A notice for case 3, is that although the reference is kept the same, the PV and office
consumption data contain large steps in both production and loads, which resulted in
overshooting the 63 Amp limit more frequently than desired.
4.2
Case 0, uncontrolled charging
As seen in figure 4.2, the unconstrained, uncontrolled charging would result in a maximum
current of 208 Amps. This would demanded large investments in local grid infrastructure,
given the current limit is 63 Amps. Although 18 EVs are considered, only 13 EVs are
actually charging simultaneously, but would require owners to move their vehicle during
the day, if only 13 chargers were considered. This thesis proposed a solution to this,
reducing the amount of chargers while allowing more EVs to be connected during the
same time, and in addition reducing the need to move the EVs during the day.
25
==PAGE:35==
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Power [kW]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
Current [A]
Case 0
Figure 4.2: Calculated demand with 18 chargers, based on historical EV data.
4.3
Case 1, controlled charging without priority
Case 1 is utilising controlled charging. Figure 4.3 demonstrates that charging can be con­
trolled and kept within limits except for some spikes. This case does not include priority,
meaning that all chargers will charge with the same power level between 1.38 ­ 3.68 kW.
There are some spikes violating the Preference = 63A limit, and the fuse limit of 63A. The
spike happens after the following event: An EVs battery is full, or the owner wants to
leave, and thus stops to charge. This is followed by another charger starting to charge.
Common to all these spikes is that they only last for a maximum of 10 seconds. The
reason for this is the reduced transparency caused by the 10 second cycle output from
the smart­meter. This makes the charging controller ”blind” for 10 seconds, allowing the
Pmeasured to exceed its limit. The amplitude of the spike is determined by the point of
time within the 10 second smart­meter output cycle the described event starts. A more
detailed explanation is given in appendix A.1. However the measured spike only last for
10 seconds, and usually is in the area between a 0­20% overshoot. It should be noted
the actual spike is higher than the measured one, but also last for a shorter time, due to
the measurement cycle. In the end there is a small chance of triggering protecting fuse.
This is of course depending on the tripping characteristics of the residual current device.
Another solution to reduce overshoot could be to tune the PID controller to have a slower
response. Or to implement a safety margin in the Preference.
26
==PAGE:36==
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Power [kW]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Current [A]
Case 1
Figure 4.3: Case 1a.
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
10
20
Power [kW]
0
50
Current [A]
Case 1a, controlled charging, without priority Preference = 100%
Case 1a
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
5
10
Power [kW]
0
50
Current [A]
Case 1b, controlled charging, without priority, Preference = 75%
Case 1b
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
5
10
Power [kW]
0
20
40
Current [A]
Case 1c, controlled charging, without priority, Preference = 50%
Case 1c
Figure 4.4: Case 1, controlled charging, without priority. Scenario 1a, 1b and 1c with
Preference at 100%, 75% and 50%, respectively.
27
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.4 gives an overview of the measured charging power for scenario a, b and c for
case 1. An interesting observation can be made in for case 1c. Rather unexpectedly the
charging in case c ends before case b. Since the charging power is more constrained
in case c, on would normally expect the duration of charging to be longer. A analysis
shows that this is related to the connection queuing logic. A more detailed explanation
is given in appendix A.2. It should be kept in mind that in case number c, only five out
of nine chargers can charge simultaneously, so it is a very constrained scenario. Thus in
the overall result it has a minor impact. There are some spikes in scenario b and c, but
these are even less of a problem since there is good safety margin between the 63 Amp
limit and the Preference.
4.4
Case 2, controlled charging with priority
Case 2 is utilising controlled charging, and priority. As mentioned in section 3.3.2, a
quantizer block from Simulink is normally utilised to replicate the granular steps of 0.6
Amps. A comparison of the result, without and with the quantizer block in every charger
is shown in figure 4.5. As seen in the lower part of the figure, some oscillation occur
between 09:00, and 17:00. Common for this time period are that there is a high number
of chargers charging simultaneously. This is expected to happen because of the ∆P
requesting a charging power between two of the steps of 0.6 Amps. When this happens,
the PID controller will try to correct the value, which results in the power going up and
down between the two closest current levels. Because of the controllers synchronising,
the oscillations are aggregated when more charges charge. It was also found that a
controller tuned too aggressively, would lead to a bigger problem, causing the controller to
change between several steps larger than 0.6 Amps. When the chargers were operating
close to their upper and lower limit, 1.38 kW and 3.68 kW, respectively. The controller
would try to adjust the charging below or above the minimum or maximum value. This
caused larger oscillations. Therefore a function that effectively reduced the ∆P, and thus
the input to the controller was implemented. The result of this is shown in the lower part
of figure 4.5. However the quantizer block was taken out of the model for all the other
simulations, to better show the actual values.
Figure 4.6 gives an overview of the measured charging power for case 2 scenario a, b and
c. An interesting observation is that when comparing case 1a and 2a, the priority seems
to removes some of the spikes entirely, while others are have a reduced magnitude, and
some are moved. It is fair to assume that the spikes with reduced magnitude, which are
happening at the same time, come from the priority function. The reason for this is that
most likely an EV is given low priority when starting to charge, as priority is calculated
based on equation 3.1. The spikes that are removed, or moved, can not be directly linked
to the priority function, without further analysis. It is more likely related to the connection
queue logic as described in A.2.2. However the only difference between the simulations
are the priority function, so indirectly it has an positive impact.
28
==PAGE:38==
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
#104
0
5
10
15
Power [kW]
0
20
40
60
Current [A]
Case 2a without quantizer
Case 2a
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
5
10
15
Power [kW]
0
20
40
60
Current [A]
Case 2a with quantizer
Case 2a with quantizer
Figure 4.5: Case 2a comparison without, and with quantizer block.
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
10
Power [kW]
0
50
Current [A]
Case 2a, controlled charging, with priority Preference = 100%
Case 2a
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
5
10
Power [kW]
0
50
Current [A]
Case 2b, controlled charging, with priority, Preference = 75%
Case 2b
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
5
10
Power [kW]
0
20
40
Current [A]
Case 2c, controlled charging, with priority, Preference = 50%
Case 2c
Figure 4.6: Case 2, controlled charging, with priority.
Scenario 2a, 2b and 2c with
Preference at 100%, 75% and 50%, respectively.
29
==PAGE:39==
In figure 4.7 the SOC for all EVs are shown during the 24 hour period for case 1a. As
mentioned in section 3.1, the process of assigning EVs to charging spots is not optimised
for maximum delivered energy. The EVs are assigned a charger in pais of two. EV 1
and 2 on charger 1. EV 3 and 14 on charger 2, EV 5 and 6 on charger 3, and so on. All
EVs reach their SOC goal of 90% except for EV 2, which is promising, considering the
limited charging power compared to case 0. EV 1 and EV 2 are connected to the same
charger. They have both a relative low SOC when arriving, 25% and 17%, respectively.
At the same time EV 2 is only connected for 6 hours, and arrives later compared to EV
1. EV 1 starts charging first, which means that EV 2 will not charge until EV 1 is done.
This is the reason that EV 2 is not reaching its SOC goal, but instead just below 50%.
After analysing table 3.1, EV 2 is only connected about 3 hours and 19 minutes during
the second session. Since EV 1 arrived first, the maximum SOC EV 2 can reach is 68%,
given the circumstances that it can only charge during its second session.
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Individual battery SOC [%]
1
2
3
14
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
15
16
17
18
19
20
Figure 4.7: Individual EV SOC, case 1a, controlled charging, priority, Preference = 100%.
In figure 4.8 the SOC for all EVs in case 2a is shown. Compared to case 1a there are small
differences, but the most noticeable is that EV 2 reaches a 60% SOC. When comparing
the SOC curves for EV 1, one can spot that EV 1, the blue line starting with a SOC of
25%, has a steeper curve in figure 4.8, compared to figure 4.7. If looking at the SOC
curve for EV 2, the orange line starting with a SOC at 17%, one can also see that it is
steeper compared to case 1a. This shows that the priority function as intended.
30
==PAGE:40==
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Individual battery SOC [%]
1
2
3
14
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
15
16
17
18
19
20
Figure 4.8: Individual EV SOC, case 2a, controlled charging, priority, Preference = 100%.
Figure 4.9 shows the accumulated SOC for every EV in case 2b. EV 2 and EV 16 are the
outliers with a SOC at 20% and 69% which pulls the total energy charged down. SOC for
EV number 3, 7, 8, 18, lies around 83­90 % which is very close to the goal.
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Individual battery SOC [%]
1
2
3
14
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
15
16
17
18
19
20
Figure 4.9: Individual EV SOC, case 2b, controlled charging, priority, Preference = 75%.
31
==PAGE:41==
Case 2c are showcased in figure 4.10. This case is a worst case scenario, but shows the
potential flexibility a aggregation of EVs can provide. 18 EVs sharing 9 chargers with a
combined max charging power of 7.2 kW, compared to 18 EVs with dumb charging with
a potential combined max power of 66 kW. Strictly speaking only 13 EVs would charge
simultaneously in this case, so 47 kW would be more fair. However this showcase the
large flexibility potential EV charging can provide.
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Individual battery SOC [%]
1
2
3
14
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
15
16
17
18
19
20
Figure 4.10: Individual EV SOC, case 2c, controlled charging, priority, Preference = 50%.
4.5
Case 3, controlled charging with priority, PV production
and office consumption
Case 3 is utilising controlled charging and priority, so its identical in terms of charging
control tocase 2. The difference is that PV production and office consumption from figure
3.1 is added at the POCC. So now Pmeasured is the sum of office load and charging load,
minus PV production. In the case that the PV is not producing anything, this forces the
charging control to take into account that both the office consumption and EV charging
does not exceed 63 Amps, or 14.49 kW. Now this case is also a bit on the extreme end,
with a PV maximum production capacity of 25 kW, and an office load which averages
around 10 kW. It should be noted that there is no lower limit on the Pmeasured variable,
meaning that if PV production exceeds the office consumption, the VA will distribute a ∆P
with a higher value than the set Preference = 14.5. This causes the chargers to exceed 63A
limit at the fuse, trying to consume all the available PV effect, as seen in figure 4.11. This
makes a direct comparison between the other cases less suitable, but it is an interesting
case nonetheless. A proposed solution could be to adjust Preference = 0, and only charge
the surplus PV effect. However case 3c with a Preference = 7.2 is exceeding the limit to a
less extent, making it more comparable against the other cases.
32
==PAGE:42==
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
10
20
Power [kW]
0
50
100
Current [A]
Case 3a controlled charging, priority, PV production, o/ce demand, POCC = 100%
Case 2a
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
10
20
Power [kW]
0
50
100
Current [A]
Case 3b controlled charging, priority, PV production, o/ce demand, POCC = 75%
Case 2b
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
10
20
Power [kW]
0
50
Current [A]
Case 3c controlled charging, priority, PV production, o/ce demand, POCC = 50%
Case 2c
Figure 4.11: Case 3a, 3b and 3c with Preference at 100%, 75% and 50%, respectively.
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Power [kW]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Current [A]
Case 3
Case 1
Case 0
Case 2
Figure 4.12: Comparison between all cases with power limited at 14.45 kW.
A comparison of the case 0, 1a, 2a and 3a is shown in figure 4.12. It shows a nice
33
==PAGE:43==
overview of the different cases. One can appreciate that only 4 EVs connected to a dumb
charger would require the same amount of effect as charging 18 EVs. Even though the
combined charging effect is 3 times lower, almost the same SOC goal is achieved as seen
in the comparison of total energy charged in figure 4.13. As expected the cases with the
highest Preference are the closest to case 0, and the cases with lowest Preference are the
furthest away. An interesting thing about the plot is that the slope of the lines indicates the
combined charging power. Case 0 has by far the steepest curve, and as shown in figure
4.12, the highest charging power. Another interesting thing to compare is at what time the
curve flatten out, indicating charging has stopped. For case 0 it is around 16:00, while
for case 2b around 20:00. Case 2b seems to be charging for a longer period compared
to case 1c, even if case 1c still have long way before reaching its SOC goal. The reason
for this have been explained in appendix A.2. All in all the SOC goal reaches a satisfying
level. Especially considering the use of a novel charging control architecture, tested in
what is a considered by the author a very constrained case. A summary of the total energy
charged is found in table 4.1.
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Total energy charged [kWh]
Case 0a
Case 1a
Case 1b
Case 1c
Case 2a
Case 2b
Case 2c
Case 3a
Case 3b
Case 3c
Figure 4.13: Total energy charged comparison.
34
==PAGE:44==
Simulation result, total energy charged [kWh]
Scenario
Case 0
uncontrolled
charging
Case 1
controlled charging,
no priority
Case 2
controlled charging,
with priority
Case 3
controlled charging,
with priority + PV and
office consumption
a
Preference = 100%
158
148
150
1441
b
Preference = 75%
129
130
1391
c
Preference = 50%
80
89
941
Charging current in these cases exceed the limit for a considerably amount of time1
Table 4.1: Summary of simulation results for most important cases, total energy charged
35
==PAGE:45==
4.6
Economical assessment of the distributed approach
In this section a brief description of the economical considerations related to this type of
investment is described. Prices for chargers are retrieved from [36]. Prices range from
3000,­ DKK to 23 000,­ DKK for a dumb charger. Price of a smart charger range from
14200,­ DKK to 29200,­ DKK. A price of 5000,­ DKK is assumed for a dumb charger, and
15000,­ DKK for a smart charger. The price for upgrading a tariff fuse is assumed a one
time 1000,­ DKK per Amp. It could very well be that if you were to upgrade from a 63
Amps fuse, to 288 Amps, there would be other cost, such as cable upgrade, potential
increased effect tariffs, etc. But for sake of simplicity these are not considered. These
are prices for household fuse upgrades, and not for a workplace where prices probably
would be different. However this is just to give an indication of the price range we are
discussing. Figure 4.14 gives an overview of prices for different investments.
No.
EVs
Power
[kW]
Amps per 
phase
No. of
chargers
Price
[DKK]
Fuse total cost
above 63A [DKK}
Approx
investment [DKK]
18
3.68(1-p)
288
18
90000
225000
315000
18
3.68(1-p)
208
13
65000
145000
210000
18
3.68(1-p)
63
9
135000
0
135000
Figure 4.14: Investment cost of to charging equipment, depending on type and required
current
The first investment with 18 dumb chargers, would cost approximately 315 000,­ DKK.
If we only consider 13 chargers, the price goes down for both number of chargers, and
required fuse size to 210 000,­ DKK. With the smart charging investment one could stay
on the fuse level of 63 Amps and get away with only investing in smart chargers. This
would cost approximately 135 000,­ DKK. As shown above, there are significant saving
to be made if smart chargers are selected. A smart charger is more likely to be capable
of receiving future software updates, and new smart functions related to the internet of
things, and so on. Not to mention the potential for participating in future flexibility markets,
as a part of an aggregation of EVs controlled in a distributed manner. User remuneration
is not considered in this thesis, but with the distributed control architecture, it is not long
before this is attainable.
36
==PAGE:46==
5
Conclusion
The thesis work focused on designing and implementing coordinated and autonomous
charging control in a workplace parking lot, by use of a distributed control architecture. The
results presented are based on a model created in Simulink. The first step was to design
a charger controller which could coordinate and provide charging to a total number of 18
EVs autonomously. The overall goal was to develop a charger control that could provide
behind the meter services such as power limitation, load balancing, by use of a virtual
aggregator responding to demand­response signals. The model utilised historical driving
patterns from 18 Nissan Leaf. The work focused on two main research questions, as
listed in section 1.2. This chapter aims to conclude them, relying on results an knowledge
gained.
• How is it possible to design a coordinated and autonomous charging con­
troller? Before starting the design process, information about the distributed con­
trol architecture had to be acquired from different sources. This lead to a better
understanding of the project, and the design process could start. The design of the
coordinated and autonomous charging controller was build step by step in Simulink.
The model should reflect a realistic charging model, and therefore input values, de­
lays, and information flow needed to me properly designed. The main inputs are
the historical EV data, containing arrival time, departure time, and initial SOC when
arriving. Other inputs such as the POCC limit or fuse size, historical PV data, and
Office loads was also considered. Measurement cycle from the smart meter, delay
related to the on­board EV charging system, and transportation delay from the VA
to the other chargers was included. Outputs of the model is the SOC for every EV
and the charging power from every charger. The connection logic process is also
of great importance, which is the logic that makes sure power limitation is kept, and
that the power is distributed fairly between the EVs. A priority logic is also designed
to improve charging fairness, and emulate a last call function.
• How is it possible to assess the grid service flexibility of an aggregation of
EVs? To assess the grid services flexibility, flexibility have to be defined. In this
case, flexibility is defined as the ability to respond to a demand response signal,
which is a dynamic power reference distributed to all chargers from the VA. The VA
could receive a signal from the DSO or TSO, if the VA has placed a bid in the mFRR
market, which the DSO or TSO can then activate if needed. The aggregation of
EVs requires a certain size, to be allowed to participate in this market. Usually in
the MW size, but depends on legislation in the area. If activated the aggregation of
EVs will reduce its demand, and thus provide flexibility to the grid operator. Another
type of grid service flexibility could be behind the meter services, such as power
balancing with local PV production and consumption. Another mode EVs could
provide flexibility is by adjusting the dynamic power reference signal after a price
signal from Nordpool. Other operational modes could be to operate below the power
limit, for example 75% or 50% of the power limit at the POCC, defined by the fuse
and cable connected.
5.1
Future work
Under this section it will be described some future topics and proposals that are not cov­
ered in this thesis:
37
==PAGE:47==
• Improve the connection logic functionality.
• Implement VA redundancy.
• Design and implement a disconnect logic that will allow the VA to disconnect EVs
as seen fit, if a sudden flexibility is required.
• Investigate user remuneration from provided flexibility.
38
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations. The Paris agreement on climate change. https://unfccc.int/process-
and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement. (Accessed on 02/19/2021).
Dec. 2015.
[2]
A European Green Deal | European Commission. https : / / ec . europa . eu / info /
strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en. (Accessed on 06/07/2021).
[3]
IRENA. Demand­side flexibility for power sector transformation. Tech. rep. 2019,
pp. 1–44. URL: /publications/2019/Dec/Demand-side-flexibility-for-power-sector-
transformation.
[4]
IEA. “Global Energy Review 2020”. In: Global Energy Review 2020 (2020). DOI:
10.1787/a60abbf2-en.
[5]
IEA. TRANSPORT, ENERGY AND CO2 Moving Toward Sustainability. Tech. rep.
URL: https://webstore.iea.org/transport-energy-and-co2.
[6]
Ban on new petrol and diesel cars in UK from 2030 under PM’s green plan ­ BBC
News. https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-54981425. (Accessed on
02/21/2021).
[7]
En grønnere transporthverdag ­ regjeringen.no. https://www.regjeringen.no/no/
aktuelt/en-gronnere-transporthverdag/id2548633/. (Accessed on 02/21/2021).
[8]
IEA. “Global EV Outlook 2021”. In: Global EV Outlook 2020 (2020). DOI: 10.1787/
d394399e-en.
[9]
IEA. Global EV Outlook 2020. Tech. rep. 2020. DOI: 10.1787/d394399e-en.
[10]
M. Duvall, E. Knipping, and Epri/Nrdc. “Environmental Assessment of Plug­In Hy­
brid Electric Vehicles, Volume 1: Nationwide Greenhouse Gas Emissions (1015325)”.
In: 1 (2007).
[11]
M. Duvall, E. Knipping, and Epri/Nrdc. “Environmental assessment of plug­in hybrid
electric vehicles, volume 2: United States air quality analysis based on AEO­2006
assumptions for 2030. EPRI Report 1015326, Jul 2007”. In: EPRI, July 1.1015325
(2007), pp. 1–70.
[12]
Lisa Calearo et al. “Grid Loading Due to EV Charging Profiles Based on Pseudo­
Real Driving Pattern and User Behavior”. In: IEEE Transactions on Transportation
Electrification 5.3 (2019), pp. 683–694. ISSN: 23327782. DOI: 10.1109/TTE.2019.
2921854.
[13]
Statnett SF. Langsiktig markedsanalyse. Tech. rep. 2020. URL: https : / / www .
statnett.no/contentassets/723377473d80488a9c9abb4f5178c265/langsiktig-markedsanalyse-
norden-og-europa-2020-50---final.pdf.
[14]
Daniel Esteban Morales Bondy. “Demand Response for a Secure Power System
Operation”. In: (2017).
[15]
International Energy Agency. “Lessons from liberalised electricity markets”. In: CE­
Sifo DICE Report 4.2 (2006), pp. 24–29. ISSN: 16120663.
[16]
Copenhagen Cleantech Cluster CCC. “Denmark: a European Smart Grid Hub”. In:
(2011). URL: https://stateofgreen.com/files/download/5492.
[17]
ACES | Bornholms Energi og Forsyning. https://beof.dk/om-os/udviklingsprojekter/
aces/. (Accessed on 02/22/2021).
[18]
Ecogrid. http://ecogrid.dk/. (Accessed on 06/26/2021).
[19]
ACDC Project. https://www.acdc-bornholm.eu/home. (Accessed on 02/22/2021).
39
==PAGE:49==
[20]
J. García­Villalobos et al. “Plug­in electric vehicles in electric distribution networks:
A review of smart charging approaches”. In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 38 (2014), pp. 717–731. ISSN: 13640321. DOI: 10.1016/j.rser.2014.07.040.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.07.040.
[21]
Andreas Thingvad et al. “Value of V2G Frequency Regulation in Great Britain Con­
sidering Real Driving Data”. In: Proceedings of 2019 IEEE PES Innovative Smart
Grid Technologies Europe, ISGT­Europe 2019 (2019). DOI: 10.1109/ISGTEurope.
2019.8905679.
[22]
DTU. “Across Continents Electric Vehicle Services”. In: DTU Denmark (2021). URL:
https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/projects/across-continents-electric-vehicle-services.
[23]
Peter Richardson, Damian Flynn, and Andrew Keane. “Local versus centralized
charging strategies for electric vehicles in low voltage distribution systems”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid 3.2 (2012), pp. 1020–1028. ISSN: 19493053. DOI: 10.
1109/TSG.2012.2185523.
[24]
Abb. Could electric vehicles threaten power systems … and how can we fix it ?
2020.
[25]
Working Group A2.20 CIGRÉ. “TB 248. Guide on Economic of Transformer Man­
agement”. In: June (2004), p. 68.
[26]
IEA. Nordic EV Outlook 2018. Tech. rep. 2018. URL: https://www.iea.org/publications/
freepublications/publication/nordic-ev-outlook-2018.html.
[27]
Kristian Sevdari. “Electric Vehicle Chargers Market Outlook”. In: August (2020).
[28]
M Landi. V2G Benefits and Learnings. https://www.slideshare.net/KTNUK/v2g-
cohort-the-future. (Accessed on 06/28/2021). May 2020.
[29]
Xue Han et al. “Taxonomy for Evaluation of Distributed Control Strategies for Dis­
tributed Energy Resources”. In: IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 9.5 (2018), pp. 5185–
5195. ISSN: 19493053. DOI: 10.1109/TSG.2017.2682924.
[30]
Katarina Knezović. “Active integration of electric vehicles in the distribution network
– theory, modelling and practice”. In: (2017), pp. 1–229.
[31]
Statnett SF. Distributed balancing of the power grid. Tech. rep. February. 2021,
pp. 1–48.
[32]
Energinet. “Ancillary services to be delivered in Denmark Tender conditions”. In:
Energinet December (2019), pp. 1–49. URL: https://en.energinet.dk/Electricity/
Rules-and-Regulations#Market%20regulations.
[33]
Andreas Kieldsen et al. “Efficiency test method for electric vehicle chargers”. In:
EVS 2016 ­ 29th International Electric Vehicle Symposium (2016).
[34]
Aidon. ”HAN Interface Description (ID 31864). https://www.nek.no/wp-content/
uploads/2018/11/Aidon-HAN-Interface-Description-v10A-ID-34331.pdf. (Accessed
on 06/19/2021).
[35]
International Electrotechnical Commission. “IEC 61851”. In: (2010).
[36]
L. Calearo, K. Sevdari, and M Marinelli. “Status e­mobility DK”. In: (2021).
40
==PAGE:50==
A
A
A.1
Spike explanation
The spike investigated is the one highlighted with blue in figure A.1 from case 1a.
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
Time [hours]
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Power [kW]
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Ampere [A]
Case 1
Figure A.1: Overview of Pmeasured,largest spike from case 1a marked in blue
The enlarged blue area is shown in figure A.2. Four points are marked illustrating the mea­
surements of the 10 second measurement cycle. These points show the actual values,
Pmeasured that are being sent from the smart­meter to the VA.
41
==PAGE:51==
5.846
5.847
5.848
5.849
5.85
5.851
Time [seconds]
#104
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Power [kW]
Pmeasured
X 58481
Y 16.4261
X 58471
Y 9.31596
X 58491
Y 10.2332
X 58461
Y 14.49
Figure A.2: Detailed overview of Pmeasured, largest spike from Case 1a
The same points from figure A.2 in terms of time, are marked in figure A.3. The y­axis
shows individual charging power, the points describe the total Pmeasured at the same time.
The first point at t = 58461, also represent the Preference at 14.49 kW. The system is
in perfect balance before the event starts, in other words the measured error, ∆P = 0.
Shortly after this, between 1­2 seconds, charger 8 disconnects. The smart­meter is not
distributing a new signal until 8 more seconds has passed, as seen in figure A.2. On the
contrary, the VA is immediately notified that a charger has disconnected, and allows the
next charger, which is first in the queue, to connect, but not to start charging. The VA starts
to distribute the ∆Ptemporarily, for 10 seconds, as described in equation 3.5. Normally this
is a function that is activated when a charger connects, to reduce overshoot that occur
the moment the charging begins. At the point of the second measurement cycle, the
output power has been reduced for a period of 8 out of the 10 seconds, as is should
do. At this time, the smart­meter also distributes a new value, Pmeasured. To summarise,
the ∆Ptemporarily function is still active, output power have been reduced, and charger 8
recently disconnected. These three factors add up, and changes the error term to a bigger
then desired. ∆P is now a large negative value, that goes into the charging controller.
42
==PAGE:52==
The PID will try to eliminate the error by increasing the output signal, and thus increase
charging power. The short delay before charging power increases is due to the transport
delay from the VA, to the different chargers. Since the error term is very negative, the
increased charging power response is equivalent positive. Around the same time charger
6 starts charging, the ∆Ptemporarily function deactivates, which causes the slope of the
charging to slightly reduce it self. However the response form the controller is so strong
that within the third measurement cycle, the Pmeasured have exceeded the 63 Amp limit,
and the result is a spike in total power consumption. This spike is regarded as a worst
case, where the smart­meter have just measured before a charger disconnects. Also,
case 1 is without priority, which has a side effect that tend to reduce spikes, although that
is not the primary function of the priority.
5.846
5.847
5.848
5.849
5.85
5.851
Time [seconds]
#104
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Power [kW]
charger1
charger2
charger3
charger4
charger5
charger6
charger8
charger9
charger10
First measurement cycle at time 58461
Last measurement before charger 8 disconnects Pmeasured 14.49
Second measurement cycle at 58471
Pmeasured 9.31596
 Thrid measurement cycle at time 58481
Pmeasured 16.4261
Charger 6 starts charging
Figure A.3: Detailed overview of chargers, largest spike from Case 1a
43
==PAGE:53==
A.2
Connection queue logic explanation
A.2.1
Queuing logic
The reason for case 1c is not charging to its fully extent is related to mainly two reasons.
The first reason requires an explanation of the queuing logic. The charging queue logic
consist of a integrator that can be thought of as a counting device. When a charger is de­
nied charging, the integrator starts counting, and its value increases. If a second charger
is denied charging, another integrator start counting. Every charger has an counter. To
be allowed to charge, it has to be the the counter with the highest counted value, as well
as other criteria such a as available capacity at POCC. Ideally the integrator would been
reset, when the charger was allowed to charge. But due to time constrain of the thesis,
this was not possible to achieve without violating other aspects, more important to the
model, such as power limitation. The downside to this is that the counter for the charger
second in queue has to surpass the counted value of the charger first in queue. This
cause a delay for charging to start, and can effect the individual SOC of the charger that
has to wait. However, in the meantime the other chargers will increase their power output.
Therefore the total energy charged will only have a slightly reduced value. But when it is
getting close to the end of the day, and this queue delay could cause an EV to not fulfil
its goal, because of the reduced available charging time due to the counting delay.
A.2.2
Connection logic
The second reason is related to the connection logic. To be able to connect, there has to
be available capacity at the POCC. This is checked by reducing the ∆P temporarily, with
an value given by equation 3.5. The function that checks available capacity is triggered
by an EV connecting, or disconnecting. This works fine most of the time. But some times
not, and that is related to the described queue logic above. In the event, that two chargers
disconnects relatively close in time, charger 1 and charger 2. And there are two chargers
in queue, charger 3, and charger 4. The first charger in queue, charger 3, will connect
just after the charger 1 disconnected, since this charger have waited for the longest time.
Now, because the integrator counter is not reset, charger 4, which is in queue will now
have to count until it surpass the waiting time of the charger 3. In the mean time charger
2 disconnect, triggers the capacity check function, but there is no charger which is first in
the queue, because charger 4 is waiting for the counter to surpass charger 3. After the
∆P temporarily reduction, other chargers will increase their charging power again to use
all of the available capacity at the POCC. Charger 4 will have to wait until next time the
POCC is reduced.
44
==PAGE:54==
45
==PAGE:55==
Technical
University of
Denmark
348, Ørsteds Pl.
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.elektro.dtu.dk
