==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Style transfer applied to structural optimization
Tanguy Navez (s192702)
Dassault System, Vélizi-Villacoublay, France 2021
Supervisors
Martin-Pierre Schmidt, Claus Pedersen,
Jakob Andreas Bærentzen and Ole Sigmund
==PAGE:2==
Summary
During my Master Thesis, I was part of a team involved in 3D Bio Founded Modelling that aims to
find new ways to conceive and optimize 3D designs guided by natural principles. In this context, I
explored and implemented a new Appearance Constraint to control the geometrical properties of gener-
ated structures during Structure Optimization. This Constraint can be easily integrated in a classical
Topology Optimization framework and become an additional control tool over the generated design.
Direct applications are the generation of mechanically viable artistic designs or oriented structures.
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master Thesis was prepared at Dassault Systèmes in Velizy-Villacoublay in France in fulfillment
of the requirements for acquiring a MSc degree in Human Centered Artificial Intelligence from the
Technical University of Denmark. I was supervised by Claus Pedersen and Martin-Pierre Schmidt on
the Dassault Système side, and Jakob Andreas Bærentzen and Ole Sigmund on the DTU side.
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor Martin-Pierre who have welcomed me at Dassault
Systèmes and from whom I have learned a lot. Thank you for taking the time to answer each of my
numerous questions always so quickly, even when working from home.
I also want to thank Claus, Andreas and Ole for our regular exchanges and their valuable insights.
I am also grateful to the rest of the team, David-Henri, David, François and Luc for our weekly
discussions and for their friendly welcoming.
I have to thank my fellow DTU students Gaétan Moisson-Franckauser, Brian Tang and Reda Lahlou,
alongside whom I had the chance to work every Friday to alleviate the weight of teleworking. I will
miss our gastronomic evenings and our challenging tennis matches.
Finally, I cannot end without thanking my most faithful allies in this time of pandemic. Thanks to
my coffee machine for warming me up whenever the need arose, and to Sophie the ficus tree for her
soothing presence near to my desk.
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction of the subject
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background and related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Appearance optimisation without physical considerations
8
2.1
Generalities on appearance computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Appearance optimization without physical considerations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Importance of voting during patch blending step
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4
Matching algorithm convergence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.5
Patch assignment convergence and initialization influence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3
Distance measure investigation for appearance constraint
19
3.1
Topology optimization formulation with appearance constraint
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Appearance formulation baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Distance between patches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4
General study of appearance constraint
29
4.1
General convergence of the method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Matching convergence during topology optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Acceleration of the appearance constraint computation
36
5.1
Multi-Threading
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Computation time evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Reduction scheme for matching assignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4
Patch search limitation in empty areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Interactions between patterns of the library
43
6.1
Behaviour with multiple Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Using one appearance constraint per pattern
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.3
Penalizing the overuse of a pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.4
User-specified pattern by areas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Propagation of patterns
46
7.1
Spatial matching jump energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.2
Different boundaries condition for patch evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
==PAGE:6==
Contents
v
7.3
Tolerant propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.4
Soft-min aggregation of distances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8
Rotation and Scaling invariance
53
8.1
Generalized PatchMatch . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
8.2
PatchMatch with feature keypoints descriptors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
9
High resolution 3D results
59
10 Conclusion
61
Bibliography
62
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction of the subject
The rise of additive manufacturing and 3D printing offer new freedoms, allowing to explore the possi-
bilities of generative design and especially from topology optimization. As part of my master thesis, I
joined the Bio Founded 3D Modelling project which aims to find new approaches for generative design
inspired by biological principles.
Topology optimization solution focus on functional objectives to generate the best solution given user-
specified design requirements. The objective of my work was to develop new constraints allowing the
control of the geometry of the generated design from discrete patterns. As main applications in view: the
generation of artistic and mechanically viable designs and oriented structures (given suitable oriented
patterns). Figure 1.1 shows examples of generated designs with our solution.
Figure 1.1: Generated designs with our solution
1.2
Background and related work
1.2.1
Topology optimisation
Topology optimisation is the most common form of structural optimisation, used to predict the optimal
distribution of material under constraints in a given design space.
There are many mathematical
approaches for topology optimisation such as ”phase-field”, “level set”, “topological derivatives” or
“evolutionary”.
In this work, we consider the ”density-based” SIMP (Solid Isotropic Material with
Penalization) model, initially proposed in [PN88].
==PAGE:8==
1.2 Background and related work
2
Figure 1.2: Topology optimization flowchart
A typical topology optimization workflow is presented in figure 1.2. It follows the following steps:
• 1 - Discretization of the design space and application of boundary conditions:
The design space Ωis subdivided into a grid of connected finite elements i. For reasons of sim-
plicity, we use a cubic discretization, but it is possible to use other subdivisions e.g. tetrahedrons,
hexahedrons... This elements will serve both as a Finite Element Mesh for the physical simula-
tion but also as a container for the design variables of the optimization. In a typical topology
optimization framework, the designer provides, in addition to the definition of the design space,
clamps and forces that are directly applied to the nodes of the finite element mesh. Figure 1.3
shows an example of a cubic mesh where the nodes on the left side are clamped and a downward
force is applied on the bottom right hand side of the design space.
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Background and related work
3
Figure 1.3: On the left: example of model specification for a topology optimization scenario.
On the right: obtained 2D design after 50 iterations of topology optimization for a global volume
fraction constraint set to 40%.
• 2 - Initialization of design variables
Each finite element is assigned a continuous density ρi. As opposed to traditional approach where
each element is filled with material or void, these continuous functions avoid the binary nature
of the model. This densities are bounded by the box constraint: ∀i ∈Ω
0 ≤ρi ≤1. A relative
density of 0 relates to an empty element and a density of 1 to an element full of material.
• 3 - Evaluation of the compliance objective function
This step consists in computing the compliance objective that we seek to minimize. The Young
modulus of elasticity Y of each element i for the assigned isotropic model Y0 is computed by the
power law Y (ρi) = ρp
i × Y0. The penalisation power p is usually taken equal to 3. It discourages
the optimizer to keep densities different from 0 or 1 for elements by reducing the contribution
of elements with intermediate densities to the total stiffness of the design. The state equation
K(ρ)u = f linking the global stiffness matrix K, the nodal force f and the nodal displacement
u can be solved for u to formulate the objective function J(ρ) = f T u as the compliance in the
design, which is a measure of the overall flexibility of the system. It encapsulates the amount of
deformation in the structure given loads and boundary conditions provided by the designer.
• 4 - Evaluation of the gradients of the objective function with respect to Design
Variables
It is common to solve the optimization problem using a gradient based method, due to the number
of Design Variables. Thus, we calculate the gradient of the objective function with respect to
each Design Variable, which gives an idea of how we must change the variable to improve the
compliance score. These derivatives are then smoothed with a suitable filter [AO95] to improve
numerical stability, reduce erroneous checkerboard patterns and introducing a length scale in the
optimization so it is well defined.
• 5 - Evaluation of the constraint function(s)
A typical topology optimization problem involves one or more constraint that need to be satisfied.
A classical constraint that we also adopt here is the global volume fraction constraint. It defines
the maximum allowable volume to be used in the final design. Its expression is the following:
Gtot =
1
|Ω| ×
∑
i∈Ωρi
G∗
tot
−1 ≤0 where G∗
tot is the total allowable volume fraction chosen by the
user. In particular, this avoids the trivial case of filling the entire design space with elements of
maximum volume.
In addition to the global volume fraction constraint, we propose to add a new appearance con-
straint Atot which expression is detailed in this paper.
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Background and related work
4
• 6 - Evaluation of the gradients of the constraint function(s) with respect to design
variables
As for the compliance, we compute the gradients of each constraint with respect to each of the
Design Variables.
• 7 - Update of Design Variables
Once the values and gradients of the objectives and constraints have been computed, we use a
gradient-based mathematical programming approach to update the Design Variables without vio-
lating the constraints. For this purpose, a common approach is the Method of Moving Asymptotes
(MMA) [K87] that can handle multiple non linear constraints. Once the Design Variables have
been updated, the algorithm loops back to step 3 if the convergence criteria of the optimizer is
not verified.
• 8 - Output of the final design
Several convergence criteria can be used to stop the optimization when the design is converged.
Here, the user simply provide a fixed number of iterations before the optimization process stops.
We then have an optimized design satisfying the different constraints where each element has an
optimized relative density. An example of a structure generated through topology optimization
is shown in figure 1.3.
The complete formulation for the topology optimisation problem baseline without appearance con-
straint used in this work, can thus be written:
argminρJ(ρ) = f T u
s.t.K(ρ)u = f
∀i ∈Ω
0 ≤ρi ≤1
(1)
Gtot = 1
|Ω| ×
∑
i∈Ωρi
G∗
tot
−1 ≤0
1.2.2
Patch based appearance optimisation of an image
1.2.2.1
Continuous texture synthesis
The problem of synthesizing a new image from exemplars traces its origin from the field of ”texture
synthesis” which aims to create rectangular textures from small examples [LM09].
In [Va05], the problem of synthesizing a new image resembling an exemplar image is addressed using
the formulation of an energy. Pixels of the output image are the variables that are modified through
the optimization of the appearance energy. This point of view is adopted in our approach to quantify
the appearance of the generated design relatively to the provided inputs.
Figure 1.4: Example of synthesized texture from [Va05]. On the left is the input used and on the right
the corresponding generated texture
Patch-based synthesis is a computer graphics area where output images are synthesized by copying
small regions from exemplar images. A comprehensive review of patch-based texture synthesis methods
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Background and related work
5
up to 2017 is available [CF15]. This local approach, operating on the use of small compact regions, was
chosen in order to be easily coupled with topology optimization.
The main stage in most patch-based synthesis methods is the matching phase which find suitable
patches to copy from the exemplars. Although search in the design space can be done by exhaustively
sampling the research space, this tends to be impractical with large exemplar. More eﬀicient approxi-
mation algorithm are prefered, such as PatchMatch [Ca09] that is discussed later in this paper.
These techniques usually used in ”texture synthesis” are easily adaptable to the optimization of struc-
ture, by replacing the usual data which are the pixels and their intensity by the finite elements and
their relative density.
1.2.2.2
Discrete texture synthesis
In our solution, we propose to guide the appearance optimization from a Library of several Patterns
instead of only one. This idea comes from the WaveFunctionCollapse Github project [M] that generates
procedural coherent bitmaps from several inputs tilemaps by constraining their positioning on a grid.
They are constrained by edges conditions: for example, a tile whose right side is green can only be
positioned to the left of a tile whose left side is green. The idea was to leave the possibility to the
algorithm to choose between several inputs which are more or less locally adapted to the generated
structure.
Figure 1.5: Example of bitmap generation from several bitmaps - WaveFunctionCollapse
1.2.3
Appearance optimisation and 3D fabrication
Topology optimization methods are increasingly popular as design tools to automatically produce struc-
tures having desirable physical properties. However, there is no simple way to control the geometrical
patterns appearing in the generated design. Indeed, only physical behaviors and simple geometrical
properties are considered as an optimization objective in most of traditional approaches.
1.2.3.1
Post-processing appearance optimization of 3D structures
A very few work have considered both texture synthesis and 3D fabrication. A possibility is to resort to
post processing. In [Oa12], the object’s structural strength is improved after its modelling. Conversely,
in [Ja15a], geometric patterns are synthesized along the surface of a 3D object while ensuring it stays
printable. However this last approach does not take into account a material budget and tends to fill
the design domain. In [Wa16], fine filigree are created along the surface of a 3D object to resemble a
2D exemplars.
==PAGE:12==
1.3 Contributions
6
Figure 1.6: Example of synthesis for 3D fabrication from (a) [Oa12], (b) [Ja15a], (c) [Wa16]
1.2.3.2
Optimization of the appearance during the structure generation process
Others have tackled the problem of both the optimisation of appearance and compliance at the same
time. [IC99] initially developed for eﬀiciency reasons the possibility to control somewhat the appear-
ance of design through explicit constraints such as avoiding regions of space or enforcing symmetries.
More recently, [Ja15b] developed a single optimization problem for optimizing both appearance and
compliance at the same time. They propose a formulation in which the appearance is optimized as
an objective whereas the stiffness and the mass of the structure are provided as constraints. We chose
to experiment around this idea because it allows more control on the design generated by topology
optimization, which constitutes a frequent request from designers.
Figure 1.7: Example of results from [Ja15a]
We adopted a similar approach optimizing both appearance and stiffness, this time using compliance
as an objective and appearance as a constraint.
1.3
Contributions
My research work was done within the C++ test framework of my Dassault Systèmes supervisor Martin-
Pierre, where a complete topology optimization workflow optimizer was already implemented. I was
thus able to implement and experiment with various algorithms and expression for the appearance con-
straint in this framework. The innovative aspect of our work resides in the idea of providing a library of
patterns instead of a single pattern for the appearance constraint computation which makes it possible
to choose the most suitable local patterns during the optimization.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Contributions
7
The first part of my master thesis consisted in implementing an altered version of the appearance energy
proposed by [Ja15b] and optimize it by itself without any physical considerations. Investigative work
was carried out on the three main axes of the solution, namely a local matching algorithm between the
optimized density field and a pattern library, a distance measurement between two local patches and
an appearance energy formulation. This allowed us to choose the most viable formulation, presenting
the best compromise between computation time, rigidity of the generated structure and propagation of
provided patterns. Results are presented in chapters 2 and 3.
Once a satisfying solution has been determined, the convergence of the topology optimization process
after integration of the appearance constraint has been studied (chapter 4) and new features have been
implemented and tested to improve the general behavior of the appearance constraint (computation
time in chapter 5, pattern interactions and control in chapter 6, propagation of patterns in chapter 7,
rotation and scaling invariance in chapter 8). Finally, chapter 9 presents some high resolution results
and applications. A large emphasis has been placed on testing the different proposed solutions. Thus
you will find example of results throughout the course of this report.
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2
Appearance optimisation
without physical
considerations
To formulate the appearance constraint before injecting it as a constraint in the topology optimisation
problem (1) presented in the Background section, the appearance of a density field was first optimised
on its own by gradient descent to test it without physical considerations. This section first describes the
general principles behind the calculation of the appearance before presenting the first results obtained
without physical constraints. Note that although most of the results presented are in 2D for convenience,
the algorithms implemented are designed for 3D.
2.1
Generalities on appearance computation
2.1.1
General notations
We denote i the coordinates of a finite element and ρi its assiocated density strictly between 0 and
1. Concisely, a finite element will be mentioned simply by its coordinate i in the following. Ωis the
density field to optimise. The user can provide a library of several patterns I = {I1, I2, I3, ..., In} to
the algorithm.
To evaluate the appearance, a local patch approach was adopted, so that the constraint couples
well with the general topology optimization process later. The patches used are typically rectangular
windows of size |ω| = (2 × lx + 1) × (2 × ly + 1) × (2 × lz + 1) where lx, ly, lz are integers defining the
radius of the patch along each axis. ωi contains the elements of a patch having for center the element i:
ωi = {j | ∥(jk −ik)∥∝≤lk, k ∈{x, y, z}
In the following, the variable density of i ∈Ωis noted ρi whereas the constant density of i∗∈I
is αi∗. Alternatively, the notations ρi,j or αi,j are also used to refer to the density of elements j in a
neighborhood ωi of i.
For each element i in Ω, the best matching element i∗belonging to I (i.e. the element with the most
similar neighborhood) is obtained through a correspondence function m between elements from Ωand
elements from I:
m : Ω→I
i →i∗
This mapping m is carried out using a matching algorithm and an adequate distance measurement
between two patches which are described later.
Figure 2.1 shows an illustration of the notations introduced in this section.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Generalities on appearance computation
9
Figure 2.1: Illustration of introduced notations
2.1.2
General appearance evaluation flowchart
In this section we describe the general process to evaluate the constraint of appearance. A general
flowchart is provided in figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: General appearance constraint flowchart
• 1.bis - Setup of a discrete pattern library:
In addition to providing the Design Space, the boundary conditions and loads applied to the finite
element mesh, the designer provides a library of patterns. Practically, this library consists in a
series of PNG files whose pixels intensity in gray level is interpreted as a material density between
0 and 1. The main benefit of using PNG files is that it allows easily hand-painting or adjusting
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Generalities on appearance computation
10
of patterns in image processing software for testing. The appearance of the structure generated
during optimization is then measured relatively to this pattern library.
• 2.bis - Setup of a Patch Discretization of the Design Space:
A patch ωi is assigned to each finite element i of the design domain Ω. This discretization is used
to compute the appearance constraint locally by considering the measure of the appearance of each
patch relative to a well-chosen location of the pattern library determined during the matching
assignment step.
• 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 - Matching assignment:
Each evaluation of the appearance constraint begins with the matching of each patch initialized
in 2.bis with the most similar patch in the pattern library. For this purpose, a distance measure-
ment between two patches must be defined. Several different measures have been tested and are
presented in this report. In order to reduce the search space, a matching algorithm, described in
section 2.1.5, is used to reduce search space in the pattern library.
• 5.4 - Computation of appearance constraint functions:
The appearance constraint function is computed from the matching assignment.
• 6 - Evaluation of the gradients of the appearance constraint function(s) with respect
to Design Variables:
The gradients of the appearance constraint is computed with respect to each design variable and
provided to the MMA optimiser along with computed gradients of compliance and global volume
constraint.
2.1.3
Patch-based method
The two main steps of a patch-based synthesis algorithm are the matching, and the blending. During
the matching, the best matching patch among exemplars is attributed to each patch of Ω. The approach
used for this purpose is discussed in Section 2.4. As one patch ωi is defined around every element i, we
face dense overlapping patches. A common approach to blend the contributions from each patches in
this case is to adopt a ”voting” method illustrated in figure 2.3, considering an average of contributions
from all patches. This is how the appearance gradient is computed relatively to each design variable
(step 6 in figure 2.2).
Figure 2.3: Illustration of a voting method. The central element of the red patch receives a contribution
from all the surrounding patches including it.
2.1.4
Boundary conditions for patch evaluation
The main step of the assessment of the appearance is the assignment of the best match m(i) among
patterns I for each of the elements i the optimized density field Ω. The best match m(i) found for
an element i is the one which gives the smaller distance D(ρi, ρm(i)). However this distance is not
completely defined when evaluated on patches that are partially outside of the Design Space Ωor one
of the patterns of I. Two choices were made in such cases:
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Generalities on appearance computation
11
• All elements of the density field Ωhave to be optimised. As we do not want any material outside
the grid of the density field, the approach taken is to estimate the density of outside elements to
0:
∀i ∈Ω, j ∈wi & j /∈Ω=⇒ρj = 0
• Only patches lying entirely inside an pattern exemplar grid I1, I2, I3, ..., In are evaluated. Thus,
only elements in the following set I∗are considered as center of patches:
I∗= {j, ld ≤jd < |Ik
j | −ld∀d ∈{x, y, z} & k ∈|[1, n]|}
This choice was made to avoid unexpected behavior on edges by forcing matching with a region
completely included in the pattern library. Moreover, this approach makes it possible to limit the
number of calculations by reducing the number of patches to evaluate among patterns.
Figure 2.4: Illustration of specific cases management for patch evaluation
2.1.5
Matching algorithm
As a matching algorithm, an adapted version of the fast randomized approximation correspondence
algorithm PatchMatch [Ca09] that manages several patterns was implemented. This method keeps in
memory the best patch assignment from one iteration to another and approximates the attribution of
the best matching patch from it. It has the advantage of strongly reducing the matching search space
compared to a method testing all possible locations in the pattern library. Convergence of the method
is estimated in 2.4.
The matching algorithm is based on 4 phases:
• Initialization: before the first iteration of the optimization algorithm, every element i from Ωis
assigned a matching element m(i) at random among patterns I.
• The original PatchMatch algorithm is an iterative process that improves continually the matching
assignment. In our case, we use the fast randomized matching algorithm at each iteration of the
general structural optimization scheme as a starting step to evaluate the appearance constraint.
Thus, an iteration of the algorithm aims at both improving the matching assignment and updating
it by taking into account the design variables updates coming from physical considerations. We
keep the matching assignment in memory throughout the entire design optimization process. At
each iteration, the 3 following steps of the fast randomized matching algorithm are applied once on
all elements of the design domain before proceeding to the evaluation of the appearance constraint
functions:
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Generalities on appearance computation
12
– Switch Search: This phase allows us to travel through the pattern library. To give the
algorithm an opportunity to change the pattern in which it searches for the nearest patch,
we attempt to improve the matching assignment by testing a set of nS patches taken at
random among each other pattern of the library. The selection is made following an uniform
distribution on the subspace of the maximum dimension of each pattern. Unless specified
otherwise, we use nS = 3 in our implementation.
– Walk Search: To not be stuck in a local minimum, we attempt to improve the matching
assignment by testing several patches taken inside a circle of decreasing radius of center its
current best match. To improve the convergence speed as proposed in [Pa10], we update
the center of the search during the Walk Search if a better match is found. This tweaking
has shown to improve the convergence speed of the matching algorithm.
Concisely, the
coordinates of an element will be referred by a simple mention to the element in the following.
The coordinates of tested element are then obtained by m(i) + ( 1
2)kwRk where m(i) are the
coordinates of the current best matching assignment, Rk ∈[−1, 1] × [−1, 1] × [−1, 1] is an
uniform random vector, w is the maximum search radius taken equal to the maximum pattern
dimension and clamped to the bounds of the pattern. We examine patches for k=0,1,2,...
until the current search radius ( 1
2)kw is below 1 voxel.
– Propagation: The idea is that if two elements are next to each other in the design domain,
there is a high chance that their best match are also next to each other in the pattern library.
We attempt to improve the matching assignment by using a propagation algorithm similar to
the Distance Transform. To ensure a coherent spreading, the propagation is performed two
times, forward and then backward. First, the design domain is browsed from bottom to top
and left to right. For each browsed element i, we try to improve the matching m(i) by testing
translations of mapping m(i + (−1, 0, 0)), m(i + (0, −1, 0)) and m(i + (0, 0, −1)). Then, the
propagation is performed a second time from top to bottom and right to left by testing for
each element i potential patch assignment improvements m(i + (1, 0, 0)), m(i + (0, 1, 0)) and
m(i + (0, 0, 1)).
Each of the three matching update steps is applied independently on all i ∈Ωbefore proceeding to
the next step. The different phases of the fast randomized matching algorithm are illustrated in figure
2.5.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Appearance optimization without physical considerations
13
Figure 2.5: Illustration of different phases of the randomized matching algorithm. Best matches are
initialized at random during the Initialization. At the Switch Search phase, the red patch randomly
search for improvements in other patterns. The red patch randomly search for a better assignment
inside a concentric neighborhood in its current pattern in the Walk Search phase. Finally, during the
Propagation, the blue patch checks bottom (orange) and left (red) patches assignment for a better
one and propagates the best match.
2.2
Appearance optimization without physical considerations
In this section are introduced the notations specific to the formalization of the appearance as well as
a first formulation used at the beginning of the project. This formulation made it possible to test the
validity of the proposed appearance expression without being encumbered by the other constraints /
objectives of a topology optimization problem, and in particular to investigate the matching algorithm
used.
2.2.1
Patch distance and appearance energy baseline
The choice made for the appearance energy A is that the closer the appearance of the system is from
that of the pattern library, the lower the appearance energy should be.
The sum of squared difference between densities is used as the measure of distance between two
patches. The distance is normalized by the patch size |ω| to ensure its value is between 0 and 1.
D(ρi, ρi∗) =
∑
j∈ωi
(ρi,j −αi∗,j)2
|ω|
This measure has first order derivative available which is a requirement from any gradient-based opti-
mization method like the MMA optimizer used in the later sections. The appearance energy contributed
by an element i ∈Ωis then:
A(ρi) = D(ρi, ρm(i))
and the total appearance energy is:
Atot(Ω) =
∑
i∈Ω
A(ρi)
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Importance of voting during patch blending step
14
It follows that the derivative of the appearance energy is:
∂A
∂ρj
=
∑
i|j∈ωi
2 × (ρi,j −αm(i),j)
|ω|
This formulation has undergone some adjustments after integration into the MMA optimiser which
are presented later in this paper.
2.2.2
Gradient descent optimiser
The appearance was firstly used as the objective of a simple gradient descent scheme.
In order to quickly get a feeling for the direction of gradient, the computed gradient magnitudes are
rescaled between -0.1 and 0.1 before applying the gradient descent locally to the density of each element
of Ω. The pseudo-code of such a process is described in figure 2.2.2.
Algorithm 1 Gradient algorithm on an appearance objective
1: Initialization: density values ρi are initialized with user-specified values
2: for n = 0 to Niterations do
3:
Matching: search and store the the best matching assignments m(i) ∈I for each i ∈Ω
4:
Gradient computation: ∀j ∈Ω, ∂A
∂ρj ←∑
i|j∈ωi 2 ×
(ρi,j−αm(i),j)
|ω|
5:
Gradient rescaling: ∀i ∈Ω, ∂A
∂ρi ←−0.1 + 2 × 0.1 ×
( ∂A
∂ρi −mini( ∂A
∂ρi ))
maxi( ∂A
∂ρ (ρi)−mini( ∂A
∂ρi
)
6:
Gradient descent: ∀i ∈Ω, ρi ←ρi −∂A
∂ρi
7: end for
2.2.3
Optimization with a gradient descent scheme
A typical result obtained with the a gradient descent scheme and the features described above is shown
in figure 2.6. In this example, finite element densities are initialized with intermediate values of 0.5.
Figure 2.6: Appearance optimization with a gradient descent scheme
2.3
Importance of voting during patch blending step
In this section we are interested in investigating the importance of a voting step during the blending
of contribution of patches for the computation of appearance gradients, described in section 2.1.3. As
==PAGE:21==
2.3 Importance of voting during patch blending step
15
can be noticed in figure 2.6, a typical result of appearance optimization alone gives many intermediate
densities due to the averaging of contributions of neighboring patches.
Here, we consider the appearance gradient for each element i as an only contribution from the patch
ωi from which it is central. The appearance gradient therefore becomes:
∂A
∂ρj
=
∑
i|j∈ωi
2 × (ρi,j −αm(i),j)
|ω|
=⇒∂A
∂ρj
= 2 × (ρj −αm(j))
This formula gives good result with small simple patterns. Two examples with such pattern libraries
are shown in figure 2.7a. In both cases, the patterns used propagate well and their influence is easily
recognizable in the final design. They are much sharper and do not contain intermediate densities as in
the figure 2.6. However, when the patterns are larger, the voting step is necessary, in particular because
it harms a good propagation of the design. Such an example is shown in figure 2.7b. This time, it is
diﬀicult to recognize Totoro in the final design.
(a) With a low resolution pattern library
(b) With a high resolution pattern library
Figure 2.7: Appearance optimization through a gradient descent scheme and without a voting step
Tests were also carried out once the energy of appearance was integrated into the topology opti-
mization workflow presented later in this report. The idea is that with the contribution of a second
constraint on the geometry via the compliance objective, this could avoid clutter cases like the previous
one. Nevertheless, the same observation was made: only simple and repeated patterns gave recognizable
geometric patterns in the final design. Two such cases are shown in figure 2.8.
(a) With a low resolution pattern library
(b) With a high resolution pattern library
Figure 2.8: Appearance optimization with physical considerations and without a voting step
==PAGE:22==
2.4 Matching algorithm convergence
16
2.4
Matching algorithm convergence
The objective of this section is to investigate the convergence of the chosen fast randomized matching
algorithm described in section 2.1.5. For comparison, we first implemented a deterministic baseline
presented in section 2.4.1.
2.4.1
Matching algorithm baseline: brute deterministic matching
Brute deterministic matching explores the full combinatorial space to find the best matching location
for each element i ∈Ω. It consists in testing the distance D(ρi, ρi∗) between the patch wi of each
element i and the patch wi∗of each element i∗among patterns to keep the best match at each iteration.
In order to use parallel operations to speed up the matching algorithm, the evaluation of patches
from Ωis done relatively to their value at the previous iteration. A pseudo-code for the brute patch
assignment algorithm is presented below.
Algorithm 2 Brute matching
1: for each i ∈Ωdo
2:
Dmin ←1.0
▷Lower distance initialization
3:
for each j ∈I do
4:
D(ρi, ρj) = ∑
k∈ωi
(ρi,k−αj,k)2
|ω|
5:
if D(ρi, ρj) ≤Dmin then
6:
m(i) = j
7:
Dmin ←D(ρi, ρj)
8:
end if
9:
end for
10: end for
The larger issue encountered with brute matching is its computation time.
Indeed, the general
complexity of the optimization algorithm resides in the searching and the comparison of patches during
the matching phase which is accelerated with fast randomized matching.
2.4.2
Computation time comparison and propagation quality
The objective of this experiment is to evaluate the quality of the matching and the gain in time obtained
with fast randomized matching.
A black and white image of Lena is used as a density fields. For density padding, a white pixel equals
a density of zero and a black pixel equals a density of one. Grey levels are intermediate densities. The
patch assignment test is done using sections of Lena’s photo as patterns. The objective is to check that
the pixels of these sections are matched with the correct patterns. The test is carried out with fast
randomized matching and brute matching for comparison in figure 2.9.
==PAGE:23==
2.5 Patch assignment convergence and initialization influence
17
Figure 2.9: Patch assignment map after one iteration for brute matching and fast randomized matching.
Each pattern is assigned one color in the assignment map
For each method, the matching areas are clearly visible and similar. Fast randomized matching
therefore makes a good approximation of the perfect matching obtained with brute matching.
As seen in the previous experiment, the matching is much faster in the case of fast randomized matching
by a factor of about 150. This difference would of course be less marked on lower resolution cases, and
may also depend on the size of the patch used or the size of the patterns.
However there is an effect at the edges due to the choices made for their processing. This visible effect
during matching is not necessarily annoying when updating the gradient during an optimization process,
given that the updated gradient of each element is a contribution of gradients from surrounding patches.
2.5
Patch assignment convergence and initialization influence
The task of this section is double:
• To assess the correct convergence of matching assignment across iterations of the optimization
process with the fast randomized algorithm
• To test the influence of the initialization of the relative densities of Ωon the convergence of the
result
For this purpose, we define a temporal matching jump energy MI at an iteration it as the sum of
euclidean difference between the coordinates of assigned patches from this iteration to the previous one:
M it
I =
∑
i∈Ω
√
(m(i)it
x −m(i)it−1
x
)2 + (m(i)it
y −m(i)it−1
y
)2 + (m(i)it
z −m(i)it−1
z
)2
A low energy means the matching is stable from one iteration to another.
The appearance of two density fields Ωinitialized differently, either with intermediate densities of
0.5, or with random densities in [0, 1], is optimized with a gradient descent scheme. Results are shown
in figure 2.10.
==PAGE:24==
2.5 Patch assignment convergence and initialization influence
18
Figure 2.10: Appearance optimization through a gradient descent scheme with different initialization
of initial relative densities. The appearance energy A and the matching jump energy MI are plotted
across iterations respectively in blue and green
In both cases, the patch assignment converges quickly in about ten iterations. The result obtained
are however not homogeneous and boundaries are clearly identifiable between the different areas that
get to propagate in the final design. This is an expected effect of local propagation which is constrained
by the size of the design (edge effects) and the size of the patches. If the latter increases, this effect is
much less visible, as in image 2.11.
Figure 2.11: Result obtained after 100 iterations on a density field initialized with random values and
with a different patch size lx = ly = 10, lz = 1.
The energy of appearance is also decreasing as expected. Oscillations can be observed after about
sixty iterations. They are due to the way in which the energy gradient
∂A
∂ρi rescaling is implemented,
which is forced even if the system has converged. This rescaling was useful for quick testing but not
appropriate for actual optimization problems. Having concluded the initial experiments, subsequent
tests will now use the MMA optimizer to solve constrained optimization formulations.
In topology optimization it is common to initialize Ωwith intermediate densities equal to the tar-
geted volume fraction G∗
tot. Since the two initialization give very similar results in terms of convergence,
an initialization with intermediate densities equal to G∗
tot is systematically used thereafter in the opti-
mization workflow.
Further investigations of matching convergence with the appearance optimized as a constraint in a
global topology optimization process are presented in section 4.2.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Distance measure
investigation for
appearance constraint
The previous section presented the optimization of an appearance objective without any physical con-
sideration. The aim of this section is to integrate the appearance as an additional inequality constraint
in the classic topology optimization problem subject to a global volume fraction constraint described
in the Background section. In this section are presented the investigations carried out concerning the
formulation of the appearance constraint. This formulation has undergone many changes. The final
appearance constraint mathematical formulation adopted is provided at the end of the chapter.
3.1
Topology optimization formulation with appearance constraint
To use it as a constraint, the appearance energy is further normalized by the worst appearance score
in order to be bounded between 0 and 1. The worst appearance score is obtained when comparing an
empty density field with an pattern full of matter or vice versa. Since the distance between two patches
is already between 0 and 1, a simple normalization therefore consists in the number of finite elements
in Ω.
Similarly to the global volume fraction constraint, the desired appearance score A∗∈[0, 1] is added to
the formulation. A user can thus control the appearance of the final design by playing with this value.
The resulting appearance constraint is added to the topology Optimisation problem presented in the
Background section:
argminρJ(ρ) = f T u
s.t.K(ρ)u = f
∀i ∈Ω
0 ≤ρi ≤1
Gtot = 1
|Ω| ×
∑
i∈Ωρi
G∗
tot
−1 ≤0
A(Ω) =
∑
i∈Ω
1
A∗|Ω|D(ρi, ρm(i)) −1 ≤0
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Appearance formulation baseline
20
3.2
Appearance formulation baseline
3.2.1
Appearance constraint baseline
In the first implementation, the distance used between two patches is the simple sum of squared differ-
ence of corresponding elements in the two evaluated patches, as in chapter 2:
D(ρi, ρm(i)) =
∑
j∈ωi
(ρi,j −αρm(i),j)2
|ω|
The expression of the gradient used for the appearance update consequently becomes:
∂A
∂ρj
=
1
A∗|Ω|
∑
i|j∈ωi
2(ρi,j −αm(i),j)
|ω|
3.2.2
Methodology: verification of gradient expressions
For this expression of
∂A
∂ρi and those proposed later in this chapter, the analytical expression of the
gradient and its implementation are verified by comparison with a finite difference approximation to
the gradient.
3.2.3
Structure optimization with appearance constraint
Figure 3.1 shows a typical result of topology optimization with appearance constraint. Unless otherwise
specified, the value of the maximum volume allowed G∗
tot taken in experiments presented in this paper
is 0.4.
Figure 3.1: Topology optimisation with appearance constraint baseline
3.2.4
Choice of A*
In order to obtain good results, the right value of A∗have to be used to constrain the maximum
appearance. This value varies according to the patterns provided, the size of the patch, the setting of
the global volume fraction constraint, etc ... A too high value of A∗will not constrain the appearance
enough and it will be impossible to recognize the pattern in the final design. On the contrary, a too
low value of A∗causes the appearance constraint to take precedence over the global volume fraction
constraint or the compliance objective.
Examples of structures generated with critical values of A∗constraining not enough, fairly or too much
the appearance are shown in figure 3.2.
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Distance between patches
21
Figure 3.2: Influence of the choice of A∗on generated structure
In order to choose the correct value for A∗, the method consists in running the algorithm with all
the chosen parameters but without taking into account the appearance constraint over ten iterations.
This is done simply by taking a maximum value of A∗= 1. The appearance constraint is still calculated,
and its average value is then used to determine the correct value to give to A∗that will constrain the
appearance of the pattern in the final design.
A smarter methodology was used later to determine A∗and is described later in this report.
3.3
Distance between patches
This section presents the results obtained concerning the investigation of different measures of distance
for patches evaluation to improve the one described in 3.2.1.
3.3.1
Distance investigation without physical consideration
Below are presented a few of investigated distances for the appearance:
a) D(ρi, ρi∗) =
∑
j∈ωi
(ρi,j −αi∗,j)2
|ω|
b) D(ρi, ρi∗) =
∑
j∈ωi
((ρi,j −αi∗,j)2 + ϵ)r/2
|ω|
c) D(ρi, ρi∗) =
∑
j∈ωi
abs(ρi,j −αi∗,j)
|ω|
In order to test the different distance expressions, we carry out a simple optimization of the appear-
ance as an objective without physical consideration, with a gradient descent scheme as in chapter 2.
Results obtained for each distance are shown in figure 3.3. The expressions of the appearance gradient
expressions used for optimization are also presented in the figure for each distance.
==PAGE:28==
3.3 Distance between patches
22
Figure 3.3: appearance optimization through a gradient descent scheme for three different measure of
distances
Concerning computation time, the expression b with the exponent in r is 5 times more expensive
than the others due to the computationally expensive general root operation. This represents an im-
portant drawback, in particular during the optimization of high resolution model specifications where
the majority of the computation time comes from the matching assignment.
Apart from that, expressions b and c give results with few intermediate densities unlike the expression
a and thus may help convergence of relative densities to values of 0 or 1 during topology optimization.
Although the expression c in absolute value also allows to have results with few intermediate densities,
it is diﬀicult to recognize the design because the propagation of neighbour patches jumps more than
with other expressions. Indeed, the expression in absolute value tends to penalize more patches which
have very different pixels.
The idea behind expression b with the r exponent comes directly from [Va05] in which they also
optimize an appearance Energy. In this article, they use a value of r = 1.2 determined experimentally.
Subsequently, we first investigated the expression b in section 3.3.2 for its help in the convergence
of the relative densities of the generated structure. We therefore preferred to use a reworked version of
the expression a as it constitutes the best compromise between computation time and recognition of
the pattern in the final design.
3.3.2
Improved sharpness distance expression
This section investigates the benefits of expression b for the convergence of the relative densities of the
final design.
3.3.2.1
Sharpness metric
In topology optimization, we are generally interested in obtaining results with few intermediate density.
In the SIMP model, these are continuous and they do not follow a binary distribution of 0 or 1. In
order to measure the degree of convergence of the densities of the final design, the following sharpness
operator is used:
s = 1 −4
|Ω|
∑
i∈Ω
(ρi(1 −ρi))
The sharpness metric s ∈[0, 1] has a high value when few intermediate densities are present in the
design.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Distance between patches
23
3.3.2.2
Sharpness convergence of appearance baseline
In figure 3.4, the sharpness of the final designs for 4 different pattern libraries is measured and com-
pared to that of the optimization of the density field without appearance constraint. In each case, the
parameters used are the same, except for the value of A∗which is chosen with the method described
previously.
Figure 3.4: Topology optimization without or with appearance constraint baseline for 4 different pattern
libraries
On average, the sharpness scores obtained with appearance constraint are low compared with the
result obtained for optimization without appearance constraint.
3.3.2.3
Improved sharpness appearance constraint and r exponent value
The distance between two elements as introduced in [Va05] is D(ρi, ρi∗) = ∑
j∈ωi
|ρi,j−αi∗,j|r
|ω|
. During
patch evaluation, it makes it possible to reduce the influence of outliers densities αi∗,j which are not
close to ρi,j, and at the same time doesn’t change much the value of ρi,j if it is already closed to αi∗,j. A
comparative illustration of the evolution of the difference x = ρi,j −αi∗,j for the squared and r exponent
expression is shown in figure 3.5
Figure 3.5: Illustration of the new distance function. With x representing the difference between two
densities in [0, 1], the curves of functions f(x) = x1.2 (orange) and f(x) = x2 (blue) are plotted
We take r = 1.2. This choice is discussed in the next section. A small ϵ is added to regularize the
appearance energy so its derivative is defined when ρi,j = αi∗,j. The appearance energy becomes:
A(Ω) =
∑
i∈Ω
1
A∗|Ω|
∑
j∈ωi
((ρi,j −αi∗,j)2 + ϵ)r/2
|ω|
−1 ≤0
==PAGE:30==
3.3 Distance between patches
24
It then follows that the new appearance gradient is:
∂A
∂ρj
=
1
A∗|Ω|
∑
i|j∈ωi
r(ρi,j −αm(i),j)((ρj,i −αj∗,i)2 + ϵ)r/2−1
|ω|
3.3.2.4
Choice of r value
The value of r has been chosen experimentally. On a few tests carried out with different values for r,
the value r = 1.2 is the one which gave the best compromise between quality of design and sharpness,
as shown in figure 3.6. In each test, several values of A∗were tested in order to find those allowing to
obtain similar and comparable results in terms of general shape of the final design. These qualitative
tests are diﬀicult to parameter otherwise because the good value of A∗to be taken changes according
to all kinds of parameters including r.
Figure 3.6: Topology optimization with improved sharpness appearance constraint
Note that the sharpness obtained with this expression of A are higher than those obtained with
the previous formulation, which confirms the positive impact of this new appearance formulation for
sharpness.
3.3.2.5
Comparison with appearance constraint baseline
Figure 3.7 shows similar structures generated whether with the appearance constraint baseline of the
improved sharpness appearance constraint.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Distance between patches
25
Figure 3.7: Topology optimization with appearance constraint baseline or improved sharpness appear-
ance constraint
The improved sharpness appearance constraint greatly improves the sharpness of the final design.
However, as underlined in figure 3.3 its higher computation time led us to keep a revised version of the
single square exponent expression later.
3.3.3
Normalization for distance between patches
Until now, the distance normalization between two patches was consisting of the size of the patch |ω|
which ensures to obtain a distance measurement between 0 and 1. This normalization is too conservative
and reduces the space of admissible values for the designer to control the appearance constraint with
the parameter A∗.
For this purpose, a patch-dependant normalization of the distance is proposed: 2×∑
j∈ωi(0.5−αi,j).
A typical distance is then:
D(ρi, ρi∗) =
∑
j∈ωi
(ρi,j −αi∗,j)2
2 × ∑
j∈ωi(0.5 −αi,j)
Thus, a larger range of values is now available for A∗as shown in figure 3.8
Figure 3.8: Topology optimization with appearance constraint baseline and the new normalization for
different values of A∗
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Distance between patches
26
3.3.4
Distance tuning to avoid the use of a void pattern
3.3.4.1
Void pattern issue
Currently, it is necessary to provide a void pattern among the pattern library in order to give the
optimizer the possibility of satisfying the appearance constraint with void rather than disconnected or
unhelpful features.
It consists in a white pattern that is directly added to the pattern library. The white color corre-
sponds to void i.e. elements which density is equal to 0. This gives the possibility to the algorithm
to satisfy the constraint of appearance by placing void in the areas where the material is not needed
rather than trying to use at all costs the provided pattern. Figure 3.9a illustrates this scenario.
Several tests were conducted before choosing the correct value of A∗for the test without the white
pattern. The choice of A∗is greater in the case where the white pattern is used because it is much
easier to place. With other designs, it is not necessary to use a white pattern to avoid unhelpful details,
as in the figure 3.9b.
(a) White pattern needed
(b) White pattern not needed
Figure 3.9: Topology optimization with appearance constraint baseline with and without a white pattern
The use of the white pattern is arranged so as not to take too much computing time. Indeed, it
would be unnecessarily expensive to treat the patches of this white pattern like that of another pattern
during the random search because all the patches that can be evaluated in it are the same.
3.3.4.2
Distance tuning
Several multiplier coeﬀicients were tested in the expressions of distance between two patches. Their
objective is to replace the addition of a white pattern in the pattern library:
a) D(ρi, ρi∗) = ρi ×
∑
j∈ωi
(ρi,j −αi∗,j)2
2 × ∑
j∈ωi(0.5 −αi,j)
b) D(ρi, ρi∗) = (2 × ρi −1)2 ×
∑
j∈ωi
(ρi,j −αi∗,j)2
2 × ∑
j∈ωi(0.5 −αi,j)
c) D(ρi, ρi∗) = abs(2 × ρi −1) ×
∑
j∈ωi
(ρi,j −αi∗,j)2
2 × ∑
j∈ωi(0.5 −αi,j)
d) D(ρi, ρi∗) = ρi × (ρi −1) ×
∑
j∈ωi
(ρi,j −αi∗,j)2
2 × ∑
j∈ωi(0.5 −αi,j)
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Distance between patches
27
Expression a may help the relative density of an element to converge towards 0 when it is low.
Expressions b and c privileged intermediate relative densities. Expression d favors elements of empty
or full relative density. The analytical gradient of each expression has been implemented and compared
to the gradient obtained through finite difference. The results of the optimization tests are presented
in figure 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Topology optimization with appearance constraint and different distances expression. Four
different measure of distances are compared. The appearance gradient used is indicated for each of them
Only the expression a gave good results. No unnecessary details are added without having to use a
void pattern.
Another advantage of this expression results in a better convergence of the sharpness by pushing low
relative densities to converge towards 0.
It also allows the use of disconnected patterns. Thus in figure 3.11, it is possible to obtain a connected
result from an pattern made up of unconnected dots with expression a.
==PAGE:34==
3.3 Distance between patches
28
Figure 3.11: Topology optimization with an unconnected pattern for the appearance constraint baseline
and expression a
A slight drawback is that the range of possible values of A∗is therefore somewhat reduced compared
to the simple squared difference distance.
This expression is used systematically for the rest of the paper as the appearance constraint:
A(Ω) =
∑
i∈Ω
1
A∗|Ω|ρi ×
∑
j∈ωi
(ρi,j −αi∗,j)2
2 × ∑
j∈ωi(0.5 −αi,j)
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
General study of
appearance constraint
The previous chapter presented the results which made it possible to come up with the final formulation
of the appearance constraint used subsequently. Here we analyze the convergence of the method.
4.1
General convergence of the method
4.1.1
Optimization history
Figure 4.1 shows a typical history of the evolution of the values of the compliance objective and the
constraints of global volume fraction and appearance during the iterations of an optimization case.
The compliance profile jumps during the first iterations mainly because of the introduction of the appear-
ance constraint which is initially not satisfied, but then decreases and converges rapidly. Concerning
the constraints, they also converge very quickly towards 1, meaning they are both active and satisfied.
Figure 4.1: Optimization history
When the appearance constraint is strongly constrained via the parameter A∗, the global volume
fraction constraint is still satisfied but inactive. This is the case in the result at the top left of figure
3.2 from the previous chapter, where the appearance constraint is satisfied by matching with a void
pattern thus reducing the volume of the design.
==PAGE:36==
4.1 General convergence of the method
30
4.1.2
Maximum appearance A∗and compliance
Figure 4.2 shows the evolution of the compliance objective value as a function of the value of A∗chosen
by the designer. For this purpose, the same optimization process is run several times with equivalent
parameters, except the parameter A∗. The assiocated compliance score is the one obtained after 50
iterations for a given value of A∗.
Figure 4.2: Final compliance obtained for 12 generated design with 12 different maximum allowed
appearance A∗
Since this is analogous to minimizing two functions i.e. the compliance objective and the appearance
constraint, the Pareto front obtained is typical of a multi-objective optimisation. The choices of A∗
giving the best compromise between compliance and appearance with the parameters of the experiment
is located on the plateau between 0.10 and 0.15 on the curve.
The designer can then constraint more or less the appearance of the final design to the detriment of
compliance. Figure 4.3 shows the evolution of the design for narrow or larger values of A∗. For tighten
values of A∗, the pattern library propagates better in the final design.
Figure 4.3: Generated designs and their final compliance for different values of A∗
The diﬀicult point concerning the use of the appearance constraint lies in the fact that it has no
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Matching convergence during topology optimization
31
physical meaning and instead relies on a more abstract and subjective idea of visual similarity between
geometrical patterns. Conversely, it is easy to choose a G∗value for the global volume fraction constraint,
because it represents an easily understood physical parameter: a percentage of the total mass available
in the design domain.
The use of the appearance constraint requires an additional effort from the
designer, which is that of playing with the values of A∗to find the one that suits the problem. This
becomes problematic in high resolution cases which take a long time to resolve. We propose a method
allowing to limit as much as possible the unsuccessful choices of value for A∗while limiting the global
computation time of the optimization mainly related to the evaluation of the appearance constraint in
the next section.
4.1.3
Methodology for optimization
The objective of this section is to detail a methodology to use the optimization with a constraint of
appearance without wasting computation time. The issue is for the user to choose the right value for
A∗. A first proposition in section 3.2.4 was to run the optimization of the design about ten iterations by
computing the appearance but without constraining it, in order to have an idea of the value to give to
A∗. Then, the user can restart the optimization taking into account the appearance constraint. After
much experimentation, a new methodology less expensive is proposed. With N an integer in the range
10 to 15, the process is:
• Run topology optimization N −1 iterations without appearance constraint
• Run iteration N with A∗= 1 and compute appearance energy
• Run from iteration N + 1 with chosen A∗value (about 70 to 90% of computed appearance energy
value)
An illustration of the methodology is shown in figure 4.4. The advantage of this new approach is
twofold: on the one hand, iterations spent to find the good value of A∗are no longer lost. On the other
hand, as the matching is the most expensive part in terms of computation time in the optimization
process, no longer computing it during the first iterations allows to save time.
Figure 4.4: Illustration of methodology for the choice of A*
4.2
Matching convergence during topology optimization
We have already discussed the convergence of the matching algorithm used to evaluate the appearance
constraint in section 2.4 where we have shown that fast randomized matching gives results very close to
the brute deterministic matching. However, once integrated into a topology optimization formulation,
==PAGE:38==
4.2 Matching convergence during topology optimization
32
we expect the matching to jump more because the appearance constraint is no longer the only one to
guide the generation of the structure. In this section, we investigate the convergence of matching during
topology optimization as well as the impact of its part of randomness on the final result.
4.2.1
Matching convergence
4.2.1.1
Topology optimization workflow convergence
The implementation of the optimization workflow used is coded in two versions. The simplest version
is deterministic, whereas the CPU parallelized version is not. Figures 4.5a and 4.5b show optimization
results obtained on four different runs with the exact same parameters for the two versions.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: Optimized design obtained for four runs with similar parameters without appearance con-
straint, for the simplest or the CPU-parallelized version of the topology optimization workflow
For the tests of this section, we favor the use of the deterministic version. Thus the only part of
randomness in the generated design may come from the appearance constraint.
4.2.1.2
Temporal matching jump energy
In order to quantify the convergence of the matching during topology optimization, we use a temporal
matching jump energy. It corresponds to a measure of the patch assignment jump from one iteration
to another. It is an extension of the expression used in section 2.5 that takes into account the use of
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Matching convergence during topology optimization
33
several patterns in the Library:
M it
T =
∑
i∈Ω













If m(i)itand m(i)it−1in same pattern:
√
(m(i)it
x −m(i)it−1
x
)2 + (m(i)it
y −m(i)it−1
y
)2 + (m(i)it
z −m(i)it−1
z
)2
If m(i)itand m(i)it−1in different patterns I1and I2:
√
max(|I1x|, |I2x|)2 + max(|I1y|, |I2y|)2 + max(|I1z|, |I2z|)2
Figure 4.6 shows the evolution of the temporal matching jump energy during an optimization case
as well as a mapping by element of the matching jump between the last two iterations.
Matching
converges quickly but never completely stops moving. The matching jump energy comes mainly from
jumping within the same pattern rather than in other patterns from the pattern library. This shows
that the appearance constraint converges to the use of certain privileged patterns per zone of the design
domain. Note that discontinuities observed in the orange curve are due to the log scale used which is
not defined in 0.
Figure 4.6: Optimized design and associated temporal matching jump energy for a pattern library of
oriented patterns
Some pattern associations give less convincing results, pushing the matching to converge less quickly.
This is discussed in chapter 6.
4.2.2
Matching randomness impact on general convergence
4.2.2.1
Matching Initialization and global convergence
In the fast randomized matching algorithm, the steps for finding a better matching in the pattern li-
brary are based on a browsing through a random subset of potential solutions in it. In particular, the
initialization of patch assignment is totally random.
Figure 4.7 results aim to show that the random patch initialization does not adversely affect the
compliance of the final result. The compliance profile of four different runs of optimization with the
same parameters are displayed. The only difference between the four runs is their initial matching
assignment.
==PAGE:40==
4.2 Matching convergence during topology optimization
34
Figure 4.7: Compliance across iterations for 4 runs with different random patch assignment initialization
Although each design converges towards a different local minimum, the compliance profiles across
iterations are extremely similar. Thus the appearance constraint makes it possible to generate different
structures that are almost equivalent mechanically speaking.
A designer may want to use a deterministic method. We can overcome this problem by deterministically
seeding the pseudorandom number generator used within the evaluation of the appearance constraint.
Note that in the figure 4.7, one pattern is much more propagated than the others. This behavior is
investigated in more detail in chapter 6.
4.2.2.2
Search matching phases convergence during topology optimization
We have seen that we could obtain different local optimums that are mechanically equivalent starting
from different initializations. This time, we keep the same patch assignment initialization and observe
the results of the 4 runs obtained in figures 4.8a and 4.8b. The difference can therefore now only come
from the search phases of the fast randomized matching algorithm.
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Matching convergence during topology optimization
35
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8: Compliance across iterations for 4 runs with different pattern library and random patch
assignment initialization
Similar results are observed to those of the previous section. Thus, the initialization phase alone
does not explain the difference in the reached local optimums, but there is also an incidence of the
search phases for best patches during appearance constraint evaluation.
In the case of figure 4.8a, the differences between the local optimums (the generated designs) are
more diﬀicult to discern because certain patterns are much more adapted to satisfy the objective of
compliance in certain zones of the generated structure. In the case of figure 4.8b, it is much more easier
to visualize differences between generated designs.
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 5
Acceleration of the
appearance constraint
computation
The objective of this section is the investigation of the solutions tested in order to reduce the computation
time of the appearance constraint without harming too much the quality of the results.
Indeed, it is the estimation of the appearance constraint which is the limiting factor on the largest
optimization cases, such as the one in figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Topology Optimization for high resolution 3D model specifications
Thus on most 3D cases, estimation of the appearance constraint constitutes the limiting factor. This
is why we focused on optimizing the timing of its evaluation.
5.1
Multi-Threading
The CPU parallelization of both Switch Search and Walk Search phases of the matching algorithm is
an obvious step to gain in performance. Unlike those of the Propagation, there is no interdependence
between operations on each element within an iteration of these two phases. One of the small issues
encountered is the use of distributions to generate random number. In C++, pseudo random generators
calls are meant to be sequential, and therefore not thread safe. This problem is worked around by using
one generator per thread.
Regarding the Propagation phase, parallelization is not at all so simple as each element propagates
to neighbours elements within the same iteration. The adopted approach consists in splitting the Ω
grid among the threads, as shown in figure 5.2.
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Multi-Threading
37
Figure 5.2: Splitting of the density field Ωamong threads during parallelized Propagation
The idea is that the propagation should work well at the borders marking the distribution of the
zones between threads since it is done in two times (forward and then backward, as illustrate in figure
5.3).
Figure 5.3: Illustration of backward and forward Propagation
The correct functioning of this propagation is experimented in figure 5.4. An image is provided as
a reference and parts of that image are provided to compose the pattern library. A matching iteration
is done. The objective is to check that the matching is done in the right pattern after an iteration of
the parallelized version.
Figure 5.4: Patch assignment mapping after one iteration of matching with or without parallelization
of propagation. Each pattern is assigned one color in the assignment map
==PAGE:44==
5.2 Computation time evaluation
38
The results obtained with and without parallelization of propagation are almost similar. Propagation
parallelisation therefore does not seem to have a negative influence on the attribution of the patches.
Note that the omnipresence of the attribution of the patch coming from the pattern of the flower (in
red) around the other areas of propagation is due to the fact that it contains white borders, which
better match with intermediate densities than the entirely white pattern.
5.2
Computation time evaluation
The objective of this section is to investigate the parameters which play the most on the total com-
putation time with the CPU-parallelized version of the appearance constraint during the optimization
process. To do this, we use the model specifications presented in figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: Model specifications and Pattern Library used for computation time evaluation
Several parameters are altered and the computation times are compared for the main phases of the
optimization. The displayed computation times are an average of the computation time per iteration
and are computed over 100 optimization iterations. For these tests, the CPU-parallelized version of the
optimizer is used. The altered parameters and corresponding table of results are:
• Resolution of the Design Domain - Table 5.1
• Patch Size - Table 5.2
For all optimization cases, solving the state equation is done using a single NVIDIA Quadro T1000 GPU,
whereas the rest of the optimization workflow including the computation of the appearance constraint
is executed on a 12 cores 2.60 GHz Intel Core i7 - 9850H CPU.
Matching Steps
Total Time
Resolution
Switch Search
Walk Search
Propagation
Gradient Computation
32x32x32
0.12786s
0.09552s
0.41219s
0.17743s
2.3067s
40x40x40
0.24308s
0.17942s
0.75941s
0.3024s
4.3281s
50x50x50
0.49556s
0.35977s
1.51224s
0.52983s
8.5797s
Table 5.1: Average computation time per optimization iteration for the specifications from 5.5 and a
fixed patch size lx = ly = lz = 3
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Reduction scheme for matching assignment
39
Matching Steps
Total Time
Patch Size
Switch Search
Walk Search
Propagation
Gradient Computation
lx = ly = lz = 3
0.24308s
0.17942s
0.75941s
0.3024s
4.3281s
lx = ly = lz = 4
0.49175s
0.25783s
1.5384s
0.55182s
5.9379s
lx = ly = lz = 5
0.86394s
0.20583s
2.5724s
0.89238s
7.772s
Table 5.2: Average computation time per optimization iteration for the specifications from 5.5 and a
fixed design domain resolution 40x40x40
Depending on the chosen parameters, the calculation of the appearance constraint and its gradients
takes 30% to 60% of the total optimization computation time. Calculation times increase rapidly with
the resolution of the design domain and the patch size. The latter must be adapted according to the
provided pattern library, and have to be higher to capture the geometric features of the highest resolu-
tion patterns. Regarding matching, it is the Propagation phase that takes the most time.
Other obvious parameters also affecting the computation time are the size of the patterns (which
can increase the number of considered patches during Propagation) or the number of patterns in the
library (which increases the number of steps during the Switch Search phase).
5.3
Reduction scheme for matching assignment
As studied in section 4.2.1.2, the matching converges quickly during optimization. It therefore makes
sense to continually reduce the search space for matching assignment in order to save computing time.
5.3.1
Alternated propagation
At each iteration of the appearance constraint evaluation, a forward propagation is followed by a
backward propagation (illustration in figure 5.3). It is possible to reduce the Propagation time by two
by doing it in only one direction during an iteration of the general topology optimisation process. More
precisely, the propagation is managed forward on even iterations and backward on odd iterations.
Figure 5.6 shows results obtained when working with a high resolution pattern library.
==PAGE:46==
5.3 Reduction scheme for matching assignment
40
Figure 5.6: Comparison of optimized designs obtained with usual propagation and alternated propaga-
tion. The matching attribution is also represented as a matching map where a blue, green or red pixel
correspond respectively to a best match attribution in the gears, spider web or white pattern
A typical computation time for the usual propagation phase on such an example is around 3 seconds.
Alternate propagation divides this time by two, which results in a significant gain of 75s over 50 iterations.
This strategy does not give good results: here the spider web does not propagate well in the case of
alternate propagation while it would help to obtain a stiffer structure.
The alternated propagation proved to gives better results when maintaining a normal propagation
during the first 10 to 20 iterations while the matching converges before switching to an alternated
propagation.
5.3.2
Reduction of Search phases
A Search phase of the fast randomized matching algorithm typically consists of phases of Switch
Search (in which we look for better matches in other patterns in the library) and Walk Search (in
which we look for better matches within the best current pattern).
During a typical Switch Search phase, for each element i ∈Ωand at each iteration it, nS potential
matching elements i∗are tested at random among other patterns. During the Walk Search phase,
random patches are tested inside a circle of decreasing radius rW = max(lx, ly, lz)/2 which decreases
by 2 at each random pick. In summary, in a typical Walk Search for one element i, the algorithm
tests a patch taken at random in a circle of radius rW , then in a circle of radius rW /2, then a circle of
radius rW /4, ... until the radius rW converges to one.
The idea is therefore to reduce the number of best matching element i∗tested for each element i
across iterations it, by reducing the Search scheme across iterations:
• max(nS −λS × it, 1) candidates are now tested during the Switch Search
• During the Walk Search, candidates are tested in a circle whose radius
rW
2+λW ×it decreases faster
and faster across optimization iterations
Here, it indeed relates to an iteration of the entire optimization problem. The different phases of
the matching algorithm described in section 2.1.5 are repeated at each iteration of the optimizer.
This reduction scheme can also be coupled with an alternated Propagation to reduce the compu-
tation time even more. It is the case in the example of figure 5.7 where similar scores of compliance are
obtained.
==PAGE:47==
5.4 Patch search limitation in empty areas
41
Figure 5.7: Results obtained with and without reduction scheme with the same parameters as in 5.6.
On this example, computation time is divided by 3 between the two results.
In the same way as for the alternated propagation, it is diﬀicult to find general nS, λS, nW and λW
parameters for the reduction scheme that work with all pattern libraries or parameters. Because of the
importance of the investigation of the values for the good functioning of the reduction scheme, it was
adopted mostly on 3D high resolution optimization cases.
5.4
Patch search limitation in empty areas
This section proposes another method to reduce the number of steps during the matching process.
The idea is that it is unnecessary to search for a better patch assignment in an empty area, as it is
highly unlikely that the choice of patch will have a strong impact in an area that the compliance needs
to be filled with void.
Practically, all patches ωi from Ωare evaluated before matching at each iteration, and patches whose
sum of relative densities is below a certain threshold θ are excluded from the matching research phases.
For i ∈Ω:
∑
j∈ωi
|ρj| < θ =⇒i excluded from matching process
Figure 5.8: Patch search limitation illustration. No better matching will be searched for the central
element of red patch and a better matching will be searched for the central element of blue patch.
==PAGE:48==
5.4 Patch search limitation in empty areas
42
This scheme nevertheless requires an additional pre-evaluation of the patches at the beginning of
each evaluation of the constraint of appearance.
Thus, it has proven to be effective only on large
resolutions model specifications and with at least moderately constrained global volume fraction where
larger areas of voids appear in the generated design.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6
Interactions between
patterns of the library
Some patterns appear to be better locally propagated than others. This section investigate ideas to
try to get the matching algorithm to use a little more of each pattern when it doesn’t conflict with the
compliance optimization. This phenomena is discussed in section 6.1 before the considered solutions
are developed in the following subsections.
6.1
Behaviour with multiple Patterns
An example of this phenomena is observable in figure 4.7: although the patterns are very different, some
are much better propagated in the final design. In the mentioned example, the spider web appears more
easily than the other patterns. We believe that two elements can explain this particular example. On
the one hand, the spider web pattern is made up of many intermediate densities which are easier to
match during the optimization process than other patterns of the library. On the other hand, some
patterns are simply more useful for producing stiff structures. This is particularly the case for grid-
shaped patterns such as the spider web.
However, tests with each pattern (from figure 4.7) taken separately would show that it is possible to
achieve similar compliance scores with each of them. It means that the optimizer is in a local optimum
which just happens to use one pattern more than the others.
6.2
Using one appearance constraint per pattern
A first solution to force the system to use all the patterns with the same frequency is to use one
appearance constraint per pattern.
Unlike the case where an unique constraint is used for all the
pattern library and only the influence of the pattern which propagate the best compared to the others
intervenes, each pattern now necessarily has an influence on the final result. Results obtained with such
a setup are shown in figure 6.1.
==PAGE:50==
6.3 Penalizing the overuse of a pattern
44
Figure 6.1: Generated design obtained using two appearance constraints
This method has not shown good results. Indeed, by trying to optimise the structure given two
appearance constraints at the same time, it emerges from it a jumble of intermediate densities.
6.3
Penalizing the overuse of a pattern
A second approach is the following. In order to force the system to use as much as possible all patterns
and not only one, a penalization is used during distance evaluation between patches. This penalization
is a factor that directly depends of the occurrences of the mapping to a specific patch of the pattern
library during the matching assignment. Thus, a pattern that is used more than another during the
matching will be more penalized in the evaluation of distances.
For this investigation, we reuse the expression of the appearance constraint used as the baseline
presented in section 3.2.1 and we include a white pattern in the pattern library. Some notations are
introduced. The normalization factor nnw is the number of best matches that are not chosen in the
white pattern Iw, evaluated on all elements i ∈Ω: nnw = ∑
i∈Ω,m(i)/∈Iw 1. Indeed, we do not want
to penalize the white pattern, and this is why it is not taken into account in the normalization. The
occurrences of best matches chosen in a specific pattern Is is Occ(m(i)) = ∑
j∈Ω,m(j)∈Is 1.
These
two factors are systematically evaluated given the matching assignment of the previous optimization
iterations. A few tested factors to penalize the distance between two patches are listed below:
Usual expression: D(ρi, ρm(i))
a) Dpenalized(ρi, ρm(i)) = Occ(m(i))
nnw
× D(ρi, ρm(i))
b) Dpenalized(ρi, ρm(i)) = (1 −S) + S × Occ(m(i))
nnw
× D(ρi, ρm(i))
c) Dpenalized(ρi, ρm(i)) = F × Occ(m(i))
nnw
+ D(ρi, ρm(i))
They were tested on the same pattern library. The results are presented in figure 6.2.
==PAGE:51==
6.4 User-specified pattern by areas
45
Figure 6.2: Optimized designs obtained with different expressions for the penalization of an overused
pattern. For each test, the A∗value has been chosen experimentally to give the better results with
regards to the recognition of the pattern in the final result
These expressions allow the influence of more patterns to appear in the final result.
Without
penalization, only 2 patterns are recognizable in the final design whereas 3 to 4 patterns appear in the
penalized designs. Nevertheless, these penalties bring their own disadvantages. Concerning expression
a, the matching jumps a lot during the first 10 iterations, as the matching algorithm can completely
change patterns in which best matches are chosen at each iteration to satisfy low distances. Expression
b and expression c proposes a solution to this problem, by using a sum of coeﬀicients. The major
problem lies in the diﬀiculty of finding general parameters S and F that work for all types of patterns.
As the addition of new parameters to the optimization would complicate it unnecessarily, this approach
has not been pursued.
6.4
User-specified pattern by areas
The PatchMatch algorithm [Ca09] has initially been designed for an application allowing in particular
to reconstruct parts of an image by copying style of the image itself. One of the showcase examples
concerns is a graphical interface in which a user erases part of the photo which is then reconstructed
by the algorithm.
Another more user-friendly way to deal with the problem of using all patterns could then be to allow
the user to decide on the areas in which he would like to make a certain pattern appear. One could
imagine an interactive graphical interface with the possibility to delimit areas for each pattern in a few
clicks. This approach would require more testing.
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 7
Propagation of patterns
For some pattern, especially high resolution ones, the correct propagation of the pattern is important
in order to be able to recognize it in the final design. We have seen that for certain pattern libraries,
patch assignment can jump a lot between the different patterns from one iteration of the optimization to
another. It is the case with the two chosen patterns shown in figure 7.1. Finally none of the patterns is
well propagated in the final generated design. In such cases, our conjecture is that the right parameter
choices (A∗, patch size) may vary from one pattern to another. When they vary too much, the optimizer
tends to favor the choice of one pattern over the others. This problem can be addressed by helping
pattern spreading. Conversely, this incentive must be small, so as not to prevent the choice of a better
patch when it greatly improves compliance.
Figure 7.1: Generated design obtained for for patterns that do not work well together
This sections presents results of investigations to force the total propagation of patterns.
7.1
Spatial matching jump energy
In the same way as for the temporal matching jump energy of section 4.2.1.2, a spatial matching jump
energy is defined to measure the quality of the propagation of the patterns of a library during the
optimization process. In order to compute it, a forward pass (Figure 7.2) is performed on the elements
of the density field, and the locations of the patches attributed to neighboring elements are compared
via an Euclidean distance. Thus the spatial matching jump energy represents a measurement of the
matching jump between neighboring voxels. The smaller this energy, the better the patterns propagate.
==PAGE:53==
7.2 Different boundaries condition for patch evaluation
47
Figure 7.2: Illustration of forward pass for spatial matching jump energy computation
The expression of this energy is:
MS =
∑
i∈Ω











If m(i)and m(j)are in same Pattern:
√
(m(i)x −m(j)x)2 + (m(i)y −m(j)y)2 + (m(i)z −m(j)z)2
If m(i)and m(j)are in different Patterns I1and I2:
√
max(|I1x|, |I2x|)2 + max(|I1y|, |I2y|)2 + max(|I1z|, |I2z|)2
On optimization cases with a single pattern, the pattern propagates well, and the matching energy
decreases very quickly as a result, as it is the case in figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: Illustration of forward pass for spatial matching jump energy computation
7.2
Different boundaries condition for patch evaluation
In order to take full advantage of the pattern library, the way in which patches are evaluated near to
border of the patterns is changed. Note that the old method is illustrated in the figure 2.5. Before, only
patches totally lying inside the pattern were evaluated. Obviously, this limits the complete propagation
of the pattern on certain cases when the motif spans the entire space of the supplied PNG. Alternatively,
for patterns surrounded by void, the bias of only using patches entirely included in the pattern was
making sense and indeed reducing the computation time. Figure 7.4 shows an example of pattern for
each of these two cases.
==PAGE:54==
7.2 Different boundaries condition for patch evaluation
48
Figure 7.4: Example of patterns suitable or not regarding patch evaluation near to borders of PNG files
This limit is now removed. The relative densities ρi∗of the elements of a patch that are outside
the pattern are now evaluated to 0 as for patches evaluated outside bounds of the design domain Ω.
Figure 7.5 shows the matching mapping of a pattern with itself. By associating each position in the
input pattern with a smoothly changing color gradient, we can visually see if the matching introduced
discontinuities. With the new patch evaluation, it is now possible to get an exact mapping. Note also
that the matching is perfect in less than 5 iterations.
Figure 7.5: Simple matching of a pattern with itself for both methods of patch management near to
borders of pattern. A gradient of colors, from dark blue (small x,y values) to red (high x,y values)
represents the matching attribution at the last iteration
Figure 7.6 shows a case of topology optimization with the same parameters and different boundary
management for patches evaluation in the pattern library.
==PAGE:55==
7.3 Tolerant propagation
49
Figure 7.6: Optimization results obtained with both methods of patch evaluation management in the
pattern library. A gradient of colors, from dark blue (small x,y values) to red (high x,y values) represents
the matching attribution at the last iteration of the optimization
In case 1, apart from the fact that the pattern is now better propagated since it is used in full, a
better matching of the patches at the edge of the pattern to the positions close to the borders is observed.
Indeed, for both the density field and the pattern, the densities of the elements of the patches evaluated
outside the limits are estimated at 0. A better matching therefore results naturally in using the patches
on the edges of the pattern. This choice for boundary conditions is thus not always beneficial. For the
flower it is good because it is a single drawing in the center of the pattern, but for the ”cells” pattern
it is undesirable because this pattern is in fact supposed to be a texture without white edges.
7.3
Tolerant propagation
Another way to make the pattern appear entirely in the final design rather than in a fragmented way
is to choose a patch ωi∗
P resulting from the Propagation phase of the matching algorithm rather than
a patch ωi∗
S resulting from the Search phases when the distances of the two patches are close to the
considered neighborhood ωi of i ∈Ω. More precisely, a threshold δ is chosen such that:
D(ρi, ρi∗
P ) −δ ≤D(ρi, ρi∗
S) =⇒i∗
P is chosen as best match
Optimized design obtained with such an altered propagation are presented in the figure 7.7 for
different values of δ. The higher the value of δ, the easier it is to recognize the pattern in the final
design. Conversely, compliance decreases when δ increases, and a balance must therefore be found.
==PAGE:56==
7.4 Soft-min aggregation of distances
50
Figure 7.7: Optimization results obtained with a more tolerant propagation with different values for δ.
A gradient of colors, from dark blue (small x,y values) to red (high x,y values) represents the matching
assignment in the pattern
7.4
Soft-min aggregation of distances
The idea behind the following experiments is to calculate the appearance constraint using a soft-min
function instead of a simple sum to aggregate distances. The objective is to push the optimizer to only
place a reduced number of times the provided patterns and then to prevent the system from trying at
all costs to make an unnecessary pattern appear in the final design.
So that the optimizer is not tempted to choose an empty area as its minimum, we reuse the quadratic
form for the distance without the multiplication by the density of the central element. We also do not
provide a void pattern to the library. We then have the following formulas for the distance, appearance
function and appearance gradient functions:
D(ρi) = D(ρi, ρm(i)) =
∑
j∈ωi
(ρi,j −αρm(i),j)2
|ω|
A(Ω) = 1
A∗
∑
i∈ΩD(ρi)eαD(ρi)
∑
i∈ΩeαD(ρi)
−1
∂A
∂ρj
=
1
A∗∑
k∈ΩeαD(ρk)
∑
i|j∈ωi
eαD(ρi)[1 + α(D(ρi) −
∑
k∈ΩD(ρk)eαD(ρk)
∑
k∈ΩeαD(ρk)
)] (ρi,j −αm(i),j)
∑
j∈ωi(0.5 −αi,j)
This expression is indeed a soft-min when we use values of α ≤0. In figure 7.8, we optimize a
density field with a gradient descent scheme on the appearance without physical considerations as in
section 2.2.2. In this example, we obtain an empty density fields on cases for α ≥0. In particular, the
α = 0 value corresponds to the quadratic expression of appearance. These results can be explained by
the low global volume fraction of the chosen pattern which encourages matching with full void patches
to minimize the appearance score. Here, thanks to soft-min aggregation (α ≤0) for the appearance
score, we are able to recognize the pattern in the final design.
==PAGE:57==
7.4 Soft-min aggregation of distances
51
Figure 7.8: Appearance optimization with a gradient decent scheme and soft-min expression
Figures 7.9a and 7.9b show cases of topology optimization with the simple quadratic distance or
the expression of the appearance in soft-min previously presented, with a library of respectively one
or two patterns. In each case, the result obtained with the new expression leads to a design with less
intermediate density and a better compliance. In figure 7.9a, a mapping of the appearance gradient
during the last iteration of the optimization is shown. It goes from blue for the smallest gradient values
to red for the largest ones. As expected, we notice that the appearance gradient is concentrated on
a single gear sub-pattern in the case of the soft-min expression while it is much more distributed in
the case of the simple quadratic expression. In the multi-patterns case of figure 7.9b, the expression in
soft-min privileges well one pattern over the other and avoids superimposing them as in the baseline
case.
==PAGE:58==
7.4 Soft-min aggregation of distances
52
(a) Single pattern
(b) Multi-patterns
Figure 7.9: Appearance optimization with quadratic and soft-min expression
However, compared to the simple quadratic formula, the soft-min formula required from us many
more attempts to choose the right value of A∗in order to effectively constrain the appearance. Indeed,
the scores obtained with the latter tend to converge much faster during the optimization, which makes
the estimation of the a priori good value for A∗harder. Soft-min aggregation is therefore of interest for
applications where one wishes the appearance of patterns only in a localized area, but does not allow a
more homogeneous distribution of the geometry over the entire design domain.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 8
Rotation and Scaling
invariance
The matching algorithm and the distance used so far are only translation invariant. The objective of
this section is to present a new method to make the estimation of the appearance constraint invariant
to both the rotation and the scaling of the patterns of the library. This work was started late and would
require more time for implementation and experimentation. We therefore mostly offer suggestions in
this section.
8.1
Generalized PatchMatch
8.1.1
Method
The simplest method to implement is to generalize the PatchMatch algorithm as suggested in [Ca10] to
consider two additional dimensions corresponding to rotations and scaling of patches when looking for
local matches in the pattern library. An illustration of the process is shown in figure 8.1a. One of the
main obvious drawbacks of this method is the computation time that is already important on 3D cases
without adding 2 additional dimensions. Moreover, by applying the generalized version of PatchMatch
on a pratical application, [Da14] shows the need to make the Propagation step more complex as it is
is not suﬀicient for large angles of patch rotation. It is thus necessary to consider the contributions of
two pixels upstream instead of one during the Propagation, which multiplies the calculation time of
the Propagation by two. An illustration of the elements considered for the forward pass is shown in
figure 8.1b.
(a) Illustration of two additional dimensions considered
during patch search
(b)
Forward
propagation
for
PatchMatch extension.
Contri-
butions from red elements are
considered in addition to those
from blue elements
==PAGE:60==
8.1 Generalized PatchMatch
54
8.1.2
Implementation
In order to easily test this method, we replace the use of oriented and rescaled patches by the addition of
oriented and upsample versions of patterns in the library. This method has the advantage of requiring
very little adjustment concerning the architecture already in place.
8.1.3
Results
We already showed results obtained with libraries of rotated patterns in figures 4.1 and 4.6. This time,
we also add versions at different scales of the rotated patterns in the library. The results are shown
in the two runs of figure 8.2. The difference between the two runs is the addition of an extra pattern
size in the second case. Although there are multiple available scales, the algorithm tends to use the
largest pattern size in both cases. Two main arguments explain this behaviour. On the one hand, larger
patterns are less affected by the lengthscale filters used by the optimizer. On the other hand, the largest
patterns describe a more stiff structure as opposed to the smaller ones.
Figure 8.2: Design obtained with generalized PatchMatch and a low resolution pattern library
On high resolution patterns like the one in figure 8.3, we encounter the same problems as those
observed in high resolution multi pattern libraries (chapter 6). Matching jumps a lot from one iteration
==PAGE:61==
8.2 PatchMatch with feature keypoints descriptors
55
to another, and we have to resort to a more tolerant propagation (section 7.3) in order to be able to
recognize the patterns in the final design.
Figure 8.3: Designs obtained with generalized PatchMatch and a high resolution pattern library
8.2
PatchMatch with feature keypoints descriptors
8.2.1
General method
Another suggestion is the use of rotation and scaling invariant feature descriptors. The idea is to carry
out a preliminary oriented matching only on keypoints and then to manage Propagation as usual.
Considering only keypoint elements allows to reduce the computation time compared to considering all
elements. Another advantage is that by browsing the library mostly on keypoints of interest, it should
avoid the matching jumps observed with high resolution pattern libraries with the previous method.
Compared to the generalized PatchMatch described in the previous section, it does not increase much
the search space: the ”best orientation” is determined by the descriptors, and only the size of the patch
intervenes as variable. The keypoint browsing can be further reduced by adapting the fast randomized
algorithm. The matching process, illustrated in figure 8.4, is described below:
• Detection and computation of translation, rotation and scale invariant feature de-
scriptors:
feature descriptors only need to be detected and computed once for the pattern
library. Regarding the optimized density field, it must be redone at each step of the optimization
process.
• Matching of keypoints from the optimised density field with keypoints from the
pattern library:
as with the classic PatchMatch algorithm, phases of Switch Search and Walk
Search search for a better patch assignment for all keypoints of Ω. The distance D used to compare
two features is adapted to the chosen descriptors.
• Matching of non keypoint elements with elements from the pattern library:
a Propa-
gation step allows to spread patch assignments to all non keypoints elements of the design domain.
==PAGE:62==
8.2 PatchMatch with feature keypoints descriptors
56
Figure 8.4: Matching process illustration
8.2.2
ORB features detector
The feature detectors used must fulfill two main requirements. On the one hand, it must be invariant
to translation, rotation and scaling. On the other hand, it must be quick to calculate. Regarding
invariances, three main algorithms are used in the field of computer vision: SIFT [G04]), SURF [Ha06]
and ORB [Ea11]. ORB (Oriented FAST and rotated BRIEF) was chosen because it has been shown to
be faster than the other two other mentioned descriptors ([Ea11]).
ORB uses the rotated BRIEF descriptor which is rotation invariant.
The scaling invariance is
obtained by using a pyramid of the same image at different sizes.
Figure 8.6 illustrates the implemented ORB workflow. Note that this process is the same whether
for patterns from the library or the density field which is optimized. The process is described in 2D
below but can be easily extended to 3D:
• A.0 - Smoothing of entry density field: The density field is convolved with a Gaussian Kernel
1
16


1
2
1
2
4
2
1
2
1

This step is necessary to smooth edges. In particular, ORB performed very poorly
on a sharp and highly detailed patterns without blurring beforehand.
• A.0.bis - Density gradients computation: Gradient densities ∂ρ
∂x and ∂ρ
∂y are calculated in
each direction x and y in order to detect the contours of the structure/pattern. The convolutions
with the right Sobel masks Sx = 1
8


−1
0
1
−2
0
2
−1
0
1

and Sy = 1
8


−1
2
1
0
0
0
−1
−2
−1

along each axis are
used for this purpose.
• A.1 - FAST feature detection: A first pass with FAST (features form accelerated segment
test) keep the elements likely to be good features. For each element i ∈Ω, FAST considers a
circular patch of radius 3. Voxels from the patch are scanned in a clockwise direction. If 8 of
them have a density greater than ρi + δ or less than ρi −δ, with δ a chosen threshold, then the
central element i is a feature.
==PAGE:63==
8.2 PatchMatch with feature keypoints descriptors
57
Figure 8.5: Circular patch for FAST
• A.2 - Feature points screening: As FAST keeps too much keypoints, an additional filtering is
performed from the Harris corner response of the FAST features. For each FAST features i, the
Harris corner response Rρi = det(Mρi) −k(trace(Mρi))2 is computed from the moment matrix
Mρi = w(i)
[ ∂ρ
∂x
2
∂ρ
∂x
∂ρ
∂y
∂ρ
∂x
∂ρ
∂y
∂ρ
∂y
2
]
, with k = 0.05 and w a Gaussian window. The large positive or
negative values of Rρi represent respectively corner and edge features. The algorithm then keeps
the N features (N being a parameter chosen by the user) having the most important abs(Rrhoi)
value. It is also possible to extend this step by applying a maximum suppression algorithm. In
some areas we can find groupings of features linked to the same corner or edges. In this case,
some features are repetitive and we keep only the feature with the strongest Harris response.
• B.1 - Direction of features: A single rotation is computed for each features.
To do this,
a rectangular 3 × 3 patch ωi is considered around each feature i to compute their moments
mpq(ρi) = ∑
i|j∈ωi(xj −xi)p(yj −yi)qρj for (p, q) ∈{(0, 0), (0, 1), (1, 0)}. From there we can
deduce the coordinates of the center of mass Ci of the patch, and thus of the centroid vector of
the feature:
⃗
OCρi = ( m10(ρi)
m00(ρi), m01(ρi)
m00(ρi)). The orientation of the patch is then θρi = atan( m01(ρi)
m10(ρi)).
• B.2 - Rotated BRIEF: Finally, the ORB descriptors are computed from the orientation θi of
each feature i. This time we consider oriented patches ωθi = Rθiωi where Rθi is the rotation
matrix of the considered feature and ωi a rectangular patch of size 21 × 21. The descriptor gρi
consists of a binary string composed of 0 and 1. To calculate it, we randomly take a pair of
elements 128 times in patch ωθi and compare their densities. If the density of the first picked
element is lower than that of the second picked element, we add 0 to gρi, otherwise 1. A typical
shape for a descriptor is gρi = 1001011001010...
==PAGE:64==
8.2 PatchMatch with feature keypoints descriptors
58
Figure 8.6: Workflow for ORB
During feature matching, the descriptors are compared with a simple normalized Hamming distance:
H(ρi, ρj) =
1
128
∑
k∈[0,127]



1 if gρi[k] ̸= gρj[k]:
0 if gρi[k] = gρj[k]:
ORB has been reimplemented in the C ++ framework but would require more adjustments to be
tested within the topology optimization workflow. In particular, one of the most critical step of its
proper implementation would concern the blending of the contributions of patches when evaluating
appearance and gradients functions.
Usually, each element receives a contribution from the same
number of neighboring patches. In this new case, each element may not necessarily receive the same
contribution because of the rotations introduced by the matching of the patches.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 9
High resolution 3D results
In this last chapter, we show a few examples of high resolution 3D structures obtained with our solution.
In order to reduce computation time, we adopt a reduction scheme like the one proposed in section 5.3.
We also propose various sections for each structure in order to visualize the effect of the appearance
constraint on the growth of the material inside.
For the following experiments, we use a cubic design space with a resolution of 102 x 102 x 102. Loads
are applied evenly on the top while the clamps are located in the 4 bottom corners of the design space.
Settings are summarized in figure 9.1 along with design obtained without appearance constraint.
Figure 9.1: 3D experiments settings and structure obtained without appearance constraint for a global
volume fraction constraint G∗= 0.5
Figure 9.2 shows the results obtained with the same load case for several different pattern libraries.
We can clearly see the effect of the appearance constraint inside the structures (sectional planes) par-
ticularly with the pattern libraries from cases 1 and 2, while the design’s inside is ”full” of matter
when optimized without appearance constraint. Obviously, we notice that the scores of compliance
and sharpness obtained are respectively greater and weaker with appearance constraint than without.
This difference is more or less marked depending on the choice of pattern libraries used and especially
of their mechanical viability. Thus, the pattern of case 2, consisting of a perforated sphere of 3 void
cylinders along each x, y and z axis, gives the worst compliance score.
==PAGE:66==
9 High resolution 3D results
60
Figure 9.2: 3D designs and basic stats obtained with 3D experiments settings from figure 9.1 after 100
optimization iterations
==PAGE:67==
CHAPTER 10
Conclusion
The present report addresses geometrical properties enforcement during topology optimization, inspired
by exemplar-based methods from the field of texture synthesis. The developed solution is based on the
formulation of an appearance constraint admitting first order derivative suitable for gradient-based
methods.
Emphasis was placed on obtaining an accessible and easy-to-use solution for the designer. Geometric
properties enforcement is controlled with two simple parameters, a maximum appearance threshold A∗
and a library of discrete patterns. Since computation time is a blocking factor on high resolution opti-
mization case, the solution is CPU-parallelized and we studied additional computation time reduction
by decreasing the problem complexity.
During this project, we investigated several solutions for the main ingredients of the appearance con-
straint evaluation i.e. a matching algorithm, a measurement of similarity between local design areas
and the formulation of a function as an aggregation of this measurements. As the appearance is a funda-
mentally subjective measure, unlike compliance or mass for instance, a large part of the project focused
on experimenting with different formulations, extensions and pattern libraries. Especially, we propose
extensions to favor the propagation of complex geometric patterns or to control their occurrence in the
generated design.
Finally, potential applications of the present method are the introduction of artistic considerations dur-
ing structural optimization or obtaining finely oriented structures. For the latter, the results already
obtained are very encouraging. Future work on adapting the constraint to both rotation and scaling
invariance of the pattern library could further improve the results and computation times.
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
[AO95]
Diaz A. and Sigmund O. “Checkerboard patterns in layout optimization.” In: Structural Opti-
mization 10, 40–45 (1995).
[Ca09]
Barnes C. and all. “PatchMatch: A randomized correspondence algorithm for structural image
editing.” In: ACM Trans. Graph. 28, 3 (2009).
[Ca10]
Barnes C. and all. “The Generalized PatchMatch Correspondence Algorithm.” In: ECCV 2010.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 6313 (2010).
[CF15]
Barnes C. and Zhang F. “A survey of the state-of-the-art in patch-based synthesis.” In: Com-
putational Visual Media, 3, 1 (2015).
[Da14]
Cozzolino D. and all. “Copy-move forgery detection based on PatchMatch.” In: IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), 2014, pp. 5312-5316 (2014).
[Ea11]
Rublee E. and all. “ORB: an eﬀicient alternative to SIFT or SURF.” In: International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, pp. 2564-2571 (2011).
[G04]
Lowe D. G. “Distinctive Image Features from Scale-Invariant Keypoints.” In: International
Journal of Computer Vision 60, 91–110 (2004).
[Ha06]
Bay H. and all. “SURF: Speeded Up Robust Features.” In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol 3951. (2006).
[IC99]
Kosaka I. and Swan C. “A symmetry reproduction method for continuum structural topology
optimization.” In: Computers Structures 70, 1, 47 - 61 (1999).
[Ja15a]
Dumas J. and all. “By-example synthesis of structurally sound patterns.” In: ACM Trans.
Graph. 34, 4 (2015).
[Ja15b]
Martinez J. and all. “Structure and appearance optimization for Controllable Shape Design.”
In: ACM Trans. Graph. (2015).
[K87]
Svanberg K. “The method of moving asymptotes — a new method for structural optimization.”
In: Int. J. Numer. Methods. Eng. 24, 2, 359-373 (1987).
[LM09]
Wei L. and Levoy M. “State of the art in example-based texture synthesis.” In: Eurographics,
State of the Art Report (2009).
[M]
Gumin M. WaveFunctionCollapse. url: https://github.com/mxgmn/WaveFunctionCollapse.
(accessed: jan 2021).
[Oa12]
Stava O. and all. “Stress relief: improving structural strength of 3D printable objects.” In:
ACM Trans. Graph. 31, 4 (2012).
[Pa10]
Busto P. P. and all. “Instant texture synthesis by number.” In: Proc. of the VMV Workshop,
81-85 (2010).
[PN88]
Bendsøe M. P. and Kikuchi N. “Generating optimal topologies in structural design using a
homogenization method.” In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 71.2,
pp. 197–224. (1988).
[Va05]
Kwatra V. and all. “Texture synthesis for example-based synthesis.” In: ACM, Trans. Graph.
24, 3, 795-802 (2005).
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
63
[Wa16]
Chen W. and all. “Synthesis of filigrees for digital fabrication.” In: ACM Transactions on
GraphicsVol, 35, 4 (2016).
==PAGE:70==
