==PAGE:1==
Identification of defining rain series
characteristics for combined sewer
overflow modelling
(Identifikation af afgørende regnseriekarakter­
istika til overløbsberegninger)
Kiara Marie Allen ­ s192554
Master Thesis
DTU Environment
Department of Environmental Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow
modelling
Identifikation af afgørende regnseriekarakteristika til overløbsberegninger
Master Thesis
July, 2021
Prepared by
Kiara Marie Allen
Supervisors
Hjalte Jomo Danielsen Sørup, Associate Professor, DTU Environment
Ane Loft Mollerup, Drainage model coordinator, Novafos
Søren Feilberg Rasmussen, Engineer, Novafos
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Colourbox
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis was completed from January 2021 to July 2021 for the Department of En­
vironmental Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU for a total of 30
ECTS. This project was completed in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science
in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Kiara Marie Allen ­ s192554
ii
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The modelling of the occurrence of combined sewer overflows (CSOs) using long­term
statistics (LTS) modelling is an important aspect of the design of urban drainage sys­
tems. However, it can be very time consuming and is dependent on the availability of
long historical rain series. The aim of this project was to identify and test any defining rain
series characteristics with the hope that any identified characteristics could eventually be
used to improve the modelling of CSOs by reducing the amount of data required for LTS
simulations.
A MIKE URBAN model provided by Novafos A/S was used to run LTS simulations for an
area in Rudersdal municipality, Denmark. This area was chosen due to the availability
of the model and 41 years of historical rain data. Before these simulations were run an
in­depth analysis and test simulations were done to determine the optimal settings to use.
A representative node was selected based on the LTS results and the CSO results of this
node were used to analyze the corresponding rain data to identify any influential variables
and defining rain characteristics. Each rain variable was investigated individually and in
relation to the others to identify any relationships.
The identified influential variables were used to make logistic regression models to pre­
dict the occurrence of CSOs. While these models all had relatively high success rates
of approximately 96%, they also had enough errors to highlight several areas of future
work. Despite the errors, the performance of the models validated the identified rain char­
acteristics, specifically those related to rain event depth, rainfall intensity, and seasonal
variables.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to sincerely thank my three supervisors Hjalte Jomo Danielsen Sørup, Ane
Loft Mollerup, and Søren Feilberg Rasmussen for their help and support. Hjalte for our
weekly meetings where he provided guidance on how to carry out the project and analyze
the results, Ane for her feedback and suggestions that improved my project scope, and
Søren for his technical assistance with KENY and MIKE URBAN. I would also like to
thank Novafos for use of the provided model and Ida Bülow Gregersen from Ramboll for
technical assistance with RamLTS.
In addition to this I would like to thank my family and friends, especially my mom Andrea
and my boyfriend Jakob, for their encouragement and support throughout this project.
iv
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Model introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Model updates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Simulation settings and LTS simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Methodology
5
3.1
Simulation settings and choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
Long­term simulations and analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Simulation settings results and discussion
15
4.1
Assigned settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
Tested settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5
Long­term analysis results and discussion
21
5.1
Data selection verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Node selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.3
Variable analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.4
Model development and testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6
Further work
73
6.1
Simulation settings and choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
6.2
Long­term simulations and analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
7
Conclusion
75
Bibliography
77
A Node locations
80
B Overview of nodes of interest
83
C Additional rain data and results
89
D Intensity­duration­frequency (IDF) curves
102
E
Additional long­term analysis plots for the calibration data set
107
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The modelling of urban drainage systems is an important aspect of their design process,
which helps to ensure that the final system will meet its service criteria and function ade­
quately. As the final system design is complex, properly testing the design via a model can
also be complex. This is especially true when choosing which rainfall input to use. While
some aspects, such as pipe size, can be adequately tested using an artificial rain series,
such as a Chicago design storm (Keifer and Chu 1957), others, such as combined sewer
overflow (CSO) frequency and volume, are best evaluated using long­term historical data
sets due to non­linear responses (Jean et al. 2018; Sørup et al. 2018).
MIKE URBAN (DHI 2020) is a commonly used program for the modelling of urban drainage
systems in Denmark and the most efficient way of using these long historical data sets as
inputs in MIKE URBAN is by long­term statistics (LTS) modelling. While this process is
commonly used and gives useful results, it also has several drawbacks. LTS simulations
typically take a long time to complete, can be computationally demanding, and they can
be negatively impacted if there is a lack of historical data. In addition to this, as the climate
changes all or part of the historical data set for an area may no longer be applicable when
modelling future scenarios (Sørup et al. 2018). This poses an issue for the future plan­
ning of urban drainage systems, and is especially true when considering that a changing
climate could result in more frequent overflows and higher discharged volumes (Fortier
and Mailhot 2015; Bi et al. 2015).
One potential way to address these issues is to identify characteristics in the input rain
series that relate to a specific outcome from the system, such as CSO occurrences or vol­
ume. These characteristics could be used to screen long historical data series to identify
sections that would be pertinent for the model outcome of interest. This could reduce the
required simulation time when using historical data, as it would require less data for an
output that is statistically the same as if the entire series was used. In a similar way, these
characteristics could also be used to improve modelling for future scenarios by reducing
simulation times and by use as a screening tool for a specific system outcome.
Previous work has been done on the parameterization of rain series and their relation to
CSO outcomes (e.g. Thorndahl and Willems 2008, Sandoval et al. 2013, Yu et al. 2018
and others). This project differs from these pieces of work in that a wide variety of rain
variables are considered and the analysis method is kept relatively simple and closely
related to the physical system.
1.1
Problem statement
The objectives of this project are to identify any existing defining rain series characteris­
tics that relate to CSO occurrence for a region of Rudersdal municipality in Denmark, to
validate their importance and applicability, and identify any required further work.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
1
==PAGE:8==
To achieve this objective, this project is split into two distinct parts with their own objectives,
which are outlined below. One part focuses on the settings for the LTS simulations and
the other focuses on the data analysis of the LTS results. Based on the completion of
these two parts recommendations can be made.
1. The first objective is to determine the optimal LTS simulation settings for the eastern
Rudersdal model provided by Novafos A/S. To complete this, the following work
must be done:
(a) Any necessary changes to the model must be made.
(b) All possible settings options must be identified.
(c) The criteria for optimal model performance must be defined.
(d) Test simulations using different model settings must be completed.
(e) The test simulation results must be compared to each other and the optimal
performance criteria to select the optimal settings.
2. The second objective is to investigate, identify, and test defining rain characteristics
using the LTS results. To complete this, the following work must be done:
(a) The historical rain data must be split into equivalent calibration and validation
data sets and checked to ensure that any erroneous data is removed.
(b) An analysis procedure must be defined.
(c) The LTS simulations must be run and the pertinent data extracted.
(d) The results must be analyzed following the analysis procedure and any defining
rain characteristics identified.
(e) The validity and applicability of the identified characteristics must be tested by
implementation in a predictive CSO model.
2
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
MIKE URBAN was selected for use in this project as LTS simulations in MIKE URBAN
are commonly used in Denmark. In addition to this, a complete MIKE URBAN model was
provided by Novafos A/S for use in the project, which allowed for more time to be allotted
to results analysis instead of model building. A short summary of the most important
model and MIKE URBAN information is included below.
2.1
Model introduction
The model used in this analysis comprises the eastern part of Rudersdal municipality and
was provided by Novafos A/S. This area was selected for this analysis because of the
abundant amount of local historical rain data available. In addition to this, it has been
previously used for both practical and academic purposes, and would therefore require a
minimal amount of work to prepare it for this analysis.
There is a total of 41 years of rain data available from the Danish Meteorological Institute
(DMI) for this area from a single tipping­bucket gauge at the Vedbæk wastewater treat­
ment plant. This was the rain data used in this analysis, and is assumed to be applicable
for and uniformly distributed over the whole model region. Additional information about
the rain data is discussed in Sarup et al. 2017.
The model of the combined sewer system has 8931 different catchments and covers a
total area of 990 ha, 337 ha of which is impervious. The model also includes the two
rivers in the area, Kighanerende and Maglemoserende, which both run from the west
of the model area to the east of the area to drain into the Øresund. In total, there is
4236 nodes in the system, but this analysis will only look at the 35 of these nodes that
overflow into a receiving water body. The location of these nodes are shown in Figure A.1
in Appendix A and further details are included in Appendix B.
The nodes of interest are fairly well distributed within the modelling area. This was not
a consideration when selecting which nodes to focus on within the system, however it is
an advantage, as it means that the analysis is not limited to one specific region within the
modelling area. Additionally, the selected nodes of interest also contain a mix of basins
and manholes, with varying volumes and emptying times. This is ideal as it means there
is the potential for a variety of phenomena to be captured by the analysis.
2.2
Model updates
While this model has been previously used in both practical and academic contexts, some
updates were required to ensure that it met the requirements of the newest regional plan
for the area (Roman et al. 2020). These changes involved increasing the storage volume
of some of the basins in the system, all of which were located at nodes of interest.
This was done by creating an additional fictional basin at each of the nodes and connect­
ing it to the existing basin to clearly show that additional volume was added. The new
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
3
==PAGE:10==
fictional basins have the same ground level as the existing basins, but have a slightly
higher bottom level (approximately 10 cm higher) than the existing basin to ensure that
they would completely empty before the existing basin empties. The pipes connecting
the basins also all have diameters of 150 mm for the same reason. The volumes of the
additional basins were determined considering the weir heights of the existing basins so
that no water that should flow over the weir would instead be stored in the new basin. The
volumes of the updated basins are shown in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Original and update volumes for the model nodes with updated basins
Node name
B24
B30RUND
E010013
Original volume [m3]
565
4556
0
Additional volume [m3]
6075
1230
5996
Total volume [m3]
6640
5786
5596
2.3
Simulation settings and LTS simulations
LTS simulations are more efficient than other simulations because they convert a con­
tinuous long­term period into a discontinuous series of relevant events (DHI 2017). This
requires less simulation time as any unnecessary events are excluded and only the rele­
vant ones are simulated.
Whether a rain event is relevant or not is determined by the start criteria and when the
simulation of that event should end is determined by the stop criteria. Both the start and
stop criteria are specified by the user and can include a minimum rain depth, the amount
of time between rain events, and the total volume in the system, among others. While this
customization is convenient, it also means that the settings must be carefully selected to
ensure that no relevant events are excluded from the simulation and that the simulation
of the discontinuous events ends at an appropriate time.
The simulation results are directly impacted by the settings used in the simulation, which
vary based on the desired output. The main output of interest in this project is information
on the occurrence, frequency, and volume of CSO events for the nodes of interest. As
the focus of this analysis is slightly different than those of the previous uses of this model,
some settings were best to determined by trial­and­error testing, while others could be the
same as in the previous uses. The settings that needed to be evaluated and the outputs
from the simulations are discussed further in chapter 3.
4
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:11==
3
Methodology
This analysis is divided into two distinct parts: the determination of simulation settings
and the running and analysis of the long­term simulations. The latter is dependent on the
results of the former, and therefore the methodology and results sections were divided
into two parts to address each individually. The connection between the two are shown
in Figure 3.1. Sections 3.1 and 3.2 describe the respective methodologies. The model
building and rain data acquisition processes have been previously completed (as detailed
in Berggren 2020 and Roman et al. 2020) and will therefore not be discussed in this report.
Figure 3.1: Project work flow and connections
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
5
==PAGE:12==
3.1
Simulation settings and choices
The model results are heavily influenced by the simulation choices and settings used in
the model. It was therefore important to run short test simulations to establish the most
ideal settings before running the actual simulations to be used for analysis. The most ideal
settings are those that provide the desired data resolution and outputs, while requiring a
minimal amount of simulation time, and facilitate stable model behaviour.
All simulation settings were selected for use with LTS simulations and therefore all test
simulations were also run as LTS simulations to adequately test the settings. This means
that criteria are used to define a list of jobs, where each job is a specified time period that
would capture the outcomes of interest. Only these defined jobs are run in the simulation,
as the data outside of these jobs is assumed to be negligible to the analysis. Each job
continues to run until the stop criteria are met. Due to this, the selected settings, especially
the job list definition and stop criteria, are very important as if they are poorly defined the
right data will not be included as an output.
As some settings can simply be assigned based on literature values without testing, these
are discussed first followed by the settings that needed to be tested and the applicable
test criteria. The results of the test simulations and the selected settings are discussed in
chapter 4.
3.1.1
Assigned settings
As shown in Figure 3.1, there are only three simulation settings that were decided using
literature or expert recommendations without test simulations. They are the time steps
used in the simulation, the output data settings, and the hotstart file definition and are
discussed below.
Time steps
It is possible to specify minimum and maximum values for the time steps taken by MIKE
URBAN as it runs a simulation. The specification of these values is important as they
impact the required simulation time. Larger steps allow the simulation to run faster than
shorter ones, however, if the steps are too large they may result in computational errors
that result in the simulation crashing. As a working model was provided for this project
with well­defined time steps, i.e. they did not result in the model crashing, these time
steps were not changed. All of the simulations were run with a minimum time step of 5
seconds and a maximum time step of 60 seconds.
Output data settings
Several different types of data were saved for each simulation to allow for adequate data
analysis. This considered both the CSO data itself and any additional data to ensure
that sufficient data was available to explain any unexpected CSO results. These outputs
could be defined based on previous work (such as Berggren 2020) and the desired results
without test simulations, as they do not tend to have a large impact on the simulation time.
Information such as water level was saved for all nodes in the system every 24 hours, while
data for the nodes of interest were saved more frequently, at a resolution of 5 minutes. In
addition to water level, weir discharge, pump discharge, volume data and time data were
6
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:13==
also saved at 5­minute intervals for the nodes of interest, as specified in the user­specified
settings. No orifice or valve data was saved as it was not applicable for this analysis.
In terms of LTS specific outputs, a global time step (dT) of 24 hours was specified to
separate events for statistical analysis, and all discharges from the system were saved
with a monthly statistic frequency. The annual discharge, event discharge and maximum
level was saved for all the links and nodes in the system, while the event duration was
also saved for the nodes.
Hotstart file
To account for the dry weather flow in the system, a hotstart file was generated and used
for each simulation. This hotstart file accounts for the regular wastewater flow from houses
and the rivers in the system, both of which are present in the system whether there is a rain
event or not. The loads for the wastewater flow and river flow were defined by Novafos
A/S under Network Loads in the model, and were not re­defined in this project.
The hotstart file was generated by running a two­day simulation of the system without
any rain in order to generate system flows without the influence of runoff. When the hot­
start simulation first starts the system is totally empty, which means that the first day of
the hotstart is spent filling up the system and the levels are not stable until the second
day. Therefore, only the second day of the hotstart was used for the initial system con­
ditions in the simulation. As the conditions of the dry weather flow vary with time, the
initial conditions were determined from the hotstart values at the same time of day as the
job started. Only one hotstart file was generated for all simulations, and therefore only
short­term temporal variation was considered and seasonal variation was assumed to be
negligible.
3.1.2
Tested settings
As shown in Figure 3.1, there are several settings that were determined by use of test
simulations. They are: rain event grouping, job list settings, computational engine, stop
criteria, and whether or not to use RamLTS to split and run simulations. An explanation
of the options and test procedure is discussed below, while the results and final settings
used are discussed in Section 4.
Rain event grouping
Rain event grouping determines how and whether separate rain events are lumped to­
gether and treated as one by MIKE URBAN. It is important to specify this value, as many
different definitions are used. For instance, DMI states that a minimum time of 60 minutes
separates two rain events in their rain data (Sarup et al. 2017), so if two events happen
within 60 minutes of each other they are treated as one singular event.
In the context of this system, a time of 6 hours and 12 hours have both been used to group
events together (Berggren 2020; Roman et al. 2020). Typically, a longer length such as 12
hours is preferred, as it can account for the coupling of rain events more accurately. Test
simulations were used to determine this setting as how rain events are grouped together
can affect the length of the defined jobs, and thus the required simulation time. Although
the job definition and rain event grouping are separate settings, the former is influenced
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
7
==PAGE:14==
by the latter. So while a 12­hour event grouping may result in more realistic model results
than a 6­hour grouping, it may also take much longer to run the simulation. In this project
test simulations were run using both a 6­hour and a 12­hour grouping to determine the
difference in model results and required simulation time.
Computational engine
There are two different computational engines that can be used in MIKE URBAN: MOUSE
and MIKE 1D. Typically, the MOUSE engine is used as a default, but it was theorized
that the MIKE 1D engine may be more computationally efficient for these simulations.
Therefore, two almost­identical test simulations, where the only difference was the engine
used, were run to compare the difference in model results and required simulation time
for the two engines.
Use of RamLTS
The abundant amount of historical rain data was one of the reasons why this area and
model were selected for this project, however there were also concerns about how time­
consuming it would be to run LTS simulations for 41 years of data. Therefore, the use of
RamLTS (Ramboll 2021) was considered to reduce the required computation time.
RamLTS is a program developed by Ramboll that can divide a MIKE URBAN simulation
into smaller pieces that can then run simultaneously so that it can be run in less time. This
program can also be used to generate job lists.
RamLTS works by using the generated simulation .MEX file to split the simulation. This
means that the simulation is set up as normal in MIKE URBAN, and no special steps
have to be taken when generating the .MEX file. However, it should be noted that the
rain boundary conditions should be active when the .MEX file is generated, as RamLTS
will automatically run a corresponding runoff simulation for a network simulation. The
.MEX file is used to split the simulation up into shorter simulations of equal length. In
this analysis, a length of one year was used for the shorter simulation. One year was
chosen as to minimize the impact that splitting the simulation up may have on the results;
there are not often large rain events in late December and early January, and splitting
the simulations once per year at this time decreases the chance that one event will be
split over two shorter simulations. Using a shorter period, for example of 6­months or 3­
months, would increase the chance of an event being split, in part because the simulation
is split more, and in part because it will be split during seasons that tend to have more
rain events. To verify that no events were split over two different simulations, the job lists
were checked for this before the simulations were run.
Test simulations were used to compare the difference in results and required simulation
time between two identical simulations where the default MOUSE engine was used to run
one, and RamLTS was used to run the other. This was done to ensure that using RamLTS
would not result in a loss of result data and would take less time than the MOUSE engine.
Job list settings
It was previously mentioned that the job list settings define the periods of data that will be
simulated and are therefore influenced by the rain event grouping. However, this is not
8
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:15==
the only influence. Another major component of the job list criteria is the rain depth cutoff
value, as this defines what is considered a rain event.
Typically, a value of 3 mm is used to capture large rain events that may result in CSOs
(as used in Berggren 2020 and Roman et al. 2020), while a lower value, often 0.6 mm
(Gregersen 2021), can be used to capture every rain event. As with a longer event group­
ing length, a lower depth threshold better facilitates the modelling of coupled events, but
it also results in a longer simulation time. Therefore test simulations were used to deter­
mine the difference in the resulting jobs and simulation time when using a threshold of 3
mm versus 0.6 mm.
There are several different programs that can be used to define the job lists used in MIKE
URBAN, and job lists made with the same criteria may vary slightly depending on the
program used. Two different programs, RamLTS (Ramboll 2021) and KENY (LNH water
2016), were used in this project to make job lists, as each had preferred capabilities that
were not available in one program alone. RamLTS was convenient to use when running
simulations with RamLTS, and KENY was used to generate additional rain files where
the events were grouped together according to the defined grouping criteria, which was
convenient for statistical purposes. While these two programs are similar in many ways,
they have slightly different features and selection mechanisms. For example, KENY will
include events with a depth equal to or greater than the specified depth, while RamLTS
will only include events with a depth that is greater than the specified depth, unless it is a
grouped event.
Stop criteria
All of the jobs in the defined job list come with a stop time in addition to a start time,
however, this stop time is just an approximation and the simulation of that job does not stop
until the defined stop criteria is met. The chosen stop criteria is therefore very important,
as if it is too stringent it will result in a longer simulation time and excess output data, while
if it is not stringent enough the jobs may finish too early.
If a job finishes too early, for instance before a basin is adequately drained, then a rain
event that occurs shortly after the simulation has stopped could result in a CSO from this
partially full basin, but it would not be captured in the simulation results. In addition to this,
it is important that all basins are adequately drained at the end of each job, so that the
assumptions that the basins are empty at the beginning of the next job are held. In this
analysis, adequately drained is defined as having a volume less than or equal to 10% of
the total basin volume at the end of a job.
The total system volume at a specific time is commonly used to set a stop criterion, and
was also used to define the stop criterion in this project. To determine the most optimal
stop criterion, a block rain (a synthetic rain with a constant rainfall intensity) was used
to determine the total volume in the system before any CSO events. This volume was
then tested as a stop criterion, and the resulting volume remaining in all of the basins
of interest were checked to determine if they were adequately empty. If not, the volume
criterion would be reduced and the simulation run again. This was done iteratively until all
basins of interest were adequately drained. This process is discussed further in chapter 4.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
9
==PAGE:16==
3.1.3
Test criteria
Before any of the above settings were tested in simulations, a set of criteria were defined to
allow for comparison between test simulations and to determine which choice of settings
were better. These criteria were defined to ensure that there would be sufficient time for
in­depth data analysis, and that there would be sufficient detail in the model results.
The criteria used to determine the suitability of the simulation settings were, in no particular
order, that:
• The simulation time was not prohibitive;
• The output data resolution was fine enough for analysis, but not finer than neces­
sary;
• The job list included a variety of events, ranging from small to large;
• Coupled events were captured in the job list; and
• All basins of interest were sufficiently empty (≤10% of the full volume) at the end of
each job.
A one year simulation using rain data from 2019 was used to evaluate whether all of these
criteria were met. The same 2019 data was used to evaluate all of the tested settings.
As mentioned in the previous sections, the testing approach varied depending on what
was being tested. Some tests had a trial­and­error approach, where multiple simulations
were run, while others had a comparative approach, where only two simulations were run.
Many of the test simulations were run using RamLTS, where the year was split into four
3­month sections to reduce to simulation time. While this may have had an impact on the
ensuing results, this impact was assumed to be negligible. A discussion of the results
from this process and the final settings used are in chapter 4.
3.2
Long­term simulations and analysis
Once the optimal simulation settings were determined, the following methodology was
used to run the long­term simulations, analyze, and test the resulting data and findings.
First a simulation structure and procedure for running the simulations was defined, then
an effective analysis approach for the results was determined, and finally a method to test
the validity of the findings was established.
3.2.1
Data selection and simulation procedure
To take full advantage of the abundant available rain data, and to avoid any bias associ­
ated with only using certain subsets, the entire 41 years of data is used in this project.
The large size of the data set allows for it to be split into calibration and validation subsets,
where the calibration set was used for the data analysis and the validation set was used
to test the findings from the calibration set. To avoid the changes in precipitation patterns
due to climate change impacting the identification of defining parameters, the data was
split into calibration and validation periods in alternating chronological order. As the focus
of this analysis is on low return periods, the data was split into periods of 5 years, with the
exception of one 6­year period. The allocations of these periods are shown in Table 3.1
below. The validity of these subset definitions is confirmed in chapter 5.
10
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:17==
Table 3.1: Allocation to calibration and validation periods
Calibration or validation
Series name
Start year
End year
Calibration
C1
1979
1983
C2
1989
1993
C3
1999
2003
C4
2009
2013
Validation
V1
1984
1988
V2
1994
1998
V3
2004
2008
V4
2014
2019
Each period, as defined in Table 3.1, was run sequentially and separately using RamLTS
and MIKE URBAN. This was done by using MIKE URBAN to generate the .MEX file for
each period, which was then used in RamLTS to split the period into smaller simulations
that were 1 year long, which were then run simultaneously using RamLTS. Once all the
1­year simulations were completed, the LTS results for each period were obtained by
first merging their .ERF files to produce one .ERF file, then using RamLTS to extract
the pertinent data for the nodes of interest. In this case the pertinent data is the CSO
occurrence, timing, volume and rank for each of the nodes of interest. This data was then
used along with the corresponding rain data for the results analysis.
3.2.2
Analysis procedure
The large number of nodes of interest and the length of the rain data set result in a large
amount of model output data. A well­defined analysis procedure is therefore important to
ensure that the goals of the analysis are met.
A node­wise analysis approach was determined to be the best approach in this context,
and was the approach taken. In this approach, the results for one of the previously iden­
tified 35 nodes of interest were examined in detail for each calibration period along with
the corresponding rain data and used to build the initial model. This was done due to the
large amount of data involved in this project, and due to the differing reaction that each
node will have to the same rain event depending on its structural characteristics such as
volume and weir crest height, among others. While it would be ideal to do an in­depth
analysis for all of the nodes of interest in the system, this was determined to be infeasible
due to time constraints. Instead the other nodes of interest will be used to test the findings
for the one selected node.
The criteria used to select the one node is described in subsubsection 3.2.2. Once it was
selected the data analysis was carried out in three phases. First, Rain Analyst (Sørup,
Gregersen, and Arnbjerg­Nielsen 2015) was used to analyze the rain events in each pe­
riod and the rain data was divided into groups depending on if an overflow occurred at the
node of interest or not. Then each rain variable was individually assessed and compared
between these two groups to identify any clear differences between the two. For instance,
whether a significant difference in rain event depth was present for rain events that result
in a CSO versus those that do not. Secondly, any identified differences were used as
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
11
==PAGE:18==
filters to assess correlations in the data between different variables. For instance, if rain
events with a CSO were found to have a rain event depth over a certain value in the first
step, then this value was used as a filter for both data sets and another variable, such
as rain event duration, was compared between the two groups. In the third phase, any
variables of interest identified in the first two phases were used to build a predictive model
for CSO occurrence. This final phase was done to confirm the findings in the previous
two phases. It was thought that if the identified variables could be used to create a well
performing predictive model that behaves as expected based on the findings, that this
would validate the identified characteristics. The detailed methodology for each of these
sections is discussed in the following sections.
Node selection
The node selected for this analysis was determined by reviewing the LTS results for each
of the nodes of interest for the first calibration period (C1). This period was chosen as it
was the first simulation run and also the first one completed.
It was determined that the selected node should meet the following criteria:
• Have CSO events in all years of the period C1;
• Have variation in CSO volume;
• Have a basin; and
• Have at least 20 events in the period C1.
These criteria were chosen to ensure that there were enough overflow events and suffi­
cient variation in events to create a robust model. A preference for a higher number of
events also reflects the focus of this project on frequent overflow events instead of less­
frequent, extreme events. Additionally, a basin was a requirement so that the impact of
storage volume could be taken into consideration. Once a node was selected, this was
then used in the node­wise analysis of the rain variables.
Variable analysis
As previously mentioned, two different phases of variable analysis were undertaken in
this project. The first compares variable values between the rain events that result in an
overflow with those that do not and the second uses the results from the first phase to
filter and further analyze the variables.
There were many available rain variables that could have been investigated in this project,
but due to time constraints the focus was kept on those thought to have the most impact
and that were either present in or easily derived from the available DMI rain data. The
variables investigated in the first phase of the analysis, also referred to as the one­variable
analysis, are as follows*:
• Rain event depth (total over the event; in mm);
• Rain event duration (in minutes);
• 5­minute rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 10­minute rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 3­hour rain intensity (in µm/s);
12
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:19==
• 6­hour rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 48­hour accumulated rain depth before the rain event** ( in mm);
• 48­hour accumulated rain depth before the CSO event*** ( in mm);
• Rain event season; and
• The number of rain events in the rain event season.
*Here a rain event is defined according to the same criteria specified by the event grouping settings (as
referred to in subsubsection 3.1.2 and explicitly detailed in subsection 4.2.1).
**The accumulated rain depth from 48­hours before the start of the rain event to the rain event start time.
***The accumulated rain depth from 48­hours before the start of the overflow event to the start time of the
overflow event.
The rain event depth, duration and several intensities were selected as they have been
shown to be influential on the CSO characteristics (as in Mailhot, Talbot, and Lavallée
2015, Sandoval et al. 2013, and Thorndahl and Willems 2008, among others). While
many different intensities could have been included, the above four were selected to de­
termine if there was a difference in importance between shorter duration intensities (5­
and 10­minutes) and longer duration intensities (3­ and 6­hours) as well as between two
intensities of similar durations. They were also selected so as to exclude a minimal num­
ber of events. For instance, while the 48­hour rain intensity may also be interesting to
consider, it would essentially exclude any events with a duration less than 48­hours.
In addition to the above variables, intensity­duration­frequency (IDF) curves were made
for each rain event that results in a CSO at the node of interest. These were then com­
pared to relevant IDF curves created for similar return periods in the same area by the
regional model (Gregersen et al. 2016). These were used to compare the observed rain
characteristics to the theoretical versions created by the model, so that the possible im­
plications of these differences may be determined.
Both phases of the analysis were kept relatively simple. In the first phase of the variable
analysis, histograms were used to compare the variable values between the rain events
that resulted in an overflow and those that did not. Histograms were also used in the
second phase to compare the data filtered by any values found in the first phase. In
addition to histograms, where applicable, other tools such as t­tests, correlation plots,
and regressions were also used.
The rain event season was not evaluated in the same way as the other variables. Instead,
the season was observed as part of the analysis of the other variables, and these results
influenced which facets of the season should be further explored. This approach was
taken because seasonality is not as concrete as the other variables, and while certain
events or characteristics can be associated with certain seasons, they are not exclusively
associated with these seasons and could occur in other seasons as well. This is especially
true with climate change and changing weather patterns (Sørup et al. 2018).
There were no quantitative criteria defined for determining whether a variable should be
included in the predictive model. Instead, inclusion was based on the apparent influence
of a variable, or if its behaviour was especially interesting.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
13
==PAGE:20==
Model development and testing
The goals of developing a predictive model for the occurrence of CSOs are to validate
the findings from the variable analyses and to create a well­performing predictive model
that only requires rain data available from DMI as input. It is important that the only model
input is rain data to evaluate how well a predictive CSO model can perform without being
given any information specific to the overflow structure.
The most influential variables are included in the model in order to: 1) confirm the influence
of these variables on overflows, and 2) confirm any identified variable thresholds (defining
characteristics). In this way the influence of the included variables is confirmed if the
model can predict the occurrence of overflows with a high success rate. Similarly, the
identified thresholds are confirmed by the model if the the variable values associated with
overflows by the model are at or above the threshold values.
Several different approaches for the development of predictive CSO models using rain
data have been documented (such as Zhao, Beach, and Rezgui 2017; Thorndahl, Schaarup­
Jensen, and Jensen 2008; Sandoval et al. 2013; and Thorndahl 2009, among others).
Some of these approaches are quite novel, using algorithms and techniques relatively
new to the field. The modelling approach used in this project is in direct contrast to these
approaches, in that it is relatively simple and has already been similarly implemented
(such as in Mailhot, Talbot, and Lavallée 2015). The approach used in this project was to
make a logistical regression model to predict the probability of a CSO occurring for each
rain event using the identified influential variables. The model was developed and fit us­
ing the calibration data set and the MIKE URBAN results for the selected node of interest.
Additional specific details of the model development are discussed in section 5.4.
After the model was developed, multiple model iterations were made: two of which were
made by manually selecting the included variables, and two of which were made us­
ing step­wise model building algorithms. These algorithms select variables for inclusion
based on the Akaike information criterion (AIC) (Akaike 1998) and are discussed in more
detail in section 5.4. These algorithms were used in addition to the manually made mod­
els to investigate whether different variables would be selected when based on a model fit
score such as the AIC as opposed to manually selecting variables based on their observed
behaviour in the modelled physical system. All four models were compared against each
other using their predictions for the validation data set in terms of their AIC values, as well
as their number of correct and incorrect predictions. This comparison was done to select
the best performing model.
Once the best performing model was selected, its performance was tested for other nodes
in the system with different characteristics than the originally selected node to determine
how widely applicable the model was. A caveat of basing the analysis on one node is
that the circumstances that lead to an overflow event can be very node­specific, so it
is likely that the model developed for one node will not perform well for another node
with different characteristics, like basin volume, for example. It is therefore important to
determine the models performance with other nodes to determine its wider applicability
and future applications.
14
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:21==
4
Simulation settings results and
discussion
As discussed in section 3.1, the settings and simulation choices that are used in a model
have a large influence on the resulting output from that model. In this project two types
of settings were defined: assigned settings (those that are solely based on literature) and
tested settings (those that are determined via test simulations). This section focuses on
the tested settings and the related simulation results.
4.1
Assigned settings
As previously discussed in subsection 3.1.1, the assigned simulation settings in this project
are: the time steps used in the simulation, the output data settings, and the hotstart file
definition. These settings were determined based on the desired model results and pre­
vious work using this model (such as Berggren 2020 and Roman et al. 2020).
To summarize, the minimum and maximum time steps are 5 and 60 seconds, respectively.
The main output settings of interest are that results for all nodes in the system was saved
every 24 hours, while for the 35 identified nodes of interest they were saved every 5
minutes. Additionally, statistics on event duration, annual discharge, event discharge and
maximum level were saved for all nodes and links in the system. The hotstart file, to
determine the dry weather flow in the system, was generated by running a two­day model
simulation without rain. But only the second day results were used for the simulations, as
it took a day for the system flow to stabilize.
4.2
Tested settings
There were several simulation settings where the optimal simulation choice had to be de­
termined by running test simulations and evaluated against the test criteria (as discussed
in subsection 3.1.2 and subsection 3.1.3. These include:
• Rain event grouping;
• Computational engine;
• Use of RamLTS;
• Job list settings; and
• Stop criteria.
The test simulations were used to compare the different possible setting options. As dis­
cussed in subsection 3.1.3, the selected settings were those that resulted in the lowest
simulation time while still providing sufficient resolution in the output data, capturing a
variety of rain events (including coupled rain events) and ensuring that all basins of in­
terest were sufficiently empty at the end of each job. The results of the completed test
simulations are discussed in the following sections.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
15
==PAGE:22==
4.2.1
Rain event grouping
Two different lengths were tested for the grouping of rain events. Simulations were run
with both a minimum dry weather separation time of 6 hours and 12 hours. Both were
investigated using test simulations because it was thought that a longer separation time
would better capture the interactions of smaller coupled events, because the more strin­
gent grouping criterion would result in longer individual jobs. Although the job definition
and rain event grouping are separate settings, the former is influenced by the latter. There­
fore both 6 and 12 hours were investigated to evaluate whether there was a significant
difference in the number of events and overflows captured.
While the longer separation time of 12 hours may lead to better model results, it may also
result in a longer simulation time. This is because it is more computationally intensive, as
it results in longer jobs. Therefore, the required simulation time of each length was also
investigated for both available computational engines. A summary of the results of these
simulations is shown in Table 4.1.
As shown in Table 4.1, the MIKE 1D simulation with the 6­hour definition had issues com­
pleting the simulation due to issues with the 2019 version of MIKE URBAN, so it can not
be properly compared with the other simulations. However, the two engines and the two
different rain event groupings can still be evaluated. For instance, the computational run
time of the MIKE 1D engine is almost half that of the MOUSE engine for the 12­hour event
grouping and results in similar values for total overflow volume per year, though there is a
discrepancy in total overflow events per year between the two simulations. Similarly, the
6­hour MOUSE simulation has almost identical results to those of the 12­hour MOUSE
simulation, with a reduced computation run time. Thus, if the MOUSE engine is used then
the 6­hour grouping is preferable, as the number of events missed from the 12­hour group­
ing is negligible. The same conclusion cannot be drawn for the MIKE 1D simulations, due
to crashing problems with the 6­hour grouping.
Table 4.1: Test simulation comparison for different event groupings and engines
MIKE 1D
MIKE 1D
MOUSE
MOUSE
12 hours
6 hours*
12 hours
6 hours
Simulation time [days]
2.780
0.002
4.110
3.404
Total overflow volume [m3/yr]
462302
­
470490
468506
Total overflow events [no./yr]
761
­
606
599
*Cannot be compared due to simulation crashing issues with the version of MIKE URBAN.
Due to the similarity in the overflow volume and event results and the difference in re­
quired simulation time for the two groupings, it was determined that the optimal rain event
grouping for this project is a minimum rain event separation of 6 hours of dry weather.
4.2.2
Computational engine
The MOUSE and MIKE 1D computational engines were both investigated using test sim­
ulations to determine if there was a significant difference in terms of model results and
required simulation time. To assess the difference in computational engine, the same
16
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:23==
simulation was run with each engine using both a 6­hour and 12­hour event separation
time (as previously discussed in subsection 4.2.1). A summary of these simulation results
are shown in Table 4.1.
When comparing the results between the two different engines, the main focus was on
the simulation time and any differences in overflow volume and events, but there was also
consideration for the compatibility of the engine with the chosen event grouping definition.
Since a grouping length of 6­hours was already selected, due to the negligible difference
in results, the chosen engine should be able to adequately run simulations with this defi­
nition. However, as shown in Table 4.1, the MIKE 1D simulation with the 6­hour grouping
could not be completed due to issues attributed to the version of MIKE URBAN used. This
is unfortunate, as the 12­hour simulation with MIKE 1D had more overflow events than
the 12­hour MOUSE simulation and took less time than the 6­hour MOUSE simulation.
But the stability of the simulations is also an important consideration, so although this
meant that a comprehensive comparison between the two engines could not be made, it
did favour the use of the MOUSE engine.
Another factor that favoured the use of MOUSE as the computational engine is compat­
ibility with RamLTS. As the shortest test simulation time was just under 3 hours for one
year, it was determined that it would not be an efficient use of time to run all of the simu­
lations without the use of RamLTS. Unfortunately, RamLTS is not compatible with MIKE
1D and is only compatible with MOUSE. As a result, MIKE 1D was no longer considered
as a potential engine, and it was determined that MOUSE was the best engine to use in
this project.
4.2.3
Use of RamLTS
Once it was determined that RamLTS should be used to split the simulations to reduce
the computational time, RamLTS was also used for the remainder of the test simulations.
This was done to evaluate how its use would impact the simulation results and to practice
using it to ensure that it was used properly for the longer simulations.
Table 4.2: Performance comparison with and without RamLTS for MOUSE engine with
6­hour event grouping
Without RamLTS (A)
With RamLTS (B)
Difference relative to A
Run time [days]
3.404
2.329
­1.076 (­31.6%)
For all weirs
Total weir events [no.]
755
755
0 (0%)
Total weir volume [m3]
626114.5
627539.8
+1425.3 (+0.23%)
For nodes of interest
Total weir events [no.]
599
599
0 (0%)
Total weir volume [m3]
468506
469887
+1381.1 (+0.29%)
Max. node events [no.]
64
64
0 (0%)
Max. node volume [m3]
176938
176913
­25 (­0.01%)
To see any differences resulting from RamLTS, a simulation with the same settings as
those used in the MOUSE 6­hour event definition simulation was run, where the only
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
17
==PAGE:24==
difference was that it was split into 3­month pieces using RamLTS. The four corresponding
.ERF files were then merged in RamLTS and analyzed and compared. A summary of this
comparison is shown in Table 4.2.
The biggest difference between the two simulations is the reduction in computational run
time when using RamLTS. Although there is a slight reduction in the number of events
when using RamLTS, this difference is negligible for the purposes of this analysis, and
is likely due to the frequency of 3­months that was used to split the events in the test
simulations. As the long­term simulations will be split on a yearly basis, it is likely that
the difference in events will be less. It should also be noted that Table 4.2 only considers
the results for the 35 nodes of interest and their respective weirs. When all weirs in the
system are considered the difference between the two simulations is less, but since this
project focuses on the nodes of interest, then the impact of RamLTS on their resulting
output is most important.
As shown, running the same simulation with RamLTS reduces the required simulation
time by approximately 30% for a one year simulation without any significant differences
in CSO related results. As it is important to have the shortest simulation time possible
without infringing on result quality, it was determined that RamLTS should be used when
running the long­term simulations.
4.2.4
Job list settings
The test simulations to investigate the job list settings mainly focused on comparing the
difference in CSO­related results when a minimum rain event depth of 3 mm was used to
define a job versus when 0.6 mm was used. As discussed in subsection 3.1.2, a depth of
3 mm is what is typically used for LTS simulations when the focus is larger events and 0.6
mm is what is used when the goal is to include all of the rain events. A summary of the
results from the two simulations using the two rain depth cutoffs is shown in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Results comparison for rain depth criteria of 3 mm and 0.6 mm
3 mm depth
0.6 mm depth
Difference of 3 mm to 0.6 mm
Run time [days]
2.329
4.395
+2.066 (+89%)
For all weirs
Total weir events [no.]
755
779
+24 (+3.18%)
Total weir volume [m3]
627539.8
630159.9
+2620.1 (+0.42%)
For nodes of interest
Total weir events [no.]
599
621
+22 (+3.67%)
Total weir volume [m3]
469886.7
472146.7
+2260 (+0.48%)
Max. node events [no.]
64
74
+10 (+16%)
Max. node volume [m3]
176913.2
180192.1
+3278.9 (+1.85%)
As shown, the computation run time for the simulation with a 0.6 mm cutoff depth is almost
twice that of the 3 mm depth, while there is only a marginal difference in the number
of events and volumes between the two. The biggest differences occur in the number
of events between the two simulations; the 0.6 mm depth results in approximately 20
18
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:25==
more weir overflow events and 10 more maximum node events. The difference in weir
events is small in relation to the total number of weir events (each approximately 3%) and
is therefore deemed insignificant. The difference in number of maximum node events
corresponds to a higher percentage of the total events (approximately 16%), but as this is
still relatively low and because the difference in maximum node volume is relatively small,
it was decided that this difference is also negligible. Therefore, although using a cutoff
depth of 0.6 mm does result in more overflow events than 3 mm, for the purposes of this
project the difference is negligible, and therefore a cutoff depth of 3 mm is most suitable
in this context.
Based on these results, and those from the previous sections in chapter 4, RamLTS was
used to generate job lists for all of the simulations. The criteria used to define the jobs on
these job lists were as follows:
• Rain events that occur within 6­hours of each other were grouped together as one
rain event and one job;
• All jobs had a minimum total rain event depth of 3 mm;
• Each job ends with 6­hours without rain; and
• The minimum and maximum job time steps (dT) are defined as 5 seconds and 60
seconds, the same as the time steps used in the model.
It should be noted that as rain events within 6­hours of each other are grouped together
as one event, if the combined rain depth of these events is more than or equal to 3 mm
they will be included in the job list as one job. The grouping of rain events, along with
the definition of events ending or starting with 6­hours of no rain, is done to adequately
capture coupled rain events and their impacts. The time steps were chosen to be the
same as those used in the simulation to prevent possible complications when running the
simulations.
4.2.5
Stop criteria
As discussed in subsection 3.1.2, the stop criteria is important to ensure that each job
stops after all the required results are obtained, but does not run longer than necessary,
which would needlessly increase the computational time of the simulations. Here, the total
system volume was used as the only stop criterion, and the optimal value was determined
through iterative testing and checking the amount of water remaining in each if the basins
of interest at the end of the jobs in the test simulation. The total system volume was used
as the only stop criterion because it is effective and it is relatively easy to find the optimal
value to use.
The first step in determining the optimal total system volume to use as the stop criterion
was to define an initial guess for the total system volume. This initial guess was deter­
mined by running a simulation with a 4­hour block rain with a constant intensity of 5 µm/s
as rain input. This block rain was used to determine the highest volume in the system
that does not cause overflow events, by looking at the total volume in the system after the
last overflow caused by the block rain. This approach is not exact, as it assumes that this
block rain would be sufficient to result in overflows for all of the basins of interest in the
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
19
==PAGE:26==
system and it does not consider the volume remaining in the basin after any overflows.
However, it was a sufficient method for obtaining an initial value, which could then be
tested and further refined. This initial value was found to be approximately 18000 m3.
This initial 18000 m3 was tested by using it as the stop criteria for a test simulation using
the 2019 measured rain data. The effectiveness of this criteria was verified by checking
the volume of each of the basins of interest at the end of the jobs in the simulation. If
the volume in all of these basins is 10% of the total volume or less at the end of the jobs
then the stop criteria is determined to be adequate. Unfortunately, this requirement was
not met for the 18000 m3. Therefore, an iterative process was undertaken where the
value of the total system volume was reduced and tested with a new simulation until the
requirements were met. This process resulted in a stop criteria of a total system volume of
14000 m3. This means that the volume of water in the system is at or below this volume
the simulation of the job stops. Therefore, the stop criteria used in all of the long­term
simulations was a total system volume of 14000 m3.
4.3
Summary
Some simulation settings could be determined from literature and previous work, while
others required testing using the model. Several different test simulations were run to
determine the optimal settings to be used in the long­term simulations. Although there
were several defined criteria to evaluate the success of each tested setting, the criterion
for simulation time ended up being the deciding factor. This was because for many of the
test simulations, both choices resulted in similar results with only negligible differences.
Through the above process the most appropriate settings for this project were determined.
These settings were used in all the long­term LTS simulations in this project, and are as
follows:
• Minimum and maximum simulation time step values of 5 seconds and 60 seconds
were used in all simulations and jobs;
• Model outputs were saved at a resolution of 5 minutes for the nodes of interest and
every 24 hours for the rest of the system;
• LTS statistics for event duration, annual discharge, event discharge, and maximum
level were saved for all nodes in the system;
• Rain events occurring within 6 hours of each other were grouped together and
treated as one event;
• The MOUSE computational engine was used for all simulations;
• All long­term simulations were run using RamLTS and split into one­year long sub­
simulations;
• Rain events (after the 6­hour grouping) were included in the job list if the total event
depth met or exceeded the 3 mm cutoff; and
• A total system volume of 14000 m3 was used as the job stop criteria.
20
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:27==
5
Long­term analysis results and
discussion
Once the optimal simulation settings were determined the long­term simulations for the
calibration and validation periods could be run and their results analyzed. The results of
this analysis are discussed in the following sections.
As mentioned in section 3.2, before the simulations were run, the allocation of data into
calibration and validation periods was verified. Once they were verified, the simulations
were run and one node was selected based on the LTS results from the first calibration
period. The calibration period rain data were then analyzed with respect to the LTS results
for this node. Each of the rain variables were initially analyzed individually, comparing any
differences in variable value between rain events that resulted in overflows and those that
did not. Any differences identified in this individual analysis, were then used as thresholds
to filter the data to determine any correlation between different variables. At the end of
this variable analysis, any influential variables were used to build a logistic regression
model to predict the probability of a CSO occurring for each rain event. This model was fit
using the calibration data, and was tested using the validation data for the one identified
node as well as other nodes in the system. The results for each phase of this process are
discussed in their own section below, so that the results are discussed in the same order
as the workflow was completed.
5.1
Data selection verification
As previously mentioned, the 41 years of rain data was split up into eight different periods,
four for calibration and four for validation. Before these periods were used in simulations,
they were compared to ensure that approximately the same characteristics were present
for both the calibration and validation data. This comparison looked at the number of rain
events (as defined using the 6­hour grouping discussed in section 4.2) and rain depths as
well as the number of CSO events once the simulations were completed. A summary of
these values is shown in Table 5.1, and plots of the rain depth data are shown in Figure 5.1.
Table 5.1: Number of rain events, CSO events, and relative number of CSO events for
the calibration and validation periods for all nodes of interest
Calibration
C1
C2
C3
C4
Average
Rain events
287
266
331
307
298
CSO events
2354
2441
3030
2932
2139
CSO events per rain event
8.20
9.18
9.15
9.55
9
Validation
V1
V2
V3
V4
Average
Rain events
310
293
342
399
336
CSO events
2620
2865
3347
3162
2998
CSO events per rain event
8.45
9.78
9.79
7.92
9
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
21
==PAGE:28==
(a) Calibration
(b) Validation
Figure 5.1: Event rain depths for the entire calibration and validation periods
As Table 5.1 shows, the amount of rain events and CSO event is relatively the same
across all the calibration and validation periods, while the average number of events is
slightly higher for the validation period. This difference is deemed acceptable, as it is
so small and assumed to be negligible. This acceptance is also because the number of
overflow events per rain event is approximately the same for all periods, which implies
that the system behaviour is approximately the same for all periods. This is also validated
by the rain depths shown in Figure 5.1, as although there are some higher depths in the
calibration period, both periods have similar values and occurrences of rain depths. The
historical rain data was also checked for erroneous data before use in the model to ensure
that it was removed and would not negatively impact the project results.
The number of CSO events is much higher than that of the number of rain events, as
one rain event can cause several simultaneous CSO events in the system. The number
of CSO events in each period validates the choice to focus the analysis on one node
instead of all of nodes of interest, as it would be more difficult to do an in­depth analysis
on so many events, especially with the complex factors that contribute to a CSO event
at different overflow structures. Focusing on only one overflow structure will allow for
a clearer investigation of the rain­related variables, as other factors such as structure
geometry, structure volume, and contributing catchment area, among others, are implicitly
held constant when looking at the same structure for each period.
In addition to the above data, the calculated U­ and f­values for each period are included
in Appendix C and a summary table of these values is shown in Table 5.2. These values
compare the rainfall intensities for various return periods of the given rain periods with
those generated by the regional model (Gregersen et al. 2016). The U­values indicate
the difference in extreme events between the historical series and the regional model,
with a negative value indicating that the historical series has fewer extreme events than
the regional model. The f­values are a factor of the difference between the two series,
22
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:29==
where if the historical series was multiplied by the f­value, it would result in an output
that, on average, is the same as that from the regional model (Sørup, Gregersen, and
Arnbjerg­Nielsen 2015).
The mean f­values are all relatively close to 1 for all the considered periods, which in­
dicates a similarity of the regional model. It was expected that there may be higher dif­
ference between the regional model and the older historical data, and this appears to be
somewhat true as the periods containing data from after 1993 have lower mean f­values.
For the purposes of this project, this difference is considered to be negligible. While there
is a lot of variation in the U­and f­values depending on the return period and duration as
well as between different periods, the presence of larger U­values, especially for lower
return periods, indicates the findings of this project may be potentially useful for future
improvements of the regional model.
Table 5.2: Summary of the U­ and f­values for all periods
Minimum U­value
Maximum U­value
Mean f­value
C1 (1979­1983)
­5.29
­2.61
1.54
C2 (1989­1993)
­3.51
­2.16
1.35
C3 (1999­2003)
­0.50
2.21
0.90
C4 (2009­2013)
­3.36
4.34
0.99
V1 (1984­1988)
­5.82
0.58
1.44
V2 (1994­1998)
­0.57
1.13
0.96
V3 (2004­2008)
­0.79
2.68
0.92
V4 (2014­2019)
­2.76
0.99
1.07
All of the results discussed in the above section culminate in the conclusion that the his­
torical data and its current division into calibration and validation periods are acceptable
both in terms of rain characteristics and resulting CSO characteristics. As the rain data
and simulation results are acceptable, the next step is selecting the node to base the rest
of the analysis around.
5.2
Node selection
Due to the large amount of LTS overflow generated and the time constraints of the project,
instead of analyzing the results of all the nodes of interest, it was decided that one of the
nodes of interest would be chosen as a ”representative” node and an in­depth analysis
would be carried out using its LTS results. The node was selected based on the LTS
results for the C1 period using the following criteria (as discussed in subsubsection 3.2.2):
• The node had to have CSO events in all years of the C1 period;
• There had to be variation in overflow volume;
• The node must have a basin; and
• There should be at least 20 CSO events in the period C1.
Based on this criteria, node B25_Bas was selected as an appropriate node to focus on in
this analysis. This is because for the period C1, node B25_Bas has CSO events in all of
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
23
==PAGE:30==
the five years, has variation in CSO volume, has a basin, and has 20 events. The location
of B25_Bas is shown in Figure A.1 in Appendix A. The basin at B25_Bas has a storage
volume of 569 m3 up to the weir edge. Outflows from the basin flow to node B25X via weir,
and B25 via pipe, while the basin receives inflows from node B25. Additionally, it takes
approximately 15 hours for the basin to be approximately 90% empty, and approximately
48 hours to be completely empty.
Table 5.3: Number of rain events, CSO events, and relative number of CSO events for
the calibration and validation periods for node B25_Bas
Calibration
C1
C2
C3
C4
Average
Rain events
287
266
331
307
298
CSO events
20
21
34
32
27
CSO events per rain events
0.070
0.079
0.103
0.104
0.089
Validation
V1
V2
V3
V4
Average
Rain events
310
293
342
399
336
CSO events
20
36
39
33
32
CSO events per rain events
0.065
0.122
0.114
0.083
0.096
The number of rain events and overflow events for B25_Bas for all of the considered
periods are shown in Table 5.3. Similar to Table 5.1, the number of CSO events are
approximately the same for each period, although the average is slightly higher for the
validation period than the calibration period. The number of CSO events is much lower
than Table 5.1, as only node overflow structure is considered. Similarly, because of the
number of CSO events per rain event is also much lower, and shows that approximately
just under one­tenth of the rain events result in a CSO event for this overflow structure.
While this may not seem very favourable, the relatively few number of events and the large
data set facilitates an in­depth analysis of the rain events to determine what separates
those that cause CSO events for B25_Bas and those that do not. Therefore, B25_Bas is
an approach choice for the node of interest, and is adequate for further analysis.
5.3
Variable analysis
As discussed in subsubsection 3.2.2, certain rain variables were chosen for an in­depth
analysis in relation to the LTS CSO results for B25_Bas. These variables were first in­
vestigated individually, then the results of the individual analysis were used to evaluate
any relationships between different variables. The process and results of this analysis are
discussed in the following sections. The investigated variables are as follows*:
• Rain event depth (total over the event; in mm);
• Rain event duration (in minutes);
• 5­minute rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 10­minute rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 3­hour rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 6­hour rain intensity (in µm/s);
24
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:31==
• 48­hour accumulated rain depth before the rain event** ( in mm);
• 48­hour accumulated rain depth before the CSO event*** ( in mm);
• Rain event season; and
• The number of rain events in the rain event season.
*Here a rain event is defined according to the same criteria specified by the event grouping settings (as
referred to in subsubsection 3.1.2 and explicitly detailed in subsection 4.2.1).
**The accumulated rain depth from 48­hours before the start of the rain event to the rain event start time.
***The accumulated rain depth from 48­hours before the start of the overflow event to the start time of the
overflow event.
5.3.1
Individual variable analysis
There were two main results obtained from the individual variable analysis: intensity­
duration­frequency (IDF) curves for the rain events that result in overflows and a separate
sets of histograms for each of the investigated variables comparing the distribution of
values for rain events that result in overflows and those that do not. This resulted in
a large number of plots, and therefore only some are included in the body of the report,
while all are included in Appendix D for the IDF curves and Appendix E for the histograms.
IDF curves
The main goal of making IDF curves for the rain events that resulted in CSOs was to
compare them with the IDF curves generated by the regional model to identify any dis­
crepancies between the two. However, they were also found to be useful in other ways,
such as validating the chosen rainfall intensities to investigate and to compare patterns
between different seasons.
Figure 5.2 shows the IDF curves for the rain events that result in overflows for first calibra­
tion period (C1), along with IDF curves generated by the regional model for return periods
(T) of 1 year, 0.5 years and 0.33 years. These return periods were chosen for comparison
because this project focused on frequent overflow events.
There are more events in the summer (sub­figures D, E, and F) than the other seasons
and these events seem to follow the shape of the regional model IDF curves more than the
other seasons (sub­figures A, B, and C). Although there tends to be a higher discrepancy
at higher durations and some events do not follow the shape well, most of the summer
events fit the expected IDF shape well, with only minor deviations at the lowest or highest
durations. However, the same cannot be said for the other seasons. It was expected
that there would be a similar shape in the IDF curves of the same season, but it was
not expected that fall, spring, and winter would have relatively the same shape while that
of summer was distinctly different, which is what is shown. Unlike summer, the other
seasons do not follow the trend of the regional model well, as the intensities for the lower
intensities are lower than expected. This could be admissible if it were not for the higher
than expected intensities that occur at higher durations around 50 to 500 minutes. If it
were not for these values then the shape would be similar to that of the regional model,
but for a lower return period than those presented. However, that is not the case. While
this discrepancy is not ideal, it is something that can be further investigated, both indirectly
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
25
==PAGE:32==
through this project and directly through future projects. Additionally, it validates the choice
to investigate both the 3­hour and 6­hour rainfall intensity, as they fall within this range.
Figure 5.2: IDF curves for period C1 along with those for T= 1 year, 0.5 years, and 0.33
years generated by the regional model (curves for other periods included in Appendix D)
Looking at the IDF curves for the rain events that result in overflows was useful as it
helped to highlight differences between the historical data and the output from the re­
gional model, as well as validating the chosen intensities for investigation, and showing
a pattern in summer events versus events in other seasons. These will all be considered
during the remainder of the analysis, and the impact of season is further discussed in
subsection 5.3.3.
Variable histograms
A separate histogram was made for each of the investigated variables using the results
of all four of the calibration periods. These are shown in Figure 5.3.
26
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:33==
(a) Rain depth
(b) Rain duration
(c) 5­minute rain intensity
(d) 10­minute rain intensity
(e) 3­hour rain intensity
(f) 6­hour rain intensity
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
27
==PAGE:34==
(g) Rain depth before start of rain event
(h) Rain depth before start of CSO event
(i) Number of rain events
Figure 5.3: Relative frequency histograms for the rain variables for rain events that result
in CSO events (A) and those that do not (B)
This was chosen over making plots for each calibration period individually as it would result
in a large number of similar plots. An example of the similarities between the histograms
of the individual and combined calibration periods is included in Appendix E. As shown in
Figure 5.3, there are some variables where there is a very distinct difference in variable
value between the results that result in CSO events at B25_Bas and those that do not.
This is also shown in Table 5.4, which summarizes the mean values for both groups of
each variable.
28
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:35==
One of the variables with a clear difference is rain depth. As shown in Figure 5.3a, the
majority of rain events that result in an overflow have depths above the average rain
depth of the rain events that do not. This difference makes sense in terms of the physical
system, as it is expected that larger rain depths result in larger volumes and fuller basins,
which then result in overflow events. However, depth is not the only controlling factor for
CSOs, as other variables such as the intensity of the rainfall, the event duration, and the
current volume in the basin tend to play a role as well (as discussed in Mailhot, Talbot,
and Lavallée 2015; Sandoval et al. 2013 and others). This is also shown in Figure 5.3a
in the few events that cause overflows with depths that are below the average for the rain
events that do not.
In contrast to the rain event depth, the difference between the two groups for rainfall
duration (shown in Figure 5.3b) is not clear. It was expected that the difference would
be as stark as with depth, as duration has been considered an influential variable on
CSO characteristics (Thorndahl, Schaarup­Jensen, and Jensen 2008 and others). But
although the averages are different and the mean value is higher for the rain events that
cause overflows than those that do not (approximately 10 days to approximately 8 days,
respectively), they are not dramatically different. This implies that duration does play a
role, but it is not as influential as depth.
Table 5.4: The mean values for rain events that result in CSOs (A) and those that do not
(B) for each investigated variable
Variable
Mean (A)
Mean (B)
Difference in means (A­B)
Rain depth [mm]
21.87
8.01
13.86
Duration [min]
610
496
114
5­min int. [µm/s]
8.90
2.45
6.45
10­min int. [µm/s]
6.79
1.78
5.01
3­hr int. [µm/s]
1.29
0.45
0.84
6­hr int. [µm/s]
0.80
0.29
0.51
Rain depth before rain event [mm]
15.69
10.80
4.89
Rain depth before CSO event [mm]
18.16
9.53
8.63
Number of rain events
17.52
16.71
0.81
Figures 5.3c to 5.3f show that the same distinction between the two groups for all the con­
sidered rainfall intensities exists as it does for depth. It was expected that there would be
a clear difference for rainfall intensity, due to the shown influence of intensity on overflow
events (Sandoval et al. 2013; Mailhot, Talbot, and Lavallée 2015 and others). However,
it is interesting that the difference seems to be equally strong for all the intensities. While
only four different intensities were investigated in this way, it was expected that the longer
duration intensities would have a clearer difference than those with shorter durations, as
having a non­zero 3­hour rain intensity means that the rain event would have a duration
of at least 3­hours and it was expected that longer durations would lead to more CSOs.
Although this distinction is clear for all four intensities, it is unlikely that all four will be
included in the model, as there is likely some correlation between events that have a
higher 5­minute intensity and a higher 10­minute intensity as well as with those that have
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
29
==PAGE:36==
a higher 3­hour intensity and a higher 6­hour intensity. This correlation between variables
is shown in Figure 5.4 confirms this idea, as there is a strong correlation between the 5­
and 10­minute intensities and the 3­ and 6­hour intensities for both rain events that do and
do not reuslt in CSOs. The discussion of variable correlation is continued further below.
Interestingly, neither of the accumulated rain depths (shown in Figures 5.3g and 5.3h) nor
the number of rain events (Figure 5.3i) show a clear difference between the rain events
that result in overflows and those that do not. While the mean values are higher for the
events that result in CSOs (as shown in Table 5.4), there is a lot of overlap in values be­
tween the two groups. This makes it difficult to determine an adequate threshold value,
and therefore none is defined for these variables. In addition to this, due to the similarity
between the two accumulated rain variables, it was determined that only the accumulated
rain before a CSO event will be considered in the remainder of the analysis. While the
accumulated rain before a rain event was removed as a variable, it is assumed that any
conclusions for the accumulated rain before a CSO event will translate to similar conclu­
sions for the accumulated rain before the rain event.
While the season of each event was considered and shown in the above histograms, it
was difficult to draw many firm conclusions about the event season from these plots. One
clear observation was that most rain events that result in overflows tend to occur in the
summer, while the rain events that do not are relatively distributed across all four seasons.
Due to this lack of clear trends, the event season is further investigated and discussed in
subsection 5.3.3.
(a) A ­ Correlation for events with overflows
30
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:37==
(b) B ­ Correlation for events without overflows
Figure 5.4: Correlation matrix for the investigated rain variables for rain events that re­
sulted in overflows (A) and that did not (B)
Two correlation matrices were made for all the investigated quantitative variables: one
for the rain events that result in overflows and one for the rain events that do not. Both
are shown in Figure 5.4. Matrices were made for both groups of rain events to evaluate
whether the correlation between the variables was different depending on whether there
was a CSO or not. The absolute Pearson correlation is shown because in this comparison
the direction is not important, only the magnitude of correlation.
As shown in Figure 5.4, there are some variables with where the correlation does not
change much between the two groups. For example the correlation between the rain
depth and duration, the 5­ and 10­min intensity, the 3­ and 6­hour intensity, rain depth
and 3­hour intensity, and rain depth and 6­hour intensity are relatively the same whether
there is an overflow or not. These variables are also the most highly correlated, which
was expected. This is because in terms of the physical system, it stands that the total
rain depth will be impacted by the rain duration and intensities. Although there is not a
high correlation between all intensities and depth or duration, there is some correlation
between them and this is especially true for the rain intensities with each other.
There are also some variables that are lowly correlated whose values remain relatively
constant between the two groups, such as the number of rain events, which is not strongly
correlated with any other variables. But the most interesting are those whose correlation
changes between the two groups, such as for the accumulated depth before the rain
event, whose correlation with all other variables is higher for events without any overflows.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
31
==PAGE:38==
The increase in relation to the accumulated rain before a CSO makes sense, as the two
variables have the same or similar values for most data points and any empty values were
removed in the correlation analysis, so any entries that did not have a CSO sufficiently
close to the rain event were excluded from the analysis. This is something that only
affected this variable for the rain events without overflows, as it was the only variable that
contained any empty entries in either group, and is likely the cause for the difference in
correlation for this variable. However, the change in correlation for some variables, such
as that between the rain depth and the 5­ and 10­minute intensity, can not be so easily
explained. It may mean that the rain events that result in overflows are more influenced by
the longer rain intensities, but this cannot be conclusively determined from the correlation
alone, and requires further investigation, such as that done in the following threshold
variable analysis in subsection 5.3.2.
It is promising that several parameters show a clear difference for rain events that cause
CSOs and those that do not, as it signifies the potential for a threshold value that once
crossed increases the likelihood of an overflow occurring. However, not all parameters
show a clear distinction. These variables were also investigated further in the thresh­
old analysis to determine if this would give any different results. The findings from the
IDF curves and correlation analysis between the variables will also be considered in the
threshold analysis, to determine if any further connections can be found.
5.3.2
Threshold variable analysis
Based on the results from subsection 5.3.1, threshold values were defined for most of the
investigated variables. These thresholds are summarized below in Table 5.5 and were
used for further investigation by being used as filters to reduce the data set of rain events
that do and do not result in overflows before they are further analyzed.
Most of these threshold values are defined using the mean values from the histograms
in subsection 5.3.1 and the difference in value distribution between the rain events that
do and do not result in overflows. However, some are only defined using this difference
in value distribution. An example of this is the threshold for rain event duration, as the
mean value is very close for both data sets, but relatively few events with a duration under
180 minutes (3 hours) result in a CSO. It should be noted that some variables do not have
assigned thresholds, this is because in these cases it was not apparent what a reasonable
threshold value would be, and therefore none was assigned.
Table 5.5: Initial variable thresholds
Variable
Threshold value
Impact threshold
Depth
8.0 mm
1.0 mm
Duration
180 minutes
60 minutes
5­min int.
2.50 µm/s
1 µm/s
10­min int.
1.80 µm/s
1 µm/s
3­hr int.
0.45 µm/s
1 µm/s
6­hr int.
0.30 µm/s
1 µm/s
The thresholds in Table 5.5 were used to filter the calibration data, and histograms like
32
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:39==
those in subsection 5.3.1 were made and compared to Figure 5.3. As this resulted in
a large amount of plots, only one is included in the body of the report, while all of the
produced plots are included in Appendix E. However, the results for all of the generated
plots are discussed below.
The impact thresholds in the table were used as a rough criterion to determine if the
distributions of variable values were significantly impacted by the threshold filtering. This
was done due to the non­normality of the data sets, which meant that comparing them via
a t­test was not suitable. If the data were normally distributed then a t­test would be ideal to
evaluate the impacts, as it could determine if the values were statistically different before
and after the implementation of the threshold. The impact thresholds values were decided
based on the defined threshold value and how noticeable a difference would be. So while
the impact thresholds are low for most of the threshold values, this is because these
observed values were also relatively low. Conversely, the impact threshold of 60 minutes
for duration may seem relatively high when compared to the other impact thresholds, but
this was chosen because the range of event duration extends to multiple days, in which
case a difference of 1 hour is already very small.
Figure 5.5 shows the histograms for both groups of rain data (those resulting in overflows
and those that do not) for rain event depth and duration with and without the data being
filtered by the depth threshold value of 8.0 mm. As shown, filtering by the depth criteria
affects the mean values of both rain events, but only the events without overflows have a
change larger than the impact threshold of 60 minutes. Therefore, only these values are
deemed to be significantly impacted by the threshold. This was expected, as a majority
of the rain events without any overflows fall under the threshold of 8.0 mm, while only a
handful of those that result in an overflow do (as shown in Figures 5.5a and 5.5b).
(a) Depth with no depth criteria
(b) Depth, where depth >= 8.0 mm
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
33
==PAGE:40==
(c) Duration with no depth criteria
(d) Duration, where depth >= 8.0 mm
Figure 5.5: Histograms for event depth and duration with and without implementation of
the the depth threshold of 8.0 mm (A are rain events that results in CSOs and B are those
that do not)
This demonstrates the procedure that was undertaken for each of the six defined thresh­
olds. While only the plots for rain depth and duration for the depth criteria are included
in the body of the report, plots for each of the nine investigated quantitative variables are
included in Appendix E and the results for all variables are discussed. For instance, in
addition to the duration, the depth threshold was found to impact both of the accumulated
rainfall depths for the events without overflows, but did not have a significant impact on
any of the rainfall intensities or the number of rain events.
The duration threshold was only found to significantly impact the depth for events that
result in a CSO and did not impact any other variables. Though this result validates the
correlation between the two variables, it was surprising that the threshold affected the
rain events with overflows more than those without, but this is likely due to the differing
number of events in each group (there are many more events without CSOs than those
with them) and the relative number of events with CSOs that do not meet the duration
criterion.
The rainfall intensities were more difficult to compare, due to their relatively low values
before filtering. However, an impact threshold of 1 µm/s was chosen for all intensities, as it
is already a small value and it would be difficult to argue that any value less than this would
be influential. Therefore only differences equal to or greater than 1 µm/s are considered
significant, but those that are large relative to the mean value are also mentioned. With
that being said, the 5­minute intensity threshold significantly impacts the depth, the 10­
minute intensity, and the accumulated depth before the start of the rain event for events
34
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:41==
without CSOs, while both the 3­ and 6­hour intensities were changed by approximately
0.1 µm/s. The 10­minute intensity had the same affects as the 5­minute intensity, with the
only difference that it impacted the 5­minute intensity instead of the 10­minute one. The
3­hour intensity significantly impacted the depth and both accumulated rain depths for
events without CSOs. Additionally, both the 5­ and 10­minute intensities were changed
by approximately 0.7 µm/s for the rain events without overflows while the 6­hour intensity
was changed by approximately 0.2 µm/s for these events. Finally, the 6­hour intensity
significantly impacted the same variables as the 3­hour intensity, with the addition of the
duration. While none of the intensities were significantly changed, the 5­ and 10­minute
intensities were both changed by approximately 0.5 µm/s for the events without overflows,
while the 3­hour intensity was changed by approximately 0.2 µm/s for the same events.
These results mirror those found from the correlation matrix in Figure 5.4.
In addition to the individual thresholds in Table 5.5, some combined thresholds were in­
vestigated based on the results of the individual thresholds to determine how they would
impact the behaviour and number of filtered data points. These combined thresholds are
detailed in Table 5.6 and their resulting plots are also included in Appendix E. The same
impact thresholds were used for these combinations as above. Additionally, a summary
of the number of filtered data points resulting from the different thresholds is shown in
Table 5.7.
Table 5.6: Contents of the three examined threshold combinations
Combination
Thresholds
1
depth + 10­min int.
2
depth + 3­hr int.
3
depth + 10­min int. + 3­hr int.
Table 5.7: The number of filtered data points for each implemented threshold and percent
reduction relative to the unfiltered data for events that do (A) and do not (B) result in CSOs
Threshold
Number
Percent reduction
A
B
A
B
None
107
1086
­
­
Depth
103
392
4%
64%
Duration
89
919
17%
15%
5­min int.
102
313
5%
71%
10­min int.
105
352
2%
68%
3­hr int.
105
430
2%
60%
6­hr int.
105
383
2%
65%
Combo. 1
102
167
5%
85%
Combo. 2
103
304
4%
72%
Combo. 3
102
148
5%
86%
Combination 1 significantly impacted the duration, 5­minute intensity, and both accumu­
lated rain depths for events without overflows, while the 3­ and 6­hour intensities were
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
35
==PAGE:42==
both changed by approximately half their initial value for these events. Combination 2
significantly impacts the same variables as combination 1, while also significantly impact­
ing the 10­minute intensity and resulting in a change of 0.3 µm/s for the 6­hour intensity.
Combination 3 significantly impacts the same variables as those impacted by combina­
tions 1 and 2. Therefore, there is not a large difference in impacts between the three
combinations, but instead the difference lies in their filtering capabilities, as shown in Ta­
ble 5.7. As with the other comparisons, the impact on the threshold variables was not
considered, because they would of course be impacted by the threshold.
The number of filtered data points from the thresholds was important to consider because
the more equal the two groups of rain data are (the events that result in overflows and
those that do not), then the more conclusive any findings about the influence of different
variables are. This is because it removes the effect of the two groups having very different
numbers of data points, which makes them more comparable as the only clear remaining
difference between the two is whether they result in outflows or not. Therefore, though the
results from all the thresholds are useful, those from combination 3 carry the most weight,
as the two groups are most similar in this circumstance. That is, that the depth, 10­
minute intensity, and 3­hour intensity are related to the event duration, both accumulated
rain depths, and the remaining rain intensities. This echoes the results of the correlation
matrix in Figure 5.4 and supports the inclusion of these variables in the model.
(a) Without any applied thresholds
(b) With combo. 3 thresholds
Figure 5.6: Scatter plots of the accumulated rain depth from 48­hours before the start of
the CSO event versus the event rain depth
In addition to the threshold histograms plots of the accumulated rain depth from 48­hours
before the start of the CSO event versus the rain event depth were made for both rain
event groups. These plots are shown in Figure 5.6 for the raw data without any applied
thresholds and for the combination 3 thresholds. The remaining plots for the other thresh­
36
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:43==
olds are included in Appendix E. These plots were made to examine if there was a clear
correlation between the event depth and accumulated depth and if there was a different
relationship for rain events that resulted in overflows versus those that did not, which could
support the inclusion of the accumulated depth variable into the model. It was expected
that there would be a distinct correlation present, which could be eventually related to the
approximate basin volume, but as shown this is not the case and no clear correlation is
apparent. The plots similar for both rain groups, as well as for the raw data and the most
stringent threshold. Therefore no further work was done on this correlation.
5.3.3
Seasonal analysis
The event season was also considered as a variable in this analysis, but as it is not a
quantitative variable like the others considered in this project, it was analyzed in a different
way. As shown in subsection 5.3.1 and 5.3.2 the examined variable values were grouped
according to season to be able to identify any variable trends associated with a specific
season. From Figure 5.3, it can be seen that there is not a clear correlation between
season and depth, duration or cumulative depth, but summer events appear to have more
rain events and higher 5­ and 10­minute intensities. Interestingly, the same cannot be said
for the longer 3­ and 6­hour intensities, as no apparent trend is obvious. It is also clear
from these plots that a majority of the rain events that result in overflows occur in summer.
These observations are validated by the IDF curves, as shown in Figure 5.2 for period C1
and in Appendix D for all the calibration periods. The IDF curves also show different trends
in the IDF curves of the events that cause CSOs in summer versus in the other seasons.
Namely, that in general the shape of the summer curves are more similar to the IDF curves
generated by the regional model. In comparison, the curves for the other seasons have
lower than expected intensities until a duration of approximately 180 minutes, where the
intensity is then larger than expected. A similar trend can be seen in some of the summer
events, though here it tends to occur closer to 1000 minutes. Due to the number of events
in each season, and their trends, it was decided to perform the seasonal analysis by
dividing the groups into two groups: those that occur in summer and those that occur in
the other seasons.
These groupings were then further explored by classifying them as either wet or dry and
comparing them. This was done to determine if there was a significant difference in the
number of overflow events and rain depth between wet and dry seasons. The wet or dry
classification was also done on a year basis in addition to a seasonal basis to determine
whether a difference could also be seen on an annual basis.
Table 5.8: The average total rainfall depth for summer, other seasons, and year, based
on the historical data
Average total rainfall depth [mm]
Summer
209.92
Other seasons
456.96
Year
666.88
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
37
==PAGE:44==
(a) Dry summer
(b) Wet summer
(c) Dry other seasons
(d) Wet other seasons
(e) Dry year
(f) Wet year
Figure 5.7: Event rain depth versus the number of CSO events per month for wet and dry
seasonal groupings
The classification of wet and dry was made by comparing the total rain depth in the sum­
mer, other seasons, or whole year for each year to the average total rain values. If the
value was higher than average it was classified as being wet, otherwise it was classified as
being dry. The average values were obtained by taking the average total summer, other
seasonal, and annual rain depth of the 41 years of available data. These average values
38
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:45==
are summarized in Table 5.8. This resulted in an almost perfect 50/50 split between wet
and dry for all time periods with the number of wet and dry summers, other seasons and
years being almost equal. A summary table of these values and their corresponding rain
depth is included in section C.2.
To examine any seasonal patterns, plots of the number of overflows per month for node
B25_Bas were made for each seasonal grouping. These are shown in Figure 5.7 and
show that there is no strong correlation between rain depth and the number of CSO events
for any of the groupings.
It was expected that regardless of the season there would be a clear linear relationship
between the rain event depth and the number of CSO events, in that a low rain event
depth would result in a low number of overflows and a higher rain event depth would
result in a higher number of overflows. This is because a higher rain event depth would
lead to fuller basins and thus more overflows. However, based on the shown data and
the corresponding low linear­regression R2 values, this is not true and there are other
contributing factors.
With that being said, there are still some clear seasonal trends that can be seen. For
instance, Figure 5.7a and 5.7b show that wet summers have more CSO events than dry
summers, as there is both more data points and a higher number of CSO events for the wet
summers compared to the dry ones. In addition to this, larger rain event depths are also
observed in wet summers. This was expected, due to an expectation that wet seasons
(including summer) would have higher rain event depths. But as only two events (which is
relatively low compared to the total number wet summer events) have a markedly higher
rain event depth than the events in the dry summers, no unequivocal conclusions can
be drawn about larger rain event depths in wet summers. This, along with the higher
number of rain events in the wet summers, implies that wet summers are determined by
the number of events instead of the depths of the rain events.
The other non­summer seasons (shown in Figure 5.7c and 5.7d) are similar to summer
in that they do not show a clear correlation between the rain depth and the number of
CSO events. But they differ in that there is no difference in the number of events nor
rain event depth during the wet periods and the dry periods. These results suggest that
there is not a correlation between rain event depth and the number of overflow events for
non­summer seasons and that for non­summer seasons there is not much difference in
rain event depth or the number of CSO events between wet and dry periods or between
seasons.
The same plots were made on a yearly basis to determine if there were any differences
from the summer and non­summer season plots. While the classification of wet and dry
years were determined independently of the seasons, a majority of the years have the
same annual wet or dry classification as their respective seasons, with only 9 differing
from their summer classification and 5 differing from their non­summer classification (as
shown in section C.2). This is also shown in Figure 5.7e and 5.7f, as the same seasonal
patterns are clearly shown for both wet and dry years. It can therefore be concluded that
wet or dry years are likely to have the same type of summer or non­summer season,
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
39
==PAGE:46==
but that the highest rain event depths and number of overflow events can be attributed
to summer events, which tend to be higher for wet summers than dry ones, while the
behaviour of the other seasons does not differ much.
To further elaborate on these findings, relative frequency histograms for the number of
overflow events per month and rain event depth were made for the same wet dry seasonal
groupings. These are shown in Figure 5.8 and Figure 5.9.
(a) Dry summer
(b) Wet summer
(c) Dry other seasons
(d) Wet other seasons
(e) Dry year
(f) Wet year
Figure 5.8: Histograms of the number of CSO events per month for wet and dry periods
40
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:47==
(a) Dry summer
(b) Wet summer
(c) Dry other seasons
(d) Wet other seasons
(e) Dry year
(f) Wet year
Figure 5.9: Depth histograms for wet and dry periods with (A) and without (B) CSOs
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
41
==PAGE:48==
The difference in number of CSO events is validated by the results shown in Figure 5.8,
as the mean number of events is higher in wet summers than dry summers, while it is
essentially the same for both non­summer periods. Additionally, the mean yearly value is
closer to that in summer. This is more obvious for wet years than dry, due to the larger
number of events in wet summers than dry. The proportion of CSOs occurring in summer
in Figure 5.8e and Figure 5.8f also support the ideas that more overflow events occur in
summer and that the annual values are strongly influenced by those in the summer, as
the majority of CSOs occur in summer regardless of the monthly number of overflows.
It was previously mentioned that it was expected that periods classified as wet would result
in higher event rain depths than those classified as dry. Therefore, relatively frequency
rain event depth histograms were made for the wet and dry seasonal groupings for rain
events that result in overflows as well as those that do not. These are shown in Figure 5.9.
It is interesting that the difference between wet and dry rain event depth is larger for
events that result in overflows (A) than those that do not (B). This is likely due to the
differing number of events in each groups A and B, as a majority of the rain events do
not result in overflows (i.e. B is much bigger than A) and this is also true for all seasonal
groupings. Unlike in subsection 5.3.2, no thresholds were applied to filter the data here
as all event rain depths were of interest. It was assumed that conclusions can still be
drawn from the plots although the number of data points between the groups differ (as
in subsection 5.3.1), but it is noted that these conclusions would be more robust if the A
and B groups had similar sizes. This is especially true for the wet and dry non­summer
seasons, which have the smallest number of rain events resulting in overflows.
Figure 5.9 tends to support this expectation of wetter periods having higher rain event
depths, because the mean values for almost all wet periods are higher than those in the
corresponding dry periods. The only exception to this is the summer rain events that
do not result in a CSO. In this case the mean for the dry period is higher than that for
the wet period, but both mean values are very close, differing by less than 1 mm. This
similarity further supports the idea that there is not a significant difference in the event
rain depth between wet and dry summers, but rather that wet summers have more rain
events that dry ones. This is because there is a difference in the mean number of CSO
events between wet and dry summers, but the event rain depths are relatively similar,
therefore the difference can likely be due to the number of rain events. This is validated by
Figure 5.10, which shows that the mean number of rain events is higher for wet summers
than dry summers regardless of if there is an overflow resulting from the rain event.
In contrast to the summer events, the difference between wet and dry rain event depth
is relatively large for non­summer seasons with a difference of more than 7 mm for rain
events that cause CSOs and almost 1 mm for the rain events that do not. This suggests
that there could be more of a difference in rain event depth between wet and dry periods
for these seasons. However, due to the less than significant difference (as per the defined
impact threshold of 1 mm from subsection 5.3.2) for rain events without resulting CSOs
in addition to the comparatively small number of data points that result in overflows, this
cannot be definitively stated.
42
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:49==
(a) Dry summer
(b) Wet summer
(c) Dry other seasons
(d) Wet other seasons
(e) Dry year
(f) Wet year
Figure 5.10: Number of rain eventsfor wet and dry periods with (A) and without (B) CSOs
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
43
==PAGE:50==
With that being said, the difference in Figure 5.10 implies that a differing number of rain
events is also present for the non­summer seasons. Therefore, it is plausible that wet
non­summer seasons could have higher rain event depths as well as more rain events
than their dry counterparts, although they do not result in a different number of overflow
events for B25_Bas as shown in Figure 5.8.
When comparing wet and dry years (Figure 5.9), the mean values seem to lie somewhere
between those for the summer and non­summer seasons, where the dry year depths are
closer to those of summer for events with CSOs and closer to the other seasons for events
without CSOs. This is likely due to the relative number of data points in these groups.
Similarly, the wet year mean for the rain events that do result in overflows is closer to
the corresponding mean value for wet summers than wet other seasons, likely due to the
same reason. However, the wet year mean for rain events without overflows is higher
than both corresponding means for the other wet year groups. This could be attributed
to the different criteria used to select data for the three groups, as they do not all contain
the exact same values, though most are the same. Independent of the other groupings,
these results show that a wet year is likely to have a higher event rain depth than a dry
year regardless of whether the rain results in a CSO or not. In contrast to this, comparing
the number of rain events between wet and dry years (as shown in Figure 5.10) shows
that the means between the two groups are similar whether there is a resulting overflow or
not. This suggests that while summers seem to be strongly driven by the number of rain
events, and non­summers seem to be equally driven by both the number of rain events
and the event rain depth, on an annual basis the event rain depth seems to be the most
influential.
5.3.4
Summary
Several rain variables were investigated in this section to better understand their influence
on the occurrence of overflow events at B25_Bas and to determine the suitability of their
inclusion of a predictive model for CSO events. The investigated variables include:
• Rain event depth (total over the event; in mm);
• Rain event duration (in minutes);
• 5­minute rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 10­minute rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 3­hour rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 6­hour rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 48­hour accumulated rain depth before the rain event** ( in mm);
• 48­hour accumulated rain depth before the CSO event*** ( in mm);
• Rain event season; and
• The number of rain events in the rain event season.
*Here a rain event is defined according to the same criteria specified by the event grouping settings (as
referred to in subsubsection 3.1.2 and explicitly detailed in subsection 4.2.1).
**The accumulated rain depth from 48­hours before the start of the rain event to the rain event start time.
44
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:51==
***The accumulated rain depth from 48­hours before the start of the overflow event to the start time of the
overflow event.
The above variables were first investigated in subsection 5.3.1 through the use of IDF
curves for rain events that result in overflows, relative frequency histograms that com­
pared the value distribution of each variable for events that did and did not result in
CSOs, and through correlation matrices to examine the correlation between the differ­
ent variables. From this it was determined that rain events in summer tended to behave
differently than those in other seasons in addition to occurring more frequently. It was also
found that the considered rain intensities were highly correlated with each other as well
as with the rain event depth, which was also highly correlated with event duration. The
generated histograms were used to determine some threshold values for the variables to
further evaluate their correlation and behaviour.
The determined thresholds were a rain event depth of 8.0 mm, an event duration of 180
minutes, a 5­minute rain intensity of 2.50 µm/s, a 10­minute rain intensity of 1.80 µm/s, a
3­hour intensity of 0.45 µm/s, and a 6­hour intensity of 0.30 µm/s. Thresholds were not
defined for the number of rain events or either of the accumulated rain depths as there was
no clear choice of threshold value for these variables based on their value distributions.
These thresholds were used to filter the data for each variable in subsection 5.3.2, which
was then used to re­create the value histograms for each variable. The resulting change
from the implemented threshold was interpreted as the influence of the threshold variable
on the variables of the filtered data. Rain event depth was found to significantly influence
the event duration as well as both accumulated rainfall depths, while the event duration
only influence the rain event depth. Though not all of the rainfall intensities were found
to significantly impact each other, their thresholds did result in relatively large changes
in their mean values. From this, the event rain depth, the 10­minute rain intensity, and
the 3­hour rain intensity were found to be influential and were used to create combina­
tion thresholds. Only two intensities were chosen as it was determined that it would be
unnecessary to include all four in the model, but that one short­term and one long­term
intensity would be beneficial. These were selected over the other two intensities due to
their perceived stability are model variables; the 10­minute intensity was thought to be
more stable than the 5­minute due to its longer duration, and the 3­hour intensity was
favourable to the 6­hour as it would allow for the inclusion of more rain events. A com­
bination of these three thresholds (depth, 10­minute intensity, and 3­hour intensity) was
found to be the most influential on the data results in terms of the mean values as well as
filtering, which strengthened their inclusion in the model.
In subsection 5.3.2 work was also done to investigate the correlation between the event
rain depth and the accumulated rain depth before the start of an overflow event. However,
as no clear correlation was found, it was that neither of the accumulated rain variables
were influential enough to warrant inclusion in the model.
The influence of season and wet and dry periods (periods with rainfall that is above­ and
below­average, respectively) on the occurrence of overflow events were investigated in
subsection 5.3.3. To do this the rain data was sorted into wet and dry groups based on
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
45
==PAGE:52==
the total summer rain depth, the total non­summer rain depth, and the total annual rain
depth. From this it was determined that wet summers tend to have more rain events and
overflow events than dry summers and other seasons, both wet and dry. The number
of CSO events in non­summer season is not affected by whether the season is wet or
dry, but wet seasons tend to have higher rain depths and more rain events than their dry
counterparts. Like wet summers, wet years tend to have more overflow events than dry
years, and they also tend to have higher rain event depths but have approximately the
same number rain events as their dry counterparts. From this is appears that the number
of rain events is most influential for summer events, while number of rain events and the
event rain depth are both important for other seasons, and the event rain depth is most
important for wet and dry years.
Based on the above findings, it was determined that the variables shown in Table 5.9 were
the most appropriate to include in the model.
Table 5.9: Variables to be included in the predictive model and their thresholds that if met
or exceeded are thought to increase the probability of a CSO
Variable
Threshold
Event rain depth
8.0 mm
10­min int.
1.8 µm/s
3­hr int.
0.45 µm/s
Event season
Summer
Wet or dry season
Wet
Number of season rain events
Higher*
*No threshold could be defined here, but it was thought that a higher number
of events would increase the probability of a CSO
5.4
Model development and testing
A simple predictive model was developed based on the results of the analyses in the
preceding sections. The goal of this model was to accurately predict the probability of a
CSO event occurring at B25_Bas for a specific rain event using only easily available rain
data, such as that available from DMI (Sarup et al. 2017). If the model was accurate and
the variables behaved as expected in Table 5.9, then this would validate the identified
characteristics. It was important that rain data was the only input so that the applicability
of the findings from the previous sections could be evaluated; if the model can perform
well without any information about the overflow structure of interest, then it and the related
findings regarding rain series characteristics can be more widely used.
5.4.1
Model development
The design of the model was inspired by the work of others, such as the probabilistic
prediction of CSO occurrence by Mailhot, Talbot, and Lavallée 2015. While the model
structure is also based on a Bernoulli trial, like that of Mailhot, Talbot, and Lavallée 2015,
this model is much simpler as it does not consider the number of days without a CSO
occurrence and instead only looks at the rain characteristics for each event to determine
the probability of an overflow occurring. This Bernoulli trial consists of only two outcomes:
46
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:53==
either a CSO occurs for the given rain event or it does not, and the model was set up
so that the probability of occurrence is given as output as this is more intuitive than the
probability of non­occurrence. For simplicity, any probability higher than 0.5 is interpreted
as an overflow occurring.
A logistic linear regression model was developed as the model was based on a Bernoulli
trial. This form of model was chosen as it would result in an easy to interpret output, had a
simple structure, was easy to implement, and was most appropriate for the desired binary
output (Johnson, Freund, and Miller 2011; Pitman 1993; Madsen 2007).
The model was developed in R (R Core Team 2020) using the glm function in the stats
package (R Core Team 2020) and the tidyverse package (Wickham et al. 2019). The
implementation of the model was inspired by the example shown in Kassambara 2018.
The glm function was used to define and fit the model using the iteratively re­weighted
least­squares (IWLS) method, an optimization algorithm that determines the best fit by
maximizing the log­likelihood (Dutang 2017). This function was used to develop the logis­
tic regression model by defining the variables to be used in the model, defining the training
data to be used to fit the parameters, and assigning a binomial family to the model.
The most appropriate variables to be used in the model were determined from the exten­
sive analysis in section 5.3 and are as follows:
• Rain event depth;
• 10­minute rain intensity;
• 3­hour rain intensity;
• Event season;
• Whether the event period is considered wet or dry; and
• The number of rain events in the event season.
However, due to curiosity about the importance of the seasonal parameters two iterations
of the model were made: one with only the three quantitative parameters (Equation 5.3)
and one with all six parameters (Equation 5.4). These models are henceforth referred to
as model 1 and model 2, respectively. Both follow the logistic regression model format
shown in Equation 5.1, where q is in the number of parameters and p(x) = P[Y = 1|X =
x] i.e. where p(x) is the probability of Y = 1, here a CSO event occurring, given a certain
value x, where x is an array of the input variables. Equation 5.1 can be re­written as
Equation 5.2, to directly related the probability to the model variables.
log
p(x)
1 −p(x) = β0 + βx1 + ...βq−1xq−1
(5.1)
p(x) =
exp(β0 + βx1 + ...βq−1xq−1)
1 + exp(β0 + βx1 + ...βq−1xq−1)
(5.2)
p(x) =
exp(β0 + β1x1 + β2x2 + β3x3)
1 + exp(β0 + β1x1 + β2x2 + β3x3)
(5.3)
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
47
==PAGE:54==
p(x) =
exp(β0 + β1x1 + β2x2 + β3x3 + β4x4 + β5x5 + β6x6)
1 + exp(β0 + β1x1 + β2x2 + β3x3 + β4x4 + β5x5 + β6x6)
(5.4)
In both equations, p(x) is the probability of a CSO event occurring, β0 is the intercept,
β1 is the parameter for rain depth, x1 is the measured rain depth value in mm, β2 is the
parameter for 10­minute intensity, x2 is the measured 10­minute intensity value in µm/s,
β3 is the parameter for 3­hour intensity, and x3 is the measured 3­hour intensity value in
µm/s.
Equation 5.4 has additional components, where β4 is the parameter for season, x4 is a
value indicating whether the season is summer or another season (implemented here as
a binary value), β5 is the parameter for whether the period is classified as wet or dry, x5
is a value representing whether the period is wet or dry (implemented here as a binary
value), β6 is the parameter for number of rain events, and x6 is the number of rain events
in the month and year. Unlike a normal linear regression model, there is no error term
ε in either model equation. This is convention because the predicted probability p(x) is
the mean of the Bernoulli distribution, which is the distribution used in logistic regression
(Dalpiaz 2021).
All data input values used in the model are determined from the standard rain file available
from DMI (Sarup et al. 2017). Most of the values are directly taken from the rain file for
each event, but for others some simple calculations or comparisons relative to historical
data are required. For instance, the value used for the wet or dry variable is binary, and
it is determined by comparing the total rainfall in the season where the rain event occurs
to the historical average for that season. If the value is higher than the average, then it
is classified as wet and receives a value of 1 in the model. Otherwise, it is classified as
dry and receives a value of 0. The season value is assigned in a similar way, where if the
season of the rain event is summer, a value of 1 is assigned, and otherwise a value of
0 is assigned. These variables could have been implemented in another more nuanced
way, but this approach was chosen as it is preferable for the model to be as simple as
possible.
A caveat of using this type of model is that the data used to the fit the parameters has
to be normally distributed, however this is not true for many of the variables, as shown
earlier by the shape of the histograms in Figure 5.3 and also in Figure 5.11 for all the
non­binary variables for the calibration data set. Due to this, a log­transformation (the
natural logarithm) was applied to the data. This transformation improves the normality of
the depth, 10­minute intensity, and 3­hr intensity, but the data is still not completely normal
and it does not make much of a difference for the number of rain events. However, as
shown in both Figure 5.11 and Figure 5.12, the transformation reduces the number of
outliers in all variables as the potential range of values is reduced.
48
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:55==
(a) Depth (A)
(b) 10­min intensity (A)
(c) 3­hr intensity (A)
(d) Rain events (A)
(e) Depth (B)
(f) 10­min intensity (B)
(g) 3­hr intensity (B)
(h) Rain events (B)
Figure 5.11: QQ plots for non­binary model variables with no transformation (A) and with
log­transformation (B)
(a) No transformation
(b) Log­transformation
Figure 5.12: Box plots for the non­binary variables before and after log­transformation
While the transformation also results in some negative values, this is not considered an
issue in this context. The only complication stemming from the log­transformation is how
to handle any zero values after the transformation. This is an issue because the natural
logarithm of zero is negative infinity, which is annoying to work with from a data­handling
perspective. Therefore, in this project they were assigned a value of ­10 after transforma­
tion, as this was determined to be sufficiently lower than any of the transformed values
so that it would not negatively impact the fitting of the models. This is proven by the
transformed values shown in Figure 5.12b.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
49
==PAGE:56==
The log­transformation of the non­binary input data is therefore deemed to result in an
improvement of the data such that it is adequate for use in the logistic regression models.
This is due to the reduction of outliers and the improved normality as well as the consid­
eration that real data rarely behaves in a way that is truly normal. As a result, all of the
data is log­transformed prior to use in the model, for both fitting and prediction purposes.
5.4.2
Parameter estimation
The glm function was used to find parameter estimates for the variables in both model
1 and 2 using the IWLS method. The mathematical equations behind this approach are
detailed in Dalpiaz 2021 and Dutang 2017. The parameter estimates for both models are
shown in Table 5.10, along with their standard error, z­value, p­value and AIC scores.
These values give an approximation of the confidence level of the predicted value as well
as an approximation of the parameter significance. The AIC is used for model selection
and to evaluate the goodness of fit of a model (Akaike 1998).
As shown, for model 1 the standard error for β1 is larger than the estimated value, as indi­
cated by its z­value being less than 1, which indicates a low confidence in the estimation.
That is to say that the ”true” value of the depth parameter may be very different than the
one estimated. Conversely, both β2 and β3 have standard errors that are much less than
their estimated value, as both have z­values larger than one, and thus have high confi­
dence in their estimations. In terms of significance, both β2 and β3 are more significant
than β1 due to their very small p­values. If a typical alpha of 0.05 (Johnson, Freund, and
Miller 2011) is used then both β2 and β3 would be statistically significant parameters as
their p­values are smaller than the alpha value. Conversely, β1 would not be significant as
it is larger than 0.05. The intercept β0 would also be a statistically significant parameter,
though it is not as interesting to discuss as the other parameters. It is surprising that not
all of the parameters are statistically significant, as the variables to be used in the model
were selected because of their apparent importance on the data, so all were expected to
be statistically significant in the model.
Table 5.10: Estimated parameter values along with their standard error, z­statistic value,
p­value, and Akaike information criterion (AIC) scores (Akaike 1998)
Model
Parameters
Estimate
Std. Error
z­value
Pr(>|z|)
AIC
1
β0 (Intercept)
­4.235
1.415
­2.992
2.768e­03
266.64
β1 (depth)
0.3554
0.4382
0.8109
0.4174
β2 (10­min)
2.143
0.3068
6.986
2.836e­12
β3 (3­hr)
3.823
0.7017
5.448
5.093e­08
2
β0 (Intercept)
­3.737
2.089
­1.789
0.07359
271.30
β1 (depth)
0.3498
0.4402
0.7945
0.4269
β2 (10­min)
2.051
0.3201
6.407
1.482e­10
β3 (3­hr)
3.826
0.7071
5.411
6.278e­08
β4 (season)
0.3934
0.3509
1.121
0.2622
β5 (wet/dry)
0.01593
0.3733
0.04269
0.9659
β6 (rain events)
­0.2037
0.5555
­0.3668
0.7138
For model 2, the estimated values for parameters β1,β2, and β3 are similar to those in
50
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:57==
model 1, as is their standard error, z­statistic, and p­value. The standard error for both
rainfall intensities is much lower than the estimated value, which means that there is high
confidence in these estimated values, while the standard error of the depth parameter is
larger than the estimated value, again resulting in low confidence in the estimate. Unlike
model 1, there are other parameters in addition to β1 that have z­values less than one,
i.e. where the standard error for the estimated parameter is larger than the estimated
value, including: β5 and β6. There is also β4, with a z­value that is technically larger
than 1, but its standard error is almost the same as the estimated parameter value. All of
these variables with high standard error also have relatively high p­values, and would be
classified as not statistically significant if an alpha value of 0.05 was used. This is also true
for the intercept. So in both model 1 and 2 the only statistically significant parameters are
those for the 10­minute and 3­hour rainfall intensities. When looking at the p­values, it is
interesting that the season parameter is more significant than the depth parameter, which
are both more significant than the number of rain events, and that whether the period is
wet or dry is the least significant.
While it was unexpected that so few parameters were statistically significant for models
1 and 2, when considering the physical system the given significances make sense. For
instance, rainfall intensity is very influential in determining the occurrence of CSOs as it
determines how fast a basin fills. Which explains the high significance for both rainfall
intensities. The 3­hour intensity is also related to longer durations, as events only have
a 3­hour rain intensity if they have a duration of at least 3 hours. Similarly, the season
parameter is related to the number and type of events, but will not be more influential
than either of the rainfall intensities, so its relatively high significance that is not statisti­
cally significant also makes sense. It is then the parameters that give comparatively little
information that have lower significance. For instance, while depth is also contributing,
the time frame over which it falls can make a difference on its impact on the drainage sys­
tem and in whether an overflow occurs or not. In a similar way, while the number of rain
events and whether the period is wet or dry can be contributing factors, their contribution
also depends on information from other parameters, and they would not be as helpful if
information on the season, for instance, was not available.
Although the p­values stated above show that not all of the parameters are statistically
significant for an alpha of 0.05, as it is of interest to investigate their contribution to the
model, no parameters were removed at this stage. The removal of parameters was first
considered during the optimization phase, discussed in subsection 5.4.5.
Both models 1 and 2 have similar AIC values, which suggests that they perform very
similarly for the calibration period. The score for model 2 is likely slightly higher than model
1 due to its additional non­statistically significant parameters, as additional unnecessary
parameters carry a penalty in the AIC assessment (Akaike 1998). Though both models
have similar AIC values, their performance is best assessed by examining their results and
any errors. Therefore, both models were used to predict the probability of CSO occurrence
for both the calibration (subsection 5.4.3) and validation (subsection 5.4.4) data sets.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
51
==PAGE:58==
5.4.3
Prediction results with the calibration period
Both models 1 and 2 were used to predict the occurrence of CSO events using the cali­
bration data set. These results are of interest as they describe how the model performs
using the data that was used to fit it. A model should perform well using the same data
that was used to train it, so if the modelled results for the calibration period are poor then
it is likely not worth testing the model for the validation period before improving it. An ad­
ditional benefit of testing the model with the calibration data is that any areas that require
improvement are usually easier to notice with the training data than the testing data.
Prediction results
The prediction results for both models for the calibration data are shown in Figure 5.13.
As previously stated, any probability higher than 0.5 is interpreted as the occurrence of
a CSO. The predicted outputs from models 1 and 2 were compared with the model CSO
outputs from the LTS results for B25_Bas and any errors are colour­coded.
False positives (when model 1 or 2 predict an overflow, but the LTS results do not) are
in red and false negatives (when model 1 or 2 does not predict an overflow, but the LTS
do) are shown in blue. While the ultimate goal was to minimize the total number of errors,
in this analysis the presence of false positives were preferred over false negatives within
reason. This was decided because of the negative environmental (Sandoval et al. 2013),
social (Miljøstyrelsen 2020), and economic (Vezzaro et al. 2014) impacts associated with
CSOs, which make it preferable to take a more conservative stance in relation to the
occurrence of CSOs.
(a) Model 1 ­ 3 variables
(b) Model 2 ­ 6 variables
Figure 5.13: Results of models 1 and 2 for the calibration period
52
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:59==
As shown in Figure 5.13, both models perform well with the calibration data set, with both
predicting 96% of the data points correctly, and having few false positives or negatives,
with both having approximately 18% and 3% of the positives and negatives being false,
respectively. Due to the large number of data points and relatively low number of points
that result in a CSO according to the LTS results, it is important to assess the proportion
of false negatives and positives in order to accurately evaluate the model performance.
Here both models are deemed to be acceptable and well­performing because both have
low proportions of errors. If half of the predicted overflow occurrences were errors, then
further work would have to be done on the model. While both models perform well, it was
expected that the additional parameters in model 2 would help it out perform model 1,
but this is not the case as their performance in terms of the number of predicted CSOs is
almost identical.
Model error analysis
The model residuals and a histogram of the model errors are included for both models in
Figure 5.14. As shown by the binned model residuals (Figure 5.14a and Figure 5.14b,
made using Gelman and Su 2020) for neither model are ideal. As for a well performing
model it is expected that 95% of the data points would fall between the ±2­standard error
bounds shown in grey (Gelman and Su 2020; Webb 2017).
The residuals for model 1 show that for the lower fitted probabilities (i.e. those predicted
by the model), the model tends to over­predict the occurrence of CSOs, while it strongly
under­predicts it around a fitted value of 0.5 and strong over­predicts it for fitted values
close to 1. The same tendency is apparent for model 2, although here there appear to
be fewer outliers. While both models have data points that fall outside of the confidence
intervals, both are still considered adequate based on these residuals as the majority
are close to zero and there are no clear linear trends in those outside of the confidence
interval. However, it is an area where further work could be done.
(a) Residuals (1)
(b) Residuals (2)
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
53
==PAGE:60==
(c) Errors (1)
(d) Errors (2)
(e) Zoomed errors (1)
(f) Zoom errors (2)
Figure 5.14: Model residuals and histograms of errors of model 1 (1) and model 2 (2) for
the calibration period
The error histograms for both models (Figure 5.14c and Figure 5.14d) show a lack of bias
or correlation in the errors as the errors appear to have a normal distribution with a mean
of zero and only minimal apparent skewing left. Although there is a large amount of zero
values that detract from the ideal shape, in this context it is not determined to be important.
The binned model residuals and the error histograms therefore validate that the model
performs adequately enough to be tested with the validation data set.
Rain error analysis
After predicting the probability of a CSO occurring on each of the dates in the calibration
period, the information for dates resulting in model error were analyzed to determine if
there was a trend or common factor that could be addressed in the models and to de­
termine whether the same dates resulted in errors for both models. Out of the 48 and
50 dates that resulted in errors for model 1 and model 2, respectively, 46 of the dates
occurred in both of the models.
Table 5.11: Summary of model variable values for the rain dates that only caused an error
in model 1 for the calibration period
Date
10­min int
3­hr int
Depth
Season
Wet or Dry
Rain events
CSO
27/09/2000 15.48
8.998
0.777
8.4
Fall
Wet
22
No
03/10/2009 03.35
6.167
0.851
28.6
Fall
Dry
24
No
54
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:61==
For the two dates that only resulted in errors for model 1, as shown in Table 5.11, the
values for depth, 10­minute intensity, and 3­hour intensity are all above the thresholds, so
it was expected that the model would predict that these dates result in CSOs, which it did.
However, the observations say that there were no CSO for these dates, which is correctly
predicted by model 2, likely due to the inclusion of the season and wet/dry parameter.
This is because the events occurring in fall, as well as one of them being in a dry fall,
would decrease the estimated probability of a CSO event occurring. It should be noted
that the calculated probabilities for these dates are very close to the threshold of 0.5, being
0.57 and 0.56, respectively. This further indicates that adding these parameters could be
enough to increase the calculated probabilities so that they are correctly classified.
There were four events that resulted in an error for only model 2. As shown in Table 5.12,
the cause of these errors seems to be the season parameter and the wet/dry parameter.
All the thresholds for depth, 10­min intensity, and 3­hr intensity are exceeded, so if this
was model 1 all four dates would be predicted to have a CSO, which would only result in
two errors instead of the four that are present. However, both events that have a CSO
according to the LTS results, occur in the fall and in a dry period, which according to the
model decreases the probability of a CSO event occurring. As any probability below 0.5
is interpreted as a CSO not occurring, it is likely that these factors reduced the probability
below this threshold. This is validated by the output of the model, as both events that
should result in CSOs have probabilities of 0.46 and 0.44, respectively.
Table 5.12: Summary of model variable values for the rain dates that only caused an error
in model 2 for the calibration period
Date
10­min int
3­hr int
Depth
Season
Wet or Dry
Rain events
CSO
22/09/1993 19.01
3.666
1.140
17.8
Fall
Dry
18
Yes
02/08/2002 15.25
7.773
0.773
9.8
Summer
Wet
18
No
03/09/2009 09.45
4.999
1.140
10.8
Fall
Dry
22
Yes
16/06/2011 18.44
4.499
1.037
11.2
Summer
Wet
22
No
Similarly, both events that do not have a CSO according to the observations occur during
the summer and in a wet period. They also both have probabilities of approximately 0.53.
It is therefore likely that the season and wet/dry parameters increased and decreased the
calculated probabilities just enough that they crossed the threshold to receive the wrong
classification. This is supported by the calculated probabilities for these dates from model
1, where all were properly classified to match with the LTS results, but those that should
result in a CSO have calculated probabilities of 0.52 and 0.51 and those that do not have
probabilities of 0.497. This highlights room for improvement with model 2, as well as with
model 1 as the values are still very close to the threshold.
The remaining 46 dates that result in model error are shown graphically Figure 5.15 in­
stead of in a table due to the large amount of data. However, a table summarizing their
information is also included in section C.3.
As shown in Figure 5.15a, there are four rain events that fall below the expected depth
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
55
==PAGE:62==
threshold of 8.0 mm. While the depth parameter is not the most significant parameter in
either model, this could be a contributing factor as to why the model did not predict a CSO
for these events. Additionally, the two events with the lowest probability do not meet the
3­hour intensity threshold and only one meets the 10­minute intensity threshold; as these
parameters are more significant and have more of an impact on the resulting probability,
not meeting these thresholds likely contributes more to the lower probability. While both
events occur in the summer, and one in a wet period, the comparatively low values of
these parameters are not enough to increase the probability to result in a CSO event. For
the two data points with approximately 0.35 probability, both the 10­minute and 3­hour
intensities are above the thresholds, although the 3­hour intensity is only slightly so.
For model 1 it appears that this along with the low depth is sufficient for the model to
predict that a CSO will not occur. This appears to also be the case for model 2, as both
events occur in wet summers. Although the number of rain events would also contribute
to a higher probability in model 2, as both have more than the average of 19 events in
summer. It was expected that most of the false negative values would have relatively low
depth values and that most of the false positive values would have high depth values, and
while this is true for most of the data points, it is not exclusively true, as two of the false
negative points also have the highest depths. There is also not a clear depth value that
all of the false positive values exceed and that all the false negatives are below.
However, all of the false positives are above the expected threshold of 8.0mm. Instead
of the expected separation, there is a lot of overlap in depth between the two groups. If
this dichotomy were true, it would make the case for a higher depth threshold than that
apparent in Figure 5.3.
If the data points that do not meet the depth threshold are removed, as they have already
been addressed, and the focus shifts to those that do not meet the 10­minute intensity
threshold, the results are what is shown in Figure 5.15b. From this, we can see that
there is only one point that does not meet the 10­minute threshold. This point has a low
model probability, although it exceeds both the 3­hour intensity and depth thresholds.
This validates the weight of the 10­minute intensity parameter for model 1, as the 10­
minute intensity is the likely cause of the low probability. For model 2, the fact that it
occurs during a dry non­summer season with a below average number of rain events
also exacerbates the low predicted probability. Similar to depth, it was expected that
the false negatives would have lower 10­minute intensities than the false positives. This
appears to be partially true as most of the false negatives have intensities below 5 µm/s,
while most of the false positives intensities are above this value, but there is still a lot of
overlap between the two groups.
If this data point is removed and the 3­hour intensity is plotted instead, as shown in Fig­
ure 5.15c, then it clear that none of the error rain events have a 3­hour intensity below
the expected threshold. This means that these remaining points exceed the thresholds
for depth, 10­minute intensity, and 3­hour intensity which are expected to result in a CSO
event, so it is expected that all of these data points would result in a probability over 0.50
for model 1. This could suggest that additional parameters are required for model 1, but
56
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:63==
(a) Depth
(b) 10­min intensity
(c) 3­hr intensity
(d) Number of rain events
(e) Accumulated 48­hour rain depth
Figure 5.15: CSO probability vs model variables for the calibration data
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
57
==PAGE:64==
the additional parameters in model 2 were not sufficient to correctly predict these points.
Many of the false negatives occur during dry non­summer seasons with less than the av­
erage number of rain events, which could explain their low predicted probability for model
2. While some of the false negatives that occur during wet summers also have less than
the average number of rain events, it is unlikely that this is the only cause of their low
probabilities, but as most have higher probabilities perhaps tweaking the parameter val­
ues could be sufficient to result in an adequate prediction for these points. These could
also be the result of variable values that are above the expected thresholds, but are still
relatively low. Similarly, some of the false positive predictions could be due to the fact that
the events occur in wet summers, but others, such as those that occur during dry non­
summer seasons, may be due to high variable values, as there is a clearer distinction
here between the two groups, with some false positive values being much higher than the
expected threshold values.
This same data is used to plot the number of rain events per season in Figure 5.15d. Due
to the seasonal variation, two thresholds are shown in this plot: one for summer and one
for the other seasons. Both thresholds were determined by taking the average number of
events in each season from the complete historical data set. As the figure shows, there
is no clear difference between the two groups in terms of value range, although more of
the false negative values fall below the other season threshold than the false positives.
This is not necessarily significant as there are also more false negative points than false
positive. Perhaps filtering the number of rain events per season and treating it in a similar
way as the wet or dry parameter, i.e. assigning a binary value depending on whether it
is above or below average for each rain event, may result in better model results. It was
thought that including a parameter for the accumulated rain depth could help improve the
models, but as shown in Figure 5.15e, there is so much overlap between the two groups
for this variable that it would likely not be helpful.
The analysis the errors for both models resulted in some likely causes for these errors. For
model 1, the rain events that resulted in errors all met the expected variable thresholds,
but should not result in a CSO, so it is thought that the inclusion of additional variables
such as season or the wet/dry variable would resolve these errors, as they were correctly
predicted using model 2. For model 2, all rain events again met the expected variable
thresholds, but the season and wet/dry variables seemed to cause problems. This is
because the events that should have resulted in CSOs occur during dry non­summer
seasons, and those that should not have CSOs occur in wet summers; this goes against
the trend where overflows are more likely in wet summers. Therefore, adding an additional
parameter that could overrule the seasonal parameters if the rain intensities and/or depth
were sufficiently high could improve the results from model 2. This implementation could
also reduce the errors that stem from both models. While potential some solutions were
identified, no changes were made to the model prior to testing it with the validation data.
5.4.4
Prediction results with the validation period
Both models were used to predict the occurrence of CSO events for the validation period.
These results are shown in Figure 5.16. False positives (when model 1 or 2 predict an
58
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:65==
overflow, but the LTS results do not) are in red and false negatives (when model 1 or 2
does not predict an overflow, but the LTS do) are shown in blue.
Prediction results
As shown in Figure 5.16, both models predict the occurrence of CSOs relatively well, with
both having approximately 96% correct prediction rate, the same as for the calibration
data set. The amount of false positives and false negatives is also similarly low, with
approximately 16% and 3% of the positives and negatives being false, respectively. This
is the same as the performance with the calibration period, which was unexpected as
the calibration data was used to fit the model parameters so it was expected that the
validation results would be worse. Therefore, this performance with the validation period
is very good, as it is the same as for the calibration data and the amount of errors are low.
As with the calibration period, it was surprising that the performance of the two models
was so similar. Although the similarity of their results was already seen, it was expected
that the new validation data would show more differences between the model results.
(a) Model 1 ­ 3 variables
(b) Model 2 ­ 6 variables
Figure 5.16: Results of models 1 and 2 for the validation period
Model error analysis
Histograms of the errors for the results of both models using the validation period data are
shown in Figure 5.17. As shown, these histograms look very similar to those in Figure 5.14
for the calibration period, with both having a normal distribution with a mean of zero and
little skewing. As stated in subsection 5.4.3, although there is a large number of zero error
values, in this context they are not important and the histograms of errors are deemed
acceptable.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
59
==PAGE:66==
The residuals were not included for the validation data set, as they are only meaningful
for the data used to fit the models, which in this case is the calibration data.
(a) Errors (1)
(b) Zoomed errors (1)
(c) Errors (2)
(d) Zoom errors (2)
Figure 5.17: Histograms of errors of model 1 (1) and model 2 (2) for the validation period
Rain error analysis
As with the calibration data, all of the rain events corresponding to model errors were
investigated for both models to determine any existing trends and identify possible areas
of improvement. The validation data results in a total of 56 rain events that are errors
for model 1, and 54 for model 2. This is higher than the respective 48 and 50 from the
calibration data set, but this was expected because there are more rain events in the
validation data set and because it was expected that the model would perform worse with
the validation data. Out of these error dates, 53 are the same for both models, while 3
are exclusive to model 1 and 1 only occurs for model 2.
A summary table of the 3 events that only occur for model 1 is shown in Table 5.13. As
shown in the table, all three events exceed the expected thresholds of 8.0mm for depth,
1.8 µm/s for 10­minute intensity, and 0.45 µm/s for 3­hour intensity for all three variables.
Due to this, all three the points should result in a predicted CSO from model 1, though
only two result in one in the LTS results. The resulting probability of overflow occurrence
for these points is 0.51, 0.49, and 0.49, respectively. All of them are very close to the
cutoff of 0.5, which suggests room for improvement in the model due to the relatively high
60
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:67==
variable values. For instance, the inclusion of the season as in model 2 would decrease
the resulting probability of the first date, while reducing those of the other two. This may
be why these points were correctly predicted in model 2.
Table 5.13: Summary of model variable values for the rain dates that only caused an error
in model 1 for the validation period
Date
10­min int
3­hr int
Depth
Season
Wet or Dry
Rain events
CSO
06/10/1988 16.46
4.066
1.101
13.0
Fall
Dry
22
No
07/07/1996 09.08
10.831
0.647
8.4
Summer
Dry
9
Yes
18/07/2004 02.44
4.083
1.073
11.6
Summer
Wet
26
Yes
A similar table for the solitary error date that is only in model 2 is included in Table 5.14.
As shown, this date also exceeds all thresholds for depth and both intensities in addition
to occurring in summer. These factors are likely why the model predicted that a CSO
would occur, as the fact that it was a dry summer with a below average number of events
would not be enough to reduce the probability enough that it would not predict a CSO.
However, the predicted probability of 0.54 is just above the 0.5 necessary to result in a
CSO, so potentially if these parameters were given more weight, it could result in a correct
prediction.
Table 5.14: Summary of model variable values for the rain dates that only caused an error
in model 2 for the validation period
Date
10­min int
3­hr int
Depth
Season
Wet or Dry
Rain events
CSO
13/06/1995 13.24
3.499
1.086
25.2
Summer
Dry
12
No
Like for the calibration period, the remaining 53 error dates that are common between
both models are shown graphically in Figure 5.18, although a summary table of the data
is also included in section C.3.
As shown in Figure 5.18a, there are 7 points that have a depth below the expected thresh­
old of 8.0 mm, although they are all within 2.5 mm of the threshold. All of these data points
except 2 exceed the threshold values for both the 10­minute and 3­hour intensities, with
the exceptions both being slightly below the 3­hour thresholds and one being below the
10­minute threshold. Therefore, it seems that although the depth is not the most heavily
weighted parameter, this difference is enough to result in a probability below 0.5 for the
points above the intensity thresholds for model 1. For model 2, the incorrect prediction is
likely due to the same factors as model 1, but the additional variables in favour of a CSO,
such as the events occurring in summer with above average numbers of rain events, are
not sufficient to increase the probability above 0.5. In general, when looking at this data,
while there is a larger spread of values for the false positives, it appears that the season
could play a large role in the false prediction, as many of the false positives occur in wet
summers and many of the false negatives occur in other seasons.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
61
==PAGE:68==
(a) Depth
(b) 10­min intensity
(c) 3­hr intensity
(d) Number of rain events
(e) Accumulated 48­hour rain depth
Figure 5.18: CSO probability vs model variables for the validation data
62
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:69==
The data points with depths below the threshold were removed, and the data was plotted
in terms of 10­minute intensities to further examine the error results. This plot is shown
in Figure 5.18b. As shown there are 3 points that do not meet the expected threshold,
although they are relatively close with the lowest value being 1.0 µm/s. These points
exceed the thresholds for 3­hour intensity and have depths that are more than twice the
depth threshold. This validates the weighting of the intensity parameters, as a very high
depth is not enough to compensate for a low rain intensity. This is especially true for model
1, but also applicable to model 2 as the season and wet/dry parameter are not enough to
sufficiently raise the probability for the event that occurs in a wet summer. In general, the
false positives tend to have higher intensity values than the false negatives, so this may
also contribute to the prediction errors.
The 3­hour intensity is plotted for the data points that meet the 10­minute intensity thresh­
old and are shown in Figure 5.18. As shown, all of the remaining data points exceed the
3­hour intensity threshold. As they also exceed the thresholds for depth and 10­minute
intensity, in theory they should all be predicted as resulting in a CSO by model 1, but this
is not the case. A potential cause of the incorrect prediction is the range of 3­hour intensity
values, as they tend to be higher for the false positives than the false negatives. This is
likely applicable for model 2 as well, although here season and the wet/dry parameters
likely come into play as many of the false negatives tend to occur in dry, non­summer
seasons, while the false positives tend to occur in wet, summers.
A plot of the remaining data points for the number of rain events per season when each
event occurred is shown in Figure 5.18d. These are the same points as shown in the pre­
vious figure, as all met the 3­hour intensity threshold and therefore none were removed.
Similar to in the calibration period, this data is shown along with two thresholds: one for
summer and one for the other seasons, which are the means of the historical data. Similar
to the other variables, the value range of the number of rain events may contribute to the
prediction error, as the false positives tend to have higher values than the false negatives,
though there is still a substantial amount of overlap between the two groups.
The accumulated 48­hour rain depth before the start of the rain events is shown for the
data points in Figure 5.18e. As with the calibration data, this was used as a surrogate
for the volume in the basin before the event to determine if this could have an influence
and be used to improve the model. However, as shown there is no trend apparent, so it
is unlikely that including this variable in either model would improve their performance.
The two models perform almost as well for the validation period as for the calibration period
in terms of the percentage of false positive and false negative errors. The relatively few
errors that remain are similar between both periods, and can likely be attributed to the
range in variable values, the assigned parameter weights, and potentially the included
model parameters and how some variables are used in the model.
5.4.5
Model optimization
There is not much difference between the prediction performance of the two models,
though model 2 has three additional parameters than model 1. It is therefore apparent
that there is room for optimization in at least model 2. To examine this further, statisti­
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
63
==PAGE:70==
cal tests are done on model 2 to determine the difference in performance between it and
different model versions.
First, a backwards­step search analysis was done using model 2 as the initial saturated
model to determine the optimal model parameters using the AIC, as it considers the
goodness­of­fit as well as the number of model parameters, with a preference for fewer
parameters (Akaike 1998; Dalpiaz 2021). A forwards­step search analysis was then done
starting with a null model (a model that only contains an intercept) that considered all po­
tential rain variables for inclusion in the model and chose the optimal model parameters
using the AIC. The variables considered in the forward search analysis include those cov­
ered in subsection 5.3.1, as well as some others. They are as follows:
• Rain event depth (total over the event; in mm);
• Rain event duration (in minutes);
• 1­minute rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 2­minute rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 5­minute rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 10­minute rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 30­minute rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 1­hour rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 3­hour rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 6­hour rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 12­hour rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 24­hour rain intensity (in µm/s);
• 48­hour rain intensity (in µm/s);
• Rain event rank**;
• 48­hour accumulated rain depth before the rain event*** ( in mm);
• 48­hour accumulated rain depth before the CSO event**** ( in mm);
• Rain event season; and
• The number of rain events in the rain event season.
*Here a rain event is defined according to the same criteria specified by the event grouping settings (as
referred to in subsubsection 3.1.2 and explicitly detailed in subsection 4.2.1).
**The rain events were ranked from largest to smallest for each period within the calibration and validation
data sets.
***The accumulated rain depth from 48­hours before the start of the rain event to the rain event start time.
****The accumulated rain depth from 48­hours before the start of the overflow event to the start time of the
overflow event.
Both of these processes were done using the step function in the R stats package (R Core
Team 2020) and were fit using the same process as model 1 and 2. That is, using the
glm function in R and the calibration data set. Once these two ”optimized” models were
obtained, they were tested against model 1 and 2 in terms of their AIC values and their
performances with the validation data.
64
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:71==
The backwards­step analysis resulted in a model (henceforth referred to as model B)
containing only the 10­minute and 3­hour rain intensities. The equation for model B is
shown in Equation 5.5, where β0 is the intercept, β1 and x1 represent the parameter and
values for the 10­minute intensity in µm/s, and β2 and x2 represent the parameter and
values for the 3­hour. The parameter values for this model are shown in Table 5.15 along
with their z­statistic and p­values. As shown in the table, the estimated parameter values
for model B are very similar to those for model 2, although the standard error and p­values
are both lower and all the parameters are statistically significant for model B.
p(x) =
exp(β0 + β1x1 + β2x2)
1 + exp(β0 + β1x1 + β2x2)
(5.5)
The forwards­step analysis resulted in a smaller than expected model (henceforth referred
to as model F) containing four rain variables. As with the other models, rain intensity is
included, but with this model it is the 30­minute, 1­hour and 6­hour rain intensities included
as variables. Unlike the other models the accumulated rain depth from 48­hours before the
start of the rain event is also included as a variable, while depth nor season are included.
The model equation for model F is shown in Equation 5.6, where β0 is the intercept, β1
and x1 are the parameter and values for the 1­hour intensity in µm/s, β2 and x2 are the
parameter and values for the cumulative rain depth from 48­hours before the start of the
rain event in mm, β3 and x3 are the parameter and values for the 6­hour rain intensity in
µm/s, and β4 and x4 are the parameter and values for the 30­minute intensity in µm/s.
The parameter values for this model are shown in Table 5.15.
p(x) =
exp(β0 + β1x1 + β2x2 + β3x3 + β4x4)
1 + exp(β0 + β1x1 + β2x2 + β3x3 + β4x4)
(5.6)
It is interesting that model F does not contain any of the variables identified from subsec­
tion 5.3.1. Although none of the parameters are the same as either model 1 or model 2,
all the parameter estimates are more statistically significant than these models as they
all fall below 0.05. It was expected that it would contain at least the depth, 10­minute,
intensity and 3­hour intensity, so that it could at least be compared to model 1 as a nested
model if it was not comparable with model 2. However, as it stands it cannot be compared
to either as a nested model as the variables are completely different.
It was planned to compare all the models using a likelihood­ratio test, but since model F
is not a nested model to model 1, model 2, or model B, a likelihood­ratio test between all
of the models is not possible. The models were therefore only compared using their AIC
values as well as their performance with the validation data set for B25_Bas.
As mentioned, a null model (hereafter referred to as model N) was defined as part of
the forwards­step analysis. As model N only consists of an intercept (as shown in Equa­
tion 5.7), it was not expected to perform well and is not typically included. Out of curiosity,
in this project it is compared against the other models. Its parameter values are also
included in Table 5.15.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
65
==PAGE:72==
p(x) = β0
(5.7)
As Table 5.15 shows, although the five different models are not all nested, there are still
some similarities between them in terms of parameter estimation. For instance, all models
except the null model contain at least two rainfall intensity variables. This makes sense as
the rainfall intensity is very influential with respect to the occurrence of CSOs, especially
as it can also convey information about the event duration and depth. The 10­minute and
3­hour intensity were specifically included in model 1 and 2 because of this, and because
it was thought that including both a short­ and long­term intensity would allow for better
CSO prediction, so it is encouraging that this is validated by the models produced by the
step analyses.
Table 5.15: Estimated parameter values with their standard error, z­statistic value, and
p­value for all models
Model
Parameters
Estimate
Std. Error
z­value
Pr(>|z|)
1
β0 (intercept)
­4.235
1.415
­2.992
2.768e­03
β1 (depth)
0.3554
0.4382
0.8109
0.4174
β2 (10­min int.)
2.143
0.3068
6.986
2.836e­12
β3 (3­hr int.)
3.823
0.7017
5.448
5.093e­08
2
β0 (intercept)
­3.737
2.089
­1.789
0.07359
β1 (depth)
0.3498
0.4402
0.7945
0.4269
β2 (10­min int.)
2.051
0.3201
6.407
1.482e­10
β3 (3­hr int.)
3.826
0.7071
5.411
6.278e­08
β4 (season)
0.3934
0.3509
1.121
0.2622
β5 (wet/dry)
0.01593
0.3733
0.04269
0.9659
β6 (rain events)
­0.2037
0.5555
­0.3668
0.7138
B
β0 (intercept)
­3.152
0.4385
­7.187
6.61e­13
β1 (10­min int.)
2.070
0.2912
7.110
1.16e­12
β2 (3­hr int.)
4.232
0.4987
8.486
<2e­16
F
β0 (intercept)
­1.436
0.7217
­1.990
0.046597
β1 (1­hr int.)
3.067
1.2821
2.392
0.016771
β2 (acc. depth)
­0.6538
0.1994
­3.278
1.045e­3
β3 (6­hr int.)
2.143
0.5581
3.840
1.230e­3
β4 (30­min int.)
2.207
0.9784
2.256
0.024088
N
β0 (intercept)
­2.336
0.1022
­22.86
<2e­16
A table comparing the AIC values of all the models and their performance with the valida­
tion data set is shown in Table 5.16. This table highlights the difficulty of solely depending
on a score such as the AIC to determine the best model for this type of data, as the model
with the lowest AIC score (model F) has the same performance as the model with a higher
score (model 1). That being said, in this case all of the models with the exception of model
N have similar AIC values, and would be expected to perform similarly based on them.
66
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:73==
Table 5.16: Model performance for all model iterations, where total positives are the total
number of predicted overflows and total negatives are the total number of predicted no­
overflows
Model
1
2
B
F
N
AIC
266.64
271.30
265.29
236.26
712.46
Correct predictions (#)
1288
1290
1289
1288
1219
Total data points
1344
1344
1344
1344
1344
Correct predictions (%)
95.83
95.98
95.91
95.83
90.70
False positives (#)
17
17
17
17
0
Total positives
103
105
104
103
0
False positives (%)
16.50
16.19
16.35
16.50
NA
False negatives (#)
39
37
38
39
125
Total negatives
1241
1239
1240
1241
1344
False negatives (%)
3.14
2.99
3.06
3.14
9.30
As previously mentioned, the performance of each model is evaluated based on the per­
centages of false positives and false negatives, as these are the proportion of model
errors. However, these values are virtually the same for all the models except model N,
with 16% of the total predicted overflows being errors and 3% of the total predicted no­
overflows being errors. Therefore the AIC was also considered to determine which model
is best. Model B was selected as the best, because it had one of the best performances
in regards to the number of correct predictions in addition to having a relatively low AIC
value and having the least number of parameters. Therefore model B is used for further
model testing in subsection 5.4.6 below.
5.4.6
Further model testing
As all models were determined to perform well for node B25_Bas, it was determined that
the best model should be tested for other nodes in the system with different characteristics
to evaluate how widely applicable the model is. A summary of the the characteristics of
the different nodes tested using model B is included in Table 5.17. The emptying time
shown is that required for the basin to be 90% empty. This was chosen instead of the
total emptying time, because being 90% empty was one of the criteria used to determine
an adequate simulation stop time for the LTS simulations, and because some basins had
a large difference in the time it took for them to become 90% empty versus totally empty.
Table 5.17: Volume and approximate emptying time for all of the considered nodes
Node
Type
Volume [m3]
Emptying time [hr]
B25_Bas
Basin
569
15
B38
Basin
700
26
B27
Basin
1185
16
B44
Basin
60
7
H030010
Manhole
3
2
B24
Basin
6640
84
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
67
==PAGE:74==
These nodes were selected to evaluate the impact of different characteristics on model
performance. For instance, node B38 was selected as it has a similar volume to that
of B25_Bas but a longer emptying time, so its performance would indicate the impact of
emptying time. Similarly, B27 was selected as it has a much larger volume than B25_Bas
but a similar emptying time, so its performance would indicate the impact of basin volume
on the model performance. In the same way, as B24 has a much larger volume and longer
emptying time, its results would represent the impact of both of these variables. These
were also investigated with nodes B44 and H030010. B44 is a basin with a smaller volume
and emptying time than B25_Bas and H030010 is a manhole with a smaller volume and
emptying time. While many more nodes could have been selected for evaluation, it was
determined that these five were sufficiently representative for an initial comparison.
The results of model B for each of the five additional investigated nodes are shown in Fig­
ure 5.19. These results are also summarized along with those for B25_Bas in Table 5.18.
Similar to the results for B25_Bas, there is no clear correlation between the predicted
probability and whether a prediction is falsely positive or negative.
It was expected that all points that were incorrectly classified would have predicted prob­
abilities close to the cutoff of 0.5, but this is not the case as the error probabilities vary
wildly for both the false positive and false negative values.
(a) B38
(b) B27
Figure 5.19: Predicted CSO probabilities for the additionally tested nodes
68
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:75==
(c) B44
(d) H030010
(e) B24
Figure 5.19: Predicted CSO probabilities for the additionally tested nodes (cont’d)
As the same rain data is used for each node and the model predictions solely rely on the
rain data, the number of total data points, total positives, and total negatives is the same
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
69
==PAGE:76==
for all five nodes. The difference in results between the nodes therefore depends on how
often the occurrence of a CSO at that nodes matches with the model­predicted outcome.
It was expected that the model would not perform as well for the other nodes as it did for
B25_Bas, as this was the node that was used to train it, and this was proven to be true
by the results in Table 5.18. As the metric for evaluating the model performance is the
percentage of false positives and false negatives, this is the focus of the analysis.
Table 5.18: Model performance for all considered nodes, where total positives are the
total number of predicted overflows and total negatives are the total number of predicted
no­overflows
B25_Bas
B38
B27
B44
H030010
B24
Type
Basin
Basin
Basin
Basin
Manhole
Basin
Volume
­
Same
Larger
Smaller
Smaller
Larger
Emptying time
­
Larger
Same
Smaller
Smaller
Larger
Correct predictions (#)
1289
1201
980
1289
1209
1261
Total data points
1344
1344
1344
1344
1344
1344
Correct predictions (%)
95.91
89.36
72.92
95.91
89.96
93.82
False positives (#)
17
28
16
19
20
74
Total positives
104
104
104
104
104
104
False positives (%)
16.35
26.92
15.38
18.27
19.23
71.15
False negatives (#)
38
115
348
36
115
9
Total negatives
1240
1240
1240
1240
1240
1240
False negatives (%)
3.06
9.27
28.06
2.90
9.27
0.73
When looking at the percentage of false positives, the model actually performs better for
B27 than B25_Bas. This makes sense as the volume of B27 is larger, which would result
in fewer overflows for the same rain. In the same way, it makes sense that both B44 and
H030010 would have a higher percentage of false positives, as they both have smaller
volumes than B25_Bas, which would result in more overflows for the same rain. However,
it was not expected that there would be such a large difference for B38 and B24. As B38
has a similar volume to B25_Bas, but a longer emptying time, it was expected that B38
would have more overflows than B25_Bas and that the model would under­predict the
number of CSOs at this node, but the opposite occurred. While this does not conclusively
prove that the emptying time has an impact on the model performance, it does present an
area for further work and could play a role. In contrast to B38, it was expected that B24
would have a higher percentage of false positives due to its larger basin volume, but it was
not expected that over 70% of the predicted overflows would be errors. As B24 also has
a longer emptying time that B25_Bas, and based on the results of B38, it is possible that
the emptying time also contributed to the high number of false positives. With that being
said, if maximum acceptable level of 25% error in the prediction of overflow occurrence
was set, then model B would only be adequate for nodes B27, B44, and H030010. In that
way basin does not seem to be a limitation as both basins and the manhole with larger
or smaller volume meet the criteria. However emptying time could be a limitation, as only
those that have the same or smaller emptying time meet the criteria.
70
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:77==
In terms of false negatives, it was expected that basins with larger volumes than B25_Bas
would have a lower proportion of false negatives than B25_Bas. This is due to the ex­
pectation that basins with larger volumes would have fewer overflows, thus the number of
both false negatives and false negatives would be lower. Similarly, it was expected that
nodes with smaller volumes would have a higher percentage of false negatives, as they
would have more overflows than B25_Bas which would result in higher false negatives
and positives.
While this was somewhat true for the false positives, as shown in Table 5.18, this does not
seem to be the case for false negatives. While B44 has a smaller volume than B25_Bas
and has fewer false negatives, H030010 which also has a smaller volume has many more
false negatives. However, this could be where a difference between basins and manholes
comes into play; as manholes have much smaller volumes than basins, they tend to have
more overflows, so maybe there is a certain threshold after which volume will impact the
model performance. In the same way, the larger basins did not react as expected for the
false negatives as node B27 both had a higher percentages of false negatives, while B24
had a much lower percentage than B25_Bas. While B24 behaved somewhat as expected,
though to a more extreme extent, B27 did not. This could mean that larger basin volume
is not as important in regards to false negatives, or that there is an other aspect of basin
geometry that plays a role that was not considered here.
In addition to this, the impact of emptying time on the false negatives is not clear, as B38
has a higher percentage of false negatives than B25_Bas, while B24 has much less. This
could also mean that a longer emptying time increases the number of false negatives,
which would make sense as it would mean that the basin tends to be more full which
could lead to more overflows, but that the much larger volume of B24 overcompensates
for this effect. In that way, basin volume only becomes important for the model once the
difference reaches a sufficiently large value. If the same acceptable error rate of 25% was
applied to the false errors then the model would be acceptable for all of the investigated
nodes, except for B27.
Overall, these results show that model B works relatively well for the other investigated
nodes in the system. Though they resulted in higher amounts of errors than B25_Bas,
this was expected and two nodes (B44 and H030010) had less than 25% error for both
the prediction of overflow occurrences and non­occurrences, while the other nodes were
able to meet this criteria for one or the other. While these results are promising they also
highlighted some areas where further work could be done. For instance, a more concrete
acceptable error threshold could be defined, instead of the very loose 25% used here.
These results also highlighted that there may be some limits related to basin volume in
terms of model performance, where once the difference in volume between the training
node (here B25_Bas) and the node of interest becomes too large, the model performance
is negatively affected. Additionally, the emptying time of the basin also appears to have
an impact on model performance, and is something that should be investigated further.
Further work should also be done to identify any other basin parameters that may impact
model performance that were not considered here.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
71
==PAGE:78==
5.4.7
Summary
Two logistic regression models were made based on the findings in section 5.3. One
(model 1) included only the quantitative rain variables of rain event depth, the 10­minute
rainfall intensity, and the 3­hour rainfall intensity. The other (model 2) included these
quantitative variables as well as the seasonal variables event season, whether the event
season was wet or dry, and the number of rain events in the event season. Both of these
models were fit with the calibration data set and tested using the validation data set.
They both performed equally well for both data sets with approximately 96% of all predic­
tions correct, and approximately 17% of all predicted overflow occurrences being errors,
and 3% of all predicted non­overflow occurrences of being errors. The rain events that
resulted in errors were investigated to understand the source of the errors and how the
models could be improved. The main recommendation for improvement was to incorpo­
rate additional parameters or update the parameter values to make the contribution from
seasonal data more meaningful.
Three additional models were made for comparison with the first two: one using the
backwards­step analysis (model B), one using the forwards­step analysis (model F), and
one null model (model N), which was required for the forwards­step analysis but com­
pared with the others out of curiosity. All five models were compared using the AIC and
their performance with the validation data. Although most models (all except model N)
had similar AIC values and performance, model B was selected as the best due to its
good performance, low AIC value, and low number of parameters. Model B was then
tested with five other nodes in the system with varying characteristics. While the results
were relatively good, some nodes exceeded the allowable 25% error for the prediction
of overflow occurrences or non­occurrences, which highlighted a need to further investi­
gate the impact of basin volume and emptying time on the model performance. Although
none of the developed models performed perfectly, their good performance validated the
importance of the identified rain characteristics.
72
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:79==
6
Further work
An extensive amount of work was done during the course of this project. While this work
deepened understanding on certain rain characteristics and their relationship to the oc­
currence of CSOs, it also highlighted some areas where further work could be carried out,
which was not able to be completed in this project due to time constraints. These areas
are discussed in the following sections for both major aspects of the project, first for the
MIKE URBAN simulation settings and then for the long­term simulations and analysis.
6.1
Simulation settings and choices
There are no glaring areas for future work with respect to the simulation settings and
choices with the current available technology. This is because considerable work was
done to test the different simulation setting options to evaluate their effects on the results
and ensure that the most appropriate ones were used. This included investigating the rain
event grouping, computational engine, use of RamLTS, job list settings, and stop criteria.
With that being said, it could be worthwhile to re­investigate the difference in rain event
grouping for the MIKE 1D engine if a newer version of MIKE URBAN was available. This
is because the 6­hour rain event grouping simulation could not be completed using the
available version of MIKE URBAN 2019 that was used in this project, but test simulations
using the 2020 version of MIKE URBAN did not show the same issues. Additional testing
would be especially relevant if RamLTS were updated to be compatible with the MIKE 1D
engine, as this could result in a drastic reduction in the required simulation time. If the
reduction in simulation time is great enough it could also facilitate decreasing the threshold
depth for the job list, so that more rain events could be considered in the analysis.
6.2
Long­term simulations and analysis
6.2.1
Variable analysis
The majority of the work done in the analyses in section 5.3 focused on rain variables that
were either present in or easily determined from the historical rainfall data from DMI. The
main approach taken in this analysis was a comparative one, where individual variables
were compared to each other or compared between rain events that did or did not result
in CSOs for a specific node in the system. However there could be further work done
to analyze the individual variables. For instance, while the correlation between different
variables was examined, the auto­correlation of each variable was never investigated,
which could have given some information on any trends between rain events with regards
to their timing.
One of the few areas that did not have this comparison was the IDF curves made from
rain events that resulted in CSOs. Although these curves were compared with those
generated by the regional model, it could be interesting to compare them to other historical
rain events that do not result in overflows. This could potentially help to identify meaningful
differences between the two classes of rain events.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
73
==PAGE:80==
Further work could also be conducted to evaluate whether an appropriate surrogate for
basin volume at the start of the rain event could be determined. In this work the accumu­
lated rainfall from 48­hours before the start of the rain event and the CSO event were both
considered, but neither seemed to be very influential or behave the way that basin volume
was expected to. It is possible that the influence of current basin volume was overesti­
mated or that the surrogates used for basin volume in this study were poorly constructed,
or both. This could be investigated by analyzing the amount of volume in the basins of
interest prior to their overflows and looking for a corresponding trend in the rain data.
The difference of wet and dry periods and seasons on rain events could also be further
investigated in a more statistically robust way than comparing the mean values, as done
in this project. Confirmation, or disproval of, the idea that the difference between wet and
dry summers lies in the number of rain events as opposed to a difference in rain depth
could be useful for the understanding of these events. The same is true for wet non­
summer seasons being differentiated by their rain depth, as well as the influence of these
seasons on the year as a whole.
Finally, as this whole analysis only focused on the importance of the investigated variables
in relation to the occurrence of a CSO event. Further work could be done to evaluate their
importance in relation to CSO volume as well as potentially CSO water quality.
6.2.2
Model development and testing
The developed models were shown to perform relatively well, in that they have high suc­
cess rates and perform as expected with regards to the variable values. However, there
are still areas where they could be improved upon. For instance, both models 1 and 2 tend
to produce errors for the same rain events. All of these values have predicted probabili­
ties that are very close to the cutoff threshold of 0.5. As the variable values of these data
points behave as expected (i.e. values above the thresholds identified in section 5.3 will
likely result in an overflow), their errors highlight the need to consider additional variables
and further analysis. It is thought that if additional parameters were added or the way the
seasonal variables were implemented was changed that the results of the models could
be improved. This consideration of additional variables could also include performing a
similar error analysis for the optimized models produced in the step analyses, as this was
not able to be completed and could shed some light on further model improvements and
influential variables.
This project only focused on the occurrence of a CSO, but other characteristics such as
volume are also important. It therefore follows that further work could consider whether
the identified variables could be used to make an accurate predictive CSO volume model
The development of a volume model would be more complex than that of the occurrence
models, and would likely require the entire analysis to be re­done considering overflow
volume instead of occurrence. This is partially because volume is more complex to predict
as it is a quantitative value, as opposed to a binary value like the CSO occurrence, which
can adequately be modelled via the probability of occurrence.
74
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:81==
7
Conclusion
In this project, work was carried out to identify defining rain characteristics that could be
used to aid in the modelling of CSO occurrence. This was done by using historical rainfall
data and a MIKE URBAN model for an area of Rudersdal municipality to model the occur­
rence of overflow events. These results were then analyzed along with the corresponding
rain data to identify any influential variables. The importance of these identified variables
were then tested by using them to build a predictive model for CSO occurrence where
their influence was validated or disproved based on the model performance.
Before any MIKE URBAN LTS simulations could be carried out, the provided model had to
be updated and the optimal settings determined. This was done by increasing the volumes
of some basins so that the model reflected the planned upgrades in the community to
improve the longevity of the results. After this was completed, all the possible setting
options were identified and criteria to determine optimal model performance were defined.
The identified settings options were sorted into assignable settings and testable settings.
Test simulations using the most recent year of historical data were then run to evaluate
the suitability of the testable settings, the results of which were used along with the criteria
for model performance were used to select the optimal settings. The criteria for optimal
performance were that the model provided the desired data resolution and outputs, while
requiring a minimal amount of simulation time and running each simulation stably. From
this process, the optimal tested settings were determined to be: an event grouping length
of 6­hours, using the MOUSE engine and RamLTS to run simulations, using a cutoff rain
depth of 3 mm to define jobs, and a total system volume stop criterion of 14000 m3. These
settings were used in all long­term simulations.
Once the best simulation settings were determined, the historical data was split into peri­
ods of calibration and validation and one LTS simulation was run for each period. Based
on the first completed simulation results, one node was selected as a representative node,
and the analysis of rain characteristics was based on the CSO results of this node. Ten
different rain variables were investigated for this node, first individually, then using thresh­
old values to evaluate their influence on each other. As some of the seasonal variables
could not be quantitatively examined in the same way as the other variables, a separate
seasonal analysis was also completed. The result of this analysis was that the most in­
fluential variables were rain event depth, 10­minute rain intensity, 3­hour rain intensity,
rain event season, whether the season is considered wet or dry, and the number of rain
events in the season. These variables were then used to build two different logarithmic
regression models to predict the occurrence of a CSO for the node of interest B25_Bas.
These models were built to validate the identified variable characteristics, i.e. that those
with an event depth >= 8.0 mm, a 10­minute intensity >= 1.8 µm/s, a 3­hour intensity >=
0.45 µm/s, that occur in summer, or a wet period, or have a higher amount of rain events
in a season will be more likely to result in an overflow.
One model (model 1) was made using only the quantitative influential variables, while
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
75
==PAGE:82==
another (model 2) was made using all six identified variables. Surprisingly, the results
of these two models were almost identical with both resulting in a total success rate of
96% for the validation data, where 16% of the predicted overflows were errors and 3% of
the predicted non­overflows were errors. Due to these results an in­depth error analysis
was completed, which found that many of the errors were due to events that had values
associated with a CSO occurring that did not result in a CSO in the LTS results, and
vice­versa. Two additional models were also developed using a backwards­step analysis
(model B) and a forwards­step analysis (model F). These models also had similar results
as the first two models, but due to a slightly better performance and a lower number of
parameters model B was determined to be the best. Model B was then tested for different
nodes in the system that had different characteristics than the initially selected node of
interest. The predictive results from model B for these other nodes showed that the model
has the potential for wide applicability and validated the influence of the chosen variables,
due to its relatively good performance, but that the impact of basin volume and emptying
time on model performance should be further examined. Though the performances of the
different models varied, they validated the identified characteristics and showed room for
further work.
The work done in this project also highlighted some areas where further work could be
done. For instance, while the use of the MIKE 1D engine was investigated, additional test­
ing of the engine with newer versions of MIKE URBAN could be done as it could reduce
the required simulation time. This is especially true if RamLTS is updated to be compati­
ble with this engine. Additional IDF curves could also be made for the rain events that did
not result in CSOs, for comparison with the rain events that did. As the accumulated rain
before the start of a rain or CSO event did not appear to be effective surrogates for the
basin volume at the start of the event, further work could be done to find a suitable surro­
gate variable. In addition to this, the same analysis as completed in this project could be
completed again with a focus on overflow volume instead of occurrence to determine how
these variables relate to volume and whether it differs from occurrence. This additional
analysis would also facilitate the development of a predictive volume model. Though the
developed predictive occurrence models perform well, there is still room for improvement,
specifically in terms of further investigating the interaction of the seasonal variables and
the impact of basin volume and emptying time on model performance.
76
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
Akaike, Hirotogu (1998). “Information theory and an extension of the maximum likelihood
principle”. In: Selected papers of hirotugu akaike. Springer, pp. 199–213.
Berggren, Silje Kærn (2020). Langtidssimuleringer for nuværende og fremtidigt klima
(Long­term simulations for current and future climates). Special course report. Tech­
nical University of Denmark.
Bi, Eustache Gooré et al. (2015). “Quantitative and qualitative assessment of the impact
of climate change on a combined sewer overflow and its receiving water body”. In:
Environmental Science and Pollution Research 22.15, pp. 11905–11921.
Dalpiaz, David (2021). Applied Statistics with R. URL: https://daviddalpiaz.github.io/
appliedstats/.
DHI (2020). MIKE URBAN. Hørsholm, Denmark. URL: https://www.mikepoweredbydhi.
com/.
– (2017). MIKE URBAN Collection System Modelling of storm water drainage networks
and sewer collection systems. User Guide.
Dutang, Christophe (2017). Some explanations about the IWLS algorithm to fit general­
ized linear models. URL: https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01577698/document.
Fortier, Claudine and Alain Mailhot (2015). “Climate change impact on combined sewer
overflows”. In: Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 141.5, p. 04014073.
Gelman, Andrew and Yu­Sung Su (2020). arm: Data Analysis Using Regression and Mul­
tilevel/Hierarchical Models. R package version 1.11­2. URL: https://CRAN.R-project.
org/package=arm.
Gregersen, Ida Bülow (Feb. 25, 2021). Personal communication.
Gregersen, Ida Bülow et al. (2016). Regneark regionalregnraekke version 4.1 (Regional
rain model version 4.1). Ingeniørforeningen i Danmark ­ Spildevandskomiteen. Copen­
hagen, Denmark. URL: https://ida.dk/om-ida/spildevandskomiteen/skrifter-spildevandskomiteen.
Jean, Marie­Ève et al. (2018). “Selection of rainfall information as input data for the design
of combined sewer overflow solutions”. In: Journal of Hydrology 565, pp. 559–569.
Johnson, Richard, John Freund, and Irwin Miller (2011). Miller and Freund’s Probability
and Statistics for Engineers. Eighth Edition. Boston, MA, USA: Pearson Education, Inc.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
77
==PAGE:84==
Kassambara, Alboukadel (2018). Logistic Regression Essentials in R. URL: http://www.
sthda.com/english/articles/36-classification-methods-essentials/151-logistic-regression-
essentials-in-r/.
Keifer, Clint J and Henry Hsien Chu (1957). “Synthetic storm pattern for drainage design”.
In: Journal of the hydraulics division 83.4, pp. 1332–1.
LNH water (2016). KENY. Tikøb, Denmark. URL: https://www.lnhwater.tech/.
Madsen, Henrik (2007). Time Series Analysis. Danvers, MA, USA: Taylor & Francis Group,
LLC.
Mailhot, Alain, Guillaume Talbot, and Bernard Lavallée (2015). “Relationships between
rainfall and Combined Sewer Overflow (CSO) occurrences”. In: Journal of Hydrology
523, pp. 602–609.
Miljøstyrelsen (2020). Forstå overløb ­ hvorfor er der spildevand i havet? (Understanding
overflows ­ why is there wastewater in the harbour?) Miljøministeriet. Copenhagen,
Denmark. URL: https://mst.dk/service/nyheder/nyhedsarkiv/2020/jun/forstaa-overloeb-
hvorfor-er-der-spildevand-vandmiljoeet/.
Pitman, Jim (1993). Probability. New York, NY, USA: Springer­Verlag New York, Inc.
R Core Team (2020). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foun­
dation for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria. URL: https://www.R-project.org/.
Ramboll (2021). RamLTS. Copenhagen, Denmark. URL: https://dk.ramboll.com/.
Roman, Luis Campos et al. (2020). Områdeplaner Rudersdal Øst (Area plan for east­
Rudersdal). Delrapport 1.0, scenarieberegniner for Rudersdal Øst. Regional plan. Krüger
A/S – Veolia Water Technologies.
Sandoval, S et al. (2013). “The evaluation of rainfall influence on combined sewer over­
flows characteristics: the Berlin case study”. In: Water Science and Technology 68.12,
pp. 2683–2690.
Sarup, Kim et al. (2017). DMI Report 18­03. Drift af Spildevandskomitéens Regnmåler­
system. Årsnotat. Danish Meteorological Institute (DMI).
Sørup, Hjalte Jomo Danielsen, Ida Bülow Gregersen, and Karsten Arnbjerg­Nielsen (2015).
DTU Rain Analyst. Technical University of Denmark. Lyngby, Denmark. URL: https:
//www.env.dtu.dk/.
78
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:85==
Sørup, Hjalte Jomo Danielsen et al. (2018). “Evaluating catchment response to artificial
rainfall from four weather generators for present and future climate”. In: Water Science
and Technology 77.11, pp. 2578–2588.
Thorndahl, Søren (2009). “Stochastic long term modelling of a drainage system with esti­
mation of return period uncertainty”. In: Water Science and Technology 59.12, pp. 2331–
2339.
Thorndahl, Søren, Kjeld Schaarup­Jensen, and Jacob Birk Jensen (2008). “Probabilistic
modelling of combined sewer overflow using the First Order Reliability Method”. In:
Water Science and Technology 57.9, pp. 1337–1344.
Thorndahl, Søren and Patrick Willems (2008). “Probabilistic modelling of overflow, sur­
charge and flooding in urban drainage using the first­order reliability method and pa­
rameterization of local rain series”. In: Water research 42.1­2, pp. 455–466.
Vezzaro, Luca et al. (2014). “Water quality­based real time control of integrated urban
drainage systems: A preliminary study from copenhagen, denmark”. In: Procedia Engi­
neering 70, pp. 1707–1716.
Webb, Jeff (2017). Course Notes for IS 6489, Statistics and Predictive Analytics. URL:
https://bookdown.org/jefftemplewebb/IS-6489/logistic-regression.html.
Wickham, Hadley et al. (2019). “Welcome to the tidyverse”. In: Journal of Open Source
Software 4.43, p. 1686. DOI: 10.21105/joss.01686.
Yu, Yang et al. (2018). “Simple method for calculating hydraulic behavior of combined
sewer overflow from rainfall event data”. In: Journal of Water Resources Planning and
Management 144.10, p. 04018061.
Zhao, Wanqing, Thomas H Beach, and Yacine Rezgui (2017). “Automated model con­
struction for combined sewer overflow prediction based on efficient LASSO algorithm”.
In: IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems 49.6, pp. 1254–
1269.
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
79
==PAGE:86==
A
Node locations
80
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:87==
Figure A.1: The nodes of interest including B25_Bas
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
81
==PAGE:88==
Figure A.2: The nodes of interest including those tested for model B
82
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:89==
B
Overview of nodes of interest
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
83
==PAGE:90==
Table B.1: Information summary for the nodes of interest
Node of interest
Node ID
Importance
Type
Weir ID
Weir location
Weir to
Pump ID
Pump location
Pump to
Volume (m3)
B24
overflows to recipient
basin
G011031w1
B24
V0208
NA
NA
NA
460
Node_5
mass balance
basin
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
6075
V0208
mass balance
manhole
G011031w1
B24
V0208
NA
NA
NA
NA
G011030
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
B24
G011020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
B25_Bas
to recipient
basin
D140012w1
B25_Bas
B25X
NA
NA
NA
569
B25
mass balance
manhole
B25w1
B25
B25_Bas
NA
NA
NA
NA
B25_Bas
B25X
mass balance
manhole
D140012w1
B25_Bas
B25X
NA
NA
NA
NA
B27
to recipient
basin
F010B10w1
B27
F010B10
NA
NA
NA
1185
B27_ind
mass balance
manhole
B27_indw1
B27_ind
B27
NA
NA
NA
NA
F010B10
mass balance
basin
F010B10w1
B27
F010B10
NA
NA
NA
NA
B27
F010010
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
B30RUND
to recipient
basin
E041014w1
B30RUND
E041014
NA
NA
NA
123.65
Node_4
mass balance
basin
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
1230
E041013
mass balance
basin
E041013w1
E041013
B30RUND
NA
NA
NA
24.7
B30RUND
E041014
mass balance
manhole
E041014w1
B30RUND
E041014
NA
NA
NA
NA
B36
to recipient
basin
I090012w1
B36
I090012
P114Ap1
B36
P114
102.5
I090012
mass balance
manhole
I090012w1
B36
I090012
NA
NA
NA
NA
P114
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
P114Ap1
B36
P114
NA
B36
I091C10X
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
B38
overflows to recipient
basin
I070023w1
B38
I070023
NA
NA
NA
700
I070023
mass balance
manhole
I070023w1
B38
I070023
NA
NA
NA
NA
I070020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
B38
P112
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
P112p1
P112
I010270
NA
B44
to recipient
basin
J010011w1
B44
J010011
NA
NA
NA
60
B44_indlob
mass balance
manhole
B44_indlobw1
B44_indlob
B44
NA
NA
NA
NA
B44
J010011
mass balance
manhole
J010011w1
B44
J010011
NA
NA
NA
NA
D020011
to recipient
basin
D020000w1
D020011
D020011X
D020011p1
D020011
P124
125
B43
mass balance
manhole
B43w1
B43
D020011
NA
NA
NA
NA
D020011X
mass balance
manhole
D020000w1
D020011
D020011X
NA
NA
NA
NA
84
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:91==
Table B.1 continued from previous page
Node of interest
Node ID
Importance
Type
Weir ID
Weir location
Weir to
Pump ID
Pump location
Pump to
Volume (m3)
P124
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
D020011p1
D020011
P124
NA
D020011
D020011_fik
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
E010013
to recipient
manhole
E010013w1
E010013
Kikhane_2074
E010013p1
E010013
E023010
NA
Node_1
mass balance
basin
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
5596
E023010
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
E010013p1
E010013
E023010
NA
Kikhane_2074
mass balance
manhole
E010013w1
E010013
Kikhane_2074
NA
NA
NA
NA
E010013
E010B10X
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H030010
to recipient
manhole
H030010w1
H030010
H030010X
NA
NA
NA
NA
H030010X
mass balance
manhole
H030010w2
H030011
H030010X
NA
NA
NA
NA
H041050
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H030010
H030020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H030030
to recipient
manhole
H030030w1
H030030
M0608A
NA
NA
NA
NA
M0608A
mass balance
manhole
H030030w1
H030030
M0608A
NA
NA
NA
NA
H030020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H030030
H030040
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H040010
to recipient
manhole
M0765Aw1
H040010
H111120
NA
NA
NA
NA
H111120
mass balance
manhole
M0765Aw1
H040010
H111120
NA
NA
NA
NA
H111100
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H040020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H040010
H111121
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H111042
to recipient
manhole
H111042w2
H111042
H100010
NA
NA
NA
NA
H100010
mass balance
manhole
H111042w1
H111042
H100010
NA
NA
NA
NA
P110
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H111043
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H111042
H111044
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H111B10
to recipient
manhole
H111B10w1
H111B10
Maglemose_1208
P166p1
P166
H111B10
NA
Maglemose_1208
mass balance
manhole
H111B10w1
H111B10
Maglemose_1208
NA
NA
NA
NA
P166
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
P166p1
P166
H111B10
NA
H111030
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H142130
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H114010
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
85
==PAGE:92==
Table B.1 continued from previous page
Node of interest
Node ID
Importance
Type
Weir ID
Weir location
Weir to
Pump ID
Pump location
Pump to
Volume (m3)
H111B10
H118010
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H161B10
to recipient
manhole
H161B10w1
H161B10
H161B10X
NA
NA
NA
NA
H161B10X
mass balance
manhole
H161B10w1
H161B10
H161B10X
NA
NA
NA
NA
H161030
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J031140
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
H161B10
H162010
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
I060010
to recipient
manhole
I060010w1
I060010
I060010X
NA
NA
NA
NA
I060010X
mass balance
manhole
I060010w1
I060010
I060010X
NA
NA
NA
NA
I070180
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
I060011
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
I060010
I060020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
I080B10
to recipient
manhole
I080B10w1
I080B10
I080B10­TT
NA
NA
NA
NA
I080B10­TT
mass balance
manhole
I080B10w1
I080B10
I080B10­TT
NA
NA
NA
NA
I080020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
I080B10
I071010
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
I091C10w1
I091C10
I091C10X
NA
NA
NA
NA
I091C10
to recipient
manhole
I091C10w2
I091C10
I091C10Y
NA
NA
NA
NA
I091C10X
mass balance
manhole
I091C10w1
I091C10
I091C10X
NA
NA
NA
NA
I091C10Y
mass balance
manhole
I091C10w2
I091C10
I091C10Y
NA
NA
NA
NA
I091020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
I091C10
I090020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J020010
to recipient
manhole
J020010w1
J020010
J020010X
NA
NA
NA
NA
J020010X
mass balance
manhole
J020010w1
J020010
J020010X
NA
NA
NA
NA
J030150
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J020010
J020020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J030011
to recipient
manhole
J030011w1
J030011
J030011X
NA
NA
NA
NA
J030011X
mass balance
manhole
J030011w1
J030011
J030011X
NA
NA
NA
NA
J040040
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J030011
J030B10
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J05B010
to recipient
manhole
J050010w1
J05B010
J050010
NA
NA
NA
NA
J050010
mass balance
manhole
J050010w1
J05B010
J050010
NA
NA
NA
NA
86
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:93==
Table B.1 continued from previous page
Node of interest
Node ID
Importance
Type
Weir ID
Weir location
Weir to
Pump ID
Pump location
Pump to
Volume (m3)
J050020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J05B010
J070206
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J05B190
to recipient
manhole
J05B190w1
J05B190
J130050
NA
NA
NA
NA
J130050
mass balance
manhole
J05B190w1
J05B190
J130050
NA
NA
NA
NA
HH_8010000
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J05B190
J050180
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J070010
to recipient
manhole
J070010w1
J070010
J140060
NA
NA
NA
NA
J140060
mass balance
manhole
J070010w1
J070010
J140060
NA
NA
NA
NA
J100036
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J070020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J070010
J071010
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J230015
to recipient
manhole
J230015w1
J230015
J230B15
NA
NA
NA
NA
J230B15
mass balance
manhole
J230015w1
J230015
J230B15
NA
NA
NA
NA
J220180
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J230015
J220170
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J240010
to recipient
manhole
J240010w1
J240010
J240010X
NA
NA
NA
NA
J240010X
mass balance
manhole
J240010w1
J240010
J240010X
NA
NA
NA
NA
J220171
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J240010
J240020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J250010
to recipient
manhole
J250010w1
J250010
J250010X
NA
NA
NA
NA
J250010X
mass balance
manhole
J250010w1
J250010
J250010X
NA
NA
NA
NA
J250C11A
to recipient
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J270090
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J250010
J250020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J250C11A
to recipient
manhole
J250C11aw1
J250C11A
J250C11
NA
NA
NA
NA
J250C11
mass balance
manhole
J250C11aw1
J250C11A
J250C11
NA
NA
NA
NA
J250C11A
J250010
to recipient
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J270010
to recipient
manhole
J270010w1
J270010
J270011
NA
NA
NA
NA
J270011
mass balance
manhole
J270010w1
J270010
J270011
NA
NA
NA
NA
J290090
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J270010
J270020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
87
==PAGE:94==
Table B.1 continued from previous page
Node of interest
Node ID
Importance
Type
Weir ID
Weir location
Weir to
Pump ID
Pump location
Pump to
Volume (m3)
P101
to recipient
manhole
J290011w1
P101
J290011
P101p1
P101
J240130
NA
J240130
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
P101p1
P101
J240130
NA
J290011
mass balance
manhole
J290011w1
P101
J290011
NA
NA
NA
NA
J290007
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
P101
J290020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
P103
to recipient
manhole
J220B10w1
P103
J220B10
P103p1
P103
J183171
NA
J183171
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
P103p1
P103
J183171
NA
J220B10
mass balance
manhole
J220B10w1
P103
J220B10
NA
NA
NA
NA
P103
J220020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
J180B10w1
P104
J180B10
P104
to recipient
manhole
J180B10w2
P104
J180B10
P104p1
P104
J100280
NA
J100280
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
P104p1
P104
J100280
NA
J180B10
mass balance
manhole
J180B10w1
P104
J180B10
NA
NA
NA
NA
P104
J180020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
P105
to recipient
manhole
J100010w1
P105
J100010
P105p1
P105
VEDRENS
NA
J100010
mass balance
manhole
J100010w1
P105
J100010
NA
NA
NA
NA
VEDRENS
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
P105p1
P105
VEDRENS
NA
J080010
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
P105
J100030
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
P115
to recipient
manhole
I110B10w1
P115
I110B10
P115p1
P115
I091092
NA
I091092
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
P115p1
P115
I091092
NA
I110B10
mass balance
manhole
I110B10w1
P115
I110B10
NA
NA
NA
NA
P115
I110020
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
UH14003
to recipient
manhole
UH14003w1
UH14003
B31
NA
NA
NA
NA
B31
mass balance
manhole
UH14003w1
UH14003
B31
NA
NA
NA
NA
UH14003
P150
mass balance
manhole
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
88
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:95==
C
Additional rain data and results
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
89
==PAGE:96==
C.1
Rain Analyst
C.1.1
U­ and f­ values for the calibration periods
Table C.1: U­ and f­values for period C1 (1979­1983)
U­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
­3.12
­3.88
­5.00
­3.78
­3.8
­2.91
­2.95
­1.6
­1.22
­0.69
­1.49
1
­3.62
­3.2
­4.51
­4.50
­4.25
­3.25
­3.95
­2.56
­1.86
­1.04
­2.38
2
­3.42
­2.89
­4.94
­5.04
­4.25
­3.21
­4.00
­3.38
­2.33
­1.56
­2.53
5
­2.82
­2.69
­5.56
­5.29
­3.91
­2.89
­3.34
­4.21
­2.50
­2.03
­2.15
10
­2.39
­2.58
­5.73
­5.21
­3.56
­2.61
­2.76
­4.64
­2.39
­2.17
­1.79
20
­2.04
­2.48
­5.69
­5.01
­3.22
­2.36
­2.27
­4.94
­2.23
­2.19
­1.47
50
­1.69
­2.36
­5.44
­4.67
­2.81
­2.08
­1.75
­5.15
­2.02
­2.15
­1.13
100
­1.48
­2.27
­5.19
­4.41
­2.55
­1.91
­1.44
­5.21
­1.88
­2.09
­0.92
f­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
1.17
1.27
1.47
1.36
1.35
1.24
1.21
1.11
1.09
1.05
1.08
1
1.23
1.22
1.36
1.41
1.43
1.31
1.32
1.18
1.13
1.06
1.14
2
1.29
1.23
1.41
1.51
1.50
1.38
1.4
1.27
1.18
1.10
1.17
5
1.35
1.29
1.58
1.67
1.58
1.48
1.47
1.40
1.24
1.18
1.20
10
1.38
1.37
1.76
1.81
1.64
1.55
1.49
1.51
1.29
1.24
1.21
20
1.42
1.46
1.96
1.97
1.69
1.63
1.50
1.64
1.35
1.32
1.21
50
1.45
1.61
2.26
2.22
1.76
1.75
1.50
1.83
1.43
1.44
1.20
100
1.48
1.74
2.52
2.43
1.81
1.84
1.48
2.00
1.49
1.54
1.19
90
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:97==
Table C.2: U­ and f­values for period C2 (1989­1993)
U­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
­1.65
­1.61
­1.74
­1.96
­1.24
­1.72
­1.76
­1.83
­0.05
­0.47
­0.44
1
­2.62
­1.51
­2.19
­2.25
­1.96
­2.31
­3.20
­3.00
­0.35
0.25
­0.49
2
­3.06
­2.88
­3.52
­2.73
­2.47
­2.47
­3.51
­3.62
­1.24
0.00
­0.46
5
­3.08
­3.86
­4.92
­3.25
­2.80
­2.35
­2.93
­3.89
­2.28
­0.83
­0.37
10
­2.94
­3.99
­5.41
­3.47
­2.88
­2.16
­2.32
­3.83
­2.67
­1.33
­0.31
20
­2.76
­3.87
­5.54
­3.55
­2.86
­1.97
­1.74
­3.64
­2.81
­1.66
­0.26
50
­2.52
­3.57
­5.39
­3.53
­2.76
­1.75
­1.08
­3.26
­2.79
­1.89
­0.21
100
­2.36
­3.33
­5.17
­3.47
­2.66
­1.61
­0.65
­2.94
­2.71
­1.97
­0.19
f­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
1.08
1.10
1.12
1.16
1.09
1.13
1.12
1.12
1.00
1.03
1.02
1
1.16
1.09
1.15
1.17
1.16
1.20
1.25
1.22
1.02
0.99
1.03
2
1.25
1.23
1.26
1.22
1.24
1.27
1.33
1.29
1.09
1.00
1.03
5
1.39
1.49
1.48
1.33
1.36
1.35
1.39
1.36
1.21
1.06
1.03
10
1.52
1.72
1.69
1.42
1.46
1.42
1.38
1.39
1.34
1.14
1.03
20
1.66
1.98
1.91
1.54
1.57
1.48
1.35
1.40
1.48
1.23
1.03
50
1.88
2.36
2.24
1.71
1.74
1.56
1.26
1.40
1.71
1.37
1.03
100
2.06
2.67
2.51
1.86
1.88
1.63
1.17
1.39
1.91
1.49
1.03
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
91
==PAGE:98==
Table C.3: U­ and f­values for period C3 (1999­2003)
U­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
0.94
1.12
1.76
2.11
2.22
2.16
3.37
2.86
2.25
3.88
3.97
1
0.87
0.90
1.61
2.05
2.26
1.79
2.62
2.16
2.04
3.29
2.60
2
0.60
0.87
1.73
1.92
2.21
1.49
1.43
1.26
1.96
1.96
1.22
5
0.24
0.97
2.10
1.69
2.08
1.24
0.12
0.08
1.92
0.15
0.00
10
0.04
1.08
2.43
1.53
1.97
1.12
­0.50
­0.70
1.91
­0.77
­0.51
20
­0.11
1.19
2.75
1.40
1.87
1.05
­0.89
­1.36
1.92
­1.33
­0.81
50
­0.25
1.33
3.15
1.25
1.75
1.00
­1.17
­2.05
1.98
­1.71
­1.02
100
­0.32
1.43
3.45
1.17
1.68
0.97
­1.29
­2.44
2.04
­1.84
­1.11
f­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
0.96
0.94
0.90
0.87
0.87
0.87
0.83
0.85
0.87
0.80
0.83
1
0.96
0.95
0.91
0.88
0.86
0.89
0.86
0.89
0.89
0.84
0.88
2
0.96
0.95
0.91
0.89
0.85
0.89
0.91
0.93
0.89
0.89
0.93
5
0.98
0.92
0.88
0.89
0.84
0.88
0.99
0.99
0.87
0.99
1.00
10
1.00
0.90
0.85
0.88
0.82
0.87
1.06
1.05
0.85
1.08
1.05
20
1.02
0.87
0.81
0.88
0.81
0.85
1.15
1.12
0.82
1.17
1.11
50
1.05
0.82
0.76
0.87
0.79
0.83
1.29
1.22
0.77
1.32
1.18
100
1.07
0.79
0.71
0.86
0.77
0.81
1.40
1.31
0.74
1.44
1.24
92
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:99==
Table C.4: U­ and f­values for period C4 (2009­2013)
U­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
0.72
1.54
0.72
0.70
­0.55
­0.20
0.26
0.79
1.15
0.58
­0.88
1
0.48
1.28
0.53
­0.13
­0.84
­0.31
0.58
2.90
1.66
1.03
0.36
2
­0.12
0.39
0.08
­1.36
­0.76
0.21
1.58
4.81
2.63
1.96
1.87
5
­0.78
­0.67
­0.58
­2.73
­0.39
1.27
3.17
7.00
4.01
3.27
3.52
10
­1.09
­1.17
­0.97
­3.36
­0.04
2.14
4.34
8.44
4.88
4.08
4.49
20
­1.28
­1.48
­1.27
­3.70
0.29
3.01
5.52
9.73
5.63
4.78
5.32
50
­1.42
­1.70
­1.53
­3.85
0.69
4.20
7.18
11.26
6.59
5.63
6.36
100
­1.46
­1.77
­1.65
­3.83
0.97
5.15
8.58
12.31
7.36
6.28
7.16
f­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
0.97
0.92
0.96
0.95
1.04
1.01
0.98
0.95
0.93
0.96
1.05
1
0.98
0.93
0.97
1.01
1.06
1.02
0.97
0.85
0.91
0.94
0.98
2
1.01
0.98
1.00
1.10
1.06
0.98
0.90
0.77
0.86
0.89
0.90
5
1.08
1.06
1.04
1.26
1.04
0.88
0.77
0.68
0.76
0.81
0.78
10
1.15
1.14
1.08
1.41
1.00
0.77
0.66
0.62
0.68
0.73
0.70
20
1.23
1.23
1.12
1.57
0.96
0.67
0.55
0.57
0.60
0.65
0.61
50
1.36
1.38
1.19
1.83
0.90
0.54
0.42
0.50
0.51
0.56
0.51
100
1.47
1.50
1.24
2.05
0.85
0.45
0.34
0.46
0.44
0.49
0.44
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
93
==PAGE:100==
C.1.2
U­ and f­ values for the validation periods
Table C.5: U­ and f­values for period V1 (1984­1988)
U­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
­3.60
­3.31
­1.79
­2.36
­2.84
­2.43
­1.56
­0.87
­1.36
­2.88
­3.00
1
­4.50
­4.64
­3.96
­3.68
­3.91
­2.51
­1.75
0.85
­1.99
­3.46
­3.22
2
­4.55
­5.07
­6.07
­4.86
­4.31
­2.47
­1.22
1.16
­1.77
­3.08
­2.47
5
­4.05
­4.76
­7.35
­5.68
­4.22
­2.32
­0.17
0.49
­0.55
­1.60
­1.08
10
­3.62
­4.34
­7.44
­5.82
­3.94
­2.17
0.58
­0.31
0.55
­0.39
­0.13
20
­3.24
­3.93
­7.17
­5.70
­3.61
­2.04
1.25
­1.13
1.61
0.69
0.68
50
­2.83
­3.46
­6.59
­5.35
­3.18
­1.87
2.03
­2.09
2.92
1.94
1.61
100
­2.58
­3.16
­6.13
­5.04
­2.88
­1.77
2.58
­2.67
3.89
2.80
2.25
f­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
1.20
1.22
1.13
1.20
1.24
1.19
1.10
1.06
1.10
1.22
1.18
1
1.30
1.35
1.30
1.31
1.38
1.22
1.12
0.95
1.14
1.25
1.20
2
1.42
1.48
1.56
1.48
1.51
1.27
1.10
0.93
1.13
1.23
1.17
5
1.59
1.67
1.95
1.75
1.66
1.35
1.02
0.97
1.04
1.13
1.09
10
1.73
1.83
2.27
2.00
1.75
1.42
0.93
1.02
0.95
1.04
1.01
20
1.88
2.01
2.61
2.28
1.84
1.50
0.84
1.10
0.84
0.93
0.93
50
2.10
2.26
3.09
2.70
1.95
1.62
0.72
1.23
0.70
0.78
0.81
100
2.29
2.46
3.47
3.06
2.03
1.73
0.63
1.34
0.59
0.68
0.72
94
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:101==
Table C.6: U­ and f­values for period V2 (1994­1998)
U­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
­0.15
0.32
­0.99
0.01
­0.87
­0.54
1.14
1.47
1.01
0.20
­0.31
1
­0.63
0.38
­1.53
­0.24
­0.99
0.23
0.62
0.89
0.34
­1.14
­0.86
2
­0.67
0.49
­1.21
­0.25
­0.57
0.61
0.42
0.70
0.05
­1.79
­0.27
5
­0.45
0.62
0.05
­0.05
0.35
0.74
0.43
0.86
0.13
­1.67
1.22
10
­0.25
0.69
1.25
0.16
1.13
0.72
0.52
1.19
0.34
­1.24
2.46
20
­0.07
0.75
2.51
0.37
1.90
0.65
0.63
1.63
0.59
­0.77
3.73
50
0.13
0.81
4.19
0.62
2.88
0.56
0.78
2.29
0.90
­0.20
5.49
100
0.26
0.85
5.48
0.78
3.61
0.49
0.88
2.83
1.11
0.18
6.97
f­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
1.01
0.98
1.07
1.00
1.06
1.04
0.94
0.92
0.94
0.99
1.02
1
1.03
0.98
1.10
1.02
1.08
0.98
0.96
0.95
0.98
1.07
1.05
2
1.05
0.97
1.08
1.02
1.05
0.95
0.97
0.96
1.00
1.12
1.02
5
1.04
0.95
1.00
1.00
0.97
0.92
0.96
0.94
0.99
1.14
0.91
10
1.03
0.93
0.91
0.99
0.89
0.91
0.94
0.92
0.97
1.13
0.81
20
1.01
0.91
0.82
0.96
0.81
0.90
0.91
0.89
0.94
1.09
0.69
50
0.98
0.88
0.70
0.93
0.69
0.90
0.87
0.83
0.88
1.03
0.55
100
0.95
0.86
0.61
0.91
0.61
0.90
0.84
0.79
0.84
0.97
0.45
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
95
==PAGE:102==
Table C.7: U­ and f­values for period V3 (2004­2008)
U­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
2.09
0.85
3.35
3.78
3.18
3.09
4.84
4.49
5.26
6.52
6.79
1
0.92
­0.12
2.55
3.47
2.62
2.37
3.84
4.18
5.03
6.14
6.39
2
­0.01
­0.72
1.18
2.68
1.93
1.66
2.05
3.75
4.21
4.58
5.02
5
­0.70
­0.99
­0.57
1.47
1.09
0.96
0.09
3.18
2.71
2.08
3.16
10
­0.96
­1.01
­1.53
0.68
0.59
0.60
­0.79
2.80
1.73
0.68
2.12
20
­1.09
­0.96
­2.17
0.06
0.21
0.35
­1.31
2.46
1.02
­0.25
1.38
50
­1.17
­0.88
­2.67
­0.53
­0.15
0.13
­1.64
2.07
0.39
­0.97
0.71
100
­1.19
­0.82
­2.87
­0.84
­0.35
0.02
­1.75
1.82
0.08
­1.27
0.36
f­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
0.91
0.96
0.82
0.79
0.82
0.83
0.78
0.79
0.74
0.71
0.75
1
0.95
1.01
0.87
0.82
0.84
0.85
0.81
0.80
0.76
0.74
0.75
2
1.00
1.05
0.93
0.85
0.87
0.88
0.87
0.81
0.79
0.78
0.77
5
1.07
1.09
1.04
0.90
0.91
0.90
0.99
0.82
0.83
0.87
0.80
10
1.13
1.12
1.13
0.94
0.94
0.92
1.10
0.83
0.86
0.94
0.83
20
1.19
1.14
1.23
0.99
0.97
0.95
1.24
0.84
0.89
1.03
0.86
50
1.28
1.17
1.38
1.07
1.02
0.97
1.45
0.85
0.94
1.16
0.90
100
1.35
1.18
1.50
1.13
1.07
1.00
1.64
0.85
0.99
1.27
0.94
96
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:103==
Table C.8: U­ and f­values for period V4 (2014­2019)
U­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
3.25
2.02
2.06
1.76
2.08
1.22
1.08
­0.19
­0.21
0.03
­0.71
1
2.26
1.09
0.40
0.66
1.80
1.07
0.31
­0.84
­0.76
­0.77
­1.66
2
0.85
0.00
­1.57
­0.67
0.99
0.60
­0.39
­1.00
­0.95
­1.28
­1.91
5
­0.51
­1.00
­3.50
­2.08
­0.13
­0.03
­0.94
­0.69
­0.73
­1.46
­1.67
10
­1.10
­1.42
­4.28
­2.76
­0.80
­0.39
­1.14
­0.21
­0.45
­1.37
­1.38
20
­1.44
­1.65
­4.64
­3.15
­1.29
­0.64
­1.23
0.39
­0.17
­1.24
­1.12
50
­1.65
­1.78
­4.73
­3.37
­1.70
­0.86
­1.27
1.29
0.15
­1.06
­0.82
100
­1.72
­1.81
­4.63
­3.41
­1.89
­0.96
­1.26
2.03
0.34
­0.95
­0.63
f­values
Return
period
T
[yrs]
Event duration [min]
1
2
5
10
30
60
180
360
720
1440
2880
0.5
0.87
0.90
0.88
0.89
0.88
0.92
0.94
1.01
1.01
1.00
1.04
1
0.89
0.94
0.98
0.96
0.89
0.93
0.98
1.05
1.05
1.05
1.09
2
0.95
1.00
1.10
1.05
0.93
0.95
1.03
1.07
1.06
1.08
1.13
5
1.05
1.09
1.30
1.19
1.01
1.00
1.10
1.05
1.06
1.12
1.15
10
1.15
1.17
1.48
1.31
1.10
1.06
1.16
1.02
1.04
1.14
1.16
20
1.26
1.27
1.67
1.45
1.20
1.12
1.22
0.97
1.02
1.16
1.15
50
1.44
1.40
1.94
1.66
1.35
1.21
1.31
0.90
0.98
1.18
1.14
100
1.60
1.52
2.17
1.83
1.50
1.30
1.39
0.84
0.94
1.19
1.12
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
97
==PAGE:104==
C.2
Wet and dry seasonal classification
Table C.9: Summary table of seasonal information for the historical data set
For summer
For other seasons
For the whole year
Total
rain
[mm]
Wet
or
dry
No.
of
events
More
or
less
events
Total
rain
[mm]
Wet
or
dry
No.
of
events
More
or
less
events
Total
rain
[mm]
Wet
or
dry
No.
of
events
More
or
less
events
1979
128.4
dry
11
less
259.6
dry
37
less
388
dry
48
less
1980
215.6
wet
29
more
263.4
dry
37
less
479
dry
66
more
1981
174.8
wet
18
less
376.4
wet
55
more
551.2
wet
73
more
1982
174.8
wet
25
more
212.8
dry
35
less
387.6
dry
60
less
1983
10.4
dry
2
less
424.4
wet
63
more
434.8
dry
65
more
1984
77.2
dry
13
less
266.6
dry
45
less
343.8
dry
58
less
1985
159.6
dry
19
less
309.8
dry
48
more
469.4
dry
67
more
1986
140.4
dry
16
less
252.8
dry
38
less
393.2
dry
54
less
1987
184.4
wet
20
more
253.6
dry
36
less
438
dry
56
less
1988
101.8
dry
17
less
327.4
dry
58
more
429.2
dry
75
more
1989
161.4
dry
18
less
180.4
dry
34
less
341.8
dry
52
less
1990
91.6
dry
13
less
299.2
dry
42
less
390.8
dry
55
less
1991
181.2
wet
23
more
319
dry
36
less
500.2
wet
59
less
1992
124.4
dry
15
less
248.4
dry
39
less
372.8
dry
54
less
1993
168.8
wet
26
more
286.4
dry
34
less
455.2
dry
60
less
1994
126
dry
18
less
537.4
wet
61
more
663.4
wet
79
more
1995
109.8
dry
12
less
497.2
wet
65
more
607
wet
77
more
1996
97.2
dry
10
less
159.4
dry
22
less
256.6
dry
32
less
1997
135.4
dry
12
less
297.4
dry
38
less
432.8
dry
50
less
1998
194
wet
31
more
502
wet
58
more
696
wet
89
more
1999
230.8
wet
26
more
406
wet
56
more
636.8
wet
82
more
2000
160.2
dry
19
less
442
wet
54
more
602.2
wet
73
more
2001
101
dry
10
less
330.2
wet
48
more
431.2
dry
58
less
2002
225.6
wet
22
more
514.2
wet
55
more
739.8
wet
77
more
2003
181.4
wet
25
more
333.2
wet
35
less
514.6
wet
60
less
2004
253.6
wet
30
more
372.4
wet
47
more
626
wet
77
more
2005
156.2
dry
18
less
309.6
dry
44
less
465.8
dry
62
less
2006
273.4
wet
27
more
360.6
wet
53
more
634
wet
80
more
2007
435
wet
33
more
366
wet
52
more
801
wet
85
more
2008
186
wet
14
less
359.6
wet
54
more
545.6
wet
68
more
2009
180.8
wet
19
less
293.8
dry
42
less
474.6
dry
61
less
2010
290.8
wet
19
less
302.4
dry
43
less
593.2
wet
62
less
2011
265.8
wet
23
more
251.4
dry
35
less
517.2
wet
58
less
2012
149.6
dry
19
less
293.6
dry
43
less
443.2
dry
62
less
2013
80.4
dry
12
less
282.8
dry
42
less
363.2
dry
54
less
2014
179.6
wet
18
less
367.2
wet
53
more
546.8
wet
71
more
2015
148.2
dry
19
less
438.4
wet
59
more
586.6
wet
78
more
2016
163.6
dry
22
more
207
dry
34
less
370.6
dry
56
less
2017
208.6
wet
25
more
401.8
wet
51
more
610.4
wet
76
more
2018
110.8
dry
11
less
183.6
dry
32
less
294.4
dry
43
less
2019
180.8
wet
26
more
379.4
wet
52
more
560.2
wet
78
more
98
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:105==
C.3
Predictive model rain error data
Table C.10: Summary of model variable values for the rain dates that caused an error in
both model 1 and 2 for the calibration period
Date
10­min int.
3­hr int.
Depth
Season
Wet or Dry
Rain events
CSO
26/03/1979 12.45
2.666
0.943
11.2
Spring
dry
14
Yes
09/12/1979 03.38
2.500
1.018
50.3
Winter
dry
9
Yes
30/01/1980 12.06
2.000
1.018
12.0
Winter
dry
10
Yes
24/04/1980 09.27
2.666
1.259
19.8
Spring
dry
7
Yes
09/06/1981 00.25
7.778
0.719
8.6
Summer
wet
14
Yes
20/08/1981 05.49
4.687
1.459
28.9
Summer
wet
14
No
13/08/1982 11.06
5.454
0.981
10.6
Summer
wet
23
No
15/08/1982 21.37
4.444
0.828
15.4
Summer
wet
23
Yes
14/11/1983 16.05
2.083
1.290
18.4
Fall
wet
22
Yes
27/08/1989 15.08
2.166
1.179
57.3
Summer
dry
16
Yes
14/05/1990 09.10
4.167
1.012
15.4
Spring
dry
11
Yes
25/09/1991 16.44
3.000
1.039
14.4
Fall
dry
14
Yes
26/09/1991 07.34
5.665
1.435
36.6
Fall
dry
14
No
25/06/1993 12.27
9.498
0.629
6.8
Summer
wet
25
Yes
24/06/1999 15.31
7.999
0.660
7.6
Summer
wet
23
Yes
15/08/1999 11.16
3.666
1.394
25.8
Summer
wet
23
No
26/09/1999 16.08
4.500
0.782
9.2
Fall
wet
15
Yes
09/07/2000 08.24
5.499
0.689
11.6
Summer
dry
13
Yes
10/07/2000 10.55
2.333
1.676
19.4
Summer
dry
13
No
02/08/2000 04.19
2.666
1.194
25.6
Summer
dry
13
Yes
15/12/2000 01.06
3.666
1.296
18.6
Winter
wet
18
No
16/09/2001 15.29
2.666
0.699
19.6
Fall
wet
19
Yes
18/09/2001 06.24
5.666
1.805
20.4
Fall
wet
19
No
26/05/2002 16.54
2.666
1.111
20.0
Spring
wet
15
Yes
27/06/2002 06.59
3.066
1.092
11.8
Summer
wet
18
Yes
02/08/2002 05.26
4.749
0.296
3.2
Summer
wet
18
Yes
22/05/2003 23.46
1.888
0.833
15.6
Spring
wet
12
Yes
24/05/2003 18.08
15.665
2.722
29.4
Spring
wet
12
No
15/06/2003 17.48
7.332
0.712
9.0
Summer
wet
21
Yes
11/07/2003 17.46
4.167
0.889
9.6
Summer
wet
21
Yes
13/12/2003 05.09
1.666
0.798
15.0
Winter
wet
12
Yes
15/05/2010 06.50
3.000
1.120
21.6
Spring
dry
13
Yes
29/07/2010 12.26
4.000
0.978
17.2
Summer
wet
16
Yes
17/08/2010 06.55
9.399
2.692
31.0
Summer
wet
16
No
22/05/2011 14.51
9.331
0.870
10.6
Spring
dry
13
No
02/07/2011 00.32
2.666
1.230
16.0
Summer
wet
22
Yes
02/07/2011 18.10
6.666
1.000
10.8
Summer
wet
22
No
13/07/2011 06.52
2.999
0.691
9.0
Summer
wet
22
Yes
14/07/2011 03.06
5.333
1.861
36.6
Summer
wet
22
No
24/06/2012 07.25
7.999
1.129
27.6
Summer
dry
18
No
29/06/2012 10.05
1.778
0.444
4.8
Summer
dry
18
Yes
29/06/2012 18.53
12.350
1.277
13.8
Summer
dry
18
No
14/09/2012 06.57
8.109
0.695
9.0
Fall
dry
22
Yes
25/09/2012 17.40
3.166
1.111
12.0
Fall
dry
22
Yes
08/08/2013 07.58
8.665
0.647
9.6
Summer
dry
14
Yes
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
99
==PAGE:106==
Table C.11: Summary of model variable values for the rain dates that caused an error in
both model 1 and 2 for the validation period
Date
10­min int.
3­hr int.
Depth
Season
Wet or Dry
Rain events
CSO
11/07/1984 22.53
3.333
0.827
9.8
Summer
dry
12
Yes
22/11/1984 16.05
2.334
1.322
20.0
Fall
dry
24
Yes
29/07/1985 01.41
2.111
0.612
7.0
Summer
dry
20
Yes
29/07/1985 16.36
8.996
2.056
23.0
Summer
dry
20
No
31/07/1986 17.54
7.999
0.685
7.4
Summer
dry
15
Yes
21/06/1987 19.12
5.000
0.648
7.0
Summer
wet
22
Yes
04/08/1987 20.22
4.500
1.000
10.8
Summer
wet
22
Yes
12/09/1987 09.02
2.333
1.333
23.4
Fall
dry
17
Yes
06/10/1988 08.27
4.666
0.518
5.6
Fall
dry
22
Yes
13/04/1994 11.41
1.083
0.665
23.8
Spring
wet
15
Yes
14/04/1994 16.29
4.000
1.234
23.4
Spring
wet
15
No
16/09/1994 03.03
2.167
1.104
34.2
Fall
wet
14
Yes
01/02/1995 00.04
2.111
1.370
24.6
Winter
wet
19
Yes
23/08/1995 22.35
2.666
0.981
10.6
Summer
dry
12
Yes
25/08/1995 15.52
4.832
0.704
7.6
Summer
dry
12
Yes
03/09/1995 10.02
4.000
0.601
17.0
Fall
wet
19
Yes
31/10/1995 08.41
2.083
1.280
21.6
Fall
wet
19
Yes
18/05/1996 04.53
3.333
1.037
11.2
Spring
dry
11
Yes
08/10/1997 21.22
2.333
0.964
16.6
Fall
dry
15
Yes
10/10/1997 09.02
4.166
1.229
18.6
Fall
dry
15
No
13/11/1997 00.02
1.666
1.151
19.2
Fall
dry
15
Yes
31/07/1998 08.25
8.666
0.619
11.2
Summer
wet
25
Yes
13/10/1998 23.50
2.000
0.793
14.0
Fall
wet
23
Yes
15/10/1998 08.59
2.583
0.433
6.0
Fall
wet
23
Yes
27/10/1998 12.16
2.333
0.731
12.0
Fall
wet
23
Yes
20/03/2004 16.07
2.666
1.209
31.9
Spring
wet
10
Yes
19/06/2004 03.40
2.166
1.074
22.0
Summer
wet
26
Yes
24/12/2004 02.45
2.167
1.322
32.0
Winter
wet
18
Yes
21/05/2005 03.29
4.222
0.979
15.4
Spring
dry
11
Yes
29/07/2005 13.09
5.327
0.839
9.4
Summer
dry
15
Yes
05/08/2005 13.13
5.499
0.792
12.6
Summer
dry
15
Yes
31/07/2006 02.28
7.166
0.842
9.4
Summer
wet
17
No
11/08/2006 21.42
4.778
0.783
16.4
Summer
wet
17
Yes
13/08/2006 07.33
3.833
2.071
38.2
Summer
wet
17
No
22/08/2006 09.34
10.331
0.935
47.7
Summer
wet
17
No
02/10/2006 07.02
7.663
1.631
24.6
Fall
wet
24
No
17/06/2007 10.51
11.997
1.755
26.2
Summer
wet
31
No
05/07/2007 01.01
3.666
1.703
63.2
Summer
wet
31
No
24/07/2007 06.57
1.249
0.323
6.0
Summer
wet
31
Yes
24/07/2007 20.50
10.665
1.506
20.0
Summer
wet
31
No
12/05/2014 08.02
8.000
0.713
16.6
Spring
wet
13
Yes
14/05/2014 06.28
7.332
0.708
8.2
Spring
wet
13
Yes
18/05/2014 11.41
2.000
1.280
16.0
Spring
wet
13
Yes
17/08/2014 10.29
0.999
0.574
11.8
Summer
wet
16
Yes
12/04/2015 19.58
2.166
1.173
15.6
Spring
wet
16
Yes
100
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:107==
Table C.11: Summary of model variable values for the rain dates that caused an error in
both model 1 and 2 for the validation period (cont’d)
Date
10­min int.
3­hr int.
Depth
Season
Wet or Dry
Rain events
CSO
21/11/2015 15.19
2.000
1.264
28.0
Fall
wet
23
Yes
23/07/2017 13.03
11.276
2.212
33.6
Summer
wet
26
No
30/07/2017 11.32
17.994
1.928
22.4
Summer
wet
26
No
03/08/2017 06.41
8.999
1.026
20.8
Summer
wet
26
No
06/09/2017 19.03
7.334
1.436
30.4
Fall
wet
20
No
09/09/2017 10.48
5.500
1.736
25.4
Fall
wet
20
No
13/09/2017 09.43
9.332
1.909
43.8
Fall
wet
20
No
19/10/2019 17.42
2.999
1.058
13.0
Fall
wet
25
Yes
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
101
==PAGE:108==
D
Intensity­duration­frequency (IDF)
curves
102
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:109==
Figure D.1: IDF curve for period C1
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
103
==PAGE:110==
Figure D.2: IDF curve for period C2
104
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:111==
Figure D.3: IDF curve for period C3
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
105
==PAGE:112==
Figure D.4: IDF curve for period C4
106
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:113==
E
Additional long­term analysis plots for
the calibration data set
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
107
==PAGE:114==
(a) C1
(b) C2
(c) C3
(d) C4
(e) All four calibration periods
Figure E.1: Comparison of the individual calibration period depth histograms and the
histogram using all four periods
108
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:115==
(a) Rain depth
(b) Rain duration
(c) 5­minute rain intensity
(d) 10­minute rain intensity
(e) 3­hour rain intensity
(f) 6­hour rain intensity
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
109
==PAGE:116==
(g) Rain depth before start of rain event
(h) Rain depth before start of CSO event
(i) Number of rain events
(j) Cumulative rain depth vs. event rain depth
Figure E.2: Relative frequency variable histograms for rain events that result in CSO
events (A) and those that do not (B)
110
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:117==
(a) Rain depth
(b) Rain duration
(c) 5­minute rain intensity
(d) 10­minute rain intensity
(e) 3­hour rain intensity
(f) 6­hour rain intensity
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
111
==PAGE:118==
(g) Rain depth before start of rain event
(h) Rain depth before start of CSO event
(i) Number of rain events
(j) Cumulative rain depth vs. event rain depth
Figure E.3: Relative frequency variable histograms for rain events that result in CSO
events (A) and those that do not (B) filtered for depth >= 8.0 mm
112
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:119==
(a) Rain depth
(b) Rain duration
(c) 5­minute rain intensity
(d) 10­minute rain intensity
(e) 3­hour rain intensity
(f) 6­hour rain intensity
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
113
==PAGE:120==
(g) Rain depth before start of rain event
(h) Rain depth before start of CSO event
(i) Number of rain events
(j) Cumulative rain depth vs. event rain depth
Figure E.4: Relative frequency variable histograms for rain events that result in CSO
events (A) and those that do not (B) filtered for duration >= 180 minutes
114
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:121==
(a) Rain depth
(b) Rain duration
(c) 5­minute rain intensity
(d) 10­minute rain intensity
(e) 3­hour rain intensity
(f) 6­hour rain intensity
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
115
==PAGE:122==
(g) Rain depth before start of rain event
(h) Rain depth before start of CSO event
(i) Number of rain events
(j) Cumulative rain depth vs. event rain depth
Figure E.5: Relative frequency variable histograms for rain events that result in CSO
events (A) and those that do not (B) filtered for 5­minute intensity >= 2.5 µm/s
116
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:123==
(a) Rain depth
(b) Rain duration
(c) 5­minute rain intensity
(d) 10­minute rain intensity
(e) 3­hour rain intensity
(f) 6­hour rain intensity
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
117
==PAGE:124==
(g) Rain depth before start of rain event
(h) Rain depth before start of CSO event
(i) Number of rain events
(j) Cumulative rain depth vs.
event rain
depth
Figure E.6: Relative frequency variable histograms for rain events that result in CSO
events (A) and those that do not (B) filtered for 10­minute intensity >= 1.8 µm/s
118
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:125==
(a) Rain depth
(b) Rain duration
(c) 5­minute rain intensity
(d) 10­minute rain intensity
(e) 3­hour rain intensity
(f) 6­hour rain intensity
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
119
==PAGE:126==
(g) Rain depth before start of rain event
(h) Rain depth before start of CSO event
(i) Number of rain events
(j) Cumulative rain depth vs.
event rain
depth
Figure E.7: Relative frequency variable histograms for rain events that result in CSO
events (A) and those that do not (B) filtered for 3­hour intensity >= 0.45 µm/s
120
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:127==
(a) Rain depth
(b) Rain duration
(c) 5­minute rain intensity
(d) 10­minute rain intensity
(e) 3­hour rain intensity
(f) 6­hour rain intensity
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
121
==PAGE:128==
(g) Rain depth before start of rain event
(h) Rain depth before start of CSO event
(i) Number of rain events
(j) Cumulative rain depth vs.
event rain
depth
Figure E.8: Relative frequency variable histograms for rain events that result in CSO
events (A) and those that do not (B) filtered for 6­hour intensity >= 0.30 µm/s
122
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:129==
(a) Rain depth
(b) Rain duration
(c) 5­minute rain intensity
(d) 10­minute rain intensity
(e) 3­hour rain intensity
(f) 6­hour rain intensity
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
123
==PAGE:130==
(g) Rain depth before start of rain event
(h) Rain depth before start of CSO event
(i) Number of rain events
(j) Cumulative rain depth vs.
event rain
depth
Figure E.9: Relative frequency variable histograms for rain events that result in CSO
events (A) and those that do not (B) filtered for depth >= 8.0 mm and 10­minute intensity
>= 1.8 µm/s
124
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:131==
(a) Rain depth
(b) Rain duration
(c) 5­minute rain intensity
(d) 10­minute rain intensity
(e) 3­hour rain intensity
(f) 6­hour rain intensity
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
125
==PAGE:132==
(g) Rain depth before start of rain event
(h) Rain depth before start of CSO event
(i) Number of rain events
(j) Cumulative rain depth vs. event rain depth
Figure E.10: Relative frequency variable histograms for rain events that result in CSO
events (A) and those that do not (B) filtered for depth >= 8.0 mm and 3­hour intensity >=
0.45 µm/s
126
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:133==
(a) Rain depth
(b) Rain duration
(c) 5­minute rain intensity
(d) 10­minute rain intensity
(e) 3­hour rain intensity
(f) 6­hour rain intensity
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
127
==PAGE:134==
(g) Rain depth before start of rain event
(h) Rain depth before start of CSO event
(i) Number of rain events
(j) Cumulative rain depth vs. event rain depth
Figure E.11: Relative frequency variable histograms for rain events that result in CSO
events (A) and those that do not (B) filtered for depth >= 8.0 mm, 10­minute intensity >=
1.8 µm/s, and 3­hour intensity >= 0.45 µm/s
128
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
==PAGE:135==
Identification of defining rain series characteristics for combined sewer overflow modelling
129
==PAGE:136==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.env.dtu.dk
