==PAGE:1==
Deep neural networks applied for stock selec­
tion
ARIMA model and LSTM networks
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
ARIMA model and LSTM networks
Master Thesis
April, 2021
By
Christian Petersen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Richard Pe­
tersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months plus an extended version, however with
changes to the objective of the project. The project has been completed from home, as
Covid­19 has affected the ability to work from DTU during this period of time. It is com­
pleted under the Department of Mathematical modelling and computation, Department of
Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the
degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of mathematics and
programming.
Christian Petersen ­ s124267
Signature
Date
ii
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In the current economic system of the world, stocks and trading of such has become a
way for everybody to make an little extra money. It was for a long time something only
considered for big companies and banks especially as a way to make money to pay back
the interest rates of their customers. With todays current interest rates having your money
stored it the bank will not yield you anything like it used to do.
This thesis will test if it is possible to gain an edge over the stock market by using a neural
network, LSTM or an ARIMA model. Both models is then tested and compared also to
the market average return.
This is tested using a portfolio of 10 stocks, chosen as a portfolio of some of the largest
danish companies of the last 10 years. The ARIMA model will then work using the closing
prices as input, where as the LSTM network will also be fed the company fundamentals to
see whether they can help in achieving a better prediction of the stocks price considering
the actual health of the companies.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
iii
==PAGE:6==
0.1
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Tommy Alstrøm Sonne for helping me and understanding my situation.
For providing insight and sparring throughout the project. I would also like to thank Kurt
Kara for helping with data despite it not being used to its full potential, as well as sparring
with regards to idea developments and general knowledge and insight of the stock market.
I
iv
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
0.1
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Stocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related Works
5
2.1
Stochastic processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Theory
17
3.1
ARMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
ARIMA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Recurrent neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.4
Long­Short Term Memory network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.5
Evaluation metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4
Data
29
4.1
Stock data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Training­ and Test data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.3
Data for ARIMA model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
5
Methods
37
5.1
ARIMA model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.2
LSTM Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6
Results
45
6.1
ARIMA model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.2
LSTM network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.3
Comparison of models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Conclusion
51
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Bibliography
53
A Appendix
55
A.1 Appendix A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
A.2 Appendix B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
A.3 Appendix C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.4 Appendix D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
A.5 Appendix E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In this chapter a brief introduction to stocks and their importance in the modern society,
as well as an introduction to the project and over all focus of the thesis.
1.1
Stocks
A stock is in its basic form a part of a company. If a company has released 100 stocks,
and a person owns 10 stocks in that company, the person then owns 10% of that com­
pany. Companies are often divided into many thousand of stocks, which all together then
make out the price or value of the company. If one share sells for 10$ and 100 shares is
available the company is prices at $10 · 100 = $1000.
It is believe that the stocks started in Belgium, as it was a center of international trade.
Merchants then started to buy and sell goods, with the ulterior motive of selling them with
a profit after some time. Bond trading is also believed to have started at this time, where
no actual goods are traded, but a piece of paper, saying you own to right to a give amount
of goods.(unknown 2021, source)
The idea of a stock, or part ownership as it basically is, is believed to have started with the
earliest civilizations where exploration expeditions were funded by several parties, which
would then share the profit.
In the start of the 17Th. century, the first modern stock trading is done. It is The Dutch
India Company, which is first publicly traded on the exchange, and also the only company
at first.
late 18Th. century the Philadelphia Stock Exchange is formed in the United States, mak­
ing way for their expansion towards to west as well as creating the financial sector.
Following this around the 20Th, century stock index’ starts to be developed. Since then
three major crisis of the stock market has followed, first in 1929 named The Great Depres­
sion, after the markets prices were extremely inflated due to speculators placing leveraged
bets on the market movements. This created hype, and inflated prices, which at some
point had to come down. On figure (1.1) the effect on the crash in 1929 can be seen on
the Dow Jones Industrial index.
Figure 1.1: Dow Jones Industrial index in the weeks around the crash of 1929.Benjamin
2018
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
1
==PAGE:10==
In 1987, Black Monday happened, which was created by a largest amount of sales or­
ders was placed during the weekend while the market was closed. At opening the large
amount of sales orders ended up delaying orders and stocks to open for trading, causing
panic, and more people wanting to sell. It is the largest one­day crash of the stock market.
Since then procedures to avoid that kind of bottle neck syndrome has been put into action.
latest in 2008 the stock market also crashed. It is known as the Global Financial Crisis,
as all markets around the globe was affected. It started in the US where poor regulations
had paved the way for excessive risks from banks while investing along with the Ameri­
can housing bubble bursting, meant that mortgage based securities plummeted in value,
meant that people were unable to pay their loans which then resulted in a banking crisis.
Despite the government paying out huge bail­outs to the banks, as the whole economic
system is supported by them, it still lead to large increases in both unemployment and
suicide rates.
Following the crisis in the US, the rest of the world was affected, hence the name the
Global Financial Crisis.
Since value was monetized, and society gained more structure as to the value of items,
obtaining more money and becoming wealthy was something to strive for. Money has
always been a mean to obtain what is considered ”the good life”, eating better food, and
having better and more material goods translating into ”happiness” which is what we all
want to achieve to some degree.
With the introduction of the stock market, a way of trading valuable paper became not
only a way of becoming a part owner of a company, but also a way of making investments
with the hopes of increasing your value within short or long periods of time. With mathe­
matics people have tried beating the ”market” which is the the value of which the market
in average in­ or decrease. Doing that would yield a return higher than market average
and the inflation, which meant that while not spending your money, they would not lose
value, but increase.
This has been especially interesting the last couple of years as the interest rate you get
from lending your money to the bank has become negative. This means that despite you
putting your money in the bank, they would no longer yield a small amount of money each
year depending on the interest rate of the specific bank. With negative interest rates you
now have to pay the bank to have them protect/ loan your money, as the alternative is
either cash money or investing in something else, like real estate or stocks.
The objective of investing with the largest profit is shared by many. Banks, Pension funds,
and other companies which lend money, in exchange of promises of increased value back.
Being able to produce the highest returns for your customers is the key when trying to grow
these types on companies, as the money people trust them with, is what they use to gen­
erate profit. More customers means more money, more money means better chances to
grow the profits. Without companies like this you would not be able to put your money in
a bank account to have them sit and generate more money through interest rates just like
a pension fund.
2
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:11==
1.2
Project overview
In this thesis the objective is to make and compare two different methods used for stock
selection. The Stochastic ARIMA model is to be compared with the new and more modern
Recurrent neural network, in the adjusted version of a Long­Short Term Memory network.
To do this both methods will be explained and elaborated followed by them being tested
on relevant data, to compare how well each method performs within the specified data.
Finding the better method, and comparing it with the market average return would dis­
cover whether the methods could be used to obtain and edge when it comes to trading
on the stock market.
The idea behind trying to predict future stock prices is not a new one, and the race of con­
stantly trying to get an edge over the market has been going on since the very beginning.
As new technology has made it possible for us to use large data sets and analyse them
using tools like neutral networks makes the possibilities endless. The potential of finding
a golden goose of a network is realistic however very difficult, and even if found the time
frame of which it would work optimally could be very short, but its there. Working with
stocks is exciting as the money involved are of an absurd size.
The data used have been kept relatable as it has been found looking at some of the largest
danish companies, which most of us have heard about in one way or the other. The data
consist of daily stock prices as well as company fundamentals all recorded in the period
of 2010 to just before 2020.
As mentioned the project revolves around the ARIMA model and LSTM network testing
the models performance on the data in regards to prediction. These models have been
chosen as they represent different times, and different approaches, but both focus on the
ability to forecast using time series data and historic knowledge.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:13==
2
Related Works
In this chapter a brief introduction to some of the related works on the field of stock market
prediction will be explored. Projects who has attempted similar predictions using both
similar and different methods will be briefly touched. Some of the more predominant
methods will be elaborated a bit further, and most of the focus will be on the ARIMA model,
and LSTM network and how they have been used with relation to the stock market, as
these are the methods of this thesis project.
Being able to find a model that with great success could predict the movements of the
market, would be like finding the holy grail of investing, making you able to generate a
fortune in very short time. With a potential like this it is of course a field which many find
interesting. Some of the methods used will probably never see the light of day, as they
are in fact very successful and therefore hold great value as long as they are unknown to
the majority of the investors.
Different measures has been attempted to get a step ahead of the market, and some of
the more prominent methods will be introduced, as they came before the focus of this
thesis, along with the general idea of neural networks as a tool for prediction.
The two routes has been partitioned into two sections. Illustration on figure(2.1) shows
this.
Figure 2.1: Pictures shows the partition of methods between stochastic processes and
neural networks.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
5
==PAGE:14==
2.1
Stochastic processes
Some of the methods of time­series analysis which has been used throughout time are
Markov Chains, ARIMA models and then Artificial Neural Networks. These will be the
focus, as these models have also been attempted used towards stock prediction.
The section can be in some way be parted into two different styles of method. On one side
the stochastic methods like Markov­ and ARIMA models work by estimating an equation
which is then compared to the actual results of the future, whereas the Neural networks
works by minimizing the error of the historic/training data, and then testing and changing
depending on performance measures like mean squared error.
2.1.1
Markov Chains
In general Markov Chains is a model used to predict random systems. This could be a
time­series like the ones you have in stock prediction tasks. The idea is that using the
previous time­step, and that alone, the model will adjust a variable which will then change
always depending on the previous time­step, which can then be used to predict the fol­
lowing step.
The Markov property can be expressed as:
P (Xn = in | Xn−1 = in−1) = P (Xn = in | X0 = i0, X1 = i1, . . . , Xn−1 = in−1)
Having the i as the state, X as time­series and then n for step, the probability of a given
output can be expressed.
Within the field of Markov chains, one model is especially interesting when making pre­
dicts of time­series; Hidden Markov Model.
The Hidden Markov model, uses states and probabilities to describe a system of possi­
ble outcomes. Given a set of states etc. time­steps, and different outputs at a state, the
probabilities, of a given state and output can then be calculated.
This relation was used in an attempt to predict economic trends by, among others by N.
Nguyen and D. Nguyen 2015. Using stock index such as S&P500 economic macro val­
ues, such as inflation, volatility within the market and industrial production index, they then
find regimes for each of the macro economic variables which they then score from their
regime parameters. These scores are then used to rank stocks within the S&P500 index,
comparing historic data with similar scores. From this a new score is computed from the
similar past historic data. If a stock performed well previously with the same regimes it
would score high, and if it scored high enough to be within the 50 best stocks, it would be
selected for their portfolio.
2.1.2
ARIMA model
The ARIMA model, or Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average model originates from
the ARMA model. The difference between the two models is that where ARMA model
assumes that all data is stationary, the ARIMA model first makes sure, and converts
whichever part of the data is un­stationary to stationary. Both ARMA and ARIMA models
have been used in trying to explain the movements of time­series data.
The ARIMA model is essentially three processes assembled into one model. The autore­
gressive part, is the determination of how many previous time­steps the prediction should
6
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:15==
be explained by, the integrated part is just the stationarity assurance by looking at the
differences between each time­step within the time­series, and finally the MA part is the
error term indicating that it is sampled from a linear combination of previous errors. The
standard ARIMA model then takes form as:

1 −
p′
∑
i=1
αiLi

Xt =
(
1 +
q
∑
i=1
θiLi
)
εt
This has the three parts explained before, where Xt is the time­series, α the autoregres­
sive part, θ the moving average part and ε the error term and L the lag term.
Finding the right model parameters is often referred to as using the Box­Jenkins method,
as the parameter estimation was first practised by George Box and Gwilym Jenkins in the
1970s.
Many models have since followed with various changes to the original ARMA models.
Even lately the models have been used with some success in an attempt to predict stock
prices. Using an ARIMA model Ayodele A. et al. 2014 attempted to predict the movement
of stock prices from the Nigerian stock exchange back in 2014. in never time where
machine learning has really picked up speed, others try using the ARIMA model, as a
secondary input to a neural network model creating hybrid networks which takes inputs
from both types of models. Below on figure(2.2) a forecast using an ARIMA model is
displayed.
Figure 2.2: Pictures shows a simple neural network structure.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
7
==PAGE:16==
2.2
Neural networks
Neural networks is a sub genre within the field of machine learning, they are called so
as they are supposed to mimic the a simple brain. The first simple neural networks was
created in the early 1940s, but has since then become refined manifold, along with the
fact that computational power also had experienced a exponential development. A neural
network consists of neurons and edges which are connected by a weight which is ad­
justed as the network learn. Some data comes in to the network, it gets transformed by
a or some functions depending on the wanted output, and the structure of the data. The
network then either has additional layers with transformations, or it ends directly with an
output layer. When making at network it is supposed to be trained, so that it can learn
from previous cases what the output should look like given a specific input, this is called
the training phase.
During the training of the network the weights are getting constantly adjusted to handle
the different inputs as to obtain the correct output. Having trained the network to some
level of success it can then be tested on real data to see how well it performs given the
previous training and functions used to transform.A simple neural network structure can
be seen on figure (2.3).
Figure 2.3: Pictures shows a simple neural network structure.Randieri 2015
Neural networks have many different types of networks, and functions which can be used
to transform the data. Here there will mainly be focused on two approaches that has been
singled out due to being used widespread foremost on time­series prediction and trying to
predict stock movement and prices, both for individual stocks and stock index’. The index
is treated as a portfolio of stocks, in this case not focusing on risk management, which is
the usual reason for diversifying a portfolio and crating an index, which is less susceptible
of large changes in the market.
8
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:17==
2.2.1
Convolutional neural network
As for all neural networks there is different parameters on which to tune within the struc­
ture of the actual network. This could for instance being how the error from training is
measured, and whether there is some structure to punish poor performance, or reward­
ing good performance of the network.
CNNs are most often used in image recognition, which is also how some people have
tried to make it work for stock prediction. When looking at the computer screens of regu­
lar traders, you will often see red and green candlesticks depicting the stock price move­
ments with how much bought and sold of a specific stock. These pictures can then be
used to try and find patterns in the price of stocks, and for this CNN’s can be used with
success. A such example showing the candlesticks can be seen on figure (2.4).
Figure 2.4: picture of a candlestick plot of a stocks movements.Ulrich 2013
The convolutional network works by taking the input pictures of these candlestick handling
them as matrices with the given picture dimensions, with two additional layers determin­
ing the colours of the pixels. This is the input.
A convolutional filter is then applied, resulting in a filter mapping. The filters are one of the
things the network will learn itself during the training as the find the most optimal features
to extract from. In the candlestick example it would most likely be patterns detecting pil­
lars in some pattern. To find different sets of features more filters can be applied.
A normal thing to do between each convolutional layer in a CNN is then to apply a non­
linearity function, which will force all negative values in the mappings to be 0. This insures
non­linearity, which is handy when what you what to model is often a non­linear problem,
which thus require a non­linear solution.
Pooling is another tool to help the network perform. It had various different impact points.
Pooling reduces the dimensions of the feature mappings. This leaves out some infor­
mation, but keeps the most important information. The down scaling can help to reduce
over­fitting in general along with computation time. It also help to keep the network equiv­
ariant, making sure the features would be detected despite small distortions in the input.
The next thing which is used is to reduce the features detected into an actual class, so the
network can end up actually classifying a given input as for instance ”upward­trend” in the
stock market. This is often done using a softmax function on some fully connected layers,
where each neuron in the old layer, leads to one in the new layer. Having fully connected
layers not only insures that no information is lost, but also creates the opportunity of the
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
9
==PAGE:18==
network to learn combinations of features that might be strong indicators of a class. The
softmax function is a way of getting probabilities of the different classes. The network
does so to speak output a number from 0...1 for each class depending on how highly the
chance of the input being of that class is.
From this an overall error is calculated when training to determine how well the network
actually performs.
Figure 2.5: Picture showing structure of simple CNN network.Phani8 2020
Convolutional neural networks can be used in combination with other networks and meth­
ods. Zhou and Liu 2020 is one of those cases, in which they use multiple methods, among
convolutional networks.
2.2.2
Long Short Term Memory network
LSTM networks are a sub genre of the recurrent neural network field, in which time­series
prediction has done especially good. Normal recurrent neural networks begin to fall off
when the time step(lags) becomes greater than 10 as a general rule of thumb. This is
where the LSTM networks takes over. Instead of only using feedforward connections, the
LSTM network use feedback connections. This makes the network able to do what both
normal RNN’s and Hidden Markov models lack in terms of processing more lags in time.
10
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.6: LSTM network structure
The LSTM network is in general made of three different gates; input, forget and output.
They have the following equations:
it = σ (wi [ht−1, xt] + bi)
ft = σ (wf [ht−1, xt] + bf)
ot = σ (wo [ht−1, xt] + bo)
σ depicts the sigmoid function to enforce a positive output of each gate. w the weights
given the gate and x the input with respect to the time step.Finally the bias for each gate
is represented with b. At this point the input gate will describe the new information to store
in the cell, forget gate to discard the information no longer needed and the output gate to
activate the final output.
To figure out which values to store in the cell state, the candidate state and the output of
the layer. These are expressed as:
˜ct = tanh (wc [ht−1, xt] + bc)
ct = ft ∗ct−1 + it ∗˜ct
ht = ot ∗tanh
(
ct)
Where the cell state(ct) describes the memory at time, and ˜ct its the represents candidate
of that same cell state.
The LSTM network has been used to try and predict the prices of stocks. Among them is Li
and Pan 2020. They propose a model with three networks working together, a RNN, LSTM
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
11
==PAGE:20==
and a GRU network. This they call a blending ensemble model as it is a combination of
the previously mentioned networks. Their work out performs each of the types of network
alone.
Also Kavitha and Singh 2019 have used LSTM network to predict the stock prices of
banks. In general they were able to make a LSTM network and reduce the mean squared
error, but had to conclude that if the market became to volatile with political impact, the
model would not be able to predict the actual price of the stock very precisely. They
used what would be considered normal data from the stock market, having opening price,
closing price etc.
A third approach has been done by Dou WeiWei 2019, they use an attention base LSTM
network, and get results showing lag when predicting. They test different indexes of stocks
over different periods of time, and conclude that the longer the training time the smaller
lag.
12
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:21==
2.2.3
Other networks worth mentioning
Under this section a few other methods of neural networks is mentioned. These have
also been used in stock selection. These networks will briefly be introduced like previous
methods, but will not be used for comparing at this stage.
At the end of this section a short discussion of the methods will be presented, leading to
the chosen method of comparison and network for selection
Gaussian processes
The idea behind Gaussian processes is that you can incorporate a prediction method,
based on prior knowledge of the data. It can be used both for regression, clustering and
classification tasks. The idea is that if you wish to fit a function to or cluster some data,
this can potentially be done in a lot of different way. The Gaussian process then offers a
probability to each of these fits, scoring them as to how good they are.
It is based of the principle of a Gaussian distribution, which is the distribution from which
you sample to find the probabilities of a given score.
Random forest
Random forest algorithms are used for regression or decision making within machine
learning. Random forest networks consists of a lot of decision trees which are then ran­
domly sampled, to rid some of the weaknesses of decision trees in general, such as over
fitting.
It works by getting class predictions of each decision tree from the ensemble, and whichever
class gets the most votes, is then chosen as the prediction of the model. You can say that
the decision trees works as a voters committee and which ever classifications gets the
most votes, will be chosen at that given step.
This model works the best if the trees have as little correlation with each other as possible,
as this will insure the better option being chosen, and not the correlation deciding.
A picture of a random forest network can be seen below on figure(2.7).
Figure 2.7: Structure of a Random forest network[K 2020]
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
13
==PAGE:22==
Support vector machines
Support vector machines are a tool most often considered for classification. The general
idea is that the algorithm will try and find a border, of which it can separate two classes.
In 2D this is a very easy task to imagine, but as the dimensions and classes increase it
becomes a very abstract task to do so.
Considering a 3D task of separating two classes. The SVM algorithm will then attempt to
find the hyperplane which can separate the two classes the best. To make sure this will
not use too much computational power a kernel is used to keep it down and still be able
to find the hyperplane. The third part of the SVM is the decision boundary, or the border
separating points of one class from the other.
One example of somebody using this SVM approach within the field of stock selection
is Fan and Palaniswami 2001 whom used it to optimize a portfolio of stocks where they
wanted to minimize the risk of classifying a stock as one to buy, over one to not buy.
Probably the most used SVM is Support vector regression which will now follow.
Support vector regression
Supper vector regressions is more of a regression type than an actual network. SVR is a
sub­category of support vector machines which are often used in classification tasks. The
biggest difference is that where SVMs work with classification with a single digit number
as output, SVR works on a continuous scale.
Usually when working with regression, the task is to minimize a specific error term. Using
SVR, the task becomes a bit different as the idea is to fit the error within a threshold. The
best fit model, is then the model containing the most points within the boundary around
the hyperplane.
Among those who have used SVR in stock market selection are Dai, Shao, and Lu 2013
whom uses it to minimize the empirical risk and structural risk of their model. Here when
doing the prediction they use SVR when looking at the error of the prediction checking if it
is within the boundary, else a loss is computed. The optimal prediction is then when most
points are within the boundary, returning the best hyperplane.
As the possibilities of models are endless it is important to rely on previous work to deter­
mine the direction of which to progress. Different models have been used through time
along with new hybrid models, re­using the old ideas to generate new ones. in Adebiyi,
Adewumi, and Ayo 2014b Ayodele A. etal. use their previously cited ARIMA model to
compare with an ANN. The actual results of the study showed little to no difference be­
tween the two methods, however the ANN model proved to better predict actual prices
over a linear trend.
Kavitha and Singh 2019 have tested different network structures, among them LSTM and
CNN, to see which performed better on a stock prediction task. They concluded that CNN
network performed the best, as it was more present in doing the prediction instead of re­
lying on history as LSTM does. They claim it to be cause of the dynamic nature of the
market, being effected not only by company annual tax return, but also by tweets, trends,
hype etc. which makes it difficult to use history as much when predicting the prices, due
to changes in the society surrounding the companies.
Alberg and Lipton 2018 proposed to look at the fundamentals of companies instead of the
regular stock data like open, close etc. The strength of this method compared to that of
only looking at the regular stock data, is the fact that the market is influenced by a lot of
forces from the outside. If looking at stock indices they are more robust to handle some
sector of business having a rough period. This period can be due to weather, politics
or something else entirely, but never the less something hard to predict. By looking at
14
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:23==
the company fundamentals they try to determine whether the company is under or over
valued compared to what their fundamentals compared to other companies historically
should depict.
This method will of course not work if trying to predict the future of the companies stock
price a few weeks into the future, but it could give a good hint, as to where the price might
be one, two even 5 years later as stocks are just a share of a company, and therefore only
holds value if the company does. They look at both Multi layer perceptron networks and
RNNs with both LSTM and GRU. With their network, they manage to outperform a naive
predictor defined as companies with unchanged fundamentals following the market with
both RNNs and MLPs.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:25==
3
Theory
In this chapter the theory of the selected methods, ARIMA model and LSTM network, and
their close predecessors, will be explained using mathematical theory. This is as to give
an understanding of the decision making used in the actual modelling. This will include
ARMA­, ARIMA model, RNN­ and LSTM networks.
3.1
ARMA
The Auto­regressive Moving Average model is a model used for describing stationary, or
weak stationary stochastic time series data. It does so by using two polynomials, hence
the auto­regressive part and the moving average part of the model.
The model is expressed by the orders of the two polynomials by p and q. The model is
then described by:
Xt = c + εt +
p
∑
i=1
φiXt−i +
q
∑
i=1
φiεt−i
Here the φ is the parameters of the auto­regressive part, and φ is the parameters of the
moving average parameters. c is a constant and ε is an error term. This expression
then makes out a model, to use for forecasting or other uses of the time series. The
differences between the ARMA and the ARIMA model, which will be elaborated more
upon, is the fact that to use an ARMA model, the data has to be stationary in its raw form,
where as the ARIMA model, adds an integration which determines how many times the
data is integrated to achieve stationarity. If no integration is needed and ARIMA model is
the same as an ARMA model.
3.2
ARIMA
The Auto­regressive integrated moving average(ARIMA) model is an old model used for
predicting future values of a time series. The approach used for finding the estimates of
the (AR) and (MA) parts were first used by George Box and Gwilym Jenkins in the 1970s,
and is better known as the Box­Jenkins method.
The method revolves around finding estimates of each part of the model, from which the
final equation can then be estimated, giving the amount of terms from each part of the
model. When using an ARIMA model, it is often defined as and ARIMA(p,d,q) model, of
which the each of p,d and Q then is substituted for the amount of terms found to give the
best prediction.
Using the Box­Jenkins approach for estimation of the three parts of the model (p,d,q)
each of them is found following the explained methods below. The model they general­
ized started as an ARMA model, which states that a future value can be estimated using
previous observations and innovations, which are then translated into the (AR) and (MA)
terms.
yt = C + ∅1yt−1 + ∅2yt−2 + . . . + ∅pyt−p + ϵt + θ1 ∈t−1 +θ2 ∈t−2 + . . . + θq ∈t−q
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
17
==PAGE:26==
From the model, the coefficients of the (AR) and (MA) parts of the equation, along with a
constant and an error term is then defined. The objective is then to find the coefficients, of
the model, having determined the amount of terms of both observations and innovations.
ACF
ACF is short for, Autocorrelation function, which is used for determining the amount of
moments in the model. The autocorrelation function determines the correlation between
two observations from a signal series and the changes from one signal to the other. It
measures the memory of the stochastic process.[Madsen 2007] page 103.
For any given stochastic process the ACF can be defined as:
ρXX (t1, t2) = ρ (t1, t2) =
γXX (t1, t2)
√
σ2 (t1) σ2 (t2)
Given the assumption of stationarity this can be reduced to:
ρXX(τ) = γXX(τ)
γXX(0) = γXX(τ)
σ2
X
Plotting the ACF, gives a plot for which correlated processes, as ARIMA, will have non­
zero values at some lags indicating a correlation. This correlation the translates to a
moment of interest when it comes to making a model describing a time­series.
PACF
Partial autocorrelation function is used for determining the amount of AR() terms in an
ARIMA model. Where the ACF looks at the correlation between two points, the PACF
looks at the correlataion between two points, given all the points in­between. From we
have:[Madsen 2007] page 124.
ϕkk = Cor [Yt, Yt+k | Yt+1, . . . , Yt+k−1]
Plotting the PACF, gives a simlar plot to that of the ACF, but depicts the correlation be­
tween two values, which is not explained by the correlations they share.
Stationarity
First step of the model is to insure that the time­steps of from which the prediction value
comes from, fulfills the properties required for stationarity. If the time­steps are not sta­
tionary, checks to detect either seasonality or other patterns can be made, which can then
give cause for an assumption of stationary data anyways.
This is required as the correlation between the data points need to have some point of
reference being the time­steps.
If the data is not stationary the data is differentiated until this is achieved, or an assump­
tion is made. The amount of times the data has been differentiated is then recorded as
the value d from the model.
Autoregressive part
To find out what the optimal amount of (AR) terms should be in the equations, one can
look at a plot of the PACF, which is the partial autocorrelation function. The PACF of a
given lag of a series will act as a coefficient of a autoregression for the function of yt.
It is then given that for a stationary series, if all terms of (AR) is added to the model, it will
18
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:27==
give the best fit. However as this is not very effective, people use the significance level of
the PACF plot to detect the amount of (AR)­terms to be the best initial model guess. Just
because you are able to add a lot of terms to your equation is it not always the best idea.
Keeping it simple is often a strength.
Using the theory from [Madsen 2007] page 161, the least squares estimates of an AR()­
process can be found. Considering the case of an ARIMA model, with AR(2).
The AR(2) part of the model is separated and can be defined as:
Yt = −ϕ1Yt−1 −ϕ2Yt−2 + εt
Having the observations as Y1 to YN the system can then be defined as:
Y T = (Y3, Y4, . . . , YN)
X =



XT
3...
XT
N


=



−Y2
−Y1
...
...
−YN−1
−YN−2



From which is implied that:
XT X =
(
∑N−1
t=2 Y 2
t
∑N−1
t=2 YtYt−1
∑N−1
t=2 YtYt−1
∑N−2
t=1 Y 2
t
)
XT Y =
(
−∑N−1
t=2 YtYt+1
−∑N−2
t=1 YtYt+2
)
Solving the normal equation of:
(
∑N−1
t=2 Y 2
t
∑N−2
t=1 Yt+1Yt
∑N−2
t=1 Yt+1Yt
∑N−2
t=1 Y 2
t
) ( ϕ1
ϕ2
)
=
(
−∑N−1
t=2 YtYt+1
−∑N−2
t=1 YtYt+2
)
Will then give the least square estimates of θ = (θ1, θ2)T .
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
19
==PAGE:28==
Moving average part
For the (MA)­part, instead of looking at the PACF plot, an ACF plot is used as it is depicting
the error of the forecast considering the lags. From this plot we can then find the amount
of (MA)­terms needed to rid the autocorrelation within the series. Again using [Madsen
2007] page 159, the estimates of the moments can then be found. This time considering
an MA(2) process.
Given the MA(2) process:
Yt =
(
1 + θ1 B + θ2 B2)
εt
One can then use the theoretical autocorrelation function from:
γ(k) =
{ σ2
ε (θk + θ1θk+1 + · · · + θq−kθq)
|k| = 0, 1, . . . , q
0
|k| = q + 1, q + 2, .
which then yields:
ρ(0) = 1
ρ(1) =
θ1+θ1θ2
(1+θ2
1+θ2
2)
ρ(2) =
θ2
(1+θ2
1+θ2
2)
ρ(k) = 0,
for k ≥3.
Each of the two moment estimates θ = (θ1, θ2) can then be solved as:
a) θ1 + θ1θ2
1 + θ2
1 + θ2
2
= r1
b)
θ2
1 + θ2
1 + θ2
2
= r2
θ1 can then be found by diving the two equations of r1, r2, which gives θ1. From this θ1
can be inserted into the b) equation, giving a fourth order equation which solved gives the
value of θ2.
Both the terms of the AR and MA processes can now be calculated, resulting in a full
ARIMA model.
As this is implemented following the approach of [Adebiyi, Adewumi, and Ayo 2014a] the
actual method of determining AR and MA, seems to be avoided by simply having chosen
which models to test for, and then using a combined version of AIC and BIC to measure
how well the model performs. As the actual method of obtaining the combined version is
not explained an average of AIC and BIC is used instead as the factor of comparison.
20
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:29==
Alkaike information criterion
The Akaike information criterion(AIC) is an estimator, giving a measure of a prediction
error. It is a good model measure in this case as it works by balancing the goodness of
fit with the simplicity of the model.
This means that overfitting is often avoided using AIC, choosing the more simple model
instead of the perfectly fitting model.
AIC = 2k −2 ln(ˆL)
Is the mathematical formula of the AIC, which takes into account the amount of terms in
the model k aswell as the maximum of the likelihood function ˆL giving this tradeoff be­
tween the amount of terms, and goodness of fit.
Bayesian information criterion
The Bayesian information criterion(BIC), is used for model selection as AIC. It is very much
related to AIC as it is also based around the likelihood function. It works by penalizing the
amount of parameters in a model compared to the goodness of fit, just like AIC, however
BIC use a bigger penalty. It is defined as:
BIC = k ln(n) −2 ln(ˆL)
Again showing the likelyhood function; ˆL, amount of terms in the model k and now with
the addition of the number of data points used n.
AICBIC: One can choose to use a combined measure of AIC and BIC to estimate the best
model, which is also what [Adebiyi, Adewumi, and Ayo 2014a], has done. The combined
measure will consist of the average value of the AIC and BIC values of each model. This
way of comparing the models only work for the for each individual model, and not for
cross model comparison as the idea of AIC and BIC is the evaluate the model against the
alternatives for that same data and model.
(2k −2 ln(ˆL)) + (k ln(n) −2 ln(ˆL))
2
Augmented Dickey­Fuller test
The augmented Dickey­Fuller test is a statistical test, to see whether the data you are
testing is stationary or not. As a statistical test, it uses a hypothesis, and then tests using
a P­value, whether or not this hypothesis holds true, to some confidence, usually a 5%
significance level.
The Dickey­fuller test is a unit­root test, which means, that if the time series is unit­root it
is also non­stationary.
yt = c + βt + αyt−1 + ϕ∆Yt−1 + et
In the formula above, the (H0) hypothesis is that α = 0, yt−1 = the first lag of the series
and ∆Yt−1 is the first difference of the series, at the time t −1.
If the coefficient of Yt−1 = 1, this would then imply unit root.
In the same way as the Dickey­fuller test the Adjusted Dickey­fuller test uses the same
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
21
==PAGE:30==
reasoning. Instead of having only one lag, it now contains high order regressive pro­
cesses:
yt = c + βt + αyt−1 + ϕ1∆Yt−1 + ϕ2∆Yt−2 . . . + ϕp∆Yt−p + et
This means that more difference terms is added, while everything else in the equation
is similar to that of the regular DF test. The test is the same, setting α = 1, giving a P­
value of the significance. If the P­value is below the significance level, the series can be
assumed stationary[Prabhakaran 2019].
22
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:31==
3.3
Recurrent neural network
Recurrent neural networks or RNNs for short, are a type of neural network, which use
sequential data, often in the form of a time series. The uses of RNNs are wide, and their
strenght in processing sequential data comes from the fact that it uses previous data in
the evaluation current or future data. Some of the things RNNs has been used for are
language processing, image captioning and speech recognition among others.
In a normal feedforward network the information throughout the network is only passed
forward as the name indicates, it is relying on the assumption that all inputs and outputs
are independent of one another. This means that there is no information memory looking
back at previous values at any point.
With time series data, you know that for a given time step, there is a relation to the previous
time step, or at least often there is. In a RNN the output relies not only on its own input
values and weights, but also on those of the previous time step. On figure(3.1) both a
rolled, and unrolled RNN structure can be seen.
Figure 3.1: LSTM network structure [gudikandula 2019]
The big difference from the FFNN is the arrow pointing back into the network, looking at
the rolled RNN. There are many different variations of RNNs, and because the RNNs can
work over sequences of vectors, as both input and output, this makes way for a large
variety of structures.
Some of the structures of RNNs are one­to­many, many­to­one and many­to­many(sequence
to sequence) which can be done in various ways, both directional and bidirectional.
In the RNN, what describes the transition(mapping) from one time step to the next, is the
transition function. This function has different variations which makes for different net­
works, one of which is the LSTM network. In vanilla RNNs this transition function can ex­
perience some problems, vanishing gradient and exploding gradient. Vanishing gradient
means that the network when doing the gradient descent step has little to no contribution
from the earlier steps. Exploding gradient is when the network learns itself to put extreme
importance into the weights. Both problems have found solutions, which LSTM is one of
for the vanishing gradient problem.
3.3.1
Backpropogation
For a given time in the RNN network it takes the hidden state(ht−1) as input, as well as
the input features at the current time xt. The hidden state and outputs at each time step
can then be formulated as:
ht = f (xt, ht−1, wh)
ot = g (ht, wo)
Where wh and wo are the weight of the hidden­ and output layers. And f and g are trans­
formations of the hidden layer and output layer. As the input of the RNN is a sequence,
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
23
==PAGE:32==
this means that the objective function(Loss) will be the sum of all the differences between
the output and the label(result).
L = 1
T
T
∑
t=1
l (yt, ot)
where yt = the result and ot = the output.
To compute the loss, to estimate how well the network performs, all input must first be
passed through the network, creating the outputs. The backward pass then takes the
gradients from the previous output to propagate backwards to the first time step.[BRITZ
2015][Zhang et al. 2020]
24
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:33==
3.4
Long­Short Term Memory network
The LSTM network is the chosen method of trying to beat both the historic ARIMA model
as well as the market average. This section will first explain the theory behind the network
with regards to the mathematics and general approach of a ”standard” LSTM network.
Following this the data of this model will be presented, as the idea is a network structure
using both historic stock data and key numbers of the yearly reports of the companies
from which the stock data is used.
The LSTM network in its vanilla form, stems form the more general recurrent neural net­
work structure. The part that makes it stand out is the fact that it works with loops, this
means that information from one part of the network is passed on to the next part, essen­
tially working as a memory between steps of the network.
Having this addition of memory between the layers makes for better predictions or recogni­
tion, which the RNNs have proven very successful in compared to other networks through­
out recent history. The LSTM is one of the most prominent RNNs, having gotten very good
results in almost every field whether its predicting pictures, speech recognition or working
with time series data. That is is also why it has been chosen as the network of choice
for this project along with the fact that as a neural network it mimics some of the wanted
features of an ARIMA model, being able to use previous data as memory for future pre­
dictions.
The difference between the standard RNN and the LSTM is that LSTM networks use
measures to keep information for longer periods of time, instead of only considering the
time­steps close to the prediction.
As it is still a RNN the LSTM will also have some of the same features and structure of
the network, using repeated architecture of the network. The difference is however how
the module/architecture is. The most vanilla/ standard LSTM network has the structure
which can be seen below on figure (3.2).
On the figures below relating to the LSTM network structure, the operations are color
coded, meaning that the orange bubbles means a pointwise operation, where as the yel­
low squares means that it is a network layer. The strait arrows depict vector transfers
between the states.
Figure 3.2: LSTM network structure
The network then works by receiving an input, in this case a vector containing company
fundamentals, dates and closing prices.
The network is then made out of a linear information flow called the cell stats, which can
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
25
==PAGE:34==
then be changed by receiving information from the so called gates.
A gate consists of a sigmoid function which represents the information on a scale from
one to zero, and the higher the value the more information is let through that given gate.
It also contains a multiplication from that given sigmoid function.
So information goes into the network, and a gate then choose how much of the information
should be forgotten by the cell state, and how much kept. The first gate in the network is
called the forget gate. The forget gate layer looks at ht−1 and the input, and then using
the sigmoid function it gives a value of how much of the information should be forgotten
from the cell state. The first gate has been highlighted on figure(3.3).
Figure 3.3: LSTM network structure, first gate
ft = σ (Wf · [ht−1, xt] + bf)
Having chosen the first cell state information the next step is now to choose how much of
the new information should be updated in the cell state. For this a layer called the input­
gate­layer is used. It is also a sigmoid function which determines which values should be
updated, then followed by a tanH function which estimates which new values/candidates
could be added to the network. The second gate is highlighted on figure(3.4).
it = σ (Wi · [ht−1, xt] + bi)
˜Ct = tanh (WC · [ht−1, xt] + bC)
This means that we now have chosen which values to go with, which that should be
changed and which new candidates could be added to the cell state. The next step is
then to choose which values to output. To reach the final output one once again the part
of the cell state which can be used will be decided using a sigmoid function first, followed
by a tanH function, which then transforms the values from a {0, 1} scale to {−1, 1} scale.
This is then multiplied by the output from the sigmoid layer, as to choose the right parts
of the cell state to output. The third gate has been highlighted on figure(3.5).
ot = σ (Wo [ht−1, xt] + bo)
ht = ot ∗tanh (Ct)
26
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.4: LSTM network structure, second gate
Figure 3.5: LSTM network structure, third gate
This is how the vanilla/ basic LSTM network works, however many variants have been
made since, which make chances to how the gates work, or the order of applying them.
In this thesis however the focus will be at the vanilla LSTM network.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
27
==PAGE:36==
3.5
Evaluation metric
As the models are generated, results will need to be evaluated. There exist many different
methods of measuring the accuracy, but in this thesis the focus will be on Root Mean
Squared Error, which is a measure of the differences between the predicted values and
the actual values.
The formula of the RMSE of a time series prediction is:
RMSE =
√
(f −o)2
This is the RMSE in its most simple form, it takes the square root of the differences be­
tween the f(forecasts) and the o(observed values/result). One can also express it as a
summation of the squared differences divided by the sample size N[Barnston 1992].
RMSEfo =
[ N
∑
i=1
(zfi −zoi)2 /N
]1/2
One of the strengths of measuring the performance is the fact that the RMSE only looks
at the point differences between the prediction and the result. It is a scale independnet
measurement, which also makes it robust when comparing the ARIMA models with the
LSTM networks, as scaling transformation does happen when using the LSTM network.
28
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:37==
4
Data
In this section of the thesis the data which will be evaluated will be presented. This means
that both the raw data will be shown, and explained giving full transparency of how to
recreate the project. The origin of the variables will be explained and the reasoning behind
the partition of the data for the models.
4.1
Stock data
When looking for stock data, one will fast realize that not just one price is recorded for a
given stock. Often the price will be recorded as four or five different values.
• Open ­ Opening price from the day before.
• Close ­ Final price when market closes.
• High ­ Highest price during the day.
• Low ­ Lowest price during the day.
• Adjusted Close ­ Adjusted closing price after dividends or splits.
Along with these values the total traded volume of the stock within the last 24 hours are
also recorded as Volume. These six values are then recorded daily for each stock on
the exchange. On figure ?? the form of such data can be seen before downloading it
from https://finance.yahoo.com/ which is the source of the daily stock data throughout
the thesis.
Figure 4.1: Figure showing stock data as found on https://finance.yahoo.com/
The data is then downloaded as a comma separated file, which can be opened in pro­
grams like Microsoft Excel among other to get a full overview, or as in this case loaded in
to a data frame in a Jupyter Notebook using Python for data handling and programming.
Before anything was done to the data, it was also opened in Excel as this was a more
familiar tool of looking at data.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
29
==PAGE:38==
• Novozymes A/S
• Novo Nordisk A/S
• Genmab A/S
• H Lundbeck A/S
• Rovsing A/S
• Vestas Wind Systems A/S
• RTX A/S
• Nordic Shipholding A/S
• Demant A/S
• Bavarian Nordic A/S
These 10 companies has been chosen due to the data­availability in addition to them
being some of the biggest danish companies, excluding banks. The companies needed
the have company fundamentals data going back 10 years, as well as having availiable
stock price data in the same period.
The fundamentals will only be used in the LSTM model, as the ARIMA model is only able
to use the time­series data of the prices. The focus will again be the closing price only,
but could in theory have been any one of the prices.
Below the data of the ARIMA models can be seen plotted as time­series for each of the
10 stocks. One of the stocks will then be used as an example before displaying all the
results of the 10 models computed.
It is worth noticing that an individual ARIMA model is generated for each stock, which will
then for comparison reasons also be the case of the LSTM networks. This is important
as it would be unfair to the ARIMA model, if the LSTM network would be one complete
network using the data of all stocks in the portfolio.
Below a on figure(4.2) of each stock with closing prices over time is shown, depicting the
differences in their performances over the last 10 years.
30
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:39==
(a) NZYM­B
(b) NOVO­B
(c) GMAB
(d) LUN
(e) ROV
(f) VWS
(g) RTX
(h) NORDIC
(i) DEMANT
(j) BAVA
Figure 4.2: Stock prices of the 10 stocks chosen from 2010­2020
The 10 chosen stocks to work with in this project are of some the largest danish compa­
nies not choosing banking stocks. The reason for choosing big companies were due to
availability of data, as smaller companies need not report the same amount of fundamen­
tals in their reports, and might not have stock data going back 10 years.
The reason for not using banking stocks is due to them have a different cash flow. In
”normal” companies you do not want to ow a lot of money away, as this would cause you
to go bankrupt if you are not able to fulfill a contract or obligation. This means that they
often only loan big sums of money for regular stuff like buying a warehouse, company
headquarters which has some physical value as well. A regular company could not get
away with owing more than the companies actual value, however that’s not the case of
banks, as the in theory lend all their money from their customers. This creates a different
cash flow, which would influence their key economic numbers in such a way, that they
are not directly related to that of the other companies.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
31
==PAGE:40==
4.2
Training­ and Test data
When making a model, or a neural network, making it as good as possible for prediction
is the goal. To do this the model will have to be trained on data, and then tested using
different but similar data to see if the model works, or is up to par with the measures
chosen for validation.
This means separating the data into a training­ and test set. For both the ARIMA model
and LSTM network the training data has been chosen to consist of 80% of the data and
test data 20%. In general the idea is to have enough training data to not have too much
variance in parameter estimates, and still enough test data to avoid high variance in the
performance statistics. The 80/20 split is a regularly used split in data modelling.
4.3
Data for ARIMA model
The data for the ARIMA model is also similar to that of the raw data file from https://finance.yahoo.com/.
Every one of the prices can in theory be used for making the model, but a choices has
been made for this thesis to look at the closing prices. The closing prices has been cho­
sen over High and LOW as those values would infer more insecurity as they will be the
maximum and minimum values recorded where as Close and Open should be more sta­
ble, as some stocks follow daily trends. Open could just as well have been chosen, but
was ultimately not chosen.
The data also contains dates of the recorded values, which is the indexing parameter of
the data set. Prices are not recorded on dates on weekends the market are closed. This
means that for every year around 252 values are recorded. Some years have one or two
days fewer due to the way the weeks are skewed.
The data of the ARIMA model loaded into a Notebook for processing can be seen below
on figure 4.3. The overall statistics of the data can be seen on figure 4.4.
Figure 4.3: Figure showing stock data loaded into python, with Date as index.
32
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.4: Description of the data loaded into python, showing basic statistics.
The statistics of the data set can also be seen in table4.4 where the amount of dates used,
over the 10 year period.
4.3.1
Data for LSTM network
The data set used for the ARIMA model will also function as part of the input to the LSTM
network, however with some changes. In the ARIMA model only the Date index and the
Closing prices was used to generate the model for forecasting. In the LSTM network the
Closing price will still be the focus of prediction, however this time the other daily mea­
surements like High, Low and Open will also be used, as the LSTM network is able to
handle more complex data as features.
From the 10 companies, 12 economic company fundamentals have been chosen. These
are each explained in their own section with their respective meaning. They have been
transformed from the original data, by a Sigmoid function scoring them from 0 to 1, be­
tween the 10 chosen stocks. This is to simulate a portfolio where the idea is then for the
network to be able to choose the stocks which is then valued best and worst comparing
their fundamentals to the actual stock price for a given year.
4.3.2
Company fundamentals
In this section each of the company fundamentals are explained with their meaning and
short about the impact it might have on the stock price.
EY, Earnings Yield The earnings yield of a stock, given a period of time. In this case it
is a one year period as i comes from the company fundamentals, but its an expression of
how much the investors of the stock has earned per share. It can directly be translated
to how well the stock of a given company has performed, which can then be compared to
other stocks, as the return on investment. It is calculated as:
Earningshare
Marketpriceshare
· 100
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
33
==PAGE:42==
SY, Sales Yield Is an expression of how much the company’s turnover is compared to
the stock price. This means how much you would pay per some amount of turnover
compared to the price of the stock. If you have to pay a lot per $ of turnover compared to
other companies, it might be an indicator of an unhealthy business model of the company.
FCFY, Free Cash Flow Yield The higher the value of the FCFY is in a company the
healthier it often is, as it is able to generate enough cash to pay of debt and pay out
dividends. It is related to the EY value, as a quick access to cash money in a company
is always very handy when it comes to obligations and satisfying inventors. A low FCFY
often means a low return on investment as the company will have a harder time paying
out dividends, maybe even having to liquefy other assets to do so.
Free −Cash −flowshare
Marketpriceshare
VOL, Volatility The volatility is an expression of how volatile the stock is. How much does
the price vary over the last year. It can be a sign of an unstable business, but can also
be explained by bigger factors which would make the stock price fluctuate a lot like for
instance a merger with another company, a really good/bad year could also do this.
MOM12, Momentum last 12 months Momentum during the last 12 months. This is a
value tracking the movements of the stock. If the stock has been on a rise with increas­
ing rate, the momentum of the stock will be high. It is the rate of which the stock rise or fall.
ROC, Return on capital The return on capital is often divided into two sections, above
and below a 2% benchmark where a company is considered to be making money above
2%, and losing below. It is a relative measure compared to other companies.
In this case where the data is already transformed by a Sigmoid function and relative to
the rest of the stocks in the portfolio, it will mean no change.
ROC is the amount of money a company is making which is above the cost of equity
capital and debt.
GMargin, Gross margin The gross margin of a company is the value actually made by
the company. It is the amount of value generated from selling goods, subtracted by the
cost of producing the goods:
Totalsales −Costproduction
The cost productions are the total sum, including the labor cost and the cost of materials.
It is important for a company being able to generate profit from delivering a product. The
better a gross margin the better the company is a making value by being more effective
at cutting cost and improving sales.
GROWTHYOY, Growth in earnings year on year Looking at the past year, compared to
the one you are in, how well did the company then do with regards to earnings. How much
has the income grown/ diminished is a nice way of determining how well the company is
doing. When it is relative to other companies it becomes even more telling about the com­
pany, as comparing a bad year, with a less bad year would still show improvements, but
34
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:43==
when comparing to other companies you can take away some of the macro factors of the
stock market, for instance the economic crisis, or covid­19.
The comparison between the companies would then show which companies did the best
despoite the crisis, instead of just showing the company having a bad year compared to
last year.
SHYO, Share holding yield Share holding yield, is an expression of how much the com­
pany is paying back to their shareholders. It consists usually of dividends and programs
where the company buys back their stock from the shareholders to an increased price. If
the company has had a really good year, it is a sign of a healthy economy, and trust in the
company. It is also a sign of it being a good stock to keep, as you are not only rewarded
by increases in the stock price, but also by the dividends being payed.
MCAP, Market Cap
The market cap of a company is the total value of all the stocks in the company. It is the
value of the company defined by the stock market. This means that by taking the market
cap of a company multiplying it with the amount of outstanding shares, the market value of
the company can be found. A strong stock, will often also have a strong company behind
it, meaning that the market cap will often be high.
RETURN, Return on investment last year
Return on investment is the value the investor would have gotten from investing the year
before.
All of these 11 company fundamentals are measurements of the state of a given com­
pany. In this case the values have been transformed to be relative to each other, making
out a portfolio. The data has been transformed not only to get the values relative to each
other within the portfolio, but also due to copyrights from Source: Bloomberg Finance Lp..
Kurt Cara, whom I’ve had the pleasure of sparring with throughout this project for more
insight on the stock market, was able to provide the company fundamentals data through
transformation.
The script can be found in Appendix A.5, which is what has been used to do the normal­
ization and logistic transformation using the Sigmoid function used to generate the values
between {0..1}.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
35
==PAGE:44==
36
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:45==
5
Methods
In this sections the methods of approaching the models will be elaborated. This means
the implementation and some of the decisions made with regards to the data handling
and the general modelling of the problem.
The section is parted into a section for each model.
5.1
ARIMA model
Having proven that the method can be recreated from Adebiyi, Adewumi, and Ayo 2014a,
which can be found in appendix (A.1). it will then be completed using the data set which
is then to be compared with the LSTM model, using similar data, only with the addition of
company fundamentals, as this is too complex for the ARIMA model to handle.
The data consists of daily closing prices for each of the 10 companies chosen:
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
37
==PAGE:46==
As the example stock, Genmap A/S will be used to go over how the data is analyzed and
the ARIMA models computed and evaluated.
Following the initial plots of the time­series a test for stationarity is performed via an Aug­
mented Dickey Fuller Test(ADF Test). It will determine the amount of differencing needed
to create a stationary time series, which is required for an ARIMA model. The test returns
a p­value, the ADF test statistic, the critical value which the statistic is measured against,
and then amount of lags used.
At the three critical values, if the statistic is higher value than that, the null­hypothesis, of
the data being non­stationary, cannot be rejected as the P­value indicates that it is signif­
icant. This means that differentiation is most likely needed to make the series stationary.
Following this a test of the autocorrelation of both the non­transformed data and then first­
and second order differentiation is tested, to see if an ARIMA model makes sense to fit the
data. And which order could be initial guess, if following a stepwise modelling approach.
Figure 5.1: Autocorrelation plots of Genmap A/S stock and differentials.
As this is done a secondary test to make sure how many times the series should be
differentiated is ran. This is more as a safety measure as the auto_arima­function will
be used in python, which runs ARIMA models of different orders, and then returns the
model with the lowers AIC value, which then should be the best fit. The model has been
estimated testing of orders up to five, for p and q. Higher models could potentially be an
improvement, but often when modelling, it is better to keep it as simple as possible unless
results are clearly improved by adding more term.
The data is then separated into a training­ and a test set to see the performance of the
model fit.The data has been separated with 85% as training and 15% for testing.
As mentioned the model is then found testing individual models against each other finding
the one with the lowest AIC score. This is done on the training set, which is the fitting of
the model.
The best model in the case of the Genmap A/S stock was found to be an ARIMA(3,1,2).
This means that we have 3 AR terms in the model, which has been differentiated once,
and 2 MA terms.
From the model, the predictions are then found using the model, and the RMSE is found
along with other measures of goodness of fit. The prediction along with the original series
as test­ and training data is plotted showing how well the model predicted the movements
38
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:47==
of the stock closing prices. Using the model to now try and predict the values of the test
data. On figure(5.2) the test data, as well as the models prediction has been plotted.
Figure 5.2: Prediction plot showing the ARIMA models prediction on the test data.
As the ARIMA model is a linear model, here using more than one thousand points to fit
the model, it end up lookign much like a trending line of the series.
Now plotting the full dataset with the predictions, and their confidence intervals. These
intervals use a 95% confidence. These predictions had a Root Mean Square Error of:
145.57 and Mean Absolute Error of: 125.49.
Figure 5.3: Prediction plot showing the ARIMA models prediction on the test data.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
39
==PAGE:48==
Another plot showing the prediction, but also using the prediction intervals as to better
estimate within what range the model would be able to assure with high confidence that
the stock closing price would be within using a one­step prediction, with updates using
MLE steps, to correct the model with respect to the actual values. The MSE and SMAPE
of this has been calculated as:
Mean squared error: 454.84370159160073
SMAPE: 1.4338267028262963
This gives a very nice plot, however these predictions are not real forecasts as the model
is learning from future values. On figure (5.4) these plots can be seen.
Figure 5.4: Daily prediction plot of ARIMA model.
40
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:49==
As a final way of evaluating the model an attempt of predicting 10 new values going
outside the data set is done to see how well it would perform on new data. This is to
check whether the model despite having to predict so far into the future would be able to
say something about the trend, as the linear model does not predict the fast fluctuations
of the stock very well, but seems to capture the overall movement of the Genmap A/S
stock somewhat decent.
Table 5.1: Prediction of new values, going outside both training and test data.
Dates
Stock price prediction
2019­12­31
1685.266
2020­01­01
1685.795
2020­01­02
1686.323
2020­01­03
1686.853
2020­01­04
1687.389
2020­01­05
1687.932
2020­01­06
1688.480
2020­01­07
1689.032
2020­01­08
1689.584
2020­01­09
1690.132
Again it is clear that the linear fit, cause of the amount of training data, becomes the over­
all trending of the data.
The corresponding python code, in form of a Jupyter Notebook can be found in Appendix
A.2. The overall structure of the notebook is similar through testing of all the stocks,
however results will of course vary. A Jupyter Notebook has been created for each indi­
vidual stock, in both the ARIMA modelling and LSTM networks. The total ensemble is 20
notebooks. The resutls of these will be presented in the results section.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
41
==PAGE:50==
5.2
LSTM Network
As mentioned before in the section ”Related Works2” creating and LSTM network for
stock prediction is not something new. It has been attempted since the network structure
was first discovered. Both Kavitha and Singh 2019 and Dou WeiWei 2019 has previously
attempted this having some success with it as well. Many approaches of how to model
the network and especially the data for the network has been considered, as the model of
comparison was the ARIMA, which does not handle the large amount of data points very
well.
The general idea for creating the network was again to keep the overall structure as simple
as possible going for a vanilla LSTM with only few layers, also since the data for the model
already was quite complex as it had to be compiled from different sources.
Under the section ”Data for LSTM network4.3.1” the company fundamentals are explained
as well as the transformation of them. As these values should be used, as well as the stock
data containing both Close, Open, High, Low, which would also need a transformation,
such that all values would be in the range of {0..1}. Having the values normalized helps
the network compute faster. But having these two structures of data, it was then merged
to one combined data set. This data can be seen below on figure(5.5).
Figure 5.5: Structure of combined dataset for LSTM network.
The idea is now to go from the data frame just shown, to creating a training and test set
of the data. These then needs to be re­scaled into the input form of a LSTM network,
which does not just take a time series, but needs it re­scaled with the amount of features
chosen, and the amount of time series lags used for creating a single prediction.
Using the Keras package in Python, the model can be build by defining the type of net­
work, in this case a Sequential network. As the network is now defined, the structure can
be given, using different types of layers. A regular LSTM layer consists of the units in the
layer, and then the shape of the input is taken.
From here on out, the architecture can vary a lot within just having LSTM networks. As
mentioned this will be an implementation of a vanilla LSTM network, however it will be
using Dropout, and a Dense­layer to condense the output into a single unit, or however
might be needed using a large amount of features.
5.2.1
Dropout
The idea behind dropout is that it can be used to avoid over fitting. It is a regularization
method that when used, instead of keeping the number of layer outputs, drops the amount
specified. This means that the structure of the following layer will have a different amount
42
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:51==
of nodes and connections.
In theory this should force the layer outputs which are not dropped to carry more weight in
regards to the fitting. When having large networks over fitting can become a real problem
as the network learns. It might start increasing weights, to correct towards a better fit,
even though no new information is really obtained. The network is just trying to be smart.
5.2.2
Dense
As the name suggests, the idea behind the layer is to dense the previous layer. The way
the dense layer can be used is for example having a multi feature network, as the stock
data. If one only want one single output, any of the prices ie. one could use a densing
layer in the end to only get one final output from the network.
5.2.3
Batch size
A batch is as the name suggest a grouping. It can be seen as a looping through the data.
After such a batch has completed the network output is generated from where an error is
then calculated for the fit. The amount of batches, is steps used to complete and epoch.
5.2.4
Epochs
When training a neural network, it is trained multiple times over. An epoch is the amount
of times, one choose to go through the whole data set, often using multiple batches within
one epoch. The reason for training a network using this kinda of looping, is to try and
obtain information from the whole data set, and not end up only fitting for the last part.
5.2.5
Optimizer
There exist a lot of different optimizers which can be used when making a network. They
are used to increase the accuracy of the model using different methods.
Focusing on the ”Adam” optimizer, as it is the chosen one for the networks, due to its
good performance, and overall acceptance as the go­to­optimizer. The Adam optimizer is
a mix between tho other optimizers. The AdaGrad, and RMSProp. The algorithm behind
Adam, uses an exponential moving average of the gradient, and squared gradient, and
the two parameters used then control the decay of the moving averages.
As mentioned it has proven very effective in most network types, and is therefore chosen.
5.2.6
Loss function
The initial approach for creating the network was to start out using a single feature network,
attempting to predict the price movement using a simple network. Below the first network
fit can be seen on figure(5.6).
Figure 5.6: Plot of the fit, of the simple LSTM network, using only one feature.
The architecture of this network consisted of:
As the multi­feature network using all company fundamentals was not completed within
the time frame of the project, the models of all single feature networks has been made in
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.7: Plot of the fit, of the simple LSTM network, using only one feature.
its absence. The RMSE have also been calculated so the models does have a measure
of comparison with the ARIMA model, which is now way more similar to the LSTM network
in method.
44
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:53==
6
Results
In this section the results of each model will be evaluated and discussed. A lot of tables
and plots will be shown to help illustrate the ideas behind the decisions made.
The chapter is divided into three sections, one for each model and finally on summing
what has been found out.
6.1
ARIMA model
For each of the 10 ARIMA models made to forecast the stocks, the RMSE has been
reported along with the model chosen. As mentioned the model was found by using a
step wise selection using AIC as the determining factor of model suitability. It was tested
using orders of (p, q, i) up until 5, testing in total 14 models for each stock. The raw RMSE
of each stock is reported in table(6.4). The RMSE of the model, using step wise model
updates has also been reported to show how much better the model gets, by being able
to adjust the weights of the model before each new step, with regard to the result.
Table 6.1: Data from ARIMA models
Stock
model
Evalutation metric
AR()
I
MA()
RMSE
RMSE­adjusting
NZYM­B
2
1
2
39.853
4.740
NOVO­B
4
1
4
25.236
4.707
GMAB
2
1
2
178.262
20.970
LUN
2
1
3
197.887
8.411
ROV
5
2
0
58.919
3.180
VWS
2
1
2
28.277
1.952
RTX
2
1
2
5.561
1.104
NORDIC
0
2
5
1.065
0.021
DEMANT
5
2
0
171.087
5.004
BAVA
2
1
1
39.739
3.969
As the table above only provides information about each of the ARIMA models, and not
the performances related to each other a normalization using the formula:
NRMSE =
RMSE
ymax −ymin
And:
NRMSE = RMSE
¯y
Two versions of normalization is therefore used, both reported in table(6.2). The first
normalization takes into account the range of the values, where the second normalization
uses the means of each stock. the reason for choosing two different normalization’s was
to make sure information was not lost for time series having large fluctuations within a
steady minimum and maximum value.
In table(6.2) the lowest normalized RMSE has been marked. Having the lowest NRMSE
should in theory mean that it is the best fit of all the stocks. Looking at the plot of the stock
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
45
==PAGE:54==
Table 6.2: Data from ARIMA models normalized
Stock
Evalutation metric
NRMSE
RMSE­adjusting
min/max
mean
min/max
mean
NZYM­B
0.155
0.163
0.018
0.019
NOVO­B
0.073
0.103
0.014
0.019
GMAB
0.112
0.301
0.013
0.035
LUN
0.502
1.013
0.021
0.043
ROV
0.064
0.244
0.003
0.013
VWS
0.212
0.456
0.015
0.031
RTX
0.103
0.086
0.020
0.017
NORDIC
0.059
0.446
0.001
0.009
DEMANT
0.699
1.319
0.020
0.039
BAVA
0.097
0.233
0.009
0.023
NORDIC on figure(6.2) plot (h), does however not provide that much information when it
comes to the forecasting. The model has clearly observed a downwards trending of the
stock price, but the prediction interval become very wide, as well as the prediction itself
goes into a negative price.
Looking at the plots on figure(6.2) the predictions and their prediction intervals especially
quickly becomes very large. One explanation could be the optimistic approach of trying
to fit too many time series values in one model. Instead for future work, an idea could be
to train multiple models throughout time for a single stock, generating models every year,
which would give 252 data points, which could then be split into a training and test set
with less data.
Moving on from the ARIMA models, the most focus will be on comparing the RMSE values
with those of the LSTM, which should outperform, as the time series are quite large having
2495 points, which should be more suitable for the LSTM model to handle, despite also
increasing the input features.
In terms of being able to invest from the results of the ARIMA models, this would not be
advisable, at least not as presented in this thesis. The range of the prediction intervals
are far to great, and the method has been too optimistic also forecasting too far into the
future.
The models could be used for spotting a trend which works fairly decent for both the
NOVO­B and RTX stock, in which the model has captured an upwards trend during the
10 years, which seems to still be followed the recent year 2020.
46
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:55==
(a) NZYM­B A/S
(b) NOVO­B
(c) GMAB
(d) LUN
(e) ROV
(f) VWS
(g) RTX
(h) NORDIC
(i) DEMANT
(j) BAVA
Figure 6.1: Plots of ARIMA models with prediction and 95% confidence intervals
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
47
==PAGE:56==
6.2
LSTM network
The results of the single feature LSTM networks has been plotted below as well as a table
of the RMSE. The overall fitting of the LSTM networks was done using 100 epochs and
128 batches. To avoid overfitting three dropout layers were using all with a dropout of
20%. As mentioned the Adam optimizer was chosen, using the mean squared error as
the loss function. The RMSEs was calculated from the fitted model to the test data and
the actual results.
Table 6.3: RMSE scores of LSTM networks
Stock
RMSE
NZYM­B
26.116
NOVO­B
24.725
GMAB
130.809
LUN
43.926
ROV
13.073
VWS
14.739
RTX
7.930
NORDIC
0.128
DEMANT
33.363
BAVA
23.096
48
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:57==
6.3
Comparison of models
Both the ARIMA models and LSTM networks does show some promising results when it
comes to predicting the trends. As the forecasting periods was 50 days and even more for
the ARIMA model, this is probably all you can expect when using simple models. Looking
at the RMSE values of both model types it is apparent that the average model of the non­
scaled RMSE’s that the LSTM network out performs the ARIMA models as a whole. This
was of course to be expected had the LSTM network been very complex, but it is still
surprisingly good considering it is using only a single feature.
Looking at the two tables, comparing the RMSE un­scaled, it becomes apparent that at
only RTX performs better using the ARIMA model. This could be due to the fact that it
does somewhat follow a linear trend, with fluctuations, but nevertheless the stock has
been climbing steadily in value since 2010. The other networks showing somewhat close
results could be the NZYM­B, GMAB or NOVO­B which again all follows a linear trend.
On the network outputs no confidence intervals are plotted, but it can quickly be realized
from he plots that these would not be as wide as those of the ARIMA model. The LSTM
networks performs much better when it comes to the fluctuations of the data and does not
necessarily becomes worst at fitting the further into the time series, which is the case of
the ARIMA model.
Table 6.4: Data from ARIMA models
Stock
model
Evalutation metric
AR()
I
MA()
RMSE
RMSE­adjusting
NZYM­B
2
1
2
39.853
4.740
NOVO­B
4
1
4
25.236
4.707
GMAB
2
1
2
178.262
20.970
LUN
2
1
3
197.887
8.411
ROV
5
2
0
58.919
3.180
VWS
2
1
2
28.277
1.952
RTX
2
1
2
5.561
1.104
NORDIC
0
2
5
1.065
0.021
DEMANT
5
2
0
171.087
5.004
BAVA
2
1
1
39.739
3.969
Table 6.5
Stock
RMSE
NZYM­B
26.116
NOVO­B
24.725
GMAB
130.809
LUN
43.926
ROV
13.073
VWS
14.739
RTX
7.930
NORDIC
0.128
DEMANT
33.363
BAVA
23.096
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
49
==PAGE:58==
(a) NZYM­B A/S
(b) NOVO­B
(c) GMAB
(d) LUN
(e) ROV
(f) VWS
(g) RTX
(h) NORDIC
(i) DEMANT
(j) BAVA
Figure 6.2: Plots of ARIMA models with prediction and 95% confidence intervals
50
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:59==
7
Conclusion
As a conclusion to this project the neural network has to be more complex in order to re­
ally say a lot. The idea of using company fundamentals is still great, an i believe there is
a lot of information untapped in their yearly reports. The ARIMA model performed as ex­
pected, but fell short due to the large amount of data. Despite only being able to achieve
a single feature LSTM network it clearly out performed the ARIMA model with regards to
the predictions and use­ability.
The project as a total was not a great success as the idea of using company fundamentals
was not carried out . There is however still things to learn from this project with regards
to the models. The data processing of the project was the overwhelming task, as well as
formulating the actual models even in their simple forms, to still achieve use­able results.
There is a lot of room for future work on this project, and hopefully working a multi fea­
ture network using company fundamentals is achievable. Five different architectures with
various amount of layers were tested using multi­feature structure, however the output of
them all just produced ”nan”. This could be due to the network not being complex enough
in its structure, or that the codeing of the problem did not suffice.
It is difficult to compare the current models with the average market return, even consid­
ering a loose number like 10% increase would be difficult to translate into a real stock
trading price increase. From the models created it would not be advisable to trade from,
as they currently only show trending predictions. One could make the argument that if
enough money, and placed at the right time, these models could also provide more than
a 10% increase in value, however the measure as a whole has been reflected upon, and
it therefore makes more sense to compare an index increase that of the market. To trade
a single stock which in itself would not beat the market increase, you would have to trade
the stock often. Here price­predictions could be predicted with milliseconds if available.
7.1
Future work
As future work creating a working LSTM network containing both stock data prices and
company fundamentals is the target. This should be doable it is only a matter of being
able to test enough structures. The ARIMA models could also be approved upon using
bootstrapping to enhance the models.
In general stock market prediction using neural networks is a field of which there can
always be approved upon. Many have tried, and many have failed. Those who succeed
with it, keep it to themselves, and even if a working network was created, it would most
likely not work for a very long period.
An idea could be to approach the problem is a value stock investor, trying to predict a trend
instead of 1­30 days ahead, some even minutes or seconds. A trend could be something
that is spotted over a year, or even many years if one could be able to model the values
of the stocks in such a way that the network would output for a given stock whether it was
under or over valued in comparison with other stocks in a given index, or stock portfolio.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
unknown (2021). A Brief History of the Stock Market. URL: https://www.sofi.com/learn/
content/history-of-the-stock-market/.
Benjamin (2018). 1929 MARKET CRASH: A COMPREHENSIVE GUIDE. URL: https :
//www.valuewalk.com/2018/04/the-1929-stock-market-crash-a-comprehensive-guide/.
Nguyen, Nguyet and Dung Nguyen (2015). Hidden Markov Model for Stock Selection.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9091/3/4/455.
Adebiyi, Ayodele A., Aderemi O. Adewumi, and Charles K. Ayo (2014a). “Stock Price
Prediction Using the ARIMA Model”. In: URL: http://eprints.lmu.edu.ng/2357/1/
UKSim2014_IEEE.pdf.
Randieri, Cristian (2015). INTRODUCTION TO DEEP LEARNING ON SOCIAL NET­
WORKS: “HOW TO LEARN EVEN MORE ABOUT YOUR PERSONAL LIFE USING
NEURAL NETWORKS TECHNOLOGY”. URL: https://www.intellisystem.it/en/category/
news/news-tecnologia/.
Ulrich, Joshua (2013). How do I set width of candles in candle chart using plot.xts? URL:
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/14443093/how-do-i-set-width-of-candles-in-candle-
chart-using-plot-xts.
Phani8 (2020). What is the Convolutional Neural Network Architecture? URL: https://
www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2020/10/what- is- the- convolutional- neural- network-
architecture/.
Zhou, Qiao and Ningning Liu (2020). A Stock Prediction Model Based on DCNN. URL:
https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2009/2009.03239.pdf.
Li, Yang and Li Pan (2020). A Novel Ensemble Deep Learning Model for Stock Prediction
Based on Stock Prices and News. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2007.12620.pdf.
Kavitha, R. and Sonal Singh (2019). Optimizing Stock market prediction using Long Short
Term Memory. URL: https://www.ijitee.org/wp-content/uploads/papers/v9i1/J98240881019.
pdf.
Wei, Dou (2019). Prediction of Stock Price Based on LSTM Neural Network. URL: https:
//ieeexplore-ieee-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8950831.
K, Gurucharan M (2020). Machine Learning Basics: Random Forest Classification. URL:
https://towardsdatascience.com/machine-learning-basics-random-forest-classification-
499279bac51e.
Fan, A. and M. Palaniswami (2001). Stock selection using support vector machines. URL:
https://ieeexplore-ieee-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/document/938434.
Dai, Wensheng, Yuehjen E. Shao, and Chi­Jie Lu (2013). Incorporating feature selection
method into support vector regression for stock index forecasting. URL: https://link-
springer-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/article/10.1007/s00521-012-1104-1#citeas.
Adebiyi, Ayodele A., Aderemi O. Adewumi, and Charles K. Ayo (2014b). Comparison of
ARIMA and Artificial Neural Networks Models for Stock Price Prediction. URL: https:
//www.hindawi.com/journals/jam/2014/614342/.
Alberg, John and Zachary C. Lipton (2018). Improving Factor­Based Quantitative Invest­
ing by Forecasting Company Fundamentals. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1711.04837.pdf.
Madsen, Henrik (2007). Time Series Analysis.
Prabhakaran, Selva (2019). Augmented Dickey Fuller Test (ADF Test) – Must Read Guide.
URL: https://www.machinelearningplus.com/time-series/augmented-dickey-fuller-test/.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
53
==PAGE:62==
gudikandula, purnasai (2019). Recurrent Neural Networks and LSTM explained. URL:
https://purnasaigudikandula.medium.com/recurrent-neural-networks-and-lstm-explained-
7f51c7f6bbb9.
BRITZ, DENNY (2015). Recurrent Neural Networks Tutorial, Part 3 – Backpropagation
Through Time and Vanishing Gradients. URL: http : / / www . wildml . com / 2015 / 10 /
recurrent-neural-networks-tutorial-part-3-backpropagation-through-time-and-vanishing-
gradients/.
Zhang, Aston et al. (2020). Dive into Deep Learning. https://d2l.ai. URL: https://d2l.ai.
Barnston, Anthony G. (1992). Correspondence among the Correlation, RMSE, and Hei­
dke Forecast Verification Measures; Refinement of the Heidke Score. URL: https://
www.swpc.noaa.gov/sites/default/files/images/u30/Barnston,%20Anthony%20G.,%
201992.pdf.
54
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:63==
A
Appendix
The appendix is separated into sections, each with their own short introduction of what it
contains. Though out the thesis, if needed the appendix section used will then be linked.
A.1
Appendix A
The comparison of results when choosing the ARIMA model as the model used for com­
paring with the LSTM network.
A.1.1
Comparison of results
As the paper by Adebiyi, Adewumi, and Ayo 2014a was implemented in Matlab, and
the attempt to replicate these results in Python, some discrepancies can be expected,
however not much. The model was first tested using the settings of the paper.
In Adebiyi, Adewumi, and Ayo 2014a they have gathered data from the Natinal stock
exchange in India. The data consists of four stocks and one index, from which the four
stocks have also been chosen. The data is from the period 01/01/2007 to 31/12/2011.
They then partition the data into quater­yearly sections which they then test viable ARIMA
models on.
Below of the full data structure can be seen:
Table A.1: Full dataset statistics
Stock
NiftyMidcap50
Reliance
OFSS
ABB
JSWSteel
Datapoints
1237
1237
1237
1237
1237
Period
02/01/2007­30/12/2011
02/01/2007­30/12/2011
02/01/2007­30/12/2011
02/01/2007­30/12/2011
02/01/2007­30/12/2011
Avg. closing price
2360.942
1535.505
1736.126
1147.004
796.593
As Adebiyi, Adewumi, and Ayo 2014a did some preliminary testing using ACF and PACF
to identify viable models for each stock. This has been skipped as its the model compar­
ison which is in focus. As it was not completely clear from Adebiyi, Adewumi, and Ayo
2014a, whether or not the actual modelling was conducted on the full data­set or on the
quarterly sectioned data, both has been programmed. The models of each stock is then
recorded with the choice of best model being the point of comparison.
The results of Adebiyi, Adewumi, and Ayo 2014a is shown below, with the corresponding
results of this thesis for both the full­ and quarterly data.
Each table from Adebiyi, Adewumi, and Ayo 2014a can be seen side by side with the ta­
ble attempted to recreate the same results. The values from Adebiyi, Adewumi, and Ayo
2014a is under Paper, whereas the other comparison methods are parted into Quarterly
data and Full data.
Table A.2: NiftyMidcap50
Paper
MA(1)
MA(2)
MA(3)
MA(4)
AR(1)
302.68
317.63
307.80
307.63
Quarterly data
AR(1)
304.412
307.157
309.189
307.908
Full data
AR(1)
13063.345
13064.986
13068.845
13070.227
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
55
==PAGE:64==
Table A.3: Reliance
Paper
MA(1)
MA(2)
AR(1)
297.48
300.15
Quarterly data
AR(1)
299.703
302.062
Full data
AR(1)
13481.719
13486.109
Table A.4: OFSS
Paper
MA(1)
MA(2)
AR(1)
285.13
288.05
AR(2)
288.10
306.73
AR(3)
209.16
311.61
Quarterly data
AR(1)
289.875
292.331
AR(2)
292.304
293.105
AR(3)
294.097
294.333
Full data
AR(1)
12685.523
12689.081
AR(2)
12683.532
12694.268
AR(3)
12693.714
12684.070
Table A.5: ABB
Paper
MA(1)
AR(1)
318.9165
Quarterly data
AR(1)
328.806
Full data
AR(1)
15157.872
Table A.6: JSWSteel
Paper
MA(1)
MA(2)
MA(3)
MA(4)
AR(1)
274.26
277.86
275.04
275.06
AR(2)
269.38
271.65
271.31
272.27
Quarterly data
AR(1)
276.113
277.982
274.6815
275.902
AR(2)
273.165
275.132
277.328
277.760
Full data
AR(1)
11736.983
11741.548
11746.104
11750.249
AR(2)
11741.519
11741.279
11745.563
11749.225
As the results of the arima models show, the models ran using the quarterly data is very
much similar to that of Adebiyi, Adewumi, and Ayo 2014a. Both their AIC­BIC values are
similar and so is the overall model selection where they chose the same structures of the
ARIMA models. The differences in model choices is found at JSWSteel and OFSS.
56
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:65==
Final models in this replication case end up being:
yt(Nifty50) = 2340.4605 + 0.5030∅1yt−1 + ϵt + 0.3502θ1 ∈t−1
yt(Reliance) = 1438.746 + 0.6648∅1yt−1 + ϵt + 0.4371θ1 ∈t−1
yt(OFSS) = 1765.027 + 0.6096∅1yt−1 + ϵt + 0.9997θ1 ∈t−1
yt(ABB) = 1146.9402 + 0.8516∅1yt−1 + ϵt −0.1186θ1 ∈t−1
yt(JSWSTEEL) = 781.5819 + 1.4900∅1yt−1 −0.7944∅2yt−2 + ϵt −0.5629θ1 ∈t−1
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
57
==PAGE:66==
A.2
Appendix B
The GMAB stocks full ARIMA jupyter notebook can be found in this section. Some of the
plots has been commented out to better be able to read the code. It is inserted using a
ipynb coverter to html­file and then from html to pdf format, which can then be inserted
into the latex document.
58
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:67==
Open
High
Low
Close
Adj Close
Volume
Date
2010-01-04
92.000000
92.000000
92.000000
92.000000
92.000000
543887
2010-01-05
91.500000
91.500000
87.599998
89.599998
89.599998
177344
2010-01-06
89.099998
90.500000
88.300003
88.750000
88.750000
43851
2010-01-07
88.000000
88.000000
88.000000
88.000000
88.000000
296539
2010-01-08
88.699997
89.449997
87.500000
89.000000
89.000000
40014
In [1]:
import warnings
warnings.filterwarnings('ignore')
#Data Manipulation and Treatment
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import datetime as dt
from datetime import timedelta
#Plotting and Visualizations
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import seaborn as sns
import plotly.express as px
import plotly.graph_objects as go
from plotly.subplots import make_subplots
#Scikit-Learn for Modeling
from sklearn.metrics import mean_squared_error,r2_score, mean_absolute_error,mean_squared_log_error
In [2]:
#Statistics
import statsmodels.api as sm
from statsmodels.tsa.api import Holt,SimpleExpSmoothing,ExponentialSmoothing
from pmdarima import auto_arima
In [3]:
df = pd.read_csv('GMAB.CO.csv')
df.head()
df['Date'] =  pd.to_datetime(df.Date,format='%Y-%m-%d')
df.index = df['Date']
df = df.drop('Date',axis=1)
df.head()
Out[3]:
In [4]:
# df.describe()
==PAGE:68==
ADF Statistic: 0.029167068028715618
n_lags: 15
p-value: 0.9608787343545174
Critial Values:
  1%, -3.432990614846413
Critial Values:
  5%, -2.8627066052691217
Critial Values:
  10%, -2.567391029898424
In [5]:
# fig = px.line(y=df.Close, x=df.index)
# fig.update_layout(title_text='Stock Prices of GMAB',font=dict(size=12),
#                  xaxis_title_text="Date", yaxis_title_text="Close")
# fig.show()
In [6]:
from statsmodels.tsa.stattools import adfuller
from numpy import log
result = adfuller(df.Close.dropna())
print(f'ADF Statistic: {result[0]}')
print(f'n_lags: {result[2]}')
print(f'p-value: {result[1]}')
for key, value in result[4].items():
    print('Critial Values:')
    print(f'   {key}, {value}') 
In [7]:
import numpy as np, pandas as pd
from statsmodels.graphics.tsaplots import plot_acf, plot_pacf
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# plt.rcParams.update({'figure.figsize':(9,7), 'figure.dpi':120})

# # Original Series
# fig, axes = plt.subplots(3, 2)
# axes[0, 0].plot(df.Close); axes[0, 0].set_title('Original Series')
# plot_acf(df.Close, ax=axes[0, 1])

# # 1st Differencing
# axes[1, 0].plot(df.Close.diff()); axes[1, 0].set_title('1st Order Differencing')
# plot_acf(df.Close.diff().dropna(), ax=axes[1, 1])

# # 2nd Differencing
# axes[2, 0].plot(df.Close.diff().diff()); axes[2, 0].set_title('2nd Order Differencing')
# plot_acf(df.Close.diff().diff().dropna(), ax=axes[2, 1])


# axes[0,0].set_xticklabels([])
# axes[0,1].set_xticklabels([])
# axes[1,0].set_xticklabels([])
# axes[1,1].set_xticklabels([])
==PAGE:69==
1
1
1
ARIMA(0,1,0)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17809.558, Time=0.03 sec
ARIMA(0,1,1)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17811.289, Time=0.13 sec
ARIMA(0,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17812.883, Time=0.25 sec
ARIMA(0,1,3)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17813.944, Time=0.36 sec
# axes[2,1].set_xticklabels([])
# axes[2,0].set_xticklabels([])

# plt.show()
In [8]:
#three tests to see how many differentiations is needed for stationarity

from pmdarima.arima.utils import ndiffs
y = df.Close
y
## Adf Test
ndiffs(y, test='adf')  # 
Out[8]:
In [9]:
# KPSS test
ndiffs(y, test='kpss')  # 
Out[9]:
In [10]:
# PP test:
ndiffs(y, test='pp')  # 
Out[10]:
In [11]:
#model_train=df.iloc[:int(df.shape[0]*0.85)]
#model_test=df.iloc[int(df.shape[0]*0.85):]
#y_pred=model_test.copy()

train_data, test_data = df[0:int(len(df)*0.85)], df[int(len(df)*0.85):]
y_train = train_data['Close'].values
y_test = test_data['Close'].values
y_pred = y_test.copy()
In [12]:
model_arima= auto_arima(train_data["Close"],trace=True, error_action='ignore', start_p=1,start_q=1,max_p=5,max_q=5,
              suppress_warnings=True,stepwise=False,seasonal=False,max_order=10)
model_arima.fit(train_data["Close"])
==PAGE:70==
ARIMA(0,1,4)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.853, Time=0.49 sec
ARIMA(0,1,5)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.721, Time=0.68 sec
ARIMA(1,1,0)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17811.282, Time=0.06 sec
ARIMA(1,1,1)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17812.616, Time=0.54 sec
ARIMA(1,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17815.188, Time=0.38 sec
ARIMA(1,1,3)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.944, Time=1.28 sec
ARIMA(1,1,4)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17816.420, Time=1.18 sec
ARIMA(1,1,5)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17816.539, Time=2.21 sec
ARIMA(2,1,0)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17812.877, Time=0.18 sec
ARIMA(2,1,1)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.500, Time=0.78 sec
ARIMA(2,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17792.184, Time=1.35 sec
ARIMA(2,1,3)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=2.15 sec
ARIMA(2,1,4)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=2.87 sec
ARIMA(2,1,5)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=3.28 sec
ARIMA(3,1,0)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17813.898, Time=0.27 sec
ARIMA(3,1,1)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.960, Time=0.66 sec
ARIMA(3,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17793.766, Time=2.04 sec
ARIMA(3,1,3)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17796.235, Time=2.90 sec
ARIMA(3,1,4)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=3.35 sec
ARIMA(3,1,5)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=3.74 sec
ARIMA(4,1,0)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.526, Time=0.34 sec
ARIMA(4,1,1)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17816.099, Time=1.18 sec
ARIMA(4,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=2.56 sec
ARIMA(4,1,3)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=2.53 sec
ARIMA(4,1,4)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=3.32 sec
ARIMA(4,1,5)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=4.17 sec
ARIMA(5,1,0)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.740, Time=0.45 sec
ARIMA(5,1,1)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17816.484, Time=1.96 sec
ARIMA(5,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=2.70 sec
ARIMA(5,1,3)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=3.36 sec
ARIMA(5,1,4)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=3.93 sec
ARIMA(5,1,5)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=5.00 sec
Best model:  ARIMA(2,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept
Total fit time: 62.701 seconds
ARIMA(order=(2, 1, 2), scoring_args={}, suppress_warnings=True)
SARIMAX Results
Dep. Variable:
y
No. Observations:
2120
Model:
SARIMAX(2, 1, 2)
Log Likelihood
-8890.092
Date:
Wed, 14 Jul 2021
AIC
17792.184
Time:
10:14:36
BIC
17826.136
Sample:
0
HQIC
17804.614
Out[12]:
In [13]:
model_arima.summary()
# for table in model_arima.summary().tables:
#     print(table.as_latex_tabular())
Out[13]:
==PAGE:71==
- 2120
Covariance Type:
opg
coef
std err
z
P>|z|
[0.025
0.975]
intercept
0.1166
0.094
1.236
0.217
-0.068
0.302
ar.L1
1.6642
0.013
125.606
0.000
1.638
1.690
ar.L2
-0.9393
0.013
-73.413
0.000
-0.964
-0.914
ma.L1
-1.6991
0.012
-147.219
0.000
-1.722
-1.676
ma.L2
0.9616
0.010
98.807
0.000
0.942
0.981
sigma2
257.9641
2.003
128.759
0.000
254.037
261.891
Ljung-Box (Q):
93.25
Jarque-Bera (JB):
123207.56
Prob(Q):
0.00
Prob(JB):
0.00
Heteroskedasticity (H):
165.22
Skew:
-0.37
Prob(H) (two-sided):
0.00
Kurtosis:
40.35
Warnings:
[1] Covariance matrix calculated using the outer product of gradients (complex-step).
In [14]:
# x = np.arange(y_test.shape[0])
# plt.scatter(x, y_test, marker='o', color='red')
# plt.plot(x, model_arima.predict(n_periods=y_test.shape[0]))
# plt.title('Actual test samples vs. forecasts')
# plt.legend(loc='upper center',  fancybox=True, ncol=5, labels=['forecast', 'test data'])
# plt.show()
In [15]:
preds, conf_int = model_arima.predict(n_periods=test_data.shape[0], return_conf_int=True)
print("Test RMSE: %.3f" % np.sqrt(mean_squared_error(y_test, preds)))

x_axis = np.arange(y_train.shape[0] + preds.shape[0])
plt.plot(df.index[: 2120], train_data['Close'], alpha=0.75)
plt.plot(df.index[2120 :], preds, alpha=0.75)  # Forecasts
plt.plot(df.index[2120 :], test_data['Close'], alpha=0.9, marker=',')  # Test data
plt.fill_between(df.index[2120 :],
                 conf_int[:, 0], conf_int[:, 1],
                 alpha=0.1, color='b')
==PAGE:72==
Test RMSE: 178.262
Text(0.5, 0, 'Year')
ARIMA(0,1,0)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17809.558, Time=0.03 sec
ARIMA(0,1,1)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17811.289, Time=0.13 sec
ARIMA(0,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17812.883, Time=0.25 sec
ARIMA(0,1,3)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17813.944, Time=0.37 sec
ARIMA(0,1,4)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.853, Time=0.52 sec
ARIMA(0,1,5)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.721, Time=0.72 sec
ARIMA(1,1,0)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17811.282, Time=0.07 sec
ARIMA(1,1,1)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17812.616, Time=0.57 sec
ARIMA(1,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17815.188, Time=0.40 sec
ARIMA(1,1,3)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.944, Time=1.37 sec
ARIMA(1,1,4)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17816.420, Time=1.18 sec
ARIMA(1,1,5)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17816.539, Time=2.29 sec
ARIMA(2,1,0)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17812.877, Time=0.17 sec
ARIMA(2,1,1)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.500, Time=0.77 sec
ARIMA(2,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17792.184, Time=1.36 sec
ARIMA(2,1,3)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=2.16 sec
ARIMA(2,1,4)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=2.86 sec
plt.title("GMAB forecast")
plt.xlabel("Year")
Out[15]:
In [16]:
model_train=df.iloc[:int(df.shape[0]*0.85)]
model_test=df.iloc[int(df.shape[0]*0.85):]
y_pred=model_test.copy()

model_arima_stats= auto_arima(model_train["Close"],trace=True, error_action='ignore', start_p=1,start_q=1,max_p=5,max_q=5,
              suppress_warnings=True,stepwise=False,seasonal=False,max_order=10,verbose=0)
model_arima_stats.fit(model_train["Close"])
==PAGE:73==
ARIMA(2,1,5)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=3.29 sec
ARIMA(3,1,0)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17813.898, Time=0.25 sec
ARIMA(3,1,1)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.960, Time=0.69 sec
ARIMA(3,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17793.766, Time=1.99 sec
ARIMA(3,1,3)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17796.235, Time=2.83 sec
ARIMA(3,1,4)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=3.24 sec
ARIMA(3,1,5)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=3.86 sec
ARIMA(4,1,0)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.526, Time=0.34 sec
ARIMA(4,1,1)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17816.099, Time=1.15 sec
ARIMA(4,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=2.49 sec
ARIMA(4,1,3)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=2.57 sec
ARIMA(4,1,4)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=3.32 sec
ARIMA(4,1,5)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=4.14 sec
ARIMA(5,1,0)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17814.740, Time=0.45 sec
ARIMA(5,1,1)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=17816.484, Time=1.92 sec
ARIMA(5,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=2.73 sec
ARIMA(5,1,3)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=3.40 sec
ARIMA(5,1,4)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=3.98 sec
ARIMA(5,1,5)(0,0,0)[0] intercept   : AIC=inf, Time=4.80 sec
Best model:  ARIMA(2,1,2)(0,0,0)[0] intercept
Total fit time: 62.683 seconds
ARIMA(order=(2, 1, 2), scoring_args={}, suppress_warnings=True)
R Square Score ARIMA:  0.039689912218057954
Mean Square Error ARIMA:  31777.414150111545
Out[16]:
In [17]:
model_scores_r2=[]
model_scores_mse=[]
model_scores_rmse=[]
model_scores_mae=[]
model_scores_rmsle=[]
prediction_arima_stats=model_arima_stats.predict(len(model_test))
y_pred["ARIMA Model Prediction"]=prediction_arima_stats
r2_arima= r2_score(y_pred["Close"],y_pred["ARIMA Model Prediction"])
mse_arima= mean_squared_error(y_pred["Close"],y_pred["ARIMA Model Prediction"])
rmse_arima=np.sqrt(mean_squared_error(y_pred["Close"],y_pred["ARIMA Model Prediction"]))
mae_arima=mean_absolute_error(y_pred["Close"],y_pred["ARIMA Model Prediction"])
rmsle_arima = np.sqrt(mean_squared_log_error(y_pred["Close"],y_pred["ARIMA Model Prediction"]))
model_scores_r2.append(r2_arima)
model_scores_mse.append(mse_arima)
model_scores_rmse.append(rmse_arima)
model_scores_mae.append(mae_arima)
model_scores_rmsle.append(rmsle_arima)
print("R Square Score ARIMA: ",r2_arima)
print("Mean Square Error ARIMA: ",mse_arima)
print("Root Mean Square Error ARIMA: ",rmse_arima)
print("Mean Absoulute Error ARIMA: ",mae_arima)
print("Root Mean Squared Logarithmic Error ARIMA: ", rmsle_arima)
==PAGE:74==
Root Mean Square Error ARIMA:  178.26220617425204
Mean Absoulute Error ARIMA:  136.05949301066377
Root Mean Squared Logarithmic Error ARIMA:  0.1433294488871698
Root mean squared error: 20.9743636704486
SMAPE: 1.4098077201192851
In [18]:
# fig=go.Figure()
# fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x=model_train.index, y=model_train["Close"], mode='lines',name="Train Data for Stock Prices"))
# fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x=model_test.index, y=model_test["Close"], mode='lines',name="Validation Data for Stock Prices",))
# fig.add_trace(go.Scatter(x=model_test.index, y=y_pred["ARIMA Model Prediction"], mode='lines',name="Prediction for Stock Pric
# fig.update_layout(title="ARIMA",xaxis_title="Date",yaxis_title="Close",legend=dict(x=0,y=1,traceorder="normal"),font=dict(siz
# fig.show()
In [19]:
train_data, test_data = df[0:int(len(df)*0.85)], df[int(len(df)*0.85):]
y_train = train_data['Close'].values
y_test = test_data['Close'].values
In [20]:
from sklearn.metrics import mean_squared_error
from pmdarima.metrics import smape

model = model_arima  # seeded from the model we've already fit

def forecast_one_step():
    fc, conf_int = model.predict(n_periods=1, return_conf_int=True)
    return (
        fc.tolist()[0],
        np.asarray(conf_int).tolist()[0])

forecasts = []
confidence_intervals = []

for new_ob in y_test:
    fc, conf = forecast_one_step()
    forecasts.append(fc)
    confidence_intervals.append(conf)

    # Updates the existing model with a small number of MLE steps
    model.update(new_ob)

print(f"Root mean squared error: {np.sqrt(mean_squared_error(y_test, forecasts))}")
print(f"SMAPE: {smape(y_test, forecasts)}")
In [21]:
# fig, axes = plt.subplots(2, 1, figsize=(12, 12))

==PAGE:75==
Dates
ARIMA Model Prediction
0
2019-12-31
1685.266316
1
2020-01-01
1685.794988
# # --------------------- Actual vs. Predicted --------------------------
# axes[0].plot(train_data.index,y_train, color='blue', label='Training Data')
# axes[0].plot(test_data.index, forecasts, color='green', marker='o',label='Predicted Price')

# axes[0].plot(test_data.index, y_test, color='red', label='Actual Price')
# axes[0].set_title('Genmap stock prediction')
# axes[0].set_xlabel('Dates')
# axes[0].set_ylabel('Prices')

# axes[0].set_xticks(np.arange(0,252,300).tolist(), test_data.index[0:252:300].tolist())
# axes[0].legend()


# # ------------------ Predicted with confidence intervals ----------------
# axes[1].plot(train_data.index,y_train, color='blue', label='Training Data')
# axes[1].plot(test_data.index, forecasts, color='green',
#              label='Predicted Price')

# axes[1].set_title('Prices Predictions & Confidence Intervals')
# axes[1].set_xlabel('Dates')
# axes[1].set_ylabel('Prices')

# conf_int = np.asarray(confidence_intervals)
# axes[1].fill_between(test_data.index,
#                      conf_int[:, 0], conf_int[:, 1],
#                      alpha=0.9, color='orange',
#                      label="Confidence Intervals")

# axes[1].set_xticks(np.arange(0,252,300).tolist(), test_data.index[0:252:300].tolist())
# axes[1].legend()
In [22]:
ARIMA_model_new_date=[]
ARIMA_model_new_prediction=[]

for i in range(1,11):
    ARIMA_model_new_date.append(df.index[-1]+timedelta(days=i))
    ARIMA_model_new_prediction.append(model_arima.predict((len(model_test))+i)[-1])
    
pd.set_option('display.float_format', lambda x: '%.6f' % x)
model_predictions=pd.DataFrame(zip(ARIMA_model_new_date,ARIMA_model_new_prediction), columns=["Dates","ARIMA Model Prediction"]
model_predictions
Out[22]:
==PAGE:76==
2
2020-01-02
1686.322777
3
2020-01-03
1686.853333
4
2020-01-04
1687.389405
5
2020-01-05
1687.932070
6
2020-01-06
1688.480464
7
2020-01-07
1689.032081
8
2020-01-08
1689.583546
9
2020-01-09
1690.131617
In [ ]:
 
In [ ]:
 
==PAGE:77==
A.3
Appendix C
In this section the code of the LSTM network belonging to the GMAB stock will be pre­
sented as the full Jupyter Notebook. like the notebook of the ARIMA network, it is inserted
using a ipynb coverter to html­file and then from html to pdf format, which can then be in­
serted into the latex document.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
69
==PAGE:78==
Number of rows and columns: (2495, 7)
Date
Open
High
Low
Close
Adj Close
Volume
0
2010-01-04
92.000000
92.000000
92.000000
92.000000
92.000000
543887
1
2010-01-05
91.500000
91.500000
87.599998
89.599998
89.599998
177344
2
2010-01-06
89.099998
90.500000
88.300003
88.750000
88.750000
43851
3
2010-01-07
88.000000
88.000000
88.000000
88.000000
88.000000
296539
4
2010-01-08
88.699997
89.449997
87.500000
89.000000
89.000000
40014
(345, 1)
In [1]:
import math
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import keras
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
from keras.models import Sequential
from keras.layers import Dense
from keras.layers import LSTM
from keras.layers import Dropout
from keras.layers import *
from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler
from sklearn.metrics import mean_squared_error
from sklearn.metrics import mean_absolute_error
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from keras.callbacks import EarlyStopping
from keras.callbacks import EarlyStopping, ReduceLROnPlateau, ModelCheckpoint, TensorBoard
In [2]:
df=pd.read_csv('GMAB.CO.csv')
print('Number of rows and columns:', df.shape)

df.head(5)
Out[2]:
In [3]:
training_set = df.iloc[:2150, 1:2].values
test_set = df.iloc[2150:, 1:2].values
test_set.shape
Out[3]:
In [4]:
# Feature Scaling
sc = MinMaxScaler(feature_range = (0, 1))
training_set_scaled = sc.fit_transform(training_set)
==PAGE:79==
(2100, 50, 1)
(2100,)
(50, 1)
<keras.callbacks.History at 0x1d37635a518>
# Creating a data structure with 60 time-steps and 1 output
X_train = []
y_train = []
for i in range(50, 2150):
    X_train.append(training_set_scaled[i-50:i, 0])
    y_train.append(training_set_scaled[i, 0])
X_train, y_train = np.array(X_train), np.array(y_train)
X_train = np.reshape(X_train, (X_train.shape[0], X_train.shape[1], 1))
#(740, 60, 1)
X_train.shape
print(X_train.shape)
print(y_train.shape)
(X_train.shape[1], 1)
Out[4]:
In [5]:
model = Sequential()
#Adding the first LSTM layer and some Dropout regularisation
model.add(LSTM(units = 50, return_sequences = True, input_shape = (X_train.shape[1], 1)))
model.add(Dropout(0.2))
# Adding a second LSTM layer and some Dropout regularisation
model.add(LSTM(units = 50, return_sequences = True))
model.add(Dropout(0.2))
# Adding a third LSTM layer and some Dropout regularisation
model.add(LSTM(units = 50, return_sequences = True))
model.add(Dropout(0.2))
# Adding a fourth LSTM layer and some Dropout regularisation
model.add(LSTM(units = 50))
model.add(Dropout(0.2))
# Adding the output layer
model.add(Dense(units = 1))

# Compiling the RNN
model.compile(optimizer = 'adam', loss = 'mean_squared_error')

# Fitting the RNN to the Training set
model.fit(X_train, y_train, epochs = 100, batch_size = 128, verbose = 0)
Out[5]:
In [6]:
# model.summary()
# for table in model.summary().tables:
#     print(table.as_latex_tabular())
==PAGE:80==
(295, 50, 1)
(395, 1)
(295, 1)
In [7]:
# Getting the predicted stock price of 2017
dataset_train = df.iloc[:2150, 1:2]
dataset_test = df.iloc[2150:, 1:2]
dataset_total = pd.concat((dataset_train, dataset_test), axis = 0)
inputs = dataset_total[len(dataset_total) - len(dataset_test) - 50:].values
inputs = sc.transform(inputs)
inputs = inputs.reshape(-1,1)

X_test = []
for i in range(50, 345):
    X_test.append(inputs[i-50:i, 0])
X_test = np.array(X_test)
X_test = np.reshape(X_test, (X_test.shape[0], X_test.shape[1], 1))
print(X_test.shape)
# (459, 60, 1)
In [8]:
inputs.shape
Out[8]:
In [9]:
predicted_stock_price = model.predict(X_test)
predicted_stock_price = sc.inverse_transform(predicted_stock_price)
In [10]:
predicted_stock_price.shape
Out[10]:
In [11]:
# Visualising the results
plt.plot(df.loc[:2149, 'Date'],dataset_train.values, color = 'green', label = 'GMAB stock')
plt.plot(df.loc[2150:, 'Date'],dataset_test.values, color = 'red', label = 'Real GMAB Stock Price')
plt.plot(df.loc[2200:, 'Date'],predicted_stock_price, color = 'blue', label = 'Predicted GMAB Stock Price')
plt.xticks(np.arange(0))
plt.title('GMAB Stock Price Prediction')
plt.xlabel('Time')
plt.ylabel('GMAB Stock Price')
plt.legend()
plt.show()
==PAGE:81==
Test RMSE: 136.579
In [12]:
print("Test RMSE: %.3f" % np.sqrt(mean_squared_error(dataset_test.values[50:345], predicted_stock_price)))
==PAGE:82==
A.4
Appendix D
In this appendix all results of the ARIMA models is displayed. All 10 different models are
shown with their model summary showing the different chosen models, as well as their
coefficients and significance. The stocks are labeled by their ticker.
A.4.1
NZYM­B
Tabled of model summary:
Dep. Variable:
y
No. Observations:
2120
Model:
SARIMAX(2, 1, 2)
Log Likelihood
­5845.039
Date:
Wed, 14 Jul 2021
AIC
11702.078
Time:
00:33:04
BIC
11736.030
Sample:
0
HQIC
11714.508
­ 2120
Covariance Type:
opg
coef
std err
z
P> |z|
[0.025
0.975]
intercept
0.3148
0.277
1.137
0.256
­0.228
0.858
ar.L1
­1.1840
0.008
­152.870
0.000
­1.199
­1.169
ar.L2
­0.9872
0.008
­117.186
0.000
­1.004
­0.971
ma.L1
1.1853
0.010
113.089
0.000
1.165
1.206
ma.L2
0.9770
0.011
88.939
0.000
0.955
0.998
sigma2
14.5670
0.144
100.855
0.000
14.284
14.850
Ljung­Box (L1) (Q):
0.05
Jarque­Bera (JB):
41706.37
Prob(Q):
0.83
Prob(JB):
0.00
Heteroskedasticity (H):
3.07
Skew:
­1.45
Prob(H) (two­sided):
0.00
Kurtosis:
24.54
RMSE forecast:= 39.853
RMSE adjusting model:= 4.740
A.4.2
NOVO­B
Tabled of model summary:
Dep. Variable:
y
No. Observations:
2119
Model:
SARIMAX(4, 1, 4)
Log Likelihood
­6014.546
Date:
Wed, 14 Jul 2021
AIC
12049.093
Time:
00:51:36
BIC
12105.675
Sample:
0
HQIC
12069.808
­ 2119
Covariance Type:
opg
74
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:83==
coef
std err
z
P> |z|
[0.025
0.975]
intercept
0.0936
0.099
0.948
0.343
­0.100
0.287
ar.L1
0.3080
0.090
3.428
0.001
0.132
0.484
ar.L2
0.0218
0.054
0.404
0.686
­0.084
0.128
ar.L3
0.4882
0.052
9.320
0.000
0.386
0.591
ar.L4
­0.8122
0.086
­9.429
0.000
­0.981
­0.643
ma.L1
­0.3121
0.084
­3.699
0.000
­0.478
­0.147
ma.L2
­0.0351
0.053
­0.660
0.509
­0.139
0.069
ma.L3
­0.4483
0.050
­8.936
0.000
­0.547
­0.350
ma.L4
0.8365
0.080
10.462
0.000
0.680
0.993
sigma2
17.0487
0.194
87.730
0.000
16.668
17.430
Ljung­Box (L1) (Q):
0.08
Jarque­Bera (JB):
19471.65
Prob(Q):
0.77
Prob(JB):
0.00
Heteroskedasticity (H):
8.71
Skew:
­0.84
Prob(H) (two­sided):
0.00
Kurtosis:
17.76
RMSE forecast:= 25.236
RMSE adjusting model:= 4.707
A.4.3
GMAB
Tabled of model summary:
Dep. Variable:
y
No. Observations:
2120
Model:
SARIMAX(2, 1, 2)
Log Likelihood
­8890.092
Date:
Wed, 14 Jul 2021
AIC
17792.184
Time:
00:26:05
BIC
17826.136
Sample:
0
HQIC
17804.614
­ 2120
Covariance Type:
opg
coef
std err
z
P> |z|
[0.025
0.975]
intercept
0.1166
0.094
1.236
0.217
­0.068
0.302
ar.L1
1.6642
0.013
125.606
0.000
1.638
1.690
ar.L2
­0.9393
0.013
­73.413
0.000
­0.964
­0.914
ma.L1
­1.6991
0.012
­147.219
0.000
­1.722
­1.676
ma.L2
0.9616
0.010
98.807
0.000
0.942
0.981
sigma2
257.9641
2.003
128.759
0.000
254.037
261.891
Ljung­Box (L1) (Q):
0.36
Jarque­Bera (JB):
123207.55
Prob(Q):
0.55
Prob(JB):
0.00
Heteroskedasticity (H):
165.22
Skew:
­0.37
Prob(H) (two­sided):
0.00
Kurtosis:
40.35
RMSE forecast:= 178.262
RMSE adjusting model:= 20.970
A.4.4
LUN
Tabled of model summary:
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
75
==PAGE:84==
Dep. Variable:
y
No. Observations:
2120
Model:
SARIMAX(2, 1, 3)
Log Likelihood
­5910.848
Date:
Wed, 14 Jul 2021
AIC
11835.697
Time:
01:01:09
BIC
11875.308
Sample:
0
HQIC
11850.198
­ 2120
Covariance Type:
opg
coef
std err
z
P> |z|
[0.025
0.975]
intercept
0.1103
0.059
1.861
0.063
­0.006
0.226
ar.L1
1.2834
0.018
69.582
0.000
1.247
1.320
ar.L2
­0.9446
0.020
­48.038
0.000
­0.983
­0.906
ma.L1
­1.2994
0.021
­62.750
0.000
­1.340
­1.259
ma.L2
0.9488
0.027
35.432
0.000
0.896
1.001
ma.L3
0.0128
0.013
0.959
0.338
­0.013
0.039
sigma2
15.5011
0.137
113.168
0.000
15.233
15.770
Ljung­Box (L1) (Q):
0.00
Jarque­Bera (JB):
108612.63
Prob(Q):
0.99
Prob(JB):
0.00
Heteroskedasticity (H):
11.88
Skew:
­1.68
Prob(H) (two­sided):
0.00
Kurtosis:
37.91
RMSE forecast:= 197.887
RMSE adjusting model:= 8.411
A.4.5
ROV
Tabled of model summary:
Dep. Variable:
y
No. Observations:
2120
Model:
SARIMAX(5, 2, 0)
Log Likelihood
­8752.660
Date:
Wed, 14 Jul 2021
AIC
17519.320
Time:
01:16:45
BIC
17558.928
Sample:
0
HQIC
17533.821
­ 2120
Covariance Type:
opg
coef
std err
z
P> |z|
[0.025
0.975]
intercept
0.0042
0.336
0.013
0.990
­0.654
0.663
ar.L1
­1.1679
0.012
­100.242
0.000
­1.191
­1.145
ar.L2
­0.9834
0.019
­52.203
0.000
­1.020
­0.946
ar.L3
­0.6894
0.023
­30.024
0.000
­0.734
­0.644
ar.L4
­0.4397
0.021
­21.213
0.000
­0.480
­0.399
ar.L5
­0.1973
0.014
­13.963
0.000
­0.225
­0.170
sigma2
227.3263
2.670
85.129
0.000
222.092
232.560
Ljung­Box (L1) (Q):
3.59
Jarque­Bera (JB):
16214.82
Prob(Q):
0.06
Prob(JB):
0.00
Heteroskedasticity (H):
0.12
Skew:
0.50
Prob(H) (two­sided):
0.00
Kurtosis:
16.52
76
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:85==
RMSE forecast:= 58.919
RMSE adjusting model:= 3.180
A.4.6
VWS
Tabled of model summary:
Dep. Variable:
y
No. Observations:
2120
Model:
SARIMAX(2, 1, 2)
Log Likelihood
­3828.993
Date:
Wed, 14 Jul 2021
AIC
7669.986
Time:
01:07:12
BIC
7703.938
Sample:
0
HQIC
7682.416
­ 2120
Covariance Type:
opg
coef
std err
z
P> |z|
[0.025
0.975]
intercept
0.0217
0.124
0.176
0.860
­0.221
0.264
ar.L1
­1.7449
0.034
­51.373
0.000
­1.811
­1.678
ar.L2
­0.9238
0.029
­31.393
0.000
­0.981
­0.866
ma.L1
1.7077
0.038
44.810
0.000
1.633
1.782
ma.L2
0.8932
0.034
26.500
0.000
0.827
0.959
sigma2
2.1728
0.023
93.306
0.000
2.127
2.218
Ljung­Box (L1) (Q):
0.54
Jarque­Bera (JB):
53848.01
Prob(Q):
0.46
Prob(JB):
0.00
Heteroskedasticity (H):
2.98
Skew:
­1.82
Prob(H) (two­sided):
0.00
Kurtosis:
27.43
RMSE forecast:= 28.277
RMSE adjusting model:= 1.952
A.4.7
RTX
Tabled of model summary:
Dep. Variable:
y
No. Observations:
2138
Model:
SARIMAX(2, 1, 2)
Log Likelihood
­2290.482
Date:
Wed, 14 Jul 2021
AIC
4592.963
Time:
01:17:08
BIC
4626.966
Sample:
0
HQIC
4605.407
­ 2138
Covariance Type:
opg
coef
std err
z
P> |z|
[0.025
0.975]
intercept
0.0409
0.041
1.005
0.315
­0.039
0.121
ar.L1
­0.6329
0.021
­30.467
0.000
­0.674
­0.592
ar.L2
­0.9695
0.020
­48.167
0.000
­1.009
­0.930
ma.L1
0.6382
0.025
25.641
0.000
0.589
0.687
ma.L2
0.9545
0.024
40.379
0.000
0.908
1.001
sigma2
0.4988
0.009
54.261
0.000
0.481
0.517
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
77
==PAGE:86==
Ljung­Box (L1) (Q):
0.01
Jarque­Bera (JB):
1631.02
Prob(Q):
0.91
Prob(JB):
0.00
Heteroskedasticity (H):
1.17
Skew:
­0.57
Prob(H) (two­sided):
0.04
Kurtosis:
7.13
RMSE forecast:= 5.561
RMSE adjusting model:= 1.104
A.4.8
NORDIC
Tabled of model summary:
Dep. Variable:
y
No. Observations:
2120
Model:
SARIMAX(0, 2, 5)
Log Likelihood
406.047
Date:
Wed, 14 Jul 2021
AIC
­798.095
Time:
01:18:22
BIC
­758.487
Sample:
0
HQIC
­783.594
­ 2120
Covariance Type:
opg
coef
std err
z
P> |z|
[0.025
0.975]
intercept
­2.216e­05
5.8e­05
­0.382
0.703
­0.000
9.16e­05
ma.L1
­1.1317
0.009
­126.862
0.000
­1.149
­1.114
ma.L2
0.0971
0.014
7.053
0.000
0.070
0.124
ma.L3
­0.1815
0.009
­19.317
0.000
­0.200
­0.163
ma.L4
0.1505
0.012
12.257
0.000
0.126
0.175
ma.L5
0.0712
0.008
9.225
0.000
0.056
0.086
sigma2
0.0407
0.000
125.314
0.000
0.040
0.041
Ljung­Box (L1) (Q):
1.58
Jarque­Bera (JB):
756167.47
Prob(Q):
0.21
Prob(JB):
0.00
Heteroskedasticity (H):
0.01
Skew:
2.19
Prob(H) (two­sided):
0.00
Kurtosis:
95.46
RMSE forecast:= 1.065
RMSE adjusting model:= 0.021
A.4.9
DEMANT
Tabled of model summary:
Dep. Variable:
y
No. Observations:
2120
Model:
SARIMAX(5, 2, 0)
Log Likelihood
­4368.912
Date:
Wed, 14 Jul 2021
AIC
8751.824
Time:
01:33:44
BIC
8791.432
Sample:
0
HQIC
8766.325
­ 2120
Covariance Type:
opg
78
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
==PAGE:87==
coef
std err
z
P> |z|
[0.025
0.975]
intercept
0.0013
0.043
0.031
0.975
­0.083
0.085
ar.L1
­0.8669
0.013
­67.390
0.000
­0.892
­0.842
ar.L2
­0.6844
0.020
­33.925
0.000
­0.724
­0.645
ar.L3
­0.5627
0.020
­28.455
0.000
­0.602
­0.524
ar.L4
­0.3944
0.020
­19.251
0.000
­0.435
­0.354
ar.L5
­0.2160
0.016
­13.877
0.000
­0.246
­0.185
sigma2
3.6222
0.048
74.842
0.000
3.527
3.717
Ljung­Box (L1) (Q):
1.29
Jarque­Bera (JB):
36892.70
Prob(Q):
0.26
Prob(JB):
0.00
Heteroskedasticity (H):
3.07
Skew:
­1.05
Prob(H) (two­sided):
0.00
Kurtosis:
23.34
RMSE forecast:= 171.087
RMSE adjusting model:= 5.004
A.4.10
BAVA
Tabled of model summary:
Dep. Variable:
y
No. Observations:
2120
Model:
SARIMAX(2, 1, 1)
Log Likelihood
­7316.422
Date:
Wed, 14 Jul 2021
AIC
14642.844
Time:
01:25:15
BIC
14671.138
Sample:
0
HQIC
14653.203
­ 2120
Covariance Type:
opg
coef
std err
z
P> |z|
[0.025
0.975]
intercept
0.0926
0.407
0.227
0.820
­0.706
0.891
ar.L1
­1.0283
0.017
­60.133
0.000
­1.062
­0.995
ar.L2
­0.0587
0.013
­4.488
0.000
­0.084
­0.033
ma.L1
0.9862
0.011
85.831
0.000
0.964
1.009
sigma2
58.4154
0.227
257.499
0.000
57.971
58.860
Ljung­Box (L1) (Q):
0.00
Jarque­Bera (JB):
7603565.70
Prob(Q):
1.00
Prob(JB):
0.00
Heteroskedasticity (H):
5.23
Skew:
­9.95
Prob(H) (two­sided):
0.00
Kurtosis:
295.78
RMSE forecast:= 39.739
RMSE adjusting model:= 3.969
A.5
Appendix E
In this section of the appendix the python script used for transforming the company fun­
damentals data. The script was provided by Kurt Kara as an external sparring partner.
The data had to be transformed due to copyrights from Source: Bloomberg Finance Lp.
who ultimately provided the data under the restriction of it being transformed.
Deep neural networks applied for stock selection
79
==PAGE:88==
import bql
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
from collections import OrderedDict
bq   = bql.Service()
start_year  = 2010
end_year    = 2020
year=start_year
while (year<=end_year):       
    print("processing Year "+str(year))
    endstr1 = '-01-01'
    
    
    #------------------------------ DATE RANGES ----------------------
--------
    date_range       = 
bq.func.range(str(year)+endstr1,str(year)+endstr1)
    date_range_tp12m = bq.func.range(str(year+1)+endstr1 
,str(year+1)+endstr1)
    date_range_tm12m = bq.func.range(str(year-1)+endstr1,str(year-
1)+endstr1)
    date_range_tm1   = bq.func.range(str(year-1)+endstr1,str(year-
1)+endstr1)
    date_range_vol   = bq.func.range(str(year-
1)+endstr1,str(year)+endstr1)
    
    #------------------------------ VALUES ---------------------------
--------
    shout        = bq.data.bs_sh_out(dates=date_range, Fill='prev')
    priceUSD     = bq.data.px_last(dates=date_range, Fill='prev', 
CURRENCY='USD')
    price        = bq.data.px_last(dates=date_range, Fill='prev')
    price_tm1YR  = bq.data.px_last(dates=date_range_tm12m, 
Fill='prev')
    price_tp12m  = bq.data.px_last(dates=date_range_tp12m, 
Fill='prev')
    
    
   
    
    
    coname    = bq.data.long_comp_name()
    
    eps        = bq.data.is_eps (dates=date_range, Fill='prev')
    sps        = bq.data.revenue_per_sh (dates=date_range, 
==PAGE:89==
Fill='prev')
    fps        = bq.data.free_cash_flow_per_sh (dates=date_range, 
Fill='prev')
    
    volatility = bq.data.volatility(CALC_INTERVAL=date_range_vol, 
PER='D', CURRENCY='USD')
    roc        = bq.data.return_on_cap(dates=date_range, Fill='prev')
    gmargin    = bq.data.gross_margin(dates=date_range, Fill='prev')
    growthYoY  = bq.data.eps_growth(dates=date_range, Fill='prev')
    sgrowthYoY = bq.data.sales_growth(dates=date_range, Fill='prev')
    
    shy00      = bq.data.shareholder_yield_ex_debt(dates=date_range, 
Fill='prev')
    ticker     = bq.data.company_corp_ticker()
    
    
    Fields = OrderedDict()
    Fields["NAME"]      =  coname
    Fields["TICKER"]    =  ticker
    Fields["YEAR"]      =  price
    Fields["EY"]        =  100 * eps / price
    Fields["SY"]        =  100 * sps / price
    Fields["FCFY"]      =  100 * fps / price
    Fields["VOL"]       =  volatility
    Fields["MOM12"]     =  100*(price / price_tm1YR - 1)
    Fields['ROC']       = roc
    Fields['GMARGIN']   = gmargin
    Fields['GROWTHYOY'] = growthYoY
    Fields['SGROWTHYOY']= sgrowthYoY
    Fields['MCAP']      = shout * priceUSD / 1000000000
    Fields['SHY0']      = shy00
    Fields['RETURN']    = (price_tp12m / price - 1)
       
    univ    = bq.univ.members('KFX Index', dates= 
bq.func.range(str(year)+endstr1,str(year)+endstr1))
    request = bql.Request(univ, Fields)
    response  = bq.execute(request)
    df000 = response[0].df() 
    df001 = response[1].df() 
    df002 = response[2].df() 
    df003 = response[3].df() 
    df004 = response[4].df() 
    df005 = response[5].df() 
    df006 = response[6].df() 
    df007 = response[7].df() 
    df008 = response[8].df() 
    df009 = response[9].df() 
    df010 = response[10].df() 
    df011 = response[11].df() 
    df012 = response[12].df() 
    df013 = response[13].df() 
    df014 = response[14].df() 
==PAGE:90==
    df000 = df000['NAME']
    df001 = df001['TICKER']
    df002 = df002['YEAR']
    df003 = df003['EY']
    df004 = df004['SY']
    df005 = df005['FCFY']
    df006 = df006['VOL']
    df007 = df007['MOM12']
    df008 = df008['ROC']
    df009 = df009['GMARGIN']
    df010 = df010['GROWTHYOY']
    df011 = df011['SGROWTHYOY']
    df012 = df012['MCAP']
    df013 = df013['SHY0']
    df014 = df014['RETURN']
    
    
        
    df003 = df003.fillna(df003.median())        
    df004 = df004.fillna(df004.median())        
    df005 = df005.fillna(df005.median())        
    df006 = df006.fillna(df006.median())        
    df007 = df007.fillna(df007.median())        
    df008 = df008.fillna(df008.median())        
    df009 = df009.fillna(df009.median())        
    df010 = df010.fillna(df010.median())        
    df011 = df011.fillna(df011.median())        
    f012 = df012.fillna(df012.median())        
    df013 = df013.fillna(df013.median())        
    df014 = df014.fillna(df014.median())        
    
    dataframe = 
pd.concat([df000,df001,df002,df003,df004,df005,df006,df007,df008,df009
,df010,df011,df012,df013,df014], axis=1)
    dataframe["YEAR"]  = year
   
    
    dataframe['EY']           = 1/(1+ np.exp((dataframe['EY'] - 
dataframe['EY'].mean() )/dataframe['EY'].std()))
    dataframe['SY']           = 1/(1+ np.exp((dataframe['SY'] - 
dataframe['SY'].mean() )/dataframe['SY'].std()))
    dataframe['FCFY']         = 1/(1+ np.exp((dataframe['FCFY'] - 
dataframe['FCFY'].mean() )/dataframe['FCFY'].std()))
    dataframe['VOL']          = 1/(1+ np.exp((dataframe['VOL'] - 
dataframe['VOL'].mean() )/dataframe['VOL'].std()))
    dataframe['MOM12']        = 1/(1+ np.exp((dataframe['MOM12'] - 
dataframe['MOM12'].mean() )/dataframe['MOM12'].std()))
    dataframe['ROC']          = 1/(1+ np.exp((dataframe['ROC'] - 
dataframe['ROC'].mean() )/dataframe['ROC'].std()))
    dataframe['GMARGIN']      = 1/(1+ np.exp((dataframe['GMARGIN'] - 
dataframe['GMARGIN'].mean() )/dataframe['GMARGIN'].std()))
    dataframe['GROWTHYOY']    = 1/(1+ np.exp((dataframe['GROWTHYOY'] - 
dataframe['GROWTHYOY'].mean() )/dataframe['GROWTHYOY'].std()))
    dataframe['SGROWTHYOY']   = 1/(1+ np.exp((dataframe['SGROWTHYOY'] 
- dataframe['SGROWTHYOY'].mean() )/dataframe['SGROWTHYOY'].std()))
    dataframe['MCAP']         = 1/(1+ np.exp((dataframe['MCAP'] - 
==PAGE:91==
dataframe['MCAP'].mean() )/dataframe['MCAP'].std()))
    dataframe['RETURN']       = 1/(1+ np.exp((dataframe['RETURN'] - 
dataframe['RETURN'].mean() )/dataframe['RETURN'].std()))
    dataframe['SHY0']         = 1/(1+ np.exp((dataframe['SHY0'] - 
dataframe['SHY0'].mean() )/dataframe['SHY0'].std()))
        
    
   
    d2 = dataframe
    d2 = d2.fillna(0)
    d2 = d2.dropna()
    d2 = d2.fillna(0)
        
    if year==start_year:
        outdata  = dataframe
    else:
        outdata = np.append(outdata, d2.values, axis=0)
       
    
    year+=1
df = pd.DataFrame(outdata, columns = 
['NAME','TICKER','YEAR','EY','SY','FCFY','VOL','MOM12','ROC', 
'GMARGIN', 'GROWTHYOY', 'SGROWTHYOY', 'SHY0', 'MCAP','RETURN'])
df.to_csv('CHRISTIANDATA.csv', sep=';', decimal='.')
==PAGE:92==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
