==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design 
 
 
Josue David Guifarro Castro 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0461 
July 2021 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
 
 
Author: Josue David Guifarro Castro 
Title: Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0461 
July 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
January – July 2021 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
 
Pierre-Elouan Rèthoré 
Riccardo Riva 
Rafael Valotta Rodrigues 
Mads Mølgaard Pedersen 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Wind farm layout optimization is a topic that has gained increased momentum
within the past 15 years. However, inclusion of the load constraints within layout
optimizations is a topic that has not been explored signiﬁcantly within industry and
academia. As such, it can be a method of important decrease in the levelized cost
of energy (LCOE) as an estimated 30% of a wind farm’s lifetime cost is composed
of operation and maintenance (O&M) expenditures [1]. This thesis project aims to
explore strategies to account for loads and load constraints within an optimization
workﬂow for wind farm layouts, by providing a comparison between pure AEP op-
timization and optimization based on ﬁnancial parameters with constraints on the
lifetime design equivalent loads (LDEL) of the most relevant load signals in a wind
turbine. Scripts developed in TOPFARM and PyWake are used to carry out the
optimization, taking advantage of the high ﬂexibility allowed by the software.
A through analysis of the load surrogate and wake models is done ﬁrst, where the
importance of the use of turbulence model is addressed.
The results showcased
a signiﬁcant under-prediction of blade ﬂapwise and tower top fore-aft load signals
from ﬂow model results obtained without the use of a turbulent model. This under-
prediction was found to aﬀect load signals with low sensitivity to changes in the
turbulence intensity.
A comparison provided between the objective functions yields improved results for
the inclusion of the LDEL in the objective function and as a constraint. Nonetheless,
the improvements in the AEP or ﬁnancial balance from use of load constraints do
not warrant the use of the method.
Improvements between the best cases only
amounted to 0.0027% during a 20 year lifespan. However, the limitations in the
models used, predominantly the conservative nature of the Frandsen model, may
explain the results.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This thesis project marks the end of a journey long in the making, a combined eﬀort
that started as a dream of studying abroad for my bachelor studies. After a hiatus
of 6 years during which I worked in a plastics manufacturing plant and later in a
wind farm, I returned to university to pursue a masters degree in a topic I have been
always passionate about: renewable energy. The journey brought me to DTU, with
a long and fruitful history of research and innovation within wind energy. I might
be biased, but I think no other higher education institution in the world can make
the same claim. For this I am grateful, to have studied and shared alongside the
best in the industry.
However, not everything is always as we hope it will be. Last year with the outbreak
of the Covid-19 pandemic, all of the teaching activities at university were changed
from in-class to online. Laboratory activities and special visits had to be cancelled.
Despite this, the education level did not falter. Now the situation is improving, but
even then, much of the activities are still carried out online. This impacted the thesis
project, as most work had to be done from home and meetings with supervisors were
done through Zoom. Regardless, there is always a reason to be grateful.
To my supervisors, Pierre-Elouan, Mads, Rafael and Riccardo. For their support and
patience throughout these toiling months, endurance of the weekly Zoom meetings,
and guidance of the project.
To my friends, here in Denmark and those abroad. For the many laughs and times
shared that allowed me to relax and momentarily switch oﬀfrom the thesis.
To my old work colleagues, for teaching me so much about more than just wind
turbines and starting me down this path that I know walk.
To my family, always near although physically far. For always providing the strength
and support, reminding me to count my blessings instead of simmering in the bad
times.
Finally to L, for always being there despite everything. For the calls, the laughs,
the love, and for always being such a big fan.
Here’s to you all, without whom none of this would be possible. Gracias por todo.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
List of Figures
viii
List of Tables
x
List of Symbols and Acronyms
xi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Optimization in wind energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Report outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Theoretical background
5
2.1
Optimization theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Surrogate based optimization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Wake model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Turbulence model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
TOPFARM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.6
PyWake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Problem formulation and study methodology
19
3.1
Cost model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Site . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Case studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Optimization workﬂow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.6
Analysis methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Results
31
4.1
Study of load surrogate model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Comparison of objective functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Sensitivity study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Conclusions
53
6
Future work
55
Bibliography
56
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
vii
==PAGE:10==
List of Figures
2.1
Top 2D view (left) and 3D (right) plots of a 100-turbine wind farm’s
power production as function of one turbine’s position. Reproduced
through Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License from [13].
. . . .
6
2.2
Wind speed variation in wake of single turbine.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Flowmap of wind speed for GCL deﬁcit model and ambient U of 12
m/s. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Turbulence intensity variation in wake of single turbine. . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Flowmap of turbulence for GCL deﬁcit model and ambient TI of 7.5% 13
2.6
Flowchart of TOPFARM’s main components [23]. . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.7
Flowchart of PyWake’s main components [25]. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.8
Flowchart of component interactions within the WindFarmModel ob-
ject [25]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1
Evolution of maintenance and degradation cost with increasing com-
ponent load for 1 turbine.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Detail of maintenance cost close to 100% accumulated LDEL.
. . . .
22
3.3
Horns Rev 1 site wind direction rose. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Sample initial layout and wind farm bounding area. . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Simpliﬁed XDSM diagram for optimization problem. Adapted from
the diagram in [8].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1
Load outputs from wind2loads surrogate for diﬀerent wind speed
and turbulence intensity inputs. Load signals are: BFW - blade root
ﬂapwise, TBFA - tower bottom fore-aft, ST - shaft torsion, TTFA -
tower top fore-aft. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Evolution of DEL for a waked turbine at increasing distance from the
wake source. Wind conditions are modelled using the GCL deﬁcit
and no turbulence model for U = 12 m/s, TI = 7.5%, and shear of 0.2. 33
4.3
Evolution of DEL for a waked turbine at increasing distance from the
wake source. Wind conditions are modelled using the GCL deﬁcit
and Frandsen turbulence model for U = 12 m/s, TI = 7.5%, and
shear of 0.2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.4
Initial (left) and ﬁnal (right) layouts for optimization with aggregate
blade root ﬂapwise LDEL as objective function and no turbulence
modelling. Initial layout has AEP of 433 GWh and maximum aggre-
gate normalized LDEL of 7.287. Final layout has AEP of 395 GWh
and maximum aggregate normalized LDEL of 7.228. . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
Initial (left) and ﬁnal (right) layouts for optimization with aggregate
blade root ﬂapwise LDEL as objective function and Frandsen turbu-
lence modelling. Initial layout has AEP of 434.2 GWh and aggregate
normalized LDEL of 7.743. Final layout has AEP of 438.9 GWh and
aggregate normalized LDEL of 7.682. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
viii
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:11==
4.6
Comparison of optimized AEP for diﬀerent objective functions through
10 multistart runs.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.7
Comparison of best optimal layouts for objective function a AEP
without (a) and with (b) LDEL constraints.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.8
Comparison of optimized ﬁnancial balance for diﬀerent objective func-
tions through 10 multistart runs.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.9
Comparison of total degradation cost for diﬀerent objective functions
through 10 multistart runs.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.10 Comparison of optimization iterations for diﬀerent objective functions
through 10 multistart runs.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.11 Distribution of AEP for diﬀerent values of shear. . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.12 Distribution of AEP for diﬀerent values of capacity density. . . . . . .
47
4.13 Sensitivity of LDEL for diﬀerent load signals to ambient turbulence
intensity. Load signals are: BFW - blade root ﬂapwise, TTFA - tower
top fore-aft, ST - shaft torsion, TBFA - tower bottom fore-aft. . . . .
48
4.14 Comparison of eﬀective TI in wake of a turbine for ambient turbu-
lence intensities of 5% and 30%. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.15 Eﬀective turbulence intensity in wake of single turbine for ambient
TI of 30%. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.16 Sensitivity of LDEL for all load signals to diﬀerent maximum load
constraints. Objective function is FB1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
ix
==PAGE:12==
List of Tables
2.1
Wöhler exponents used for estimation of Lref. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1
Replacement and degradation prices per component.
. . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Wind parameters for study site. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Design lifetime DEL Ld. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1
Comparison of optimum ﬁnancial balance obtained for diﬀerent ob-
jective functions as shown in Figure 4.8.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Comparison of cases with active maintenance costs CM . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Summary of parameter and objective function combinations used in
sensitivity analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.4
Summary of parameter used for sensitivity analysis. . . . . . . . . . .
44
x
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:13==
List of Symbols and Acronyms
α
Shear exponent
∆U
Wind speed deﬁcit
γ
Parameter to calculate V AR[Leq,S]
B
Space within wind farm bounds
F(x)
CDF of log-normal distribution
µ
Mean of log-normal distribution F(x)
L
Normalized LDEL
LS
Normalized LDEL for component S
Lmax
Constraint on normalized LDEL
LS,max
Constraint on normalized LDEL of component S
ρWF
Capacity density of wind farm
σ
Standard deviation of log-normal distribution F(x)
σU
Standard deviation of wind speed
θ
Wind direction
θref
Reference wind direction
A
Rotor area
AWF
Area of wind farm
CT
Thrust coeﬃcient
CD
Total degradation costs
CDS
Degradation costs of component S
CM
Total maintenance costs
CMS
Total maintenance costs
D
Rotor diameter
DS
Accumulated lifetime component degradation
FB
Financial balance
Ld,S
Design LDEL of component S
Leq,S
Equivalent LDEL of component S
Li
load range from rainﬂow counting algorithm
Lref
short-term (1 Hz) DEL
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
xi
==PAGE:14==
m
Wöhler exponent
NR
Replacements limit factor
N20
Number of seconds in 20 year period
ni
load cycle from rainﬂow counting algorithm
Nref
reference number of cycles for short-term DEL
p(x)
Wind direction probability
Pelec
Electrical power
PSr
Relative cost of component replacement, in units WTC
PS
Relative cost of component, in units WTC
PWF
Installed power capacity of wind farm
Pre
Electricity price
Prwt
Wind turbine price
Rmax
Maximum allowable number of replacements per com-
ponent per turbine
RS,max
Maximum allowable number of replacements per tur-
bine for component S
RS
Number of replacements per turbine for component S
S
Wind turbine component
TI
Ambient turbulence intensity
TIc
Ambient and wake combined turbulence intensity
TI0
IEC 61400-1 reference turbulence intensity
TIeff
Eﬀective turbulence intensity
TIref
Reference turbulence intensity
U
Ambient wind speed
Ueff
Eﬀective wind speed
Uhub
Wind speed at hub height
Uref
Reference wind speed
V AR[Leq,S]
Variance of equivalent LDEL of component S
WP
Net energy production
wt
Number of wind turbines
WTC
Wind turbine cost
2D
Two-dimensional
xii
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:15==
3D
Three-dimensional
e ct.
Euro cents
COBYLA
Constrained optimization by linear approximation
SLSQP
Sequential Least Squares Programming
AEP
Annual energy production
BFW
Blade root ﬂapwise
CAPEX
Capital expenditures
CDF
Cummulative density function
CFD
Computational ﬂuid dynamics
COE
Cost of energy
DAWM
Deep array wake models
DEL
Damage equivalent load
DTU 10MW-RWT
DTU 10MW reference wind turbine
GCL deﬁcit
Gunner Chr. Larsen deﬁcit
LCOE
Levelized cost of energy
Me
Million Euro
NPV
Net present value
NREL
National Renewable Energy Laboratory
NTM
Normal turbulence model
NWP
Normal wind proﬁle
O&M
Operations and maintenance
ST
Shaft torsion
TBFA
Tower bottom fore-aft
TOPFARM
Topology optimization of wind farms
TTFA
Tower top fore-aft
XDSM
Extended design structure matrix
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
xiii
==PAGE:16==
xiv
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:17==
1
Introduction
The topics of sustainability, renewable energy sources, and climate neutrality have
gained signiﬁcant relevance during the past few years, as the world races to meet
the goals set up in the Paris agreement to ensure global warming does not increase
by more than 2◦C. Institutions such as WindEurope have understood this urgency
well and have outlined plans for growth of an industry that is poised to become
the leader in the green energy transition: by 2050, Europe should have an installed
oﬀshore capacity between 230 and 450 GW [2]. Reaching the 450 GW goal would set
up a scenario were climate neutrality is also reached by 2050. These are ambitious
goals that require advanced technical solutions, planning, and willingness and vision
from policymakers.
Part of what can drive this growth in installed wind capacity is the capability of the
industry to reduce costs at greater rates. Wind turbine manufacturers have steadily
been increasing the size and power production of wind turbines, eﬀectively driving
down the cost of energy. Similarly, advances in modelling capabilities of the wind
resource, individual turbines, and wind farms, has contributed to the development
of novel strategies that further reduce the cost of energy. One such strategy that
has gained momentum is the optimization of wind farm layouts. Through the use of
optimization, the speciﬁc location of the wind turbines in a farm can be obtained for
various objectives. Most commonly, optimizations are carried out for annual energy
production (AEP), or some sort of ﬁnancial parameters such as the cost of energy
(COE), net present value (NPV), among others [3].
1.1
Optimization in wind energy
Optimization work in wind energy is relatively new. In their very exhaustive review,
Herbert-Acero et al [4] present a snapshot of the published works related to wind
farm optimization that spans back to the 1970’s. From the ﬁrst published work in
1974 up until the turn of the millennium, only one publication was released every
several years.
It was not until about 2005 that the number of published works
related to the subject really started to increase up to yearly double digit numbers
presently.
Several factors might have inﬂuenced this increase, predominantly the higher inter-
est in wind energy and other forms of renewable energy sources that is now globally
widespread. Ensuring proﬁt margins are adequate and able to support growth of the
industry, wind farm developers must strive for lower energy costs, where an impor-
tant factor is the optimization of a wind farm’s layout. The wind farm optimization
problem is also inherently computationally very complex, and with increased perfor-
mance from computers, better ways of tackling the problem have been found.
Historically, wind farm layout optimization started in the 90’s, with the report
published by Mosetti et al [5]. The study was conducted for a wind farm layout
optimization using a genetic algorithm and for three inﬂow conditions: a single
wind direction and speed, a constant wind speed with variable direction, and a
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
1
==PAGE:18==
more realistic case of variable wind speed and direction. The objective function
used included the energy produced and a simpliﬁed cost model that only accounted
for the price of the installed turbines. The study was greatly simpliﬁed and limited
by the technology of the time, but paved the way for more complicated studies to be
done. As the authors write: "the feasibility of the approach has been demonstrated...
the application of the method to more realistic problems would be straightforward".
[5]
Since this ﬁrst published study, there have been many advancements in the ﬁeld by
many diﬀerent authors and study institutes. The paper published by Tesauro et
al [3], provides a good synthesis of the status of optimization within wind energy,
speciﬁcally related to wind farm layout optimization.
A detailed explanation of
some of the algorithms used and their setbacks, along with some of the most novel
projects and implementations is given. The inﬂuence of Mosetti’s ﬁrst study cannot
be undermined, as many of the studies listed are a direct build-up on this ﬁrst result.
Even many of the optimizations performed are based on a genetic algorithm, as it
has proven to provide quality results.
Two of the projects that are highlighted are the TOPFARM project at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU) and the Oﬀshore Wind Farm Layout Optimization
(OWFLO) project by Elkinton [6].
As optimization techniques move forward in
research institutions and garner the attention of industry, software implementations
have also grown in complexity. TOPFARM and OWFLO both use a multi-ﬁdelity
approach, meaning that more than one optimization algorithm is used, of increasing
complexity.
OWFLO was launched in 2004 to explore optimization of oﬀshore wind farms, taking
into account the factors most relevant to them, for example operations and main-
tenance costs (O&M), availability, among others [6]. The TOPFARM project at
DTU is a still ongoing research and software development eﬀort that started in the
early 2010’s from funding by the European Union (EU). Its focus has been in the
implementation of robust tools that can handle many diﬀerent types of optimiza-
tion problems and conditions. The future roadmap of TOPFARM points towards
inclusion of hybrid and ﬂoating oﬀshore plants in their next version release (refer to
section 2.5 for more details).
1.2
Motivation
Part of the motivation behind studying the loads on turbine components is the
impact that these have on the lifetime O&M costs of a wind farm. In its report
2018 Cost of Wind Energy Review, the National Renewable Energy Laboratory
(NREL) has found that O&M costs account for 28.5% and 34% of the levelized cost
of energy (LCOE) of onshore and oﬀshore wind farms, respectively [1]. Nonetheless,
optimization studies of wind farm layouts generally do not include considerations
for the loads on the turbine components. The reason for this could be the high
computational cost required to produce high-ﬁdelity results from aeroelastic analysis
codes, for example HAWC2 or OpenFAST. It becomes highly impractical to use
these models within an optimization workﬂow, specially when many turbines and
inﬂow conditions must be tested. The use of load surrogates or databases within
2
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:19==
optimization workﬂows, however, greatly improves upon this obstacle and makes it
possible to conduct optimization studies that involve the eﬀect of the loads on the
turbines.
There are only a handful of publications where load analysis has been accounted for
in a wind farm optimization framework. One of the ﬁrst was published by Réthoré
et al [7] and utilized a loads database to estimate fatigue degradation within an op-
timization framework. More recently, the publications by Riva et al [8] and Stanley
et al [9] have shown the capabilities of conducting optimizations with constraints on
the loads of turbine components, obtaining very interesting results.
The study conducted by Réthoré et al [7] is one of the earliest within wind farm
layout optimization where loading on turbine components played a role in the opti-
mization workﬂow. It was conducted as part of the earliest version of the TOPFARM
project. In this study, a multi-ﬁdelity optimization approach was executed for three
diﬀerent wind farm scenarios. The optimization was done for a ﬁnancial balance as
the objective function, where energy production and diﬀerent cost models for grid,
foundation, fatigue degradation and maintenance were accounted for. Although the
main goal of the study was the setup and testing of a multi-ﬁdelity approach in the
optimization workﬂow, there was novelty in the inclusion of the fatigue degradation
costs and assessing its eﬀect on the optimal layout. The results of the study show
that depending on the study scenario, there is important trade-oﬀs between the
diﬀerent components of the ﬁnancial balance. For the Middelgrunden wind farm in
Denmark, which was one of the study cases considered, the optimal layout found in-
creased energy production, which was counterbalanced by the electrical grid, fatigue
degradation and maintenance costs. The ﬁnal result was an overall improvement in
the ﬁnancial balance of the optimized layout compared to a baseline case. This result
highlights the importance of the inclusion of fatigue degradation and maintenance
costs in the optimization workﬂow as opposed to pure power optimization.
A more recent study conducted by Riva et al [8] goes one step ahead and utilizes
load surrogates within the optimization workﬂow. Compared to the work of Réthoré
et al [7] almost a decade ago, this new study is conducted within the newest ver-
sion of TOPFARM and utilizes a load surrogate to estimate loads on wind turbine
components, whereas a loads database was used in the latter. The study serves
mainly as a proof-of-concept for the use of load surrogates in optimization within
the TOPFARM software, and how load constraints can be implemented in a way
that allows for the use of gradient-based optimization. The resulting layout also
gives some insight into how the optimizer strives to maximize AEP while keeping
the loads within the constraints. Some interesting results were obtained by the re-
search team, where the optimizer moved the turbines closer to each other when the
load constraints were active. As explained in the paper, this was mainly due to the
behaviour of the load surrogates and the use of the Frandsen turbulence model.
Lastly, the research conducted by Stanley et al [9] shows some promising results by
being able to constrain the turbine’s blade root edgewise bending moment while still
obtaining a base AEP [9]. This goes to show that by just varying the layout of a wind
farm, degradation on components due to fatigue can be limited while obtaining the
maximum possible AEP. In ﬁnancial terms, this translates to a lower LCOE. Stanley
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
3
==PAGE:20==
has conducted further research into this and has shown in a recent publication [10]
that the fatigue damage on turbine components can be further reduced by 10%
with an AEP reduction of 0.07% or by 20% with an AEP reduction of 0.6%. In this
case the damage calculated involved lifetime damage accumulation at the blade root
from edgewise and ﬂapwise bending moments using a surrogate model. It should
be noted that Stanley’s research focuses only in the use of one or two load signals,
while the studies conducted by Réthoré et al [7] and Riva et al [8] took into account
load signals in the blade, tower, and nacelle.
1.3
Problem statement
This project aims to study an important question regarding wind farm layout opti-
mization: when taking loads into consideration for a wind farm layout design, is a
strategy that limits the loads to ensure maximum turbine lifetime better than one
where the maximum energy is extracted from the turbines with no regard for the
loading on such turbines? The studies conducted by Stanley et al [9, 10] have shown
that it is possible to limit the loading experienced by the turbine with minimal to
no eﬀect on the power production. However, to truly assess if this limitation is ben-
eﬁcial, a ﬁnancial parameter will be used as the comparison metric. Deﬁned as the
ﬁnancial balance of the wind farm, it takes into account maintenance, replacement
and component degradation costs in the general energy cost revenue balance. This
ﬁnancial balance is obtained from the cost modelling used by Réthoré et al [7], based
on a simpliﬁed version of the cost model proposed by Larsen in [11], and will be
used in a slightly modiﬁed version. This is explained in detail in section 3.1.
The load constraint implementation produced by Riva et al [8] will be used as the
base script for load and fatigue damage calculation in this project. The script was
speciﬁcally developed to be used within TOPFARM and uses load surrogates to
produce fast and accurate results.
A realistic wind site will be selected for the
analysis, extending on the results found by Riva’s team which focused on simpliﬁed
academic examples for the optimizations carried out. In regards to the selection of
the load signals, turbine reliability data will be used to provide for a more realistic
scenario. It is the author’s opinion that optimizing a wind farm layout to maximize
power production with disregard for the fatigue degradation of the components is
a costlier approach in the long run. The author also theorizes that there might be
an optimized layout for a wind farm where no component replacements are needed
that will still reach a base AEP, thus contributing to a lower cost of energy.
1.4
Report outline
The report will follow the usual style and structure of scientiﬁc reports. Having
dealt with the introductory parts in section 1, section 2 will focus on the theoretical
background relevant to the topic. Section 3 will discuss the problem formulation
in depth and present the methodology used in the study.
Section 4 provides a
discussion of the analysis carried out and the results. Finally, section 5 summarizes
the main ﬁndings and conclusions of the study and propose plans for future work.
For all topics covered, only the most relevant information has been discussed, as
pertaining to the study conducted.
4
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:21==
2
Theoretical background
This chapter provides a very basic overview of the theory behind the study con-
ducted. First, the basics on optimization theory will be discussed, explaining the
main structure of the problem to be solved and speciﬁc aspects about optimization
in general that are relevant to the study. Then, a brief review of surrogate use
in optimization will be given, before diving into the load surrogate model used in
this project. The focus then shifts towards the models describing the wind, mainly
the wake and turbulence models. The chapter ends with a description of the TOP-
FARM and PyWake software solutions, which provide the workhorse to carry out
the optimization.
2.1
Optimization theory
Martins and Ning deﬁne optimization as "mathematically a precise concept: ﬁnding
the best possible solution by changing variables that can be controlled, often subject
to constraints" [12]. Optimization arises in many disciplines, where it has become
widespread in engineering design, commonly in cases where multidisciplinary work
is involved. Design processes are highly iterative and as such, optimization helps to
automate this process. Additionally, optimization can help a designer ﬁnd solutions
and discover interactions that are not intuitive, hence driving innovation.
Formally, an optimization problem is composed of an objective function, a set of
design variables, parameters and constraints. The objective function is the focus of
the optimization and the problem which is set out to be solved in the best possible
way. This means that the optimum can be either the minimum or maximum pos-
sible value of the objective function, depending on how the problem is formulated.
To optimize the objective, a set of independent design or decision variables is varied
iteratively until the optimum is reached. The set of values that the design variables
can take to provide a solution form the feasible space or design space. Constraints
can be introduced to bind the problem within limits that have physical signiﬁcance
or design variable values that are reasonable. They limit the design space to help
ﬁnd a feasible solution. Finally, parameters can be introduced in the optimization to
further limit the design space or help model a speciﬁc aspect of the design. Parame-
ters are diﬀerent from constraints in that they do not act on the design variables, but
indirectly provide limitations to the problem. In synthesis, an optimization work-
ﬂow works as follows: a set of design variables is varied until the objective function
reaches an optimum, given that the constraints and parameters are not violated.
All of this can be summarized in a formal mathematical structure that will be used
throughout this report
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
5
==PAGE:22==
min
x
f(x)
with design variables
x = [x1, x2, x3...xn]
subject to
g(x) ≤0
h(x) = 0
−1 ≤p ≤1
and can be read as follows: minimize f(x) with design variables given by vector x
and subject to the constraints g(x) ≤0 and h(x) = 0. Here p is used to represent
a parameter which binds the design space, but does not directly act on the design
variables. The convention adopted in this report will follow the optimization setup
used in TOPFARM, which is to minimize the objective function. A maximization
problem (eg. AEP) can be converted into a minimization problem by deﬁning it
within the optimization workﬂow as described in expression 2.1.
max[f(x)] = −min[−f(x)]
(2.1)
2.1.1
Optima and multimodality
Often functions may have more than one optimum, either a minimum or maximum,
depending on how the optimization problem is deﬁned and constrained: this be-
haviour is called multimodality. Depending on the starting position and the feasible
space, the optimization of the problem may yield a result that is not the absolute
best. This result is called a "local optimum", as it is the minimum/maximum within
a speciﬁc small subspace, but not within the whole feasible space. An optimum that
is the best within the feasible space is called the "global optimum".
Figure 2.1: Top 2D view (left) and 3D (right) plots of a 100-turbine wind farm’s
power production as function of one turbine’s position. Reproduced through Cre-
ative Commons Attribution 4.0 License from [13].
6
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:23==
The concept of multimodality is important within optimization as the goal is to ﬁnd
the best possible answer. However, multimodal functions make this task compli-
cated for some optimization algorithms, which tend to "get stuck" at local optima.
Speciﬁcally dealing with an objective function such as power production or cost for
a wind farm, which can depend on a very large amount of design variables, the
behaviour is highly multimodal. An example of this is shown in Figure 2.1, that
shows the normalized AEP of a wind farm with 100 turbines, of which 99 were ﬁxed
and one changed its position. The 3D plot to the right highlights the extreme multi-
modality of the objective function, i.e. it has many local maxima, where the global
maxima seems to occur close to the southeastern boundary of the wind farm. This
greatly adds to the complexity of the problem within wind farm layout optimization:
not only is there a great number of design variables, the objective function is also
inherently highly multimodal.
2.1.2
Algorithms
Due to the many diﬀerent approaches and classiﬁcations of optimization problems,
an all-suitable algorithm is diﬃcult to realize. Hence, many algorithms with diﬀerent
capabilities have been developed. A commonly used algorithm in gradient-based op-
timization problems is the sequential least squares programming algorithm (SLSQP),
as described by Kraft in [14]. It is regarded as one of the most eﬀective methods to
solve nonlinear constrained optimization problems [15]. An added advantage is its
implementation in free software packages such as Python’s Scipy library.
The use of a gradient-based method as opposed to a non-gradient method, is the
increase in the speed of convergence as information of the objective function’s gradi-
ent allows the algorithm to search the space in a more clever way. However, because
the gradient provides the path followed by the algorithm in search of the solution,
for highly multimodal objective functions this will mean that the method is likely
to converge to local optima. A solution to this is the use of a multi-start approach,
where the initial values of the design variables are randomized and the optimization
problem is run multiple times. This ensures a more thorough search of the design
space and the possibility that one of the solutions found is the global optimum.
A more advanced technique is described by Réthoré et al [7] where a multi-ﬁdelity
optimization approach is used.
This entails initially using a non-gradient based
method with a coarse resolution of the design variables. The optimum found is
then used as the starting point for the next optimization, where a gradient-based
method with a ﬁner resolution of the design variables is applied. The use of this
technique has shown promise in decreasing the computation resources used in the
optimization.
For the purposes of this study, a SLSQP algorithm with multi-start will be used. The
multi-ﬁdelity approach was not tested as it is out of the scope of the study.
2.2
Surrogate based optimization
A surrogate model is an approximation to a function or set of data, created with
the goal of improving the computation time of the original model. Given the com-
plexities that already arise from optimization and the interplay of models used,
surrogates are an alternative approach that is less demanding computationally and
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
7
==PAGE:24==
can provide for faster, but still accurate, computations. The use of surrogates within
an optimization workﬂow is called surrogate-based optimization [12].
The use of a surrogate becomes relevant whenever a complex and computationally
expensive optimization or model must be evaluated, such is the case when evaluat-
ing the loads in a wind turbine. Conducting a complete aeroelastic analysis using
software such as HAWC2 for a wind turbine can take several minutes, or even hours,
depending on the complexity of the analysis conducted. Therefore, the time and re-
sources needed to run an optimization problem involving loads analysis data would
be unrealistically high. Through the use of a surrogate model, an approximate aeroe-
lastic analysis that only takes seconds can be conducted, thus making optimization
work feasible.
2.2.1
DTU 10MW reference wind turbine wind2loads
surrogate
The study here presented uses the wind2loads load surrogate, developed by re-
searchers at DTU. The surrogate was trained for the DTU 10 MW reference wind
turbine (DTU 10MW-RWT) and a set of training parameters that include the wind
speed, turbulence intensity, shear, Mann model turbulence scale and anisotropy fac-
tor, wind veer, yaw, inclination and air density. The aeroelastic response of the
selected turbine was simulated using HAWC2 software, the results of which were
later used to train an artiﬁcial neural network to obtain the load surrogate. The ﬁ-
nal result is a load surrogate that receives wind site conditions as input and outputs
the 1 Hz damage equivalent loads (DEL) for the turbine. A detailed explanation of
the procedure can be found in Dimitrov et al’s published paper [16]. The use of the
wind2loads load surrogate within an optimization framework is presented in Riva
et al’s publication [8].
Calculation of short term DEL
The load surrogate outputs the 1 Hz DEL (also known as short-term DEL), which
will be represented by the symbol Lref and are deﬁned as given by equation 2.2.
Lref =
"X ni Lm
i
Nref
#1/m
(2.2)
The 1 Hz equivalent DEL Lref is found through decomposition of the time-series
load into load ranges Li and load cycles ni using a rainﬂow counting algorithm as
described in [17]. Nref is the reference number of cycles, which for the speciﬁed
case is 600, and m is the Wöhler exponent of the material. Diﬀerent load signals
for diﬀerent components in the wind turbine are used in the analysis, and hence
the Wöhler exponent is speciﬁed for each separately. The Wöhler exponents m used
in equation 2.2 are listed in Table 2.1 for the load signals relevant to the study
conducted.
The load signals selected for the analysis are all bending moments, with the exception
of the shaft torsion. A brief explanation of each follows.
• Blade root ﬂapwise, BFW: experienced by the root of the blade as it bends
due to the incoming wind. The ﬂapwise direction is given between the low and
8
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:25==
Load signal
Wöhler exponent, m [-]
blade root ﬂapwise bending moment
12
shaft torsion
8
tower base fore-aft bending moment
4
tower top fore-aft bending moment
4
Table 2.1: Wöhler exponents used for estimation of Lref.
high pressure sides of the blade.
• Shaft torsion, ST: the torsional force exerted on the shaft as the rotor spins.
• Tower bottom fore-aft, TBFA: experienced by the tower’s bottom-most
part, where it meets the foundation. The fore-aft direction is deﬁned as the
back and forth motion in the same direction as the incident wind. It arises
due to the wind loads on the tower, the aerodynamic thrust created by the
rotor, and the gravitational force on the nacelle and tower.
• Tower top fore-aft, TTFA: similar to the TBFA bending moment, with the
exception it acts at the top-most position of the tower. Usually this is deﬁned
to be at the yaw, where the nacelle and the tower are joined together. The
tower top fore-aft bending moment receives a smaller contribution from the
rotor’s aerodynamic thrust because the moment arm between the rotor shaft
and the tower top is much smaller than between the rotor shaft and the tower
bottom.
2.3
Wake model
Modelling the interaction of the wind with the turbine rotor and the incident wake
is a complex problem that has been tackled by several researchers for the past 40
years. One of the ﬁrst and most well known descriptions of a wind turbine wake
was published in 1983 by Jensen [18] in what is commonly known as the NO Jensen
wake deﬁcit model. Many other theories and models have been developed since, of
varying complexities and ﬁdelity levels, some of which utilize CFD techniques to
model accurate models of the wind. The interaction of the wind with the turbine’s
rotor and the physical mechanism of how this occurs is however still not fully un-
derstood. Regardless, the current models have shown to provide good agreement
with and have been validated through measurements. The reader should note that
both "wake model" and "wake deﬁcit model" (or simply deﬁcit model) will be used
interchangeably throughout the report. The word deﬁcit only highlights the eﬀect
of the wake on the wind speed within its area of inﬂuence.
The wake model selected for this study was derived by Larsen [19] and will be referred
to as GCL deﬁcit model. It regards wakes as linear perturbations on the ambient
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
9
==PAGE:26==
mean wind ﬁeld and is derived based on the analytical solution of the thin shear
layer approximation of the Navier-Stokes equations [19]. This model was developed
to be used as a low ﬁdelity wind model within wind farm layout optimization. The
derived wake deﬁcit is given by equation 2.3.
∆U(x, r) = −U
9

CTA(x + x0)−21/3
×
"
r3/2 
3c2
1CTA(x + x0)
−1/2 −
 35
2π
3/10
(3c2
1)−1/5
#2
(2.3)
Here ∆U is the deﬁcit in the wind speed, U is the ambient wind speed, CT is the
rotor’s thrust coeﬃcient, A is the rotor area, and x and r are the axial and radial
directions. Parameters x0 and c1 are deﬁned as follows
x0 =
9.6 D
2R9.6
kD
3
−1
(2.4)
c1 =
 kD
2
!5/2 105
2π
−1/2
(CT A x0)−5/6
(2.5)
k =
s
m + 1
2
(2.6)
m =
1
√1 −CT
(2.7)
R9.6 = a1exp(a2 C2
T + a3 CT + a4)(b1 TI + 1)D
(2.8)
where the expressions for k, m, and R9.6 are also given above. Here D is the diameter
of the wind turbine’s rotor and parameters a1−4 and b1 are constants that have been
determined empirically by Larsen [19].
Figure 2.2 plots the evolution of the eﬀective wind speed Ueff behind a wind turbine,
where the distance is given in multiples of D and the ambient wind speed is kept
constant at 12 m/s. As the distance from the wake-producing turbine is increased,
the eﬀective wind speed in the wake will asymptotically approach the ambient wind
speed, represented by the red dashed line. It must be noted that although included
in the plot, deﬁcit models are generally not valid in the near wake (ie. close to
the wake-producing turbine). As a rule of thumb, this will be taken to be within 3
rotor diameters from the turbine. A ﬂowmap showing the shape and wind speed of
the wake is plotted in Figure 2.3 for an ambient wind speed of 12 m/s. Two DTU
10MW-RWT turbines are shown in the plot, where the second one is at a distance
of 5D from the ﬁrst turbine. The wake is seen to expand as the distance from the
turbine producing it increases. The deﬁcit in the wind speed is highest at the center
of the rotor.
Larsen also describes methods for superposition and rotor averaging to be used with
his wake deﬁcit model. As described previously, the wake model regards wakes as
10
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:27==
Figure 2.2: Wind speed variation in wake of single turbine.
linear perturbations and hence the superposition algorithm proposed is a linear sum
of the wakes incident on the turbine. To average the wind speed across the rotor,
given that the wake as described by the GCL deﬁcit model takes the shape of a
Gaussian normal distribution, Gaussian integration is the method proposed in [19].
Both algorithms are pre-deﬁned within the PyWake software as LinearSum() and
CGIRotorAvg() methods, respectively.
Figure 2.3: Flowmap of wind speed for GCL deﬁcit model and ambient U of 12 m/s.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
11
==PAGE:28==
2.4
Turbulence model
The IEC 61400-1 [20] standard describes the added wake turbulence method as one of
the possible models to be used in the calculation of fatigue loads through a parameter
referred to as the eﬀective turbulence intensity TIeff. This model was developed
by Frandsen in 2007 [21] and has since been part of the standard, now commonly
known as the Frandsen turbulence model. The parameter TIeff is deﬁned as
TIeff(U) =
Z 2π
0
p(θ , U) TIm
c (θ , U)dθ
1/m
(2.9)
where p is the wind direction probability, TIc is the combined turbulence intensity
of ambient and wake ﬂows from wind direction θ, and m is the Wöhler exponent
corresponding to the structural component. The model is known as the added wake
turbulence method because it describes an additional turbulence distribution in the
wake of a wind turbine, that is added to the already present ambient turbulence
intensity. The shape of the predicted turbulence in the wake, similarly to the GCL
deﬁcit model, also follows a Gaussian normal distribution.
Figure 2.4: Turbulence intensity variation in wake of single turbine.
Figure 2.4 plots TIeff, as calculated by the Frandsen model, with increasing distance
from the wake producing turbine, which is located at 0. As before with the wake
deﬁcit, the distance is shown in multiples of the rotor diameter D. The ambient TI
is set to 7.5% and represented by the dashed red line. The modelled behaviour of
the turbulence is opposite that of the wind speed in the turbine’s wake: closer to
the wake producing turbine, TIeff increases. At far enough distances, TIeff will
eventually reach the ambient TI. Figure 2.5 shows a turbulence ﬂowmap, similar to
that of Figure 2.3 where the second turbine is at a distance of 5D behind the front
turbine. Here the ambient TI is constant at 7.5%.
12
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:29==
Figure 2.5: Flowmap of turbulence for GCL deﬁcit model and ambient TI of 7.5%
2.5
TOPFARM
Topology OPtimization of wind FARMs (TOPFARM) is a software solution devel-
oped at DTU Wind Energy that executes optimizations on wind farms. The project
started in 2007 as an EU-funded project and has seen the involvement of researchers
and experts across many diﬀerent disciplines, such as aerodynamics, resource as-
sessment, loads and control, integration and planning, among others. The main
goal of the creators of TOPFARM is to develop a tool for solution of complex wind
farm optimizations where power production, fatigue degradation, installation, and
operations and maintenance costs are taken into consideration. [22]. Since its incep-
tion, the project has expanded rapidly and included more complex, state-of-the-art
models and solution techniques.
In its current version, TOPFARM 2.2.2 is an open source Python package built on
the OpenMDAO framework that also wraps PyWake. Due to the robustness of its
build and the many diﬀerent wake models already present in PyWake, TOPFARM
is able to execute optimizations of many diﬀerent problems, such as topology layout
optimizations, turbine type optimizations, optimizations with loads as constraints,
cost models, etc. The tool supports many built-in wake and cost models, and also
allows for user-deﬁned models, thus providing with an extra layer of customization.
Given the use of the OpenMDAO framework, the interaction within the many
parts of the optimization problem are provided as "components." These are deﬁned
through OpenMDAO, where each component deﬁnes a function, lists its inputs, out-
puts, gradient, and other parameters. In general terms, a component is used to
deﬁne a function that is evaluated within the optimization workﬂow. This function
can interact as a constraint, objective function, or simply part of the coupled models
used in the analysis.
Figure 2.6 is a simpliﬁed ﬂowchart of the TOPFARM software, providing an overview
of the main architecture and the interaction between its main components. These
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
13
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.6: Flowchart of TOPFARM’s main components [23].
will be explained in further detail.
• Design variables: these are also known as the decision variables. These are
changed through the optimization and directly inﬂuence the objective function.
• Constraints: deﬁned either as functions or directly as a value.
The con-
straints provide limitations to the design variables, parameters, and even on
the objective function. Constraints can be passed through the use of diﬀer-
ent pre-deﬁned object classes, executed prior to the evaluation of the objec-
tive function, such as SpacingConstraint and XYBoundaryConstraint, or set
through the post_constraints option of the TopFarmProblem class.
• Optimizer/Driver: this component provides the numerical optimization al-
gorithm. TOPFARM wraps the most commonly used drivers already deﬁned
in Scipy, another Python scientiﬁc computing package. Some options include
the SLSQP, COBYLA, RandomSearch, and GeneticAlgorithm drivers. By de-
fault, TOPFARM will call the SLSQP algorithm when utilizing the Scipy opti-
mizer driver class.
• Cost component: an OpenMDAO component that deﬁnes and evaluates the
objective function. It is called a "Cost" component only for naming purposes,
but it may be anything from energy production such as AEP, to a ﬁnancial
parameter such as the NPV, for example.
• TOPFARM problem: the TopFarmProblem class is the heart of the opti-
mization. It deﬁnes the workﬂow needed in the optimization problem and
couples in the design variables, constraints, objective function (cost compo-
nent as explained above), optimizer, and additional optional parameters such
as plotting help. Once created, the TopFarmProblem object can be evaluated
at its current state using the evaluate method. To run an optimization, the
optimize method is used, which outputs three diﬀerent variables: cost, state
and recorder.
• Cost, state, recorder: the outputs of the TopFarmProblem optimization.
14
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:31==
Cost stores the value of the objective function, state stores the design variables,
and recorder stores a complete set of parameter values as calculated through
the optimization. It is important to note that all three objects will store the
values for each iteration carried out and can be used to observe the optimizer’s
trends.
More information about the software, including detailed tutorials, explanations on
the multiple models that it wraps, access to the source code and installation guide
can be found in the TOPFARM documentation [24].
2.6
PyWake
PyWake is an open-source software solution developed at DTU that provides a fast
way of accessing all wake models developed at DTU, plus other external wake mod-
els used in industry. It was developed to interface with TOPFARM and WAsP to
provide fast solution of ﬂow ﬁelds in wind farms and AEP calculations. PyWake’s
virtues lie in its open-source nature, very fast solution of low and high ﬁdelity mod-
els, and in its customization capabilities. The development team’s motivation is
for PyWake to become the standard software in industry and academia for imple-
mentation and evaluation of wake models. Figure 2.7 shows a detailed overview of
PyWake’s main components and interactions.
Figure 2.7: Flowchart of PyWake’s main components [25].
• WindFarm model: provides the main object class that couples all necessary
components used to describe a wind farm and calculate its ﬂow ﬁeld. As can
be seen in Figure 2.7, the WindFarmModel object receives from and outputs
data into the Site and WindTurbines classes.
Additionally, the diﬀerent
engineering models related to wake deﬁcits, superposition, etc, are deﬁned
within it.
• Site: object that deﬁnes the wind farm’s site conditions. The Site class de-
ﬁnes wind parameters such as the Weibull’s A and k parameters, frequency
distribution, terrain information, among others. It receives data on the wind
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
15
==PAGE:32==
turbine positions and reference wind direction θref, wind speed Uref, and tur-
bulence intensity TIref from the WindFarmModel object and outputs local wind
conditions (U, θ, TI, and probability p(θ, U)) into it. Additionally, Site will
calculate the downwind, crosswind and vertical distance between turbines.
• WindTurbines: this class deﬁnes the power curve, thrust coeﬃcient (CT)
curve, height and diameter for a speciﬁc wind turbine.
• Engineering Models: the engineering models are the base and workhorse of
PyWake. In here, the wake deﬁcit, superposition, rotor averaging, turbulence,
deﬂection, and blockage models are speciﬁed. Within PyWake’s architecture,
the engineering models are options passed into the WindFarmModel object.
Figure 2.8 provides a more detailed look at the engineering models deﬁned within
the WindFarmModel class, which itself has two distinct options: PropagateDownwind
and All2AllIterative. The PropagateDownwind class executes the wake deﬁcit
calculation in the downwind direction for each turbine, while the All2AllIterative
class calculates the eﬀective wind speed for all turbines until the calculated wind
speed converges. The latter can account for upstream eﬀects from wakes, such as
blockage. The other options passed to the WindFarmModel class are the deﬁcit model
that calculates the wind speed in the wake, the rotor averaging model to deﬁne the
wind speed averaging method over the rotor area, the superposition model that
deﬁnes how multiple wakes incident on a turbine are aggregated, a deﬂection model
that accounts for yaw misalignment, and the turbulence model that provides the
calculation method for added turbulence in the wake.
The PyWake documentation provides a more detailed explanation of all the models,
methods, access to the source code and installation instructions (see [26]).
Figure 2.8: Flowchart of component interactions within the WindFarmModel object
[25]
16
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:33==
2.6.1
Other software
Some of TOPFARM’s main competitors include windPro, Openwind, WindFarmer
and FLORIS. One of the main advantages of these softwares in comparison to TOP-
FARM are the easy user interface and visualization tools they provide, alongside
analysis of ﬂicker, noise and other sources of social and economic impact. However,
the price to pay is a loss in the ﬂexibility of the tools and thus in the complexity of
the analysis that can be carried out.
windPRO
Developed by EMD International, windPRO is a commercial software package used
in the analysis and planiﬁcation of wind farms.
The software covers wind data
analysis, energy yield, uncertainties, site suitability, and environmental impact as-
sessment, all through individual modules that can be used as necessary. One such
module is the OPTIMIZE module which oﬀers diﬀerent methods and tools to generate
wind farm layouts [27].
Within the OPTIMIZE module, tools can be used to generate layouts either of a regular
or random nature, or ﬁlling up a speciﬁed area with turbines given a minimum
inter-turbine distance constraint. windPRO has an added advantage of being able
to optimize to reduce noise while minimizing lost production.
The inclusion of
noise impact in the optimization is something not available in the current version
of TOPFARM. Additionally, windPro can be easily used to generate reports and
integrates to WAsP and other CFD software, but is otherwise limited in the selection
of ﬂow and wake models available as compared to TOPFARM.
Openwind
Openwind is a wind farm layout optimization software developed by UL, an advisory,
certiﬁcation and testing body based in the United States. The software provides
optimization for diﬀerent objective functions, such as cost, energy, and an option
for minimizing power losses. Openwind includes deep array wake models (DAWM)
that UL claims provides a more accurate prediction than the leading wake models,
which are also included in the software. The selection of ﬂow and wake models
is, however, limited as compared to PyWake’s library. Similar to windPRO’s oﬀer,
Openwind also provides consideration of diverse social impact parameters, such as
noise, visual impact, and shadow ﬂicker and provides a module for scheduling of
turbine production in response to these. A similarity it shares with TOPFARM
is its ability to provide in-depth cost estimation that includes O&M costs, capital
costs, and plant development costs [28].
WindFarmer: Analyst
WindFarmer: Analyst is the wind resource assessment tool developed by certiﬁcation
and advisory giant DNV. The software is mainly a wind farm development and wind
resource assessment tool with the added functionality of layout optimization. It can
integrate with WAsP and provides an easy to use graphical interface for site design.
In many ways it provides many of the same functionalities as WAsP. Related to
its optimization capabilities, WindFarmer provides limited options and ﬂexibility
in relation to objective functions and models utilized. Similar to Openwind and
windPRO, it also provides optimization with regards to the impact of environmental
factors, like visual and acoustic impact, and provides an easy to use interface [29].
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
17
==PAGE:34==
FLORIS
FLORIS is the wake analysis software solution developed by NREL. It shares many
similarities with PyWake: open-source Python based framework, multiple wake mod-
els available, and provides tools for easy visualization of results (plotting, etc). It
also combines some basic optimization functionality, where Scipy optimization tools
can be utilized for layout optimization problems. Additionally, it provides optimiza-
tion of control strategies for the wind farm (such as yaw optimization) and power
density optimization that works to reduce the wind farm area while maintaining
energy production at a speciﬁed level [30].
18
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:35==
3
Problem formulation and study
methodology
This project aims to study an important question regarding wind farm layout opti-
mization: when taking loads into consideration for a wind farm layout design, is a
strategy that limits the loads to ensure maximum turbine lifetime better than one
where the maximum energy is extracted from the turbines with no regard for the
loading limit on such turbines? Here the comparison metric is the ﬁnancial balance
of the wind turbine, where maintenance, replacement and component degradation
costs are considered in the general energy cost revenue balance.
3.1
Cost model
Reviews conducted of wind farm optimization ([3], [4], and [31]) show that the objec-
tive functions used are mostly related to energy production or ﬁnancial parameters.
However, considering only energy production disregards other factors that aﬀect the
levelized cost of energy (LCOE) [32]. Therefore accurate modelling of a wind farm’s
lifetime costs, from installation up to decommissioning, is a necessary, although
complicated task. Among some of the publicly available cost models, NREL [1] and
DTU have each published their own models to calculate LCOE, both of which are
available within the TOPFARM software.
For the purpose of the study presented in this paper, a simpliﬁed cost model as
developed by Larsen [11] and adapted by Réthoré et al [7] will be used. This cost
model has the advantage that it can easily be implemented within an optimization
workﬂow. The ﬁnancial balance is given by
FB = Pre · WP −Prwt · (CD + CM)
(3.1)
where FB is the net ﬁnancial balance (or wind farm proﬁt), WP is the net energy
production over the wind farm’s lifetime, and CD and CM are the degradation
and maintenance costs, respectively. To properly combine energy and cost units,
the electricity Pre and wind turbines Prwt prices are introduced. This relationship
represents the proﬁts obtained by a wind farm operator over the plant’s lifetime,
where the costs incurred are only those that account for operating expenses. Other
factors such as capital expenditures (CAPEX), which are considered ﬁxed, ie. they
do not vary over the wind farm’s lifetime, will not be considered in this study. The
wind farm’s lifetime is estimated to be the commonly accepted of 20 years.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
19
==PAGE:36==
3.1.1
Degradation costs, CD
The degradation costs CD are a measure of the depreciation of the components in
a wind turbine due to degradation from fatigue loads. They are given by
DS = Leq,S
Ld,S
(3.2)
CDS = PS DS
(3.3)
Equation 3.2 is a measure of the damage accumulated by a turbine’s component
S over the wind farm’s lifetime. Here, Leq,S represents the lifetime accumulated
equivalent fatigue load and Ld,S represents the design equivalent fatigue load, both
in relation to component S. Generally, Ld is a parameter speciﬁed by wind turbine
manufacturers, but this information is not available for the turbine model utilized.
Hence, the design parameter was determined in a manner that shall be explained in
further sections. The interpretation of equation 3.2 is the following: an accumulated
degradation DS > 1 means that the speciﬁc component S has undergone damage
above its design limit. A degradation value DS < 1 means the component has not
yet reached its design limit.
The degradation of the turbine’s components are then tied in to the component’s
relative price PS through equation 3.3. This price parameter is given relative to the
cost of a wind turbine and shall be referred to as wind turbine cost (WTC). Hence,
CDS represents the degradation cost for component S. The total degradation cost
for the wind farm, taking into consideration all components and turbines is deﬁned
as given by equation 3.4. This is the value that will serve as input for equation 3.1.
CD =
X
wt
X
S
CDS
(3.4)
3.1.2
Maintenance costs, CM
In the deﬁnition of the degradation costs, there is no mention of component mainte-
nance or replacement. For a turbine’s component S that has accumulated damage
above its design parameter (i.e. DS > 1), this means that the component has broken
down and is still housed inside the turbine. This is of course impractical, as normally
a faulty component would be replaced to ensure the turbine can continue operating.
Likewise, it is general knowledge that any mechanical component’s failure follows a
stochastic behaviour due to imperfections during manufacturing and/or inherently
in the material. To tackle these, the maintenance cost CM is deﬁned to include the
cost of component replacement and any costs incurred from loss of production. The
component’s cost is not included as it is already accounted for in the degradation
cost CD.
The maintenance cost CMS for component S of a wind turbine is deﬁned as given
by equation 3.5. Here F(DS, µ, σ) is the CDF of the log-normal distribution, which
will model the stochastic nature of component failure. The other parameters refer to
the replacement cost of the component PSr, the maximum number of replacements
per component per turbine Rmax, and NR is a factor used to ensure that no more
20
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:37==
than Rmax components replacements are allowed during optimization.
CMS = NR PSr F(DS, µS,(Rmax+1), σS,(Rmax+1)) + PSr
Rmax
X
j=1
F(DS, µS,j, σS,j) (3.5)
The mean µ and standard deviation σ of the log-normal distribution F are found
from
σS,j =
v
u
u
tln
 V AR[Leq,S]
j2 L2
d,S
+ 1
!
(3.6)
µS,j = ln(j) −σ2
S,j
(3.7)
where V AR[Leq,S] represents the variance of the component’s equivalent fatigue load
and j is the component’s replacement number. For simplicity and to ensure that
the maintenance cost function was smooth enough, V AR[Leq,S] is taken to be γ Ld,S,
where γ is set to 0.05, as provided in [7]. This factor is assumed to be the same for
all turbines and components, meaning that all component’s failure rates will exhibit
the same variance.
Finally, the total maintenance cost CM is found similarly as was done for the
degradation cost in equation 3.4
CM =
X
wt
X
S
CMS
(3.8)
Figure 3.1: Evolution of maintenance and degradation cost with increasing compo-
nent load for 1 turbine.
Equation 3.5 is complicated and its behaviour and the interaction of the factors
cannot be obviously understood from just the mathematical formulation. This will
be explained in more detail. The ﬁrst factor of the equation simply ensures that
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
21
==PAGE:38==
any component replacements above Rmax would greatly increase the total mainte-
nance cost. This is achieved by deﬁning NR as a high enough number, in this case
10. During optimization, it is expected for the optimizer to move the turbines to
positions that ensure that Rmax replacements are not surpassed.
The second term in the equation is the main active term and works similarly to
equation 3.2. Here, the log-normal distribution acts as a smooth "step" function that
spans a range close to 100%. As explained previously, this addresses the stochastic
behaviour of component failure. The increase in the cost function incurred by the
component’s replacement is higher than that from degradation costs. This described
behaviour can be clearly observed in Figure 3.1 for a single turbine and component,
with an Rmax value of 1. Here, the maintenance cost is level throughout and only
increases at integer multiples of Ld,S (ie, when DS = 1). When the applied load
surpasses 200%, the ﬁrst term of the CM becomes activate and greatly increases
the total cost. The degradation cost has a much more simple behaviour as is just a
continuously increasing straight line, shown in red in the plot. A detailed zoom-in
of both curves close to 100% is shown in ﬁgure 3.2, where the smooth transition
close to 100% is evident for CM.
Figure 3.2: Detail of maintenance cost close to 100% accumulated LDEL.
3.1.3
Prices
The liabilities incurred for degradation and maintenance of a wind turbine’s com-
ponent are converted from damage, in the deﬁnition of CD in equation 3.3, and
replacements, in the deﬁnition of CM in equation 3.5, into costs relative to a wind
turbine’s price via means of parameters PS and PSr. These represent the relative
price of the components degradation PS or replacement PSr in terms of the price
for a single wind turbine (WTC as mentioned before). For simplicity, throughout
the report ﬁnancial parameters will mostly refer to currency (eg. e), but the unit
WTC may also occasionally be used.
Table 3.1 has been reproduced from [7] with some changes to the distribution of
the prices, considering that the source report was published in 2011 and prices have
22
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:39==
changed during the past decade. As a reference, prices for maintenance and price
of components for an oﬀshore wind farm have been taken into account to update
the parameters, utilizing data provided by NREL in its 2018 Cost of Energy report
[1].
The relative cost of components PS was updated from the cost breakdown
of turbine components provided in table 4 of the NREL report. No maintenance
costs per component are detailed in [1], so the approach to update the costs of
maintenance PSr was to scale the factors already provided in the original study by
the ratio of the annual maintenance costs of oﬀshore to onshore wind farms. This
ratio was determined to be 2.93 times higher oﬀshore costs compared to onshore.
The author acknowledges that cost factors are an important parameter in the study,
and that uncertainty in their determination will have an impact in the ﬁnal results.
Unfortunately there is little information on this regard and hence educated guesses
combined with studies from recent years are the only means of providing the data.
Load signal
Component
Degradation
price PS
relative to
turbine cost
[%]
Replacement
price PSr
relative to
turbine cost
[%]
blade root ﬂapwise
rotor
29
73.25
tower top fore-aft
nacelle components
13.2
87.9
shaft torsion
gearbox & generator
36.1
87.9
tower base fore-aft
tower
21.7
146.5
Table 3.1: Replacement and degradation prices per component.
3.2
Site
Wind conditions are speciﬁed according to the Horns Rev 1 site. The wind distribu-
tion is uniform over the terrain, such as can be encountered in oﬀshore wind farms.
The Weibull parameters for each wind sector and the frequency of occurrence of
each are manually speciﬁed, where a total of 12 sectors were used, each of 30◦width.
The main parameters related to the wind are as summarized in table 3.2. A shear
of 0.2 was chosen, as speciﬁed in the IEC 61400-1 standard for a Normal Wind
Proﬁle (NWP) model [20]. The ambient TI was set at 7.5%, as a median value of
turbulence measured for oﬀshore wind farms in [33].
The site’s wind rose is shown in the left plot of Figure 3.3, where it shows the
main wind directions are west and west-south-west, between 225-285◦. This is an
important characteristic to keep aware of, as the main wind’s direction has a big
impact on the ﬁnal layout of the wind farm. The right plot of Figure 3.3 shows
the Weibull distribution for north, east, south and west directions, where the wind
incoming from the west has the distribution of highest wind speeds.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
23
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.3: Horns Rev 1 site wind direction rose.
Parameter
Value
turbulence intensity, TI
7.5%
shear exponent, α
0.2
Table 3.2: Wind parameters for study site.
3.3
Constraints
There are three basic constraints deﬁned for the optimization problem: a bounding
area to the wind farm, a constraint on the minimum distance allowed between wind
turbines, also called the spacing, and a constraint on the maximum lifetime DEL
(LDEL). All optimization cases have a boundary and spacing constraint, but not
all have a constraint on the lifetime DEL. The latter will be referred to as a "load
constraint" throughout the report.
3.3.1
Boundary
The wind farms bounds are passed to the TopFarmProblem class as a constraint
option. As explained in section 2.5, there are some predeﬁned classes within TOP-
FARM that aid in the creation of the boundaries for a wind farm. For this study,
a parallelogram boundary was selected, due to its simplicity, but also because most
wind farms built around the world are polygon shaped. The parameters for the
vertices of the boundary were passed into the XYBoundaryConstraint to create the
polygon. The left and right sides of the parallelogram were skewed to ensure they
would be approximately perpendicular to the main wind direction in the site. This
is shown in Figure 3.4 as the black lines.
3.3.2
Spacing
Speciﬁed as another parameter to the constraints option of the TopFarmProblem
class, the spacing constraint determines the minimum distance to be kept between
wind turbines. This parameter is deﬁned through the SpacingConstraint built-
24
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.4: Sample initial layout and wind farm bounding area.
in class where a single value is input, interpreted as the radial distance around a
turbine. For all optimization runs in this study, the minimum spacing was kept at 3
rotor diameters (3D), except where noted otherwise. Emphasis is made on the use
of the italicized D to represent the rotor diameter, as previously deﬁned. This value
was selected because most wake models are not deﬁned or have not been validated
in the near wake region. This ensures accuracy in the analysis and a proper use
of the deﬁcit models. The spacing is represented in the layouts as a dashed circle
around the turbine, such as can be seen in Figure 3.4. These are drawn to scale.
3.3.3
Load constraints
The load constraint Lmax acts to limit the normalized LDEL L for any or all of
the load signals considered.
It may be speciﬁed as simply an upper limit, or a
lower and upper limit pair. For all optimization cases considered in this report,
only an upper limit was enforced. The LDEL Leq,S is normalized against the design
load Ld,S, meaning that the normalized LDEL is equivalent to the accumulated
fatigue degradation DS, as deﬁned in equation 3.2. To avoid confusion between the
parameters, the normalized LDEL will be represented with the symbol L, where
LS is the normalized LDEL for component S. The load constraint can be set to a
value below 1 as Lmax < 1.0 to ensure the design load is not reached, or it can be
speciﬁed to be a higher value such as Lmax ≤1.5, thus limiting each component to
one replacement only. However, this is not the only way in which load constraints
can be set within the optimization workﬂow, as will be explored in chapter 4.
3.4
Case studies
Now that the main components of the optimization workﬂow have been deﬁned, the
case studies can be speciﬁed. The report is divided into two main study cases: a
component replacement model and a constrained loads model. The multiple possible
combination of parameters can make for many distinct optimization problems, how-
ever all study cases considered have been tailored to ﬁt within one of the two main
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
25
==PAGE:42==
categories proposed. Within each main study case, variations in the parameters,
constraints, and even objective function have been considered and will be discussed
in detail. An important parameter, the number of wind turbines wt, is not ﬁxed
but was varied depending on the optimization cases run, set either as 9 or 16 wind
turbines. The selection was arbitrary where a good balance was kept between having
enough turbines to ensure wake interactions and where the computational time was
not increased disproportionately.
3.4.1
Case study 1 - Component replacement model
Study case 1 is the component replacement model. The aim is to maximize
energy production in a wind farm at the expense of costs incurred from degradation
and replacement of components. The objective function is the ﬁnancial balance FB.
The mathematical formulation of the optimization problem is given below.
max
x
FB(x)
with design variables
x = [x1, x2]
subject to
RS ≤RS,max
3D ≤spacing
x1, x2 ∈B
Here x1 and x2 are the turbine positions along the x and y axis, respectively, RS
is the number of replacements for a component, RS,max is the maximum allowable
number of replacements and B is the space within the bounds of the wind farm.
3.4.2
Case study 2 - Constrained loads model
Study case 2 is the constrained loads model. The goal is to produce a wind farm
layout where the LDEL have been constrained below the design limit, ensuring that
maintenance costs CM do not become active and that component degradation CD
does not accumulate up to 100%. Same as in study case 1, the objective function is
the ﬁnancial balance FB. The formal mathematical description is as follows
max
x
FB(x)
with design variables
x = [x1, x2]
subject to
LS < LS,max
3D ≤spacing
x1, x2 ∈B
Here x1 and x2 are the turbine positions along the x and y axis, respectively, LS
is the normalized LDEL of a component, LS,max is the maximum allowable LDEL,
and B is the space within the bounds of the wind farm.
3.5
Optimization workﬂow
Having formally proposed the optimization problem in the previous section, this
section will serve to give a general overview of the scripts developed or modiﬁed to
26
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:43==
ﬁt the study cases considered. This is known as the optimization workﬂow. All
scripts were developed using the Python programming language and using DTU’s
TOPFARM and PyWake software.
As described in section 3.4, the optimization takes as design variables the locations of
the turbines within the given wind farm bounds. The load calculations for the wind
turbines will be given by a surrogate model that takes ﬂow conditions as calculated
from wake models built into the PyWake software. The problem was formulated for
the DTU 10 MW-RWT and the Horns Rev 1 wind site. A high-level overview of
the script’s architecture is shown in Figure 3.5 as an XDSM diagram [34]. Here the
design variables x1 and x2 are input into the diﬀerent components (green blocks) that
calculate the parameters needed for the optimization. The red octagons represent
the constraints, while yellow ellipse represents the surrogate model.
x1∗, x2∗
Optimizer
x1, x2
x1, x2
x1, x2
spacing penalty
spacing
boundary penalty
boundary
AEP∗
AEP
Wake
Ueff, TIeff
p, TIeff
AEP
Load
Ueff, TIeff
wind2loads
Lref
L
LDEL
L
FB∗
FB
Cost
Figure 3.5: Simpliﬁed XDSM diagram for optimization problem. Adapted from the
diagram in [8].
First, the design variables are input into the Wake component that is in charge of
calculating the ﬂow conditions in the wind farm boundaries. It does so through the
use of the engineering models deﬁned within PyWake, as detailed in section 2.6.
The PropagateDownwind engineering model was selected to decrease the compu-
tational cost of the optimizations. Here the site and wind turbines are speciﬁed,
followed by the wake deﬁcit model and its optional models. The GCL deﬁcit model
is used with a 7 point circular Gaussian integration rotor averaging method, linear
summation as the wake superposition method, and a turbulence model given by the
2017 version of the Sten Frandsen turbulence model. This provides the complete
deﬁnition of the wind farm ﬂow model used within PyWake, that is called within
the Wake component to calculate the eﬀective wind speed Ueff, eﬀective turbulence
intensity TIeff, wind direction probability p, and AEP, which are then propagated
to the components as required. The AEP is calculated according to the following
expression, as given by [7].
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
27
==PAGE:44==
AEP = 8760 ∗
nU
X
i=1
nθ
X
j=1
Pelec(Ui,j) p(Ui,j)
(3.9)
Where Pelec is the electrical power given as a function of the wind speed Ui,j, p is
the probability of occurrence of a speciﬁc wind direction and speed for the site, 8760
represents the number of hours in a year, and subscripts i and j correspond to the
wind speeds and wind directions taken into account in the analysis.
Next, the eﬀective wind speed and turbulence intensity for every turbine are input
into the Load component, which calculates the 1 Hz DEL Lref, as given by equation
2.2, for every load channel speciﬁed. It does so through the use of the wind2loads
surrogate of the 10 MW-RWT.
The resulting DEL are then input into the LDEL component along with the turbine’s
eﬀective wind speed and direction probability as given by equation 3.10. Here the
probability is integrated over all of the wind directions θ.
p(x, Uref) =
Z 2π
0
p(x, θ, Uref) dθ
(3.10)
Leq(x) =
"
N20
Z
Uref
p(x, Uref) Lref(x, Uref)m dUref
#1/m
(3.11)
The LDEL are computed according to equation 3.11 for a period of 20 years, where
N20 represents the number of seconds in this time period. The LDEL are weighted
against the probability of each wind speed for every turbine. Finally the LDEL are
normalized against the design loads Ld for each component. However, this parameter
can only be provided by wind turbine manufacturers, who are notoriously secretive
about speciﬁcs on their designs. Hence, the method employed by Riva et al in [8]
is used here: the LDEL are evaluated for a single turbine for the boundaries and
site wind as speciﬁed in sections 3.2 and 3.3 and increasing the results by 20%. The
resulting design LDEL Ld are summarized in Table 3.3.
Load signal
LDEL [kNm]
blade root ﬂapwise bending moment
64,900
shaft torsion
9,744
tower base fore-aft bending moment
288,222
tower top fore-aft bending moment
38,946
Table 3.3: Design lifetime DEL Ld.
The last step is the calculation of the ﬁnancial balance FB within the Cost compo-
nent, utilizing as inputs the normalized LDEL L, the AEP, and the cost model for
28
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:45==
the wind farm. The optimizer, which is controlled by TOPFARM, receives all vari-
ables as shown on the left side of Figure 3.5. Additionally, it receives the constraints
imposed on the inter-turbine spacing and the boundary, which are passed into the
optimizer as penalties.
3.6
Analysis methodology
This chapter has served to explain the problem deﬁnition and optimization workﬂow
deﬁned. As has been noted, many diﬀerent optimization cases were run, each with a
diﬀerent set of parameters deﬁned. It would be impractical to copy all parameters as
deﬁned for each optimization case, hence care has been taken to explain the overall
problem formulation. In the following section, the results of all optimization runs
will be presented and the details of each optimization problem will be provided, as
relevant. Unless otherwise deﬁned, the problem formulation for each optimization
is as described in this chapter.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
29
==PAGE:46==
30
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:47==
4
Results
The results obtained from the optimizations run as described in chapter 3 will be
presented here in detail. As explained in the previous chapter, each optimization
run can count as a diﬀerent case study, however for simplicity, all simulations will
be organized within the two main case studies: the component replacement model
(case 1) or the constrained loads model (case 2). Many optimization cases were de-
veloped and run, most of which did not provide good results but served to tailor the
parameters chosen. The most relevant cases and results obtained will be discussed
here.
This chapter will begin with a study of the wind2loads load surrogate, followed by
an overview comparison of the two main cases studies. A sensitivity study of the
most important parameters in the optimization are presented along with the most
signiﬁcant results. Finally, an optimization is carried out utilizing all the results
gathered through the study.
4.1
Study of load surrogate model
The ﬁrst step in the discussion of the results is to gain understanding into the
behaviour of the wind2loads surrogate. This knowledge is necessary to provide a
complete explanation of the optimization results and the motivation behind some
parameter choices. This preliminary study was conducted by varying the turbulence
intensity and wind speed inputs and plotting the response of the load surrogate.
Although the output from wind2loads is not the LDEL but rather just the 1 Hz
DEL, the results obtained still shed light unto the behaviour of the load signals to
changes in the wind conditions. The results obtained are plotted in Figure 4.1 as
surface plots for a TI range of 5-30% and wind speed variation from 4-25 m/s.
The main trend observed is that all load signals increase with increasing wind speed
and increasing TI, but not all increase at the same rate. Most notably, the tower
bottom fore-aft DEL exhibits a much higher sensitivity to TI than any of the other
load signals. Its sensitivity to this parameter is also higher than that for the wind
speed. The remaining three load signals showcase a less substantial change with
increasing TI. The trend observed for changes in the wind speed are most notable
for the blade root ﬂapwise and tower top fore-aft load signals. Speciﬁcally for the
case of the tower top fore-aft DEL, the sensitivity to the wind speed increases with
increasing TI and is highest for large values of turbulence. However, it is the blade
root ﬂapwise load signal that exhibits the highest sensitivity to increases in wind
speed through the range of TI studied.
This serves only as a qualitative appraisal of how the surrogate’s outputs behave.
Providing a complete study of the LDEL for the site would entail providing a detailed
study of all wind directions, the full range of wind speeds from cut-in to cut-out,
and diﬀerent site conditions such as ambient TI and shear. Given that the interest
is mostly on the eﬀects of wind speed and turbulence intensity, as these are the
parameters aﬀected by the wakes, the focus will be on these only.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
31
==PAGE:48==
(a) BFW
(b) TBFA
(c) ST
(d) TTFA
Figure 4.1: Load outputs from wind2loads surrogate for diﬀerent wind speed and
turbulence intensity inputs. Load signals are: BFW - blade root ﬂapwise, TBFA -
tower bottom fore-aft, ST - shaft torsion, TTFA - tower top fore-aft.
Next, the DEL for all 4 load signals will be studied using the eﬀective wind speed
and TI as modelled by the GCL deﬁcit and shown in in Figures 2.2 and 2.4 for
the Ueff and TIeff, respectively. This was done by calculating the evolution of the
DEL for all load signals using the eﬀective wind speed Ueff and turbulence intensity
TIeff for a turbine at increasing distance behind a ﬁxed turbine. Two diﬀerent cases
will be considered, the ﬁrst will use the results from the wake deﬁcit model without
any turbulence modelling, and the second case will include the eﬀective turbulence
as predicted by the Frandsen model. The results are shown in Figure 4.2 for the
case with no turbulence modelling and in Figure 4.3 for the case that includes the
Frandsen model. The results were produced for a wind site as described in section
3.2, with TI of 7.5% and shear of 0.2, and are normalized against the DEL for an
unwaked turbine under the same wind conditions. The 0 position is the location of
the wake producing turbine.
32
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:49==
(a) BFW
(b) TBFA
(c) ST
(d) TTFA
Figure 4.2: Evolution of DEL for a waked turbine at increasing distance from the
wake source. Wind conditions are modelled using the GCL deﬁcit and no turbulence
model for U = 12 m/s, TI = 7.5%, and shear of 0.2.
The results found for the case with no turbulence modelling shown in Figure 4.2
exhibit a trend that contradicts expectations: the blade root ﬂapwise and tower top
fore-aft DEL decrease as the distance to the turbine decreases. The shaft torsion
and tower bottom fore-aft DEL exhibit the opposite trend. This behaviour from
the BFW and TTFA load signals can be explained from the conclusions arrived at
previously: some load signals exhibit a higher sensitivity to wind speed and others
to the TI. This is coupled with the fact that the wake deﬁcit model does not predict
changes in the eﬀective turbulence intensity but only in the wind speed behind a
turbine. Due to the increased sensitivity from the BFW and TTFA DEL to changes
in the wind speed, these are seen to decrease closer to the wake source.
The previous analysis is repeated for ﬂow conditions that include the Frandsen tur-
bulence model. The modelled ﬂow now has an decreased wind speed and increased
turbulence closer to the wake source, as opposed to the previous ﬂow model where
the turbulence was unaﬀected by the wakes. The results in Figure 4.3 show a much
diﬀerent result: all load signals increase with decreasing distance to the turbine.
This change in the predicted DEL is due to the increased TIeff in the wake. The
results shown in Figure 4.2 exaggerate the changes in DEL for those load signals
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
33
==PAGE:50==
(a) BFW
(b) TBFA
(c) ST
(d) TTFA
Figure 4.3: Evolution of DEL for a waked turbine at increasing distance from the
wake source. Wind conditions are modelled using the GCL deﬁcit and Frandsen
turbulence model for U = 12 m/s, TI = 7.5%, and shear of 0.2.
more sensitive to wind speed, whereas the results from Figure 4.3 are governed by
the eﬀective TI.
As a last analysis and to highlight the importance of the inclusion of a turbulence
model in the modelling of the ﬂow, optimizations were carried out where the ob-
jective was to minimize the aggregate sum of the blade root ﬂapwise LDEL. The
blade root ﬂapwise loading was selected as it shows the lowest sensitivity to TI. The
cases analyzed are ﬁrst a case with no turbulence model included in the ﬂow model,
and another where the Frandsen turbulence model was included. The optimizations
were executed for wind parameters and site boundaries as described in section 3, for
9 wind turbines. Only few turbines were used in this optimization as these results
only serve to highlight an important behaviour in the optimization problem.
Figure 4.4 shows the initial and ﬁnals layouts for the optimization carried out for
a wind ﬂow model with no turbulence modelling.
The optimized layout has all
turbines close together in the middle of the domain, whereas the initial layout had
the turbines more spaced out in the domain. As explained previously, for a wind ﬂow
34
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:51==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: Initial (left) and ﬁnal (right) layouts for optimization with aggregate
blade root ﬂapwise LDEL as objective function and no turbulence modelling. Initial
layout has AEP of 433 GWh and maximum aggregate normalized LDEL of 7.287.
Final layout has AEP of 395 GWh and maximum aggregate normalized LDEL of
7.228.
model that does not include any turbulence modelling, the blade root ﬂapwise DEL
is seen to decrease as the distance to the wake sources is decreased. The optimizer
uses this information and moves the turbines closer together, decreasing the eﬀective
wind speed and thus driving down the loads. However, this is detrimental to the
power production: the initial layout has an AEP of 433 GWh and the ﬁnal layout
produces 395 GWh. This is a substantial decrease of 8.8%. more importantly, the
decrease in the aggregate LDEL is minimal, from 7.287 in the initial layout to 7.228
in the ﬁnal layout, a 0.81% decrease. It must also be pointed out that in some cases,
depending on the initial layout, TOPFARM would try to place the turbines in the
same position, yielding an error and stopping the optimization.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: Initial (left) and ﬁnal (right) layouts for optimization with aggregate
blade root ﬂapwise LDEL as objective function and Frandsen turbulence modelling.
Initial layout has AEP of 434.2 GWh and aggregate normalized LDEL of 7.743.
Final layout has AEP of 438.9 GWh and aggregate normalized LDEL of 7.682.
The behaviour of the optimizer when a turbulence model is included, such as the
the Frandsen model, is clearly diﬀerent as shown in ﬁgure 4.5. The ﬂow model now
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
35
==PAGE:52==
predicts increased turbulence and lower wind speed closer to the wake producing
turbine. As shown previously in Figure 4.3, this increases the DEL for all waked
conditions, where the lowest attainable load is in the unwaked case. This is high-
lighted in the ﬁnal layout of the optimizer, as it moves turbines further from each
other, in an attempt to have turbines in the least waked conditions. The energy
production results from the optimization are favorable: AEP is 434.2 GWh for the
initial layout and 438.9 GWh for the ﬁnal layout, an increase of 1.08%. The aggre-
gate LDEL decreased from 7.743 to 7.682, a 0.79% decrease.
The conclusion that can be drawn from the analysis carried out, is the importance
of having a turbulence model within the wind ﬂow model, to accurately address the
eﬀect of both wind speed and TI in the loads of the turbines. An optimization
where AEP is to be maximized while constraining the LDEL for a load signal that
is not sensitive to the TI will have confronting drivers in its optimization: an AEP
increase will result from more turbines in unwaked conditions, while a lower loading
will result from turbines in waked conditions. These results contradict the expected
behaviour, where the increased TI from wakes incident on wind turbines drives
loading up. Given this, for all future optimization cases discussed in the report, the
Frandsen turbulence model will be used.
4.2
Comparison of objective functions
Having now a detailed understanding of the surrogate model and the eﬀects of the
modelled wind ﬂow, the analysis is shifted towards the objective functions. As a
starting point, a comparison of the main objective functions used in the analysis is
done to understand the behaviour of the optimizer. Here four diﬀerent optimization
runs were conducted where the objective function and constraints on the loads were
varied: AEP (see equation 3.9) with and without LDEL constrains, and ﬁnancial
balance FB (see equation 3.1) with and without LDEL constraints. These opti-
mizations were run for 16 wind turbines in a parallelogram boundary. To ensure a
more thorough search of the design space, the smart_start method deﬁned within
TOPFARM will be used to run each optimization case 10 diﬀerent times.
The
smart_start method provides a randomized initial layout for the optimizer. It is
referred in the literature more commonly as multistart [12]. The results of these
optimization runs are summarized in the boxplot of ﬁgure 4.6.
The four diﬀerent objective functions and cases are labeled as AEP, AEP-L (with
LDEL constraints), FB, and FB-L (with LDEL constraints). Each boxplot represent
the interval from 5-95% of the values obtained. This was done to remove any outliers.
The red cross represents the maximum value obtained.
The values represented
are the normalized AEP, where the normalization parameter was determined by
calculating the AEP of a single turbine within the domain and multiplying by the
number of turbines. This is equivalent to removing all wake interactions within the
wind farm during optimization.
Figure 4.6 shows that optimization of AEP without load constraints leads to the
highest optimal AEP. If LDEL constraints are included for an optimization with
AEP as the objective function, the optima obtained are lower. The reason behind
this is the way in which the optimizer is able to lower the loading on the turbines.
36
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.6: Comparison of optimized AEP for diﬀerent objective functions through
10 multistart runs.
It does so by positioning the turbines in waked regions, where the eﬀective wind
speed on the rotor is lower than that of the free wind. This also yields lower energy
production, as the turbines are positioned in regions of lower wind speed. This can
be exempliﬁed by comparing the best performing layouts obtained from the opti-
mization runs between objective function AEP with and without LDEL constraints,
shown in Figure 4.7. These plots show the ﬂow map for the optimized layouts, where
the wind is shown coming from the most predominant wind direction in the site at
about 255◦.
(a) AEP
(b) AEP-L
Figure 4.7: Comparison of best optimal layouts for objective function a AEP without
(a) and with (b) LDEL constraints.
As can be observed, the layout on the right for objective function AEP with LDEL
constraints has turbine 14 positioned directly in front of turbine 11, causing the
eﬀective wind speed to decrease, decreasing the loading and the power production.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
37
==PAGE:54==
This is of course a generalization as the LDEL are calculated over the full range of
wind directions (0-360◦) and wind speeds covering all of the operating range of the
turbine. The wakes encountered by turbine 11 from turbine 14 will not be incident
when the wind comes from another direction, say for example north.
However,
this simple example utilizing the predominant wind direction to view the ﬂow map
sheds light into how the optimizer best tries to lower the loading on the turbine
components and maximize the AEP at the same time.
A surprising result is found when utilizing the ﬁnancial balance as the objective
function: higher optimal AEP is reached than when optimizing for AEP with load
constraints (AEP-L). This result shows that the detrimental eﬀects of the constraints
applied on the LDEL can be minimized by having them directly impact the objective
function. In this manner, the optimizer can "see" the trade-oﬀbetween constrain-
ing the loads and maximizing power production and will do so in a manner that
minimizes the impact from increased loading on the ﬁnancial balance.
It must also be noted that the variation in the AEP for all the optimization runs
is at most about 0.25%. This amounts to about 127.45 MWh yearly or 12,240 e
(2.55 GWh or 244,800 e over a 20 year lifespan), which is not a negligible amount.
This highlights the importance of utilizing a multistart approach during optimiza-
tion, especially when an algorithm such as SLSQP is selected, which has a tendency
of getting stuck in local minima. However to provide an adequate basis for com-
parison, the boxplot of the ﬁnancial balance for all four optimization runs is shown
in Figure 4.8. Again the value shown is a normalized ﬁnancial balance, where the
normalization parameter was taken to be the AEP for a single turbine multiplied by
the number of years of a wind farm’s lifetime (assumed 20 as throughout the report)
and the price of energy.
Figure 4.8: Comparison of optimized ﬁnancial balance for diﬀerent objective func-
tions through 10 multistart runs.
Figure 4.8 shows how the optimization for AEP-L still yields the lowest ﬁnancial
38
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:55==
balance, meaning that although the costs incurred from degradation are lowered, the
optimizer does so at the expense of AEP, with an overall eﬀect of a lower ﬁnancial
balance. Comparing the median value (red horizontal line) between all cases shows
that optimizations run for a ﬁnancial balance as the objective function will yield a
marginally higher optimum. Additionally, comparing the results between FB and
FB-L, the spread of results shifts slightly upwards for the case with load constraints.
The maximum optimum ﬁnancial balance, represented by the red crosses, obtained
for the AEP, FB, and FB-L cases are summarized in Table 4.1. The diﬀerence in the
optima obtained for AEP and FB cases is 0.0027% or e23,780, while that between
AEP and FB-L cases is 0.017% or e152,400. However, such small changes in the
objective function might be attributed to uncertainty in the models, optimizer or
methods.
Case
AEP
FB
FB-L
optimal ﬁnancial balance, normalized [%]
87.6383
87.6356
87.621
Table 4.1: Comparison of optimum ﬁnancial balance obtained for diﬀerent objective
functions as shown in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.9: Comparison of total degradation cost for diﬀerent objective functions
through 10 multistart runs.
Now looking at the distribution of the degradation costs CD as shown in Figure 4.9,
the cases AEP-L, FB, and FB-L show, in general, lower total degradation costs as
opposed to the pure AEP case. There is an outlier in the FB case, seen to have the
maximum total CD amongst all runs. This result might have been a layout where
the produced AEP was high enough to oﬀset the total damage or the starting layout
was one where the turbines were very close together, making the initial damage very
high in comparison to the optimum layout. The lower total degradation costs and
narrower spread of results seen for the FB-L case, suggest a good compound eﬀect
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
39
==PAGE:56==
when optimizing for the ﬁnancial balance and setting a constraint on the LDEL.
This is also in agreement with the results shown in Figure 4.8.
To address the performance of the optimizer through all 4 diﬀerent objective func-
tions, the number of iterations for each optimization run are plotted in Figure 4.10.
It is clearly seen that enforcing LDEL constraints in the optimizations increases the
computational time and resources used. The AEP-L case shows the highest spread
with a maximum value at more than 300 iterations, while all other cases do not go
above 120 iterations. This highlights once more the beneﬁts of including the LDEL
as both a constraint and within the objective function, as opposed to only enforcing
it as a constraint.
Figure 4.10: Comparison of optimization iterations for diﬀerent objective functions
through 10 multistart runs.
Alternatives to accounting for loads
There are many more ways in which the lifetime DEL can be accounted for within
an optimization workﬂow. This decision depends on the developer of the wind farm,
optimization software capabilities, etc. For the speciﬁc case here considered and
how the ﬁnancial balance is deﬁned in equation 3.1, two diﬀerent alternatives were
considered where the maintenance costs CM are active.
• increase the price of the component PS.
• set the number of replacements Rmax at a low number (eg. 1) to ensure the
ﬁrst term of equation 3.5 becomes active.
The eﬀect carried by both of these strategies is to increase the weight of the speciﬁc
component’s LDEL within the objective function, thus eﬀectively acting as a load
constraint. To test both strategies, two diﬀerent optimization workﬂows were set
up with the same parameters, with the exception of the constraint set on LDEL
and the number of replacements Rmax. One case was run for Rmax = 1 and no
LDEL constraints, while the second was run for Rmax = 3 and loads constrained to
40
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:57==
2. Because Rmax is set to 1 in the ﬁrst case, the ﬁrst term of 3.5 does not become
active until the LDEL reaches 200% (2.0 normalized value). To simplify the analysis,
the design LDEL for the shaft torsion only was decreased to ensure the load limit
would be reached, allowing for the turbine to be loaded beyond the limit at least
twice.
Case
AEP
ﬁnancial balance
Max LDEL
Rmax = 1
757.05
1239.88
1.9882
Rmax = 3, LS,max < 2.0
757.17
1239.68
1.9906
Table 4.2: Comparison of cases with active maintenance costs CM
A summary of the important parameters from both runs is shown in table 4.2. As can
be clearly seen, the results from both optimization runs are almost identical. This
goes to show that both strategies are interchangeable and will yield, potentially, the
same results. However, this claim cannot be supported through more evidence, as
time constraints did not allow for this idea to be explored further. Additionally, it
would be necessary to explore both strategies for diﬀerent wind conditions, surrogate
types and load signals to ensure the expected results can be generalized.
4.3
Sensitivity study
A sensitivity study on some of the optimization’s most important parameters was
carried out to shed some light into the behaviour of the objective function. Where
section 4.2 provided comparisons between the overall results through changes in the
objective function, this section will focus on detailed behaviour of the results and
interaction with the optimization parameters.
Diﬀerent objective functions were
deﬁned and used, with diﬀerent combination of constraints and parameters as rele-
vant to the problem workﬂow. For those parameters that are varied, an interval of
study is selected, according to best practices and international standards. For the
optimizations where the parameter is not varied, a nominal value is deﬁned. All
parameters used in the optimizations have a nominal value, but not all have an in-
terval of study. The selection of the parameters is explained in the following sections
alongside a summary of all parameters in Table 4.4. Each parameter study was ex-
ecuted for at least 50 runs, through randomized initial layouts using smart_start.
The number of wind turbines was lowered to 9, since the sensitivity study to be
conducted would require a many optimizations.
4.3.1
Objective function
The objective functions selected to conduct the optimizations are similar to the ones
used in section 4.2. The objective functions were selected in terms of increasing
complexity and are divided into energy production and diﬀerent variations of the
ﬁnancial balance as described in section 3.1. Within energy production, AEP with
and without load constraints will be studied, labelled as before as AEP and AEP-L,
respectively. In terms of the main study cases as described in section 3.4, the former
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
41
==PAGE:58==
corresponds to the component replacement model (study case 1), while the latter
corresponds to the constrained loads model (study case 2).
The ﬁnancial balance is deﬁned in equation 3.1 to include both degradation costs and
total maintenance costs. To analyze how the diﬀerent terms of the ﬁnancial balance
would aﬀect the optimization, the total maintenance costs are excluded ﬁrst. The
resulting ﬁnancial balance is labelled FB1 and is deﬁned as
FB1 = WP −CD
(4.1)
For this case, it is relevant to constrain the lifetime DEL, as the total maintenance
costs are not taken into account.
The second variant of the ﬁnancial balance is labelled FB2 and deﬁned as follows:
FB2 = WP −CD −CM
(4.2)
This is the expression of the ﬁnancial balance introduced in 3.1. In this case, the total
maintenance costs are included to ensure that the eﬀects of component replacements
on the objective function can be observed. No constraints are set on the loads for
this case as doing so would essentially have the same eﬀect as using the objective
function as deﬁned in equation 4.1 for FB1. The objective functions and parameters
selected for each are summarized in Table 4.3.
Parameters
AEP
AEP-L
FB1
FB2
turbulence intensity, TI


ﬁxed
shear exponent, α


ﬁxed
capacity density, ρWF




load constraints, Lmax


electricity cost, Pre


wind turbine price, Prwt

Table 4.3: Summary of parameter and objective function combinations used in sen-
sitivity analysis.
4.3.2
Parameter selection
The parameters were selected according to their relevance to the optimization and
load’s surrogate and the eﬀects obtained from each. Some parameters are not rel-
evant to some objective functions, for example electricity and wind turbine prices
have no eﬀect on the optimizations run for cases AEP and AEP-L since the ﬁnancial
balance is not the objective function. Likewise, to limit the amount of variables to
explore, all wind parameters were ﬁxed for the FB1 and FB2 cases.
42
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:59==
It is extremely important to select appropriate wind parameters as they provide
the basis of the energy production. Variables such as the wind direction and wind
speed distributions are commonly considered most important, but other factors
such as shear and turbulence intensity also play a key role. Specially when fatigue
loading is taken into account, the turbulence intensity at the site becomes a highly
important parameter. To select an appropriate set of parameters for the study, two
key limitations were taken into account: the input limits to the wind2loads load
surrogate and if the chosen parameters reﬂect real world conditions. As a basis, the
IEC 61400-1:2019 [20] standard was used in the selection of the parameters.
Wind speed, U
The wind speed must span at least the full operational range of a wind turbine,
generally starting at 3-4 m/s and stopping at 25 m/s. For the case of the wind2loads
surrogate, deﬁned for the DTU 10 MW-RWT, the wind speed range is 4-25 m/s, so
this interval was selected. The IEC 61400-1:2019 standard recommends wind speed
bins of 2 m/s as a maximum. To obtain more accurate AEP results, a bin width
of 1 m/s was selected. This provides a good compromise between accuracy and
computational time.
Wind direction, θ
Similarly as with the wind speed, the wind direction is divided into bins of speciﬁc
width. The IEC 61400-1:2019 recommends a maximum bin width of 30◦. To ensure
accuracy of results in the calculation of the AEP and to have a good resolution in
the determination of the wind turbine loading conditions, wind direction is selected
to cover from 0-360◦in bins of 2◦width.
Shear exponent, α
The shear exponent was chosen according to the Normal Wind Proﬁle (NWP) model
as described in [20]. The NWP model describes the wind proﬁle using a simple
power law approach, where the shear exponent α describes the rate of increase of
the wind with increasing altitude from the ground. As a general rule, the standard
sets α = 0.2 for normal operation of wind turbines. Cases of increased shear and of
negative shear are also described by the standard, but are not included in this study
as they are out of scope. Hence, the nominal shear exponent is set to α = 0.2. The
bounds for parameter study are set from a minimum of 0 (no shear condition) to
the nominal of 0.2, in steps of 0.05. The upper bound for the sensitivity study was
kept to the nominal case as the wind2loads surrogate’s input’s upper bound also
coincides with this value.
Turbulence intensity, TI
This is the parameter with the most diﬃculty in assessing bounds for as it has a
direct dependence on the wind speed. The IEC 61400-1 standard uses the Normal
Turbulence Model (NTM) to describe the change in turbulence with wind speed,
deﬁned through the following expression
σU = TI0 (0.75 Uhub + 5.6)
(4.3)
Where σU represent the wind speed’s standard deviation, TI0 is the reference turbu-
lence intensity speciﬁed in the standard, and Uhub is the wind speed at hub height.
TI0 is deﬁned in terms of the wind turbine classes as described in Table 1, Clause 6
of [20]. Once σU has been found, it can be used to calculate the turbulence intensity
from the deﬁnition of the turbulence intensity as TI = σU/U.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
43
==PAGE:60==
Using this model, the TI at a wind speed of 2 m/s can have a maximum value
between 0.42 and 0.65, depending on the wind turbine class selected.
Similarly,
for a wind speed of 30 m/s, this value is calculated to be between 0.11 and 0.17.
For all cases, the minimum value of the TI is always 0, although some amount of
turbulence will always be encountered in a real wind farm site. Given that this
range is a result of the diﬀerent reference turbulence intensities as described by the
wind and turbulence classes in the standard, selecting an appropriate study interval
can be a bit complicated. The upper bound selected is an average of the highest
TI value at 30 m/s (0.17) and the lowest TI value at 2 m/s (0.42), resulting in an
average of approximately 0.3. The ﬁnal interval selected for the TI is then 0.05-0.3,
in step sizes of 0.05. For cases where the TI is not varied, it will be kept at a
nominal value of 0.075.
Parameters
Lower Bound
Upper Bound
Step Size
Nominal
Value
turbulence
intensity, TI
[-]
0.05
0.3
0.05
0.1
shear
exponent, α [-]
0
0.2
0.05
0.2
capacity
density, ρWF
[MW / km2]
3
13
2
6
load
constraints [%]
95
100
1
NA
electricity cost,
Pre [e ct./
kWh]
8.64
9.60
0.192
9.60
wind turbine
price, Prwt
[Me / MW]
0.562
0.624
0.0124
0.624
Table 4.4: Summary of parameter used for sensitivity analysis.
Capacity density, ρWF
To address the size of the bounding area to use for the number of turbines considered,
a parameter known as the capacity density was studied. It is deﬁned as follows:
ρWF = PWF
AWF
(4.4)
where ρWF represents the capacity density, PWF is the wind farm’s installed capacity,
and AWF is the wind farm’s area. It must be pointed out that this deﬁnition does
44
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:61==
not contain information on the wind farm’s eﬃciency and thus cannot be used to
assess the energy production of the wind farm. Rather, it provides a measure of the
size of a wind farm in terms of land use and can be used to compare across diﬀerent
types and sizes of turbines. The study conducted by the German consultancy agency
Deutsche WindGuard GmbH [35] sheds light into the sizing of oﬀshore wind farms in
the Baltic and North seas, and although it is not exhaustive, it provides an excellent
starting point for the purposes of this thesis.
The capacity density can be varied by either increasing/decreasing the bounds and
hence the farm area, or by varying the installed capacity through the number of
installed turbines or the rated power of each (or a combination of all parameters).
Since the wind turbine load surrogate used in this study was trained only for the
DTU 10MW-RWT, then only the bound area was varied to change the capacity
density. The results of the study in [35] report oﬀshore wind farms to have a capacity
density between 3.1 and 18.7 MW/km2. However, the reported capacity density of
18.7 MW/km2 will be considered an outlier, as only one wind farm was seen to have
this high value, with the second highest being at 14 MW/km2. The selected bound
is then from 3-13 MW/km2, with step sizes of 2 MW/km2. The nominal capacity
density is kept at 6 MW/km2, which is the average for oﬀshore farms according to
[35].
Load constraints, Lmax
The constraints on the loads of interest were found to be hard to determine, as the
diﬀerent load signals were not active at the same time and not all could be con-
strained to the same bound. This involved some trial and error, but an appropiate
bound was found to work for all load signals between 95% and 100% of the design
DEL Ld.
Electricity and wind turbine prices, Pre, Prwt
The ﬁnancial balance as described in equation 3.1 involves the prices of energy and
of the wind turbines. In a sense, these parameters can be seen as weight factors,
where either the lifetime energy production (WP) or the degradation (CD) and
maintenance costs (CM) have a bigger inﬂuence on the ﬁnancial balance of the
wind farm. It was thus important to conduct some sensitivity analysis on both of
these parameters.
The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) publishes power generation
costs studies every number of years, with the latest edition of the report published
in early 2020 for the 2019 period. In this report [36], the costs of energy generation
for oﬀshore and onshore wind are detailed for the period encompassing the last 10
years. These are given to be 9.6 Euro cent per kWh (e ct./ kWh) for oﬀshore wind
farms by the end of 2019, on average. Since the prices of electricity from wind have
seen a decreasing trend for the past 10 year period, it was decided to choose an
interval that spans from the nominal value (the average in 2019) down to 90% of
this value, with steps of 2% decrease in price. The selected interval is given in Table
4.4.
The price of wind turbines was also found in the IRENA 2019 Costs of Energy
Generation report. These are given for the last 23 years, from 1997 up until 2020
and for diﬀerent manufacturers and/or sources in ﬁgure 2.3 of [36]. The prices for
wind turbines in early 2020 are reported to be around 750 $/kW (624 e/kW). As
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
45
==PAGE:62==
was done for the electricity prices, this was taken to be the nominal value, where
the study interval would be 90-100% of the nominal value.
4.3.3
Sensitivity analysis results
The sensitivity study was conducted for 13 diﬀerent objective function and param-
eter combinations, as given in Table 4.3. For each of these combinations, a total
of 250-300 optimizations were run, as each parameter would have 5 or 6 diﬀerent
values to be tested and for each value 50 optimizations were run. This resulted in an
enormous amount of data generated, of which only part of was found to yield mean-
ingful results. In this section, a selection of the important results will be discussed
and their relation to the main study.
AEP - shear exponent
The optimization runs for objective function AEP and its sensitivity to the shear
exponent are summarized in Figure 4.11. The AEP is normalized as was done in
section 4.2. The results show that there isn’t a substantial variation of the AEP
with increasing shear exponent: the median oscillates around 97.6% in a range of
about 0.05% above or below this value. There is greater variation in the results just
from the use of smart_start: the lowest spread in results was obtained for a shear
exponent of 0.05 and is about 0.7%.
Figure 4.11: Distribution of AEP for diﬀerent values of shear.
The low sensitivity of the objective function to the change in shear exponent can be
explained by the averaging eﬀect of changing wind speed across the rotor, with the
hub taken as the reference height. A blade extending above the hub will feel a wind
speed that is higher than that of a blade that is passing below the hub. However,
in reality the wind shear exponent may change with height and is also dependent
on atmospheric stability, meaning that the results as found in this sensitivity study
could be slightly diﬀerent. For the purposes of this thesis, the sensitivity of the
objective function to the shear exponent will be taken to be negligible. No further
46
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:63==
analysis of results of sensitivity to the shear exponent will be done.
AEP - capacity density
The sensitivity of the AEP to the capacity density is studied next and the results
are summarized in Figure 4.12. The capacity density was varied by decreasing the
bound area of the wind farm, while keeping the number and types of turbines the
same. As seen in Figure 4.12, an increase in the capacity density decreases the
optimum AEP; the trend is clearly observed. This result is expected, as a smaller
bounding area will lead to more wake interaction between turbines.
Figure 4.12: Distribution of AEP for diﬀerent values of capacity density.
The decrease in maximum optimum AEP, represented by the red crosses, from lowest
to highest capacity density is about 1.4%. This can add up to a signiﬁcant amount
of 12.4 Me over a wind farm’s average 20 year lifespan. It is impractical, however,
to develop a wind farm with such a large area that minimizes wake interactions
between turbines. An alternative approach would be to develop a wind farm with a
high capacity density using wind turbines with smaller rotors, which might oﬀset the
loss in production from wake interactions by having more wind turbines producing
energy. Nonetheless, the pursuit of this idea is out of the scope of the current study,
as only one surrogate type was available.
The relevance of the capacity density is mostly to provide a basis for selection of
a proper wind farm boundary area. Enforcing a higher capacity density essentially
ensures that there are wake interactions within the site, which is desirable for the
purposes of the study conducted.
AEP - TI
The most interesting result obtained from studying the variation in the ambient
turbulence intensity is the eﬀect observed in the lifetime DEL. Figure 4.13 shows
the variation of the normalized LDEL for all load signals and TI considered, where
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
47
==PAGE:64==
the maximum for each optimized layout is plotted (ie. the value obtained by the
turbine with the highest loading for the optimized layout for each run). The LDEL
are normalized against the design load Ld, which is determined as described in
chapter 3.
(a) BFW
(b) TTFA
(c) ST
(d) TBFA
Figure 4.13: Sensitivity of LDEL for diﬀerent load signals to ambient turbulence
intensity. Load signals are: BFW - blade root ﬂapwise, TTFA - tower top fore-aft,
ST - shaft torsion, TBFA - tower bottom fore-aft.
There are two key trends that can be observed.
First, the LDEL increase with
increasing ambient turbulence intensity.
This is expected as higher TI increase
loading on turbine components. It can be seen also, that this increase in the maxi-
mum LDEL, again represented with red crosses, is the lowest for the blade ﬂapwise
load signal with only a 0.6% increase, whereas all other load signals suﬀer an in-
crease above 10%. Additionally, the tower base fore-aft LDEL is the only one to
increase above the design limit for values of ambient TI above 0.2.
The second observable trend is the diminished spread in the LDEL for ambient TI
above 0.1, with the least eﬀect seen for the blade ﬂapwise load signal. To address
the trends observed in these results, a further study into the behaviour of the wind
in the wake of a turbine for diﬀerent ambient TI was conducted.
48
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:65==
Study of TI in turbine’s wake
This study was done by calculating the eﬀective turbulence intensity in the wake of
a single turbine for the wind speed range 3-25 m/s and distance behind the turbine
of 3-20 rotor diameters. The results are shown in Figure 4.14 for ambient turbulence
intensities of 5% (left) and 30% (right). The plots show the variation of the eﬀective
turbulence intensity as a normalized value with regards to the ambient TI. The x-
axis plots the distance behind the turbine, while each of the blue and orange curves
correspond to the cut-oﬀand cut-in wind speeds, respectively. The plots have been
modiﬁed intentionally to have the same scale in the y-axis to showcase the diﬀerence
in the results. Figure 4.15 shows the same results as displayed in the right side of
Figure 4.14, where the low variation in eﬀective TI is more clear.
Figure 4.14: Comparison of eﬀective TI in wake of a turbine for ambient turbulence
intensities of 5% and 30%.
It can be seen that for low ambient TI, the increase in the eﬀective TI in the wake
is much higher compared to the increase in eﬀective TI for the case of high ambient
TI. For a high ambient TI, the eﬀective TI will increase by 30% at 3D, and drop
sharply as turbine spacing increases. For distances above 8D, the eﬀective TI in the
wake of the turbine will not go above 10% of the ambient value. Compared to the
eﬀective TI for the case where the ambient TI is 5%, the maximum increase at a
distance of 3D from the wake source is between 200-500%. This can be attributed to
a much higher mixing in the ﬂow ﬁeld for high ambient TI, which causes the wakes
to dissipate faster. This is the same as saying that the recovery of the undisturbed
wind is faster for wind conditions with higher TI. The opposite is true for ﬂow
conditions with low TI, where wakes can trail for long distances behind a turbine.
This behaviour explains the trend observed in Figure 4.13 where the spread of LDEL
for higher ambient TI was greatly diminished. As the ambient turbulence intensity
becomes higher, causing the eﬀective TI increase in the wake of the turbine to be less
signiﬁcant, LDEL in the turbine components begins to be driven more by changes
in the wind speed.
The load signals would then begin to behave more like the
blade root ﬂapwise signal. The ﬁnancial balance would then have two confronting
drivers: placing turbines in less waked positions increases the energy production,
but also the loading on the turbines. The low variation in the LDEL also means
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
49
==PAGE:66==
Figure 4.15: Eﬀective turbulence intensity in wake of single turbine for ambient TI
of 30%.
that constraining the load signals becomes irrelevant.
FB1 - load constraints
Enforcing the load constraints on the load signals proved to be a complex task. Dif-
ferent values of the maximum load Lmax were tested, but the diﬀerence in behaviour
of the LDEL for the load signals means that enforcing a single value for all signals
can be problematic. Primarily with the very small variation range for the BFW
signal as shown in Figure 4.13, complications arose in cases where all load signals
could be decreased more than the BFW signal. The results from the sensitivity
analysis done for the ﬁnancial balance with no maintenance costs (FB1) objective
function sheds light on this complexity.
The execution of the optimizations shown in Figure 4.16 was done by providing a
single value of the load constraint Lmax to be enforced on all load signals. The results
plotted show how for most cases, the load constraints are not active, meaning that
the loads can be constrained further. However, the constraints are enforced and show
a decrease in the maximum LDEL calculated for each load signal. Speciﬁcally, for
the case of the BFW at a load constraint of 95%, the maximum LDEL calculated
reaches the load constraint, but this is not the case for the remaining three load
signals. Given the behaviour of the BFW LDEL, further constraining below 95%
is possible but problematic for the optimizer. Trials were run with load constraints
below 95% and the success of the optimization depended highly on the initial layout
that was output by the smart_start method. It was observed that for cases where
the turbines were close together in the initial layout, the optimizer would place
turbines in the same position, encountering an error and stopping the optimization.
A similar behaviour of the optimizer was described by Riva et al in [8], where it is
theorized that the Frandsen turbulence model is responsible for this behaviour since
50
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:67==
(a) BFW
(b) TTFA
(c) ST
(d) TBFA
Figure 4.16: Sensitivity of LDEL for all load signals to diﬀerent maximum load
constraints. Objective function is FB1.
it cannot model partial wakes.
It should be noted that the optimizations run to generate the results shown in Figure
4.16 had ﬁxed wind site parameters, where the ambient TI was set to 7.5%. The
results from the LDEL variation with increasing ambient TI in Figure 4.13 show
that for an ambient TI above 15%, all other load signals considered in the study will
experience higher loading than the BFW. This shows that depending on the wind
site conditions, the BFW signal might experience the highest or lowest LDEL.
This results can be extended to wind farms where the capacity density is high,
as increased wake interactions will drive up the TIeff and drive up all load signals
signiﬁcantly with the exception of the BFW signal, even when the ambient TI is low.
Validation of this hypothesis was, however, not carried out due to time constraints.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
51
==PAGE:68==
52
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:69==
5
Conclusions
The analyses that were carried out for this thesis project focused on gaining an
understanding into how load constraints could be implemented within a wind farm
layout optimization workﬂow. The behaviour of the loads, wind ﬂow models, and
optimizer were studied in detail, providing important insights in this regard.
First, the importance of including a turbulence model in the ﬂow model of the
optimizer was shown, where the Frandsen turbulence model was used in this study.
Due to the diﬀerence in the modelled TIeff, the response from the load surrogate
diﬀered between the modelled wakes. A comparison of the load response from the
surrogate between both ﬂow cases revealed an under-prediction of the blade ﬂapwise
and tower top fore-aft load signals for the ﬂow case with no turbulence model. This
under-prediction was linked to a higher sensitivity in both of these load signals to
the wind speed, as compared to their response to increase in the TI. Further, the
under-predicted load signals were used in an optimization where the aggregate LDEL
were minimized, showcasing how this drives the optimizer to position turbines close
to each other, thus decreasing the eﬀective wind speed and decreasing the LDEL,
at the expense of the power production. The accurate approach is to model the
eﬀective wind speed and TI in the wakes through a turbulence model, providing
good inputs for the load surrogate and thus to the optimizer.
Nevertheless, it is possible that the eﬀective TI as predicted by the Frandsen model
is on the conservative side (ie. too high) and thus cause overestimating the DEL.
Similarly, the Frandsen model does not model partial waking of wind turbine rotors.
These results have been proven by Larsen et al [37] in comparison between the
Frandsen and dynamic weak meandering (DWM) models.
Likewise, the studies
conducted by Stanley et al in [9, 10] showcase how the LDEL of blade load signals
can change when partial waking is incident on the rotor from diﬀerent sides (left
or right). The use of a more accurate wind ﬂow model could lead to interesting
interactions where a trade-oﬀbetween decreased wind speed and increased TI could
yield the lowest loading on a turbine’s component. However, testing of this theory
is beyond the scope of this project.
Second, sensitivity studies conducted for several parameters and objective functions
revealed some interesting interactions between the load signals for increased ambient
TI.
The increase in the normalized LDEL for ambient TI between 5-30% was
addressed. Two main trends were observed, the ﬁrst where the BFW loading had
very little variation between the highest and lowest ambient TI, which is supported
by the previous analysis where the load signal’s sensitivity to TI is low. This also
means that for high enough ambient TI, the BFW load signal would experience
the lowest LDEL of all four load signals considered. This turning point was found
to be somewhere between 10-15% ambient TI. The second observable trend is the
low spread of the calculated LDEL of all load signals for high ambient TI. Further
study into the wakes revealed that for high ambient TI, the added turbulence in
the wake was low and thus had a minimal impact on the loading of the components.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
53
==PAGE:70==
Due to the lower spread of the LDEL, enforcing load constraints for optimization
on sites with high turbulence intensity becomes impractical. Regardless, for any TI
considered, enforcing constraints on the BFW load signal has minimal eﬀects on the
ﬁnancial balance, due to its higher sensitivity to the wind speed. The conclusion
drawn is that load constraints on load signals other than the BFW can be beneﬁcial.
However, the author hypothesizes that the use of a ﬂow model that can account for
partial wake loading might reveal diﬀerent results than those presented here.
Third, comparison between the diﬀerent objective functions, revealed that optimiza-
tion for AEP with no LDEL constraints yields the highest optimum, and the ﬁnancial
balance does not greatly diﬀer from the cases where the objective function is the
ﬁnancial balance itself (FB) as opposed to using the AEP. The only detrimental
eﬀect was observed from optmizing AEP with LDEL constraints, which yield the
lowest AEP and ﬁnancial balance out of all cases considered. When comparing the
results found when optimizing for the FB with load constraints, where the LDEL
have a direct impact, the optimum found were higher than for the AEP-L case. This
shows a good synergy when LDEL constraints are enforced during optimization and
directly impact the objective function. In this manner, the optimizer can "see" the
trade-oﬀbetween constraining the loads and maximizing power production. Addi-
tionally, the AEP-L case shows the highest computational expense from all cases
considered.
The diﬀerences in optimum ﬁnancial balance for the AEP, FB, and FB-L cases were
seen to be small, with diﬀerences of 0.0027% or e23,780 between AEP and FB, and
0.017% or e152,400 between the AEP and FB-L cases, where the AEP case resulted
in the highest optimum. However, such small changes in the objective function might
be attributed to uncertainties in the optimization rather than substantial eﬀects that
can be attributed to the selection of the objective function. As a general observation,
it was seen that a layout that yields the maximum AEP is one where the turbines
are in the least waked positions, which also drives down the loading. Therefore, no
substantial beneﬁts were found from enforcing constrains on the loads as opposed
to a pure AEP optimization.
It must be highlighted that the study was conducted for one speciﬁc wind site and
load surrogate only, of which the load response is highly dependent. The behaviour
of the LDEL for a diﬀerent turbine type or wind site is expected to be diﬀerent, and
hence may yield diﬀerent results. Additionally, as mentioned before, the conservative
approach of the Frandsen turbulence model might have a signiﬁcant impact on the
results by over-estimating the TIeff in the wakes and thus driving up the LDEL. A
comparative analysis where another turbulence model is used, such as the DWM,
should be conducted to validate this claim.
54
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:71==
6
Future work
There is still much to be studied and scrutinized in the topic of optimization and
the eﬀect of load constraints when taken into consideration. This master thesis and
the previous published research papers have only been able to scratch the surface
in gaining understanding of the models and possibilities. However, based on the
results found so far, a few routes of future investigation are discussed here. First,
more design variables could be included in the optimization, for example the num-
ber and types of wind turbines. Since the modelling of these variables is discrete, it
becomes problematic when utilizing gradient-based optimization algorithms. How-
ever, the inclusion of diﬀerent wind turbine types, be that heights or models, can
create interesting interactions in the ﬂow ﬁeld and consequently in the loading of
the individual turbines.
This project and the previous research from Réthoré et al [7] and Riva et al [8]
have utilized loading models based on the Frandsen turbulence model. However, an
important limitation of the Frandsen model is that it cannot model partial loading
on turbine rotors. As the results found by Stanley et al [9] point out, partial wake
interation on the rotor blades can contribute to decreased loading when aﬀected
from the left side. This can be achieved by using a model such as the Dynamic
Wake Meandering (DWM), which more accurately models wakes and partial wake
interaction within wind farm ﬂow ﬁelds. The Frandsen model’s decreased physical
accuracy in modelling is however counterbalanced by its much lower computational
cost compared to that of the DWM model.
The use of other surrogate types and diﬀerent wind farm sites would also help in
expanding the results here obtained.
Loading on turbines, as well as the power
production, are highly site-dependent.
The site’s frequency distribution of wind
speeds and directions will play a key role in the optimal layout of a wind farm.
Finally, a more complex and accurate cost model can be used to address ﬁxed
costs (such as foundation and grid costs), as done in the study by Réthoré et al [7].
Considering that for oﬀshore wind farms the ﬁxed costs are an important contributor
to the LCOE, exploring these could potentially yield more important contributions
than those obtained from load constraints.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
55
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[1]
Tyler J Stehly and Philipp C Beiter. 2018 Cost of Wind Energy Review. Tech.
rep. December. 2019, pp. 1–71.
[2]
Wind Europe asbl-vzw. Reports: Our energy, our future. url: https://windeurope.
org/about-wind/reports/our-energy-our-future/ (visited on 06/14/2021).
[3]
A. Tesauro, P. E. Réthoré, and G. C. Larsen. “State of the art of wind farm
optimization”. In: European Wind Energy Conference and Exhibition 2012,
EWEC 2012 3 (2012), pp. 2020–2030.
[4]
José F. Herbert-Acero, Oliver Probst, Pierre Elouan Réthoré, Gunner Chr
Larsen, and Krystel K. Castillo-Villar. “A review of methodological approaches
for the design and optimization of wind farms”. In: Energies 7.11 (2014),
pp. 6930–7016. issn: 19961073. doi: 10.3390/en7116930.
[5]
G. Mosetti, C. Poloni, and D. Diviacco. “Optimization of wind turbine po-
sitioning in large wind farms by means of a Genetic algorithm.” In: Journal
of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics 51.51 (1994), pp. 105–116.
doi: 10.1016/0167-6105(94)90080-9.
[6]
Christopher Elkinton, James Manwell, and Jon McGowan. “Oﬀshore Wind
Farm Layout Optimization (OWFLO) Project: Preliminary Results”. In: 44th
AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit. July. Reston, Virigina: Amer-
ican Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Jan. 2006. isbn: 978-1-62410-
039-0. doi: 10.2514/6.2006-998.
[7]
P. E. Réthoré, P. Fuglsang, G. C. Larsen, T. Buhl, T. J. Larsen, and H. A.
Madsen. “TOPFARM: Multiﬁdelity optimization of wind farms”. In: Wind
Energy 17.12 (Dec. 2014), pp. 1797–1816. issn: 1095-4244. doi: 10.1002/we.
1667.
[8]
Riccardo Riva, Jaime Liew, Mikkel Friis-Moller, Nikolay Dimitrov, Emre Bar-
las, Pierre Elouan Réthoré, and Arvydas Beronskis. “Wind farm layout op-
timization with load constraints using surrogate modelling”. In: Journal of
Physics: Conference Series 1618.4 (2020). issn: 17426596. doi: 10.1088/1742-
6596/1618/4/042035.
[9]
Andrew P.J. Stanley, Jennifer King, and Andrew Ning. “Wind Farm Layout
Optimization with Loads Considerations”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference
Series 1452.1 (2020). issn: 17426596. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1452/1/012072.
[10]
Andrew P J Stanley, Jennifer King, Christopher Bay, and Andrew Ning. “A
Model to Calculate Fatigue Damage Caused by Partial Waking during Wind
56
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:73==
Farm Optimization”. In: Wind Energy Science November (2020), pp. 1–34.
doi: 10.5194/wes-2020-117.
[11]
G.C. Larsen. A simple generic wind farm cost model tailored for wind farm
optimization. Tech. rep. 2009.
[12]
J. R. R. A. Martins and A. Ning. Engineering Design Optimization. 1st ed.
2020.
[13]
Andrew P.J. Stanley and Andrew Ning. “Massive simpliﬁcation of the wind
farm layout optimization problem”. In: Wind Energy Science 4.4 (2019), pp. 663–
676. issn: 23667451. doi: 10.5194/wes-4-663-2019.
[14]
D. Kraft. A Software Package for Sequential Quadratic Programming. Tech.
rep. 28. Deutsche Forschungs und Versuchsanstalt für Luft und Raumfahrt,
1988, pp. 1–33.
[15]
Jorge Nocedal and Stehpen J. Wright. Numerical Optimization. Second. Springer,
2006. isbn: 9780387303031.
[16]
Nikolay Dimitrov, Mark C Kelly, Andrea Vignaroli, and Jacob Berg. “From
wind to loads : wind turbine site-speciﬁc load estimation with surrogate models
trained on high-ﬁdelity load databases”. In: (2018), pp. 767–790. doi: 10.5194/
wes-3-767-2018.
[17]
I. Rychlik. “A new deﬁnition of the rainﬂow cycle counting method”. In: In-
ternational Journal of Fatigue 9.2 (1987), pp. 119–121. issn: 01421123. doi:
10.1016/0142-1123(87)90054-5.
[18]
N.O. Jensen. A note on wind generator interaction. Tech. rep. Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark, Nov. 1983, pp. 1–18.
[19]
Gunner C Larsen. A simple stationary semi-analytical wake model. Tech. rep.
August. DTU, 2009, pp. 1–21.
[20]
IEC. IEC 61400-1:2019 Wind Energy Generation Systems
Part 1 : Design
requirements. Tech. rep. 2019, p. 180.
[21]
Sten Tronaes Frandsen. “Turbulence and turbulence- generated structural
loading in wind turbine clusters”. PhD thesis. 2007, p. 135. isbn: 8755034586.
[22]
Pierre Elouan Réthoré, P. Fuglsang, Torben J. Larsen, T. Buhl, and Gunner
Chr. Larsen. TOPFARM wind farm optimization tool. Tech. rep. Technical
University of Denmark (DTU), 2011, p. 95.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
57
==PAGE:74==
[23]
Riccardo Riva, Jaime Yikon Liew, Mikkel Friis-Møller, Nikolay Krasimirov
Dimitrov, Emre Barlas, Pierre-Elouan Réthoré, and Mads Mølgaard Pedersen.
TopFarm2 (Version v2.2.0). Nov. 2019. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3553713.
[24]
Riccardo Riva, Jaime Yikon Liew, Mikkel Friis-Møller, Nikolay Krasimirov
Dimitrov, Emre Barlas, Pierre-Elouan Réthoré, and Mads Mølgaard Pedersen.
Welcome to TOPFARM. url: https : / / topfarm . pages . windenergy. dtu . dk /
TopFarm2/ (visited on 06/14/2021).
[25]
Mads M. Pedersen, Paul van der Laan, Mikkel Friis-Møller, Jennifer Rinker,
and Pierre-Elouan Réthoré. DTU Wind Energy/PyWake: PyWake (Version
v1.0.10). Feb. 2019. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.2562662.
[26]
Mads M. Pedersen, Paul van der Laan, Mikkel Friis-Møller, Jennifer Rinker,
and Pierre-Elouan Réthoré. Welcome to PyWake. url: https://topfarm.pages.
windenergy.dtu.dk/PyWake/index.html (visited on 06/14/2021).
[27]
EMD International AS. windPRO modules: OPTIMIZE. url: https://www.
emd . dk / windpro / windpro - modules / energy - modules / optimize/ (visited on
06/10/2021).
[28]
UL LLC. Openwind - UL | Renewables. url: https://aws-dewi.ul.com/software/
openwind/ (visited on 06/25/2021).
[29]
Det Norske Veritas group. Wind Resource Assessment software - WindFarmer:
Analyst. url: https : / / www . dnv . com / services / wind - resource - assessment -
software-windfarmer-analyst-3766 (visited on 06/25/2021).
[30]
NREL. FLORIS. Version 2.4. 2021.
[31]
M. Samorani. “The Wind Farm Layout Optimization Problem”. In: (2013),
pp. 21–38. doi: 10.1.1.456.8116.
[32]
Katherine Dykes. “Optimization of Wind Farm Design for Objectives Beyond
LCOE”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1618 (2020). doi: 10.1088/
1742-6596/1618/4/042039.
[33]
Peter Argyle, Simon Watson, Christiane Montavon, Ian Jones, and Megan
Smith. “Modelling turbulence intensity within a large oﬀshore wind farm”. In:
Wind Energy 21.12 (2018), pp. 1329–1343. issn: 10991824. doi: 10.1002/we.
2257.
[34]
Andrew B. Lambe and Joaquim R. R. A. Martins. “Extensions to the Design
Structure Matrix for the Description of Multidisciplinary Design, Analysis, and
Optimization Processes”. In: Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization 46
(2012), pp. 273–284. doi: 10.1007/s00158-012-0763-y.
58
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:75==
[35]
Rasmus Borrmann, Knud Rehfeld, Anna-Kathrin Wallasch, and Silke Lüers.
Capacity Densities of European Oﬀshroe Wind Farms. Tech. rep. Deutsche
Windguard GmbH, 2018, p. 83.
[36]
Michael Taylor, Pablo Ralon, Harold Anuta, and Sonia Al-Zoghoul. RENEW-
ABLE POWER GENERATION COSTS IN 2019. Tech. rep. IRENA, 2019,
p. 144.
[37]
Torben J. Larsen, Gunner Larsen, Helge A. Madsen, and Søren M. Petersen.
“Wake eﬀects above rated wind speed. An overlooked contributor to high loads
in wind farms”. In: European Wind Energy Association Annual Conference and
Exhibition 2015, EWEA 2015 - Scientiﬁc Proceedings (2015), pp. 95–98.
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
59
==PAGE:76==
60
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
==PAGE:77==
Strategies to best account for loads in a wind farm design
61
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Nils Koppels Alle, Building 403
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
