==PAGE:1==
Modelling atomic vibrations in neural
network analysis for electron
microscopy images
Written by
Anders Dreisig (s144108)
Supervisors
Jakob Schiøtz, Professor at DTU Physics
Ole Winther, Professor at DTU Compute
Matthew Helmi Leth Larsen, PhD student at DTU Physics
M.Sc. Thesis in Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Handed in 25. July 2021
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Data quality and the corresponding increase in performance from deep learning algorithms is becoming
increasingly important with the steep increase in the amount of data available. One particular example
is high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images, in which microscopists are able to
see atomic columns of a nanoparticles when the balance of microscope parameters is just right. However,
as this can diﬃcult, many HRTEM images are captured with a low signal-to-noise ratio, prompting the
need for analysis tools such as deep learning to assist the microscopist in locating e.g. atomic columns or
edges of a nanoparticle. This thesis attempts to utilize the frozen phonon method to increase the data
quality, thus also increasing the performance of an already implemented mixed-scale dense convolutional
neural network (MSDnet) for image segmentation tasks. To that end, a method of emulating the thermal
diﬀuse scattering (TDS) eﬀect seen in experimental HRTEM images using molecular dynamics (MD)
was constructed and implemented. The experiments with the neural networks showed that the proposed
methods qualitatively increased the model inference on experimental HRTEM images for atomic column
segmentation, but not for nanoparticle segmentation.
i
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This M.Sc. thesis was written at DTU Nanolab, the National Centre for Nano Fabrication and Charac-
terization, in collaboration with DTU Compute, the department of mathematics. The work concludes an
Engineering degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation with focus on deep learning and data
science. The work was completed during the spring and summer of 2021 (February to July) under the su-
pervision of Prof. Jakob Schiøtz, Prof. Ole Winther and PhD student Matthew Helmi Leth Larsen. The
work has been conducted as research, and therefore focuses on the scientiﬁc process and its corresponding
methods.
I hereby declare that I have completed this work without any assistance from third parties beyond
the mentioned supervisors and the discussions from group meetings with the Machine Learning Assisted
Atomic-Resolution Electron Microscopy group at DTU Nanolab. The thesis is not previously graded or
otherwise presented in any foreign or Danish examination boards.
Anders Siig Dreisig (s144108)
Kongens Lyngby, July 2021
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to give huge thanks to both Prof. Jakob Schiøtz, Prof. Ole Winther and PhD student
Matthew Helmi Leth Larsen for the fantastic opportunity to work with a combination of my favorite
subjects in engineering: Data science, machine learning and material physics. I conducted my bachelors
project with Prof.
Jakob Schiøtz and Senior Researcher Thomas Willum Hansen in 2018/2019, and
getting to continue in the same group and with a similar, albeit larger, project has been a fantastic
learning experience.
This thesis certainly felt like the culmination of my time at DTU as I got to
combine all I’ve learned during the years in a single, compact project.
A special thanks to Matthew Larsen for your quick response over email during the Covid-19 pandemic
work-from-home situation, and your patience and support when writing and debugging the code for the
project.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theoretical Background
4
2.1
Molecular Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Canonical Ensemble (NVT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Frozen phonon method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Convolutional neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Mixed-scale dense convolutional neural network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Learning metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Methodological approaches and experimental setup
12
3.1
Experiment 1: Comparing MD simulations and Gaussian perturbations
. . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.1
Stage 1: Simulations and vibrational amplitude extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.2
Stage 2: Perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.3
Stage 3: HRTEM image simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Experiment 2: Statistical analysis of FPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Experiment 3: Testing the MSDnet on the perturbed HRTEM images . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.1
The MSDnet architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.2
Learning curves of the MSDnet for nanoparticle segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3.3
Learning curves of the MSDnet for atomic segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3.4
Detection of thermal vibrations in simulated HRTEM images . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Results from experiments
23
4.1
Experiment 1: Comparing MD simulations and Gaussian perturbations
. . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Computation time of the methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Experiment 2: Statistical analysis of FPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Experiment 3: Testing the MSDnet on perturbed HRTEM images
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.1
Learning curves of the MSDnet for nanoparticle segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.3.2
Learning curves of the MSDnet for atomic segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3.3
Detection of thermal vibrations in simulated HRTEM images . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Discussion
44
5.1
Experiment 1: Comparing MD simulations and Gaussian perturbations
. . . . . . . . . .
44
5.2
Experiment 2: Statistical analysis of FPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Experiment 3: Testing the MSDnet on perturbed HRTEM images
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3.1
Learning curves of the MSDnets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
1
==PAGE:6==
5.3.2
Detection of thermal vibrations in simulated HRTEM images . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Conclusion
48
7
Outlook
49
8
Bibliography
50
8.1
Articles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.2
Books . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.3
Websites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A Appendix
52
A.1 Simulated HRTEM images of regular small and large Au nanoparticles . . . . . . . . . . .
52
A.2 Learning curves for 12 networks trained for nanoparticle- and atomic segmentation . . . .
55
==PAGE:7==
1
|
Introduction
In today’s society, with the amount of devices capable of extracting data from our daily lives, the quantity
of data available for machine learning purposes is ever increasing. The data is used to highlight problems
before they occur, help visualize and enhance properties useful for making decision and much more. To
do so, the machine learning algorithms needs a large quantity of data. But how important is the data
quality and how do we balance between the quantity and the quality of the data?
In many cases, the amount of data is restricted by manual data gathering processes, where machine
learning concepts like regularization or ensemble techniques become crucial to achieving satisfactory per-
formance from the models[24]. But in some cases, as in this project, the creation of synthetic data solves
this issue, and the limitations of the learning process solely relies on the quality of the simulated data.
In terms of the bias-variance trade-oﬀ, we are in control of the variance, but in turn increase the bias in
our system by dictating how the data is created. This creates a precarious situation, where we need to
be careful and work with the data simulation to accurately capture the underlying manifold on which
the data lies.
Figure 1.1: In this ﬁgure, a gold nanoparticle is
shown sitting on a CeO2 support. The image was
taken by William Bang Lomholdt at the TEM at
DTU and used in this thesis with his permission.
In the world of material science, the properties of a
nanomaterial, i.e. a material on the nanoscale, is de-
pendent on the surface conﬁguration of the material[4].
With the advances in high resolution transmission elec-
tron microscopy (HRTEM), we are now able to see the
surfaces of materials such as the catalyst molybdenum
disulphide (MoS2), used in oil reﬁning [3] or simple
metallic nanoparticles such as gold (Au), see Figure
1.1. However, distinguishing atomic columns or edges
of a nanoparticle can be diﬃcult for the operator, as
it is necessary to have an optimum balance of micro-
scope parameters to yield a HRTEM image with a high
enough signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Even with perfect
conditions, the change in contrast across an image can
produce boundaries, edges or bulk regions very diﬃcult
to perceive.
To assist the operator in discerning where a
nanoparticle is located in a HRTEM image accurately,
deep learning methods are employed to perform image segmentation using a so called MSDnet, which is
a type of convolutional neural network (CNN). Image segmentation is the process of segmenting a digital
image into partitions, usually called objects, that share the same label. In this case, this can either be
nanoparticle segmentation, where it is attempted to locate the entire nanoparticle by drawing a mask
around the nanoparticle, or atomic segmentation, where the atomic columns are located by learning the
honeycomb pattern that occurs when viewing the nanoparticle down the [110] zone-axis.
However, as mentioned earlier, when we have the ability to generate our own training data for the
MSDnet, the only way to improve the models performance on experimentally captured HRTEM images,
is by improving the data itself. One way to do so, is by including molecular dynamics (MD) into the
data generation and thereby account for the thermal vibrations of the nanoparticle.
An example of
1
==PAGE:8==
MD simulations can be seen in Figure 1.2, where the same gold nanoparticle is viewed before and after
MD simulations, where we can see a displacement on each of the atoms, especially in the bulk region
of the nanoparticle. As the MD simulations will contain information of the atomic conﬁguration of the
nanoparticle at each time step, it is possible to extract the thermal vibrational amplitude on each of
the atoms by using the frozen phonon method[1]. This method functions by approximating the thermal
displacement on each atom, also known as a phonon conﬁguration, by counting the diﬀerent displacements
in each "frozen" time step, which is subject to thermodynamic statistics. This allows us to incorporate
that important quantum mechanical behaviour, which is otherwise very computationally heavy to derive,
in our simulated HRTEM images without explicitly calculating the phonons, thereby improving the data
quality.
Figure 1.2: In this Figure, a simulated HRTEM image of a gold nanoparticle is shown before and after molecular
dynamics simulations.
1.1
Thesis outline
In this thesis, the application of the frozen phonon method in simulated HRTEM images and its uses
with deep learning is investigated. To explore this, the thesis is split into 3 experiments which deﬁne the
following sections:
1. Theoretical background for the thesis. The necessary theory to be able to understand the methods
and results are laid out in this section. The section in partitioned into two parts.
(a) Atomic simulations and molecular dynamics in Section 2.1.
(b) Deep learning and learning metrics in Section 2.2.3.
2. A breakdown of the experiments and methods employed in the thesis.
For scientiﬁc purposes
and reproducibility, the qualitative and quantitative analysis of the frozen phonon method, image
simulations and deep learning are described in this section. The methods are divided into three
parts.
(a) Qualitative comparison of MD simulations and the perturbation method in Section 3.1.
(b) Quantitative analysis of the frozen phonon method in Section 3.2.
(c) Test of a convolutional neural network on the perturbed data in Section 3.3.
2
==PAGE:9==
3. The results and discussion from the methodological approach, which are reported in Sections 4 and
5.
4. Conclusion of the thesis in Section 6.
5. Outlook of the project in Section 7, in which the proposed further works are outlined.
3
==PAGE:10==
2
|
Theoretical Background
This section entails the theoretic background necessary to understand the applied methods and results
of this thesis. As the scope of the thesis is limited to the data generation, neural network training and
analysis thereof, the theory section will focus on how the molecular dynamic simulations and frozen
phonon method functions, and how convolutional neural networks, particularly the MSDnet, works. The
inner workings of a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) will not be discussed, but the reader is
referred to D. B. Williams and C. B. Carters Transmission Electron Microscope: A Textbook for Materials
Science[5] for more information.
2.1
Molecular Dynamics
Molecular dynamics (MD) is a simulation method used when analyzing the interatomic behaviour of
atoms and, in our case, nanoparticles. The method uses numerical methods to solve Newton’s equations
of motion, using the current positions, velocities, interatomic potentials and forces of the atoms to evaluate
the atomic conﬁguration in the next time step. This yields an approximation to the molecular motion
on an atomic scale, which is accurate on short time scales, but will generate cumulative errors dues to
the numerical integration[21].
MD simulations are based on Newton’s second law of motion, specifying the force Fi applied on
each atom i with mass mi and acceleration ai. We can also write the force as the negative gradient of
the potential energy of the system, resulting in the following equality:
Fi = miai = −∇iV
The acceleration can be described as the temporal derivative of the velocity of the atom vi, the second
temporal derivative of the position of the atom ri or the negative derivative of the total potential energy
with respect to the position of the atom:
ai = dvi
dt = d2ri
dt2 = −1
mi
dE
dri
If we combine Newton’s second equation with the rewritten expressions for the acceleration and force,
we get the result in Equation 2.1:
−dV
dri
= mi
d2ri
dt2
(2.1)
This correlates the change in potential energy to the second derivative of the location of each of the
atoms, i.e. the acceleration, which can be derived using numerical methods. These numerical methods
requires initial conditions of the positions and velocities, and calculated from these, we can extract the
forces and energies. As for the energy, it is common to use the Eﬀective Medium Theory (EMT) when
approximating the total energy of the system. This approximation is useful when dealing with metals
such as Cu, Ag, Au, Ni, Pd and Pt, as they sit in FCC crystals[9]. The method consists of approximating
4
==PAGE:11==
the energy by a pair-potential Vij, and uses electron density contributions n from the surrounding atom
to compute a cohesive function Ec by superimposing these densities. The method is described in further
detail by Jakobsen et al. in their article[9], and won’t be discussed further in this thesis, as it is merely
an eﬀective method of computing the total energy of the system.
Usually, the velocities are initially deﬁned by either a Gaussian distribution or a Maxwell Boltzmann
distribution. In this case, we look at the Maxwell Boltzmann distribution, which deﬁnes the probability
that an atom has a given velocity at a speciﬁc temperature, see Equation 2.2.
P(vi) =

mi
2πkBT
 1
2
exp

−1
2
miv2
i
kBT

(2.2)
Where kB = 1.380649 × 1023 J/K is Boltzmanns constant. This distribution is used to "kick" each of the
atoms with some momentum, while preserving that the overall initial momentum is zero, i.e. that
p =
N
X
i=1
mivi = 0
Using the velocities derived from the Maxwell Boltzmann distribution, we can then derive the temperature
as
3
2NkBT =
N
X
i=1
p2
2mi
(2.3)
In the end, we end up with a set of equations that, combined with our initial conditions, allows us to
derive the positions of and forces on all of the atoms in a nanoparticle iteratively over a time period.
This yields, for each time step, the positions, velocities, forces and energies for each atom as well as
the temperature for the entire system. There exists a number of integration methods used to solve these
equations, including Verlet, VelocityVerlet or even Runge Kutta methods. The most common by far is the
VelocityVerlet algorithm, which is stable over long time periods, and conserves energy[22]. Pseudocode
for the algorithm can be seen in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 VelocityVerlet
Initialize ⃗v(t),⃗r(t) and deﬁne ∆t > 0
while t < tfinal do
Compute velocities ⃗v half a time step into the future
⃗v(t + 1
2∆t) = ⃗v(t) + 1
2m∆t⃗F(⃗r(t))
Compute positions ⃗r a full time step into the future
⃗r(t + ∆t) = ⃗r(t) + ∆t · ⃗v(t + 1
2∆t)
Compute velocities ⃗v a full time step into the future
⃗v(t + ∆t) = ⃗v(t + 1
2∆t) + 1
2m∆t⃗F(⃗r(t + ∆t))
Update time step ∆t
t = t + ∆t
end while
However, as this project works with simulating Au nanoparticles sitting on a support material at con-
stant temperature, it was chosen to work with the so called Canonical Ensemble (NVT) methods, more
speciﬁcally the NVTBerendsen dynamics, which adds a scaling to the velocities, to keep the temperature
constant.
5
==PAGE:12==
2.1.1
Canonical Ensemble (NVT)
The Canonical Ensemble is a type of MD simulation that deals speciﬁcally with ensembles (a mechanical
system of states) at thermal equilibrium[6]. The method depends on three variables: The number of states
N, the volume of the system V and the equilibrium temperature T, which is the important variable in
this type of ensemble. However, we cannot directly change the temperature, only derive it from our
simulations. As such, the NVTBerendsen[2] molecular dynamics functions by scaling the velocities of the
atoms in each step of the algorithm, as shown in Equation 2.4.
Tscale =
r
1 + ( T
Told
−1) · ∆t
τ
(2.4)
⃗v(t) = ⃗v(t) · Tscale
It then computes the new velocities and positions as prescribed in Algorithm 1, in which the scaling in
Equation 2.4 has the eﬀect that the temperature change decays exponentially towards our desired temper-
ature Told. This can be deﬁned as shown in Equation 2.5, and is called the Berendsen thermostat.
dT
dt = T −Told
τ
(2.5)
Where Told is the desired temperature, T is the current temperature and τ is the characteristic time
constant.
2.1.2
Frozen phonon method
If we look at a nanoparticle sitting on a specimen stage in a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM),
each atom in the crystal will vibrate slightly, given by the phonon conﬁgurations of the crystal. These
vibrations are small but distinct and depend on the temperature of the system. The result of this is a
diﬀuse background intensity of the diﬀraction pattern, also known as thermal diﬀuse scattering (TDS)[10].
As the imaging electrons hitting the specimen travels at a velocity of about 1.5×1010cm/sec, the electrons
traverses the specimen in about 0.7 × 10−16s, which is faster than the optical phonons of the atoms that
vibrate at a frequency of about 1012 −1013Hz[11][10]. This means that the imaging electrons will see
the atoms as stationary, but slightly oﬀset from their equilibrium position, and as the ﬁnal diﬀraction
pattern is made up of the average of the diﬀraction patterns from a number of imagining electron, the
result will be a blurring eﬀect around the equilibrium of the atom[10].
A way to emulate this, is by using the MD simulations described above to implement the frozen
phonon method (FPM). The method consists of using the stored trajectories from the simulations, specif-
ically the positions in spatial coordinates from each time step, to derive the vibrational amplitude of each
of the atoms by calculating the standard deviation of the thermal displacement over all atoms that share
coordination number[1]. This corresponds to approximating the quantum mechanical distribution of the
phonon conﬁgurations, usually derived from the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the dynamical matrix
of the system, using only classical motion obtained from Newton’ s equations of motion[1]. This rather
simple approximation is shown to be quite good by Krause et al.[1], where they compared this method
to the phonon displacements expectations from DFT for AlGaN alloys.
6
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Deep learning
As described in Deep Learning by Goodfellow et al.[7], artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is a ﬁeld of study that
focuses on automating routine labor and making decisions based on learning from large quantities of
data[7]. Speciﬁcally, AI is used for tasks that are easy for people to do in their everyday life, but hard to
formally deﬁne. Such tasks include recognizing accents or dialects, or objects in images. To solve these
tasks, a hierarchy of models are employed, with each sub-model learning from its predecessors. When
the depth of such a hierarchy is suﬃciently large, the process is coined deep learning.
In Sections 2.2.1 and 2.2.2, the deep learning model utilized for image segmentation in this thesis is
described in detail. The learning metrics used to evaluate model performance are outlined in Section 2.2.3.
To limit the scope of the thesis, the reader is assumed to have a basic knowledge of neural networks and
their training procedures, including the forwards- and backwards passes, gradient descent optimization
and loss functions. Furthermore, general machine learning terms such as generalization, model selection
methods, supervised- and unsupervised learning and learning curves are also assumed familiar to the
reader. For more information about these terms, the reader is referred to Deep Learning by Goodfellow
et al.
2.2.1
Convolutional neural networks
A convolutional neural network (CNN), also sometimes known as a shift-invariant or space invariant
artiﬁcial neural network (SIANN), is a form of artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) suitable for learning tasks
of a grid-like topology[16][7], such as the HRTEM images focused on in this thesis. As with any neural
network, the model is deﬁned by an input layer, a number of hidden layers and an output layer. However,
where the regular ANNs functions as multi-layer perceptrons, i.e. fully connected neural networks, the
layers in a CNN are only locally connected through a shared convolutional kernel, making the CNN
less likely to overﬁt. This kernel, K, is a square matrix, much smaller than the input image, I, and is
combined with the input image through the convolutional operation, usually denoted by ∗, to form a
feature map, S. This can be seen in Equation 2.6[7].
S(i, j) = (I ∗K)(i, j) =
X
m
X
n
I(m, n)K(i −m, j −n)
(2.6)
This way of locally convolving a kernel with a small section of the input image, also known as a local
receptive ﬁeld, results in sparse interactions or sparse weights[7]. Speciﬁcally, this means that the
CNN is adept at locating features or patterns locally instead of globally in an image as the same kernel is
shared across the entire input image. Reusing the same kernel across the input is also called parameter
sharing, and while it does not decrease the computation time of a forward pass through the network, it
certainly reduces storage needs for this type of model[7]. This procedure is depicted in Figure 2.1, where
a randomly set, binary 6x6 pixel input image is convolved with a 3x3 kernel to produce a feature map.
Convolving across the input image also shrinks the output feature map, depending on the stride, i.e. how
many pixels we shift the kernel each time, and the amount of padding we put around the input image.
This padding is usually zero valued pixels, only put in place to keep the feature map the same size as the
input, but other methods exists such as the reﬂection padding method used in the neural network from
this project. This padding method simply reﬂects the pixel values around the edges, thereby working
as a form of mirror. This way of parameter sharing also makes the convolutional layers equivariant
to translation, meaning that changing the input, will result in a similar change in the output. In the
context of images, if we move an object in the input image, the object will have moved the same amount
in the feature map[7]. This lends a robustness to the model, as it can adapt to the images in which the
object we are trying to locate are shifted around.
Usually, after convolving the local receptive ﬁeld with the kernel to yield a feature map, a non-linear
activation function is applied to the map to help the neural network learn.
There are a number of
activation functions used in this type of neural network, but the most common are found in Equation
2.7.
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1:
In this ﬁgure, the convolution between
the kernel and the local receptive ﬁeld is shown. The
result is called a feature map, after which a non-linear
activation function is usually applied to each pixel (not
shown here).
Figure 2.2: In this ﬁgure, the max pooling operation
of the feature map is shown, which results in a pooled
response. The values shown are meant to illustrate how
the maximum value is selected in each of the 2×2 pixel
squares and returned as the pooled response.
ReLU :
g(z) =
(
0,
for z < 0
z,
for z ≥1
(2.7)
PReLU :
g(z) =
(
αz,
for z < 0
z,
for z ≥1
Sigmoid :
g(z) =
1
1 + e−z
Tanh :
g(z) = tanh(z)
Softmax :
g(zi) =
ezi
P
j ezj
Among these, the Parametric Rectiﬁed Linear Unit (PReLU) is deﬁnitely the most common, as it
works like a linear function that yields nicely deﬁned and simple derivations when we backwards propagate,
but by adding a small slope to the negative values, thereby ﬁxing the vanishing gradient problem by not
having any zero-gradients. This allows the network to learn complex, non-linear relationships in the
data.
After the feature map has been created using the convolutional operation, is it common to apply a
pooling function to the feature map, see Figure 2.2. The pooling function acts as a form of non-linear
down-sampling, which helps make the feature map invariant to local translation in the input[7]. Invariance
to local translation is useful if we care more about classiﬁcation tasks, e.g. is there a cat in the image,
rather than image segmentation tasks, e.g. locating atomic columns in a HRTEM image. But if we care
about both of these types of tasks, for example if we want to both ﬁgure out if there is a cat in the image,
and locate it in the image, it has been common to implement skip-connections in the architecture. One
example of this is the Unet[17], which employs the usual CNN architecture and down-samples the input
images to learn the respective pattern of the learning task, but after which up-samples the feature maps
to original size to locate where the objects learned are positioned in the original image. An example of
a Unet implementation can be found in the original paper from Jacob Madsen et al.[15], where the Unet
architecture was utilized for atomic column segmentation.
As the goal of the CNN is to segment the image into partitions or objects, a number of convolutional
layers, each of which consists of a convolutional operation, a non-linear activation function and a pooling
function, are usually stacked. In each layer, a number of kernels, sometimes also known as ﬁlters, are
convolved with the input and all their features mapped are stored and passed along to the next layer
in the network. As we go deeper into the network, the abstraction of the features that the kernel is
8
==PAGE:15==
attempting to locate increases. Initially, the input is convolved with a number of simple kernels that
attempts to ﬁnd edges in the input[7]. In the next layer, the output feature maps from the ﬁrst layer are
then convolved with a new set of kernels, that can then combine the edges found in the image with new,
more complex patterns. This is known as a spatial hierarchy, and is what allows the CNN to eventually
learn to segment entire complex objects such as a persons face or an animal from an image.
2.2.2
Mixed-scale dense convolutional neural network
Usually, the CNNs employed to solve image segmentation or classiﬁcation problems have a large number
of convolutional layers, typically also combined with down-sampling and/or up-sampling processes to
help capture the patterns or features at diﬀerent scales[17][15]. A signiﬁcant drawback to this approach,
is the large number of trainable parameters that comes with these networks, both in terms of storage
issues and in computational complexity. As described by Daniel Pelt et al.[19], a way to counteract
this issue, is by deﬁning a new network architecture called the mixed-scale dense convolutional neural
network (MSDnet). This architecture consists of densely connecting all the intermediate feature maps,
which are kept at the same dimensions m = mi, n = ni in each layer. Furthermore, the feature maps are
now computed using a dilated convolutional operation instead of scaling using the pooling operation, see
Figure 2.3. This eﬀectively removes a number of variables needed when constructing the network, such
as the choice of max pooling vs. average pooling, as the network itself learns the combinations of dilation
required for the speciﬁc problem[19].
Figure 2.3: In this ﬁgure, the mixed-scale dense convolutional neural network can be seen. The network uses
dilated convolutions in a densely connected network to reduce the number of trainable parameters, and achieve
satisfactory performance with a lower computational tax. The network is setup with an input image, x, which is
densenly connected to all 3 convolutional layers and the ﬁnal output layer, y. In each layer there are two channels,
noted as Feature map channel in the ﬁgure, where each channel in a layer is connected to all other layers, and
their respective channels, but not to each other. This ﬁgure is reproduced from the article by Daniel M. Pelt[19].
As mentioned in the article by Daniel M. Pelt et al., the dilated convolution Dh,s, in which the dilation
parameter is s ∈Z+, uses a dilated ﬁlter h that is nonzero only at distances which are at a multiple
of s pixels away from the center[19]. Combining this with using diﬀerent values of s for each layer, the
architecture eﬀectively operates at a mixed-scale in each feature map, as the name of the network suggests.
The dilated convolution, gij(zi−1), can be seen in Equation 2.8, where the dilation convolution uses the
output image from another layer zk
i−1.
gij(zi−1) =
ci−1
X
k=0
Dhijk,sijzk
i−1
(2.8)
Where i denotes the layers and j denotes the channels. However, as the MSDnet is also densely connected
as shown in Figure 2.3, the architecture allows the ﬁnal output image to use the information from each
of the intermediate feature maps[19]. Beyond simplifying the network by reducing parameters, it also
9
==PAGE:16==
helps to avoid overﬁtting to the training data as the model complexity is reduced. This changes Equation
2.8 by convolving each of the previous feature maps with the convolutional dilation and summing the
response, see Equation 2.9.
gij({z0, z1, ..., zi−1}) =
i−1
X
l=0
ci−1
X
k=0
Dhijkl,sijzk
l
(2.9)
zj
i = σ(gij({z0, z1, ..., zi−1}) + b)
The ﬁnal output layer is computed by a linear combination of all the feature maps, and applying a
non-linear activation function σ to the sum, e.g. the softmax seen in Equation 2.7.
2.2.3
Learning metrics
This ﬁnal section pertains to the learning metrics by which the chosen models performance is evaluated.
As the image segmentation methods employed in this thesis are based on binary labels, it is a common
choice to choose recall, precision and the harmonic mean of the two, also known as a F-measure, to
evaluate the predictions from the model[20].
Figure 2.4:
This ﬁgure contains a 2 × 2 confusion matrix, which shows the four diﬀerent outcomes from a
binary classiﬁcation task. If we have two possible conditions for our task, negative and positive (or 0 and 1 in
the binary case), then the true positive and true negative corresponds to the predictions being correct, and the
false positive and false negative corresponds to wrong predictions.
As shown in Figure 2.4, there are four diﬀerent states for our models predictions based on the labels in
the binary case. Either the model predicted correctly, yielding either a true positive (TP) if the label
was 1, or a true negative (TN) if the label was 0. Meanwhile, if the models predictions are wrong, we
get either a false negative (FN), if we guessed 1 and the label was 0, or a false positive (FP) if we assign
a 0 and the true label as 1. These diﬀerent measurements can be combined into more tangible metrics
called the recall and the precision, as shown in Equation 2.10.
10
==PAGE:17==
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(2.10)
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
The recall of a model is determined by the fraction of true positives to the sum of true positives and false
negatives. In layman’s terms with regards to e.g. atomic segmentation: Out of how many actual atomic
columns there are in the image, how many did the network ﬁnd? Meanwhile, the precision of a model is
measured as the fraction of true positives to the sum of true positives and false positives. This can be
explained as: Out of the predicted atomic columns, which were true?
To combine these two metrics into a single measure, the harmonic mean of the precision and recall is
often used. This is what is known as the F-measure[20], and is given in Equation 2.11.
Fβ = (1 + β2) ·
Precision · Recall
β2 · Precision + Recall
(2.11)
F1 = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
The F-measure is based on a β value, which weighs the recall higher than the precision for β > 1, and
vice versa for β < 1. If we set β = 1, we get the common F1 score, which weighs the two metrics equally
and is a value between 0 and 1. This is generally useful in image segmentation tasks, as we wish to value
models that have both a high recall, i.e. locates a lot of objects, but also a high precision, such that the
located objects are correctly segmented.
11
==PAGE:18==
3
|
Methodological approaches and ex-
perimental setup
This section contains the methods employed in each experiment for this thesis, and thorough explanations
of why the speciﬁc methods were chosen. The work has been carried out on both the High Performance
Computers (HPCs) and on the Niﬂheim cluster, located at DTU using the Python coding language. As
the methods include heavy MD simulations and parallelization of image simulations using the abTEM
Python module1, it was necessary to use the computer clusters to increase performance. Furthermore, as
NP simulations and image generation was conducted on the HPC, and network training was conducted
on Niﬂheim, GitLab was used to store and move updated code between clusters. A link to the repository
can be found here2.
Section 3.1 contains a qualitative comparison of using MD simulations vs perturbing an initial atomic
conﬁguration using FPM when simulating HRTEM images of gold (Au) nanoparticles. The focus of the
section is the FPM, see Section 2.1.2, which is used to capture the thermal vibrational behaviour of the
nanoparticles and use it to improve the quality of the resulting HRTEM image while reducing the need
for expensive MD simulations. Section 3.2 contains a more quantitative analysis of the FPM and focuses
on comparing the thermal vibrational amplitudes of small and large Au nanoparticles. The idea here is
to verify that it is suﬃcient, at least with simple metallic nanoparticles, to simulate small nanoparticles
and use their thermal vibrational behaviour to estimate how much each atom vibrates, even with larger
nanoparticles. Finally, in Section 3.3, the method is scaled and the resulting performance of a MSDnet,
when trained for nanoparticle- or atomic segmentation on the perturbed data, is investigated using
learning curves. New models are then trained on both the raw, non-perturbed data and the perturbed
data, and the results are compared for both segmentation methods.
3.1
Experiment 1: Comparing MD simulations and Gaussian per-
turbations
In this ﬁrst section, the goal is to incorporate the thermal vibrational behaviour of the atoms in the
nanoparticle into the ﬁnal HRTEM image while avoiding computationally heavy phonon calculations.
To do so, the workﬂow is split into three stages, as shown in Figure 3.1. In the ﬁrst stage, marked
with red in Figure 3.1, a Au nanoparticle is created and then run through MD simulations from which
the approximated vibrational amplitudes of each atom is extracted using FPM. Next, the second stage,
marked with blue in Figure 3.1, consists of using the extracted vibrational amplitudes to perturb the same
initial conﬁguration as the MD simulations were conducted on, using a Gaussian distribution, to achieve a
similar result as the MD simulations but without having to run a computationally heavy MD simulations.
Finally, the third stage, marked with green in Figure 3.1, uses the simulated and perturbed trajectories of
the atomic conﬁgurations to create simulated HRTEM images. The process creates HRTEM images of the
initial atomic conﬁguration (pre), the last conﬁguration after MD simulation or Gaussian perturbation
(post) and of each step in the simulation or perturbation and takes the mean (mean). These images are
then compared qualitatively to see if the perturbation method can emulate thermal vibrations that are
present in the MD simulations.
1The full link to GitHub is provided here: https://github.com/jacobjma/abTEM.
2The full link to GitLab is provided here: https://gitlab.com/AndersDreisig/masters-thesis.
12
==PAGE:19==
Figure 3.1: This ﬁgure contains the entire workﬂow for Section 3.1, which is split into three stages. The ﬁrst
consists of MD simulations and thermal vibrational amplitude extraction of a Au nanoparticle. The second contains
Gaussian perturbations of the same Au nanoparticle, and lastly the third stage simulates HRTEM images of both
processes and compares them.
3.1.1
Stage 1: Simulations and vibrational amplitude extraction
Zooming in on stage 1 in Figure 3.1, there are three steps: Nanoparticle creation, MD simulations and
thermal vibrational amplitude extraction. These three steps are highlighted in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: In this ﬁgure, the ﬁrst stage is zoomed in on, where the Au nanoparticle creation, MD simulation
and vibrational amplitude extraction progress can be seen. The speciﬁc nanoparticle shown is the largest of the
nanoparticles simulated in this section. The nanoparticle is ﬁrst created, then run through NVTBerendsen MD
simulations and lastly the frozen phonon method is employed to extract the thermal vibrations.
3.1.1.1
Nanoparticle generation
Following the workﬂow seen in Figure 3.2, an initial atomic conﬁguration of the Au nanoparticle is ﬁrst
created using the Atomic Simulation Environment (ASE) in Python. For this purpose, two functions
13
==PAGE:20==
were made which can create either regular or irregular nanoparticles. The reasoning for testing diﬀerent
methods to create the nanoparticles, is that we need to have enough variety in the training data for the
MSDnet to accurately explore the data manifold, and learn to correctly segment either atomic columns
or whole nanoparticles, depending on the task at hand. However, as much as variety is necessary, the
method also needs to be realistic, and not create shapes of nanoparticles that will immediately relax into
a new conﬁguration the second we turn on the simulation.
The irregular nanoparticles are created by generating a block of Au atoms, and using spherical
harmonics to cut oﬀparts of the 3D shape, thereby generating a randomly shaped Au nanoparticle. This
method will generate very diﬀerently shaped, albeit unrealistic nanoparticles. The method was utilized
as it was in place when the thesis started, and was used as a stepping stone to the second, more regular
method. The regular nanoparticles are named as such, as they appear more regular in shape due to
be being created by cutting a block of Au atoms down along the [100] and [111] crystal planes. The
advantage of being able to make regular nanoparticles like this, is that nanoparticles like Au will not
sit in strange conﬁgurations at room temperature, but will more likely have a regular shape depending
on the number of atoms in each direction of a speciﬁc crystal plane. The method is newly created by
Matthew Larsen, and can be seen in his GitLab repository here3, and is the method of choice for the
remainder of the project.
In this ﬁrst Section, 3 diﬀerently sized nanoparticles (small, medium and large) were created using the
two methods with setup parameters shown in Table 3.1. The idea was to generate a number of diﬀerently
sized nanoparticles, and look at the computation time and behaviour of the vibrational amplitudes as
the nanoparticles increased in size. To really hone in on the vibrational behaviour, two versions of each
nanoparticle is created: One with a tilt angle of 5 degrees away from the [110] zone-axis and one with no
tilt angle. The eﬀect of this is a drastically diﬀerent image before and after MD simulations and Gaussian
perturbations, which therefore helps comparisons between the methods.
The nanoparticles are created such that with a grid size of 1200 x 1200 pixels and a sampling of 0.05
Å/pixels, the nanoparticles would be roughly 5-15 Å in radius. The limit mentioned in Table 3.1 is the
amount of space around nanoparticles, regardless of where it is randomly moved when it is generated. The
reasoning for this, is that abTEM uses periodic boundary conditions when simulating the HRTEM image.
If the nanoparticle is resting on the boundary, it will be mirrored onto the opposite side, resulting in an
incorrect HRTEM image. As such, it is important to keep a small distance away from the edges.
Table 3.1: In this table, the important parameters for Au nanoparticle creation are shown. The tilt is the tilting
angle away from the [110] zone-axis of the crystal plane, and is either 0 or 5, to better visualize the vibrational
behaviour. The sampling is kept at a standard 0.05 to give abTEM enough resolution for image simulations. The
limit is the amount of vacuum created around nanoparticle to allow us to see the entire nanoparticle and N is the
cell size in pixels.
Tilt [°]
Sampling [Å/pixels]
N [pixels]
Limit [Å]
Approx. radius [Å]
0 / 5
0.05
1200
3
5 −20
3.1.1.2
MD simulations and vibrational amplitude extraction
After the 3 nanoparticles were created using both regularity methods and with/without tilt, they were
run through MD simulations (middle box in Figure 3.2), using ASE and As Soon As Possible (ASAP),
a calculator used for large-scale MD simulations in ASE. A number of diﬀerent dynamics were tested in
this project, including Langevin and VelocityVerlet. However, in the end, as it was necessary to keep
the nanoparticle at a constant temperature throughout the simulation to keep the amplitudes of the
thermal vibrations in each step constant, NVTBerendsen MD was chosen. Beyond keeping a constant
temperature, NVTBerendsen also conserves the angular momentum, keeping the nanoparticle rotationless
when simulating. Lastly, the nanoparticles are kept stationary to mimic their behaviour on a substrate
and to enable usage of the FPM4. The wall time of each simulation as well as the number of atoms in
each nanoparticle is saved for comparison with the perturbation method.
3The full link to the GitLab repository can be found here: https://gitlab.com/matthewhelmi/NeuralNetwork_HRTEM.
4If the nanoparticles begin to drift, we would not be able to use the FPM as the atoms in the nanoparticle would not
be at an equilibrium.
14
==PAGE:21==
The simulation parameters can be found in Table 3.2.
To keep the simulations simple, and to
achieve thermal stabilization before the simulations began, and to balance computation time with ease
of debugging, we ﬁrst run the molecular dynamics at 300°K for 2000 fs, then simulate 100 steps with 5
fs between each step for a total of 500 fs. The time step of 5 fs is reasonable for Au nanoparticles due to
the observed phonon conﬁguration of Au, i.e. that with 5 fs between each snapshot of the simulations,
we get a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent atomic conﬁguration.
Table 3.2: In this table, the important parameters for Au nanoparticle simulations are shown. The simulations
are carried out at room temperature with a thermalization process over 2000 fs at ﬁrst, which is considered a
reasonable amount of time for Au to stabilize. After thermalization, 100 simulation steps with a time step of
5 fs are carried out using the EMT calculator. At each step, the atomic conﬁguration is stored and saved as a
trajectory, to be used in the frozen phonon method for vibrational amplitude extraction.
Temp [K]
Thermalization time [fs]
Time step [fs]
# Simulations
ASE Calculator
300
2000
5
100
EMT
Once MD simulations are completed, and all 3 nanoparticles for both regularity types and both types of
tilt angle have 100 trajectories with atomic positions stored, we move on to utilizing the frozen phonon
method to extract the vibrational amplitudes of the nanoparticles, see the third box in Figure 3.2. To do
so, the standard error of all the atomic positions is calculated over the course of the simulation. Then,
the unique number of coordination numbers5 is calculated and used to group the atoms. Lastly, the mean
of the standard error for each group of atoms, characterised by their coordination numbers, is computed.
This results in a list in which we have a mean of the standard error of the vibrational behaviour for each
coordination number.
This concludes Stage 1, and we now have perturbation lists, containing the thermal vibrational
behaviour for each coordination number of 3 diﬀerently sized nanoparticles. These are used in Stage 2,
see Section 3.1.2, to perturb the same initial atomic conﬁgurations that the simulations were run on, to
arrive at a ﬁnal conﬁguration of the Au nanoparticles which should be similar to the ﬁnal conﬁguration
of the Au nanoparticles after simulations.
3.1.2
Stage 2: Perturbations
The second stage is comprised of taking the same initial atomic conﬁguration as the simulations were
run on and the vibrational amplitudes were extracted from, and perturb each atom in that conﬁguration,
characterized again by their coordination numbers, by a value drawn from a Gaussian distribution with
mean zero and standard deviation equal to the vibrational amplitude. The workﬂow seen in Figure 3.3
zooms in on the second stage in Figure 3.1.
To emulate the simulation process, the perturbation is carried out on the initial conﬁguration 100
times to replicate the eﬀect of a crystalline vibrational behaviour, and saved in a similar manner to the
simulation process. After this, we have an initial conﬁguration and a trajectory with 100 random pertur-
bations of the initial conﬁgurations. The wall time for the perturbations is saved for later comparison to
the simulation method.
3.1.3
Stage 3: HRTEM image simulations
Finally, after both simulations and perturbations are completed, we move on to actually simulating
HRTEM images using abTEM, the third stage shown in Figure 3.1. The parameters used for image
simulations are shown in Table 3.3, where the majority of parameters are kept ﬁxed in this section, but
are randomly selected when generating training data for the neural network. This is done to be able
to better qualitatively see the eﬀect of the MD simulations and Gaussian perturbations in the HRTEM
image, as e.g. the defocus or focal spread can obscure the HRTEM image quite signiﬁcantly.
An important factor worth highlighting, particularly when doing atomic segmentation, is the sign
of the defocus in the simulated HRTEM image. If the sign is positive, as it has been set in this section,
the atoms will appear as black dots on a light background, and the pattern that the CNN will try to
5The coordination number of an atom is given by the number of nearest atoms within a certain threshold.
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.3: In this ﬁgure, the extracted vibrational amplitudes from the simulation process in Figure 3.2, here
referenced as a perturbation list, is used to perturb the same initial atomic conﬁguration of the Au nanoparticle. As
such, all atoms with the same coordination number will be displaced by a randomly drawn value from a Gaussian
distribution with mean zero and standard deviation equal to the corresponding vibrational amplitude.
learn is a honeycomb structure. If the sign of the defocus was ﬂipped, the reverse image will appear,
and the network will learn the pattern between the atomic columns. As such, for atomic segmentation,
the images will be simulated with a positive defocus, to allow tests on the experimental data which is
captured with a positive defocus. For nanoparticle segmentation, the defocus is allowed to have both
negative and positive defocus, as the edges of the nanoparticles, which the network is trying to ﬁnd, is
the same regardless of defocus.
Another point to mention, is the initial and ﬁnal size of the image. When the nanoparticle is created, it
is created on a 1200x1200 pixel grid with a random positioning therein, with a sampling of 0.05 Å/pixels.
When we run the nanoparticle through abTEM and simulate the HRTEM image, we only take an area
of about 640x640 pixels and create our HRTEM image in that space. This is done to reduce the required
RAM storage needed to analyze the images with the neural network, and it does not impact the learning
capabilities of the network.
Table 3.3: This table shows the microscope-, image and MTF parameters used for image simulations.
Microscope parameters
Image parameters
MTF parameters
v0 [eV]
300 · 103
Blur
1
c0
1
Dose [e/Å2]
104
Brightness
- 0.1 −0.1
c1
0.029
Focal spread [Å]
10
Contrast
0.9 −1.1
c2
0.40
Defocus [Å]
100
Gamma
0.9 −1.1
c3
1.063
Cs [Å]
-5 · 104 −5 · 104
N [Å]
1200
Resampling [Å/pixels]
0.07 −0.08
Sampling [Å/pixels]
0.05
Image size [Å]
640
As mentioned in the introduction to this section, the HRTEM images are simulated with abTEM based
on either the initial atomic conﬁguration, the last atomic conﬁguration after MD simulations or Gaussian
perturbations or on each step in the simulations/perturbations with a fraction of the dose and averaged.
All images are locally normalized around the nanoparticle to force the pixel values to a normal distribution
with mean around 0 and standard deviation around 1.
The HRTEM image simulated on the initial atomic conﬁguration, mentioned as HRTEM image
16
==PAGE:23==
pre in Figure 3.1, is created to act as a benchmark to which the other simulated HRTEM images are
compared. The HRTEM simulated based on the last conﬁguration after simulations or perturbations is
made to check if a single perturbation of all atoms will qualitatively resemble what the ﬁnal conﬁguration
of MD simulations looks like. Finally, the mean HRTEM image is created by averaging the image wave
intensities of each conﬁguration during simulations/perturbations, and then applying the random noise,
blurring and MTF at the end. The reasoning for only adding noise etc. at the end, was that if we
simply make 100 individual HRTEM images, with the random noise addition from abTEM, we would
risk applying structure to the noise. As such, the "only" thing that we add, and the thing that we
are actually after, is the smoothing eﬀect of the slightly diﬀerent atomic positions in the image wave
intensities. This process is parallelized using multiprocessing to increase performance by extracting the
wave intensities for each conﬁguration in parallel, and then subsequently average them to get the ﬁnal,
mean intensity. The comparison of all the images for MD simulations and Gaussian perturbations can
be found in Section 4.1.
3.2
Experiment 2: Statistical analysis of FPM
Where Section 3.1 focused on qualitatively comparing the MD simulations to the Gaussian perturbations,
this section will attempt to generalize and quantify the extracted thermal vibrational amplitudes from the
frozen phonon method. The reason for doing so, is that the entire premise of the frozen phonon method
is to conduct MD simulations to extract the vibrational amplitudes. However, when the nanoparticle be-
comes suﬃciently large or complex, these simulations become too computationally expensive to compute.
An example of this is the nanoparticle MoS2, which requires DFT simulations that in some cases scale as
∝N 3 with N being the size of the system[14]. As such, the section will explore if it is enough to simulate
small nanoparticles, in this case continuing with simple Au nanoparticles, to get an accurate measure
of the thermal vibrational amplitudes, or if these scale signiﬁcantly with the size of the nanoparticle.
Furthermore, the simulations are carried out at diﬀerent temperatures, to look into whether or not the
behaviour between large and small nanoparticles deviates.
To investigate this behaviour, a temperature range from 150K to 450K was looked into, as this
is usually the temperatures at which Au nanoparticles are stable[11]. For each temperature, 25 small
and 25 large Au nanoparticles are created using the regular nanoparticle method explained in Section
3.1.1, using the same parameters are shown in Table 3.1. The small nanoparticles are created to have an
approximate radius of about 5-10Å and the large from about 15-25Å, and the number of nanoparticles for
each temperature setting is chosen as a trade oﬀbetween having enough data to statistically represent
the underlying mean and variance, and computational time. The important part to consider, is that
it is necessary to have enough atoms with varying coordination numbers in the small nanoparticle to
get a satisfactory estimate of vibrational amplitudes. After nanoparticle creation, MD simulations using
NVTBerendsen dynamics are run on each nanoparticle using the same simulation parameters as shown in
Table 3.2. From each MD simulation, the thermal vibrational amplitudes are extracted and saved. Finally,
the mean and standard error of the vibrational amplitudes at each temperature for each coordination
number is plotted for both large and small Au nanoparticles and the results are compared in Section
4.2.
17
==PAGE:24==
3.3
Experiment 3: Testing the MSDnet on the perturbed HRTEM
images
This section describes the method used to train and evaluate a MSDnet trained on the data generated
from the frozen phonon method and the averaging of simulated HRTEM images.
The idea is to at-
tempt to visualize the eﬀect of including thermal vibrations in the training data when attempting both
nanoparticle- and atomic segmentation. As the scope of the thesis is limited, the section will focus on
investigating the performance for a MSDnet trained on simulated HRTEM images of regular Au nanopar-
ticles. The networks are set to train on the HPC’s at the DTU Computing Center (DCC), using the Tesla
V100 GPU’s owned by DTU Compute. The GPU’s are much more eﬃcient at training the network than
CPU’s, and takes about 1.5-2 days to train with the parameters used in this project. All HRTEM images
are made with randomly generated microscope parameters, listed in Table 3.4 and Table 3.5. To train the
networks, an associated label for the HRTEM image needs to be generated. The label is what determines
the choice of segmentation. To do nanoparticle segmentation, a mask label with binary pixel values is
used, which is a roughly drawn polygon that outlines the nanoparticle. To do atomic segmentation, a disk
label with binary pixel values is generated, which clusters the atomic columns along the (110) zone axis,
and draws a disk with a diameter of 0.4 Å or a number of disks if the sample is tilted a lot at each atomic
columns location in the image. For both labels, the initial atomic conﬁguration after thermalization is
used to make the label, as it is considered the ground state for the phonon conﬁguration. Sections 3.3.2
and 3.3.3 looks into investigating the learning curves of nanoparticle- and atomic segmentation respec-
tively with simulated HRTEM images of averaged atomic conﬁgurations. Section 3.3.4 then focuses on
comparing the performance of the network when it is trained on HRTEM images of the initial conﬁg-
uration and the averaged conﬁguration, i.e. on data with and without vibrational behaviour for both
types of segmentation. It also tests the trained networks on experimentally acquired HRTEM images of
Au nanoparticles and gives a qualitative estimate of performance. All averaged HRTEM images in this
section are perturbed with the vibrational amplitudes shown in Figure 4.5.
3.3.1
The MSDnet architecture
The MSDnet itself is written by Matthew Helmi Leth Larsen6, and consists of 100 convolutional layers,
with 3 channels in each layer with reﬂection padding. The MSDnets use dilations of sizes from 1-10,
which increases with subsequent layers in the network and then resets to 1 every 10th layer. The kernels
are 9 × 9 and are randomized initially by a Gaussian distribution N(0, 1) and the biases is initialized to
0.1. The PReLU activation function is used with α = 0.01, with a sigmoid activation function utilized
at the ﬁnal layer with a 1 × 1 kernel initialized like the other kernels.
3.3.2
Learning curves of the MSDnet for nanoparticle segmentation
As outlined in the introduction to this section, this section deals with calculating learning curves from the
nanoparticle segmentation training process of MSDnets when trained on the averaged simulated HRTEM
images with associated mask labels. The idea is to ﬁgure out how much data the network needs to see
to reach a converging performance. This is relevant, as training the network takes days, so being able to
reduce the amount of data needed will optimize the training process signiﬁcantly.
The HRTEM images are generated with the microscope parameters seen in Table 3.4, in which a
large range of diﬀerent HRTEM images can be produced. The main distinction point from the atomic
segmentation in Section 3.3.3 is the sign of the defocus, which is both negative and positive in this case,
as we do not care about the atomic column pattern, but are only interested in the rough shape of the
nanoparticle. The main reason for varying the defocus at all, is that the edges of the nanoparticle can
become obscured by a large/small defocus.
The training session is comprised of making 12 diﬀerent data sets of various sizes, see Table 3.4,
all made with 500 atomic conﬁgurations to save memory, and training 12 MSDnets, one on each data
set7. The networks are trained for 100 epochs using Tensorﬂow and the entire model is saved in each
6The MSDnet can be found on his GitLab repository.
7Except for the data sets with less than 500 datapoints (1,2,3), which are generated with the same number of atomic
conﬁgurations as HRTEM images.
18
==PAGE:25==
Microscope Parameters
Values
v0 [eV]
300 · 103
Dose [e/Å2]
102 −105
Focal spread [Å]
5 −20
Defocus [Å]
-200 −200
Cs [Å]
-5 · 104 −5 · 104
Image parameters
Values
Blur
0.5 −1.5
Brightness
- 0.1 −0.1
Contrast
0.9 −1.1
Gamma
0.9 −1.1
N [Å]
1200
Resampling [Å/pixels]
0.07 −0.08
Sampling [Å/pixels]
0.05
Image size [Å]
640
MTF parameters
Values
c0
1
c1
0-0.1
c2
0.3-0.6
c3
2-3
Data set
# Train images
# Valid. images
1
50
2000
2
100
2000
3
300
2000
4
500
2000
5
1000
2000
6
1500
2000
7
2000
2000
8
2500
2000
9
3000
2000
10
5000
2000
11
7500
2000
12
10000
2000
Table 3.4: This table show the parameters used in the HRTEM image simulation of averaged atomic conﬁgura-
tions, and the training and validation data setup for training the MSDnet on the images with mask labels.
training epoch, along with the binary cross-entropy loss, the precision and the recall. To better compare
the performances between the 12 diﬀerent networks, they are all validated during training on the same
validation set, which contains 2000 images, made from 2000 atomic conﬁgurations. As with the training
metrics, the validation loss, precision and recall is also saved. The networks are validated during training
to help visualize overﬁtting to the training data if it occurs. To plot the learning curves themselves, the
F1-score, see Section 2.2.3 is calculated from the precision and recall and used as a combined learning
metric.
Figure 3.4: An example of a 640 × 640 pixel simulated HRTEM image of an averaged atomic conﬁguration
with negative defocus and a mask label.
The HRTEM image is used for training the MSDnet.
The image is
generated with the following parameters: ∆f = −56.87Å, dose = 228.93e/Å
2, focal spread = 18.85Å, v0 = 300keV,
resampling = 0.074, Cs = −19799.14 Å, blur = 1.03, brightness = 0.05, contrast = 0.99, gamma = 0.93, c1 = 0.05,
c2 = 0.31 and c3 = 2.25.
In Figures 3.4 and 3.5, examples of the training and validation data can be seen. The ﬁrst image in the
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.5: An example of a 640 × 640 pixel simulated HRTEM image of an averaged atomic conﬁguration
with positive defocus and a mask label. The HRTEM image is used for validating the MSDnet during training.
The image is generated with the following parameters: ∆f = 82.56Å, dose = 211.10e/Å
2, focal spread = 7.21Å,
v0 = 300keV, resampling = 0.075, Cs = −5832.36 Å, blur = 1.30, brightness = 0.1, contrast = 0.93, gamma =
1.04, c1 = 0.073, c2 = 0.48 and c3 = 2.75.
image series is the averaged simulated HRTEM image that the network is trained on. The middle image
is the label that the MSDnet attempts to learn and the ﬁnal image is the label plotted on top of the
nanoparticle. As we can see in the images, we clearly see a diﬀerence in the data that the network is
trained on, and the data that it is validated on. As mentioned in the introduction to the section, the
nanoparticles are generated using the regular method, which outputs randomly generated nanoparticles,
and the HRTEM images are made with random microscope parameters. This is done to better explore
the manifold on which the data lies, and thereby allow the model to better generalize.
3.3.3
Learning curves of the MSDnet for atomic segmentation
Next, the exact process is repeated for atomic segmentation, i.e. trying to locate the individual atomic
columns in the averaged simulated HRTEM image. Using the disk label, 12 data sets are created using
the microscope parameters and training setup found in Table 3.5. A validation set comprised of 2500
averaged simulated HRTEM images are used to validate the 12 MSDnets during training.
Figure 3.6: An example of a 640 × 640 pixel simulated HRTEM image of an averaged atomic conﬁguration with
positive defocus and a disk label. The HRTEM image is used for training the MSDnet. The image is generated with
the following parameters: ∆f = 143.73Å, dose = 189.52e/Å
2, focal spread = 19.51Å, v0 = 300keV, resampling =
0.072, Cs = −30272.41 Å, blur = 1.22, brightness = −0.02, contrast = 0.93, gamma = 1.09, c1 = 0.056, c2 = 0.31
and c3 = 2.12.
20
==PAGE:27==
Two examples of the training and validation images can be found in Figures 3.6 and 3.7. In Figure 3.6,
the disks drawn as labels are seen to be circular and regular in shape and size. The picture however, is
diﬀerent in Figure 3.7, where the tilted nanoparticle yields slightly stretched atomic columns along the
[110] zone-axis. The result is sort of oblong labels, which may make the network less sensitive to tilted
atomic columns in the experimental data.
Figure 3.7: An example of a 640 × 640 pixel simulated HRTEM image of an averaged atomic conﬁguration with
positive defocus and a disk label. The HRTEM image is used for validating the MSDnet during training. The
image is generated with the following parameters: ∆f = 97.28Å, dose = 10177.95e/Å
2, focal spread = 17.49Å,
v0 = 300keV, resampling = 0.071, Cs = −31582.46 Å, blur = 0.68, brightness = 0.049, contrast = 1.076, gamma
= 1.04, c1 = 0.018, c2 = 0.502 and c3 = 2.25.
Microscope Parameters
Values
v0 [eV]
300 · 103
Dose [e/Å2]
102 −105
Focal spread [Å]
5 −20
Defocus [Å]
0 −200
Cs [Å]
-5 · 104 −5 · 104
Image parameters
Values
Blur
0.5 −1.5
Brightness
- 0.1 −0.1
Contrast
0.9 −1.1
Gamma
0.9 −1.1
N [Å]
1200
Resampling [Å/pixels]
0.07 −0.08
Sampling [Å/pixels]
0.05
Image size [Å]
640
MTF parameters
Values
c0
1
c1
0-0.1
c2
0.3-0.6
c3
2-3
Data set
# Train images
# Valid. images
1
50
2500
2
100
2500
3
300
2500
4
500
2500
5
1000
2500
6
1500
2500
7
2000
2500
8
2500
2500
9
3000
2500
10
5000
2500
11
7500
2500
12
10000
2500
Table 3.5: This table show the microscope parameters used in the HRTEM image simulation of averaged atomic
conﬁgurations, and the training and validation data setup for training the MSDnet on the images with disk labels.
21
==PAGE:28==
3.3.4
Detection of thermal vibrations in simulated HRTEM images
After the learning curves for the MSDnet trained for either atomic- or nanoparticle segmentation has
been investigated, the next part is the actual test on whether or not the neural network can detect the
inclusion of thermal vibrations in the training data. To do so, two new training data sets are generated
for both atomic- and nanoparticle segmentation, four in total, each with the same microscope parameters
as listed in Tables 3.4 and 3.5 respectively. Furthermore, two validation sets are created, again with
the same microscope parameters, which consists of a 50/50 split of images with and without thermal
vibrations included, i.e. using the pre and mean methods described in Section 3.1.
Table 3.6: This table shows the training setup for the ﬁnal test of the MSDnet when trained for both nanoparticle-
(Mask label) and atomic (Disk label) segmentation. In each case, there is generated 2500 HRTEM training images
using the pre and mean methods, and 2500 HRTEM validation images using a 50/50 split of the pre and mean
methods.
Nanoparticle segmentation
Atomic segmentation
Pre model
Mean model
Pre model
Mean model
Train set
Valid. set
Train set
Valid. set
Train set
Valid. set
Train set
Valid. set
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
2500
In each of the four training sets, 2500 HRTEM images are created, and four diﬀerent MSDnets are then
trained on their respective training data, and validated on the same validation set in their respective
segmentation class. The outputs from these networks are then investigated using their learning curves,
this time using the networks F1-score over the training epochs, and a visualization of the best, worst and
typical performance on the validation set. This is done by calculating the F1 score for all images in the
validation set, ordering the images by their scores and picking the highest, the lowest and the image with
the mean F1 score. Furthermore, a histogram of the F1-scores on the entire validation set is also plotted,
to visualize the distribution of the networks performance across the validation data. However, as the
"true" test is the performance on the experimental data, the trained MSDnets are lastly tested on the
same experimental HRTEM image series of a Au nanoparticle, and the model inference are visualized to
see the improvement of including the thermal vibrations in the training data. The experimental data is
captured by William Bang Lomholdt at DTU Nanolab in building 314 on a FEI Titan E-Cell 80-300ST
TEM under high vacuum conditions (HVAC) with a electron incident energy of 300keV. The image series
is captured at a dose rate of about 103e/Å
2s, where the particular dose for each frame is calculated
and shown in each image. The subsequent analysis of the experimental HRTEM images are done with
permission from William Bang Lomholdt.
22
==PAGE:29==
4
|
Results from experiments
As deﬁned by Section 3, the results will also be divided into 3 sections. Section 4.1 will contain the
qualitative comparison of the MD simulations and Gaussian perturbations, including simulated HRTEM
images and computation wall times. Section 4.2 will be comprised of a more in-depth analysis of the
extracted vibrational amplitudes and show a quantitative comparison of the vibrational amplitudes of
small and large Au nanoparticles. Finally, Section 4.3 will use the information gathered from Sections 4.1
and 4.2 and show learning curves and performances of MSDnets trained for both atomic- and nanoparticle
segmentation.
4.1
Experiment 1: Comparing MD simulations and Gaussian per-
turbations
This section contains the results from the initial qualitative analysis made in this project. The speciﬁc
microscope parameters used to generate the speciﬁc images in this section can be found in Table 4.1. To
keep the results readable, and to focus on the important aspects of the HRTEM images, only the HRTEM
images of the medium regular Au nanoparticle are shown here, see Figures 4.1 and 4.2. The remaining
regular nanoparticles are shown in Appendix A.1, as the ﬁndings here represent the general picture from
all the Au nanoparticles that were looked into.
Table 4.1: This table shows the microscope-, image and MTF parameters used for image simulations.
Microscope parameters
Image parameters
MTF parameters
v0 [eV]
300 · 103
Blur
1
c0
1
Dose [e/Å2]
104
Brightness
0.031
c1
0.029
Focal spread [Å]
10
Contrast
1.063
c2
0.40
Defocus [Å]
100
Gamma
1.076
c3
1.063
Cs [Å]
-7923.94
N [Å]
1200
Resampling [Å/pixels]
0.078
Sampling [Å/pixels]
0.05
Image size [Å]
640
The HRTEM images are generated with a positive defocus, which yields dark atoms on a light background,
and with a high enough SNR to help see the eﬀect of the thermal vibrations in the nanoparticles. Figure
4.1 shows an example of a mediumly sized Au nanoparticle, aligned along the [110] zone-axis, and Figure
4.2 shows the same medium Au nanoparticle with a 5° tilt away from the [110] zone-axis. Each ﬁgure
shows 6 images, in which the ﬁrst row contains the pre-simulation, post-simulation and the average
of the HRTEM images from the MD simulations, and the second row contains the pre-perturbations,
post-perturbations and the average of the HRTEM images from the Gaussian perturbation.
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.1: This ﬁgure reports the simulated HRTEM images of the initial conﬁguration, the post MD simulation
or Gaussian perturbation conﬁguration and the averaged atomic conﬁguration of a medium Au nanoparticle with
no tilt angle. The important details about the image are highlighted by red circles in the bulk region, a blue arrow
in the noisy part of the image, and orange arrows for the atomic columns on the edges of the nanoparticle. The
image parameters can be found in Table 4.1.
If we ﬁrst dive into Figure 4.1, the same simulated HRTEM image of the initial conﬁguration of the
medium Au nanoparticle can be seen in Figures 4.1.a and 4.1.d. The nanoparticle is roughly 10Å in
radius and shows a fairly regular pattern along the edges. The bulk region of the nanoparticle shows a
tiny amount of blurring, as indicated by the red circles, and the noise immediately around the nanoparticle
is evened out due to the localized normalization that is necessary to train the MSDnet, which is shown by
the blue arrow. For more on this, see Section 3.3. If we then look at Figure 4.1.b which shows an HRTEM
image post MD simulations and compare it to Figure 4.1.e which shows the post Gaussian perturbation,
we can see that they are qualitatively similar.
The blurring in the bulk region is lessened, and the
slight blurring around the edge atoms looks similar. One point of interest though, is the pair of atoms
highlighted by an orange arrow in Figures 4.1.e and 4.1.b, located at the top of the nanoparticle in the
post-simulations and post-perturbations. The perturbations appear to displace the atoms in a slightly
exaggerated way, which the MD simulations does not. However, when we then look at the averaged
HRTEM images, Figures 4.1.c and 4.1.f, the eﬀect is averaged out by the method, and the two images
appear similar again. When the nanoparticle sits nicely on the [110] zone-axis, the two ways of simulating
HRTEM images appear qualitatively similar with small blurring eﬀects on especially the atoms around
the edges. This eﬀect is also evident in the images in Appendix A.1.
24
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.2: In this ﬁgure, simulated HRTEM images of the initial conﬁguration, the post MD simulation or
Gaussian perturbation conﬁguration and the averaged atomic conﬁguration of the medium Au nanoparticle with 5°
tilt angle added can be seen. The important details about the image are highlighted by red circles in the bulk region
and orange arrows for the atomic columns. The image parameters can be found in Table 4.1.
Next, we look at Figure 4.2, which shows the same Au nanoparticle but with 5° added tilt away from the
[110] zone axis. Here we immediately see a diﬀerent image. The blurring eﬀect in Figures 4.2.a and 4.2.d
is exaggerated in the bulk region. This is due to the entirety of an atomic column becoming visible when
we tilt the nanoparticle away from the [110] zone-axis, not just the top-most atom in the column. When
we then either add MD simulations or Gaussian perturbations in Figures 4.2.b and 4.2.e, the bulk region
becomes even more blurred, as highlighted by red circles, and locating the atomic columns becomes very
hard. However, when we then average 100 images of simulations or perturbations, as shown in Figures
4.2.c and 4.2.f, this chaotic behaviour in the bulk region lessens, and we see some fading of the atomic
columns at the edge of the nanoparticle, as highlighted by the orange arrows.
25
==PAGE:32==
4.1.1
Computation time of the methods
In Figure 4.3, the wall time of MD simulations and Gaussian perturbations of the 3 nanoparticles can be
seen. As the simulation and perturbation times is the same for the Au nanoparticles with or without tilt
angle added, only the 3 non-tilted data points are plotted. They are shown as to give a feel for how much
faster the perturbation method is compared to running actual MD simulations. However, it is necessary
to mention that the computation times are recorded on the clusters at DTU, which are available to all
DTU faculty. The speciﬁc timings therefore depend greatly at which computing node the simulations
and perturbations were run on, and the time of day.
Figure 4.3: In this ﬁgure, the logarithm of the wall time comparison of MD simulations vs Gaussian perturbation
on regular Au nanoparticles is shown.
As we can see, the perturbation method takes anywhere from 0.5 to 1.5 seconds to run, even on relatively
large Au nanoparticles, whereas the MD simulations takes anywhere from 2-5 seconds to over 100 seconds,
depending on the size of the nanoparticle. While simulating MD on a single Au nanoparticle for 100
seconds is not a lot of time, it will begin to stack up if MD simulations are needed for 10.000 diﬀerent
Au nanoparticles when generating a training set for the MSDnet. However, with perturbations, this
computation is reduced substantially even for simple metallic nanoparticles.
26
==PAGE:33==
4.2
Experiment 2: Statistical analysis of FPM
As mentioned in Section 3.2, now that it has been veriﬁed that Gaussian perturbation is qualitatively
the same as MD simulations in regards to simulated HRTEM images, we now move on to looking into
the actual vibrational amplitudes of Au nanoparticles simulated at various temperatures and sizes. The
result of following the method prescribed can be seen in Figures 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6. To quickly summarize,
to quantify the vibrational amplitudes at diﬀerent temperatures, 25 Au nanoparticles (small in Figure
4.4 and large in 4.5, are generated and run through MD simulations and the thermal displacements of the
atoms, classiﬁed by their coordination number, is extracted. To get a feel for the diﬀerence in vibrational
amplitude when the size of the Au nanoparticle is increased, the diﬀerence in amplitudes for small and
large Au nanoparticles is then produced, see Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.4: This ﬁgure reports the vibrational amplitudes for small Au nanoparticles for various coordination
numbers (number of nearest neighbours) at diﬀerent temperatures.
If we look at Figure 4.4, the ﬁrst thing to note is the odd coordination numbers occurring in the simula-
tions. As the maximum coordination number for FCC crystals, in which a Au nanoparticle sits, is 12[11],
this plot looks peculiar and deserves a comment. This is most likely an eﬀect of the MD simulations,
in which the atoms sitting on a corner or a surface can move around in the crystal. As such, an atom
sitting in the bulk region might suddenly notice a corner/surface atom appear in its FCC unit cell, and
count it amongst its nearest neighbours. As evident in the plot for coordination number 13, some of
the amplitudes have zero standard errors, due to the event only occurring once in the entirety of the
simulations.
If we then disregard the amplitudes from 13 and on wards, we can see a clear trend in the plot. First
of all, we get an increase in both mean amplitude and standard error, as the temperature increases for
all coordination numbers. Secondly, we can clearly see that the atoms more closely bonded in the crystal,
i.e. with higher coordination number, will have a lower vibrational amplitude. Looking at coordination
number 3 and 4, both the mean amplitude and standard errors are signiﬁcantly larger than the rest, and
the regular structure that is seen for the rest of the coordination numbers is not present. Furthermore,
we can see that for e.g. coordination number 3 the 200K simulations yielded a larger mean vibrational
amplitude than e.g. 300K, even when considering the standard errors.
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.5: In this ﬁgure, the vibrational amplitudes for large Au nanoparticles is shown for various coordination
numbers (number of nearest neighbours) at diﬀerent temperatures.
Regarding Figure 4.5, we see more or less the same general picture as in Figure 4.4. The main diﬀerence
is the reduction in the mean and standard errors of the extracted amplitudes that occurs with an increase
in nanoparticle size. Qualitatively speaking, it appears that the lower bound of the standard error of the
vibrational amplitudes from small Au nanoparticles more or less align with the mean of the vibrational
amplitudes of the large Au nanoparticles. Continuing the comparison, looking at Figure 4.6, we can
see the slight systematic diﬀerence between the small and large Au nanoparticles. Especially for higher
temperatures, the diﬀerence becomes evident, but for almost all the coordination numbers, the propagated
standard error of the two system enclose the entirety of the diﬀerence. Looking at e.g. 300K for most
coordination numbers, the error is quite small compared to the actual amplitudes in Figures 4.4 and
4.5.
Figure 4.6: In this ﬁgure, the diﬀerence in vibrational amplitudes for small and large Au nanoparticles is shown
for various coordination numbers (number of nearest neighbours) at diﬀerent temperatures. The standard error is
calculated using propagation of errors by addition of standard errors in quadrature.
28
==PAGE:35==
4.3
Experiment 3: Testing the MSDnet on perturbed HRTEM
images
This section contains the results from training a convolutional neural network, namely the MSDnet, on
simulated HRTEM images, generated using the Gaussian perturbation method described in Section 3.1.
The section is split into investigating the learning curves for a number of MSDnets trained for either
nanoparticle- or atomic segmentation using the perturbed data in Sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2, and looking
closer into the performance of the MSDnet when it is trained on data either with or without vibrational
behaviour included in the HRTEM images in Section 4.3.3.
4.3.1
Learning curves of the MSDnet for nanoparticle segmentation
During training the 12 MSDnets for nanoparticle segmentation as prescribed by the method in Section
3.3.2, the learning metrics described in Section 2.2.3 are extracted, namely the recall, precision and their
harmonic mean, the F1 score. The recall and precision for each model over the course of training can be
found in Appendix A.2, whereas the F1 score can be seen in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: In this ﬁgure, the learning curves for 12 MSDnets trained for Au nanoparticle segmentation with
mask labels at 300K can be seen. The models F1 scores are shown over the course of 100 training epochs when
evaluated on both the training and validation sets. The data is described in Section 3.3.2 and Table 3.4, and the
sizes of the data sets can be seen in the sub-titles for each plot. All models are set up identically, and only vary
by the amount of training data that it is shown.
As we can see from Figure 4.7, the training F1 score does not vary much between the 12 training sessions,
as it appears that the network does not learn anything additionally from increasing the size of the data
set. The training performance (blue lines) of all the models begins at 0.90 or more, and then climbs to
almost 1.00 in about 50-60 training epochs. A similar trend can be seen for the validation performance,
29
==PAGE:36==
albeit with more noisy behaviour. Nearly all the models end with a F1 score between 0.90 and 0.95,
which appears to a learning ceiling for the models, but as the data set size increases, the initial F1 score
also increases. For the two ﬁrst models with data sets of 50 and 100, the initial score is around 0.70, after
which it then stabilizes around 0.95 after the 100 training epochs. One detail worth mentioning, is that
it appears that some training sessions appears to have a more stable learning curve with less ﬂuctuations.
Examples are the models trained on 300 and 1500 HRTEM images respectively, where the model does
not seem to actually increase its generalizability during training by an increasing validation performance,
even when the training performance increases during training.
4.3.2
Learning curves of the MSDnet for atomic segmentation
Next, we look at the results for the experiments conducted with atomic segmentation using the methods
described in Section 3.3.3. The section reports the F1 score for 12 MSDnets trained on data sets consisting
of HRTEM images of varying sizes, with the recall and precision shown in Appendix A.2. The result can
be found in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: This ﬁgure shows the learning curves for 12 MSDnets trained for Au atomic segmentation with disk
labels at 300K. The models F1 scores are shown over the course of 100 training epochs when evaluated on both
the training and validation sets. The data is described in Section 3.3.3 and Table 3.5, and the sizes of the data
sets can be seen in the sup-titles for each plot. All models are set up identically, and only vary by the amount of
training data that it is shown.
In Figure 4.8, we can see some more clear distinctions between the 12 plots. If we ﬁrst look at the
three plots in the top row, the training performances (blue lines) start at increasing values (0.2, 0.3,
0.45 respectively) for the three plots, but then increases similarly over the course of training and ends at
around 0.98. If we continue down through the remaining models, we see that the initial F1 score begins
at 0.5 for all of them, and increases with a slower rate as the data size increases, reaching a maximum
30
==PAGE:37==
performance of about 0.95. As such, it appears that increasing the data size that the models see while
training, will reduce the training performance slightly. However, as all models are still learning at the
100th training epoch (blue lines are still increasing), and the validation curves (orange lines) seems to
stabilize, it looks like the models are overﬁtting to the training data.
Looking closer at the validation performance, this slight decrease in training performance as the
data set size increases, appears to positively aﬀect generalizability of the models. Again looking at the
ﬁrst three models in the top row, the F1 score increases from 0.7 to 0.8 when we increase the training
data from 50 to 300 HRTEM images. For the remaining 9 models, the picture seems to be a more or less
plateauing performance at around 0.8 after only a few training epochs, regardless of the data size. If we
take into account the general structure from the precision and recall learning curves, seen in Appendix
A.2, it can clearly be seen that the task that the networks are struggling with is locating enough of the
atomic columns in the HRTEM images, i.e. low recall values (< 0.8). The ones that the network does
locate are mostly correct, as the precision is comparably larger (> 0.8) for all the models.
4.3.3
Detection of thermal vibrations in simulated HRTEM images
Now that the learning curves for the two segmentation tasks are investigated, we move on to testing
the diﬀerence in model performance from MSDnets when trained on either the perturbed data or the
non-perturbed data. The training sessions are described in Section 3.3.4 and Table 3.6, and the results
are reported in this section as the F1 score during training, histograms of the F1 scores on all validation
data after training, qualitative comparisons of model inferences and model inference on experimentally
gathered data.
4.3.3.1
Nanoparticle segmentation
Figure 4.9: In this ﬁgure, the F1 scores computed on both training and validation data for two MSDnets trained
for nanoparticle segmentation can be seen. The model on the left (pre) is trained on 2500 HRTEM images with
no vibrational behaviour accounted for, and the model on the right (mean) is trained on 2500 HRTEM images
with vibrational behaviour incorporated in the data. Both models are validated during training on the same data
set with 2500 HRTEM images, consisting of 50% non-perturbed and 50% perturbed HRTEM images, to allow
comparison of the models.
In Figure 4.9, the F1 scores of two MSDnets trained for nanoparticle segmentation can be seen. The
two models are trained on separate training data, but then validated on the same data, as described in
Section 3.3.4, and this comparison thus shows how well the MSDnet picks up on the inclusion of thermal
vibrational behaviour in the simulated HRTEM images. As both pairs of training performances (blue
31
==PAGE:38==
lines) and the validation performances (orange lines) shows, the two models are not distinguishable. The
training F1 scores both begin at around 0.94 and increase similarly to a max value of almost 0.99. Same
goes for the validation scores, which begins slightly diﬀerently, but both ﬁnds the maximum score of
about 0.975 in around 30 training epochs. During the ﬁnal 30 training epochs, it appears that the mean
model begins to move away slightly from the optimum in weight-space, whereas the pre model stays
where it is, but the diﬀerence in the end is less than 0.01.
Figure 4.10: In this ﬁgure, two histograms of the F1 scores, when computed after training two MSDnets for
nanoparticle segmentation on either non-perturbed- (pre) or perturbed (mean) data, can be seen. Beyond the
histograms, the average F1 scores for the two models are shown with dotted lines.
Looking at Figure 4.10, we see a histogram of the F1 scores computed after training on all of the validation
data. The pre model is shown in blue and the mean model is shown in red. The average F1 score for
the pre model is shown to 0.97 with 98.2% of examples above F1 = 0.8, whereas the average F1 score
for the mean model is shown to 0.964 with 97.1% of examples above F1 = 0.8. As such, the pre model
is seen to be slightly better than the mean model for nanoparticle segmentation when looking at the
validation performance. However, as the margin is so small, it is hard to quantify.
Now that the two models performances are evaluated in terms of F1 scores, we move on to looking
at the two models inferences on the validation set. Figures 4.11, 4.12 and 4.13 shows the best, worst and
typical model predictions for the nanoparticle segmentation tasks for both models pre and mean. Each
ﬁgure shows two image series, with ﬁrst the HRTEM image, selected from the validation set consisting
of a 50/50 split of non-perturbed and perturbed data, then the corresponding ground truth and lastly
the model inference, i.e. the predictions from the model on the given HRTEM image.
32
==PAGE:39==
In Figure 4.11, two HRTEM images, both from the part of the validation data with thermal vibrational
behaviour added, are shown along with their corresponding labels. In Figure 4.11.c and Figure 4.11.f,
the model inferences can be seen for the pre model (top row) and the mean model (bottom row).
Figure 4.11: This ﬁgure shows the best predictions from the MSDnets when evaluated on the entire validation
set for both the pre and mean model respectively. The top row shows a) the validation HRTEM image, b) the
ground truth for the image and c) the inference from the pre model. The bottom row shows the same sequence of
images, only this time for the mean model.
Comparing the model inferences to the labels and to each other, they seem almost indistinguishable from
their labels, as they should as their respective model’s best predictions. This is very much due to the
fact that the SNR on the simulated HRTEM image is very high, and as a result, the models has no issues
locating the edges of the nanoparticles. One thing to note however, is that some of the edges at the
border of the images for both models, where they blur ever so slightly. This is highlighted by orange
arrows, and is present for both models in Figure 4.11.c and Figure 4.11.f.
33
==PAGE:40==
If we next look at Figure 4.12, we can see the worst inferences that the models make. In the left-most
column in Figures 4.12.a and 4.12.d, we can see the two nanoparticles in question, both with a positive
defocus and from the part of validation set with thermal vibrations. The SNR in both HRTEM images is
so low, that the nanoparticles are hardly visible. Particularly the HRTEM image in the top row is nearly
indistinguishable from the noise in the bulk region of the nanoparticle. As for the HRTEM image in the
bottom row, the bulk region is a tad more visible, but still very obscured.
Figure 4.12: In this ﬁgure, the worst predictions from the MSDnets when evaluated on the entire validation set
is shown for both the pre and mean model respectively. The top row shows a) the validation HRTEM image,
b) the ground truth for the image and c) the pre models inference. The bottom row shows the same sequence of
images, only this time for the mean model.
Looking at the inference that the models make in Figures 4.12.c and 4.12.f, we see very poor performance,
with both of models only catching a few of the edges of the nanoparticles, but nothing tangible. However,
the task itself is nearly impossible, so it isn’t expected that the models ﬁnd anything in these HRTEM
images.
34
==PAGE:41==
Finally, looking at Figures 4.13.a and 4.13.d, we can see two nanoparticles, where the nanoparticle in the
top row has a negative defocus, and the nanoparticle in the bottom row has a positive defocus, both from
part of the validation set with thermal vibrations included. Looking at the top row ﬁrst, the nanoparticle
appears to have a relatively good SNR, but with slight blurring at the edges in the left-most part of the
image. Comparing this to the bottom row, the nanoparticle appears to be more sharply deﬁned across
the image, yielding more clear edges, but with a slightly lower resolution in the top-left and bottom-right
area of the nanoparticle.
Figure 4.13: In this ﬁgure, the typical predictions from the MSDnets when evaluated on the entire validation
set is shown for both the pre and mean model respectively. The top row shows a) the validation HRTEM image,
b) the ground truth for the image and c) the pre models inference. The bottom row shows the same sequence of
images, only this time for the mean model.
Turning to the model inferences in Figures 4.13.c and 4.13.f, we can see a general trend of the models
being good at deﬁning a border between the nanoparticles and background when the atoms are neatly
arranged, as highlighted by the green arrows. Here, both the models yield a smooth border without
a lot of noise in the inference. However, when the atoms sit in more irregular positions with a lower
coordination number as highlighted by orange arrows, and therefore are more loosely bound in the
crystal, the inference becomes more blurred and noisy.
35
==PAGE:42==
4.3.3.1.1
Experimental image analysis for nanoparticle segmentation
Next, the pre- and mean models for nanoparticle segmentation are tested on experimentally acquired
HRTEM images, as prescribed in Section 3.3.4. This analysis consists of presenting the models with 190
individual frames of image series in which a Au nanoparticle sits on a CeO2 support at about 470K, and
comparing the inference from the two models. The dose in each frame is extracted using a script provided
by Matthew Helmi Leth Larsen, and displayed in the HRTEM image. The following section will present
a few of these frames with the corresponding inferences from the two models in order of decreasing SNR
of the HRTEM image.
Figure 4.14: In this ﬁgure, an experimental HRTEM image of a Au nanoparticle sitting on a CeO2 support at
around 470K, captured at the TEM at DTU Nanolab can be seen. The camera is a FEI Titan E-Cell 80 −300ST,
and the dose for this particular frame of the image series is approximately 8.87 · 102e/Å
2 with a electron incident
energy of 300keV. The two plots in ﬁgure b) and c) show the pre and mean model inferences respectively.
In Figure 4.14, a high SNR HRTEM image of a Au nanoparticle is shown sitting on the CeO2 support.
The corresponding inference for the pre model is shown in Figure 4.14.b, where most of the nanoparticle
can be seen to enveloped by the mask that the model outputs. The model also seems to pick out some of
the CeO2 support with a slight amount of noise, but the inference is otherwise quite good. Comparing
this to the inference from the mean model in Figure 4.14.c, the outline of this predicted mask seems
to slightly more precise at the bottom, indicated by the orange arrow. The mean model also assigns
some probability in the support region, albeit slightly higher and more compactly than the pre model.
As such, it is hard to evaluate which model performs better, as they both achieve qualitatively good
performance on the HRTEM image with high SNR.
Figure 4.15: This ﬁgure shows an experimental HRTEM image of a Au nanoparticle sitting on a CeO2 support
at around 470K, captured at the TEM at DTU Nanolab. The camera is a FEI Titan E-Cell 80 −300ST, and the
dose for this particular frame of the image series is approximately 8.92 · 102e/Å
2 with a electron incident energy
of 300keV. The two plots in ﬁgure b) and c) show the pre and mean model inferences respectively.
The HRTEM image presented in Figure 4.15 has slightly lower SNR, especially at the bottom edge
as indicated by the arrow, and as a result, the model inferences generally decrease slightly in quality.
However, as shown in Figure 4.15.b, the pre model seems to handle this quite nicely, as the inference is
36
==PAGE:43==
not particularly worse when compared to Figure 4.14.b. There is still a bit of noise in the support region,
but the mask that the model outputs eﬀectively envelops the Au nanoparticle. However, if we look at
Figure 4.15.c, the mean model seems to begin to struggle a bit with this. Particularly at the bottom
edge, as highlighted by the arrow, where the SNR was poor, the model outputs some false negatives,
thereby missing a signiﬁcant part of the Au nanoparticle. To summarize, it is again hard to determine
which of the models are quantitatively best.
Figure 4.16: In this ﬁgure, an experimental HRTEM image of a Au nanoparticle sitting on a CeO2 support at
around 470K, captured at the TEM at DTU Nanolab can be seen. The camera is a FEI Titan E-Cell 80 −300ST,
and the dose for this particular frame of the image series is approximately 8.96 · 102e/Å
2 with a electron incident
energy of 300keV. The two plots in ﬁgure b) and c) show the pre and mean model inferences respectively.
In Figure 4.16, the SNR in the experimental HRTEM image of the Au nanoparticle is reduced a little
bit more, and the resulting changes in inference from the pre- and mean model can be seen in Figures
4.16.b and 4.16.c respectively. Generally, both models struggle with correctly masking the nanoparticle
when the SNR drops and the hexagonal pattern that is visible in e.g. Figure 4.14.a transforms to a more
row-like pattern. In this particular frame of the image series, we can see that the inference from the pre
model in Figure 4.16.b is a bit stronger than the one from the mean model in Figure 4.16.c, especially
towards to the bottom edge of the Au nanoparticle.
37
==PAGE:44==
4.3.3.2
Atomic segmentation
If we look to the atomic segmentation task, and the two MSDnets trained for that, we can see results from
training the models in Figures 4.17 and 4.18. As with the nanoparticle segmentation, the method can
be seen in Section 3.3.4, where this part looks into how much the thermal vibrations aﬀect the training
data when trying to locate the individual atomic columns in the HRTEM image.
Figure 4.17: This ﬁgure reports the F1 scores computed on both training and validation data for two MSDnets
trained for atomic segmentation. The model on the left (pre) is trained on 2500 HRTEM images with no vibrational
behaviour accounted for, and the model on the right (mean) is trained on 2500 HRTEM images with vibrational
behaviour incorporated in the data. Both models are validated during training on the same data set with 2500
HRTEM images, consisting of 50% non-perturbed and 50% perturbed HRTEM images, to allow comparison of the
models.
Looking ﬁrst at Figure 4.17, we see two plots that look almost identical. The validation F1 score looks
slightly higher for the mean model, reaches a slightly higher plateau of performance compared to the
pre model. As for the training performance, it seems to be still learning at epoch 100, indicating a slight
overﬁtting trend as the generalizability of the model is not improving, but the model seems to still learn
from the training data.
Figure 4.18: In this ﬁgure, two histograms of the F1 scores, when computed after training two MSDnets for atomic
segmentation on either non-perturbed- (pre) or perturbed (mean) data, can be seen. Beyond the histograms, the
average F1 scores for the two models are shown with dotted lines.
38
==PAGE:45==
Next, the histograms showing the F1 scores can be seen in Figure 4.18, where the blue histogram and
dotted line is the pre model and the red histogram and dotted line represent the mean model. From the
ﬁgure, it can be seen that the mean model performs a little bit better than the pre model when evaluated
on 2500 simulated HRTEM images with a 50/50 split between data with or without thermal vibrations
included in the images. The average F1 score for the pre model is 0.797 with 64.4% of examples above
F1 = 0.8, whereas the average F1 score for the mean model is shown to 0.812 with 66.9% of examples
above F1 = 0.8. However, it is by a very tiny margin, and on data that we have created ourselves, and
as such, it is hard to deﬁnitely declare that the model trained on perturbed data performs better.
Figure 4.19: This ﬁgure reports the best predictions from the MSDnets when evaluated on the entire validation
set for both the pre and mean model respectively. The top row shows a) the validation HRTEM image, b) the
ground truth for the image and c) the pre models inference. The bottom row shows the same sequence of images,
only this time for the mean model.
In Figure 4.19, the best predictions from both the pre and mean models can be seen. As both the
validation examples that the models are trying to replicate are HRTEM images with a very high SNR,
it is not surprising that both of them succeed in inferring most, if not all, of the atomic columns from
the image. However, if we look at Figure 4.20, speciﬁcally Figures 4.20.a and 4.20.d, we can see the
same HRTEM image chosen for both models, as this was apparently the hardest example to infer in
the entire validation set. Both models struggle with producing usable predictions as shown in Figures
4.20.c and 4.20.f. But it is interesting to see that the mean model infers with slightly low probability
that an atomic column exists at the bottom of the nanoparticle, highlighted by the blue arrow. However,
with the stochastic nature of neural networks, if we were to train our model again, the picture might be
reversed, where the pre model picks it up, and the mean model does not. With this weak of a signal,
one model cannot be claimed superior to the other.
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.20: In this ﬁgure, the worst predictions from the MSDnets when evaluated on the entire validation set
is shown for both the pre and mean model respectively. The top row shows a) the validation HRTEM image,
b) the ground truth for the image and c) the pre models inference. The bottom row shows the same sequence of
images, only this time for the mean model.
40
==PAGE:47==
Finally, in Figure 4.21, the typical model inference for the two models can be found.
The topmost
HRTEM image in Figure 4.21.a, which corresponds to the typical image for the pre model, yields quite
nice inference, taking the poor quality of the image into account. The left-most area of the bulk region
in the nanoparticle is reasonably visible, but the right-hand side is not, but the pre model still picks it
up relatively satisfactory. It seems to struggle with the right edge of the nanoparticle, and also assigns
a single atomic column at the bottom where there aren’t any, highlighted by an orange arrow. Looking
at the mean model, the HRTEM image in Figure 4.21.d that it is inferring from seems to have a higher
SNR, yielding a better prediction, so it is hard to compare the two models directly. But one interesting
point, is that the model seems to assign some amount of tilt to the inference in Figure 4.21.f, as if the
nanoparticle is tilted slightly. The ground truth does not appear to have anything like this, so the model
appears to mistake the smearing around the atoms as tilt.
Figure 4.21: Here the typical predictions from the MSDnets when evaluated on the entire validation set is shown
for both the pre and mean model respectively. The top row shows a) the validation HRTEM image, b) the ground
truth for the image and c) the pre models inference. The bottom row shows the same sequence of images, only
this time for the mean model.
41
==PAGE:48==
4.3.3.2.1
Experimental image analysis for atomic segmentation
Like for the nanoparticle segmentation, this section shows the test on the experimentally acquired HRTEM
images of a Au nanoparticle sitting on a CeO2 support at around 470K for the pre- and mean models
for atomic segmentation. The models are shown 190 frames from the same image series as before, and
compares the inference of the two models. The section shows four diﬀerent frames picked out from the
image series in order of decreasing SNR, and reports the performance. The inference is measured as
values between 0 −1, with a color-scale going from black to red to yellow with increasing values.
In Figure 4.22, we see three plots, with the experimental HRTEM image of the Au nanoparticle in Figure
4.22.a, then the inference from the pre model in Figure 4.22.b, and lastly the inference from the mean
model in Figure 4.22.c. The SNR in the experimental image is quite good, making the atomic columns
in the bulk region and on the top edge of the nanoparticle quite easy to see, as indicated by the orange
arrow. However, the resolution drops slightly on the leftmost- and bottom edge, which is highlighted by
the blue arrow.
Figure 4.22: In this ﬁgure, an experimental HRTEM image of a Au nanoparticle sitting on a CeO2 support at
around 470K, captured at the TEM at DTU Nanolab can be seen. The camera is a FEI Titan E-Cell 80 −300ST,
and the dose for this particular frame of the image series is approximately 8.9 · 102e/Å
2 with a electron incident
energy of 300keV. The two plots in ﬁgure b) and c) show the pre and mean model inferences respectively.
If we look at the inference from the pre model in Figure 4.22.b, we can see that almost all the atomic
columns are located by the network. However, at the bottom edge, where the SNR was slightly lower, the
network misses a few columns, as well as an entire row of atomic columns at the left-most edge, which
is indicated by the green arrows. Lastly, the network infers a few columns on the interface to the CeO2
support. If we compare this to the inference from the mean model in Figure 4.22.c, we can see that this
model captures a few more of the atomic columns at the leftmost- and bottom edge, indicated again by
the green arrows. However, the mean model also picks up quite a few more atomic columns inside the
support, shown by the blue arrow, indicating a higher recall.
Figure 4.23: In this ﬁgure, an experimental HRTEM image of a Au nanoparticle sitting on a CeO2 support at
around 470K, captured at the TEM at DTU Nanolab can be seen. The camera is a FEI Titan E-Cell 80 −300ST,
and the dose for this particular frame of the image series is approximately 9.0 · 102e/Å
2 with a electron incident
energy of 300keV. The two plots in ﬁgure b) and c) show the pre and mean model inferences respectively.
42
==PAGE:49==
If we then look at Figure 4.23, we can see that the SNR in Figure 4.23.a has decreased slightly, such
that the previously mentioned leftmost- and bottom edge, indicated by the blue arrow, are even more
blurred out. The atomic columns in the bulk region also behaves slightly diﬀerent, almost appearing as
rows, more than individual columns along the [110] zone-axis. Observing 4.23.b and the inference from
the pre model, we can see that the decrease in SNR has had an eﬀect. The network detects a good
amount of atomic columns in the bulk region, but towards the leftmost- and bottom edge and the top left
corner, as indicated by the green arrows, the model misses quite a few. Furthermore, the certainty in the
hexagonal pattern that the Au atoms sits in along the [110] zone-axis is decreased, and the model infers
more of a row-like behaviour than the hexagonal pattern that we are looking for. Directly comparing
this to the mean model in Figure 4.23.c, we can see a distinct increase in located atomic columns, both
in the bulk region, and along the edges as pointed out by the orange arrows. The tendency of almost
row-like behaviour from the inference is also present in the mean model, but as the model assigns higher
probability at locations where it predicts an atomic column (the ), the eﬀect is lessened.
Figure 4.24: In this ﬁgure, an experimental HRTEM image of a Au nanoparticle sitting on a CeO2 support at
around 470K, captured at the TEM at DTU Nanolab can be seen. The camera is a FEI Titan E-Cell 80 −300ST,
and the dose for this particular frame of the image series is approximately 8.96 · 102e/Å
2 with a electron incident
energy of 300keV. The two plots in ﬁgure b) and c) show the pre and mean model inferences respectively.
From Figure 4.24, we see a similar trend as in Figures 4.22 and 4.23, in that the mean model performs
better than the pre model when the SNR is decreased. Comparing Figure 4.24.a to Figure 4.22.a and
Figure 4.23.a, we can see that the atomic columns are now no longer easily discernible, and that the
row-like behaviour has become more prevalent. As a result, the inference from the pre model in Figure
4.24.b has become poorer than in Figure 4.23.b. Meanwhile, the inference from the mean model in
Figure 4.24.c is still relatively good, but with more of the row-like behaviour included in the prediction
as compared to Figure 4.23.c. The last included image can be seen in Figure 4.25, where the SNR is now
so bad, that the pre model in Figure 4.25.b doesn’t even output anything. However, the mean model
in Figure 4.25.c outputs a few predictions, but with low probability. This indicates that even with low
SNR, the proposed mean model can still pick up information from the experimental images.
Figure 4.25: In this ﬁgure, an experimental HRTEM image of a Au nanoparticle sitting on a CeO2 support at
around 470K, captured at the TEM at DTU Nanolab can be seen. The camera is a FEI Titan E-Cell 80 −300ST,
and the dose for this particular frame of the image series is approximately 8.94 · 102e/Å
2 with a electron incident
energy of 300keV. The two plots in ﬁgure b) and c) show the pre and mean model inferences respectively.
43
==PAGE:50==
5
|
Discussion
This section pertains to analyzing and discussing the results reported in Section 4 and is divided into
three sections. Section 5.1 consists of discussing the comparisons made between the MD simulations and
the Gaussian perturbations reported in Section 4.1. Section 5.2 then moves on to the qualitative analysis
of the frozen phonon method, and the results in Section 4.2, whereas Section 5.3.2 discusses the deep
learning results of the thesis as reported in Section 4.3.
5.1
Experiment 1: Comparing MD simulations and Gaussian per-
turbations
When the work on the thesis started, the ﬁrst milestone was to establish whether or not we could
emulate the eﬀect of simulating MD on simple Au nanoparticles by using the FPM in which the initial
atomic conﬁguration was perturbed with the thermal vibrational amplitudes extracted from FPM. One
of the interesting things to consider, was the computational tax of this task, and whether this Gaussian
perturbation method would be quicker and easier to compute as opposed to MD simulations.
To answer these questions, 3 Au nanoparticles were run through MD simulations or Gaussian per-
turbations concurrently, and then processed to procure the HRTEM images shown in Figures 4.1 and 4.2.
As the results show, there exists some small discrepancies between the two methods, such as the Gaussian
perturbation occasionally perturbing single atoms to perhaps unrealistic positions in a single frame of
the total trajectory, as indicated but the orange arrow in Figure 4.1.e. This occurs because the Gaussian
perturbations are not under any physical constraints that limit this type of behaviour as opposed to MD
simulations that are checked to ensure boundary conditions and conservation of e.g. energy or mass hold.
But overall, when we average the behaviour to get the so-called mean image as shown in e.g. Figures
4.1.c and 4.1.f, the two methods appear relatively similar. The perturbations, even though they might
appear unrealistic in single frames during the process, will even out and create an averaged HRTEM
image similar to the MD simulated one if we ensure that there are enough steps in the perturbation pro-
cess. The behaviour extends to HRTEM images of smaller and larger sized Au nanoparticles as shown
in Appendix A.1, and also for Au nanoparticles that are tilted away from the [110] zone-axis.
If we look at the computational tax of MD simulations vs Gaussian perturbations, as indicated by
Figure 4.3, we can clearly see that even for simple metallic nanoparticles, the Gaussian perturbation
method is already much faster as it is simply an addition to the (x, y, z) coordinate of each atom. This
is important when we need the HRTEM images for training deep neural networks that generally need a
lot of training data to yielding satisfactory results. Looking to the future of this work, and using these
methods on more complex nanoparticles, such as MoS2, this trend will only increase as the MD simulations
become more and more computationally taxing or even unrealistic to compute for suﬃciently large
nanoparticles. As such, we can conclude that the Gaussian perturbations are an eﬀective approximation
to MD simulations.
44
==PAGE:51==
5.2
Experiment 2: Statistical analysis of FPM
Now that the Gaussian perturbation was shown to be an eﬀective approximation, the next question
that arose was whether or not the size of the nanoparticles had a signiﬁcant eﬀect on the thermal
vibrational amplitudes extracted from FPM, as simulating e.g. large MoS2 nanoparticles is in practice
impossible due to time constraints. This was investigated in Section 4.2, where the thermal vibrational
amplitudes, extracted from 25 small and 25 large Au nanoparticles run through MD simulations at
diﬀerent temperatures were plotted in Figures 4.4 and 4.5. As described in the results, it became clear
that the atoms sitting on corners or edges with a small coordination number would vibrate more, and that
with increasing temperature, the vibrational amplitude would increase, which is true regardless of the size
of the nanoparticle. However, when the Au nanoparticle is larger, thereby containing more Au atoms, the
resulting mean and standard error of the mean extracted from the MD simulation will tend towards to the
"true" underlying values more precisely than when we have fewer data points. When we simulate 25 small
and 25 large nanoparticles, we have fewer data points for the thermal vibrational amplitudes of the small
Au nanoparticles, which can aﬀect the evaluated mean and standard error. To further investigate this,
it might be a good idea to increase the number of small Au nanoparticles generated for MD simulations,
to ensure that we have suﬃcient atoms for our statistics. This could be done by ensuring that we have
an equal amount of atoms, not nanoparticles, between the two simulations runs of small and large Au
nanoparticles respectively.
This might explain the size of the propagated error bars and diﬀerence in mean shown in Figure 4.6,
which envelops the mean values of the thermal vibrational amplitudes for almost all of the diﬀerent coor-
dination numbers. Even though the diﬀerence in mean value increases systematically as the temperature
increases, based on the uncertainty in the amplitudes, we always include a diﬀerence of mean value of
zero vibrational amplitude in the span of our uncertainty. This further increases the need for more data
in the analysis, to investigate whether the pattern we see is systematic in nature, or an artefact of our
speciﬁc choice of analysis. In any case, as mentioned in the results, the diﬀerence in mean vibrational
amplitude is relatively small compared to the amplitudes themselves, especially for low temperatures
(<325K). This means that we perhaps perturb approximately 90% with the amplitudes from the large
nanoparticles compared to the small nanoparticles, which will still result in a blurring eﬀect around the
equilibrium position of the atoms when we use the averaging method described in Section 3.1.3. Thus,
even if we don’t get the correct degree of displacement, we still increase the quality of our resulting
HRTEM image. One factor to consider though, is if we use the amplitudes generated from small nanopar-
ticles, and we end up perturbing some atoms with small coordination number by a large degree, we risk
creating atomic conﬁgurations that are unrealistic. It is therefore important to conduct this analysis,
and verify by experiments that this does not occur, e.g. by ensuring that we don’t perturb any atoms by
more than 100% of the mean amplitudes from the other coordination numbers.
To summarize, this means that we can eﬀectively use the vibrational amplitudes extracted from MD
simulations on the small Au nanoparticles for Gaussian perturbations when we generate new, larger Au
nanoparticles. This also makes intuitive sense, as the underlying vibrational behaviour of the atoms are
determined primarily by the temperature and the position of the particular atom in the crystal, and not
by the size of the nanoparticle.
45
==PAGE:52==
5.3
Experiment 3: Testing the MSDnet on perturbed HRTEM
images
Finally, this last section pertains to the discussion of the testing of several MSDnets, trained for both
nanoparticle- and atomic segmentation. The section is divided into 2 parts, ﬁrst diving into the learning
curves for nanoparticle- and atomic segmentation in Section 5.3.1, and then discussing the diﬀerence
between MSDnets trained on either non-perturbed or perturbed data for both segmentation tasks in
Section 5.3.2.
5.3.1
Learning curves of the MSDnets
As the primary goal of these experiments were to determine the minimum amount of necessary training
and validation data for a MSDnet to achieve satisfactory performance on perturbed HRTEM images, a
signiﬁcant amount of time was spent creating training data on the Niﬂheim cluster at DTU. This was
made to investigate the sensitivity of the MSDnet to the amount of training data, as the HRTEM images
are computationally expensive to create using the perturbation method.
Looking at Figure 4.7, where the MSDnet was trained for nanoparticle segmentation using mask labels,
the F1 scores from the validation curves (orange graphs) showed an oscillatory behaviour, regardless
of the amount of data in the training set. One reason for this behaviour might be that the network,
as it is attempting to place a binary mask around the nanoparticle, quite easily and quickly ﬁnds the
correct area in which the nanoparticle lies. This might happens because the shape of the masks are
non-complex which allows the network to place accurately masks in few training epochs. A way to ﬁx
this issue could be to introduce some regularization or reduce model complexity, and see how that aﬀects
the generalizability of the model.
As for the oscillatory behaviour, this might occur as the network then spends the remaining training
epochs trying to nail down the exact location of the edges in the training data, which it does by moving
the edges of the mask back and forth. This could improve the training performance slightly, but cause
signiﬁcant loss of generalizability in single training epochs. Another possibility is that as we are simulating
the HRTEM images by using randomized microscope parameters, we perhaps have created a diﬃcult set
of validation HRTEM images in terms of SNR to validate the model on as opposed to the training set.
A way to visualize this, could be to plot the inference from the model on the same HRTEM images from
subsequent training epochs in which the validation performance suddenly jumps or falls. This could
pinpoint whether it is the HRTEM images themselves that are causing issues, or if it is the MSDnet that
is doing anything strange.
As mentioned in the results, it also appears that the model hits a learning ceiling after maybe 20
training epochs. At this point most of the models has a validation F1 score of about 0.95, and thereafter
begins to oscillate. It is quite possible that the network with its current architecture cannot extract
anymore information from the HRTEM images, and we could therefore use early stopping techniques to
save computational power when training our networks.
If we look to Figure 4.8 that shows the F1 scores for 12 MSDnets doing atomic segmentation using
diﬀerently sized training sets, we see less oscillatory behaviour, but more overﬁtting trends in many of
the graphs. As the results highlighted, the network beneﬁts from getting more data in the three top
graphs with training set sizes 50, 100 and 300, as the generalizability increases with increasing data.
However, after we reach 500 training HRTEM images, the network plateaus as the validation F1 score
never increases above 80 while the training performance seems to increase, indicating that the MSDnets
are perhaps overﬁtting. This could indicate that the model is too complex, which could be ﬁxed by
removing some of the convolutional layers, or by introducing e.g. regularization such as dropout.
5.3.2
Detection of thermal vibrations in simulated HRTEM images
Beginning with the MSDnets trained for nanoparticle segmentation, the general trends that are seen in
Figures 4.9 and 4.10 show that the MSDnet doesn’t signiﬁcantly improve by introducing an approximation
to thermal vibrational behaviour in the training HRTEM images. If we were to re-simulate our training
and validation data, and plot their performances during training and afterwards as a histogram, we would
46
==PAGE:53==
most likely see a similar picture. This trend continues when we look at the model inferences plotted in
Figures 4.11, 4.12 and 4.13, in which the inferences are almost indistinguishable from each other. This
is particularly evident for the typical model inference shown in Figure 4.13, where even though the
validation images in Figures 4.13.a and 4.13.d are diﬀerent, the two models produce masks that are very
similar in shape, and share the same traits, e.g. better deﬁnition of straight edges (green arrows) and
almost smoke-like inference at e.g. corners (orange arrows).
Finally, looking at the most important inference, namely the model performance of the two models on
the experimentally acquired HRTEM images, the same picture appears, albeit with a slight advantage to
the pre model. As shown in Figure 4.14, when the SNR is high, both models picks up the Au nanoparticle,
but when the SNR decreases, the mean model begins to fall behind as shown in Figures 4.15 and 4.16.
However, as mentioned above, as the inferences are somewhat stochastic in nature and the diﬀerences are
small, we might train two new models using the same procedure but on new simulated HRTEM images,
and get the reverse trend. It can therefore be diﬃcult to determine whether this actually means that
the network becomes worse with the inclusion of thermal vibrational behaviour in the HRTEM images.
We can however say that it does not signiﬁcantly improve the network. This makes sense in a way that
we are only trying to place a mask around the edge of the nanoparticle without using the bulk region,
and as such, we are only actively using the atomic displacements on the edges. Having better precision
on these atoms could of course mean better model inference, but as the experiments show, this eﬀect is
quite small compared to the otherwise already quite high performance on the pre model. If we could
quantify the performance on the experimental HRTEM images, it would be easy to declare whether or
not the eﬀect of including the thermal vibrational behaviour was signiﬁcant.
Next, if we look at the MSDnets trained for atomic segmentation in Figures 4.17 and 4.18, the results
showed that the models both appeared to overﬁt slightly, and that there wasn’t a clear performance
increase from using the mean model. This trend is similar to that of the models trained for nanoparticle
segmentation, in that the models appear to overﬁt a bit, and that the performance from the models on
validation data does not clearly show a diﬀerence between them. I suspect this is generally a problem
when we simulate our own validation data as well as the training data, as even though the validation
set consists of 50% non perturbed and 50% perturbed data, we still bias the data set by controlling
the microscope parameters by which the HRTEM images are generated.
This means we need to be
careful with using the histograms and evolution of performance during training in Figures 4.17 and
4.18 to conclude anything deﬁnite about the two models, but instead turn to the inferences made on
experimental HRTEM images.
If we turn to the model inference shown in Figures 4.22 - 4.25, it was shown that the mean model
generally does seem to perform somewhat better compared to pre model. Especially at low SNR, as
shown in Figure 4.25, the mean model does seem to pull some information from the otherwise muddled
HRTEM image whereas the pre model does not, indicating that the mean model has higher recall.
Again, as we don’t have a clear quantitative way of evaluating the two models performances and as
we are selecting only a few images at a speciﬁc temperature with a speciﬁc, relatively high dose rate,
one needs to be careful with pronouncing one model superior to the other. However, it would not be
unreasonable to say that these results certainly instigates further research, as it appears that in some
cases, the mean model has an easier time capturing the atomic structure in the experimental HRTEM
images.
47
==PAGE:54==
6
|
Conclusion
The aim of this project was to increase the quality of the simulated HRTEM images used for analysis
of experimentally acquired HRTEM images. The method proposed utilized the frozen phonon method
(FPM) to include thermal vibrational behaviour in the simulated HRTEM images in an attempt to
emulate thermal diﬀuse scattering (TDS) eﬀects seen in the experimental HRTEM images. The work
was split into three separate experiments that 1) compares HRTEM images simulated based on atomic
conﬁgurations either from molecular dynamics (MD) simulations or Gaussian perturbations using the
FPM, 2) statistically analyses the FPM and tries to answer whether the vibrational amplitudes changes
signiﬁcantly when we increase the size of the metallic nanoparticles and 3) compares performance of
neural networks (MSDnets) trained on simulated HRTEM images with or without thermal vibrational
behaviour included.
The ﬁrst experiment showed that using the proposed Gaussian perturbation method was qualita-
tively similar to using MD simulations for Au nanoparticles both aligned on or tilted 5° away from the
[110] zone-axis, see Figures 4.1 and 4.2. Combined with a decrease in computation time, as shown in
Figure 4.3, the proposed Gaussian perturbations were deemed an eﬀective approximation to the MD
simulation, allowing us to include TDS-like eﬀects in our simulated HRTEM images without directly
using MD simulations.
The results from second experiment in Figure 4.6 showed a systematic diﬀerence in vibrational
amplitudes extracted from small and large Au nanoparticles using the FPM. However, as the diﬀerence
in mean vibrational amplitudes is small and the systematic trends are enveloped by the standard errors,
it was concluded that it is possible to utilize the vibrational behaviour from small Au nanoparticles when
simulating larger Au nanoparticles for training neural networks.
Finally, the results from the last experiment with the MSDnets, evaluated on experimental HRTEM
images in Figures 4.14 - 4.16 and Figures 4.22 - 4.25 for nanoparticle- and atomic segmentation respec-
tively, showed that the MSDnet trained using the perturbed data was, qualitatively, slightly better at
atomic segmentation when compared to a MSDnet trained on non-perturbed data. This eﬀect was not
observed with the MSDnets trained for nanoparticle segmentation, prompting further research as to
why.
48
==PAGE:55==
7
|
Outlook
The overarching goal of this project was ﬁrst to establish whether or not the proposed method was
feasible, then implement it on simple metallic nanoparticles and ﬁnally attempt to scale the method
to more complex nanoparticles. Due to the great number of hours spent debugging the implemented
methods, getting the code to work on two diﬀerent computing clusters and then running the very heavy
computations, scaling to more complex nanoparticles wasn’t completed in this thesis.
As such, this
section will describe some of the interesting points of future research with the frozen phonon method as
well as outline some of the suggested work on the simple metallic nanoparticles.
Deeper statistical analysis of the FPM
• As discussed, increasing the amount of atoms for the simulations with small Au nanoparticles could
help look into the systematic trends of the diﬀerence in mean vibrational amplitudes. Another,
more statistically sound method could be using a two-sample t-test to set up a null hypothesis
and from that determine if the diﬀerence in vibrational amplitude is actually zero or systematic in
nature.
Reviewing MSDnet architecture and training setup
• In the analysis of the inferences and learning metrics from the MSDnets, all the networks were
identical and without any regularization methods implemented. Using some form of regularization
such as dropout could investigate the overﬁtting trends seen in the results, and perhaps increase
performance overall.
• Another feature to look into is the number of convolutional layers in the MSDnets, to see if the
model complexity is too large. This could be done by plotting the ﬁnal F1 score, or perhaps an
average of the F1 scores from the last 20 training epochs, for a number of models with varying
number of layers.
• The dilation parameter in the convolutional layers could also be investigated, as currently it is
setup as incrementally increasing values from 1-2-3-...-10 and then resets back to 1 for subsequent
convolutional layers. A reason for changing this is that the network might not learn something
signiﬁcant from only increasing the dilation by 1 from one layer to the next, but could learn more
if we randomized the order of dilation. This could also assist the network if we reduced the number
of convolutional layers by allowing the network to detect objects at diﬀerent scales faster.
Scaling to complex nanoparticles
• One of the big parts of this project was to get everything working and then scale to more complex
nanoparticles such as MoS2. To do this, a rewrite of the function pertaining to the perturbations
is necessary, as each atom in e.g. MoS2 is not only characterized by its coordination number, but
also to what kind of atom is next to it. Once this is completed, the remaining code should be set
up in a way in which new data could be simulated and then trained upon by MSDnets.
49
==PAGE:56==
8
|
Bibliography
8.1
Articles
[1]
Florian F. Krause et al. “Using molecular dynamics for multislice TEM simulation of thermal diﬀuse
scattering in AlGaN”. eng. In: (2018). doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultramic.2018.03.025.
[2]
H. J. C. Berendsen et al. “Molecular dynamics with coupling to an external bath”. eng. In: (1984).
doi: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.448118.
[3]
Jeppe V. Lauritsen et al. “Location and coordination of promoter atoms in Co- and Ni-promoted
MoS2-based hydrotreating catalysts”. In: Journal of Catalysis (2007).
[9]
P. Stoltze K.W. Jacobsen and J.K. Nørskov. “A semi-empirical eﬀective medium theory for metals
and alloys”. eng. In: (1996).
[12]
W. Kohn. “Nobel Lecture: Electronic structure of matter - wave functions and density functionals”.
eng. In: (1999).
[14]
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller. “Eﬃciency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and
semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set”. eng. In: (1996).
[15]
Jacob Madsen et al. “A Deep Learning Approach to Identify Local Structures in Atomic-Resolution
Transmission Electron Microscopy Images”. English. In: Advanced Theory and Simulations 1.8
(2018). issn: 2513-0390. doi: 10.1002/adts.201800037.
[17]
Philipp Fischer Olaf Ronneberger and Thomas Brox. “U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomed-
ical Image Segmentation”. In: (2015).
[18]
et al. Pablo Garc´ıa Risue~no. “Frozen-phonon method for state anticrossing situations and its
application to zero-point motion eﬀects in diamondoids”. eng. In: (2019).
[19]
Daniel M. Pelt and James A. Sethian. “A mixed-scale dense convolutional neural network for image
analysis”. eng. In: (2018).
[20]
David M W Powers. “Evaluation: From Precision, Recall and F-Factor to ROC, Informedness,
Markedness Correlation”. eng. In: (2007).
8.2
Books
[4]
Ravin Narain Anika Benozir Asha. Polymer Science and Nanotechnology, Fundamentals and Ap-
plications. Science Direct, 2020. isbn: 978-0-12-816806-6. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/C2018-
0-01134-2.
[5]
David B. WilliamsC. Barry Carter. Transmission Electron Microscopy, A Textbook for Materials
Science. Springer, 2009. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-76501-3.
[6]
Josiah Willard Gibbs. Elementary Principles in Statistical Mechanics. C. Scribner’s sons; [etc .,
etc.], 1902. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-88857-4_6.
[7]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.deeplearningbook.
org. MIT Press, 2016.
[8]
Ågren H. Håkan H.W. Quantum Mechanics/Classical Mechanics Modeling of Biological Systems.
Springer, New York, NY, 2009. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-88857-4_6.
50
==PAGE:57==
[10]
Earl J. Kirkland. Advanced Computing in Electron Microscopy. Springer, 2010, 2nd ed. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-6533-2.
[11]
Charles Kittel. Introduction to Solid State Physics. John Wiley and Sons, Inc, 7th ed., 1996.
[21]
Schlick T. Pursuing Laplace’s Vision on Modern Computers. Springer, New York, NY, 1996. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4612-4066-2_13.
8.3
Websites
[13]
Matt Krause. what-is-translation-invariance-in-computer-vision-and-convolutional-neural-netwo. 2016.
url: https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/208936/what-is-translation-invariance-
in-computer-vision-and-convolutional-neural-netwo (visited on 06/02/2021).
[16]
Mayank Mishra. Convolutional Neural Networks, Explained. 2020. url: https://towardsdatascience.
com/convolutional-neural-networks-explained-9cc5188c4939 (visited on 06/02/2021).
[23]
Technative. Data Quality vs Data Quantity: What’s More Important for AI? 2018. url: https:
//technative.io/data-quality-vs-data-quantity-whats-more-important-for-ai/ (visited
on 06/01/2021).
[24]
towardsdatascience.com. Breaking the curse of small datasets in Machine Learning: Part 1. 2018.
url: https://towardsdatascience.com/breaking- the- curse- of- small- datasets- in-
machine-learning-part-1-36f28b0c044d (visited on 06/01/2021).
51
==PAGE:58==
A
|
Appendix
A.1
Simulated HRTEM images of regular small and large Au
nanoparticles
Figure A.1: In this Figure, simulated HRTEM images of the initial conﬁguration, the post MD simulation or
Gaussian perturbation conﬁguration and the averaged atomic conﬁguration of a small Au nanoparticle with no
tilt angle can be seen. The image parameters can be found in Table 4.1.
52
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.2: In this Figure, simulated HRTEM images of the initial conﬁguration, the post MD simulation or
Gaussian perturbation conﬁguration and the averaged atomic conﬁguration of the small Au nanoparticle with 5°
tilt angle added can be seen. The image parameters can be found in Table 4.1.
Figure A.3: In this Figure, simulated HRTEM images of the initial conﬁguration, the post MD simulation or
Gaussian perturbation conﬁguration and the averaged atomic conﬁguration of a large Au nanoparticle with no
tilt angle can be seen. The image parameters can be found in Table 4.1.
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.4: In this Figure, simulated HRTEM images of the initial conﬁguration, the post MD simulation or
Gaussian perturbation conﬁguration and the averaged atomic conﬁguration of the large Au nanoparticle with 5°
tilt angle added can be seen. The image parameters can be found in Table 4.1.
54
==PAGE:61==
A.2
Learning curves for 12 networks trained for nanoparticle-
and atomic segmentation
Figure A.5: This ﬁgure shows the learning curves for 12 MSDnets trained for Au atomic segmentation with
disk labels at 300K. The model recall is shown over the course of 100 training epochs when evaluated on both
the training and validation sets. The data is described in Section 3.3.3 and Table 3.5, and the sizes of the data
sets can be seen in the sup-titles for each plot. All models are set up identically, and only vary by the amount of
training data that it is shown.
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.6: This ﬁgure shows the learning curves for 12 MSDnets trained for Au atomic segmentation with
disk labels at 300K. The model precision is shown over the course of 100 training epochs when evaluated on both
the training and validation sets. The data is described in Section 3.3.3 and Table 3.5, and the sizes of the data
sets can be seen in the sup-titles for each plot. All models are set up identically, and only vary by the amount of
training data that it is shown.
56
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.7: This ﬁgure shows the learning curves for 12 MSDnets trained for Au atomic segmentation with
disk labels at 300K. The model recall is shown over the course of 100 training epochs when evaluated on both
the training and validation sets. The data is described in Section 3.3.3 and Table 3.5, and the sizes of the data
sets can be seen in the sup-titles for each plot. All models are set up identically, and only vary by the amount of
training data that it is shown.
57
==PAGE:64==
Figure A.8: This ﬁgure shows the learning curves for 12 MSDnets trained for Au atomic segmentation with
disk labels at 300K. The model precision is shown over the course of 100 training epochs when evaluated on both
the training and validation sets. The data is described in Section 3.3.3 and Table 3.5, and the sizes of the data
sets can be seen in the sup-titles for each plot. All models are set up identically, and only vary by the amount of
training data that it is shown.
58
