==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
Power-to-cold storage for superconducting direct drive 
wind turbine generators 
 
 
Georg Gamper 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0470 
July 2021 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Georg Gamper 
Title: Power-to-cold storage for superconducting direct drive wind turbine 
generators 
DTU Wind Energy-M-04700 
July 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
February – July 2021 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
 
Asger Bech Abrahamsen 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
Anders Christian Wulff 
DTU Energy 
 
Alexander Alekseev 
Linde GmbH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
2
Theory
6
2.1
Superconductivity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Generators for wind turbines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.1
Superconducting wind turbine generators, state of the art . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Cold storage design concepts
9
3.1
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Cold storage for a superconducting wind turbine generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Design example of a cold storage using solid Nitrogen
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Experiments
16
4.1
Experimental set-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
HTSGEN: Initial cool-down . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3
HTSGEN: Warm-up experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Notes on the temperature uncertainties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5
Modelling
24
5.1
Load line evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.1.1
Building the geometry and setting up the AC/DC module . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.2
Results of the COMSOL simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1.3
Sensitivity analysis and mesh convergence test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.1
Coil- and model description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.2
Mass and heat capacity of the coil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.2.3
Heat sources and sinks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2.4
Heat ﬂow: Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.5
The algorithm
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.6
Estimation of parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.7
Results of the MATLAB model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.2.8
Introducing the Nitrogen Storage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.3.1
Wind data analysis and simulation of the dynamic operating mode . . . . . .
48
5.3.2
The scaling relation and evaluation of the instantaneous power . . . . . . . .
52
5.3.3
Modelling of the EcoSwing generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.3.4
Discussion: Modelling of the dynamic operating mode . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Discussion
59
7
Conclusion
62
8
Outlook
62
Section 0:
CONTENTS
page 3 of 66
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
In the eﬀort of reducing the emission of greenhouse gases, many countries strive for increasing the
share of green energy. Wind energy is one of the main contributors to this trend and shows a very
high growth rate of about 17% increase of installed capacity per year in the second half of the ’10
years of this millennium. Taking the example of Denmark, the country had a share of 47% of its
electricity consumption in 2019 produced by wind energy [14].
Due to wind speeds that are in general higher and more consistent, oﬀshore wind farms have at-
tracted a lot of attention in the recent years, with a total of 35 GW of capacity installed by the end
of 2020. This accounts for 5% of the global installed wind energy capacity and shows a rapid growth
[8] [13]. Especially in the oﬀshore wind industry, the trend goes towards larger turbine ratings, with
the motivation being the reduction of the levelized cost of energy (LCoE). As up-scaled versions of
conventional generators go along with weight-, volume- and cost challenges, superconducting wind
turbine generators could become an important player in this ﬁeld. This type of generator usually
goes along with higher torque densities due to the possibility to eﬃciently produce higher magnetic
ﬁelds and hence, compared to the conventional machines, can reduce signiﬁcantly weight and volume
of the generator and therefore also of the wind turbine head. This more light-weight tower head
mass would also be of a great beneﬁt for next-generation ﬂoating wind turbines [32].
So far, superconducting wind turbine generators are still expected to have a higher LCoE with
respect to conventional machines [1]. Besides the high cost of the cooling system and the super-
conductors themselves, also the reduced eﬃciency due to the power needs of the cooling system
contributes to the increase of the LCoE. Superconductors have to be cooled down to a base temper-
ature that is well below the critical temperature of the superconductor used. The power drawn from
the cooling system can either be subtracted from the power produced by the wind turbine, in which
case the energy production is lowered, or it has to be drawn from the grid and hence bought from
external sources in the case wind is absent and no power is produced by the wind turbine. Due to
higher electricity prices during periods of low or absent wind, especially the latter case is expected
to have a considerable negative impact on the LCoE. Reducing the amount of power drawn from
external sources would therefore be of great interest.
This work investigates whether introducing a cold storage in the superconducting wind turbine
generator could reduce the negative impact of the power consumption of the cooling system and
consequently raise the LCoE. The idea is that during periods of high wind and therefore also high
power production, a part of the system’s cooling power is transferred to a cold storage. During
low-wind or wind-absent periods, instead of running the cooling system at high power prices, the
cold storage could be employed to compensate for the heat inﬂow into the cold area of the genera-
tor, keeping the warm-up of the system to a minimum. The cold storage would hence draw cooling
power during periods of power abundance and release cooling power during periods of power scarcity.
The main questions that this work tries to answer are the following:
• What is the cooling capacity that such a cold storage should have?
• What material should be used for the cold storage and what mechanism should be employed
to store the cooling power?
• What are the design features of a cold storage?
• What is the eﬀect on the LCoE and will there be an economic beneﬁt in using a cold storage?
Section 1:
Introduction
page 4 of 66
==PAGE:5==
As a start, a short introduction to some important theoretical concepts about wind turbine generators
and superconductivity will be given. Next comes the discussion about the state of the art of cold
storage solutions in cryogenic systems, some conceptual questions about the cold storage will be
answered and ﬁnally a cold storage design will be proposed. One chapter is dedicated to experiments
investigating the warm-up behaviour of a cryogenic system with a superconducting coil. This is
followed by a chapter about modelling, with the ﬁnal scope of developing a simulation ﬁnding the
eﬀect of a cold storage in a wind turbine generator, using wind data records with a total length of
almost ﬁve years. The results will be analyzed in the Discussion-chapter, followed by a conclusion
and an outlook.
Section 1:
Introduction
page 5 of 66
==PAGE:6==
2
Theory
2.1
Superconductivity
Superconductivity describes a variety of diﬀerent eﬀects of certain materials, the most striking eﬀects
being the drop of the resistance to virtually 0 Ωupon cooling below the so-called critical temperature
Tc and the Meissner eﬀect, which is the expulsion of the magnetic ﬂux density B from the parts of
the material in the superconducting state. Superconductivity has been discovered in 1911 by Heike
Kamerlingh Onnes and since then a lot of research has been invested into this topic.
One generally diﬀers between Type I and Type II superconductors. Type I superconductors exit the
superconducting state abruptly once the magnetic ﬂux density it is exposed to goes above the critical
ﬁeld Bc. Below Bc, Type I superconductors are in the Meissner state, meaning expulsed magnetic
ﬂux density in the whole bulk. The situation is diﬀerent for Type II superconductors, which stay
in the Meissner state up until Bc1 and then enter the mixed state, where the superconductor is
penetrated by quantized magnetic ﬂux lines going through ﬂux tubes. Only within those ﬂux tubes
is the material out of the superconducting state. Increasing the magnetic ﬁeld increases the number
of ﬂux tubes and at the second critical ﬁeld Bc2 the breakdown of the superconducting state of the
whole material occurs. The appearance of the mixed state allows for higher ﬁelds before the material
exits the superconducting state.
Due to the higher critical ﬁelds, Type II superconductors is the group that is relevant for engi-
neering purposes. Three parameters are of fundamental when working with those superconductors:
• Critical temperature Tc: This is the temperature at which the transition to the superconducting
state occurs. Going above Tc, the material exits the superconducting state.
• Critical current density Jc: The current density above which the superconductor shows a
resistive behaviour is called the critical current.
For Type II superconductors, this is the
current density at which the ﬂux tubes start moving and hence start dissipating energy. For
superconducting machines, it is useful to deﬁne the critical current Ic, which is the current
above which the superconductor turns resistive.
• The irreversible ﬁeld Birr: The ﬂux tubes of Type II superconductors need to be pinned to
pinning sites to have a non-zero critical current density. The magnetic ﬂux density above
which the ﬂux tubes start moving and start dissipating energy is called the irreversible ﬁeld
Birr.
Due to the dependence of Jc and Birr on temperature and their interdependence, one can deﬁne the
critical surface of a superconductor, below which a superconducting material has superconducting
behaviour. As an example, the critical surface of niobium titanium is shown in ﬁgure 1.
Without any pinning sites, the ﬂux tubes in a Type II superconductor feel the Lorenz-force in the
presence of a current. This force will make them move and dissipate energy, giving a critical current
of zero. If the ﬂux tubes are pinned to pinning sites, they can be thought of as a particle in a
potential well with depth U0. For zero current, the thermally activated escape rate R of the particle
will be proportional to
R ∝e
U0
kB T
(1)
where U0 is the depth of the potential well, kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature.
If now there is a current, there will be a tilting of the pinning potential landscape, which’s slope will
Section 2:
Theory
page 6 of 66
==PAGE:7==
Figure 1: Example of a critical surface of a superconducting material: As one stays below the
critical surface, the material will have a superconducting behaviour. This is the critical surface of
the Niobium titanium alloy used in the accelerator of CERN. Reproduced from [27].
be given by the Lorenz force:
∂U
∂x = F = J × B
(2)
with J being the current density and B the magnetic ﬂux density of the ﬂux line. While the well
depth on one side will be raised, on the other side it will be lowered, which raises the escape rate of
that side and the ﬂux lattice will start moving with a speed proportional to R. The superconductor
will then start showing a resistive behaviour and start dissipating energy. By taking into account
the collective ﬂux line behaviour, it can be shown that the microscopic Ohm’s law is given by
E = Blv0e
U
kBT = Blv0e
Uc
kBT ln Jc
J = ... = E0( J
Jc
)
Uc
kBT = E0( J
Jc
)n(T )
(3)
where B is the magnetic ﬂux density, l is the jump distance, v0 is the base attempt frequency, Uc is
the critical barrier and E0 is the critical electric ﬁeld, which is usually taken to be 1 µV/cm. The
last part of the equation represents the so-called power law, describing the transition to the resistive
region. Both the critical current density Jc and the n-value are strongly temperature dependent.
2.2
Generators for wind turbines
For evaluating the yearly power production of a wind turbine, two things are necessary to know:
• The power curve of the wind turbine, dictated by the power density of wind, the power coef-
ﬁcient Cp and by the maximum power of the generator.
• the wind speed distribution.
Beginning with the analysis of the former, one needs to ﬁnd the energy density of wind at a certain
speed v. The energy contained in wind is kinetic energy. The kinetic energy of a cylinder of wind
with speed v is simply
Ekin = 1
2ρV v2
(4)
Section 2:
2.2
Generators for wind turbines
page 7 of 66
==PAGE:8==
where ρ is the density of wind and V is the volume of the cylinder of wind in consideration. Given
the area swept by the wind turbine blades A and having wind with speed v, the volume that passes
through this area per second is then
˙V = A · v
(5)
and hence the mass passing through the swept area A is
˙M = ρ A v. The energy per second of the
wind passing through area A and hence the power of wind is then given by
Pwind = 1
2ρAv3
(6)
and the shaft power is then
Pshaft = 1
2ρAv3 Cp
(7)
where Cp is the power coeﬃcient, which depends on the aerodynamic properties of the blades. As
can be seen by this equation, the shaft power follows a v3-law. The wind turbine can only produce
energy above a certain wind speed, which is called the cut-in wind speed vcut in.
The maximum power at which a wind turbine can produce energy is limited by the maximum
generator torque:
Pmax = ωτmax,gen
(8)
where ω is the frequency and τmax,gen is the maximum generator torque. The generator produces
current following the induction law, stating that the electromotive force is equal to the change in
time of magnetic ﬂux through the area of the conductor:
U = ∂
∂t
Z
B(t)ds = RI
(9)
where the integral is over the surface enclosed by the wire. The force on a piece of length dl of that
wire is given by the Lorenz force:
df = I × Bdl
(10)
It can be shown that for a cylindrical generator with radius r and length L and multiple conductors
picking up the varying magnetic ﬁeld, the torque is equal to
τmax,gen = Bair gap · AS · Vgen · cos(φ)
(11)
where Bair gap is the magnetic ﬂux density of the air gap, felt by the wires, AS is the electric loading
of the armature windings, Vgen is the generator volume and cos(φ) is the torque angle. For a limited
magnetic ﬂux density, one therefore has to grow the generator size in order to increase the maximum
torque.
Once the shaft power reaches the value of the maximum power Pmax, the curve ﬂattens out and
stays constant, which is achieved by pitching the turbine blades. Once the cut-oﬀwind speed is
reached, the power curve goes to zero by further pitching of the blades. This happens because the
wind turbine could be damaged at very high wind speeds. An example of a power curve can be seen
in ﬁgure 2(a).
To get the total produced energy, one needs to know the wind speed distribution over the year.
It turns out that the probability of having a certain wind speed is well described by the Weibull
distribution, given by
F(v) =
k
Aw
( v
Aw
)k−1 exp[−( v
Aw
)k]
(12)
with the shape parameter k = 2 and the scaling parameter Aw equal to the average wind speed of the
site. An example of the Weibull distribution can be seen in ﬁgure 2(b). Multiplying the normalized
Section 2:
2.2
Generators for wind turbines
page 8 of 66
==PAGE:9==
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: (a) Example of a power curve: This power curve belongs to a Vestas V-164 machine and
it is possible to see the cut-in wind speed, the curve following the v3-law, the ﬂattening of the curve
at Pmax and the drop to zero at the cut-out wind speed. (b) Example of a normalized Weibull
distribution with shape parameter k = 2 and scale parameter Aw = 11.3.
Weibull distribution with the total amount of hours per year and multiplying that function with the
power curve, one obtains the energy production distribution, indicating how much energy per year
is produced at each wind speed. Finally, integrating over the wind speed gives the total amount of
energy produced per year.
2.2.1
Superconducting wind turbine generators, state of the art
The EcoSwing project:
The superconducting wind turbine generator built in the EcoSwing-
project was the world’s ﬁrst full scale MW-class superconducting wind turbine generator and rep-
resents the state of the art in this area. The generator, subsequently referred to as the EcoSwing
generator, has been built, tested and in the end installed in a wind turbine in Thyborøn, Denmark,
where it has been connected to the grid and successfully passed the testing period of 650 h of op-
eration. The rated power is 3.6 MW. While the stator of the generator is conventional, the rotor is
made out of 40 superconducting coils, creating the magnetic ﬁeld for the generator. 9 single stage
cold heads from Sumitomo have been employed, using a cooling power of 62.1 kW and keeping
the superconducting coils at a base temperature of around 20 K. The estimated heat input into
the cryogenic system is estimated to be between 222 and 278 W. The superconductor used in the
generator is a ReBCO-tape manufactured by Theva GmbH [23]. [4] [33] [32]
The EcoSwing generator is frequently used as a reference case in this work.
3
Cold storage design concepts
3.1
State of the art
Here, a quick overview on cold storage related research regarding is given, with a short description
of what has been done.
• SN2 has been successfully used as a thermal battery to create a portable high temperature
superconductor (HTS) magnet. A thermal barrier is created when frozen under vacuum, hence
this freezing method should be avoided. [15]
Section 3:
Cold storage design concepts
page 9 of 66
==PAGE:10==
• SN2 has been used as a cold storage. The low thermal conductivity has been improved by the
use of copper foam, which increased the eﬀective thermal conductivity of SN2 and enhanced
the cold release of the cold storage. [41]
• An HTS magnet has been successfully operated with varying coil temperature. The use of SN2
dramatically increased the warm-up time from minimum operating temperature to maximum
operating temperature. [16]
• An exploratory study of using SN2 for protecting a Helium-cooled HTS power cable against
unexpected heat loads has been conducted, with promising ﬁndings. Furthermore, a buﬀer
chamber for evaporating Nitrogen was predicted to be 80% smaller in volume if activated
charcoal was used. [36].
• Here the properties of a mobile HTS magnet as a cold storage has been investigated. The
warm-up time could be prolonged by 25% by adding approximately 10% of the cold mass as
ice. [24]
• As the thermal contact of HTS systems and solid cryogen deteriorates if repeated overcurrents
occur, a mixed cryogenic system employing solid cryogens and a small amount of liquid cryogens
was proposed. This increased the thermal stability of the system and maintained the thermal
contact thanks to the presence of the liquid cryogen. [30]
• Experiments have been done investigating the inﬂuence on the phase diagram of having mixed
cryogens, in particular mixing Neon with Nitrogen to get a liquid mixture below the triple
point of Nitrogen at 63 K. The ﬁndings were that this might be possible and further research
has to be done. [35]
• A superconducting ﬂywheel energy storage has been proposed, with the combination of a
thermal storage with a solid nitrogen thermal storage. Thanks to the SN2, the losses due to
cooling power are greatly reduced. [22]
• SN2 is described as an enabling feature for building persistent mode liquid Helium (LHe) -
free MgB2 magnet. Three SN2 HTS-magnets have been built to the date of the publication
(2017). [18]
• Solid nitrogen has been used to build a persistent mode HTS magnet used for ultra high-speed
maglev trains, which would allow the trains to run for more than 9 h without the need of
cooling power. [10]
• A HTS synchronous rotating machine has been built with SN2 as a cryogen, where Nitrogen
has been solidiﬁed by passing liquid Helium through heat exchangers. The use of SN2 as a
cryogen is proposed, as it has a lower operating temperature than liquid Nitrogen and it could
simplify the cooling system. [19]
• The thermal behaviour in response to overcurrent of a conduction cooled Bi-2223/Ag tape
could be improved drastically by using a cryogen mixture of SN2 and liquid Neon, compared
to only using SN2. It was deduced that liquid Neon acts as a thermal exchanger, while SN2
acts as a heat capacitor. [26]
3.2
Cold storage for a superconducting wind turbine generator
A cold storage for a superconducting wind turbine generator has the purpose of transferring cooling
power during periods of high wind and consequently also high power production to periods of low
wind and possibly absent power production, allowing then to switch of the cooling machines of the
superconducting generator. The superconductors need to be kept below their critical temperature
Section 3:
3.2
Cold storage for a superconducting wind turbine generator
page 10 of 66
==PAGE:11==
Figure 3: Overview of phases and phase transitions at low temperatures. The temperature range
of interest is colored in pink and its lower boundary has been chosen to be the base temperature of
the EcoSwing generator described in section 2.2.1. Evidently, Hydrogen and Neon would have phase
transitions in the temperature range of interest.
Tc. Taking the example of an YBCO-tape, this would be 93 K. When the generator is at base
temperature, there is a continuous heat input from heat sources like conduction, radiation and Joule
heating. At base temperature and during normal operation, this heat input is compensated by the
cooling machines, having a cooling power of same magnitude and opposite sign as the heat input
from those sources. When the cooling machines are oﬀ, there is a net heat inﬂow into the system,
causing it to heat up. The goal of having a cold storage would be to either absorb as much as
possible of this incoming heat and so keeping the cold mass at a low temperature, or substantially
increase the heat capacity of the cold mass so tat the warm-up is slowed down enough to bridge the
period of low wind, up until to the moment when there is again enough wind to power the cooling
system.
From this, one can conclude that storing cooling power basically means having a heat sink where the
incoming heat can be dumped into, avoiding or slowing down the warm-up of the cold mass until
the sink is full. There are two mechanisms one can use for a cold storage:
• Use of the latent heat of a phase transition: During periods of high wind speeds, part of the
abundant generator power can be used to either condense a gas into a liquid or freezing a
liquid into a solid. The energy is then stored mainly in the latent heat of the substance.
• Use of a high heat capacity material: Here the idea is to add mass to the system, and ideally
this mass should have a high heat capacity. It then compensates for the incoming heat by
warming up.
In the following part of this section, each of these mechanisms will be explained a bit more in depth.
Furthermore, it will be discussed which materials could be considered to be used for the cold storage,
and by doing back of the envelope-calculations some insight is gained in the order of magnitude of
volume and mass required by the cold storage.
Section 3:
3.2
Cold storage for a superconducting wind turbine generator
page 11 of 66
==PAGE:12==
Phase transition based cold storage:
One of the basic questions is the choice of material.
There aren’t many choices of materials when one aims at employing a phase transition for the cold
storage. Using the base temperature of the EcoSwing generator introduced in section 2.2.1, which is
around 20 K, it turns out that there are just four elements undergoing a phase transition in this low
temperature range. Excluding Helium from the start due to its very low boiling point, the elements
are Nitrogen (N2), Oxygen (O2), Neon (Ne) and Hydrogen (H2). Figure 3 gives an overview on the
diﬀerent phases and temperatures of the phase transitions at ambient pressure of the aforementioned
elements. The area colored in pink shows the temperature range that is of interest. Evidently, the
phase transitions of Oxygen and Nitrogen are rather high and therefore not ideal. The system would
need to heat up to too high temperatures for reaching the phase transition temperatures. Hydrogen
and Neon instead seem to have their phase transition in the right place. In particular, Neon, which
is the element with the narrowest liquid range, has both the solid-liquid and liquid-gas phase transi-
tions at the temperatures 24.56 K and 27,10 K, respectively. The boiling point of Hydrogen, which
is at 20.28 K, could be raised by increasing the pressure in the condensation vessel of the cold storage.
Besides the phase transition temperature, also the magnitude of the latent heat is important and it
has a huge inﬂuence on how much of each substance one needs to add to the cold storage for having
the same eﬀect. To demonstrate this, a simple calculation has been done. The assumption here is
that the cold storage material needs to compensate for a heat input of 100 W into the cryogenic
system at a temperature of around 30 K for a time span of 10 h. This means that the respective
phase transition needs to absorb a total energy of 3.6 MJ. The resulting masses and volumes required
are summed up in table 1.
Phase trans.
Ttrans[K]
L [J/g]
L [J/ml
M [kg]
V [l]
H2
L →G
20.28
441
31
8,13
116,13
Ne
L →G
27.10
86
103
41,94
34,95
N2
L →G
77.36
119
161
18,11
22,36
O2
S →L
54.15
13,90
18,93
258,99
190,20
Ne
S →L
24.56
25,70
23,90
216,87
150,60
N2
S →L
63.15
25,70
21,85
140,08
164,80
Table 1: Table with volumes and masses that are necessary for compensating a heat input of 100
W for 10 h. Especially the liquid-gas phase transitions turn out to be very eﬃcient, requiring only
low masses and volumes. The values transition temperature Ttrans and latent heat are taken for
ambient pressure.
The results in table 1 allows one to identify some promising candidates for the cold storage. While
solid-liquid phase transitions require a rather high volume and mass of the respective substance, the
liquid-gas phase transitions stand out with much lower values. Nitrogen would require both a very
low mass of 18.11 kg and a very low volume of 22.36 l, but its transition temperature is very high.
Hydrogen and Neon both have fairly low values for mass and volume. As volume is most likely the
more stringent constraint in a generator, and also due to the risk of explosion and the low transition
temperature, evaporation of Hydrogen might be less promising than Neon. Problematic for Neon
might be the high price, but it was diﬃcult to ﬁnd an indicative number to back this up. Taking
the case of the liquid-gas phase transition a bit further, one needs to consider also that the liquid
expands drastically upon evaporation. Out of all these gasses, Neon has the highest expansion ratio
with 1445 [9], meaning 1 l of liquid Neon expands to 1445 l of gaseous Neon at room temperature.
Using the ideal gas law and assuming that the gas was kept at 50 K, this means that the required
volume of 34.95 l of liquid Neon will ﬁll a volume of around 20 m3 at ambient pressure. Obviously
one could keep the Neon at a higher pressure within the gas vessel, in that case one could reduce
the volume to 2 m3 at a pressure of 10 bar. The volume of a generator is in general very big, so
Section 3:
3.2
Cold storage for a superconducting wind turbine generator
page 12 of 66
==PAGE:13==
Figure 4: Comparison of the heat capacity per unit volume of diﬀerent materials. The heat capacity
of solid Nitrogen is very high compared to other materials and features also a solid-solid phase
transition at around 35 K. Reproduced from [17].
a multiple cubic meter gas vessel could be accommodated. Keeping the pressure of the gas higher
than ambient pressure still might be a good idea. The necessity for having a gas chamber for the
evaporated gas represents an additional complication in the design of a cold storage, which is absent
in solid-liquid phase transitions and also heat capacity based solutions.
Heat capacity based cold storage:
A cold storage based on heat capacity intrinsically allows
the cold storage to warm up during the oﬄine periods of the cooling system. The heat capacity
describes here how much energy needs to be absorbed to raise the temperature of the cold storage by
one Kelvin. As one starts investigating on heat capacity based solutions, the challenge of it becomes
immediately clear. As phonons are gradually being frozen out when going towards temperatures
as low as 20 K, the heat capacity, carried mainly by phonons, drops to very small values. This is
especially true for metals like copper or aluminium. Lead would have a comparably high speciﬁc
heat capacity per unit volume, but it would still require a huge weight compared to phase tran-
sition based solutions. If one abandons metals and instead looks for other solutions, there is one
exceptional material that quickly catches one’s attention: Solid Nitrogen. Its speciﬁc heat capac-
ity is orders of magnitude higher than that of common metals like aluminium and copper, and in
addition it undergoes a solid-solid phase transition at a temperature of 35.61 K, adding additional
heat capacity without going out of the solid phase. As can be seen in ﬁgure 4, the heat capacity per
unit volume is comparable to the one of lead, but the weight speciﬁc heat capacity is again an order
of magnitude higher due to the much lower density of solid Nitrogen. Doing the same back of the
envelope-calculations as before and allowing the solid Nitrogen to warm up from a temperature of
24 K to 40 K, one ends up with a required mass and volume of 127.09 kg and 135.20 l, respectively,
which are acceptable values and qualify solid Nitrogen as a candidate for the cold storage. As could
be seen in the previous subsection, solid Nitrogen was also employed in many diﬀerent research
projects. Due to the vast amount of available information and also due to the prediction that the
realization of a heat capacity solution will have a lower complexity compared to phase transition
based ones, solid Nitrogen has been chosen as the main candidate for designing a cold storage.
Figure 5 gives a ﬁnal overview on the transition temperatures, required masses and required volumes
Section 3:
3.2
Cold storage for a superconducting wind turbine generator
page 13 of 66
==PAGE:14==
of the diﬀerent solutions that were considered in this section. Next follows a cold storage design
example, using solid Nitrogen as a cold storage material.
Figure 5: Overview on the transition temperatures and masses and volumes of diﬀerent cold storage
materials, required to compensate for a heat inﬂux of 100 W into a cryogenic system at a temperature
of around 30 K for a time span of 10 h. The pink area denotes the temperature range of interest.
For solid Nitrogen, being a heat capacity-based solution, a warm-up from 24 K to 40 K has been
considered.
3.3
Design example of a cold storage using solid Nitrogen
The following list shows some fundamental design requirements for a cold storage with solid Nitrogen,
in the following referred to as SN2:
• It must be possible to load the cold storage during high power production periods. When
using SN2, this means cooling the material to a low temperature which should be at least
comparable to the temperature of the cold mass.
• The cold storage must be able to keep the stored cooling capacity during periods when it is
neither loaded nor discharged.
• When discharged, the cold storage must be thermally connected to either the cold mass or the
locations where the heat comes in. In that way, it can absorb the incoming heat and warm up
or slow down the warm-up of the cold mass by adding more heat capacity to the system.
• In particular, when the whole system has warmed up after a period of low wind, it must be
possible to disconnect the cold storage from the cold mass in order to be able to cool down
the coil as quick as possible.
• If a complete shut-down of the whole system happens, the temperature of the cold storage could
rise above the boiling point of the cold storage media. In this case, the safety of the generator
must be guaranteed and the destruction of the SN2 chamber due to increasing pressure must
be avoided.
• Solid Nitrogen has a low thermal conductivity. A huge bulk of SN2 will be diﬃcult to utilize
fully, because the propagation of heat will be slow.
Section 3:
3.3
Design example of a cold storage using solid Nitrogen
page 14 of 66
==PAGE:15==
Figure 6: Sketch of the ﬁnal design of a cold storage employing solid Nitrogen (SN2). The SN2
is stored in a chamber with thermal conductivity enhancing ﬁn structures (1) where the SN2 is
solidifying. The chamber can be disconnected from the cold mass or coil (4) and the cooling system
(5) by a heat switch (2) and (3). In the case of overpressure, a valve can connect the SN2 chamber
to an N2 storage (6).
In the ﬁnal design, it was proposed to have a structure like a hollow ring that goes past all supercon-
ducting coils of a generator. The cross section of that structure and the connections to the generator
system will now be explained.
Figure 6 shows a sketch of the cross section of the ﬁnal design of the SN2 storage.
The de-
scription of each part makes use of the number labels in ﬁgure 6. Label 1 shows the main element
of the cold storage, which is the chamber where the SN2 is solidiﬁed. It consists of a chamber wall
and a ﬁn structure, both of which are made out of a material with a high thermal conductivity, e.g.
copper or aluminium. The ﬁn structure has the purpose of enhancing the heat propagation into the
SN2, such that all the available material is accessible and fully utilized. The indicative dimensions
of the chamber can be calculated by using the results of the back of the envelope-calculations from
the previous subsection and the dimensions of the EcoSwing generator. The latter has a outer stator
diameter of 4 m and length 1.142 m[4] and a guess for the rotor diameter is then DSC rotor = 3.5 m.
Then, for being able to store VSN2, target = 135 l of SN2, a ring structure with a square cross section
would need to have a quadratic side length of around wchamber =
p
VSN2, target/(2πDSC rotor/2) =11
cm.
An idea to even further increase the thermal conductivity inside the chamber is to ﬁll the chamber
with Helium gas. As SN2 is expected to form in a structure similar to snow, the Helium would then
go in between the frost ﬂakes and increase the thermal conductivity.
The requirement of of being able to thermally disconnect the cold storage from the cold mass led
to the idea of employing a Helium heat switch. This element goes in between the SN2 chamber
(1) and the coil (4). The working principle is that there are two high surface areas that are at a
small distance from each other. The space in between the two areas can be ﬁlled with Helium and
hence close the switch, or it can be evacuated, giving an open switch. The pressure inside the space
can be regulated with a Helium getter, which is activated carbon. This activated carbon eﬃciently
adsorbs Helium on its surface below a certain temperature Tad, while releasing it if warmer than
Tad. The temperature can be regulated with a small Joule heater, where current is passed through
a wire. Activated carbon has a low heat capacity and will therefore heat up quickly. The Helium
Section 3:
3.3
Design example of a cold storage using solid Nitrogen
page 15 of 66
==PAGE:16==
getter is depicted at label (2). The high surface area was achieved by using copper ﬁns (3). Some
examples of heat switch and getter designs can be found in [7], [21]. The heat switch between SN2
and coil will be turned on when the cooling system (5) is switched oﬀ, hence thermally connecting
the two elements and increasing the overall heat capacity of the cold mass. The SN2 chamber is
also connected to the cooling system with a cold bus, which can be connected and disconnected by a
heat switch. That way a connection can be established during high power-availability. Finally, there
is a connection to a storage chamber (6) which can be opened with a valve in case of over-pressure
in the SN2 chamber.
4
Experiments
In order to be able to outline the required capacity and predict the eﬀectiveness of a cold storage,
one needs to investigate the warm-up behavior of a representative superconducting device. The
object at hand and hence also the central object of the experiments is the HTSGEN coil.
The HTSGEN coil is a high temperature superconducting (HTS) coil element, built as a precursor
of the EcoSwing project, which aimed for building the world’s ﬁrst MW class direct drive HTS wind
turbine generator [34]. As of summer 2021, the HTSGEN coil is located in a laboratory at Risø
Campus of Denmark’s Technical University (DTU), with the current set-up depicted in ﬁgure 7(a).
The HTSGEN consists of a cooling system comprising two of the single stage coldheads CH-110LT
from Sumitomo [29] and copper heat conductors, a heat shield, the superconducting coil, current
leads feeding the coil as well as a cryostat, connected to a vacuum pump. The coil itself is built from
a double racetrack coils with 152 turns in each layer, made out of an YBCO-based superconductor
tape, made by American Superconductor (AMSC) [2]. Stainless steel pressure plates and side sup-
ports stabilize the coil against the high Lorentz forces acting on the tapes and an iron core made of
9% Nickel steel (FeNi9), which is a ferromagnetic material, concentrating the magnetic ﬂux density
in the pole center of the coil. A sketch of the coil can be seen in ﬁgure 7(b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 7: (a) Photo of the HTSGEN coil, taken in the laboratory at DTU Risø Campus.
(b)
Sketch of the coil element of the HTSGEN coil with description of the positions of the diﬀerent coil
temperature sensors (T1 - T7) and hall probes (HP1 - HP3). Reproduced from [31].
Section 4:
Experiments
page 16 of 66
==PAGE:17==
(a)
(b)
Figure 8: (a) Photo of the F-70 compressors in the laboratory at DTU Risø Campus. (b) Cooling
capacity map of the cold heads that provide the cooling to the HTSGEN coil [6]
.
Each cold head is driven by a F-70 Helium compressor, as shown in ﬁgure 8(a). The compressors
run at an almost constant power input of 6.9 kW. The cooling capacity of the cold heads is shown
in ﬁgure 8(b) and it clearly shows how the cooling capacity drops dramatically when going towards
lower temperatures.
4.1
Experimental set-up
The cryostat of the HTSGEN coil is evacuated by a two-staged vacuum pump. A membrane vac-
uum pump gets the pressure inside the cryostat down from ambient pressure to around 10−2 mbar,
consequently a turbo pump switches on and brings the vacuum down to a pressure of 10−7 mbar.
Only once the ultra-high vacuum is established, can the cold heads be switched on.
A set of CERNOX temperature sensors manufactured by Lake Shore Cryotronics [5] provide
insight into the temperature evolution of the diﬀerent elements of the HTSGEN coil. While ﬁgure
7(b) shows the positions of the temperature sensors on the coil, ﬁgure 9 shows the cooling system
with the positions of the remaining temperature sensors.
The temperature value of the temperature sensors are found from a calibration table relating the
resistance of the CERNOX sensor with the temperature. The thermometer resistance is measured
with a 4-point probe, where the current is provided by a Yokogawa 7651 power supply and the
voltage is then measured by a multi channel Prema 5017 voltmeter. The voltage values are read
in in a LabVIEW program and periodically written into a csv-ﬁle. The program also controls the
PREMA 5017 voltmeter as well as the HP 6681A power supply, which is connected to the current
leads of the HTSGEN coil and provides the current. The voltage drop over each racetrack coil of the
HTSGEN is measured with three voltage taps, where two taps are at either end of the coils while
the third is attached to the connection in between the two racetrack coils. This is described in ﬁgure
10. The voltage taps are also connected to the PREMA 5017 voltmeter.
Section 4:
4.1
Experimental set-up
page 17 of 66
==PAGE:18==
Figure 9: Photo of the cooling system of the HTSGEN-coil with the positions of the temperature
sensors. Photo from private communication with Xiaowei Song.
Figure 10: Electrical diagram of the HTSGEN coil. The two inductor symbols correspond to the
two layers of racetrack coils of the HTSGEN coil. V1-V6 are the voltage taps. Reproduced from
[31].
Section 4:
4.1
Experimental set-up
page 18 of 66
==PAGE:19==
4.2
HTSGEN: Initial cool-down
Figure 11: Initial cool-down of the HTSGEN coil. Depicted are the temperature curves of the mid-
temperature (MT) cold head, the low temperature (LT) cold head and two temperature sensors on
the coil as well as the coil resistance. The cool-down of the coil to base temperature took about
40 h. After 30 h of cool-down the coil starts turning superconductive and soon after the whole coil
transitioned to the superconductive state, bringing the resistance to 0 Ω.
In preparation of the initial cool-down of the HTSGEN coil from room temperature to base temper-
ature, the LabVIEW program was started and all necessary currents were set. The coil current was
set to 0.1 A. In this way it was possible to monitor the resistance of the coil. After some minutes,
the csv-ﬁle has been checked and as it was looking alright, the F-70 compressors were switched on
and the cool down then started. The resulting temperature curve can be seen in ﬁgure 11. It took
about 40 hours to get from room temperature to base temperature, which is 24 K for the coil, 18 K
for the low temperature (LT) cold head and about 28 K for the mid temperature (MT) cold head.
From ﬁgure 11 it becomes evident that there is a slight temperature gradient along the coil, which
an be understood by looking up the positions of sensors T2 and T5 in ﬁgure 7(b).
4.3
HTSGEN: Warm-up experiments
Once the base temperature of the cryostat was obtained then a warm-up experiment was conducted
in order to establish how fast the cryostat is warming up if the cooling is stopped. For a warm-up
experiment, as a ﬁrst step one needed to check whether the system was at base temperature. If that
was the case, the data acquisition of the LabVIEW-program was started. After some minutes, the
csv-ﬁle was checked to conﬁrm whether the writing of the ﬁle was working correctly. If the ﬁle looked
ﬁne, the next step was to switch oﬀthe F-70 helium compressors and hence to stop the cooling of
the cold heads. As a consequence, the temperature of the MT cold head, the LT cold head and the
coil rise. After the desired warm-up period, the F-70 compressors are switched back on, and the
HTSGEN coil is cooled back down to base temperature.
The warm-up periods that have been executed during the ﬁrst experimental sessions were 30 minutes,
1 h, 6 h, 9h and two 12 h. Figure 12 shows an example of a warm-up curve, in this case it is the 6 h
warm-up. It can be seen that the MT cold head rises most rapidly, going above 140 K within the 6
Section 4:
4.2
HTSGEN: Initial cool-down
page 19 of 66
==PAGE:20==
Figure 12: Temperature curves of the mid temperature (MT) cold head, the low temperature (LT)
cold head and the two coil temperature sensors. The warm-up period was 6 h.
h. The LT cold head and the coil rise more slowly, the latter one going slightly above 60 K. When
the compressors are switched back on again, the temperatures of the cold heads drop rapidly, while
the coil follows with some delay, transitioning to a fairly steady cool-down to base temperature.
If one overlays the temperature curves of sensor T2 on the coil of all warm-up experiments, one
obtains ﬁgure 13, which shows how for every experiment, the temperature follows the exact same
curve during the warm-up. Also, the 12 h warm-up experiment has been conducted twice and the
resulting curves are almost indistinguishable, showing that the experiment is well-reproducible.
An interesting result appears when analyzing the cool-down to base temperature of the temperature
curves. Here one aims at answering the question of how long it takes to come back to base tem-
perature when having a certain temperature diﬀerence. For each warm-up curve, two points are of
interest:
• The maximum of the temperature curve and the time stamp at which it occurred, giving point
(T1, t1).
• The point were the temperature curve is again at base temperature range, here deﬁned as
TB = 23.85 + 1.5K, and the time stamp at which the crossing occurs. This gives the point
(T2, t2).
If one then takes the diﬀerence between the two temperature values and the two time stamps, then
the distance to base temperature ∆T and the cool-down time ∆t are obtained. This is illustrated in
ﬁgure 14(a). Plotting ∆t against ∆T for each warm-up curve, ﬁgure 14(b) is obtained and one can
see that the points lay approximately on a line, suggesting a linear relation between ∆T and ∆t.
Section 4:
4.3
HTSGEN: Warm-up experiments
page 20 of 66
==PAGE:21==
Figure 13: Warm-up curves from coil temperature sensor T2 plotted on top of each other. Evidently,
the parts of the curves where the coil warms up overlay almost perfectly. The 12h experiment has
been done twice and indeed the two curves are almost indistinguishable.
(a)
(b)
Figure 14: (a) Illustration of how one obtains the quantities distance to base temperature (∆T) and
cool-down time (∆t). The heat-up range ∆T to base temperature was taken to be the diﬀerence
between the maximum of the warm-up curve and the upper limit of the base temperature range
TB = 23.85 + 1.5 K. (b) Plot of ∆t versus ∆T. The points lay approximately on a line, suggesting
a linear relation between the two quantities.
This section ends with the description of the last set of experiments, which are the warm-ups with
only one cold head switched oﬀ. The same preparations were taken as for the previous warm-up
experiments. In one experiment, only the F-70 compressor of the MT cold head has been switched
oﬀwhile the other one was left on, similarly in the second experiment only the compressor of the
Section 4:
4.3
HTSGEN: Warm-up experiments
page 21 of 66
==PAGE:22==
(a)
(b)
Figure 15: a) Comparison of the warm-up curves when both cold heads are switched oﬀ(in blue) and
when only one cold head is switched oﬀ. There is a huge diﬀerence when switching one or the other
cold head oﬀ. When the mid temperature (MT) cold head is switched oﬀ, the low temperature (LT)
cold head is still able to keep the coil at a low temperature. b) Warm-up of with the LT cold head
oﬀ: Plotting the resistance on a second y-axis, it is possible to see the transition of the coil from
superconducting to resistive. The transition temperature of the tape is 93 K but the temperature
sensors T2 and T5 on the coil show a lower temperature. Hence some parts of the coil must be at a
warmer temperature.
LT cold head has been switched oﬀ. The warm-up times were 24 h for the warm-up with no LT
cold head and 25 h for the warm-up with no MT cold head. The resulting temperature curves of
the temperature sensor on the coil (T2) are shown in ﬁgure 15(a). The warm-up curve of the 12 h
warm-up with both cold heads oﬀhas been added as a reference. The temperature curves of the two
experiments are dramatically diﬀerent and illustrates the purpose of the cold heads: When the LT
cold head is switched oﬀ, the coil warms up almost as fast as if both cold heads were oﬀ, reaching
100 K after 24 h. Instead, when the LT cold head keeps running and the MT cold head is oﬀ, the
coil warms up very slowly and indeed just barely goes over 30 K after a warm-up of 25 h. It is then
clear that the main purpose of the MT cold head is to take the heat load from the current leads
produced by the Joule heating from the current feeding the coil, while the purpose of the LT cold
head is to keep the coil at a low temperature.
An interesting detail was revealed when looking at the voltage measurements of the superconduct-
ing coil as a current of Icoil = 0.2 A was passed through it. During the the warm-up experiment
with no LT cold head, the coil heated up to about 100 K and so the coil transitioned from the
superconducting state to the resistive state, which can be nicely seen in ﬁgure 15(b). As the coil
heated up further above the critical temperature of the YBCO-tape, it is also possible to see the
linear increase of the resistance up until the point where the LT cold head was switched back on
and the temperature started decreasing again. The dashed line in ﬁgure 15(b) shows the expected
transition temperature of 93 K and by a closer examination, one can see that the coil exited the
superconducting state 6 K before the intersection between that line and the temperature curves.
This indicates that some part of the coil must be at a higher temperature than the one measured
at sensor T2. Looking at ﬁgure 7(b), showing the temperature sensors on the coil, this seems like a
reasonable assumption. During the warm-up, there is a temperature gradient across the coil and as
Section 4:
4.3
HTSGEN: Warm-up experiments
page 22 of 66
==PAGE:23==
T2 is not located in the immediate vicinity of the cooling system, which is where most of the heat
comes in. The part of the coil between cooling system and T2 will therefore be warmer. This has
to be taken account of if one plans on doing experiments close to the transition temperature.
4.4
Notes on the temperature uncertainties
The uncertainties of the temperature readings turned out to be very low. For the CERNOX tem-
perature sensors, the accuracy was indicated as ±9mK at 20 K and the relative error of the sensor
exposed to a magnetic ﬁeld of 2.5 T is 0.04% at 20 K, which at that temperature would be 8 mK [5].
The evaluation of the uncertainty due to the Prema voltage measurements and the current supplied
by the Yokogawa 7651 were done by taking the calibration table of temperature sensor T2 and a
resistance value of R0 = Vmeasured/Itermo = 561.91 Ω, corresponding to a temperature of 25 K and
where Vmeasured is the voltage measured by the Prema voltmeter and Itermo is the current going
through the temperature sensors, supplied by the Yokogawa 7651 power supply. The accuracy of
the voltage measurements by the PREMA 5017 voltmeter was given as 0.003% reading and 0.0002%
full scale at the 300 mV range. The voltage measurement uncertainties give a temperature error of
1.6 mK. For the Yokogawa 7651 instead the accuracy for the 1 mA range was indicated as 0.02%
reading and ±0.1 µA, giving rise to an uncertainty of 39.8 mK [40]. As none of the uncertainties go
beyond the order of magnitude of tens of mK, one can conclude that the temperature values were
measured with a satisfactory accuracy.
Section 4:
4.4
Notes on the temperature uncertainties
page 23 of 66
==PAGE:24==
Figure 16: Flow chart of the modelling work: The results from the load line evaluation and from
the thermal model of the HTSGEN will be used together with wind data from the Høvsøre wind
turbine test site to simulate the dynamic operating mode of a wind turbine generator. The results
will give a clue on the eﬀect of a cold storage on the energy production and cooling power needs of
a dynamically operated wind turbine generator.
5
Modelling
The modelling work has the overall scope of predicting the eﬀect of a cold storage on the energy
production and the cooling power needs of a wind turbine generator. The ﬁrst step is creating a ﬁnite
element model of the HTSGEN coil for the evaluation of its load line. Then a thermal model of the
HTSGEN coil will be made, where the results from the warm-up experiments and the knowledge of
the heat capacity of Nitrogen will be used to predict the warm-up curves of the HTSGEN coil with
a solid nitrogen/liquid nitrogen cold storage. These results will then be combined with the load line
and wind data from the Høvsøre wind turbine test site to do a simulation of the dynamic operating
mode of a wind turbine generator with and without a cold storage, allowing then to calculate the
total energy production and the cooling needs. A sum up of all steps is shown in the ﬂow chart in
ﬁgure 16.
5.1
Load line evaluation
A major task of this project is to determine the load line of the HTSGEN coil if this is tested
without the armature structure as shown in the original design in ﬁgure 17(a). With the load line,
one describes the magnetic ﬂux density that the superconductor in the coil is exposed to due to its
own current. As described in section 2.1, a superconductor can just handle a certain magnetic ﬂux
density Bc(J), dependent on the current density in the superconductor, before it is pushed out of
the superconducting state. Hence the importance of the load line: The point where it crosses the
the critical current curve of the superconductor describes the current for which the coil will turn
resistive.
The load line for the complete setup, including both the HTSGEN coil as well as the stator, was
calculated in a 3D FE-model by [31]. In the sketch of the full setup in ﬁgure 17(a), one can see the
back iron in blue, the rounded stator at the bottom and the HTSGEN coil element between back
iron and stator. The missing stator in the DTU Risø Campus test setup is signiﬁcantly changing the
magnetic environment of the coil and it cannot be assumed that the critical current of the coil and
the safe operating current stay the same. During the modelling work, three diﬀerent setups have
been modelled:
• The HTSGEN coil element
• The HTSGEN coil element with back iron
• The HTSGEN coil element with back iron and stator
Section 5:
Modelling
page 24 of 66
==PAGE:25==
(a)
(b)
Figure 17: (a) Description of the total experimental setup that tries to reproduce the environment
of the coil element in the generator. There are three elements: The superconducting coil element in
the middle, the back iron (in blue shades), which together with the coil element forms the magnetic
pole pair, and the stator.
Reproduced from [34].
(b) Cross section of the coil element of the
HTSGEN coil. One can see the two layers of the YBCO tapes marked in pink, each layer consisting
of 152 turns. The mechanical stability is provided by the steel pressure plates and side support.
The copper plates are connected to the cooling system and provide a cooling path that has a high
thermal conductivity. The iron core has the purpose of concentrating the magnetic ﬂux density in
the generator pole. Reproduced from [31].
For the modelling, the ﬁnite element software COMSOL Multiphysics has been used, which allows
to do multiphysics simulations and the solving of diﬀerential equations. In particular, the AC/DC
module has been used, which is a package for simulating electromagnetic systems.
Instead of doing a full 3D-model, it has been decided to only model the cross-section of the HTSGEN
coil to simplify the analysis. To verify the validity of this approximation, the load line results of the
setup with HTSGEN coil element, back iron and stator will be compared with the results obtained
by [31].
5.1.1
Building the geometry and setting up the AC/DC module
As a ﬁrst step, one needs to build the geometry of the model in COMSOL. The diﬃculty here is that
the dimensions of all parts were either incomplete as provided in papers or unknown. The dimen-
sions of the cross section of the coil element could be determined almost completely thanks to the
descriptions in [31]. A detailed sketch can also be seen in ﬁgure 17(b). Same holds for the distance
between the coil and the stator, described as the air gap, which is also known. All the dimensions
of the back iron and the stator as well as the distance between back iron and coil element were
unknown and had to be guessed from the drawings. The ﬁnal geometry is depicted in 18 and all
the dimensions are summed up in table 2. Comparing ﬁgure 18 with the cross section in 17(b), one
can notice that the pressure plates, the copper plates and the side supports in the COMSOL model
are summed up to one domain. This is because these parts all share the same material properties
signiﬁcant to the model and hence summing them up into one domain gives a great simpliﬁcation
of the geometry without any trade oﬀ.
Once the geometry is completed, one needs to assign the materials to each part of the geometry.
The only important material property in this model is the magnetic properties and one therefore
distinguishes only between magnetic and non-magnetic materials. Looking at ﬁgure 18, the domains
which were assigned to be non-magnetic are the orange and red colored parts of the coil element, the
Section 5:
5.1
Load line evaluation
page 25 of 66
==PAGE:26==
Figure 18: Geometry of the HTSGEN model implemented in the ﬁnite element analysis software
COMSOL. While most of the dimensions of the coil element and the air gap (17) could be found in
[31], the dimensions of the back iron and the stator were unknown and had to be guessed from the
drawings of ﬁgure 17(a). One important simpliﬁcation is that the curvature of the back iron and
the stator has been neglected.
1
150 mm
8
47.1 mm
15
80.212 mm
2
107 mm
9
468 mm
16
196.46 mm
3
46.5 mm
10
47.1 mm
17
40 mm
4
28.5 mm
11
117.75 mm
18
563.5 mm
5
96.5 mm
12
15.13 mm
19
106.95 mm
6
24.5 mm
13
12.25 mm
7
47.1 mm
14
12.25 mm
Table 2: Dimensions of the geometry built in COMSOL. The numbering follows the one in ﬁgure
18.
Section 5:
5.1
Load line evaluation
page 26 of 66
==PAGE:27==
Figure 19: Magnetization curve of FeNi9 at a temperature of 30 K. The iron core is made out of this
material. In the COMSOL model, this non-linear magnetic behaviour was used for the iron core,
the back iron and for the iron parts of the stator, which is colored in grey in ﬁgure 18. Reproduced
from [33].
orange colored parts of the stator and the background. The non-magnetic materials have a linear
relationship between the H and B-ﬁeld, following the following relation:
¯B = µ0µr ¯H
(13)
where ¯B is the magnetic ﬂux density in [T], µ0 is the vacuum permeability, µr is the relative
permeability and ¯H is the magnetic ﬁeld strength in [A/m]. All the materials that are non-magnetic
turned out to have a relative permeability µr = 1. The magnetic materials include the iron core
(turquoise colored area of the foil element in ﬁgure 18), the whole back iron and grey part of the
stator in ﬁgure 18. The magnetic materials follow a non-linear H/B relation. The H/B curve that
has been used for all the magnetic materials is the one of FeNi9 (9% Nickel steel) at a temperature
of 30 K, which is depicted in ﬁgure 19 and taken from [33]. The only part of the setup that is
actually made out of FeNi9 is the iron core, while the back iron and the magnetic part of the stator
are made out of magnetic iron. At the beginning the assignment of the same H/B curve was to keep
the model simple, but as the simulations were repeated at a later point with the H/B curve of soft
iron and no signiﬁcant changes emerged, the initial assignment was kept.
With the material properties assigned, one continues by implementing the physics. The domain of
the superconductor, which are the orange colored areas in the coil element in ﬁgure 18, will be car-
rying the current and the approximation of a uniform current density is made. As described in [31],
the superconducting coil consists of two layers of wound YBCO-tape with a cross section of 12 mm
x 0.2 mm. The number of turns per layer is 152. Having a tape current of Itape, the overall current
in each superconducting domain is Itot = 152 · 2 · Itape, giving a current density of J = Itot/ASC,
where ASC is the area of one superconductor domain. This is information is fed into the COMSOL
model as an external current in the superconductor domains, going into the plane on one side and
out of the plane on the other side. Next, Ampere’s law is applied to all domains of the model, with
the magnetic ﬂux density given by the relation ¯B = µ0µr ¯H for the non-magnetic materials and by
the H/B curve in ﬁgure 19 for the magnetic materials.
As a last step, the mesh needs to be built. The maximum mesh size has been taken as a fourth
of the height of the superconductor domain, denoted with arrow number 6 in ﬁgure 18, giving a
maximum mesh size of 6.125 mm. The minimum mesh size is a fourth of the maximum mesh size.
Section 5:
5.1
Load line evaluation
page 27 of 66
==PAGE:28==
On a later point, a mesh convergence test will be executed to check whether all calculated physical
properties converge when going to very ﬁne mesh sizes.
5.1.2
Results of the COMSOL simulation
The simulation solves for the magnetic ﬂux density and the resulting ﬁeld distribution for the diﬀer-
ent setups are shown in ﬁgure 20. The non-linear magnetic materials are having very high absolute
magnetic ﬂux densities, with the edges giving rise to local maxima. Looking at the magnetic ﬁeld
direction in plots 20(b) and 20(c), one can see how the back iron and the stator suck in the magnetic
ﬁeld from the non-magnetic surroundings and guide it along their geometries. The presence of the
stator in ﬁgure 20(c) creates an area of high magnetic ﬂux density in the air gap between coil element
and stator. As the air gap ﬂux density has been measured in [34] to be 1.7 T for a tape current of
480 A and an air gap of 40 mm, which is the same air gap as used in the model, this quantity can be
used to verify the correctness of the model. Figure 21 shows the magnetic ﬂux density norm along
the ortho-line, which runs orthogonal to the wide side of the coil, along the symmetry axis from the
stator on to the coil element and also through the back iron. The arc length of 0 corresponds to
the top of the line. One can easily identify where the line leaves the stator, goes through the air
gap enters and leaves the iron core and ﬁnally goes through the back iron. For a tape current of
480 A, the model gives a magnetic ﬂux density of approximately 1.6 T, which is less than 7% oﬀ
the experimental value. The diﬀerence might be due to the fact that the correct dimensions of the
stator and the back iron are not known, hence at a later point a sensitivity analysis will be done to
see how the air gap ﬂux density changes when changing the size of the back iron and the stator.
The load line has been evaluated for the setup without stator/ with back iron and with both stator
and back iron. When calculating the load line, one measures the maximum magnetic ﬂux density
in the superconductor domain for a certain tape current Itape. The plot is then obtained by doing
a parameter sweep of the tape current Itape, going from 0 to 700 A. The critical current for the
HTSGEN coil is reached when the load line crosses the critical current lines which have been found
in [31]. When this happens, the superconducting tape carrying the supercurrent Itape feels such a
high magnetic ﬁeld that it is pushed out of the superconducting state. The maximum of the magnetic
ﬁeld density can simply be chosen to be the maximum of the norm of the magnetic ﬁeld density in
the superconductor domain, but since the critical current is angle-dependent and lowest when the
ﬁeld is perpendicular to the tape, the norm of the x-component of the magnetic ﬂux density will
have the biggest inﬂuence on breaking down the superconducting state. In ﬁgure 5.1(a), the two
load lines are plotted, where one load line is calculated by taking the maximum of the norm of the
magnetic ﬂux density, while the other load line is calculated by taking the maximum of the absolute
value of the x-component of the magnetic ﬂux density. Assuming the coil temperature to be at 40
K, the critical currents are 450 A and 470 A, respectively. Deﬁning the safe operating current as
being the point on the load line being 25% below the critical current curve at the respective ﬁeld
value, the safe operating currents have been found to be 374 A and 391 A. Evidently, by taking
the maximum of the norm of the magnetic ﬂux density, one underestimates the critical current and
lower safe operating currents are found. The quantities have been calculated also for the setup with
the stator. Here the critical current values and the safe operating current values are higher, being
458 A and 497 A, and 380 and 415 A, respectively. In [31], the load line for the complete setup at
40 K has been calculated to cross the critical current curve at 500 A. With he value obtained by the
COMSOL simulation using the maximum of the x-component comes with 497 A very close and this
is a further proof that the 2D COMSOL model is a good approximation to the 3D model.
Section 5:
5.1
Load line evaluation
page 28 of 66
==PAGE:29==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 20: Results of the evaluation of the magnetic ﬂux density of three diﬀerent setups: (a) Coil
element alone, (b) coil element and back iron and (c) complete setup.
Section 5:
5.1
Load line evaluation
page 29 of 66
==PAGE:30==
Figure 21: Norm of the magnetic ﬂux density along the ortho line (depicted as the red line in the
image in the right upper corner) for four diﬀerent tape current values. As there are 152 turns of
the tape in the coil and two layers, the total current is then the tape current times 2x152. One can
easily identify the sections of the ortho-line that goes through the iron core, the air gap and the
stator. The air gap ﬂux density for Itape = 480A comes close to the 1.7 T as described in [34].
(a)
(b)
Figure 22: load line evaluation of the HTSGEN coil and cryostat without stator but with back iron
(a) and the complete setup with stator and back iron (b). The load line has been calculated as
the maximum of the magnetic ﬂux density norm in the domain of the YBCO tape (light orange
area of the coil element in ﬁgure 18) plotted against the tape current. This has been done both
for the maximum of the total ﬁeld as well as the maximum of the x-component, as the latter has
a signiﬁcantly higher inﬂuence on degrading the critical current, which shows a minimum for ﬁelds
perpendicular to the tape surface. Evidently, the presence of the stator allows higher operating
currents, taken as being 25% below the critical current. The obtained critical current of 497 A
when taking the x-component with the full setup is within a 1% deviation from the values from the
3D-model of [31], where they have obtained a value of 500 A.
Section 5:
5.1
Load line evaluation
page 30 of 66
==PAGE:31==
Figure 23: Results of the sensitivity analysis for the magnetic ﬂux density norm along the ortho-line:
The variation of the width of the stator and all dimensions of the back iron by up to 40% and 10%,
respectively, induces noticeable changes of the magnetic ﬂux density norm. Focusing on the air gap,
a bigger back iron and a bigger stator get the air gap ﬂux density up to the value of 1.7 T, obtained
experimentally by [34]. One can therefore conclude that the COMSOL model could improve if the
exact dimensions of the back iron and the stator were known.
Section 5:
5.1
Load line evaluation
page 31 of 66
==PAGE:32==
Figure 24: Sensitivity analysis of the safe operating current IOP and related to that the magnetic
ﬂux density BOP : When varying the width of the stator and all dimensions of the back iron by up
to 40% and 10%, respectively, the induced changes on the operating current are below 1%. Hence,
the stator and back iron dimensions do not have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the safe operating current.
The x-shaped markers in the sub-image are the operating points obtained by the diﬀerent size and
width variations.
5.1.3
Sensitivity analysis and mesh convergence test
The sensitivity analysis investigates the dependence of the calculated physical quantities on un-
knowns such as the size of the back iron and the stator. For this, both the ﬁeld distribution of the
ortho-line and the load line (taking the maximum of the x-component) have been re-calculated for
diﬀerent sizes of the back iron and the stator. While all dimensions of the back-iron has been either
shrunk by 10% or blown up by 10%, the stator width has been changed to 1.2 times its original
value and 1.4 times its original value. The air gap distance has been kept constant, just as the
dimensions of the coil element and the height of the stator. The result of the sensitivity analysis for
the ortho-line is shown in ﬁgure 23. The magnetic ﬁeld distribution changes by a fair amount and
when increasing both the size of the back iron and the width of the stator, one reaches indeed the
desired 1.7 T for the air gap ﬂux density. Hence it is possible that knowing the exact dimensions of
the stator and the back iron the model could indeed correctly reproduce the experimental results of
[34].
Also the sensitivity of the safe operating point on the width of the stator and the size back iron has
been calculated. The result is shown in ﬁgure 24. In contrast to the magnetic ﬂux density along the
ortho-line, the safe operating current is very insensitive to changes of the back iron and stator size.
The zoom-in into the operating point shows that the variation of it is smaller than 1% and hence
negligible for moderate size changes.
The mesh convergence test conﬁrmed the convergence of the magnetic ﬂux density if all corners
of the magnetic materials are rounded. In the model, a ﬁllet-function was used with a radius of
1.6333 mm. If there are non-rounded corners, a singularity is created and the magnetic ﬂux density
does not converge in that point.
Section 5:
5.1
Load line evaluation
page 32 of 66
==PAGE:33==
Figure 25: Equation describing the temperature evolution of a thermal mass.
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
The scope of the modelling work is to reproduce the thermal behavior of the HTSGEN coils and
cryostat as obtained from the cool-down and warm-up experiment as reported in chaper 4. This
will be done by implementing a numerical solver of the diﬀerential equations describing the thermal
response in the software MATLAB. Once the MATLAB model results ﬁt the experimental results to
a satisfying degree, it will then be possible to estimate the eﬀect of adding a thermal storage based
on solid nitrogen to the system.
The main diﬃculty of creating the model are the unknowns of exact material properties as well as
the exact geometry, especially of the cooling system. This is because there were no data sheets or
plans at hand and opening the cryostat was not an option. Even if the cooling system geometry was
perfectly known, it would be a formidable task to model it properly and eﬃciently.
As it is practically not possible to ﬁnd out the exact parameters, it was attempted to ﬁt the pa-
rameters to the experimental results, followed by an assessment whether the results seem physically
reasonable or not.
5.2.1
Coil- and model description
The thermal model should mimic the cooling system in a realistic way while keeping the model simple.
The basic idea is to set up a numerical solver that iteratively solves a set of diﬀerential equations,
describing the thermal evolution of the system in time. The diﬀerent elements of the cooling system
and coil are summed up as thermal masses and one then takes account of the diﬀerent sources of heat
ﬂux to evaluate the change in temperature in time of the thermal masses. The governing equation
for the change of temperature in time for a given net heat inﬂux is given by
dT
dt =
1
M · cv(T)
˙Qin,net
(14)
where M is the mass, cv(T) is the speciﬁc heat capacity and ˙Qin,net is the net heat ﬂowing in, which
is positive if more heat enters than exits and negative in the other case. Equation 14 is visualized
in ﬁgure 25.
A helpful sketch of the cooling system was provided by [34] and is reproduced in ﬁgure 26. As a
start, it seems reasonable to make a model with three thermal masses: One mass connected to the
mid-temperature (MT) cold head, one to the low-temperature (LT) cold head, and one representing
the coil. The thermal mass connected to the MT cold head takes account of the thermal masses of
the heat shield, the MT cold head and the current leads, while the thermal mass connected to the
LT cold head takes account again of the current leads and the cold head, but also for the copper
used as the cold bus. The third thermal mass then describes the coil and the diﬀerent materials it
is composed of.
As can be seen in equation 14, the change in temperature of a thermal mass is proportional to the
net heat ﬂux into the system, with the proportionality factor given by the inverse of the speciﬁc heat
capacity times the mass. It is therefore necessary to assign to each thermal mass its mass as well
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 33 of 66
==PAGE:34==
Figure 26: sketch of the cooling system of the HTSGEN coil. The mid-temperature (MT) cold head
cools down the current leads and the heat shield, while the low-temperature (LT) cold head cools
down the coil via a cold-bus and cools down the current leads even further. Image reproduced from
[34]
as the heat capacity as function of temperature. While most values for the heat capacities could
be found online in the NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology) Cryogenic Materials
Property Database [9], the masses of the thermal mass blocks connected to MT- and LT cold head
are unknown and have to be guessed from the experimental data. The mass of the coil could be
determined with fairly high accuracy thanks to detailed descriptions in [34]. Some approximations
have been done for the superconducting tape, which has been modelled as having only the heat
capacity of its substrate NiCrW [20], which makes up most of the mass of the tape, and the density
of Nickel which makes up by far the largest portion of NiCrW.
5.2.2
Mass and heat capacity of the coil
For the coil, as it is added to the model as one mass, one deﬁnes the composite heat capacity. This is
the sum of the masses of each component of the coil multiplied by the relative speciﬁc heat capacity.
The sum is denoted as Cv,coil:
Cv,coil =
X
n
Mn · cv,n(T)
(15)
where n runs over the diﬀerent components that the coil is composed of, Mn is the mass of the n-th
component and cv,n(T) is the temperature dependent speciﬁc heat capacity of the n-th component.
The unit of Cv,coil is [J/K]. The masses and densities of the materials of the coil are listed in table
3: The heat capacities of the diﬀerent materials of the coil are plotted versus temperature in ﬁgure
27.
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 34 of 66
==PAGE:35==
Figure 27: Plot of the speciﬁc heat capacities against temperature of stainless steel 304, Copper with
RRR=100, NiCrW and FeNi9. Here RRR stands for ’residual resistance ratio’ and it describes the
ratio between the room temperature resistance and residual resistance at 0 K. Large RRR values
are usually indicators for a small amount of defects and high purity of the conductor. The speciﬁc
heat capacities follow the general trend of low values at low temperatures, as phonons are gradually
frozen out. The speciﬁc heat capacity of FeNi9 needed to be manually extended in the range 60-20
K, as no data could be found in that temperature range. [9]
Coil parts: Volumes and masses
Material
Volume [m3]
Density [kg/m3]
Mass [kg]
Stainless
steel
(pressure
plates, side support)
5.2·10−3
7700
40.01
FeNi9 (Iron core)
4.7·10−3
7860
37.17
NiCrW
(superconducting
tape)
1.9·10−3
8900
17.28
Cu (copper plates)
0.9·10−3
8940
8.00
Total
12.8·10−3
-
102.46
Table 3: Sum-up of the volumes, material densities and masses of the diﬀerent parts that make up
the coil element.
5.2.3
Heat sources and sinks
At the core of this modelling work is the estimation of the diﬀerent heat ﬂuxes. There are four
diﬀerent sources that inject or draw heat from the thermal masses: The cold heads, which act as
heat extractors when operating or heat conductors when switched oﬀ; heat injection by radiation;
heat injection by conduction through gas; and heat injection by conduction in solids. The latter has
a special importance as the whole cooling system is based on conductance. While the cooling power
of the cold heads could be found in the data sheet of the Sumitomo CH-110LT [6], the other heat
sources needed to be calculated and estimated. Here the approach of [38] has been used as a base
for these calculations. In the following subsections, each source and sink will be shortly described.
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 35 of 66
==PAGE:36==
Cooling by the cold heads:
The Sumitomo CH-110LT cold head has a temperature dependent
cooling power, as can be seen in ﬁgure 8(b). As the cooling power depends largely on the speciﬁc
heat capacity of the heat exchanger material inside the cold head, it decreases with decreasing
temperature in a similar trend as the speciﬁc heat capacity of other materials. As the heat injection
by other sources generally increases with decreasing temperature, the cooling power will be eventually
compensated at a certain temperature.
Radiation:
An object at a certain ﬁnite temperature emits energy by radiation according to its
temperature and absorbs energy from surrounding objects. For ideal black bodies the emitted power
per unit surface is given by the Stefan-Boltzmann law:
Prad = σT 4
(16)
where σ is Stefan’s constant and T is the temperature of the body. Materials used in cryogenics
usually behave diﬀerently compared to a black body and have a wavelength- dependent absorption-
and emission coeﬃcient. If one assumes to have two parallel surfaces with area A, temperatures T1
and T2 and emissivities ϵ1 and ϵ2, then the heat exchange is given by
˙Q = σA(T 4
1 −T 4
2 ) · ¯ϵ
(17)
where ¯ϵ is the reduced emissivity given by
¯ϵ =
ϵ1ϵ2
ϵ1 + ϵ2 −ϵ1ϵ2
(18)
Here ϵ1 is the emissivity of surface 1 and ϵ2 is the emissivity of surface 2. For modelling the HTS-
GEN coil inside the cryostat, the ϵ have been chosen to be the one of stainless steel at a temperature
of 300 K and 30 K, which is ϵ1 = 0.092 [39] and ϵ2 = 0.025 [25], respectively. This is justiﬁed by
the fact that most of the surfaces of the heat shield and the coil are made of stainless steel and at
a temperature between 20 and 30 K when at base temperature, while the cryostat is also made of
stainless steel and at room temperature.
Both the coil and the cooling system are wrapped in a multilayer insulation (MLI) blanket. This is
a eﬃcient way for reducing the radiation heat input. The MLI blanket is composed of thin sheets
usually made out of plastic and coated with metal. Each layer is thermally isolated from the other
layers and if put under a good vacuum, each layer reduces the heat input by reﬂecting back some
of the incoming radiation. The MLI blanket can decrease the heat input by radiation by up to two
orders of magnitude [3]. This can be described by a multiplicative factor χMLI, which has a value
between 0 and 1. If χMLI = 0, the shielding by the MLI would be perfect.
Conduction by gas:
If the pressure inside the cryostat is low enough to fulﬁll the Knudsen-
condition, meaning that the mean free path is comparable to the distance of the warm and cold
surface, then heat injection from convection by gas is eliminated and the heat exchange occurs only
through conduction by gas. In this situation, the heat exchange per unit area between two parallel
surfaces is given by
˙Q = const · a · p(T2 −T1)
(19)
where the value of const is 1.2 for air, a is the accommodation coeﬃcient, p is the pressure and T1
and T2 are the temperatures of the respective surfaces. The value of a ranges between 0.025 for clean
metallic surfaces and 1. However, values below 0.1 are achieved only for freshly degreased surfaces,
and it is more likely to expect a range between 0.4 and 1 for a.
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 36 of 66
==PAGE:37==
Figure 28: Overview of the heat ﬂow model. The arrows describe the heat ﬂow when the system
has reached base temperature (Tcoil = 24 K, Tbusblock = 18 K, THeatshield = 28 K).
Conduction by solids
As the cooling system of the HTSGEN coil works completely without any
cryogenic liquids, all the cooling is done by conduction through solids. Also, as will be seen later,
heat injections due to conduction through solids will be the most important heat source for the
thermal masses. Conduction by solids is therefore the most important way heat is exchanged in the
HTSGEN coil. When having a rod with uniform cross section A and length l where the temperature
is constant in the plane of the cross section but varies along x, with the x-axis being normal to the
cross section, the heat ﬂux through the cross section at point x is given by
˙Q(x) = λ(T(x))A∂T(x)
∂x
(20)
where λ(T(x)) is the temperature dependent thermal conductivity of the rod material and ∂T (x)
∂x
is
the temperature gradient at point x. Assuming now that the ends of the rod are at temperature T1
and T2, then the heat ﬂux through the rod is given by
˙Q = A
l
Z T2
T1
λ(T)dT
(21)
The thermal conductivity integral is of great importance and the values for the thermal conductivity
could be found again in the NIST Cryogenic Materials Property Database and a plot of the thermal
conductivities against temperature of the diﬀerent materials used can be seen in ﬁgure 29.
5.2.4
Heat ﬂow: Overview
Following the idea of the three masses- model described in section 5.2.1, it is now necessary to ﬁnd
the net heat ﬂow into each of the thermal masses, which means assigning the types of heat sources
mentioned in the previous section and then estimating the values of the unknown parameters. Figure
28 depicts the three diﬀerent masses, referring to the heat shield (1), the bus block (2) and the coil
(3). The convention used here is that incoming heat has a positive sign, while outgoing heat has a
negative sign.
From the very beginning, conduction by gas has been disregarded in the calculations.
All the
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 37 of 66
==PAGE:38==
thermal masses are inside a cryostat, which is at a pressure of p = 10−7 mbar. This has the eﬀect
that conduction by gas, being directly proportional to p, is virtually eliminated. For the coil ele-
ment at T = 24 K, the heat input from conduction would be around 1 mW, which is three orders
of magnitude below the heat input through the GFP rods, being around 8 W.
Looking at ﬁgure 28, one can now start assigning the heat sources/drains for each mass point.
The heat shield mass is connected to the environment via two current lead rods. Furthermore, it is
attached to the MT cold head, is connected to the bus block via another pair of current leads and
receives heat from radiation. The diﬀerent heat sources are therefore conduction by solids, radiation
and conduction or cooling from the cold head. Looking at the bus block, it is connected to the heat
shield via the current leads, has a connection to the coil with the copper cold bus and is attached
to the LT cold head. It is assumed that the bus block does not receive any heat by radiation due
to eﬀective shielding of the heat shield. Hence, only conduction by solids and cooling from the LT
cold head contribute to the heat ﬂow. Finally, the coil is connected to the bus block by the cold
bus, which for simplicity also includes the contributions of the current leads going into the coil. The
coil is suspended by six glass ﬁber polymer (GFP) -rods, through which conduction occurs. It also
receives heat by radiation.
The cold heads act as a heat sink or a heat source according to the operation mode. In the cooling
mode, they draw heat according to the capacity map in ﬁgure 8(b). If they are switched oﬀ, e.g.
when trying to reproduce a warm-up experiment, the cold heads act as heat conductors made out of
stainless steel with a certain length and cross section, thus injecting heat in the bus block and the
heat shield. There is also a substantial amount of high pressure Helium (22 bar) that would make
up part of the cross section, but the thermal conductivity of Helium turned out to be negligible
compared to the one of stainless steel.
It is now possible to set up the diﬀerential equations describing the temperature evolution of each
element of the system.
As described in ﬁgure 28, the heat shield has the subscript 1, the bus
block subscript 2 and the coil subscript 3, while the environment will be denoted with subscript 0.
Furthermore,
˙Qa,b = −˙Qb,a
(22)
where a and b can be any subscript as long as a ̸= b. The set of equations is then
Heat shield: dT1
dt =
1
M1 · cv,1(T1) · ( ˙QCL1,0(T0, T1) + ˙QCL1,2(T1, T2) + ˙Qrad,1(T0, T1) + ˙QCH,1(T1))
Bus block: dT2
dt =
1
M2 · cv,2(T2) · ( ˙QCL2,1(T1, T2) + ˙QCB2,3(T2, T3) + ˙QCH,2(T2))
Coil: dT3
dt =
1
Cv,3(T3) · ( ˙QCB3,2(T2, T3) + ˙QGF P,3(T0, T3) + ˙Qrad,3(T0, T3)
(23)
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 38 of 66
==PAGE:39==
Figure 29: Thermal conductivities of stainless steel 304, Fiberglass Epoxy G-10 CR (denoted as
GFP) and two types of copper with RRR-values 100 and 50, RRR being the residual resistance
ratio.
Evidently, the high purity copper RRR=100 has he highest thermal conductivity at low
temperatures. As it gave better results, λ Copper RRR=50 has been used for all copper connections
in the coil. [9]
where where Cv,3(T3) is given by equation 15 and
Conduction through current leads: ˙QCLa,b(Ta, Tb) =
ACL
lCL,a−b
Z Tb
Ta
λCu,RRR=50(T)dT
Conduction through cold bus: ˙QCBa,b(Ta, Tb) =
ACB
lCB,a−b
Z Tb
Ta
λCu,RRR=50(T)dT
Conduction through GFP rods: ˙QGF P a,0(Ta, T0) = AGF P
lGF P
Z T0
Ta
λGF P (T)dT
Radiation: ˙Qrad−Xa,0(Ta, T0) = σAX(T 4
0 −T 4
a ) · ¯ϵ
Cooling/conduction from cold head: ˙QCH,a(Ta) =
(
−˙Qcooling(Ta)
if cooling mode on
ACH
lCH
R T0
Ta λStSt(T)dT
if cooling mode oﬀ
where
ACL
lCL,a−b ,
ACB
lCB,a−b , AGF P
lGF P and ACH
lCH are the cross section/length ratios of the current leads, the
cold bus, the GFP rods and the cold head, respectively, λCu,RRR=50(T), λGF P (T) and λStSt(T) are
the thermal conductivities of copper (RRR=50), Fiberglass Epoxy G-10 CR and stainless steel 304,
respectively. σ is Stefan’s constant, AX is the equivalent area for the radiation surface, T0 is the
ambient temperature, ¯ϵ is the reduced emissivity and ˙Qcooling(Ta) is the cooling power of the cold
head. These equations describe the coupling between the thermal masses. In ﬁgure 29 one can see
the values for the thermal conductivity of the diﬀerent materials used in the model plotted against
temperature.
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 39 of 66
==PAGE:40==
5.2.5
The algorithm
A code for solving the partial diﬀerential equations of T1, T2 and T3 was implemented in MATLAB
and the method for solving the diﬀerential equation was a simple Euler-algorithm. By multiplying
each side of equation 14 with dt, one obtains an expression describing the inﬁnitesimal temperature
increment for a time step dt0:
dT0 =
1
Cv(T)
˙Qin,net(T) · dt0
(24)
where Cv(T) is the speciﬁc heat capacity given by Cv(T) = M · cv(T) or, in the case of the coil,
the composite heat capacity Cv,coil, ˙Qin,net(T) is the net inﬂow of heat and dt0 is the time step for
one iteration. This was implemented within a while-loop for each thermal mass. The temperature
increment dTi of the i-th iteration of the loop is given by
dTi =
1
Cv(Ti)
˙Qin,net(Ti) · dt(Ti)
(25)
where Ti is the temperature of the respective thermal mass at the i-th iteration and dt(Ti) is the
time step with emphasized dependence on the temperature. The time step was chosen to decrease
for lower temperatures to avoid oscillations at base temperature. The maximum time step is 12 s.
After each iteration, the temperature increment is added to the temperature of the previous iteration
number, giving
Ti+1 = Ti + dTi
(26)
5.2.6
Estimation of parameters
The inaccessibility of everything that is inside the cryostat makes the direct determination of all
cross sections and lengths of the heat conductors as well as the equivalent areas for radiation diﬃcult.
Instead, the unknowns are taken as parameters which need to be tuned such that the model data
ﬁts the experimental data. Once the experimental data is successfully reproduced by the model,
one has to assess whether the obtained parameter values are physically reasonable and whether they
can be obtained in reality. As an example, the equivalent area in the radiation formula for the coil
can not be greater than the real area of the coil. Similar reasoning can be done for the masses and
cross section-length ratios for the heat conductors. The sum-up of known and unknown parameters
is given in table 4 to 6.
Parameter list conduction
Name
Symbol
Known
initially
Final value
A/l ratio current leads (env)-(1)
ΓCL,env−1
No
2.29e-04 m
A/l ratio current leads (1)-(2)
ΓCL,1−2
No
3.43e-04 m
A/l ratio cold bus (2)-(3)
ΓCB,2−3
No
1.100e-3 m
A/l cold heads
ΓCH,env−1+2
No
7.700e-3 m
A/l ratio GFP rods (env)-(3)
ΓGF P,env−3
No
0.0123 m
Thermal conductivity copper (RRR=50)
λCu(T)
Yes
Fig. 29
Thermal conductivity stainless steel 304
λStSt(T)
Yes
Fig. 29
Thermal conductivity Fiber glass epoxy G-10
λGF P (T)
Yes
Fig. 29
Table 4: List of parameters used for calculating the heat from conduction through solids. All the
cross section/length ratios were initially unknown and had to be obtained by ﬁtting.
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 40 of 66
==PAGE:41==
Parameter list radiation
Name
Symbol
Known
initially
Final value
Aeq coil
Aeq,3
Yes
0.62 m2
Aeq heat shield
Aeq,1
No
Not evaluated
MLI reduction factor
χMLI
No
Not evaluated
Table 5: List of parameters for calculating the radiation heat. The ﬁnal values are not known as
radiation has been decided not to be included in the model.
Parameter list mass and heat capacity
Name
Symbol
Known
initially
Final value
Mass heat shield
M1
No
34.30 kg
Mass cold bus
M2
No
57.03 kg
Mass coil
M3
Yes
102.46 kg
Heat capacity heat shield
cv,1(T)
Yes
cv,stainless steel
Heat capacity bus block
cv,2(T)
Yes
cv,copper
Composite heat capacity coil
Cv,3(T)
Yes
See eq. 15
Table 6: Masses and heat capacities used for the thermal masses in the MATLAB model. While
the mass of the heat shield seems to be reasonable, the cold bus mass is most likely too high. This
could be adjusted in further ﬁtting work.
The end-result is a vast number of 10 unknown variables. Before introducing a method for the
determination of these variables, one further approximation is made: The heat input due to radiation
for both the heat shield and the coil is assumed to be either negligible with respect to the heat input
from conduction by solids or to be incorporated into the conduction heat. This is easily justiﬁed
for the heat shield block, where the heat injection due to conduction through the current leads is
signiﬁcantly higher than the radiation heat, even if one assumes only moderate radiation reduction
by the MLI layers. For the coil, one cannot make the same argument, as the heat input due to
radiation is smaller, but not negligible with respect to the GFP rod conduction. Instead, the idea
is that if one ﬁts only the GFP-rod conduction parameters and neglects radiation heat, it will make
the determination of the heat input to the coil at base temperature much simpler and will cause just
minor qualitative diﬀerences during cool-down and warm-up.
It is possible to get some intuition about the system by making the following observations:
• The role of the mass times the speciﬁc heat capacity is mainly the one of giving the slope of
the temperature curve for a given heat input, as can be seen by looking at equation 14. This
can be used to ﬁt the model curves of the heat shield mass and the bus block mass to the
experimental values. An increase of the mass will decrease the slope of the temperature curve
and the relative mass will cool down slower.
• For given temperatures of two masses connected via a solid heat conductor, the heat exchange
can be varied by varying the ratio of cross section and length. A higher cross section/shorter
length of the conductor gives a higher heat input. As the base temperatures of each element
of the model are known from the experiment, this can be used to give an estimate for the cross
section-length ratios and therefore the heat input.
• Every mass is connected to its neighbor by a heat conductor. Therefore, if the temperature of
a mass goes down, it ’drags’ the temperature of the neighboring mass with it. In a very lose
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 41 of 66
==PAGE:42==
way, the eﬀect of this on the equilibrium temperatures can be visualized as a chain of three
masses connected with each other by springs and the end points being connected with springs
to two points on the x-axis. The cooling of the cold heads pulls two masses in the y-direction
abd a higher y-value of a mass would correspond to a lower temperature. Thermally well
connected masses would then have a high spring constant, pulling them closer together on the
y-axis. One has to keep in mind that this is only a very simpliﬁed analogy.
One can then go on to the ﬁtting procedure. The overarching constraint here is given by the necessity
of reaching the correct base temperatures, dictated by the experiments. At base temperature, the
system is in steady state, and the left side of equations 23 are zero. It is then clear that the heat
coming in and going out of each thermal mass need to balance out. Focusing on the coil, one can
notice that the heat coming in from the GFP-rods needs to be balanced by the heat going out
through the cold bus to the bus block. As this heat is proportional to ΓCB,2−3, it is possible to
conclude that the cold bus and GFP cross section/length ratio are directly proportional to each
other. If one ﬁxes the cross section/length ratio of the cold bus at an arbitrary value (which should
be a physically reasonable guess) and includes the respective base temperatures of the bus block
being T2 = 19 K and and of the coil being T3 = 24 K, one can ﬁnd the heat going through the
cold bus ˙QCB,32(T2, T3). Then, by using the equilibrium condition of equation 23, it is possible
to go through the mass chain and ﬁnd all other heat ﬂow values, keeping in mind that the base
temperatures are T1 = 27.5, T2 = 19 and T3 = 24:
dT3
dt = 0 => ˙QGF P,30(T0, T3) = −˙QCB,32(T2, T3)
dT2
dt = 0 => ˙QCL,21(T1, T2) = −˙QCB,23(T2, T3) + ˙Qcooling(T2)
dT1
dt = 0 => ˙QCL,10(T0, T1) = −˙QCL,12(T1, T2) + ˙Qcooling(T1)
Next, one needs to ﬁnd the value of the cross section/length ratio of the cold bus as well as the
equivalent masses of the bus block and the heat shield block. This can be done iteratively:
1. The ﬁrst step includes ﬁtting the temperature curves of the heat shield and the bus block to
the curves obtained by the experiment. This can be done by simply varying the equivalent
masses.
2. Once the bus block and the heat shield mimic the rather rapid cool-down seen in the exper-
iment, the much more massive coil needs to follow the experimental curve as well. As the
composite heat capacity is known, the cool-down speed is mainly determined by the cross
section/length ratio of the cold bus. A higher value will speed up the cool-down, while a lower
value deteriorates the thermal connection and hence slows down the cool-down. Each time the
value is changed, one has to go back to step 1 and re-adjust the masses. This is repeated until
the coil cool-down time of the model and the experiment match.
Once all the parameters required for the cool-down are found, one can go further and compare the
warm-up experiments with the model. The last parameter to ﬁt is then the cross section/length
ratio of the cold heads when switched oﬀ. Without varying any other parameter, it was possible to
ﬁt the warm-up curves of coil, MT and LT cold head very well to the experiment.
5.2.7
Results of the MATLAB model
After the ﬁtting procedure, the MATLAB model could well reproduce the data obtained from the
experiments. Looking ﬁrst at the cool-down results, shown in ﬁgure 30, it can be seen that especially
the coil temperature curve is very similar to the actual data, while the cold head temperature curves
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 42 of 66
==PAGE:43==
Figure 30: Cool-down: comparison of model results (in black) with the data from the experiment
(colored).
deviate to some extend from what has been seen in the experiments. Still, the deviations are within
an acceptable range. The base temperatures achieved are 18.3 K compared to the experimental
value of 19 K for the LT cold head, 28.6 K compared to 27.5 K for the MT cold head and ﬁnally
24.3 K compared to 24 K for the coil. The experimental values are rather indicative, as the base
temperature does vary by about ±0.5 K.
Even before ﬁtting the cross section/length ratio of the cold heads, the warm-up model values
were very close to the experimental ones and resembled the experiment both qualitatively and quan-
titatively well. By tuning that parameter, ﬁgure 31 was obtained and one can see that both the
coil and the LT cold head temperature curve just deviate very little from the experiment. The MT
cold head instead shows some deviation as time passes. This can be due to an inadequately ﬁt of
the cross section/length ratio of the current leads coming in from the cryostat. Some further ﬁtting
cycles could improve the MT temperature curve, but as the results were considered as satisfactory
this hasn’t been done.
As a last check of the validity of the model, it was attempted to reproduce the 12 h warm-up
experiment with consequent cool-down to base temperature. Figure 32 shows the results. The out-
come was satisfactory and this conﬁrmed that the model approximates the reality reasonably well.
A ﬁnal reality check is done by scrutinizing the parameter values after the ﬁt. Looking ﬁrst at
the masses, it is immediately clear that the mass of the bus block is with 57 kg rather high. This
can be improved by doing further ﬁtting and a reduction of the mass will have the eﬀect of accel-
erating the cool-down in ﬁgure 30. As it will also accelerate the warm-up of the bus block in ﬁgure
32, one might need to do further ﬁtting also of the current leads to get the warm-up curves of the
bus block and the heat shield back in place.
Considering now the cross section/length ratios, one can now guess a length of the respective ele-
ment and ﬁnd the cross section. For the current leads, for a length of 30 cm and 20 cm between
environment and heat shield and between heat shield and bus block, one would get a radius of 4.7
mm, which seems acceptable. For the cold heads, a tube shape with length 17 cm and outer radius
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 43 of 66
==PAGE:44==
Figure 31: Warm-up: Comparison of model results (in black) with the data from the experiment
(colored).
Figure 32: 12 h warm-up with consequent cool-down: Comparison of model results (in black) with
the data from the experiment (colored).
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 44 of 66
==PAGE:45==
of 9 cm has been assumed (both values have been read oﬀthe data sheets [6]). The wall thickness
would then be around 3 mm, which seems like not much. Also the cross section of the cold bus,
assuming a length of 30 cm, just amounts to 3.3 cm2, which seems like a rather small cross section.
In any case, all of the values are in the right order of magnitude.
5.2.8
Introducing the Nitrogen Storage
With the conﬁdence of having a well-working model, one can now go on and study the eﬀect of
introducing a cold storage into the coil.
This is simply done by adding a new element to the
composite heat capacity of the coil, which is described by
Cv,tot+N2(T) = Cv,tot(T) + MN2 · cv eq,N2(T)
(27)
where Cv,tot(T) is the bare composite heat capacity of the coil, MN2 is the amount of N2 used in
the cold storage and cv eq,N2(T) is the equivalent heat capacity of N2, described by
cv eq,N2(T) = cv,N2(T) + LS−S · δ(T −TS−S) + LS−L · δ(T −TS−L)
(28)
Here cv,N2(T) is the usual speciﬁc heat capacity of N2, LS−S is the latent heat for the solid-solid
phase transition with the value 8.17 kJ/kg, LS−L is the latent heat of the solid-liquid phase transition
with the value 25.69 kJ/kg, δ(T) is the delta-function and TS−S and TS−L are the solid-solid and
solid-liquid phase transition temperatures, which are taken to be 35.61 K and 63 K, respectively [12].
To simplify the implementation in the code, the delta-function has been replaced with a normalized
gaussian with mean equal to the transition temperatures and a standard deviation of 0.5 K. The
heat of evaporation has been neglected and the N2-related heat capacity has been switched oﬀabove
77 K, because the cold storage is not meant to operate beyond this temperature. In general it is not
desirable to go far beyond the melting point of N2, since pressure then increases and it becomes more
diﬃcult to handle the cold storage. Figure 33 shows the diﬀerence of the composite heat capacity
with and without 8.9 kg of N2. The amount of N2 has been chosen as to compensate the heat input
at base-temperature of the HTSGEN (amounting to approximately 70 W) for 1 h, by letting the
cold storage warm up from 24 to 40 K. Integrating the equivalent speciﬁc heat of N2, cv eq,N2(T),
from 24 to 40 K and dividing the obtained quantity by 70 W · 3600 s, one obtains 8.9 kg.
It is important to notice that simply adding the heat capacity of nitrogen to the composite heat
capacity neglects problems like the low thermal conductivity of SN2 and it will therefore in general
give an overestimate of the eﬀect of the cold storage. Still, the model gives some qualitative insights
in how the SN2 cold storage works.
Figure 34 shows the results of a warm-up model with 8.9 kg of N2 in comparison with the warm-up
experiment under normal conditions. The warm-up has evidently been slowed down substantially:
While the experiment shows a maximum value of around 91 K, the model gives a maximum of 69 K
and so instead of warming up by 67 K it warmed up by only 45 K, hence reducing the temperature
diﬀerence by approximately a third.
The comparison of the eﬀect of diﬀerent amounts of N2 in the cold storage is described in ﬁgure
35. Here the amounts of 8.9 kg, 2 · 8.9 kg and 0.5 · 8.9 kg of N2 have been used, the warm-up curve
of the bare coil without any N2 has been put as a reference. One can notice that especially at low
temperatures, both below 65 and also 40 K, the warm-up has been delayed substantially. This is
explained by the huge diﬀerence in the heat capacity of the coil and the N2 in this temperature
range. One can quantify this by normalizing the coil composite heat capacity by its mass and then
doing the temperature integral from base temperature to 40 K or 65 K as shown in equation 29:
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 45 of 66
==PAGE:46==
Figure 33: Comparison between the composite heat capacity with and without 8.9 kg of N2. The
amount of N2 has been chosen to compensate the heat input of 70 W of the HTSGEN for one hour
by heating up from 24 to 40 K. The heat of evaporation has been neglected and above 77 K the
N2-related heat capacity is switched oﬀ. The two spikes in the Cv-curve with N2 belong to the
gaussians added to the N2-speciﬁc heat capacity and describe the solid-solid and solid-liquid phase
transitions.
Figure 34: Modelling of the warm-up with 8.9 kg N2 added to the coil heat capacity, plotted together
with the experimental results of the 12 h warm-up of the HTSGEN coil. The phase transitions are
clearly visible as plateaus in the warm-up curve.
Section 5:
5.2
Thermal model of the HTSGEN setup
page 46 of 66
==PAGE:47==
Figure 35: Comparison of the model results with diﬀerent amounts of N2.
It can be seen that
even small quantities of N2 delay the warm-up substantially, especially within the ﬁrst 15 K of the
warm-up.
Z 40 K
24 K
Cv,tot(T)
Mcoil
dT = 553.32J/kg
Z 40 K
24 K
cv eq,N2(T)dT = 2.8327 · 104J/kg
Z 65 K
24 K
Cv,tot(T)
Mcoil
dT = 2.9282 · 103J/kg
Z 65 K
24 K
cv eq,N2(T)dT = 9.2627 · 104J/kg
(29)
In the range between 24 and 65 K, N2 can take up 32 times more energy per kilogram than the coil,
while in the range between 24 and 40 this factor goes up to 50. Hence, if one adds 1/50 of the mass
of the coil as Nitrogen, the heat capacity already doubles and the coil should heat up half as fast.
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
With the load line evaluation and the investigation of the warm-up behaviour of the HTSGEN
coil with and without cold storage completed, almost all the ingredients for a basic analysis of the
beneﬁts of a cold storage implemented in a superconducting wind turbine generator are gathered.
The results will be used in the following ways:
• The warm-up behaviour will be used for running a simulation using wind speed data gathered
over a time span of almost 5 years. When the wind speed is below a certain value, the coil will
warm up according to the obtained warm-up curves.
Section 5:
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
page 47 of 66
==PAGE:48==
Figure 36: Wind speed measurements in the time frame of a month, starting the 28th of September
2004. The data was recorded at the Høvsøre wind turbine test site in Denmark at a height of 100 m
above ground level [37]. The dashed line shows the cut-in wind speed, below which a conventional
wind turbine produces no power.
• The load line instead will be used for ﬁnding the temperature-dependent operating current.
Using the so-called scaling relation, which relates the critical current to the operating temper-
ature, one can ﬁnd the safe operating current in the same way as described in section 5.1. The
operating current is the limiting factor to the power of the generator.
This describes the dynamic operating mode. The coils of the generator are not kept at the same
base temperature by continuously running the cooling machines, but are allowed to heat up, hence
saving electricity drawn from the grid to keep the He compressors running the cold heads. As higher
temperatures will also mean lower operating currents and lower maximum power of the generator,
and as it takes time to cool down the system once wind is back, the question arises whether the lower
maximum power of the generator gives a penalty in the energy production that outweighs the savings
in cooling power. This section aims at giving an answer also to this question. As a ﬁrst step, the
analysis of the wind data and the coil warm-up will be tackled. Next, The scaling-relation for critical
current of the generator coils will be introduced and the energy production of diﬀerent operating
modes will be evaluated. Finally, an attempt will be made to model the dynamic operation mode
of the world’s ﬁrst MW-class direct-drive superconducting wind turbine generator, built within the
EcoSwing project, which was introduced in section 2.2.1.
5.3.1
Wind data analysis and simulation of the dynamic operating mode
The data used in this section was provided by DTU Wind Energy. The wind speed data was collected
at the Høvsøre wind turbine test site located near the Danish town Høvsøre [37]. The test site is
located in the immediate vicinity of the windy coast of western Jutland and the height at which the
wind data was recorded is 100 m above the ground level. The data includes the wind speed average
over a time interval of 10 minutes and covers the wind speeds of over 4.8 years, starting from the
28th of September 2004. Some data cleaning had to be done for removing NaN - values and getting
Section 5:
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
page 48 of 66
==PAGE:49==
(a)
(b)
Figure 37: (a) Histogram showing the distribution of wind-still intervals (below a wind speed of 4
m/s) over the time span of approximately 5 years. Histogram (b) is obtained when one multiplies
the counts of an interval with its length. The result is the cumulative time of such intervals in the
whole time span, which is 4.87 years.
everything in a format one can work with. All the data analysis as well as the simulations have been
done in MATLAB.
To get an idea of the necessary capacity that a cold storage needs to have, it is useful to ﬁnd
the distribution of the length of time intervals that the wind speed is below cut-in wind speed.
Figure 36 shows the wind speed recordings of the ﬁrst month, with the dashed line indicating a
wind speed of 4 m/s, which is a number frequently found as cut-in wind speed for larger wind tur-
bines. The interval between the event when the wind speed goes below this line to the event when
it crosses it again and goes above is here called a wind-still interval. To evaluate how many intervals
of a speciﬁc length occur in the wind speed time series, a MATLAB code has been written that goes
through the whole vector of wind speed entries, setting a ﬂag when going below and unsetting it
when going above 4 m/s, saving the interval length in a separate array. The results are shown in
ﬁgure 37, where (a) shows the count of intervals between 0 and 1 h, between 1 and 2 h etc, while
in (b) each column has been multiplied by the interval length, giving the cumulative time that the
intervals of the respective length make up during the whole time of recording. It is evident that
intervals longer than 10 h rarely occur, hence it is reasonable to say that a cold storage should have
the capacity to compensate for the heat inﬂux for approximately 10 h.
Next comes the simulation of the warm-up of the HTSGEN coil dictated by the wind data. The use
of the HTSGEN warm-up data can be justiﬁed by assuming that a wind turbine generator is built
out of modular cryostats, each of which has the thermal and electrical properties of the HTSGEN
coil.
Depending on the state of the HTSGEN coil and the wind speed, one can identify four cases:
• If the wind speed is above 4 m/s and the temperature of the coil is at base temperature, the
system stays as it is.
• Whenever the wind speed goes below 4 m/s, the coil heats up as the cooling system is considered
Section 5:
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
page 49 of 66
==PAGE:50==
Figure 38: Temperature of the HTSGEN coil with and without 8.9 kg of N2 against time. It is
evident that the blue line without cold storage has a higher temperature average than the red line
with cold storage.
to be switched oﬀ.
The temperature curve follows the warm-up curves obtained from the
models in section 5.2.
• If the wind speed is above 4 m/s and the temperature of the coil is higher than base temper-
ature, the system cools down with a slope of - 0.020 K/s. This is a result of the analysis in
section 4.3, shown in ﬁgure 14.
• Should the wind speed go below 4 m/s again and the cool down has not yet been completed,
the temperature curve follows again the respective warm-up curve of the model, starting from
the current coil temperature.
Here it should be noted that this model completely neglects the delay between switching on the
cooling system and the moment when the coil actually feels the eﬀect of the cooling, which is around
30 minutes. Two diﬀerent warm-up curves have been used: The warm-up curve from the model of
the bare HTSGEN coil without any N2 and the warm-up curve of the HTSGEN model with 8.9
kg N2, representing the model with a cold storage. The simulation was implemented in the same
code as the interval counting and hence runs over all the entries of the wind speed vector. The
resulting temperature curves for warm-up curves without N2 and with 8.9 kg of N2 are shown in
ﬁgure 38. It shows nicely how the temperature curve for the coil with 8.9 kg N2 generally stays
at lower temperatures, staying mostly below 50 K. Zooming into this graph, one can see shapes as
depicted in ﬁgure 39, showing a time period where the wind speed often crosses the 4 m/s line. As
a consequence, the coil is changing often from heat up to cool down and vice versa. The features of
the phase transitions are nicely visible in the orange line.
Putting the data shown in ﬁgure 38 in a histogram as in ﬁgure 40, the eﬀect of adding a cold storage
to the HTSGEN-coil becomes evident. While in either case the coil is most of the time at base
temperature, zooming into the higher temperature bars, one can see that the cold storage shifts the
temperature distribution to lower values, making temperatures above 65 K unlikely to happen.
As the resulting warm-up curves will in the end be used to dictate the safe operating current of
the coil, it is necessary to ask oneself the question whether it is a good idea to let the coil heat up to
temperatures close to the transition temperature of 93 K of the YBCO tape. Indeed, it seems like
an unreasonable choice, and consequently the maximum operating temperature has been chosen to
Section 5:
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
page 50 of 66
==PAGE:51==
Figure 39: Close-up of the temperature curves of the HTSGEN coil with and without cold storage.
Here the diﬀerence in the warm-up behaviour becomes evident. The bumps in the warm-up curve
with cold storage are due to the solid-solid and solid-liquid phase transitions, occurring at 35.61 K
and 63 K.
Figure 40: Histogram showing the temperature distribution of the HTSGEN coil with and without
N2.
The coil is predominantly within 2.5 K to base temperature.
Another feature is that the
distribution is strongly shifted towards lower temperatures in the presence of a cold storage.
Section 5:
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
page 51 of 66
==PAGE:52==
be 65 K, which itself is by no means a conservative guess of an upper limit. The simulation has been
re-run with an additional condition for cool-down:
• If the coil temperature reaches 65 K, the cooling machines are switched on and the system is
cooled down all the way to base temperature, independently of the wind speed. Whenever the
system cools down and the wind speed is below cut-in, external power is drawn from the grid.
The temperature curves obtained from this simulation (again with warm-up curves of the model
with and without N2 cold storage) were then used for calculating the time dependent safe operating
current.
5.3.2
The scaling relation and evaluation of the instantaneous power
For evaluating the safe operating current at diﬀerent temperatures, one needs to know the critical
current of the superconducting tape at the respective temperatures. As there are only two critical
current curves available, namely the one for 40 K and for 77 K, one needs to ﬁnd a way to get to the
curves in between. The solution to this problem is was found by [28], where the following relation
for temperature scaling of the critical current density of REBCO coated conductors has been given:
Jc(T, B) = Jc(T = 0, B = 0) · e−
T
T ∗(B) · B−α(T )
(30)
where Jc(T, B) is the critical current density, T is the temperature, B is the magnetic ﬂux density,
T ∗(B) is the scaling parameter for the temperature dependence and α(T) is the scaling parameter
for B-ﬁeld dependence. Here we are interested in calculating the temperature scaling parameter
T ∗(B). One can use equation 30 for temperatures 40 K and 77 K, solve for Jc(T = 0, B = 0) and
equate them. That way one can ﬁnd an expression for T ∗(B):
T ∗(B) =
77K −40K
ln[Jc(40K, B)] −ln[Jc(77K, B)] + ∆α ln(B)
(31)
where ln(x) is the natural logarithm, Jc(T, B) is the critical current density, B is the magnetic ﬁeld
and ∆α = α(T = 40K) −α(T = 77K) is the diﬀerence between the B-ﬁeld scaling parameter. It
turns out that the B-ﬁeld scaling parameter does not vary greatly with temperature as can be seen
in [28], hence if B is suﬃciently far from 0 T and doesn’t go too far above 1 T, one can neglect the
term including the B-ﬁeld scaling parameter. This is indeed the case, considering that the range of
interest goes from 0.5 T (point of intersection of the load line with the 77 K critical current curve)
to 2.5 T. Equation 31 allows now to ﬁnd T ∗(B) for B values where both critical current curves are
present, which is the ﬁeld range from approximately 1 T to 3 T. For lower magnetic ﬁelds, a linear
extrapolation has been made, as shown in ﬁgure 41(b).
If now, with the same method used before, one takes the scaling relations for 77 K and a generic
temperature T, one ﬁnds by solving for Jc(T, B)
Jc(T, B) = Jc(77K, B) · e
77−T
T ∗(B)
(32)
where the B-ﬁeld scaling parameters for the diﬀerent temperatures were again assumed to be equal.
Figure 41(a) shows the critical current curves for diﬀerent temperatures together with the load line
of the HTSGEN coil and the two known critical current curves. The resulting curves seem reasonable
and the linear extrapolation seems to work, but introduces some unnatural looking bumps in the
curves. Comparing the T ∗(B) with the one obtained for a REBCO tape of the same manufacturer
(American Superconductors) in [28], it becomes evident that not only has the calculated T ∗(B) a
slope with a diﬀerent sign, it is also quite below the values obtained in the paper. The reason for
this is unclear, it might be that a diﬀerent tape has been used for the HTSGEN coil. Calculating
T ∗(B) without neglecting the B-ﬁeld scaling parameter gives only a slightly diﬀerent curve, so it
can be excluded as the main reason for this diﬀerence.
Section 5:
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
page 52 of 66
==PAGE:53==
(a)
(b)
Figure 41: (a) Plot of the load line of the HTSGEN coil together with critical current lines at
diﬀerent temperatures. The critical current curves with solid lines have been found in [31], while
the remaining curves were calculated with the scaling relation described in [28]. (b) Plot of the
temperature scaling parameter (in orange) with the linear extrapolation (in blue). The result does
not comply with the one found in [28] for a tape of the same manufacturer.
Assuming to have a uniform critical current density along the width of the tape, the result for the
scaling of the critical current density with temperature can be used for the critical current and one
can then calculate the safe operating current as function of temperature, using the criterion of the
safe operating current being 25% below the critical current. There are two limiting factors to the
operating current:
• Below a temperature of 40 K, the superconducting coil allows for high operating currents, but
as the coil is fed with copper current leads, the Joule heating would push the heat load to the
limit o the cryogenic system. Therefore, a maximum of 480 A for the operating current has
been imposed.
• It is assumed that when going above a temperature of 65 K, one leaves the safe operating
range of the superconducting coil. The operating temperature limit has therefore been set to
65 K.
The resulting plot of the operating current is shown in ﬁgure 42(a). It is important to note here
that a operating temperature limit of 65 K is not a conservative guess and it might be necessary to
lower the limit.
The missing link between operating current and instantaneous power of the generator Prated,inst is
given by the air gap ﬂux density, a plot of which is shown in 42(b) and was reproduced from [34].
This plot was then interpolated to get the relation between air gap ﬂux density and tape current.
As described in the theory section, the rated power of the wind turbine is given by the maximum
torque of the generator:
Prated = ω · τmax,gen
(33)
where ω is the rotation frequency of the blades and τmax,gen is the maximum torque of the generator,
which is
τgen = Bair gap · AS · Vgen · cos(φ)
(34)
Section 5:
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
page 53 of 66
==PAGE:54==
(a)
(b)
Figure 42: (a) Plot of the safe operating current against temperature. T = 65K has been deﬁned
as the limit of the safe operating region, hence above 65 K the safe operating current goes to 0 A.
The plateau below 40 K is due to the fact that the cooling system cannot handle heat loads from
Joule heating of currents much higher than 480 A, as described in [34]. (b) Air gap ﬂux density as
a function of the tape current of the HTSGEN coil. Reproduced from [34]
where Bair gap is the air gap ﬂux density, AS is electric loading of the stator, Vgen is the generator
volume and cos(φ) is the torque angle. While for conventional machines the maximum torque is
constant, in the dynamic operating mode it varies with temperature due to the dependence of the
torque on the air gap ﬂux density:
Bair gap →Bair gap(Iop)
Iop →Iop(Tcoil)
The instantaneous rated power hence scales linearly with the air gap ﬂux density and as the latter
is dependent on the operating current which is suggested to vary with temperature, the tempera-
ture dependence of Prated,inst has been established. While up until 40 K the operating current and
hence also Prated,inst are at their respective maximum, at higher temperatures the operating current
decreases rapidly, lowering the air gap ﬂux density and hence also the instantaneous rated power.
Now one can build the power curve of a wind turbine with the warm-up behaviour of the HTSGEN-
coil. Due to its immediate availability, the power curve of a Vestas V-164 with rated power of 8 MW
has been used, but anticipating a comparison with the results of the EcoSwing model, the power
curve has been normalized with its rated power and then multiplied with the rated power of the
EcoSwing machine, which is Prated,0 = 3.6 MW. It was also assumed that the same cooling power as
the EcoSwing was required, which amounts to a power consumption by the complete cooling system
of Pcooling = 62.10 kW.
Let P0(v) be the wind speed dependent power curve with rated power Prated,0 = 3.6 MW. The net
Section 5:
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
page 54 of 66
==PAGE:55==
Figure 43: Plot of the diﬀerent features of a power curve of a 3.6 MW wind turbine with a super-
conducting generator, allowing a dynamic operating point. The net power produced does not go
below 0 and has a maximum dictated by the safe operating current, which itself is dependent on
temperature. The dashed line below 0 shows the power required by the cryogenic cooling system.
power produced Pnet is then given by
Pnet(v, Tcoil) =





0
if P0(v) −Pcooling ≤0
Prated,inst(Tcoil)
if P0(v) −Pcooling ≥Prated,inst(Tcoil)
P0(v) −Pcooling
otherwise
(35)
Figure 43 shows the resulting power curve and it has the following features:
• The cooling power shifts the whole curve down by 62.10 kW, giving it a negative oﬀset when
the wind speed is below 4 m/s or above 26 m/s. In those cases, external power is drawn from
the grid in the non-dynamic operating mode.
• The net power produced Pnet(v, Tcoil) is always ≥0.
• The maximum of the net power produced is limited by the instantaneous rated power
Prated,inst(Tcoil).
Using the wind speed data and the temperature curves obtained from the simulation where the coil
temperature does not ago above 65 K, one can easily implement a MATLAB script evaluating the
net power produced Pnet(v, Tcoil) at each time stamp of the wind speed data. The total energy
produced is then found by integrating Pnet(v, Tcoil) over time, which in the discrete case becomes a
sum:
Eprod,tot =
Z tf
t0
Pnet(v(t), Tcoil(t))dt →Eprod,tot =
N
X
i
Pnet(v(ti, Tcoil(ti))dt0
(36)
where t0 is the start time of the recordings, tf is the ﬁnal or end time, N is the length of the wind
speed vector and dt0 is the time interval between each measurement.
Section 5:
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
page 55 of 66
==PAGE:56==
The total energy produced Eprod,tot has been calculated for three diﬀerent cases:
1. The static operating mode, in which the coil stays at base temperature all the time and external
power is drawn whenever the wind speed is below cut-in wind speed;
2. The dynamic operating mode without cold storage, where the cooling system is switched oﬀif
the wind speed is below cut in wind speed and the coil is allowed to heat up until 65 K; here
external power is only drawn if the coil reaches this temperature, in which case the cooling
system switches on even if the wind speed is below cut in wind speed.
3. The dynamic operating mode with cold storage.
Case 1) will be used as a reference for both the total amount of energy produced (Eprod,ref) as well
as the external power needed for running the cooling system (Eext.cool.power,ref). Case 2) and 3) will
have a lower amount of produced energy, since in those cases Prated,inst ≤Prated,0. The diﬀerence
is described by the quantity ∆Eprod. On the other hand, in case 2) and 3) the required external
cooling power Eext.cool.power will be lower than Eext.cool.power,ref of case 1), this will be quantiﬁed
by ∆Eext.cool.power. The results are summed up in table 7:
No N2
With 8.9 kg N2
Eprod,ref
18.73 GWh/y
18.73 GWh/y
∆Eprod
-16.49 MWh/y
-4.02 MWh/y
Eext. cool. power,ref
39.07 MWh/y
39.07 MWh/y
Eext. cool. power
7.88 MWh/y
0.83 MWh/y
∆Eext. cool. power
+31.19 MWh/y
+38.24 MWh/y
∆Etot
+14.70 MWh/y
+34.22 MWh/y
Table 7: Sum-up of the diﬀerences in produced energy and the reduced cooling power. The reference
values are for the conventional operating mode, when the coil stays continuously at base temperature.
By evaluating the diﬀerences in cooling energy used and the diﬀerence in energy produced, one gets
a net diﬀerence in energy produced, which is outweighed by the savings in cooling power in the
dynamical mode both with and without cold storage. The overall surplus of the model with cold
storage is double the one of the model without cold storage. Nevertheless, compared to the overall
energy production, which is of the order of tens of GWh/year, the savings in cooling power are not
that signiﬁcant.
5.3.3
Modelling of the EcoSwing generator
The EcoSwing project followed the HTSGEN project and represents the state of the art of supercon-
ducting wind turbine generators. The 3.6 MW direct-drive superconducting wind turbine generator
has been installed and tested successfully. Apart from the fact that the HTSGEN coil is only a single
pole pair while the EcoSwing generator is indeed a whole generator, there are still some important
similarities as well as diﬀerences:
• The EcoSwing generator used a similar cooling system as the HTSGEN coil, with one cold
head cooling down the current leads and another set of cold heads cooling down a set of
superconducting coils.
• The EcoSwing generator has a non-consequent pole design. This means that instead of the two
iron poles added to the back iron, there is a second coil with current running in the opposite
way, hence creating an opposite magnetic pole.
The pole pair of the EcoSwing generator
therefore consists of two coils. The two conﬁgurations are depicted in ﬁgure 44.
Section 5:
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
page 56 of 66
==PAGE:57==
(a)
(b)
Figure 44: Description of the consequent-pole conﬁguration (a) with alternating coil and iron pole,
and the non-consequent pole conﬁguration (b) where two HTS coils form a pole pair. While the for-
mer example is similar to the HTSGEN coil, the latter was implemented in the EcoSwing generator.
Reproduced from [33].
• The EcoSwing generator has a cold back iron, as opposed to the warm back iron of the
HTSGEN. This increases the cold mass.
The fact that a similar cooling system is used suggests that MATLAB model of the HTSGEN can
be adapted and used also for crudely modelling the EcoSwing generator. The EcoSwing generator
has 8 cold heads on 40 coils with one additional cold head cooling down the current leads. By
using symmetry, one can argue that one needs to model only 1/8 of the generator, giving one cold
head per ﬁve coil elements, with an assumed 1/8 of the heat load from the current leads. The fact
that the coils in the EcoSwing generator reach a similar base temperature as the HTSGEN coil [33]
suggests that the heat input for the HTSGEN coil corresponds to the heat input for 5 coils of the
EcoSwing. These ﬁndings suggest the following modiﬁcations to the MATLAB model: A reduction
of the current lead cross section/length ratio between heat shield and bus block to 1/8 of its original
value and an increase of the coil mass by at least a factor of 5, approximately maintaining the heat
load. To include also the additional cold mass from the cold back iron, the coil mass has been
multiplied by a factor of 7, giving a ﬁnal cold mass of 717 kg. A simulation of the initial cool-down
gave a cool-down time of slightly more than 10 days, which comes close to the 12 days of cool-down
indicated by [32].
Using this new value of the cold mass, the warm-up simulation was run. The result is shown in ﬁgure
45, with the warm-up curves of the HTSGEN coil with and without 8.9 kg of N2 as a reference. Ev-
idently, the warm-up is much slower even compared to the warm-up curve of the HTSGEN coil with
N2. This is mainly due to the much higher cold mass with the same heat input as the HTSGEN coil.
Running the simulation with the warm-up curve of the EcoSwing generator and evaluating the
histogram of the temperature distributions, ﬁgure 46 is obtained. As a ﬁrst and most striking fea-
ture to mention is that the temperature does never go above 70 K, this without adding any nitrogen
to it. The time spent at the base temperature also decreases, and a signiﬁcant amount of time is
spent at intermediate temperatures up to 45 K. Evaluating then the amount of energy produced and
the external cooling power needed in the same way as in the previous subsection, with the reference
case being the static operating mode, one gets the results described in table 8:
Section 5:
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
page 57 of 66
==PAGE:58==
Figure 45: Warm-up behaviour of the EcoSwing generator model compared to the HTSGEN coil.
Having about 8 times the cold mass of the HTSGEN coil, the warm-up is substantially slower.
No N2
Eprod,ref
18.73 GWh/y
∆Eprod
-24.61 MWh/y
Eext. cool. power,ref
39.07 MWh/y
Eext. cool. power
0.21 MWh/y
∆Eext. cool. power
+38.86 MWh/y
∆Etot
+14.25 MWh/y
Table 8: Results of the produced energy and savings in external cooling power for the dynamic
operating mode of the EcoSwing model. Even if the amount of external power drawn from the grid
has become negligible, also the net produced energy is lowered. The energy gain per year is rather
small.
The amount of external power drawn for cooling down the system during wind still periods has
become negligible. This is partially outweighed by the fact that the net produced power is lowered
by the derated power due to the time spent at higher temperatures. Overall, there is still an energy
saving of 14.25 MWh/year.
5.3.4
Discussion: Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
All in all, the previous section gave some insights in to the possible eﬀects that the dynamic operating
mode and/or an implementation of a cold storage could have. For the simulation with the HTSGEN
coil, the results were clearly in favor of the use of the cold storage. This is partly also due to the
fact that each modular cryostat of the imagined generator made out of HTSGEN coils would have
an additional 9% of cold mass weight. Here it is necessary to mention an important shortcoming of
the model: Even if the cold storage slows down the warm-up, it is never actually recharged during
high power production periods. The eﬀect of the cold storage is provided ’for free’. Making a model
that also included cold storage charging was not possible due to time constraints, but would be an
interesting step towards a more realistic model.
Section 5:
5.3
Modelling of the dynamic operating mode
page 58 of 66
==PAGE:59==
Figure 46: Histogram of the temperature distribution of the EcoSwing generator model compared to
the HTSGEN coil without N2. Due to the much higher cold mass, the distribution of the EcoSwing
generator is strongly shifted towards lower temperatures and does indeed never go above 70 K in
the time range of the wind data.
6
Discussion
Model results:
This work studied the eﬀects of using a dynamic operating mode of a supercon-
ducting wind turbine generator with and without the addition of a cold storage. The results were
indicating quite clearly that there is a beneﬁt in the energy production/energy consumption in both
the case of using the dynamic operating mode as well as when a cold storage is added. Here one
has to keep in mind that the model does not consider the cool-down of the cold storage during high
power periods, the results should therefore be seen as optimistic estimates.
In either case, the savings in the usage of external power outweighs the reduction of the energy
production due to the instantaneous rated power not being at its maximum. Considering now the
HTSGEN-based generator model, the total energy production for a superconducting generator in
the static operating mode is 18.739 GWh/year, the generator without cold storage but operating in
the dynamic operating mode produces 18.721 GWh/year (17.75 MWh/year less) and the generator
with cold storage and dynamic operating mode produces 18.735 GWh/year (-4.02 MWh/year less).
The lower amount of energy produced is more than compensated by the lower cooling energy used:
While in the static operating mode there are 39.07 MWh/year drawn from the grid, in the dynamic
operating mode without cold storage it is only 7.88 MWh/year and if then also the cold storage is
added then the number reduces to 0.83 MWh/year.
For the HTSGEN-based generator model, the increase in net energy production amounts to ap-
proximately 0.1% for the generator without N2 and approximately 0.2% for the generator with N2.
At ﬁrst sight, this change seems negligibly minute, but it is worth investigating this a little further.
In the Nordic energy market, the power price can vary rather strongly in time according to demand
Section 6:
Discussion
page 59 of 66
==PAGE:60==
and supply of energy. The large share of renewable energies have a large inﬂuence on this: Tak-
ing the example of wind energy, during the windy periods the wind turbines will be in full power
production and so there can be an overproduction of energy, with the eﬀect of the electricity price
falling dramatically. On the other hand, the price increases during wind-still periods. This means
that when the cooling system is switched on during wind-still periods, the power that needs to be
bought from external suppliers will likely have a higher price per kWh than the power sold during
periods with wind, when prices are lower. This gives a higher penalty to the power from external
sources, while producing less energy during periods with wind hurts less.
Assuming that the power cost during wind still periods is 0.7 DKK/kWh and the selling price during
periods with wind is 0.4 DKK/kWh [11], in the case of the HTSGEN model with N2 one saves (with
respect to a statically operated generator) approximately 27.300 DKK/year by not buying external
power, while losing 1.600 DKK/year by selling less power. This amounts to saving 642.300 DKK
(86.215 €, taking an exchange rate of 1€ = 7.45 DKK) during a life-time of 25 years of the wind
turbine. In the highly competitive energy market, this can be a signiﬁcant amount. If one considers
instead the simulation with dynamic operating mode but without cold storage, the savings would
be 380.925 DKK. Adding a cold storage hence brings additional savings of approximately 260.000
DKK.
It is diﬃcult to quantify the other economic factors that will alter this number. As an example, while
the cost of adding such a cooling system to the generator will surely reduce the ﬁnancial beneﬁt of
the cold storage, the longer life time of the cold heads might reduce the costs of maintenance of the
generator. Due to the absence of these pivotal quantities, the calculation of the levelized cost of
energy (LCoE) has been omitted.
Some last words on the HTSGEN-based generator with modular cryostats: When doing the evalua-
tions of cooling energy used and power produced, both numbers for the rated power and the required
cooling power have been taken from the EcoSwing generator, with the scope of being able to better
compare the numbers. While it is diﬃcult to estimate the actual rated power for such a generator, it
is easy to estimate the required cooling power. Aiming at keeping the number of pole pairs the same
as the EcoSwing generator, the HTSGEN-based generator would be made out of 20 cryostats. This
gives a required cooling power of approximately 276 kW, which is about four times higher than the
cooling power for the EcoSwing generator. Clearly, in this case the cold storage would have great
beneﬁts.
The situation for the simulation results of the EcoSwing generator are quite diﬀerent: The cold
mass of the generator with respect to the heat input is much higher than the one for the HTSGEN
coil. The warm-up speed is reduced to such an extend that in the dynamic operating mode there is
almost no external power required at all and the cooling machines can simply be run during periods
with wind. A cold storage would therefore not reduce the expensive power consumption during wind
still periods, but rather increase the energy production during periods of cheaper selling prices by
keeping the generator at lower temperatures. Assuming now that ∆Eprod could be reduced from
-24.61 MWh/year to -4 MWh/year (similar to the HTSGEN coil result), the additional earnings
from selling more energy with a price of 0.4 DKK/kWh gives amount to approximately 8.200 DKK
/ year and approximately 200.000 DKK during the whole lifetime of the wind turbine. One then ends
up at approximately the same amount of saved money as for the HTSGEN-based generator. This
is not surprising: The maximum amount of money that one could save with respect to a statically
operated machine is capped. If one eliminates all the expenses from external cooling power without
reducing the total energy produced, one gets the same amount of savings.
One can now try to think the other way: Instead of reducing money losses due to drawing ex-
pensive external power and reduced energy production, one could aim at producing more energy
during high power price- periods by extending the oﬄine-range of the cooling system. If one ex-
Section 6:
Discussion
page 60 of 66
==PAGE:61==
tends the oﬄine range for example from the wind speed range 0 to 4 m/s to 0 to 6 m/s, the power
production from cut-in wind speed to 6 m/s will rise due to the absence of cooling. For the power
curve in ﬁgure 43, this would mean a shift of 0.062 MW. In this wind speed range, one can generally
expect the power price to be higher. Some quick calculations give an extra of 138 MWh of produced
power, amounting to an extra of 2.000.000 DKK in energy sales in the lifetime of the wind turbine
(83.000 DKK per year). This also means that the cold storage would need to compensate for 1600 h
of absent cooling per year, compared to the around 600 h/year below cut-in wind speed. While the
economical indicators give a clear green sign for this idea, it is now mainly the physical constraints
that will make problems.
For making a cold storage with a higher capacity, it is necessary to make space for even more
nitrogen. As seen in equations 29, Nitrogen absorbs about 50 times more heat per unit mass when
warming up from 25 to 40 K compared to the coil element. This means that if one adds 1/50 of the
cold mass of the generator in Nitrogen, the total heat capacity doubles and the warm-up time should
half. For the EcoSwing generator, assuming a cold mass of 6.5 tons, this means 130 kg of added
weight as Nitrogen. The amount might need to be doubled or tripled if one wants to compensate
for the 1600 h of cooling per year.
In the light of the apparent need of high cold storage capacities, one then could reconsider the use
of Neon as a cold storage material if the weight and volume of the Nitrogen exceeds the limits of
feasibility.
In general, there are still many questions to answer regarding the cold storage. In this work, Nitrogen
was the point of focus as a cold storage material, as it has already been used for many years to serve
the purpose of increasing the heat capacity of cryogenic systems as well as the fact that it is used in
solid form. Still, solutions like evaporating Neon stored in a Neon- sponge could prove to be working
well. In fact, compared to the heat per unit weight needed for warming up Nitrogen from 25 K to
40 K, the heat of evaporation per unit weight of Neon is more than three times higher, therefore
one would require less than a third of the mass of Nitrogen. In terms of volume, the reduction is
with 1/5 even higher. These advantages could potentially outweigh the drawback of the high price
of Neon and the technical diﬃculties in building a cold storage with Neon.
Another unanswered question is the transfer of power during high power periods to the cold storage.
While one solution is to provide an extra cold head for the cold storage, it could also be beneﬁcial
to use a cooling machine the cooling power of which can be ramped up when there is excess power
available. This can be done for a reverse Turbo-Brayton machine. By using such a machine, a
rapid cool-down of the cold storage could be guaranteed and hence the cold storage usage could be
maximized.
The optimal implementation of the cold storage still needs to be discovered. In the models used,
the cold storage has simply been added as a cold mass to the coil. In reality, the situation is much
more diﬃcult, as limited thermal conductivities of the cold storage materials and of a potential heat
switch need to be considered. In general, the cold storage should be placed where most of the heat
comes in during warm-up. Placing it at the coil, this can be either next to the GFP rods or close to
the position of the cold bus and current lead entries. On the other hand, it might also be beneﬁcial
to place the cold storage at the low temperature cold head, as, according to the model, this is the
place where most of the heat is injected due to conduction through the cold head and the good
thermal connection through the cold bus to the coil. Here one could also consider replacing the
cold bus with a capillarity-based thermosyphon, which shows a high heat conductivity and has the
ability to be switched oﬀby removing the working liquid. That way the coil could be disconnected
from the cold head as a heat source.
This section is concluded with a discussion about the constraints for a cold storage. The required
cooling capacity of a cold storage is ultimately dictated by the safe operating temperature range of
Section 6:
Discussion
page 61 of 66
==PAGE:62==
the generator. In the simulations of the previous section, the generator has been allowed to warm up
until 65 K, without considering that running the superconducting coils at such a temperature might
be considered unsafe. If the maximum operating temperature would be set to 50 K or even lower,
the cold storage capacity would need to increase drastically, as - in the case of a Nitrogen-based cold
storage- one loses the heat of fusion of N2, and leaves unused the high heat capacity of N2 in that
temperature range as well as the increasing heat capacities of the materials used for the coil. This
could result in unreasonably high amounts of Nitrogen to be used in the cold storage, forcing one
either to switch to other solutions or to drop the cold storage idea all together.
7
Conclusion
The technical feasibility of realizing a heat-capacity based cold storage using solid Nitrogen has been
proved by a variety of projects in diﬀerent research institutions. This solution seems also promising
for the application in a superconducting wind turbine generator. Some important design features
for a SN2 based cold storage are structures that enhance the propagation of heat throughout the
solid Nitrogen, an over-pressure valve for safety, a link to a cooling system that cools down the SN2
during high power periods and the possibility of connecting and disconnecting the cold storage from
the cold mass to enable a rapid cool-down of the superconducting coils after a warm-up period.
Evaporating Neon or Hydrogen could also be a good mechanism for a cold storage, but further
research and design proposals need to be done.
A cold storage should have a capacity high enough to decelerate the warm-up of the cold mass and
keep it within the safe operating temperature range for a period of 10 h. This is because wind-still
periods longer than 10 h have a rather low occurrence.
The simulation of a dynamically operated wind turbine generator where each pole pair has its own
cryostat suggests that the addition of a SN2 cold storage with approximately 9% of the cold mass
added as SN2 leads to a diminished energy production, reducing it by approximately 18 MWh/year
from 18.739 GWh/year of a statically operated 3.6 MW wind turbine generator (with constant gen-
erator temperature and oﬀshore like wind conditions as dictated by the Høvsøre test site) to 18.721
GWh/year. On the other hand, the cooling power drawn from the power grid during wind-still
periods is greatly reduced, from 39.07 MWh/year in the case of a statically operated generator to
0.83 MWh/year. The power savings hence outweigh the reduced energy production. Considering
the varying electricity prices of the Nordic energy market and assuming that power is sold at a price
of 0.4 DKK during windy periods but bought at a price of 0.7 DKK during wind-still periods, the
proﬁt increase by switching oﬀthe cooling system when the wind speed is below cut-in and using
a cold storage amounts to 642.300 DKK (86.215 €, taking an exchange rate of 1€ = 7.45 DKK)
in a 25 year life time of a wind turbine. This could be increased by more than a factor of 3 if the
oﬄine-range of 0 to vcut in =4 m/s of the cooling system was extended, switching it oﬀat higher
wind speeds than cut-in wind speed. The simulation gives optimistic results, as the cool-down of the
cold-storage has not been included because the cool-down mechanism and eﬃciency has not been
determined. The ﬁnal LCoE calculation could not be done due to the uncertainty of the price of
building a cold storage, which can greatly inﬂuence the ﬁnal change of the cold storage on the LCoE
and possibly annihilate any positive eﬀect.
8
Outlook
One of the many questions that emerged and went unanswered regards the charging process of a
cold storage. In the SN2 cold storage case, a hypothesis on this topic would allow a more realistic
simulation of the cold storage, as the charging of the cold storage during periods of high power pro-
duction would also be considered, hence showing the real availability of it. In addition, by knowing
Section 8:
Conclusion
page 62 of 66
==PAGE:63==
the charging behaviour of a cold storage, one could calculate the maximum cooling power one could
transfer to low wind or wind-still periods, putting an upper limit to the ﬁnancial beneﬁts of a cold
storage under ideal circumstances. Also, running the simulation on diﬀerent wind data sets would
give an idea about the transferability of the results to other locations.
For the SN2 cold storage, another factor that will greatly inﬂuence the eﬃciency of it is the ability to
transfer heat to the solid Nitrogen. The functionality of diﬀerent methods that enhance the eﬀective
thermal conductance of SN2 need to be veriﬁed. Also, the feasibility of building an adequate heat
switch has to be investigated and the inﬂuence on the thermal properties of the cold storage would
need to be modelled.
The use of phase transition based cold storage materials should also be considered. As both Hydro-
gen and Neon allow the use of signiﬁcantly less mass and volume of cold storage material compared
to SN2, they might represent a good alternative. As the generator represents a rotating frame, one
might investigate on the capillarity eﬀect in a porous metal ’sponge’ that would keep the cryogenic
liquids in contact with the cold mass.
More research needs be done to verify the safe operating temperature range of a superconducting
machine and the technical feasibility of the dynamic operating mode in general: The temperature
constraints will substantially inﬂuence the required cold storage capacity and it is not clear whether
the materials employed in the generator can withstand the temperature-cycling over the span of a
generator life time of 25 years.
References
[1]
Asger Bech Abrahamsen et al. “Comparison of Levelized Cost of Energy of Superconducting
Direct Drive Generators for a 10-MW Oﬀshore Wind Turbine”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Applied Superconductivity 28.4 (June 2018), pp. 1–5. issn: 1558-2515. doi: 10.1109/TASC.
2018.2810294.
[2]
American Superconductor (AMSC). AMSC. url: https : / / www . amsc . com/ (visited on
07/08/2021).
[3]
B. Baudouy. “Heat Transfer and Cooling Techniques at Low Temperature”. In: arXiv:1501.07153
[physics] (2014). doi: 10 . 5170 / CERN - 2014 - 005 . 329. arXiv: 1501 . 07153. url: http :
//arxiv.org/abs/1501.07153 (visited on 06/21/2021).
[4]
Anne Bergen et al. “Design and in-ﬁeld testing of the world’s ﬁrst ReBCO rotor for a 3.6 MW
wind generator”. In: Superconductor Science and Technology 32.12 (Oct. 2019), p. 125006.
issn: 0953-2048. doi: 10.1088/1361-6668/ab48d6. url: https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-
6668/ab48d6 (visited on 07/08/2021).
[5]
Cernox®. Default. url: https://www.lakeshore.com/products/categories/overview/
temperature-products/cryogenic-temperature-sensors/cernox (visited on 07/11/2021).
[6]
CH-110LT 40K Cryocooler Series. SHI Cryogenics Group. url: https://www.shicryogenics.
com/product/ch-110lt-40k-cryocooler-series/ (visited on 07/10/2021).
[7]
Ho-Myung Chang and Hyung-Jin Kim. “Development of a thermal switch for faster cool-down
by two-stage cryocooler”. In: Cryogenics 40.12 (Jan. 1, 2000), pp. 769–777. issn: 0011-2275.
doi: 10.1016/S0011-2275(01)00034-0. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0011227501000340 (visited on 07/09/2021).
Section 8:
REFERENCES
page 63 of 66
==PAGE:64==
[8]
China installed half of new global oﬀshore wind capacity during 2020 in record year. Global
Wind Energy Council. Feb. 25, 2021. url: https://gwec.net/china-installed-half-
of-new-global-offshore-wind-capacity-during-2020-in-record-year/ (visited on
07/08/2021).
[9]
Cryogenics Material Properties. url: https://trc.nist.gov/cryogenics/materials/
materialproperties.htm (visited on 06/20/2021).
[10]
Fangliang Dong et al. “An on-board 2G HTS magnets system with cooling-power-free and
persistent-current operation for ultrahigh speed superconducting maglevs”. In: Scientiﬁc Re-
ports 9.1 (Aug. 14, 2019), p. 11844. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-48136-x.
url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-48136-x (visited on 07/09/2021).
[11]
Elpris Outlook 2021: Vil grøn efterspørgsel betyde højere elpriser? Dansk Energi. url: https:
//www.danskenergi.dk/arrangement/elpris-outlook-2021-vil-groen-efterspoergsel-
betyde-hoejere-elpriser (visited on 07/05/2021).
[12]
W. F. Giauque and J. O. Clayton. “The Heat Capacity and Entropy of Nitrogen. Heat of
Vaporization. Vapor Pressures of Solid and Liquid. The Reaction 1/2 N2 + 1/2 O2 = NO
from Spectroscopic Data”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 55.12 (Dec. 1, 1933),
pp. 4875–4889. issn: 0002-7863. doi: 10.1021/ja01339a024. url: https://doi.org/10.
1021/ja01339a024 (visited on 06/30/2021).
[13]
Global Wind Report 2021. Global Wind Energy Council. Mar. 24, 2021. url: https://gwec.
net/global-wind-report-2021/ (visited on 07/08/2021).
[14]
Jacob Gronholt-Pedersen. “Denmark sources record 47% of power from wind in 2019”. In:
Reuters (Jan. 2, 2020). url: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-climate-change-
denmark-windpower-idUSKBN1Z10KE (visited on 07/08/2021).
[15]
P. Hales et al. “Investigation into the use of solid nitrogen to create a “Thermal Battery” for
cooling a portable high-temperature superconducting magnet”. In: Cryogenics 45.2 (Feb. 1,
2005), pp. 109–115. issn: 0011-2275. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . cryogenics . 2004 . 04 . 011. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0011227504001584 (visited on
07/09/2021).
[16]
Y. Iwasa et al. “Thermal and magnetic responses of a solid nitrogen/magnetized YBCO disk
system undergoing temperature cycles in the range of 8-60 K”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Applied Superconductivity 14.2 (June 2004), pp. 1727–1730. issn: 1558-2515. doi: 10.1109/
TASC.2004.831055.
[17]
Yukikazu Iwasa. Case Studies in Superconducting Magnets: Design and Operational Issues.
2nd ed. Springer US, 2009. isbn: 9780387097992. doi: 10.1007/b112047. url: https://www.
springer.com/gp/book/9780387097992 (visited on 07/08/2021).
[18]
Yukikazu Iwasa. “Towards liquid-helium-free, persistent-mode MgB2MRI magnets: FBML
experience”. In: Superconductor Science and Technology 30.5 (Mar. 2017), p. 053001. issn:
0953-2048. doi: 10.1088/1361- 6668/aa5fed. url: https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-
6668/aa5fed (visited on 07/09/2021).
[19]
Young-Sik Jo et al. “Temperature characteristic of rotor of HTS synchronous rotating ma-
chine cooled by solid nitrogen”. In: Physica C: Superconductivity 372-376 (Aug. 1, 2002),
pp. 1535–1538. issn: 0921-4534. doi: 10.1016/S0921-4534(02)01077-8. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921453402010778 (visited on 07/09/2021).
Section 8:
REFERENCES
page 64 of 66
==PAGE:65==
[20]
L. N. Khanov et al. “Thermal and electric conductivity of textured Ni-Cr-W alloy ribbon sub-
strates for high-temperature superconductors”. In: Technical Physics Letters 38.7 (July 2012).
WOS:000308644900019, pp. 665–667. issn: 1063-7850. doi: 10.1134/S106378501207019X.
url: https : / / gateway . webofknowledge . com / gateway / Gateway . cgi ? GWVersion = 2 &
SrcAuth=DOISource&SrcApp=WOS&KeyAID=10.1134%2FS106378501207019X&DestApp=DOI&
SrcAppSID=F3LkHYAO6UKSUjjvevo&SrcJTitle=TECHNICAL+PHYSICS+LETTERS&DestDOIRegistrantName=
Pleiades+Publishing (visited on 07/09/2021).
[21]
Mark O. Kimball and Peter J. Shirron. “Heat Switches Providing Low-Activation Power and
Quick-Switching Time for Use in Cryogenic Multi-Stage Refrigerators”. In: Cryogenic En-
gineering Conference and International Cryogenic Materials Conference (CEC/ICMC) 2011.
NTRS Author Aﬃliations: NASA Goddard Space Flight Center NTRS Report/Patent Num-
ber: LEGNEW-OLDGSFC-GSFC-LN-1232 NTRS Document ID: 20180001194 NTRS Research
Center: Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). Spokane, WA, June 13, 2011. url: https:
//ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20180001194 (visited on 07/09/2021).
[22]
Jisung Lee et al. “Concept of Cold Energy Storage for Superconducting Flywheel Energy Stor-
age System”. In: IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 21.3 (June 2011), pp. 2221–
2224. issn: 1558-2515. doi: 10.1109/TASC.2010.2094177.
[23]
linda. Welcome to THEVA GmbH - your manufacturer of 2G HTS wire. THEVA english. url:
https://www.theva.com/ (visited on 07/09/2021).
[24]
Katsutoshi Mizuno et al. “Cold storage characteristics of mobile HTS magnet”. In: Cryogenics.
Special Issue: ACASC 2009 51.6 (June 1, 2011), pp. 321–325. issn: 0011-2275. doi: 10.1016/
j.cryogenics.2010.07.008. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0011227510001645 (visited on 07/09/2021).
[25]
V. Musilova et al. “Low temperature radiative properties of materials used in cryogenics”. In:
Cryogenics 45.8 (Aug. 1, 2005), pp. 529–536. issn: 0011-2275. doi: 10.1016/j.cryogenics.
2004.11.010. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0011227505000093
(visited on 06/30/2021).
[26]
T. Nakamura et al. “Performance of conduction-cooled HTS tape with the aid of solid nitro-
gen–liquid neon mixture”. In: Physica C: Superconductivity. Proceedings of the 16th Interna-
tional Symposium on Superconductivity (ISS 2003). Advances in Superconductivity XVI. Part
II 412-414 (Oct. 1, 2004), pp. 1221–1224. issn: 0921-4534. doi: 10.1016/j.physc.2003.12.
085. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921453404008743
(visited on 07/09/2021).
[27]
Safeguarding the superconducting magnets. CERN Courier. Aug. 19, 2013. url: https://
cerncourier.com/a/safeguarding-the-superconducting-magnets/ (visited on 07/08/2021).
[28]
Carmine Senatore et al. “Field and temperature scaling of the critical current density in com-
mercial REBCO coated conductors”. In: Superconductor Science and Technology 29.1 (Dec.
2015), p. 014002. issn: 0953-2048. doi: 10.1088/0953-2048/29/1/014002. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1088/0953-2048/29/1/014002 (visited on 06/21/2021).
[29]
SHI Cryogenics Group - Advanced Cryogenic Technology Solutions. SHI Cryogenics Group.
url: https://www.shicryogenics.com/ (visited on 07/08/2021).
[30]
Jung-Bin Song and Haigun Lee. “Mixed cryogen cooling systems for HTS power applications: A
status report of progress in Korea University”. In: Cryogenics. Special Issue: ACASC 2011 52.12
(Dec. 1, 2012), pp. 648–655. issn: 0011-2275. doi: 10.1016/j.cryogenics.2012.06.013. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0011227512001464 (visited on
07/09/2021).
Section 8:
REFERENCES
page 65 of 66
==PAGE:66==
[31]
Xiaowei Song et al. “A Full-Size High-Temperature Superconducting Coil Employed in a Wind
Turbine Generator Setup”. In: IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 27.4 (June
2017), pp. 1–5. issn: 1558-2515. doi: 10.1109/TASC.2017.2656627.
[32]
Xiaowei Song et al. “Commissioning of the World’s First Full-Scale MW-Class Superconducting
Generator on a Direct Drive Wind Turbine”. In: IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion
35.3 (Sept. 2020), pp. 1697–1704. issn: 1558-0059. doi: 10.1109/TEC.2020.2982897.
[33]
Xiaowei Song et al. “Designing and Basic Experimental Validation of the World’s First MW-
Class Direct-Drive Superconducting Wind Turbine Generator”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Energy Conversion 34.4 (Dec. 2019), pp. 2218–2225. issn: 1558-0059. doi: 10.1109/TEC.
2019.2927307.
[34]
Xiaowei Song et al. “Experimental Validation of a Full-Size Pole Pair Set-Up of an MW-Class
Direct Drive Superconducting Wind Turbine Generator”. In: IEEE Transactions on Energy
Conversion 35.2 (June 2020), pp. 1120–1128. issn: 0885-8969. doi: 10.1109/TEC.2019.
2958613. url: https://orbit.dtu.dk/en/publications/experimental-validation-of-
a-full-size-pole-pair-set-up-of-an-mw- (visited on 06/30/2021).
[35]
P. Borges de Sousa and G. Bonfait. “Contribution to the study of neon-nitrogen mixtures at
low temperatures”. In: IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 101 (Dec.
2015), p. 012121. issn: 1757-899X. doi: 10.1088/1757-899X/101/1/012121. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1088/1757-899x/101/1/012121 (visited on 07/09/2021).
[36]
N. Suttell et al. “Investigation of solid nitrogen for cryogenic thermal storage in supercon-
ducting cable terminations for enhanced resiliency”. In: IOP Conference Series: Materials
Science and Engineering 278 (Dec. 2017), p. 012019. issn: 1757-899X. doi: 10.1088/1757-
899X/278/1/012019. url: https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899x/278/1/012019 (visited
on 07/09/2021).
[37]
Test Centre Høvsøre - DTU Wind Energy. https://windenergy.dtu.dk. url: https://windenergy.
dtu.dk/english/test-centers/hoevsoere_uk (visited on 07/11/2021).
[38]
G. K. White. “Experimental techniques in low-temperature physics”. In: (1987). url: http:
//inis.iaea.org/Search/search.aspx?orig_q=RN:21012666 (visited on 06/30/2021).
[39]
S. I. Woods et al. “Emissivity of silver and stainless steel from 80K to 300K: Application to
ITER thermal shields”. In: Cryogenics 60 (Mar. 1, 2014), pp. 44–48. issn: 0011-2275. doi:
10.1016/j.cryogenics.2014.01.002. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0011227514000101 (visited on 06/30/2021).
[40]
Yokogawa datasheet. url: https://www.nbn-elektronik.ch/shop/files/7651_krr_7651_
1.pdf.
[41]
P. Zhang et al. “Cold Storage and Release Characteristics of a Thermal Battery Unit Using
Solid Nitrogen and Solid Nitrogen Impregnated in Metal Foam”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Applied Superconductivity 26.4 (June 2016), pp. 1–4. issn: 1558-2515. doi: 10.1109/TASC.
2015.2510452.
Section 8:
REFERENCES
page 66 of 66
