==PAGE:1==
Identification and Pose Estimation of Pallets
Aditya Vijaychandra (s192935)
Master of Science in Engineering
2021
==PAGE:2==
Identification and Pose Estimation of Pallets
Report written by:
Aditya Vijaychandra (s192935)
Advisor(s):
Søren Hansen, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
Jack M. Pimbert, Senior Engineer, Autonomous Systems and Robotics of IPU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
25 January- 25 July 2021
ECTS:
35
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Electrical Engineering
Class:
Public
Edition:
1. edition
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Aditya Vijaychandra, 2021
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Mobile Robots have seen increased adoption for material handling in internal logistics in
many industries due to their ability to take over repetitive processes in a cost effective
and eﬀicient manner. One of the applications that has been automated is the movement
of pallets on the shop floor. The current solutions leave the pallets at designated areas,
after which docking operations are performed by human operators. One of the challenges
preventing mobile robots from performing pallet loading and unloading is the diﬀiculty
in operating in an unstructured environment where pallet locations and poses are not
controlled and can change in real time.
In this thesis, a Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) based neural network has
been used to detect the 6 Degrees of freedom (6D) pose of EUR pallets using Red Green
Blue (RGB) images as input to aid in autonomous loading and unloading.
A data
acquisition system was created using the Gazebo simulator that generated synthetic
data for use in training and evaluating the suitability of the chosen network for pose
estimation. Once the network showed satisfactory performance, real data was generated
and the pose estimation performance evaluated.
The results show that the network is capable of picking out pallets from different
environments and also predict 6D poses of the pallets at a high level of accuracy for the
test dataset.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor from DTU, Søren Hansen for his guidance and
support throughout the development of this project.
I would also like to thank my
supervisor from IPU, Jack M. Pimbert, for his help in solving the challenges that came
up during project execution. I am grateful to both of them for the weekly meetings and
the invaluable feedback that helped in achieving the technical and academic objectives
of the thesis.
Finally, I would like to thank my family for their constant support and encourage-
ment. I am especially thankful to my father for his help in proofreading the manuscript.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acronyms
2D 2 Dimensional. 5, 7–9, 13–17, 23, 27, 29, 30, 36, 37, 39, 40, 46
3D 3 Dimensional. 5–8, 14–16, 19, 20, 23, 27, 29, 32, 34, 37, 39, 40
6D 6 Degrees of freedom. i, vii, 1, 2, 5–9, 14, 19, 27, 34, 49, 53
AABB Axis-Aligned Bounding Box. 34
ADD average distance. 40, 41, 47
AGV Automated Guided Vehicle. 1
AMR Autonomous Mobile Robot. 1
CNN Convolutional Neural Networks. i, vii, 6, 7, 9, 12–14
CPU Central Processing Unit. 35
DKK Danish krone. 43
DTU Danmarks Tekniske Universitet. iii, 35
FPS Frames Per Second. 2, 9, 21, 43, 48, 53
GB GigaByte. 35
GPU Graphics Processing Unit. 9, 35, 43, 48, 53
GPUs Graphics Processing Units. 6, 35, 43
HSV Hue-Saturation-Value. 30
ICP Iterative Closest Point. 32, 42, 49
IMU Inertial Measurement Unit. 21
IoU Intersection over Union. 15
OEMs Original Equipment Manufacturers. 1
==PAGE:8==
vi
Acronyms
PLY Polygon File Format. 31, 34
PnP Perspective-n-Point. vii, 7, 8, 14, 16, 17, 37, 39, 40
RANSAC Random Sample Consensus. 5, 7, 32
RCNN Region Based Convolutional Neural Networks. 7
ReLU Rectified Linear Units. 13, 14
RGB Red Green Blue. i, 2, 5, 7, 14, 19, 21, 22, 27, 37, 49, 53
RGB-D Red Green Blue-Depth. 7, 21, 32
ROS Robot Operating System. 19–21
SDK Software Development Kit. 32
SIFT Scale-Invariant Feature Transform. 7
SSD Single Shot Detector. 7, 8
USB Universal Serial Bus. 21
YOLO You Only Look Once. 7, 8, 14–16
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Acronyms
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Pallet Pose Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
6D Pose Estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Analysis
9
4
Theory
11
4.1
Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.3
Singleshotpose Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4
PnP Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5
System Description
19
5.1
Synthetic Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Real Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
Methodology
27
6.1
Synthetic Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6.2
Real Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3
Pose Estimation using Generated Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7
Results
39
7.1
Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2
Synthetic Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
7.3
Real Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.4
Performance in Different Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
8
Discussion
49
8.1
Limitations of the System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
8.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
9
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Problem Statement
In the pursuit of increased productivity, manufacturing plants and warehouses have
automated a large number of processes which are highly repetitive and can be performed
without operator intervention. This has led to the deployment of the Automated Guided
Vehicle (AGV) and more recently the Autonomous Mobile Robot (AMR) on the shop
floor for material handling. While AGVs navigate using wires, magnetic strips or sensors,
AMRs can be programmed to follow specific paths and navigate using saved maps [1].
This allows AMRs to adjust to changing environments and production requirements.
In the last few years with the slashing of prices and increased flexibility offered by
better sensor packages, there has been an increased adoption of driverless forklifts in
warehouses to replace or supplement human operators. There are multiple companies
offering products designed for pallet handling including major forklift Original Equip-
ment Manufacturers (OEMs) such as Toyota as well as various newer players [12]. They
can transport multiple pallets and larger loads over long distances whereas human oper-
ated forklifts have to make multiple trips for the same task. Current solutions leave the
delicate pallet loading and unloading operations to skilled human operators mainly due
to diﬀiculties in operating in an unstructured environment where pallet pose has to be
detected instantaneously.
6 Degrees of freedom (6D) pose refers to the translation and rotation of an object
along the x, y, z axes. For automated forklifts to manage the entire material handling
process from docking operations to internal goods movement, it is crucial to identify
and compute the 6D pose of pallets in real time. Even though a pallet can be expected
to have rotation only about the z axis in the majority of scenarios, it is essential to
cover all the edge cases if full autonomous operation is to be achieved. This means that
with 6D pose information, the system can handle cases where the pallet is skewed at
an angle with respect to the floor or when the pallet is not at floor level and be able
to take a decision on whether the current pallet pose allows safe operation. This allows
for flexibility and enables the machine to compute pick and drop operations without
explicit programming.
Ideally, the system to compute the 6D pose of pallets in real time has to function
using already installed sensors since additional sensors drive up costs and further delays
adoption. Cameras are therefore an interesting sensor solution which are usually already
installed on most current solutions and if not can be inexpensively retrofitted.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Introduction
This thesis aims to provide increased autonomy for pallet handling operations. The
expected outcome is a system that can estimate the 6D pose of pallets using cameras as
the primary sensing solution.
Figure 1.1: Rendering of a driverless forklift in operation.
1.2
Objectives
The main objective of this thesis is the development of a system that can identify pallets
as well as estimate their 6D pose with respect to a reference frame using RGB images
generated by a camera as input. The following conditions need to be considered while
implementing the system.
• The system needs to have a translation error of less than 5 cm and angle error of
less than 5 degrees for predictions.
• The system should be capable of providing pose estimations at a minimum of 2
Frames Per Second (FPS) while running on affordable processing hardware.
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Thesis Outline
3
• Initial system validation on a simulation environment which would be configured
as part of the project.
• On achieving success in the simulated world, an experimental phase using a real
pallet to validate the solution.
The implementation will focus on the EUR pallet and will initially work on a single
pallet.
1.3
Thesis Outline
The thesis structure is detailed below.
• Chapter 2: This chapter provides a brief overview of the previous research con-
ducted in pallet pose estimation as well as a summary of work that focuses on pose
estimation in general.
• Chapter 3: In this chapter, the research described in Chapter 2 is analysed in
the context of the project objectives and a suitable approach is selected.
• Chapter 4: This chapter provides a brief description of the concepts used in this
thesis.
• Chapter 5: In this chapter, the details of the hardware and software used to
generate data for pallet pose estimation is detailed.
• Chapter 6: This chapter describes the methodology used in pose estimation of
pallets. There are also details on how labelled data is created for network training.
• Chapter 7: In this chapter, the performance of the network is detailed on both
the synthetic as well as real world data.
• Chapter 8: This chapter contains some points observed while training and eval-
uating the system as well as limitations and future work.
• Chapter 9: This chapter highlights the achievements of the system in terms of
the stated objectives.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
The main objectives of this project are listed in Section 1.2. Relevant literature was
studied to choose a method that satisfies these requirements. The main requirement is a
system that can identify and compute the 6D pose of a pallet with respect to a reference
frame. This literature review describes the current research which focuses on pallet pose
estimation and also provides details on general vision based 6D pose estimation research
which are further categorised as classical computer vision based approaches and deep
learning based methods.
2.1
Pallet Pose Estimation
There is limited literature detailing approaches for determining pallet pose to aid opera-
tion of automated forklifts in unstructured environments. N. Bellomo et al. [3] propose
a combination of a laser rangefinder and a vision system to identify and localise a pallet.
They use a 2 Dimensional (2D) laser rangefinder fixed at a certain height to provide
scans parallel to the floor, which are then compared for matches with a set of object
models comprised of line segments. The camera is used to further refine the results from
the rangefinder data by expressing the relevant laser points in the camera frame and
then associating the chromatic information of nearby pixels with the transformed laser
points. This allows them to select relevant laser points using the Red Green Blue (RGB)
characteristics of the pallet. The use of laser rangefinder as the primary sensor limits
the system to predicting the position and orientation of pallets on a fixed plane. This
essentially limits the system from perceiving pallets that are at a different height from
the rangefinder or even pallets that are at an angle with the floor.
Varga et al. [40] proposed a vision based system for detecting and computing the
position and orientation of EUR pallets. They use monocular images for pallet detection
and stereo reconstruction methods using stereo images to detect the position of the
operating point, where the operating point is the 3 Dimensional (3D) position of the
center of the frontal view of the pallet. The authors use traditional computer vision
for preprocessing the data and then a binary classifier to detect the presence of a pallet
in the image. Once the area of interest is detected, the stereo information is used to
compute the position and orientation of the pallet. The plane for the frontal view of
the pallet is approximated by running Random Sample Consensus (RANSAC) on the
disparity image and this approximates the position of the pallet. The orientation is
calculated by sampling points at the extremities of the fitted plane.
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Literature Review
Cameras are used by Fernando Casado et al. [7] to detect and compute pose of pal-
lets. Since the authors use template matching, which is not scale invariant nor rotation
invariant, an iterative approach is followed where scale and rotation transformations are
applied to the original template in steps within a specified range. In every step the
transformed template is used for matching, and a matching score is computed. The best
matching score gives the scale and rotation for detection which is used to compute the
actual pallet pose.
Cameras are an interesting sensor solution to solve the pallet pose estimation problem,
but the previous approaches do not provide the full 6D pose of the pallets but attempt to
calculate the pallet orientation with respect to a single plane. This causes the system to
fail when the pallets are at an angle with the floor since the algorithm does not account
for such variations.
2.2
6D Pose Estimation
Real time object detection and 6D pose estimation is an actively researched topic due
to its utility in fields such as robotics and augmented reality. Since there is a wealth of
literature available, it is logical to investigate the approaches and study the feasibility
of using one of these approaches for computing the pose of pallets. They vary from
traditional template matching and feature extraction based approaches to newer CNN
based approaches. There is extensive literature available on this subject, but the brief
review below mainly focuses on approaches that return the 6D pose of objects. The
works are broadly separated into classical computer vision based approaches and the
relatively newer CNN based methods.
2.2.1
Classical Computer Vision Based Approaches
Template matching is used for 6D pose estimation of objects by Stefan Hinterstoisser et
al. [20] and Zhe Cao et al. [6]. These methods propose using a 3D model to generate
templates for examples of object poses and use template matching to find the nearest
match with the input image. Of course, both works have variations in how the actual
template matching is performed and optimised. For example, Zhe Cao et al. [6] propose
converting the template matching operation to a matrix multiplication which is more
suited for the parallel processing capabilities of Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). The
drawback of template matching based methods is that performance significantly drops
when the object of interest is under occlusion.
Another method used in pose estimation is feature matching. A framework for object
recognition and pose estimation is described by Alvaro Collet et al. [10]. Images of the
object are taken in different poses, following which descriptors are generated from image
features using SIFT(Scale-invariant feature transform). These descriptors are invariant
to changes in scale, rotation and lighting conditions. Using the method described for
==PAGE:17==
2.2 6D Pose Estimation
7
extracting 3D shape and motion from image sequences described by Richard Szeliski et
al. [34], the information from each training image is merged into a sparse 3D model
using the matched Scale-Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) keypoints. The generated
3D points and descriptors are then used to generate the image to object pose relation.
An Iterative Clustering Estimation algorithm is proposed that given initial image-to-
model correspondences, computes the object poses that best fits each object instance.
The method shows good performance in complex scenes where the object is occluded
and also offers fast performance. According to Vincent Lepetit et al. [22], despite these
advantages feature matching based methods are limited by the requirement of textured
objects in high resolution images.
With the lower cost and easier availability of depth cameras, pose estimation has
seen the introduction of various approaches that leverage the depth data provided by
these devices and use Red Green Blue-Depth (RGB-D) images as input. The template
matching approach developed by Stefan Hinterstoisser et al. [19] uses a combination of
colour images and depth maps to extract the pose of objects of interest. The algorithm
shows good results even in cluttered environments. Brachmann et al. [5] use a regression
forest based approach followed by a RANSAC based optimisation approach to separate
out the object and to recover its pose. This research claims better performance than
template matching methods.
2.2.2
Deep Learning Based Approaches
Deep learning techniques have been increasingly used in recent years to solve the pose
estimation problem. Most of these leverage CNN based architectures to detect and com-
pute the pose of objects. These approaches are broadly based on two staged frameworks
such as Faster-Region Based Convolutional Neural Networks (RCNN) [33] and more
recently single stage frameworks such as Single Shot Detector (SSD)[25] and You Only
Look Once (YOLO) [32][31]. These frameworks use the LINEMOD [19] and OCCLU-
SION [5] datasets to evaluate and compare performance while solving the pose estimation
problem. The LINEMOD dataset is the standard benchmark for 6D pose estimation of
textureless objects in cluttered scenes. The central object in each RGB image is assigned
a ground truth rotation, translation and ID. The OCCLUSION dataset is a multi object
detection and pose estimation dataset with additional annotations for all objects in the
scene.
POSECNN [44] is a CNN based framework that accepts an RGB image as input and
solves the pose estimation problem by training the network to perform different tasks,
namely, semantic labelling, 3D rotation and 3D translation.
BB8 [30] uses multiple
stages, where one CNN segments the object out of the image while the second CNN
estimates the 2D pixel location of 3D bounding box from the segmentation followed by
using a Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithm to compute the 6D pose. There is also an
additional step detailed to refine the pose estimates. Even though, this method shows
good performance the multi stage nature results in slower processing times. SSD-6D
==PAGE:18==
8
2 Literature Review
[21] is a different approach that is based on the SSD[25] architecture to predict the 2D
bounding boxes of the object of interest and each 2D box is provided with a pool of
possible 6D poses for that instance. This method uses a final pose refinement step as
well.
Tekin et al. [35] proposed a single shot approach for simultaneously detecting an
object and predicting its 6D pose with respect to the camera frame without requiring
multiple stages or pose refinement steps. This network architecture is based on YOLO
[32][31]. The network predicts the 2D projections of the 3D bounding box coordinates
of the object of interest. The network also predicts the 2D projections of the centroid
of the object. The authors then use a PnP pose estimation method [23] to estimate the
6D pose of the object.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Analysis
The review of relevant work performed in Chapter 2 reveals that the previous research
performed for pallet pose estimation is limited. The research mainly focused on finding
the pose of the pallet in a single plane where the translation is available in x, y, z coor-
dinates while the rotation is only computed for a single axis. This single axis is usually
the vertical axis which is perpendicular to the plane of the pallet loading surface. These
approaches are successful when the pallets rotation is constrained to a single plane but
would struggle to accurately predict pose in cases where the pallet has rotation in other
axes.
Literature detailing object detection and 6D pose estimation were studied since there
is a possibility of leveraging these approaches to compute pallet poses. Of the approaches
explored, CNN based solutions using cameras to compute the 6D pose of objects were
particularly interesting. This is due to the great performance reported by these papers
on pose estimation tasks and the low cost of cameras. Of these approaches, the networks
utilising single stage operation, where the network has an image pass through just once
before making a prediction offer a good combination of accuracy and processing speed.
Singleshotpose [35] is a promising architecture to achieve the objectives listed in Sec-
tion 1.2. The fact that the network achieves a speed of 50 FPS running on a Titan X
GPU and still offers comparable performance to other approaches without extra pose
refinement steps makes it suitable for real time operation. Of course, the network perfor-
mance reported by the research is with reference to objects with small overall dimensions,
while the EUR pallet whose pose needs to be estimated is significantly larger.
The research into CNN based approaches for 6D pose revealed that these neural
networks require significant amounts of labelled ground truth pose data for achieving
good accuracy. It is significantly more complex to generate labelled 6D pose data vis-
a-vis generating labelled data for 2D applications. Hence, it was decided to utilise a
simulator to generate synthetic data as the ground truth labelling process is simpler in
the simulation environment where the object poses are directly available. Following the
validation of network performance using synthetic data, real data can then be acquired
and network performance in the real world evaluated.
==PAGE:20==
10
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 4
Theory
This chapter provides details and background on a few of the concepts and technologies
utilised in this project. The sections in this chapter are focused on the terms related
to training neural networks as well as concepts and algorithms specific to the pose
estimation problem.
4.1
Neural Networks
Neural networks are algorithms inspired from the human brain that are designed to
learn patterns in input data. They comprise of node layers, one input layer, one or
more hidden layers and an output layer. The depth in deep learning comes from the
depth or number of hidden layers present in the network. In these types of networks,
each node is connected to all other nodes in the preceding and following layers with
the connections between nodes having an associated weight attached. The output for
each node is a non linear function which has a linear combination of weighted outputs
from the previous layers as input parameter. The non-linear function which is called an
activation function helps to introduce non-linearities into the network. Some examples
of activation functions are the sigmoid and the tanh functions. These help the network
to learn complex patterns in data. A trained network would have optimum weights that
can map between inputs and outputs.
Figure 4.1 shows a simple neural network where red represents the input layer, while
the hidden layers are represented by green and finally the output layer is in blue. In
Figure 4.1, x1, x2 and x3 are input nodes which accept the input data while ˆy1 and ˆy2
are the output nodes.
A neural network learns a mapping from a set of input data to output data based
on labelled data. It is diﬀicult to directly calculate the optimum weights for deep neural
networks due to the large number of weights involved. Instead, an iterative process is
followed to find weights that can output good predictions. Usually, a network is trained
using the stochastic gradient descent algorithm and weights are updated using the back
propagation of error algorithm.
For training, the network is used to make a prediction and the prediction is compared
with the actual labelled data to generate an error. The gradient descent essentially finds
the derivative of this error to find the direction of decreasing error. This is then used
==PAGE:22==
12
4 Theory
to update the weights of the network with the objective of minimizing the error in the
next iteration of network training.
Figure 4.1: Neural Network.
4.1.1
Loss Functions
The loss function is a measure of how good or bad the network is performing. When
training a network, the object is to minimize the loss function. Loss functions are chosen
based on the task being performed by the network. They essentially provide a measure
of how much the network prediction varies from the actual labelled ground truth. An
example is the mean squared error which is the mean of the squared differences between
the predicted and actual values of the output. It is the default loss function for regression
problems.
4.2
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
Computer vision is one of the many fields that has seen impressive results from utilising
neural networks.
The standard densely connected neural networks described in the
previous section are not optimal for operating on image data. Images are of the form
(width * height * depth) where depth represents the number of color channels. A single
fully(densely) connected neuron in the first hidden layer of a network accepting a 360x480
image would have 360*480*3 connections which is equal to 518400 connections. The
connection number is equivalent to the number of weights connected to that single
neuron. This is a large number of weights to be optimised and it has to be noted that
the hidden layer would have multiple neurons, each with the same number of weights.
Moreover, densely connected neural networks cannot retain spatial information of input
images which means the network cannot learn any information based on the relative
positions of pixels in the image.
==PAGE:23==
4.2 Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
13
Figure 4.2: CNN Architecture.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are designed taking into account the spatial
restrictions introduced by having images as input. Unlike a regular neural network, each
layer in a CNN has neurons arranged in width, height and depth dimensions. A simple
CNN has three main type of layers: a convolutional layer, a pooling layer and a fully
connected layer [39]. Figure 4.2 shows a simple CNN architecture for classifying an
image as containing a lion or not.
Lets assume the input image is of dimensions 32x32x3. For the convolutional layer
to operate, we perform the convolution operation on each neuron in the input using
filter matrices of dimensions much smaller than the input image. Please note the filters
will have smaller height and width than the input image but depth would match that
of the input image. This filter is slid across the width and height of the image to return
a 2D activation map that gives the response of that filter at every position. Essentially,
the dot product of the weights in the filter matrix and the input neuron and its region
of same dimension is computed to get the output of the neuron taking into account its
local region as well. Each filter in the convolutional layer is designed to detect a specific
feature in the input. If the convolutional layer in Figure 4.2 has 12 filters, it would have
a dimension of 32x32x12. The elementwise application of Rectified Linear Units (ReLU)
activation which is the function f(x) = max(0, x) to the convolutional layer introduces
non-linearities to the convolutional layer. There is no change in dimensions of the layers
after applying ReLU.
The pooling layer is usually added between successive convolutional layers. This is
==PAGE:24==
14
4 Theory
done to reduce the spatial size of the representation which in turn reduces the number
of parameters and the computation in the network and also helps to reduce chances of
overfitting. Pooling acts independently on each depth slice of the convolutional layer
and applies the MAX operation. The pooling layer is usually a 2x2 filter applied with
a stride of 2. This essentially means the pooling filter replaces 4 values in the input
with a single value( the maximum) essentially resulting in discarding 75% of the values.
Pooling filter sizes are usually set to sizes of 2 or 3 since larger filter sizes can end up
removing too much data.
The output layer is a fully connected layer that computes the class scores, which
in the case of Figure 4.2 is ’lion’ and ’not lion’. It can be seen that the CNN converts
the image using multiple layers to the final class scores. The ReLU and pooling layers
are fixed functions, which means that the only variables are the parameters in the
convolutional layers. Therefore to train the CNN, the parameters in the convolutional
layers are trained using gradient descent so that the class scores are consistent with each
image in the training dataset.
4.3
Singleshotpose Network
The singleshotpose network [35] is a CNN architecture that is end-to-end trainable and
is capable of predicting 6D pose in real time. The network is designed to predict the 2D
projections of the 3D bounding box around the object. The network is inspired from the
YOLO architecture [32][31], specifically the YOLOv2 architecture [31]. While YOLO is
designed to predict the coordinates of 2D bounding boxes, adding a few more points to
the target output helps to predict the projections of 3D bounding box corners. Using
these 2D predictions and 3D ground control points for the bounding box corners, a PnP
algorithm [23] can calculate the 6D pose.
In this network, the 3D of each object 3D model is parametrized as 9 control points,
where the corner points of the bounding box fitted to the model constitute 8 points while
the centroid of the object model makes up the ninth point. These control points can be
used for objects of any shape since the parametrization is general in nature and is not
dependant on a detailed model or textures. Moreover, these points will be suﬀiciently
spread out in a 2D image.
The model takes an RGB image as input and processes using the architecture shown
in Figure 4.3 and divides the image into SxS grids as shown in Figure B of 4.4. Figure
A of 4.4 shows an example input image while Figure C shows the 2D bounding box
predictions on the image.
In the model, each grid location is associated with a 3D tensor which is the output
target value as shown in Figure D of 4.4. This 3D tensor consists of the 2D coordinates
of the predicted control points, the class probabilities of the object and a confidence
value. The cells where no objects are present, that is with a low confidence score will be
pruned during testing.
==PAGE:25==
4.3 Singleshotpose Network
15
Figure 4.3: Singleshotpose architecture [35].
Figure 4.4: Network output [35].
It is clear that the confidence value is crucial to recognise regions where objects
are present. While YOLO uses an Intersection over Union (IoU) score related to the
predicted rectangle to generate a confidence value, the same concept does not translate
to generating confidence values for a cuboid. This network uses a confidence function to
model the confidence score as shown in Equation 4.1. Here DT(x) is the 2D euclidean
distance in image space while α defines the sharpness of the exponential function and
dth is the threshold after which confidence goes to zero. During implementation, the
confidence function is calculated for all the control points and the mean is assigned as
confidence.
c(x) =



e
α(1−DT (x)
dth
)
ifDT(x) < dth
0
otherwise
(4.1)
As illustrated in Figure D in 4.4, the output 3D tensor has a shape of SxSxD, where
SxS is the spatial grid having SxS cells and each cell has a D dimensional vector. The
length of D is (9x2+C+1), where there are 9 control points, C class probabilities and
==PAGE:26==
16
4 Theory
one confidence value. The network has 23 convolution layers and 5 max pooling layers.
Similar to YOLOv2, a 13x13 spatial grid is used to make predictions with the intro-
duction of features at 26x26 image resolution from an earlier layer to allow the network
to learn fine-grained features. Figures 4.3 and 4.4 are sourced from the research paper
introducing this network [35].
4.4
PnP Algorithm
Perspective-n-Point (PnP) aims to determine the rotation and translation of a camera
given its intrinsic parameters and a set of n correspondences between 3D points and their
2D projections. There are multiple approaches available for solving this problem, but this
section focuses on the “EPnP: Eﬀicient Perspective-n-Point Camera Pose Estimation”
approach [23] which is the method used in this project for converting the 2D predictions
made by the singleshotpose network to rotation and translation information. OpenCV’s
solvePnP function implements this algorithm and can be used directly with the camera
intrinsics, 3D control points and corresponding 2D prediction as parameters.
The EPnP solution is a non-iterative approach that provides a nice middle ground
with better accuracy and lesser computational complexity than other non-iterative meth-
ods and faster processing times than iterative solutions to the PnP problem. This method
requires a minimum of 4 correspondences to determine the rotation and translation com-
pared to other solutions that work only with fixed small number of correspondences or
are much slower. In this project, the solvePnP function takes the 9 control points pre-
dicted by the singleshotpose network as input.
Let the reference points, whose 3D coordinates are known in world frame be
pi, i = 1, ..., n.
(4.2)
Let the 4 control points used to express their world coordinates be
cj, j = 1, ..., 4.
(4.3)
Each reference point can be represented as a weighted sum of control points. Here c
denotes with respect to camera frame and w denotes with respect to world frame.
pw
i =
4
∑
j=1
αijcw
j with
4
∑
j=1
αij = 1
(4.4)
where αij are homogeneous barycentric coordinates. The extra condition setting the
sum of the coordinates to 1 ensures that the barycentric coordinates are unique. The
same relation holds in camera coordinates.
==PAGE:27==
4.4 PnP Algorithm
17
pc
i =
4
∑
j=1
αijcc
j
(4.5)
The control points can be set arbitrarily but the authors suggest taking the centroid
of the reference points as one control point. Since we know the 2D projections of the
reference point, let uii=1,...,n be the 2D projection of the reference points pii=1,...,n and
letA be the camera internal calibration matrix.
∀i, wi
[
ui
1
]
= Apc
i = A
4
∑
j=1
αijcc
j
(4.6)
Expanding Equation 4.6,
∀i, wi


ui
vi
1

=


fu
0
uc
0
fv
vc
0
0
1


4
∑
j=1
αij


xc
j
yc
j
zc
j


(4.7)
The unknowns in the system are the 12 control point coordinates (xc
j, yc
j, zc
j)j=1,...,4
and the n projective parameters (wi)i=1,...,n. By analysing Equation 4.7, we can see that
wi = ∑4
j=1 αijzc
j. Using this condition, we can derive 2 linear equations for each reference
point:
4
∑
j=1
αijfuxc
j + αij(uc −ui)zc
j = 0
(4.8)
4
∑
j=1
αijfvyc
j + αij(vc −vi)zc
j = 0
(4.9)
Equations for the reference points can be concatenated to an equation of the form
Mx = 0
(4.10)
where x = [c1cT , c2cT , c3cT , c4cT ]
T is a vector of length 12. This equation can be solved
to extract the x values which are essentially the reference points in the camera frame.
Once the reference points in world coordinate system and camera coordinate system
are available, the rotation and translation between the two sets of coordinates can be
calculated [37].
==PAGE:28==
18
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 5
System Description
System description provides details on the software and hardware used to generate the
data used to test the model. Since the project implementation depended on synthetic
data initially to validate the network capability to predict 6D pose of the pallet from
RGB images followed by a phase of validation using real world data, this chapter will
have two subsections, one focusing on the setup used for generating synthetic data, while
the other subsection will focus on the hardware and tools used to generate real world
data from a single EUR pallet.
5.1
Synthetic Data
For generating synthetic data, the simulator platform chosen was Gazebo [15] while the
actual programming interaction with the simulator was performed using Robot Operat-
ing System (ROS). Gazebo was chosen as it’s a physics simulator with inbuilt support
for ROS and ROS powered hardware which provides the possibility of eventually set-
ting up a full simulation environment where actual strategies for pallet handling can be
designed and transferred to hardware with relative ease. Further, it was envisaged that
the authors familiarity with the platform would enable easier setup of the simulation
environment.
5.1.1
Gazebo
Gazebo is an open source 3D simulator that is popular in the robotics community for
simulating robots in complex indoor and outdoor environments for testing robot designs
and algorithms. Gazebo offers a physical engine, high quality graphics and the ability
to interact with and modify the simulation environment using code. Gazebo also offers
a model database with a large collection of popular models as well as the capability to
render high quality textures on simulated models. For the purpose of generating data for
the pallet pose estimation problem, a EUR pallet from the model database was imported
into an empty environment. Then a camera model was imported to capture images of
the pallet. The gravity for the camera model was switched off so that it was possible to
move the camera to different poses to get image sequences of the pallet. A frame from
the Gazebo environment setup for data collection is shown in Figure 5.1. The simulator
is capable of returning the pose of models with respect to the world.
==PAGE:30==
20
5 System Description
Gazebo allows the use of C++ plugins to modify and extract information from the
simulation environment. A C++ plugin was added to the Gazebo environment to return
the 3D coordinates of the bounding box corners of loaded models. This enables the
extraction of bounding box coordinates for the pallet in world frame.
Figure 5.1: Gazebo Environment with pallet and camera models loaded.
5.1.2
ROS
ROS Noetic Ninjemys was used to interface between the Gazebo simulator and the
python scripts performing the image and pose capture. This version is targeted for the
Ubuntu 20.04 release with an end of life date of May 2025. ROS was the middleware
of choice for interacting with the simulator due to the already existing integrations and
wide support for Gazebo. For the creation of synthetic data, ROS is used to command
the camera to different poses and to capture pallet images and pose.
While most of the ROS implementation depends on the publisher-subscriber model
to receive and transmit information, the pose change of the camera is handled using
services. Essentially, Gazebo offers a service that accepts pose messages and allows a
client node to provide poses for models in the environment. A client node was created
in ROS that interacts with this service and provides new pose commands to the camera
model for generating images. More details of the data acquisition setup and how ROS
and Gazebo interact with each other are provided in Section 5.1.3.
5.1.3
Data Acquisition Setup
The data acquisition setup for synthetic data at a basic level involves keeping the camera
at different poses in the world and saving the corresponding image and poses of both the
camera and the pallet. Figure 5.2 shows the interaction between ROS and Gazebo for
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Real Data
21
Figure 5.2: Interaction between ROS and Gazebo.
generating data. Here all the ROS functionality is concentrated in the Data Extraction
node.
Essentially, the node acts as a client and makes a service request to Gazebo
for moving the camera to a new pose. Once the pose change is performed, the node
subscribes to the camera topic to save an image at the new pose. This topic has the
RGB data from the camera being published continuously. The node then subscribes
to Gazebo’s model states topic to extract and saves the pallet and camera pose with
reference to simulation world frame. Once the data is saved, the node commands another
pose for the camera. The data acquisition is handled by a python script that commands
a large number of camera poses and extracts and saves the corresponding images and
poses. Please note, the script was run multiple times with the pallet having different
surface textures to generate 4715 images of which 943 images were reserved for the test
dataset.
5.2
Real Data
An Intel RealSense camera was used for generating the RGB-D images of a EUR pallet,
which are further processed to create the real world dataset with ground truth labels.
5.2.1
Intel RealSense Depth Camera D455
The Intel RealSense D455 is a stereo vision depth camera system with a Universal
Serial Bus (USB) 3.1 connection to the host processor. The camera leverages the Intel
RealSense SDK 2.0 which is an open source cross platform library. The system is a
combination of a stereo depth module, RGB sensor and an Inertial Measurement Unit
(IMU). The depth sensors work at a resolution of 1280x720 resolution while the RGB
sensor operates at a maximum resolution of 1280x800 with a supported frame rate of
up to 90 FPS. For the purpose of generating data, both sensors are set to operate at
1280x720 resolution. The camera system has a depth range varying from 0.4 to 10 metres.
==PAGE:32==
22
5 System Description
Figure 5.3: Intel RealSense Depth Camera D455.
Figure 5.4 shows the RGB and depth images generated by the camera in real time in the
realsense-viewer software. As shown by the ruler at the side of the depth image, bluer
parts of the image are closer to the camera while redder parts are farther away. It has
to be noted that the effective depth estimation range of the system is dependant on the
lighting conditions and reflective properties of the objects in frame.
Figure 5.4: RGB and Depth Image from Intel Depth Camera.
5.2.2
Aruco Markers
The main concern while creating the real world dataset is the question of pose estimation
of the pallet for generating ground truth labels. The obvious solution is to find feature
==PAGE:33==
5.2 Real Data
23
Figure 5.5: 6x6 aruco marker with ID 3.
matches between points in the 3D world and their 2D image projections [28]. Since this
is not a trivial problem to solve, fiducial markers are used to make the task easier.
Aruco markers are binary square fiducial markers. The advantage is that a single
marker provides four corners to find the camera pose.
OpenCV provides an aruco
module that is based on the ArUco library, a popular library for detection of square
fiducial markers that has the capability to detect aruco markers, return their ID and also
provide the pixel coordinates of the four corners [17]. Aruco markers are square markers
with a black border and an inner binary marker that determines its identifier. These
markers can be rotated and the detection module can still detect its original rotation.
The module consists of a dictionary with a range of dictionary sizes and marker sizes.
The marker sizes vary from 4x4 to 7x7 grids while the dictionary sizes can vary from
50, 100, 250 and 1000 available identifiers. The aruco markers used in this thesis are
of marker size 6x6 and dictionary size 1000. Figure 5.5 shows an image of one of the
markers used in this thesis.
5.2.3
EUR Pallet
Pallets on a basic level are platforms fixed to a sturdy base usually made of wood. They
allow forklifts and other transport vehicles to lift and move goods. They also protect
goods from damage. EUR pallets are an important part of logistics operations. They are
the most widely used pallet type in the world and mainly used in Europe. Around 450-
500 million of these pallets are in circulation [13]. All of these pallets contain the EUR
logo or in some cases the EPAL logo. A EUR pallet measures 1200x800x144 millimetres
with a pallet weight of around 25 kilograms and can support a constant load of 1500
kilograms.
This thesis is centered around the pose estimation of the EUR pallet. Figure 5.6
==PAGE:34==
24
5 System Description
Figure 5.6: EUR pallet with aruco marker array.
shows the EUR pallet used for data generation with the aruco marker array to aid in
generating ground truth labels.
5.2.4
Data Acquisition Setup
Figure 5.7: Data Acquisition Setup for Real Data.
The process for data acquisition is simple as shown in Figure 5.7. Essentially, the
laptop running the sequence recording code is set up on a small wheeled platform and
the RealSense camera is attached to it. The recorded sequence length is 40 seconds
==PAGE:35==
5.2 Real Data
25
where the platform is used to go around the pallet while ensuring that the camera has
the complete pallet in frame along with ensuring that the maximum number of aruco
markers are visible for aiding pose estimation. It has to be noted that limited angles
were recorded of the pallet from a look down camera angle to ensure proper transforms
were generated between the frames. This was not an issue in the simulator since Gazebo
can return the pose of objects at any pose without the aid of markers. Using this setup,
a total of 620 images were generated with 124 images reserved for the test dataset.
==PAGE:36==
26
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 6
Methodology
In Chapter 5, the software and hardware used to generate the data required to train
the network for 6D pose estimation of pallets is detailed. This chapter deals with the
methodology used in actually generating and labelling the data as well as the details of
the steps involved in training the network.
6.1
Synthetic Dataset
Section 5.1.3 details the software used for generating the RGB images and pose of the
EUR pallet and camera with respect to the world frame in simulation. In this section,
the further processing of the data required for creation of a dataset compatible with the
singleshotpose [35] network is discussed.
6.1.1
Compute Pallet Pose with respect to Camera
The Gazebo simulator is capable of returning the pose of models spawned in the envi-
ronment with respect to the world frame, but for training the network we need the pose
of the pallet with respect to the camera.
The frames set by Gazebo follows the standard setup where the z axis points upwards
while for cameras the convention is z axis points out of the camera into the world. This
is important in the following sections where we project 3D points to 2D. To make the
camera frame compatible with the projection formula, we transform the camera frame
to the conventional frame before calculating the pallet transform with respect to the
camera.
Let wTc be the homogeneous transformation matrix of the camera frame with respect
to the world frame and wTp be the homogeneous transformation matrix of the pallet
frame with respect to the world. The transformation of the pallet frame with respect to
the camera frame is given by
cTp = cTw.wTp
(6.1)
We have wTc from Gazebo, we can see that
cTw = (wTc)−1
(6.2)
==PAGE:38==
28
6 Methodology
Figure 6.1: Synthetic dataset generation.
Then the transformation from the pallet frame to the camera frame becomes
cTp = (wTc)−1.wTp
(6.3)
For a homogeneous transform matrix, the inverse is relatively easy to calculate since
it is undoing the rotation and translation performed by the transformation. Let T be a
homogeneous transformation matrix
T =
[
R3x3
d3x3
01x3
11x1
]
(6.4)
The inverse of T becomes,
==PAGE:39==
6.1 Synthetic Dataset
29
T −1 =
[
R−1
3x3
−(R−1d)3x3
01x3
11x1
]
(6.5)
But for a rotation matrix, the inverse is same as the transpose. Since calculating
transpose is computationally less expensive, we replace the inverses operation with the
transpose
T −1 =
[
RT
3x3
−(RTd)3x3
01x3
11x1
]
(6.6)
6.1.2
Project Pallet Bounding Box Corners to 2D and
Create Labels
For generating the labels for network training, it is essential to project the 3D bounding
box corners and the centroid of the pallet to image coordinates. The plugin described in
Section 5.1.1 is used to extract the 3D coordinates of the pallet bounding box corners. To
project from 3D to 2D, we use the camera matrix which is available from the simulator.
P =


fx
0
cx
Tx
0
fy
cy
Ty
0
0
1
0


(6.7)
This matrix projects 3D points in the camera coordinate frame to 2D pixel coordi-
nates. Here fx, fy are the focal points of the camera while cx, cy are the principal points.
For the camera model used in this setup, Tx, Ty is 0. The actual values returned by
Gazebo for the camera matrix is given by
P =


554.25
0
320.5
0
0
554.25
240.5
0
0
0
1
0


(6.8)
Given a 3D point (X, Y, Z), the projection (x, y) of the point onto the image plane
is given by


u
v
w

= P


X
Y
Z
1


(6.9)
Then (x, y) becomes
x = u
w
(6.10)
==PAGE:40==
30
6 Methodology
y = v
w
(6.11)
This equation is used to create the label files for generating the ground truths for
pallet pose in the camera frame. Figure 6.2 shows one of the training images with the
bounding corners and centroid projected onto the image.
6.1.3
Create Segmentation Masks
The network uses segmentation masks with the pallet pixels in white and all the other
pixels in black to help generalise the network. For the synthetic images, the segmenta-
tion is performed in the Hue-Saturation-Value (HSV) colour space. The advantage of
using HSV is that it becomes possible to separate the colour and intensity components
of the image, which in turn makes it easier to recognise colours irrespective of lighting
conditions or shadows in the image. For segmenting the image, lower and upper thresh-
olding ranges for the colour brown are inputted into the OpenCV ’inRange’ function to
generate a mask image. Figure 6.2 shows an example of the mask generated during this
step.
Figure 6.2: Synthetic Data 2D projected points and segmentation mask.
==PAGE:41==
6.2 Real Dataset
31
6.2
Real Dataset
In this section, the generation and processing of the data from the setup described in
5.2.4 is detailed.
Figure 6.3: Real dataset generation.
The Object Dataset Tools package [41] contains a set of scripts used to generate
the required data for the singleshotpose network. This includes generating label files,
segmentation masks and a reconstructed object mesh stored in the Polygon File Format
(PLY) format. The steps involved in generating the files required for training the network
are detailed below.
==PAGE:42==
32
6 Methodology
6.2.1
Record Sequence
The librealsense Software Development Kit (SDK) 2.0 is used to interface with the Intel
RealSense D455 camera.
It is a cross platform library that allows depth and color
streaming as well as returns the intrinsic as well as extrinsic calibration information.
This library allows the possibility to align depth and color images and save them as well.
For generating data, a sequence of frames is generated by moving the camera around
the pallet for a time period of 40 seconds ensuring that the pallet is always completely
in frame and also taking care to ensure that the maximum number of aruco markers are
visible in each frame. The output of this stage is a set of aligned depth and color images
extracted from the image stream as well as the camera intrinsics saved in a file.
6.2.2
Generate Frame Transforms
Transforms have to be generated to align one frame with another. For this purpose,
multiway registration functionality of the open3d library [27] is used. Multiway regis-
tration is the process of aligning pieces of geometries in a global frame. The input for
registration are point clouds derived from the RGB-D output of the RealSense camera
Pi and the output is a set of transformations Ti such that TiPi is aligned in global space.
Open3d implements multiway registration using pose graph optimization [9]. A pose
graph is a representation consisting of nodes and edges. The nodes represent the geome-
try Pi while the edges represent the transform Ti. To generate the transforms, the script
uses marker registration as the primary means of finding transforms and uses ICP to
compute transforms if an insuﬀicient number of markers( less than 2) are detected in
the frame.
The aruco markers array described in system description [5] are used for finding
transforms between consecutive frames. When an aruco marker is detected by the code,
the marker id and corner coordinates of the marker are returned. Consecutive frames are
processed and if there are 2 or more of the same marker ids visible, marker registration is
initiated. Essentially the corner coordinates of the same marker id can be considered as
the same feature in both frames and the respective 3D points in the point cloud can be
extracted. This set of features extracted from consecutive frames are fed into RANSAC
and the transform is generated between consecutive frames. RANSAC is an iterative
method used to find the best fitting model for a set of data points.
ICP is a very popular algorithm used for geometric registration. The input for the
algorithm is two point clouds and the output is a transformation that aligns the two
point clouds. ICP works by finding a correspondence set K = {p, q} from target point
cloud P, and source point cloud Q transformed with current transformation matrix T.
This transformation matrix is updated with the objective of minimising an objective
function E(T). This particular script implements the point-to-plane version of ICP [8]
where the objective function is given by
==PAGE:43==
6.2 Real Dataset
33
E(T) =
∑
(p,q)∈K
((p −Tq).np)2
(6.12)
where np is the normal of pointp.
6.2.3
Register Frames and Create Mesh
In this step, the script accepts as input the list of point clouds and the transforms gener-
ated in the previous step. After transforming the point clouds to the same frame using
the transforms, these point clouds are merged to create a mesh of the scene captured by
the recording process. It has to be noted that the generated mesh will contain the whole
scene including the aruco markers as well as any other object captured in the scene.
6.2.4
Manually Edit Mesh and Fill Up Gaps
In this step, the mesh generated in the previous step is imported into MeshLab which
is an open source software used for editing meshes.
After importing the mesh, the
background is removed, surface reconstruction is performed and noise is removed. The
result from manually editing the mesh is shown in Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: Pallet model after processing.
==PAGE:44==
34
6 Methodology
6.2.5
Create Label Files
After creating the mesh, in this step the label files are generated. As a first step, the
mesh generated in the first step is reoriented in a Axis-Aligned Bounding Box (AABB)
centered at the origin with the same dimensions as the original mesh bounding box. This
mesh is saved as a PLY file which is used in further steps. After aligning the mesh, the
camera matrix and the relative pose of the pallet with respect to the camera which is
available from the transforms computed in Section 6.2.2 are used to create labels where
the 3D bounding box corners of the aligned mesh are transformed to pixel coordinates.
For the Intel RealSense camera, the camera matrix is given by
P =


636.72
0
641.9
0
0
636.72
371.07
0
0
0
1
0


(6.13)
In addition to the reoriented mesh and label files, the script also creates segmentation
masks for helping generalise the network. Figure 6.5 shows a representation of the label
data for a single frame as well as the respective segmentation mask.
Figure 6.5: Real Data label visualised and segmentation mask.
6.3
Pose Estimation using Generated Data
The singleshotpose network as described in Section 4.3 was used to detect the 6D pose
in this thesis. In this section, details are provided of the steps involved in training the
network which includes the software framework and training hardware as well as some
details on the actual training procedure.
6.3.1
Software Framework and Training Hardware
The model [36] has been implemented using the PyTorch [29] machine learning frame-
work which is built as an open source library on python. The specific version of PyTorch
==PAGE:45==
6.3 Pose Estimation using Generated Data
35
used is 1.8.0 with CUDA 11.1 support. The use of CUDA allows the training process to
leverage the computing power of GPUs and dramatically speed up the training process.
The model was trained using the Tesla V100 GPU with 32 GB of memory. This GPU
was one of the several options available at the Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU)
Compute Cluster which is available for all students to access using university credentials.
The GPUs are a shared resource where users are allowed to request GPU resources using
batch jobs. A batch job is a script specifying the exact number of Central Processing
Unit (CPU) cores, GPU model, time for which the resources are required, environment
setup for the code and finally the actual scripts to execute.
6.3.2
Data Augmentation
Data augmentation is the technique by which random but realistic transformations are
applied to data to increase the amount of data points.
This allows the network to
generalise better and reduces the chances of overfitting when training. Overfitting is
a condition when the network fits perfectly to its training data, but starts performing
poorly on unseen validation data resulting in poor real world performance.
This network uses common data augmentation methods such as changing the training
image hue, saturation, exposure and introduction of jitter while training. To help the
network generalise and not get influenced by specific backgrounds, the segmentation
masks described in Sections 6.1 and 6.2 are used to segment the pallets out and insert a
random image from the PASCAL VOC dataset [14] as the background. This dataset is
mainly used for object recognition tasks with 20 categories of objects including people,
vehicles and other household objects. The images in this dataset are used for switching
the backgrounds.
Figure 6.6: Sample Images - Augmentation on synthetic data.
In addition to the standard augmentations, an extra attempt was made on the syn-
thetic data to generalise the networks training and prevent the network from learning
==PAGE:46==
36
6 Methodology
specific pallet textures or backgrounds. In this setup, the generated segmentation mask
for the training image is used to generate two image variants. The first variant has a
random color for the pallet and a random color as the background, the second variant
has a random color for the pallet and random pixels for the background. Sample images
from the augmented dataset are shown in Figure 6.6. The ability of these augmenta-
tions to improve network generalisation is not known since no tests were performed with
pallets of different textures in simulation.
6.3.3
Control Points and Loss Functions
From Figure 4.3, the final output layer of the network returns the class probabilities,
(x, y) coordinates of the control points and the overall confidence score. The 2D coor-
dinates are predicted by adding an offset to (cx, cy), the top left corner of the grid cell.
For the centroid, this offset is set between 0 and 1 while for the corner points there are
no limitations in the offsets since these can fall outside the cell. The predicted control
point gx, gy is defined in Equations 6.14 and 6.15.
gx = f(x) + cx
(6.14)
gy = f(y) + cy
(6.15)
Here f(.) is chosen to be a sigmoid function to limit the centroid offset between 0
and 1. For the 8 corner points, f(.) is set as the identity function. The loss function to
minimise while training the network is given by Equation 6.16.
L = λptLpt + λconfLconf + λidLid
(6.16)
In Equation 6.16, Lpt, Lconf and Lid are respectively the coordinate, confidence and
classification loss. Here λ are the weight values while L represents the loss values. For
cells with no objects, λconf is set to 0.1 to improve model stability, while for cells con-
taining objects λconf is set to 5.0. λpt and λid are set to 1. Mean squared error is used
for coordinate and confidence loss while cross entropy error is used for classification loss.
Mean Squared Error = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(6.17)
Cross Entropy Error = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(yi log (ˆyi) + (1 −yi) log (1 −ˆyi))
(6.18)
where n is the number of points, y is the ground truth value and ˆy is the predicted
value.
During training, the confidence value is calculated using Equation 4.1 to measure the
distance between ground truth and predicted coordinates. For scenarios where objects
==PAGE:47==
6.3 Pose Estimation using Generated Data
37
are close to one another, there is a possibility of objects being close to or occluding each
other. To account for this, the network assumes a maximum of 5 objects are visible in
a grid cell and computes 5 sets of control points per cell.
6.3.4
Pose Estimation and Implementation
The parameters of the network are initialised by training on the ImageNet [11] classi-
fication task. In essence, the network weights are set to these weights before training
for the pallet pose estimation task. The confidence values are unreliable in the initial
stages. To overcome this, λconf is set to 0 and the network is pretrained for a few epochs.
For the pallet dataset, the network was pretrained for 15 epochs. After pretraining, the
standard λconf values described in the previous sections are used. The parameters for the
confidence function described in Equation 4.1 are set as α = 2 and distance threshold,
dth is set to 30 pixels. Stochastic gradient descent is used for minimising the loss [6.16]
with an initial learning rate of 0.001 and the learning rate is divided by 10 for every 100
epochs of training.
The pose estimation is performed by the network viewing an input RGB image once.
As described in Section 4.3, the network returns a 3D tensor of shape SxSxD. Class
specific confidence scores are calculated by multiplying the confidence function result and
the respective objective class probabilities. Each cell in the grid produces a prediction
and some cells are pruned based on low confidence scores. For large objects, it would
follow that nearby cells in the grid would return high confidence scores. To help with
this, the cells in the 3x3 neighbourhood of the cell with the maximum confidence score
in the region is processed and the corner predictions of the related cells are combined
using a weighted average where the contribution of a cell is determined by the confidence
score that it returns.
During testing, the network returns the 2D projections of the 9 control points. These
points along with the 3D bounding box coordinates are used to generate the rotation
and translation matrices of the pallet in camera coordinates using the PnP algorithm
[23].
==PAGE:48==
38
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 7
Results
The results chapter is divided into four sections. The first section introduces the pa-
rameters used in evaluating the performance of the network on both synthetic and real
world data. The second section describes the networks performance on the data gener-
ated from the Gazebo simulator. The third section describes the networks performance
on the test dataset of the real world dataset while the results from tests performed in
different conditions such as indoor, under occlusion and outdoors are presented in the
fourth section.
Figure 7.1: Result visualisation - ground truth in green and prediction in blue.
In Figure 7.1, the output from the network is visualised as a 2D bounding box on an
image picked from the test set from both synthetic data as well as real world data. The
green box represents the ground truth while the prediction is drawn in blue.
7.1
Parameters
7.1.1
Translation Error
For computing the translation error, the 2D corner values predicted by the network
and the 3D mesh corners are inputted to the PnP algorithm [23] and the rotation and
translation matrices are extracted. This predicted translation is then compared to the
ground truth translation to compute the translation error. Please note, camera intrinsics
==PAGE:50==
40
7 Results
are required for the PnP algorithm to work.
Translation Error =
√
(tgx −tpx)2 + (tgy −tpy)2 + (tgz −tpz)2
(7.1)
where tg is the ground truth translation and tp is the predicted translation.
7.1.2
Angle Error
Angle error in this section is the angular distance between the ground truth rotation
matrix and the predicted rotation matrix. Both rotation matrices are outputs from the
PnP algorithm [23] when ground truth and predictions in 2D as well as the 3D mesh
corners are fed in as inputs respectively. We know that Rgt and Rpr are orthogonal
matrices. The distance between rotations represented by rotation matrices Rgt and Rpr
is the angle of the difference rotation represented by the rotation matrix Rdiff [4].The
difference between the two rotation matrices are
Rdiff = Rgt.RT
pr
(7.2)
Using Rodrigues rotation formula [16], we can retrieve the axis-angle representation
of the difference rotation matrix, which gives components of one vector in the world
frame, and an angle of rotation about that vector. This angle of rotation is the angle of
difference rotation in this case. We can calculate the angle of difference rotation from
the trace of Rdiff, where trace is the sum of elements in the main diagonal. We know
from Rodrigues rotation formula [16] that
trace(Rdiff) = 1 + 2 cos θ
(7.3)
θ = arccostRdiff −1
2
(7.4)
where θ is the angle error.
7.1.3
Correctly Estimated Poses with ADD Metric
The average distance (ADD) metric was proposed by Hinterstoisser et al. [18] to compute
the mean distance between the ground truth coordinates of the 3D mesh vertices and
network predicted 3D vertex coordinates. Then the ADD metric becomes
ADD = 1
m
∑
x∈M
∥(Rx + T) −( ˆRx + ˆT) ∥2
(7.5)
where m is the number of vertices of the 3D model, M is the set of all 3D vertices
of the model, p = [R|T] is the ground truth pose and ˆp = [ ˆR| ˆT] is the estimated pose
==PAGE:51==
7.2 Synthetic Dataset
41
and Rx + T denotes transforming the point with the given pose p. Once the metric is
computed, we regard the maximum distance as the diameter of the model. Then a pose
estimate is considered to be correct if the average distance is within 10% of the model
diameter. Then the pose estimation accuracy using ADD metric with a threshold of
10% of model diameter becomes
Correct Pose % = (Images where ADD <= 0.1*diameter)
Total Images
∗100
(7.6)
For most objects in the LINEMOD datatset [19], this threshold is around 2 centime-
tres but the EUR pallet for which the pose estimation is being performed is much larger
in dimensions. The diameter of the pallet is 1.44 metres for the real pallet, while the
diameter for the simulated pallet model is 1.43 metres. Then the accurate pose esti-
mation threshold becomes 14.4 centimetres for the real pallet and 14.3 centimetres for
the simulated pallet. The network pose estimation accuracy using the ADD metric at a
threshold of 10% of model diameter is listed in Table 7.1.
7.1.4
5 cm 5 degree Metric
This metric puts a combination condition on translation and angle error to compute if
a pose is correctly predicted. Essentially, for an input image if the translation error is
less than or equal to 5 cm and the angle error is less than or equal to 5 degrees, it is
considered an accurate prediction. The network pose prediction accuracy using the 5
cm 5 degree metric is listed in Table 7.1.
7.2
Synthetic Dataset
As described in Chapter 6, synthetic data was generated using the Gazebo simulator
and annotated to train the singleshotpose network [35].
The trained model performance was validated on 943 images, the results are described
below.
7.2.1
Translation and Angle Error
In this section, histograms were plotted for both the translation error and angular error
computed from the test set of the synthetic data. The mean translation and angle error
are listed in Table 7.1.
The translation error histogram [7.2] shows that the major part of the images were
processed with a translation error less than or around 0.1 metres.
The angle error histogram [7.3] shows that the angle error for the majority of images
comes within 4 degrees.
==PAGE:52==
42
7 Results
If the mean values for both translation and angle error are closely examined, it
becomes clear that even though the majority of images have returned low errors, the
mean is located much farther than the major distribution of images. It can also be
observed that all the 943 input images are not represented in the histogram. This is
due to the presence of a few input images that caused the network to return large error
values and causes the mean values to go up. These images are not represented in these
plots to improve readability.
Figure 7.2: Translation Error Histogram for synthetic data.
7.3
Real Dataset
The methodology described in Section 6 was used to generate real world training data
using aruco markers and Iterative Closest Point (ICP). The trained model was evaluated
on 124 images and the results are detailed below.
7.3.1
Translation and Angle Error
Translation and Angle error histograms were plotted for the test images in the real
world dataset. The plots show the image distribution with respect to translation error
in metres and angle error in degrees.
The translation error histogram [7.4] shows that the majority of the images are
distributed around the 0.02 metre mark with a mean of 0.026 metres. The maximum
error reported by the plot is well within 0.1 metres.
==PAGE:53==
7.3 Real Dataset
43
Figure 7.3: Angle Error Histogram for synthetic data.
The angle error histogram [7.5] shows that the image distribution is distributed
around the 1 degree mark with a mean of 1.02 degrees. The maximum angle error from
the plot is less than 4 degrees.
Unlike the plots in Section 7.2.1, all test images are represented in the histogram
distributions in this section.
7.3.2
Prediction Time
One of the requirements in Section 1.2 was a model that can predict pose at a minimum
of 2 FPS while running on inexpensive hardware. This was evaluated by recording the
time time taken by the network to process each frame and then plotting the prediction
time with respect to the frame number. This test was performed on two different GPUs,
a NVIDIA GTX 1050 Ti which is a graphics card released in 2016 and a NVIDIA Tesla
V100 which is a data center GPU released in 2017.
The results show that on the GTX 1050 Ti, the mean time to make a prediction
is 0.059 seconds which is equivalent to processing frames at the rate of 16 FPS. While
using the Tesla V100 the mean prediction time comes down to 0.014 seconds which is
equivalent to processing at 71 FPS. It should be noted that these results can also be
affected if the GPU resources are shared by some other system process. For example, the
GTX 1050 Ti also drives a laptop display while running the predictions. The GTX 1050
Ti launched as an entry level GPU retailing at 875 DKK on launch and still manages to
process frames at an average speed of 16 FPS which achieves one of the objectives of pose
==PAGE:54==
44
7 Results
Figure 7.4: Translation Error Histogram for real data.
Figure 7.5: Angle Error for real data.
estimation using affordable hardware. Of course, the exact frame rate required for pallet
pose estimation has to be decided after further study of the operating environment.
==PAGE:55==
7.4 Performance in Different Conditions
45
Figure 7.6: Prediction Time.
Parameters
Synthetic Dataset
(943 Images)
Real Dataset
(124 Images)
Mean Translation Error
0.130991 m
0.026187 m
Mean Angle Error
5.396487◦
1.028797◦
ADD metric accuracy(10% threshold)
92.79%
100%
5 cm 5 degree accuracy
60.02%
91.94%
Table 7.1: Network Performance.
7.4
Performance in Different Conditions
In this section, the model trained on the real world data was used to predict poses of
pallets placed in different environments namely indoors, outdoors and under occlusion
to evaluate performance in unstructured environments.
It has to be noted that the
network hasn’t trained on any of the images from this set. The images cover a wider
variety of camera angles compared to the training set and also introduces varied lighting
conditions and backgrounds. Of course, the images generated for this experiment do
not have ground truth pallet poses available. In Figures 7.7, 7.8 and 7.9, the images
are arranged in three columns. The first column from the left has images where the
networks predicted bounding box was aligning perfectly, while the middle column has
predictions with small errors and the final column has images where the network failed
in predicting the correct bounding box coordinates.
==PAGE:56==
46
7 Results
Due to a lack of ground truth, it is not possible to programmatically evaluate perfor-
mance. But to get a sense of the networks performance, the pose estimation accuracy
is evaluated by manually inspecting the fit of the bounding box around the pallet. For
sorting, all images where the network had made perfect predictions as well as predictions
with minor errors were classed as successful predictions. In indoor conditions [7.7], for
a total of 308 images the network was successful in fitting the 2D bounding box for
186 images. In outdoor conditions [7.8], the network was successful in fitting the 2D
bounding box for 141 images out of 312 images. Finally, under occluded conditions [7.9]
the network successfully predicted the 2D bounding box coordinates for 84 images out
of a total of 306 input images. It has to be noted that the network was never trained
on occluded images and that is reflected in the results.
Figure 7.7: Network prediction in indoor conditions.
7.5
Summary
Table 7.1 summarises the performance of the network on both the synthetic and real data.
It has to be noted that the second column of the table lists the performance of the model
that is trained solely on synthetic data while the third column lists the performance of
the model trained solely on real data. Both models have their performance evaluated
on test datasets reserved from their respective datasets.
The synthetic dataset is much larger(4715 images) with the distance of the pallet from
the camera ranging from 50 centimetres to around 7 metres and the camera pose with
respect to the pallet varying to a large degree. On the other hand, the real world dataset
is small(620 images) with the pallet at a near constant distance from the camera and
==PAGE:57==
7.5 Summary
47
Figure 7.8: Network prediction in outdoor setting.
Figure 7.9: Network prediction under occlusion.
with very limited camera poses with respect to the pallet. This is due to the limitations
of the data acquisition setup for real data detailed in Section 5.2.4.
It can be seen that the pose estimation accuracy is 60.02% for synthetic data and
91.94% for real data using the 5 cm 5 degree metric. While using the ADD metric
with a threshold of 10% of model diameter, the pose estimation accuracy is 92.79% for
==PAGE:58==
48
7 Results
synthetic data and 100% for real data. The network can process input frames at the
rate of 16 FPS on an Nvidia GTX 1050 Ti GPU.
When the model trained on the real dataset was tested under different conditions
[7.4], the pallet pose estimation accuracy on images taken with different backgrounds and
outdoors under the sun was average with a little more than 50% of pallet poses predicted
correctly. It was noticed that the network had diﬀiculties accurately estimating pose for
camera angles which were not covered by the training data. On testing under occlusion,
the network performance was poor with correct pose predictions at less than 30%. For
working under occlusion, the network has to be trained on images where the object of
interest is occluded as in the Occlusion dataset [5]. However, the current model is not
trained on images of occluded pallets.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
In this chapter, some observations from the previous sections are detailed as well as
the limitations noticed in the current implementation. Additionally, the final section
discusses the possibilities of enhancing the current system based on the learnings from
the project.
This project followed an implementation flow where synthetic data was initially used
to train the network. This step helped prove the networks ability outside of the standard
datasets to compute the 6D pose of pallets from just RGB images. Moreover, the com-
plicated and time consuming steps involved in calculating the pallet pose with respect
to the camera frame could be simplified due to the simulator reporting model poses with
respect to its world frame. Once setup, the data acquisition setup could create as many
labelled images as required with minimal effort.
Once the network proved its ability to reliably predict pallet poses, real data had to be
generated which necessitated generating labelling data for real world pallet images. To
generate labelling data, it is essential to calculate the pallet pose with respect to camera
frame and this cannot be directly calculated in the real world. This was achieved by
modifying the environment around the pallet by including a grid of aruco markers. The
process of generating the labelling data involved generating transforms that align one
frame of the recorded sequence with the other. It was noticed that marker registration
using aruco markers worked much better than ICP while computing the transforms. To
achieve this, the camera was held at limited angles while recording to ensure maximum
number of aruco markers are visible in the frame.
The trained models performance was evaluated both on the test set as well as on
image sequences in different environments. On the test set, the accuracy was 91.94%
using the 5 cm 5 degree metric as shown in Table 7.1. Mean translation error was 0.026
metres, while mean angle error was 1.02 degrees. These values are well within the thresh-
old set by the evaluation metric which has been used as a measure of performance for
pose estimation algorithms in multiple research papers [35][30][42][24]. Pallet handling
is not a precision operation, with some margins available which can possibly allow the
evaluation metric to extend beyond the stated 5 cm of translation error and 5 degrees of
angle error. Since information is not available on the actual margins allowed for safely
handling pallets and as this project hasn’t reached the field testing stage, it was decided
to retain the standard evaluation metrics.
During evaluation, there were some limitations noticed for the current system which
==PAGE:60==
50
8 Discussion
are detailed in the following section.
8.1
Limitations of the System
The limitations of the trained model were observed when the testing moved from the test
set to image sequences taken in different lighting conditions with different backgrounds.
The performance of the network when predicting pallet pose with different backgrounds
and outdoors under the sun was average with a little more than 50% of pallet poses
predicted correctly. It was noticed that the network had issues predicting pose at angles
which were not covered by the training data. For example, the network had diﬀiculty
predicting pose for images where the camera is at a look up position.
It should be
noted that the training dataset had only limited angles of the pallet recorded due to
requirements of having the aruco markers visible in the recorded frames.
On testing under occlusion, the network performance was poor with correct pose
predictions at less than 30%. Usually for working under occlusion, the network has to
be trained on images where the object of interest is occluded as in the Occlusion dataset
[5]. It has to be noted that the trained model was only trained on unoccluded images
where the whole pallet was in frame.
8.2
Future Work
From the limitations section, it is obvious that the major factor limiting network per-
formance is the limited dataset used for training the dataset. Ideally, a training dataset
would have images of the pallet at a wide variety of angles, under various levels of oc-
clusion and different environments. With the current data acquisition setup, it would
be diﬀicult to create a more comprehensive training dataset to improve network perfor-
mance.
The data acquisition setup for synthetic data shows the relative ease at which ground
truth for training can be generated in simulation. Moreover, a simulator provides the
capability to create more complex scenes where multiple pallets as well as occluded
pallets under different lighting conditions are present. If Figure 7.1 is inspected, it can
be seen that the simulated and real life pallets are significantly different. This would
make it extremely diﬀicult in the current setup to train in simulation completely and
get good pose estimation accuracy in the real world. There are a few approaches that
have potential to achieve this and can be explored in future iterations of this work.
Photorealistic simulators have recently become popular due to applications in train-
ing neural networks. These simulators create simulation worlds which are close to real
life and can help bridge the gap between simulation and the real world. For example
the Vista simulator [2] is a system that allows training of autonomous vehicles using
reinforcement learning without the requirement for resource intensive and potentially
==PAGE:61==
8.2 Future Work
51
dangerous real world training. Simulators from Nvidia [26] and Unity [38] are promising
platforms which can be explored for generating photorealistic synthetic data.
Another approach worth exploring would be finding an intermediate stage that helps
reduce the difference between synthetic and real world data. The idea is to implement a
transformation which when applied on synthetic and real data gives an output that strips
the features that differentiate both types of data but retain enough information to train
the network. Jimmy Wu et al. [43] propose a similar approach where a segmentation
step is performed on data before training to create a pose estimation model that is
trained purely on simulated data and is capable of pose estimation on real world data.
Once the network attains good pose estimation accuracy, the next logical step for the
project would be to transition to a field testing stage where pose predictions are used to
generate instructions that can be used by an automated forklift to manipulate a pallet.
==PAGE:62==
52
==PAGE:63==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
A neural network based system for 6D pose estimation of pallets was presented in this
thesis. The system accepts an RGB image of a EUR pallet as input and predicts the
pallet pose at a frame rate of around 16 FPS on a NVIDIA GTX 1050 Ti GPU. The
system was initially trained and tested on a synthetic dataset generated using the Gazebo
simulator. Once the network performance was deemed satisfactory, a real world dataset
was generated. The network was again trained on the real dataset and the performance
evaluated under different conditions.
The results show that the network has good pose estimation performance on its
testing dataset in both simulation and the real world. While testing network performance
on the real world testing dataset, the accuracy was 91.94% using the 5 cm 5 degree metric
as shown in Table 7.1. On testing the network performance in the wild, it was observed
that even though the network successfully predicts pallet pose while operating under
different lighting conditions and backgrounds for a good number of images, there were
also a significant number of images for which the model predictions were not satisfactory.
This is possibly due to the small real world dataset with limited angles of view of the
pallet used to train the network.
The network shows significance promise in predicting the 6D pose of pallets using
just RGB images and can be expected to show much better performance when trained on
a more comprehensive dataset. It is also an interesting proposition to explore methods
of training the network purely on the simulator and transferring the performance to the
real world.
==PAGE:64==
54
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
AGV vs. AMR - What’s the Difference? url: https://www.mobile-industrial-
robots.com/en/insights/get-started-with-amrs/agv-vs-amr-whats-the-
difference.
[2]
Alexander Amini et al. “Learning Robust Control Policies for End-to-End Au-
tonomous Driving From Data-Driven Simulation.” In: IEEE Robotics and Automa-
tion Letters 5.2 (2020), pages 1143–1150.
[3]
N. Bellomo et al. “Pallet Pose Estimation with LIDAR and Vision for Autonomous
Forklifts.” In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes 42.4 (2009). 13th IFAC Symposium on
Information Control Problems in Manufacturing, pages 612–617. issn: 1474-6670.
doi: https://doi.org/10.3182/20090603-3-RU-2001.0540. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1474667016338629.
[4]
Boris Belousov. Distance between rotations. url: http://www.boris-belousov.
net/2016/12/01/quat-dist/.
[5]
Eric Brachmann et al. “Learning 6D object pose estimation using 3D object coor-
dinates.” eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including Subseries Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 8690.2 (2014),
pages 536–551. issn: 16113349, 03029743. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-10605-2_35.
[6]
Zhe Cao, Yaser Sheikh, and Natasha Kholgade Banerjee. “Real-time scalable 6DOF
pose estimation for textureless objects.” In: 2016 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 2016, pages 2441–2448. doi: 10.1109/ICRA.
2016.7487396.
[7]
Fernando Casado et al. “Pose Estimation and Object Tracking Using 2D Images.”
In: Procedia Manufacturing 11 (2017). 27th International Conference on Flexible
Automation and Intelligent Manufacturing, FAIM2017, 27-30 June 2017, Modena,
Italy, pages 63–71. issn: 2351-9789. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.
2017.07.134. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2351978917303384.
[8]
Yang Chen and G. Medioni. “Object modelling by registration of multiple range
images.” eng. In: Image and Vision Computing 10.3 (1992), pages 145–55. issn:
18728138, 02628856. doi: 10.1016/0262-8856(92)90066-C.
==PAGE:66==
56
Bibliography
[9]
Sungjoon Choi, Qian Yi Zhou, and Vladlen Koltun. “Robust reconstruction of in-
door scenes.” eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee Computer Society Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition 07-12 (2015), page 7299195. issn: 2332564x,
10636919. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7299195.
[10]
Alvaro Collet, Manuel Martinez, and Siddhartha S. Srinivasa. “The MOPED frame-
work: Object recognition and pose estimation for manipulation.” eng. In: Interna-
tional Journal of Robotics Research 30.10 (2011), pages 1284–1306. issn: 17413176,
02783649. doi: 10.1177/0278364911401765.
[11]
J. Deng et al. “ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database.” In: CVPR09.
2009.
[12]
Driverless forklifts are now a thing. url: https : / / www . dcvelocity . com /
articles/44254-driverless-forklifts-are-now-a-thing.
[13]
EPAL EURO Pallet. url: https://www.epal- pallets.org/eu- en/load-
carriers/epal-euro-pallet.
[14]
Mark Everingham et al. “The pascal visual object classes (VOC) challenge.” eng.
In: International Journal of Computer Vision 88.2 (2010), pages 303–338. issn:
15731405, 09205691. doi: 10.1007/s11263-009-0275-4.
[15]
Open Source Robotics Foundation. GAZEBO. url: http://gazebosim.org/.
[16]
Guillermo Gallego and Anthony Yezzi. “A Compact Formula for the Derivative
of a 3-D Rotation in Exponential Coordinates.” eng. In: Journal of Mathematical
Imaging and Vision 51.3 (2015), pages 378–384. issn: 15737683, 09249907. doi:
10.1007/s10851-014-0528-x.
[17]
S. Garrido-Jurado et al. “Automatic generation and detection of highly reliable
fiducial markers under occlusion.” eng. In: Pattern Recognition 47.6 (2014), 2280–
2292. issn: 18735142, 00313203. doi: 10.1016/j.patcog.2014.01.005.
[18]
Stefan Hinterstoisser, Kurt Konolige, and Nassir Navab. “Model Based Training,
Detection and Pose Estimation of Texture-Less 3D Objects in Heavily Cluttered
Scenes.” eng. In: (2012).
[19]
Stefan Hinterstoisser et al. “Multimodal templates for real-time detection of texture-
less objects in heavily cluttered scenes.” eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision (2011), page 6126326. issn: 23807504,
15505499. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2011.6126326.
[20]
Stefan Hinterstoisser et al. “Technical Demonstration on Model Based Training,
Detection and Pose Estimation of Texture-Less 3D Objects in Heavily Cluttered
Scenes.” In: Computer Vision – ECCV 2012. Workshops and Demonstrations.
Edited by Andrea Fusiello, Vittorio Murino, and Rita Cucchiara. Berlin, Heidel-
berg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pages 593–596. isbn: 978-3-642-33885-4.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
57
[21]
Wadim Kehl et al. “SSD-6D: Making RGB-Based 3D Detection and 6D Pose Es-
timation Great Again.” eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee International Conference
on Computer Vision 2017- (2017), page 8237431. issn: 15505499, 23807504. doi:
10.1109/ICCV.2017.169.
[22]
Vincent Lepetit and Pascal Fua. “Monocular model-based 3D tracking of rigid ob-
jects: a survey.” eng. In: Foundations and Trends in Computer Graphics and Vision
1.1 (2005), pages 1–91. issn: 15722759, 15722740. doi: 10.1561/0600000001.
[23]
Vincent Lepetit, Francesc Moreno-noguer, and Pascal Fua. “EPnP: An Accurate
O(n) Solution to the PnP Problem.” eng. In: (2016).
[24]
Yi Li et al. DeepIM: Deep iterative matching for 6D pose estimation. eng. 2018.
[25]
Wei Liu et al. “SSD: Single shot multibox detector.” eng. In: Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lec-
ture Notes in Bioinformatics) 9905 (2016), pages 21–37. issn: 16113349, 03029743.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-46448-0_2.
[26]
NVIDIA Isaac Sim. url: https://developer.nvidia.com/isaac-sim.
[27]
Open3D tutorials. url: http://www.open3d.org/docs/0.10.0/index.html.
[28]
OpenCV. Detection of ArUco Markers. url: https://docs.opencv.org/4.5.2/
d5/dae/tutorial_aruco_detection.html.
[29]
PyTorch. url: https://pytorch.org/.
[30]
Mahdi Rad and Vincent Lepetit. “BB8: A Scalable, Accurate, Robust to Partial
Occlusion Method for Predicting the 3D Poses of Challenging Objects without
Using Depth.” und. In: (2018).
[31]
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. “YOLO9000: Better, faster, stronger.” eng. In:
Proceedings - 30th Ieee Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Cvpr 2017 2017- (2017), pages 6517–6525. issn: 2332564x, 10636919. doi: 10.
1109/CVPR.2017.690.
[32]
Joseph Redmon et al. “You only look once: Unified, real-time object detection.”
eng. In: Proceedings of the Ieee Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition 2016- (2016), page 7780460. issn: 2332564x, 10636919.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.91.
[33]
Shaoqing Ren et al. “Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with
Region Proposal Networks.” eng. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 28 (nips 2015) 28 (2015). issn: 10495258.
[34]
Richard Szeliski and Sing Bing Kang. “Recovering 3D Shape and Motion from Im-
age Streams Using Nonlinear Least Squares.” In: Journal of Visual Communication
and Image Representation 5.1 (1994), pages 10–28. issn: 1047-3203. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1006/jvci.1994.1002. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1047320384710029.
==PAGE:68==
58
Bibliography
[35]
Bugra Tekin, Sudipta N. Sinha, and Pascal Fua. “Real-Time Seamless Single Shot
6D Object Pose Prediction.” In: 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. 2018, pages 292–301. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018.00038.
[36]
Bugra Tekin, Sudipta N. Sinha, and Pascal Fua. “Real-Time Seamless Single Shot
6D Object Pose Prediction.” In: CVPR. 2018.
[37]
S. Umeyama. “Least-squares estimation of transformation parameters between two
point patterns.” eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In-
telligence 13.4 (1991), pages 376–380. issn: 21609292, 01628828, 19393539. doi:
10.1109/34.88573.
[38]
Unity Simulator. url: unity.com/solutions/automotive- transportation-
manufacturing/robotics.
[39]
Stanford University. CS231n: Convolutional Neural Networks for Visual Recogni-
tion. url: https://cs231n.github.io/convolutional-networks/.
[40]
Robert Varga and Sergiu Nedevschi. “Vision-based autonomous load handling for
automated guided vehicles.” In: 2014 IEEE 10th International Conference on In-
telligent Computer Communication and Processing (ICCP). 2014, pages 239–244.
doi: 10.1109/ICCP.2014.6937003.
[41]
Fan Wang. Object Dataset Tools. url: github.com/F2Wang/ObjectDatasetTools.
[42]
He Wang et al. “Normalized Object Coordinate Space for Category-Level 6D Ob-
ject Pose and Size Estimation.” und. In: (2019).
[43]
M. Eng. Massachusetts Institute of Technology Wu Jimmy et al. “Robotic object
pose estimation with deep neural networks.” eng. In: (2018).
[44]
Yu Xiang et al. “PoseCNN: A Convolutional Neural Network for 6D Object Pose
Estimation in Cluttered Scenes.” eng. In: Robotics: Science and Systems Xiv (2018).
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:70==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
