==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Master Thesis
Modeling Idle Time of Electric
Vehicle Charging Stations with
Machine Learning Methods
for the Master of Transportation and Logistics
by Andreas Frederik Kaae, s154395
Supervisors:
Francisco Camera Pereira, DTU
Inon Peled, DTU
DTU Management - Department of Technology, Management and
Economics
Division for Transport
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby
21/6 - 2021
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Modeling Idle Time of Electric Vehicle Charging Stations with
Machine Learning Methods
Copyright ©2021 by Andreas Kaae. All rights reserved.
DTU Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Division for Transport
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone: (+45) 45 25 48 00
info@man.dtu.dk
www.man.dtu.dk/english
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Preface
The present thesis is submitted as partial fulﬁlment of the requirements for the
degree of Master of Transportation and Logistics at the Technical University of Den-
mark (DTU). The thesis was prepared at the Section of Transport, DTU Management
department of Technology, Management and Economics.
The work was carried out between January 25, 2021 and June 21, 2021, under the
supervision of Professor Francisco Camera Pereira (DTU) and Postdoc Inon Peled
(DTU).
The thesis is credited with 32.5 points.
Copenhagen, June 21, 2021
Andreas Frederik Kaae
i
==PAGE:8==
ii
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisors Francisco Camera Pereira and Inon
Peled for providing guidance throughout the project. A special thanks goes to Inon
Peled for answering my countless questions by e-mail and for meeting with me over
Zoom all most every week of the duration of the thesis.
I would also like to send the biggest thanks to my beautiful and brilliant girlfriend
for listening to all my worries about the thesis and keeping me sane throughout the
process.
I also owe a thanks to my family and friends for being by my side through all the
years as a student and helping me develop into the person I am today. A special
thanks to my friends at my student dorm kitchen for making the time during my
thesis writing a memorable time despite the COVID-19 pandemic. Also, a thanks to
the person who invented kite surﬁng for helping me blow of steam during my thesis
process.
The thesis is also the ﬁnal chapter of a six year long journey at the Technical Uni-
versity of Denmark.
It has been quiet the journey, which have been extremely
challenging but also rewarding. A ﬁnal thanks is therefore given to all the students
and teachers at the Technical University of Denmark that I have crossed paths with
over the years as without them I would never have made it this far. I am especially
grateful for the group of students that I today consider my best friends which have
made the past six years the most memorable years of my life.
I am truly excited to see what the future holds.
iii
==PAGE:10==
iv
==PAGE:11==
Abstract
As demand for electric mobility keeps increasing, so does the need for adequate
public charging facilities. Consequently, public charging providers seek to expand
the charging infrastructure, while also maximizing revenues under substantial costs.
In particular, charging providers wish to minimize idle times as unused equipment
generates zero (or even negative) revenue. To address these needs, this thesis studies
three Machine Learning methodologies for predicting idle times: traditional regres-
sion, quantile regression and survival analysis. These are applied on a case study
of charging in Boulder, Colorado, USA, with feature selection and optional clas-
siﬁcation of expected idle duration. The main ﬁndings for the case study are: 1)
Predicting idle time behavior challenging due to noisy data. 2) The most useful
features for predicting idle times are the time of day and day of week speciﬁc fea-
tures. 3) Combined, the three methodologies show relevance for charging providers
to optimize day-to-day usage in addition to future planning of stations.
v
==PAGE:12==
vi
==PAGE:13==
Table of Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Abstract
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
3
Theory
5
3.1
Traditional Regression Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1.1
Linear Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.2
Logistic Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.3
Random Forest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.1.4
Gradient Boosting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.5
Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1.6
Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1.7
Evaluation for Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.8
Evaluation for Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Quantile Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.1
Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.2
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Survival Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3.1
Kaplan-Meier . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.2
Cox Proportional Hazard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.3
DeepSurv
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.4
Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3.5
Survival Analysis Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Dataset for Case Study
20
4.1
Raw Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Data Cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Methodology
26
5.1
Data Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Feature Construction and Exploration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.2.1
Time of Day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
vii
==PAGE:14==
5.2.2
Day of Week . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.3
Station Identiﬁer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2.4
Activity Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2.5
Spatial Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2.6
Feature Constellations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Modeling Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3.1
Two-Step
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6
Experiments and Results
40
6.1
Testing of Feature Constellations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2
Classiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.3
Traditional Regression Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.4
Quantile Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.5
Survival Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6.6
Operational Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.6.1
Analysis of Particular Events
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.6.2
Modeling with Another Existing Station . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.6.3
Adding a Nonexistent Station . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7
Discussion
60
8
Conclusion and Further Work
64
9
References
66
A Appendices
70
A.1 Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.2 Results for Traditional Regression Methods with Eight Stations
. . .
70
A.3 Kaplan-Meier Estimators for the Day of Week . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.4 Quantile Regression Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.5 Survival Analysis Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
A.6 Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
viii
==PAGE:15==
ix
==PAGE:16==
1
Introduction
1
Introduction
Fossil fuels have been the predominant energy source in the transportation sector
within the last decade and have only decreased by 2% since 1973 [1]. The transporta-
tion sector is thereby alone responsible for one-quarter of the global energy-related
direct CO2 emissions and other environmental hazardous problems such as air pol-
lution. Therefore, non-fossil fuel transportation solutions, such as electrical vehicles
(EV), are needed. In 2010 there were roughly 17,000 EVs on the roads of the world.
However, with an increased awareness of fossil fuels’ environmental problems, this
number has soared over the last decade to 7.2 million by 2019. EV sales are expected
to match this rapid increase over the next decade, with a projected 25 million EVs
sold alone in 2030 [1].
The rapid increase in EVs also implies an increase in the need for charging
stations. Many EV owners will have the possibility of gaining access to charging
from their houses. However, for EV owners who live in denser city areas as well
as daily commuters, proper availability of public charging stations is critical for the
growth and success of EVs [1][2].
The development of the charging infrastructure can nonetheless be seen as the
well-known chicken-and-egg problem [3]. Potential EV owners do not want to invest
in EVs before the charging infrastructure is ready, while charging station providers
are reluctant to make signiﬁcant investments before they observe a demand for pub-
lic charging stations. Therefore, for providers, the utilization of a station is crucial
to ensure that an investment in charging stations brings in as much revenue as possi-
ble. Simultaneously, charging station providers want to minimize the time between a
charging station is left idle until it again is occupied as unused equipment generates
zero (or even negative) revenue. Models that can predict idle times are therefore of
interest to public charging station providers, as they can provide insight into past
and future behavior, help optimize day-to-day usage of current charging stations,
and help in the decision-making processes for the planning and deployment of future
charging stations.
Much research has been allocated to analyze and predict session-by-session charging
characteristics, which in itself is valuable and lays much of the foundation for
analyzing the impact of EVs on the electricity grid. However, none of the articles,
known by the author of the thesis, has allocated resources to analyze and predict
idle times. This thesis hence also tries to address this gap and lay the foundation
for further research. The goal of the thesis is to explore the possibility of predicting
the idle time for charging stations. In the thesis, an analysis based on data from
1
==PAGE:17==
1
Introduction
the city of Boulder in Colorado in the USA is conducted, but the methodology can
be extended to any other charging station network. Supervised machine learning
methods, including quantile regression and survival analysis methods, are used to
explore the possibilities of idle time predictions and compare the predictive powers
of the methods and relevant usage for the problem.
2
==PAGE:18==
2
Literature Review
2
Literature Review
To accommodate the rising demand for charging stations, much research within
prediction and analysis of charging demand has been made. A large portion of the
research focuses on how EV energy providers and policymakers need to adapt the
current electricity infrastructure to accommodate the rising demand while main-
taining stability in the electricity grid. The central aspect, accordingly to papers
such as [4], is to ﬁrst of all estimate the development in EVs sold and secondly to
estimate and predict the charging patterns of EV users. The results show that the
ocurrence of peak hours depends on the season and whether the charging station is
public or private, as users prefer to charge at diﬀerent times of the day depending
on the station type.
In an attempt to help policy makers with the planning of electricity infrastructure
the authors of [5] uses statistical modeling to predict the impact on the electricity
infrastructure. Speciﬁcally the authors uses a case study of 4933 charging events in
Victoria, Australia. They ﬁnd that the increased demand for EVs only will cause
an increase in power demand between 5.72% and 9.79%.
However, the authors
highlights that this can change between diﬀerent states with more or less densely
populated areas and diﬀerent driving behaviors.
To avoid overloading the electricity grid, the authors of [6] suggests a solution
with intelligent algorithms which automatically determine the best charging station
for EV users. In contrast, the authors of [7] suggests scheduling the charging request
of users online accordingly to their needs and preferences.
As the cost of setting up charging stations is substantial, providers want to ﬁnd
the best locations to maximize usage. Some papers propose optimization models to
determine the placement of charging stations based on the predicted demand [8].
At the same time, others also factor in budget, coverage and waiting time at the
stations to optimize the placement [9].
For EV users choosing the optimal charging station will also become a considerable
problem as EVs gain popularity. The authors of [10] address the problem by develop-
ing a framework for choosing the optimal route and charging station. The framework
is evaluated based on both distance, travel time and waiting time while also con-
sidering dynamical changing traﬃc patterns. The authors of [11] goes even further
and considers advertisements, privacy leakage and security threats when selecting
charging stations. The authors propose a blockchain-based technology (BlockEV),
to ensure security and privacy, with an implemented cost model to minimize the
travel time, waiting time and charging time.
3
==PAGE:19==
2
Literature Review
An essential prerequisite for most of the ﬁndings presented in this section is the
ability to predict charging characteristics at a session-by-session level which is more
closely connected to the scope of this thesis. Not only is this important concerning
preparing the electricity grid - it is also valuable when assessing and optimizing the
operation of current charging stations as well as the deployment and planning of
new charging stations [12][13][14].
To predict the session-by-session energy demand, the authors of [12] compared
four diﬀerent supervised machine learning methods using charging data from Ne-
braska, USA, with roughly 22,000 sessions. They found that the XGBoost method
slightly outperformed the other methods (random forest, SVM and linear regression)
but that all methods oﬀer moderate accuracy as they only manage to account for
approximately 50% of the variance. The authors conclude that a large amount of
semi-random data leads to low accuracy and that the main explaining feature is the
historical average consumption of every user.
Conversely, in a study to determine what factors inﬂuence the length of charging
sessions, the authors of [13] found that the variables which have the most substantial
eﬀect on the charging duration are time of day related variables and the charging
station type. The authors used a dataset of Dutch EV users with more than 2.6
million charging sessions. They emphasize that predicting the charging duration is
challenging as charging stations are used for refueling and parking.
Further, to address the problem that charging stations are used for both refueling
and parking, the authors of [14] explored modeling the time an EV is plugged-in
without charging. Similar to [13], the authors found that the time of day variables
were the most signiﬁcant features and managed to achieve an accuracy of roughly
60% using a Dutch dataset with more than 1.8 million charging events.
Other recent studies have focused on probabilistic EV load forecasting methods,
such as various quantile regression methods [15]. These models can be beneﬁcial as
instead of predicting exact values, the models instead estimate the certainty of the
predictions.
4
==PAGE:20==
3
Theory
3
Theory
This section presents the machine learning methods used throughout the thesis and
the metrics used for evaluating them. Three main types of methods are used. The
ﬁrst method is traditional regression methods such as linear regression and random
forest, referred to as the traditional regression methods. The two other methods are
quantile regression and survival analysis, referred to by the same names.
Machine learning is not a new concept, and the general ideas behind it can be
traced back to the 1950s [16]. Essentially, it is the study of how algorithms can
learn interesting things from data. In turn, these allow to improve or predict future
values by learning about the past while limiting human intervention. The goal is
reached by training models on data and using the trained models to make predictions
on new data in an automated way.
While the general concepts have more or less remained the same over the years,
the ﬁeld of machine learning has changed massively. Machine learning has especially
seen an explosion in interest within the past decades, partly due to technological
advancements. Thus, machine learning has become an integrated part of everyday
lives as it is involved in everything from tailoring advertisements, predicting credit
card fraud to speech recognition.
All methods used in the thesis belong to the supervised machine learning cate-
gory, where the actual value or label of the data is known. The actual values and
labels are used in the training process to adjust the weights until the models ﬁt
appropriately.
3.1
Traditional Regression Methods
The methods chosen for the traditional regression methods are all regression methods
that produce exact estimations of the continuous dependent variable based on the
independent explanatory features. Four methods are used to explore how diﬀerent
techniques can model idle times. All four methods are implemented using functions
from the Python scikit-learn library [17], also commonly referred to as sklearn. The
classiﬁcation counterparts of the four methods are furthermore used to classify the
data. As the concepts more or less are the same for all methods, besides linear and
logistic regression, these are explained together.
5
==PAGE:21==
3
Theory
3.1.1
Linear Regression
Linear regression (LR) is the simplest of the four chosen regression methods and is
a linear approach to model the relationship between the target variable and the ex-
planatory variables. The expression for the linear regression is shown in Equation 1.
f(X) = β0 + βX ,
(1)
where the β-values are estimated using the Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) procedure
which minimizes the sum of the squared errors. In other words, the OLS seeks to
ﬁnd the β-values, which minimizes the sum of the squared distances from the data
points to the regression line [16]. The method is also seen as a baseline method
to the other traditional regression methods, which do not hold the same simplistic
linear assumptions.
3.1.2
Logistic Regression
The logistic regression (LoR) is the most simple of the four classiﬁcation methods.
In the case of binary classiﬁcation, also referred to as binomial logistic regression,
the method models the conditional probability of the dependent variable belonging
to one of the classes, Y = {1, 0}. The logistic regression is expressed in Equation 2.
log
 
P(Y = 1|X)
1 −P(Y = 1|X)
!
= β0 + βX ,
(2)
where the β-values are estimated using the maximum likelihood estimation. The
maximum likelihood estimation thus seeks for the β-values, which minimizes the
errors of the predicted probabilities [16].
3.1.3
Random Forest
One of the earlier implementations of the random forest (RF) algorithm was devel-
oped by Leo Breiman in 2001 and has since gained much recognition as it generally
produces good predictions across diﬀerent kinds of data [18]. The random forest
method is an ensemble method that consists of multiple decision trees and is used
for both regression and classiﬁcation. A decision tree is a straightforward technique
and resembles a ﬂowchart-like structure where each node represents a question that
splits the data. However, the disadvantage of decision trees is that they have a high
risk of overﬁtting and ﬁnding local instead of global optima. Random forest helps
prevent this by constructing a collection of decision trees, therefore the name forest,
and uses the results of all trees to compute the ﬁnal results. For classiﬁcation, the
mode of the predicted classes is used as the results, where for regression it is the
6
==PAGE:22==
3
Theory
mean of the individual decision trees. The randomness in the name comes as each
tree is trained on a random subset of the features in the data. During the training
process, each tree is further only exposed to a subset of the training data. The trees
are thus likely to diﬀer, which increases the diversity in the forest and leads to a
robust estimator [16].
3.1.4
Gradient Boosting
The gradient boosting (GB) algorithm is an ensemble technique that uses multiple
weak learners, in this case also decision trees, to make a robust model for regression
and classiﬁcation. The idea of gradient boosting originates from Breiman [19] under
the name ARCing algorithms (Adaptive Reweighting and Combining algorithms)
and was later formalized as gradient boosting. In the method, a decision tree is
added one at a time where each tree is dependent on the residuals of the previous
tree as the boosting algorithm uses the residuals of the previous tree to train the
next.
Gradient descent is used to minimize the loss when a new tree is added.
In the case of regression, this may be done by using squared error loss, while for
classiﬁcation, the logarithmic loss is used. The sequential procedure of adding trees
continues for a ﬁxed number of iterations or until the error is suﬃciently small [16].
3.1.5
Neural Network
The speciﬁc type of neural network used is a multilayer perceptron (MLP) but
is referred to as a neural network (NN) throughout the thesis. The network is a
fully connected feedforward neural network that is used for both classiﬁcation and
regression. It consists of an input layer, one or several hidden layers, and an output
layer. All layers are connected so one layer feeds into the next. Besides the neurons
in the input layer, all neurons use a nonlinear activation function to map the weights
of the previous layer to the next layer. The explanatory features are fed to the input
layer and passed through the network to the output layer. For the output layer the
activation function depends on the problem at hand. For both regression and binary
classiﬁcation, the output layer may be a single neuron. In the case of regression the
output neuron, for example, uses the identify function, wherein the case of binary
classiﬁcation the sigmoid function is used to compute the probability of an event
belonging to one or the other class [16]. Fig. 1 shows what the architecture of the
NN can look like.
When training the network, backpropagation compares the actual and predicted
values and computes the error using gradient descent. The algorithm moves back-
wards through the network to detect the weights that inﬂuence the errors the most
and changes the weights accordingly to reduce the errors.
7
==PAGE:23==
3
Theory
Fig. 1: Example of neural network architecture.
3.1.6
Hyperparameters
When training the traditional regression methods, several hyperparameters are tuned
to achieve the best results and avoid overﬁtting. As the space of possible hyper-
parameters is too large to exhaustively explore, only the most essential are chosen.
Tuning of the chosen parameters is performed using the build in function in the
scikit libarary, RandomizedSearchCV, which randomly searches the hyperparame-
ter space rather than trying all possible combinations as in a traditional grid search.
The function thereby manages to search the grid in a fast and eﬀective manner and
at the same time performs 5-fold cross-validation for each parameter combination.
For linear and logistic regression, the only parameter which is tuned is the regu-
larization. Regularization is a simple way to avoid overﬁtting by adding a penalty to
the coeﬃcients. For logistic regression, the hyperparameter tuned is whether to use
L1 or L2 regularization. For linear regression, the L2 regularization is used, which
penalizes the regressions by adding a penalty with the same size as the square of
the magnitude of coeﬃcients.
For the random forest algorithm the parameters tuned concerns the speciﬁcs of
the decision trees. The number of trees in the random forest needs to be tuned
as more trees might yield better results but also increases the training time. The
maximum depth is also tuned, which speciﬁes up to what depth every tree should
be allowed to grow. Finally, the minimum number of samples required to consider a
split point of the tree and the minimum number of samples required to split a node
is also tuned. All these parameters set boundaries for the decision trees in the forest
and prevents the model from overﬁtting.
A problem with the gradient boosting algorithm is that it learns quickly and
thereby risks overﬁtting the data. To avoid this, a learning rate is used for slowing
down the learning and adds a factor that speciﬁes the contribution from previous
trees. Furthermore, as the gradient boosting and random forest algorithms both
use decision trees, the decision tree-speciﬁc hyperparameters tuned for the random
8
==PAGE:24==
3
Theory
forest are also tuned for the gradient boosting algorithm.
The parameters tuned for the neural network are ﬁrst of all the network archi-
tecture and the learning rate. The architecture speciﬁes the number of neurons and
layers while the learning rate is the parameter which controls how much the model
is changed in response to the estimated errors as they are updated. A too small
learning rate may result in the algorithm getting stuck and longer training time
while too large learning rates can mean that the weights are updated too fast. The
activation function of the neurons is another hyperparameter to tune, with some of
the most common activation functions being the tanh, ReLU and logit. Finally, the
number of epochs, which determines the number of times the train data has had
the opportunity to update the network’s weights, also needs to be tuned. If the
number of epochs is too small, the model will underﬁt while too many epochs can
cause overﬁtting. In order to aboid this, early-stopping is used and is implemented
in the sciki-learn library. In early stopping a small proportion of the data is set
aside for validation, and if the validation score is not improved by some tolerance
the algorithm stops. Using early-stopping, the number of epochs can be set to a
large number, in this case 1000.
3.1.7
Evaluation for Regression
The accuracy of a regression model is evaluated by computing and examining the
error between the predicted idle times and the actual idle times in the test set.
The individual errors of each model are aggregated as summary statistics for direct
comparison. The following section explains the summary statistics used to evaluate
the traditional regression methods.
Coeﬃcient of Determination
The coeﬃcient of determination, also known as R-squared or R2, is a common metric
to measure the performance of a model. The R-squared provides a measure for how
much of the variability in the target variable the model is able to explain based on
the explanatory variables. A value of one indicates that the model makes perfect
predictions for the target variable and can explain all variance. In contrast, a value
of zero indicates that the explanatory features cannot explain any of the variance in
the target variable. The most general deﬁnition of R-squared is shown in Equation
3 and is the ratio between the sum of squares of the residuals, SSres, and the total
sum of squares, SStot [20]. In other words it is the ratio of variance explained by
9
==PAGE:25==
3
Theory
the model and the variance in the data.
R2 = 1 −SSres
SStot
=
P
i(yi −fi)2
P
i(yi −y)2 ,
(3)
where yi is the actual value of the target variable, y is the mean of all target variables
and fi is the predicted outcome.
Mean Absolute Error
The Mean Absolute Error, or MAE, is another common performance metric for the
goodness of ﬁt. As the name suggests it is the mean of the absolute error as described
in Equation 4, where n is the number of events [21]. As the metric expresses the
average prediction error in the same unit of the dependent variable, it beneﬁts from
being easily relatable.
MAE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
|fi −yi| .
(4)
Mean Absolute Percentage Error
The Mean Absolute Percentage Error, or MAPE, is given by equation 5 and is the
relative variant of MAE. The MAPE thus indicates how far the predictions are oﬀ
the actual values in percentage terms [21]. Due to the denominator in the MAPE
term, it is not deﬁned for when the true value is 0, however there are no such events
for the problem in the thesis.
MAPE = 100
n
n
X
i=1
|yi −fi|
yi
.
(5)
Root Mean Square Error
The Root Mean Square Error, or RMSE, is another measure for the goodness of ﬁt
and is the average of the squared error between the actual and the predicted values.
By taking the square root of the expression it has the beneﬁt of having the same
units as the target variable. It is deﬁned by Equation 6.
RMSE =
v
u
u
t1
n
n
X
i=1
(fi −yi)2 .
(6)
As the RMSE squares all errors it is sensitive to large prediction errors as these are
penalized harder than in MAE. Large prediction errors will thus increase the RMSE
signiﬁcantly more than MAE and is hence always higher than or equal to MAE [21].
10
==PAGE:26==
3
Theory
3.1.8
Evaluation for Classiﬁcation
To evaluate the quality of a classiﬁcation model a confusion matrix which shows the
proportion of True Positives (TP), False Positives (FP), True Negatives (TN) and
False Negatives (FN) is evaluated. In Fig. 2 a visualization of a confusion matrix is
shown. A perfect classiﬁer will have TP = TN = 1 and FP = FN = 0.
Fig. 2: Visualization of confusion matrix.
In the thesis, the confusion matrix together with the Accuracy and the F1-score,
both of which can be calculated from the confusion matrix, are used to evaluate the
performance of the classiﬁers. The Accuracy is given by the proportion of correctly
classiﬁed events out of all events and is thus given by Equation 7.
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + FP + TN + FN .
(7)
The F1-score is given by the two metrics Recall and Precision. Recall is the
proportion of correctly labelled positive class (TP) out of the actual positive class
(TP + FN) while Precision is the proportion of correctly labelled positive class (TP)
out of all events predicted as positive (TP + FP). The Recall can thus be increased
easily by labeling all events as positive, however this will mean that the Precision
will suﬀer. The F1-score tries to balance excatly this and is given by Equation 8.
The highest and best score is one which indicates a perfect model while the lowest
score is zero which happens when either the Precision or Recall is zero [16].
F1 = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall .
(8)
11
==PAGE:27==
3
Theory
3.2
Quantile Regression
The quantile regression can be seen as an extension to the traditional regression
methods described in Section 3.1 which instead of describing the mean of the target
variable can estimate diﬀerent quantiles. Quantile regression can thereby give users
and providers information about the certainty of the idle time predictions which
can be more relevant from a business perspective. Quantile regression furthermore
has the beneﬁt that it does not make any assumptions about the distribution of the
target variable and is thus able to model distribution artifacts, such as heteroscedas-
ticity and multi-modality. In order to enable the models to predict the quantiles,
the loss functions are changed to the tilted loss function which is shown in Equation
9.
QL((yi, fi)|q) = max[q(fi −yi), (q −1)(fi −yi)] ,
(9)
where yi is the observed value, fi is the predicted outcome and q is the quantile. Fig.
3 shows a visualization of the 5%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 95% quantile loss function.
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Prediction error
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Loss
5%
25%
50%
75%
95%
Fig. 3: Tilted loss function for the 5%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 95% quantile.
In the Equation, the ﬁrst term is dominant when fi > yi, when over-predicting or
in other words when the prediction error is positive, and the second term is dominant
when fi < yi, when under-prediction or in other words when the prediction error
is negative. For example, for the 50% quantile (q = 0.5) over and under predicting
is weighted by the same factor and the model will try to split the data in half, as
appropriate for the median. This is also seen in Fig. 3 as the function for the 50%
quantile is the same for negative and positive errors. For the 25% quantile (and
q = 0.25) the model will try to avoid under predicting three times harder than over
12
==PAGE:28==
3
Theory
predicting. This will split the data so one quarter of the data is below the 25%
quantile and three quarters of the data is above, and in this way the 25% quantile
is obtained. The line for the 25% quantile in Fig. 3 also shows this, as the loss is
always three times higher when the error is negative than when it is positive.
Several methods can be extended to quantile regression by implementing the
tilted loss function. However, due to practical time consideration, only linear regres-
sion and gradient boosting are extended to quantile regression in the thesis. Linear
quantile regression is implemented using the Python statsmodels library [22] while
the gradient boosting quantile regression again is implemented using the scikit-learn
library.
3.2.1
Hyperparameters
For the quantile linear regression, hyperparameter tuning was not possible due to
the limited implementation possibilities in the statsmodels library. For the quantile
gradient boosting method, hyperparameter tuning was experimented with for every
quantile. However, it was found that worse ﬁts generally were obtained by tuning
the parameters for every quantile. Therefore, the parameters for every quantile were
ﬁxed to the same values.
3.2.2
Evaluation
The quantile regression can be compared to the other methods by using the me-
dian (50% percentile) to compute the summary statistics described in Section 3.1.7.
However, to directly compare the diﬀerent quantile regression models the Interval
Coverage Percentage (ICP) and Mean Interval Length (MIL) are used [23]. The ICP
speciﬁes the proportion of events which are within the prediction interval. For the
90% prediction interval the ICP should be close to 0.9 and for the 50% prediction
interval it should be close to 0.5. Contrary, MIL speciﬁes the average length of the
prediction interval.
A model is evaluated based on both ICP and MIL where the best model will be
the model with an ICP closest to the chosen prediction interval and the lowest MIL.
Intuitively, it is easy to have a model with low MIL scores at the cost of an ICP far
from the desired value. Vise versa it is rather uncomplicated to have a model with
good ICP but which have large MIL values. To evaluate the models, the MIL and
ICP are computed for both the 50% conﬁdence interval, between the 25% and 75%
quantile, and the 90% conﬁdence interval, between the 5% and 95% quantile.
13
==PAGE:29==
3
Theory
3.3
Survival Analysis
Survival analysis is a branch of statistics used to analyze the time until an event
occurs and can be traced back to 1662 [24]. In its classical form survival analysis
is used within the biomedical industry to analyze the eﬀect of a treatment until an
event occurs. Today, however, survival analysis is extended far beyond the biomedi-
cal industry to ﬁelds where the time until event plays an important role. In [25], the
authors apply survival analysis to predict disruptions within the supply chain such
as mechanical breakdowns. Survival analysis have also been used to help companies
manage their customers relationship as it allows insight into when customers are
likely to churn [26].
A key aspect of survival analysis is its ability to handle censored data. In a medi-
cal experiment it can, for example, be that a patient withdraws from the experiment
before the corresponding event (e.g., death) occurs. Using survival analysis, such
data does not need to be discarded but can be used for modeling. For predicting idle
times in the thesis, there are however no censored observations due to the nature of
the data.
The survival time is denoted as T and is a non-negative variable (T ≥0). In survival
analysis terminology, the survival time starts with a birth and ends with a death
when an event occurs, which is also how the name originates. To put it into the
context of the thesis, it is the time between a vehicle leaves a charging station (birth)
and the next vehicle arrives (death).
The cumulative distribution function (CDF) in Equation 10 is denoted F(t) and
is deﬁned as the probability of surviving until time t.
F(t) = P(T ≤t) =
Z t
0
f(x)dx .
(10)
From this the survival function, S(t), follows in Equation 11. Thus, the survival
function is deﬁned as the probability of surviving past time t given that an event
(death) has not occurred yet.
S(t) = 1 −F(t) = P(T > t) .
(11)
From the CDF and the survival function the main dependent variable, the hazard
function h(t), is given. It is deﬁned as the risk of an event happening at time t given
that the event has not yet occurred and is showed in Equation 12. The hazard is
given as a limit to when the time interval ∆t goes towards 0 with the probability of
14
==PAGE:30==
3
Theory
an event happening between time t and t + ∆t [27][28].
h(t) = lim
∆t→0
P(t < T ≤t + ∆t|T > t)
∆t
.
(12)
All terms in survival analysis are thus connected and if one expression is known
it is possible to calculate the others. The main objective for the survival analysis
methods in the thesis are therefore to estimate the hazard rates as this also allows
for predictions of the survival curves. The survival analysis methods used in the
thesis are implemented using the libraries Pysurvival [29] and Lifelines [30], both of
which are Python libraries speciﬁcally made for survival analysis.
3.3.1
Kaplan-Meier
The Kaplan-Meier estimator was proposed by Kaplan and Meier in 1958 and is
the ﬁrst major advancement within the ﬁeld of survival analysis [24]. The Kaplan-
Meier estimator is a non-parametric statistic which is used to estimate the survival
function. As the true underlying survival function is always unknown, the Kaplan-
Meier estimator is a simple approach which, with a large enough sample size, will
approximate the true underlying survival function of the data, see Equation 13.
ˆS(t) =
Y
i:ti≤t

1 −di
ni

,
(13)
where di is deﬁned as the number of death events which has happened at time ti
and ni is the number of observations that have survived up to time ti, or to put it
diﬀerently the number of observations at risk at time ti.
The survival curves of the Kaplan-Meier estimator are excellent tools for com-
paring data samples. By splitting the data into groups, the survival curves can
be examined and tested using the log-rank test. The log-rank test is a statistical
test which compares two or more groups and test if the survival probabilities are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. The null hypothesis of the test it that there is no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between two survival curves. A high value in the log-rank test thus fails
to reject the null hypothesis and accepts the alternative hypothesis, i.e., that the
survival curves of the two groups are similar [27][31].
3.3.2
Cox Proportional Hazard
Following the Kaplan-Meier estimator, the next signiﬁcant advancement within sur-
vival analysis happened in 1972 as David Cox proposed the famous Cox Proportional
Hazard model (CPH) [24]. Where the Kaplan-Meier estimator and the long rank
test are both examples of univariate analysis, which means they only account for the
15
==PAGE:31==
3
Theory
survival times, the CPH is a semi-parametric model. Thereby, the CPH can adjust
for the eﬀects of both binary and continuous variables, also referred to as covariates.
This is crucial when, for example, performing experiments where variables such as
the age or gender of patients often play a role. It is still typically used for survival
analysis and is also used in this thesis.
The CPH is expressed by the hazard function, see Equation 14, which can be
seen as the risk of dying within a given time t for a set of covariates x [27].
h(t|x) = h0(t) exp(xTβ) ,
(14)
where h0 is the baseline hazard and is the non-parametric part of the expression as
it is only time-dependent. This is opposed to the partial hazard, the exponential
part of the expression, which is the parametric part of the expression as it does
not vary over time but is unique for each covariate.
It follows that in case the
covariates have a value larger than zero for observations, the probability of survival
for that observation will decrease as the hazard increases, and vice versa if the value
is smaller than zero. To estimate the weights, β, for the covariates without involving
the baseline hazard, the Cox’s partial likelihood, see Equation 15, is maximized for
the uncensored data.
L(β) =
Y  
exp(βTxi)
P
j:R(Ti) exp(βTxj)
!
,
(15)
where R(Ti) is called the risk set and speciﬁes the observations at risk at time Ti.
A fundamental assumption for the CPH is, as the name suggests, that the hazard
curves of two groups of observations must be proportional over time. This also im-
plies that the survival curves over time cannot cross. For many cases, this may hold,
but for many more complex real-life problems, nonlinear interactions are needed.
3.3.3
DeepSurv
In 1995 Faraggi and Simon proposed the ﬁrst simple feed-forward neural network
[32]. The model though often failed to demonstrate improvement beyond the CPH.
Consequently, a group of Yale students proposed a deep neural network method,
DeepSurv, in 2016 [33]. As opposed to Faraggi and Simon’s simple neural network,
DeepSurv is a deep network with multiple connected layers. The article showed
that DeepSurv successfully modeled complex relationships between covariates and
performed as well and often better than other techniques, such as the CPH, for
diﬀerent sets of actual medical data.
DeepSurv uses the original structure of the hazard function, as seen in the CPH,
but models the non-parametric part of the expression using a deep neural network
16
==PAGE:32==
3
Theory
allowing for higher ﬂexibility and non linear relations [33]. Thus, the network con-
sists of an input layer, which takes the covariates as input, hidden layers of neurons
followed by dropout layers, and an output layer with just one neuron, which con-
tains the predicted hazard rate for an observation. All hidden layers are, as for
the neural network, assigned an activation function. The architecture of the Deep-
Surv network is the same type as for the neural network, and the structure of the
DeepSurv network thus follows the example shown in Fig. 1. The model is trained
by minimizing the negative log partial likelihood of the Cox partial likelihood in
Equation 16. In the Equation, θ refers to the weights of the network while NE=1
indicates the observations with an observed event.
l(θ) = −
1
NE=1
X
i:Ei=1
 
ˆhθ(ti|xi) −log
X
j∈R(Ti)
e
ˆhθ(tj|xj)
!
.
(16)
Besides CPH and DeepSurv, another popular method is the Random Survival Forest
method which was proposed in 2008 [34] and is a tree-based method that constructs
an ensemble estimation for the hazard functions. More recently, in 2018, the concept
of DeepHit was proposed. In contrast to CPH and DeepSurv, the DeepHit method
does not rely on parametric assumptions, which are often violated. Instead, it uses a
deep neural network to learn the distribution of survival times [35]. As DeepHit has
no assumptions about the underlying processes, it also allows covariates to change
over time. However, only the CPH and DeepSurv methods are used in the thesis
due to practical time considerations.
3.3.4
Hyperparameters
For the CPH, only the learning and regularization rate are chosen as hyperparam-
eters.
If the learning rate is too small, it will cause the algorithm to spend an
unpropotional amount of time on the training process. If the learning rate on the
other hand is too large, it will cause the weights of the covariates to be updated
rapidly. For the regularization rate, the same L2 regularization, as used for the
linear regression, is applied.
For the DeepSurv model, the learning rate and network architecture are also
trained, as for the neural network. The activation function is ﬁxed to ReLU due to
the limited implementation options in the Pysurvival library. The ReLU function is
chosen as it, through experimentation, produced as good results as other functions
and as it generally has been found to show good results for complex data [36]. In
the Pysurvival library, early stopping is further not implemented but instead, the
number of epochs is speciﬁed as a hyperparameter. Lastly, dropout is used as a
hyperparameter for the DeepSurv model. When using dropout, a fraction of the
17
==PAGE:33==
3
Theory
input units is set to zero at every training iteration. This makes the model less
complicated and thereby potentially prevents overﬁtting.
While the DeepSurv hyperparameters are established using the same Random-
izedSearchCV as used for the traditional regression methods, this was not possible
for the CPH as the gradients would often explode. For the CPH, instead, a grid
search with 3-fold cross-validation was implemented.
3.3.5
Survival Analysis Evaluation
A direct output of the survival analysis methods are estimates of the underlying
survival curves. These survival curves can be summarized into a single prediction
for the idle time, E[T], by computing the area under the survival curve as shown in
Equation 17. With point estimates, the same metrics as the traditional regression
methods are evaluated by can be applied, which allows for comparison of the diﬀerent
methods.
E[T] =
Z ∞
0
P(T > t)dt =
Z ∞
0
S(t)dt ,
(17)
To evaluate the survival analysis methods internally, the concordance index, also
referred to as the C-index, is used. The C-index was introduced in 1982 by Harrell
and is the most commonly used metric when evaluating survival analysis models
[37]. It focuses on the models’ ability to predict the order of the survival times
correctly. The C-index is given by the proportion of concordant pairs divided by
the total number of possible pairs, where concordant pairs mean that the model
correctly predicts the ordering of the predicted survival times. The C-index is given
by Equation 18.
C = 1
|ϵ|
X
i:Ei=1
X
j:Tj≥Ti
1f(xi)<f(xj) ,
(18)
where 1f(xi)<f(xj) is the indicator function which returns 1 if f(xi) < f(xj) and 0
otherwise and |ϵ| is the total possible number of correctly ordered pairs [27]. The
summation i : Ei = 1 indicates that it is only for uncensored data, however in the
thesis no censored data is used. The C-index thus uses the predicted point estimates,
as explained in Equation 17, and the actual survival times as input. A C-index of
0.5 indicates that the model is random, while a C-index of 1.0 indicates that the
model does a perfect job at ranking the survival times.
As later explained in section 5.3, data is divided into individual datasets, and models
are ﬁtted independently. The division will generally cause a lower C-index for the
18
==PAGE:34==
3
Theory
individual datasets but a higher C-index for the combined. To explain this further,
an example is constructed. Imagine that there is a total of ten survival times:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
The data is then split into the two datasets where the ﬁrst dataset is the ﬁrst ﬁve
survival times and the second dataset is the last ﬁve survival times. Two individual
models are then ﬁtted to each dataset and make the following predictions for the
order of the survival times where one error, written in bold and underlined, is made
in each set.
1
5
2
3
4
6
8
9
7
10
As the C-index is calculated by the concordant pairs divided by the total number
of possible pairs, the C-index for the two sets are calculated as below.
4 + 0 + 2 + 1
4 + 3 + 2 + 1 = 7
10 = 0.7
4 + 2 + 1 + 1
4 + 3 + 2 + 1 = 8
10 = 0.8
The C-index of the two datasets is thus 0.7 and 0.8. However, by combining the
predictions for the order of the survival times, the C-index is increased to 0.889. This
happens, as when there are more survival times in the dataset, correct ordering will
be more signiﬁcant.
9 + 7 + 6 + 5 + 5 + 4 + 1 + 2 + 1
9 + 8 + 7 + 6 + 5 + 4 + 3 + 2 + 1 = 0.889
19
==PAGE:35==
4
Dataset for Case Study
4
Dataset for Case Study
This section includes an introduction to the data used throughout the thesis. The
use of the data, ﬁltering, distributions, and characteristics are also discussed.
To accommodate the rising attention within the research ﬁeld of EV charging, the
authors of [38] provides the reader with an overview of public and open datasets,
which is also how the data for this thesis was found. The speciﬁc dataset used in
the project is provided by the city of Boulder in Colorado, USA [39]. To reduce
the emissions from the transportation sector, Colorado released their ﬁrst electri-
cal vehicle plan in 2018 with the target of 940,000 EVs on the roads by 2030. To
achieve this, more than 350 public EV chargers have since 2018 been installed across
Colorado [40][41].
4.1
Raw Data
The dataset is comprised of charging events from 2018 and is constantly updated.
At the time of writing, the dataset contains more than 23,000 events for 27 charging
stations and 12 feature columns. The feature columns are:
• Station Name
• Station Address
• City
• State Province
• Transaction Date
• Transaction Start Time
• Charging Time minutes
• Energy kWh
• GGH Savings kg
• Gasoline Savings gallons
• Port Type
• ObjectId”
The features ”Station Name”, ”Station Address”, ”City” and ”State Province”
are used to get the exact coordinates for the charging station. To get the starting
time as a Python DateTime object, the features ”Transaction Date” and ”Trans-
action Start Time” are combined. The features ”GGH Savings kg ” and ”Gaso-
line Savings gallons ” are not used as they are directly correlated with the en-
ergy usage and thereby appear to be calculated based on the energy usage. The
”Port Type” speciﬁes the number of charging ports of the station, and the ”Ob-
jectId” is merely a unique number assigned to each observation, precisely like an
20
==PAGE:36==
4
Dataset for Case Study
index. The ”Charging Time minutes ” is not the actual charge time but the time
the vehicle was plugged in and is therefore referred to as the Plug-in time.
4.2
Data Cleaning
As a large proportion of the data has been collected during the 2019-2021 COVID-19
pandemic, the data has been inﬂuenced. Upon investigating the data up till 2020
and after, it was concluded to remove all observations after 2020 as the two datasets
showed diﬀerent characteristics due to the changed movement patterns of people as
a consequence of COVID-19 restrictions and other repercussions. Removing these
observations reduces the dataset to approximately 19,000 plug-in events.
Plug-in times shorter than 2 minutes are excluded as these events can be due to
data errors or users changing their mind about EV charging last minute, making
the observations irrelevant. Additionally, only sessions with an energy usage above
0 and below 100 kWh are included. The upper limit is set to 100 kWh as this is
similar to the capacity of the Tesla Model S, which is one of the EVs with the largest
battery capacity among the most widespread models [38]. Plug-in events with no
plug-in time or energy usage are also removed as the observations cannot be used
without this information. Several charging stations are consolidated as they are
placed in the exact location next to each other. After data cleaning, the dataset is
reduced to 16,023 plug-in events and 17 charging stations.
(a) Outskirt charging stations.
(b) City center charging stations.
Fig. 4: The 17 charging stations for Boulder showed on a street map. As a large proportion
of the stations are centered around the city center (see the red square in (a)), a zoom-in
overview of these stations are shown in (b). The numbers indicate the station names
which can be found in Table 1.
21
==PAGE:37==
4
Dataset for Case Study
Information about the characteristic of the charging stations are gathered from
[42] and [43]. All charging stations are of the type J-1772, which has two plugs.
In total, there are 290 plugs in all of Boulder, thus the dataset is only a subset
of the total vehicle charging data in Boulder. In Fig. 4 the charging stations are
visualized on a map of Boulder. The numbers in Fig. 4 relates to Table 1 where
more information about each station is given.
4.3
Data Analysis
Fig. 5 shows the distribution of plug-in events and shows that by far the largest
amount of plug-in events are short plug-in events (up until two hours) which accounts
for 66% of the observations. The next segment is the medium plug-in events, between
two and six hours, which accounts for 32%. Finally, the long plug-in segment, above
six hours, only accounts for 1.5%.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Plug-in time (hours)
0.0%
1.0%
2.0%
3.0%
4.0%
5.0%
6.0%
7.0%
Percentage
Fig. 5: Distribution of plug-in times.
While the data described in Fig. 5 directly concerns the plug-in time of the
charging stations, the scope of the thesis is to model the previously described idle
times. From the dataset with plug-in times, a dataset with idle times is constructed
by ﬁnding for each station the times when no plug-in sessions are recorded.
In
survival analysis terminology each idle time corresponds to the survival time and is
an event, such that the station is born at its beginning and dies at its end. This
yields a dataset with 12,711 idle times. The distribution of the idle times is shown
in Fig. 6 which is limited to only show idle times up to 100 hours as the distribution
has a long tail with a maximum idle time of 1508 hours (≈63 days). The idle times
above 100 hours accounts for 1.6% of the data.
22
==PAGE:38==
4
Dataset for Case Study
0
20
40
60
80
100
Idle time (hours)
0.0%
2.5%
5.0%
7.5%
10.0%
12.5%
15.0%
Percentage
Fig. 6: Distribution of idle times binned per hour. The distribution is cut oﬀat 100
hours due to extreme outliers.
From Fig. 6 several segments can be recognized, and in Fig. 7 these segments
are showed in an area plot over the week for every hour of the day and are listed
below.
• The ﬁrst segment is the short segment with idle times up to 2 hours. The
segment accounts for 25% of all idle times. The short idle times are mainly
during the day and peak hours where EV-users use the charging stations for
short periods, and the stations are thus only left idle brieﬂy.
• The second segment is the medium segment (between 2 and 8 hours) and
accounts for 24% of the data. This segment is again mainly used during the
daytime when people go to work and shops are open.
• The third segment, the long segment, with idle times between 8 and 24
hours, is present throughout the day but mainly during the evening and night
hours where few EV-users use public charging stations, and the stations are
thus left empty overnight or longer. The third segment accounts for the most
signiﬁcant proportion of the data with 35%.
• The ﬁfth segment is the extreme long segment consisting of idle times above
24 hours and accounts for 16% of the observations. The segment is slightly
more represented during nighttime but otherwise stable throughout the day
and day of the week. These idle times might account for the smallest part of
the data, but they account for 57% of all idle time hours. Most of the extreme
idle times are observed within the ﬁrst months after the station is taken into
use. They can therefore be due to limited knowledge about the stations in the
beginning.
23
==PAGE:39==
4
Dataset for Case Study
Fig. 7 thus shows that the time of day has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the length of the
idle time. Furthermore, it shows a similar pattern for the weekdays and a slightly
shifted distribution for the weekend with a higher concentration of short idle times
in the early hours of the day.
0
6 12 18
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Monday
0
6 12 18
Tuesday
0H-2H
2H-8H
8H-24H
24H+
0
6 12 18
Wednesday
0
6 12 18
Thursday
0
6 12 18
Friday
0
6 12 18
Saturday
0
6 12 18
Sunday
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Time of day
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Fig. 7: Area plot of idle times over the week binned per hour of day.
The idle times are not distributed evenly across the 17 stations, as some stations
have more than 1000 events another station only has 13, as Table 1 shows. In Table
1 an index for each station is also given which relates to the position of the station
in Fig. 4. Table 1 further shows the time between the ﬁrst and last event of a
station and the % of the time the station has been idle. Table 1 reveals that some
stations have been active for more days than others, which is because the stations
have been erected over time and not simultaneously. Lastly, it can be seen that
most of the stations are idle for a large proportion of the time, with many of the
stations being unused more than 90% of the time. It therefore also makes sense
that a signiﬁcant proportion of the data has idle times way above two hours, as the
stations the majority of the time are idle. From a provider’s point of view, the less
time the station is idle, the better. Therefore, based on the percentages presented
in the Table 1, there is room for improvement.
24
==PAGE:40==
4
Dataset for Case Study
Table 1: Number of events, days between ﬁrst and most recent event and the proportion
of time the stations have been idle. The index for each station is related to Fig. 4.
Index
# Events
Days in use
% of time idle
ALPINE
1
357
722
0.939
ATRIUM
2
988
721
0.920
BASELINE
3
1190
724
0.899
BOULDER PARK
4
176
493
0.939
EAST
5
424
350
0.902
FACILITIES
6
516
721
0.956
B. JUNCTION
7
351
581
0.944
N BOULDER
8
1403
494
0.733
REC CENTER
9
1139
714
0.875
BJ. JUNCTION
10
100
141
0.926
1000 WALNUT
11
1445
700
0.792
1100 WALNUT
12
1111
633
0.864
1104 SPRUCE
13
1295
693
0.684
1400 WALNUT
14
521
703
0.913
1500 PEARL
15
912
723
0.881
2200 BROADWAY
16
13
344
0.998
BOULDER JCTN
17
758
634
0.903
25
==PAGE:41==
5
Methodology
5
Methodology
This section introduces the general methodolody of the thesis and demonstrates it
on the case study from Section 4. The methodology consists of the following stages:
selection of data for modeling; construction and evaluation of features; and usage of
several modeling techniques.
5.1
Data Selection
As previously shown, a small proportion of the data have very long idle times, some
several days. These events are considered outliers as they do not follow normal
usage behavior and confuse the models. The events are excluded by removing all
events considered outliers by the boxplot deﬁnition (± 1.5 times the interquartile
range). By doing this, 4.9% of the data is lost. Fig. 8 shows the number of events
pr. station after removal of outliers.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Number of events
ALPINE
ATRIUM
BASELINE
BOULDER PARK
EAST
FACILITIES
B. JUNCTION
N BOULDER
REC CENTER
BJ. JUNCTION
1000 WALNUT
1100 WALNUT
1104 SPRUCE
1400 WALNUT
1500 PEARL
2200 BROADWAY
BOULDER JCTN
Fig. 8: Number of events for each of the 17 stations after outliers have been removed.
Fig. 8 shows a large variation in the number of events per station. The stations
that have a limited number of events are not suited for modeling. With limited data,
a model will have few events to make fair predictions for one-hot encoded feature
combinations that could bias the models.
Several diﬀerent constellations of stations were experimented with to decide the
number of stations to include for modeling. However, it was generally found that
as stations with less data were included, the results and model ﬁts would worsen.
As an example, the traditional regression methods were ﬁtted to two datasets: one
with the four stations with the most events and the other with the eight stations
with the most events. The results for the dataset with four stations can be seen in
Table 11 while the results of the dataset with eight stations can be seen in Appendix
26
==PAGE:42==
5
Methodology
A.2. The results show an increase of 20-25% in RMSE and MAE and a decrease
in R-squared of up to 25% between the dataset with four and eight stations, thus
signiﬁcantly worse results. Accordingly, the addition of more stations adds a bias to
the shared parameters and overall deteriorates the results. Therefore only the four
stations with the most events are used for the remainder of the thesis. The total
number of idle times for the four stations is 5157.
Fig. 9: Map of Boulder with the four stations with most events.
In Fig. 9 the four stations N BOULDER, 1104 SPRUCE, 1000 WALNUT and
BASELINE are shown on a map of Boulder city. The two stations, 1104 SPRUCE
and 1000 WALNUT, are in the city center of Boulder, while the two other stations are
further away. The N BOULDER station is north of the city center at a recreational
center.
The BASELINE station is south of the city center in a residential area
and next to a park where several treks into the mountains start. Table 2 shows
the number of events and average idle time of the four stations. The four stations
have similar number of events. However, the average idle times are diﬀerent as the
N BOULDER stations have a signiﬁcantly lower average idle time than the other
stations.
Table 2: Information about the four stations with most events.
Nr. of events
Average idle time
(minutes)
BASELINE
1128
668
1000 WALNUT
1391
476
1104 SPRUCE
1237
548
N BOULDER
1354
333
27
==PAGE:43==
5
Methodology
5.2
Feature Construction and Exploration
To make predictions for the idle times, features are needed. It has previously been
found in [13] and [14] that time is the parameter that inﬂuences the models the most.
Consequently, the features time of day (TOD), which speciﬁes the birth hour of an
event, and the day of week (DOW), which speciﬁes the birth weekday of an event,
are explored. Furthermore, temporal features that describe the previous activity
of and around the stations and spatial features that describe the surroundings are
explored.
5.2.1
Time of Day
As Fig. 7 shows, the TOD has a noteworthy inﬂuence on the length of the idle
times. However, from a modeling perspective, it might make more sense to group
the time of day into segments as the diﬀerence between two adjacent hours might
not be signiﬁcant. However, the diﬀerence between, for example, morning and mid-
day might be. Therefore, a day is divided into the ﬁve general segments: morning,
midday, afternoon, evening and night.
The behavior of the data throughout the ﬁve segments are commented upon by
looking at the median, lower and upper quantiles of every hour of the day in Fig.
10. During the morning hours, from 7 to 10 o’clock, the idle times are between 100
and 400 minutes with a median close to the 25% quantile. This segment is referred
to as the morning segment.
0
5
10
15
20
Hour of day
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Idle time (minutes)
Median
25% quantile
75% quantile
Fig. 10: Median, upper and lower quantile for the idle time for every hour of the day.
The next segment, the midday segment, has a very similar pattern as the morning
segment. This is also observed in Fig. 7 as during these hours the short and medium
idle times are dominant. By inspecting Fig. 11 it can further be seen that more
events happen over the time of the morning and midday segments with the peak in
28
==PAGE:44==
5
Methodology
the midday segment. The increase could be because users leave their cars overnight
and unplug them in the morning or simply because, as the day progresses, more
people enter the city and will charge their cars for short periods, which creates more
events.
0
5
10
15
20
Hour of day
0
100
200
300
400
Number of events
Fig. 11: Number of events for every hour of the day.
The next segment is the afternoon segment from 15 to 18 o’clock. In this segment,
the behavior of the idle times changes as while the lower quantile remains at 100
minutes, the upper quantile increases to more than 1000 minutes while the median
jumps from just under 200 minutes to more than 800 minutes at 18 o’clock. Again,
this behavior is also observed in Fig. 7 as the most dominant segment shifts from
being the short and medium idle times to the long idle times. An explanation can
be that this is also the time where most users will leave work. Therefore, some users
unplug their cars and go home, and many of the stations are left empty until the
next day where users reenter the city.
From 19 to 0 o’clock, referred to as the evening segment, the idle times are
generally high but decrease throughout the segment. An explanation for this can be
that if a station is unplugged during the segment, the chance of another user plugging
in will be minimal. Fig. 11 conﬁrms this as the number of events decreased over
the time of the segment. However, as the time approaches midnight, the time until
users reenter the city decreases, and hence the idle times also decrease.
The last segment is the night segment from 0 to 6 o’clock in the morning. During
these hours, very few events happen, as Fig. 11 shows. As the quantiles furthermore
ﬂuctuate signiﬁcantly during these hours, no conclusion can be drawn form the data.
To further evaluate the behavior of the ﬁve segments, the survival curves for each
segment are estimated using the Kaplan-Meier estimator in Fig. 12. The survival
curves show that the morning, midday and afternoon segments have similar survival
29
==PAGE:45==
5
Methodology
probabilities until approximately four hours (240 minutes). After four hours, the
afternoon segment stagnates, which also makes sense accordingly to the behavior
seen in Fig.
10.
The evening segment has a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent behavior as
the survival probability is stable until 500 minutes, after which the probability of
survival drops, again this is as expected accordingly to Fig. 10. The night segment
has very diﬀerent behavior and also has much wider conﬁdence intervals than the
other segments. This is primarily due to the limited amount of observations for the
segment, as Table 3 shows.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Idle time (minutes)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Survival probability
Morning
Midday
Afternoon
Evening
Night
Fig. 12: Survival curves for the TOD segments using the Kaplan-Meier estimator.
Table 3: Summary of TOD segment hours and number of events.
TOD segment
Morning
Midday
Afternoon
Evening
Night
Hours of day
[7:10]
]10:14]
]14:18]
]18:00]
]00:06]
Events count
1436
1279
1656
739
47
As the night segment has minimal observations and much more unpredictable
behavior, it is decided to exclude events from this segment, reducing the data to
5110 events. The remaining segments are used as a feature for modeling. From
a user and provider perspective, this also makes sense as the behavior during the
nighttime is less relevant as only a limited amount of potential customers are active
during these hours. However, the nighttime segment can easily be implemented for
other projects if this is desired.
5.2.2
Day of Week
From the area plot in Fig. 7, a slight shift in the distribution of idle times was
detected from the weekdays to the weekend. To get a closer look at DOW patterns,
the median, upper and lower quantiles are visualized in Fig. 13. The 25% quantiles
stay at the same level while the median slightly ﬂuctuates over the week, and the 75%
30
==PAGE:46==
5
Methodology
quantile has a slight increase from Friday to Sunday. Fig. 14 shows a reasonable
distribution of events for the weekdays, with most events on Fridays and fewest
on Mondays. Together the two plots do not show any clear evidence of diﬀerent
behaviors for the days of the week. This is further backed up by the Kaplan-Meier
curves, which show very similar behavior for all days. The curves can be seen in
Appendix A.3.
Monday
Thuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Day of week
200
400
600
800
Idle time (minutes)
Median
25% quantile
75% quantile
Fig. 13: Median, upper and lower quantiles for the idle times over the days of the week.
0
200
400
600
800
Number of events
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Fig. 14: Number of events for the days of the week.
Both Fig. 7 and 13 had slight tendencies towards diﬀerent behaviors for weekdays
and weekends.
However, the Kaplan-Meier plots in Fig.
15 show no signiﬁcant
diﬀerence between the two groups. As the p-value of the log-rank test is further
well above 0.05, it would not make sense to include a weekday/weekend variable.
Consequently, only the weekdays are kept as features as some methods might ﬁnd
interactions between DOW and TOD signiﬁcant.
31
==PAGE:47==
5
Methodology
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Idle time (minutes)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Survival probability
p-value = 0.127
Weekday
Weekend
Fig. 15: Survival curves for weekdays and weekend using the Kaplan-Meier estimator.
5.2.3
Station Identiﬁer
Each charging station might have diﬀerent characteristics due to location. For ex-
ample, Fig. 16 shows signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the survival curves of the four
stations, as follows. The BASELINE station, which was situated south of the city
center, has the highest probability of surviving (i.e., remaining idle). In contrast,
the N BOULDER station, situated north of the city, has the lowest chance of sur-
viving and a much higher probability of being occupied. The two stations placed in
the city center, 1000 WALNUT and 1104 SPRUCE, have similar survival curves up
until 500 minutes, after which the 1000 WALNUT station has a lower probability
of survival.
It thus makes sense to include a station identiﬁer feature, so that models can
treat stations diﬀerently. This feature is used for modeling and is referred to as the
station name.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Idle time (minutes)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Survival probability
BASELINE
1000 WALNUT
1104 SPRUCE
N BOULDER
Fig. 16: Survival curves for the four stations using the Kaplan-Meier estimator.
32
==PAGE:48==
5
Methodology
5.2.4
Activity Features
As the charging stations are stationary, the number of features that change over
time is minimal. Furthermore, no knowledge about the users is available, which
previously has been found to yield very good predictors of charging demand [12].
Instead, the plug-in time, energy usage and idle time are used to give information
about the activity level of a station leading up till an event, as this might explain
the future idle times.
Initially, experiments where the features for every three hours up until ﬁve days
before an event were constructed. For every third hour the correlation between the
feature and the idle time was further computed. The results showed that the absolute
correlations generally would increase as the time before the event was increased.
However, instead of adding explanatory power, the features mimicked the average
values of the features and did not add any valuable information.
Instead, an experiment where the same features were constructed for every hour
from one to six hours before an event was carried out. In Fig. 17 the correlations
between the features and the idle times are visualized for every hour before an event.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Hour before event
0.04
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
Correlation
Idle time
Energy usage
Plug-in time
Fig. 17: Correlation between the features and the idle times for every hour before an
event up to six hours before.
Fig. 17 reveals that all the correlations are very low, below 0.06, meaning that
the features explain less than 6% of the variance in the data.
Furthermore, for
the idle time and plug-in time, the highest correlation is at four hours, while for
the energy usage, it is at ﬁve hours. However, to keep the principles general, it is
decided to take the activity levels within the four hours before an event. By further
inspecting the correlations internally between the three features revealed that idle
time and plug-in time had a high correlation. The features would thereby add the
same information to the models and, for some methods, potentially cause problems.
Therefore, the idle time activity feature is discarded as it has the lowest correlation
with the idle time of the two.
33
==PAGE:49==
5
Methodology
In this thesis it was further hypothesized that the state of a nearby charging sta-
tion might be able to explain what will happen to a charging station. Accordingly,
the activity level at the nearest neighbor station within the last four hours before
an event was also added.
The duration of the last three idle times before a birth were also added as features,
referred to as the lagged features: lag1, lag2 and lag3. The idea behind these fea-
tures is that if, for example, the previous idle times were short, perhaps the next
idle time would be similar. The lagged features however only consider the order of
events happening. As an example, this means that for one event there might have
been three events within the previous few hours. The duration of these events would
be relatively low. For another event, the last three events might have been within
the past few days. These events will contrary have much longer duration’s.
In summary, the seven added activity features are as follows:
• Plug-in time 4H - The percentage of plug-in time within the last four hours
until birth event.
• Charge energy 4H - The amount of kWh charged within the last four hours
until birth event.
• Plug-in time 4H, neighbour - The percentage of plug-in time within the
last four hours until birth event for the nearest neighbour.
• Charge energy 4H, neighbour - The amount of kWh charged within the
last four hours until birth event for the nearest neighbour.
• lag1 - The idle time of the last event.
• lag2 - The idle time of the second last event.
• lag3 - The idle time of the third last event.
In Fig. 18, the correlations for all seven constructed features with the idle time
are shown. The two features with highest correlations are lag2 and lag3. However,
these still only explain around 12% of the variance in the data. The lag1, lag2 and
lag3 features are all positively correlated, which means that if the previous events
were long, the next event would also be. The same is true for the neighbor features,
although with a much smaller magnitude as the correlation is below 0.025. The
Energy usage 4H and Plug-in time 4H are both negatively correlated. This means
that as the plug-in time or energy usage within the previous four hours before an
34
==PAGE:50==
5
Methodology
event increases, the idle time of the event will generally decrease, however, both
correlations are also minimal.
0.050
0.025
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
lag2
lag3
lag1
Plug-in time 4H, neighbour
Energy usage 4H, neighbour
Energy usage 4H
Plug-in time 4H
Fig. 18: Correlations between constructed features and the idle time.
5.2.5
Spatial Features
The last features explored are spatial features. Spatial features are explored as if,
for example, a station is placed next to a restaurant, this might mean that it is
used either more or less. Together with the other features, this will also give the
models the possibility of predicting how a station in a new area might perform based
on the distances to diﬀerent points of interest (POIs).
To add spatial features,
OpenStreetMap [44] is used, as it has comprehensive and up-to-date information
about cities across the world. In total, 69 diﬀerent types of POIs are gathered for
the city of Boulder. However, some POIs are less relevant and are thus removed.
The remaining POIs are grouped into categories to limit the number of features.
These are listed in Table 4.
Table 4: Grouped spatial categories with POI examples.
Category
POI examples
Entertainment
pub, social facility
Service
post oﬃce, library, police, bank
Food
restaurant, fast food, cafe
Childcare
childcare, kindergarten
Education
prep school, college, school
Medical
clinic, hospital, dentist
Waste-Management
recycling, waste disposal
Each of the POI categories are used as a continuous feature that speciﬁes the distance
from a station to the nearest POI within the category. As an example, the feature
Medical describes the distance to the nearest clinic, hospital, dentist, etc., whichever
of these is nearest to each station. Thus, the value will be the same for all events
for the same station but will diﬀer between stations. As the number of stations is
35
==PAGE:51==
5
Methodology
limited to only four, the features are easily correlated. However, the features are
kept for the sake of generalization, and as for larger datasets with more stations,
the correlation problems may be nonexistent.
5.2.6
Feature Constellations
In total, four diﬀerent feature constellations are used. The ﬁrst model only contains
the categorical features Station name, TOD and DOW, which can also be seen as a
baseline for all other feature constellations and is referred to as Baseline. The Base-
line is compared with three other models: one where the seven activity features are
included (Activity), one where the eight spatial POI features are included (Spatial),
and ﬁnally a model where all features are included (Full). The four models are listed
below.
• Baseline - Station name, TOD, DOW
• Activity - Station name, TOD, DOW, activity features
• Spatial - Station name, TOD, DOW, spatial features
• Full - Station name, TOD, DOW, activity features, spatial features
5.3
Modeling Strategy
When training the methods and models, the data is divided into a training and
test set.
The train set is used to choose hyperparameters and train the models
while the test set is kept apart and only showed to the models at the end for
evaluation. It is the results of the test set which are shown throughout the thesis.
The hyperparameters used for all models can be found in Appendix A.6.
As some of the features developed in section 5.2 are dependent on the previous
activity, the data is split by the event start time where 80% is used for training and
20% is used for testing. All categorical features (Station name, TOD and DOW)
are one-hot encoded. This means that each category within each categorical feature
will get its own binary column, for example specifying whether it is Monday or not.
The continuous features, the activity, and spatial features are scaled by subtracting
the mean and dividing by the standard deviation. Scaling the features ensures that
a feature is not given higher importance due to its larger scale. To model the data,
both a single-step and two-step approach is used. The single-step approach is the
most simple and is implemented as explained above. The procedure of the two-step
approach is explained below.
36
==PAGE:52==
5
Methodology
5.3.1
Two-Step
The Kaplan-Meier survival curves of the TOD in Fig. 12 and the station name in
Fig. 16 showed that the variables do not split the data very well within the ﬁrst
four hours (240 minutes). This suggests that a two-step approach could optimize
the performance of the methods further. In the two-step approach, the data is split
in train and test-set as for the single-step approach.
In step 1) of the two-step
approach, the data is split into short (< 4H) and long (≥4H) idle times using
a classiﬁer. The four-hour threshold is chosen after experimenting with thresholds
of two, four and eight hours, where the four-hour threshold gave the best trade-
oﬀbetween good classiﬁcation results and business usage.
The eight-hour split
produced better results for the classiﬁer but would be of limited use from a business
perspective. The two-hour split would be very relevant from a business perspective
but showed inferior results in the classiﬁcation. By setting the threshold to four
hours, the data is evenly balanced with 48% short events and 52% long events. This
balance is also kept in the test and training set, thus no sampling is needed.
In step 2) of the two-stage approach, the optimal hyperparameters are found for
short and long idle times, separate models are ﬁtted, and predictions for the test
sets are made. Fig. 19 illustrates the two-step approach:
Fig. 19: Illustration of the two-step approach.
To obtain a bound on best performance, a Perfect Classiﬁer is used for the tradi-
tional regression methods. That is, instead of actually training a classiﬁer, the test
and train data is split into short and long idle times by the four-hour threshold.
The results for the short idle times are shown in Table 5 while the results for the
long idle times are shown in Table 6. The R-squared values are much higher for the
long idle times than for the short idle times, although still low. This indicates that
the short idle times are much more unpredictable, as at maximum 2% of the vari-
ance is explained. The short idle times further has much smaller RMSE and MAE
37
==PAGE:53==
5
Methodology
values. However, this is not because of a better ﬁt of the data as the low R-squared
values and high MAPE values show. The reason is simply that the variation of the
short idle times is much smaller than that of the long, which limits the potential
errors. The MAPE values are also lower for the long idle times at approximately
40%, which is much more reasonable than the 700+% for the short idle times, which
again indicates that the shorter idle times are much more unpredictable.
For the short idle times, both the Baseline and Full feature constellations per-
forms all most the same for all methods. However, for the long idle times, diﬀerences
are seen. Here, best results are obtained with the RF for the Baseline feature con-
stellation. Interestingly, the LR for the Baseline constellation performs signiﬁcantly
worse than the other methods for the long idle times. Furthermore, the additional
features seem to confuse the NN as it performs worse for the Full feature constella-
tion, as especially seen by the low R-squared.
Table 5: Results for traditional regression methods for the short idle times, < 4H. The
data has been split using a perfect classiﬁer.
Baseline
Full
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
LR
-0.05
66
54
730
0.01
64
54
713
RF
0.02
64
54
734
0.01
64
55
730
MLP
0.00
65
54
727
0.00
64
54
726
GB
0.03
64
54
736
0.02
64
54
743
Table 6: Results for traditional regression methods for the long idle times, ≥4H. The
data has been split using a perfect classiﬁer.
Baseline
Full
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
LR
-0.81
494
389
56
0.11
346
253
37
RF
0.16
336
244
38
0.13
343
246
37
MLP
0.13
342
253
39
0.08
352
256
38
GB
0.15
338
247
38
0.12
346
250
38
The predictions made by each of the two models in the two-step approach can be
combined. Table 7 shows the results. The RMSE, MAE and MAPE are in between
the results of the long and short idle times while the R-squared indicates a signiﬁcant
better ﬁt. However, then main reason for this is primarily that by splitting the data
by a perfect classiﬁer and ﬁtting individual methods the possibility for major errors
38
==PAGE:54==
5
Methodology
is decreased. Furthermore, the increase in R-squared it is also due to the nature of
how the coeﬃcient is calculated. As previously explained, the numerator is given
by the residual sum of squares (SSres), which for each independent event does not
change. Contrary, the denominator does change depending on the data as it is given
by the total sum of squares (SStot), which is proportional to the total variance in
the data. Consequently, by combining the two groups of predictions, the total sum
of squares is increased signiﬁcantly while the residual sum of squares remains the
same, which in return increases R-squared.
Table 7: Results for traditional regression methods for the two-step approach, combined
predictions. The data has been split using a perfect classiﬁer.
Baseline
Full
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
LR
0.48
343
212
411
0.74
243
248
394
RF
0.76
236
144
404
0.75
240
245
403
MLP
0.75
240
148
402
0.73
246
150
401
GB
0.75
237
145
406
0.74
242
147
410
39
==PAGE:55==
6
Experiments and Results
6
Experiments and Results
This Section presents experiments for evaluating the methodology. First, the best
feature constellations are chosen. Next, the best classiﬁcation method for the two-
step modeling approach is chosen. Then, the three Machine Learning approaches
– traditional regression methods, survival analysis, and quantile regression – are
compared via both the single- and two-step approach. Lastly, speciﬁc examples of
how the methods can be applied are given.
6.1
Testing of Feature Constellations
To test the diﬀerent feature constellations, the traditional regression methods are
used and the results are shown in Table 8. By inspecting Table 8, it becomes clear
that all models ﬁt the data relatively poorly, as only between 20% and 24% of the
variance in the data is explained as seen by the R-squared values. Furthermore, the
RMSE values are all above 400 minutes (6 hours and 40 minutes), while the more
outlier robust MAE lies around 330 minutes (5 hours and 30 minutes) both of which
are relatively high errors when trying to predict the idle time. Furthermore, the
MAPE values are all above 1800%, meaning the models make predictions which,
on average, are more than 18 times higher or lower than the actual values. The
MAPE values are very high, but they make sense according to the high RMSE
and MAE as if an idle time, for example, is 15 minutes and the model predicts oﬀ
by approximately 300 minutes, this would give a MAPE value above 1800%. All
together, the metrics indicate that predicting idle times is a tough problem with the
data at hand and that the data appears to be very noisy and thus challenging to
predict.
The best performing method among the four traditional regression methods is the
NN for the Baseline and Full features constellations as it has the highest R-squared
values and lowest RMSE, MAE and MAPE values, while the worst performing
method is the simple LR. However, across all methods, the results are very similar
as, for example, the R-squared value only changes by 4%, and the most signiﬁcant
MAE diﬀerence is 14 minutes (less than 0.05% change). This indicates that the
constructed features have limited explanatory power regarding the target variable,
which suggests that the Baseline would be the better choice due to its simplicity.
However, to compare results across methods, and as other methods may ﬁnd the
extra features relevant, both the Baseline and Full feature constellations are used.
The Full features constellation also allows for diﬀerent usage due to its additional
features that might be relevant in a business context.
40
==PAGE:56==
6
Experiments and Results
Table 8: Summary statistic of the four feature constellations for the traditional regression
methods.
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
Baseline
Activity
LR
0.21
424
328
1872
0.20
428
332
1926
RF
0.23
419
321
1804
0.23
421
330
1900
NN
0.24
419
332
1879
0.20
427
331
1985
GB
0.23
418
319
1815
0.21
424
333
1815
Spatial
Full
LR
0.21
424
331
1964
0.20
427
333
1954
RF
0.23
419
322
1879
0.23
420
330
1929
NN
0.24
416
322
1831
0.22
423
329
1859
GB
0.21
424
330
1951
0.23
418
333
1967
6.2
Classiﬁcation
The four diﬀerent classiﬁcation methods, logistic regression (LoR), random forest
(RF), neural network (NN) and gradient boosting (GB), are used to classify the
data for the two-step approach. For all methods, both the Baseline and Full feature
constellations are tested. In Table 9, the results are shown. Overall the four methods
yield similar accuracy and F1 scores. However, the random forest classiﬁer shows
the best results for both the Baseline and Full features constellations.
The F1
score is 0.001 higher for the Baseline than the Full constellation, which indicates
a slightly better balance between recall and precision. The accuracy for the Full
feature constellation is, however, approximately one percentage point higher. For
this reason, the random forest classiﬁer for the Full feature constellation is used
for classiﬁcation. The confusion matrix of the random forest classiﬁer is shown in
Fig. 20.
Table 9: Results of the four classiﬁcation methods.
Baseline
Full
F1
Accuracy
F1
Accuracy
LoR
0.700
0.733
0.698
0.739
RF
0.716
0.743
0.715
0.755
NN
0.696
0.738
0.656
0.672
GB
0.698
0.733
0.699
0.734
41
==PAGE:57==
6
Experiments and Results
SHORT (< 4H)
LONG (>= 4H)
Predicted label
SHORT (< 4H)
LONG (>= 4H)
True label
0.85
0.15
0.35
0.65
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Fig. 20: Confusion matrix for the random forest classiﬁer for the Full feature constellation
with a four hour split.
The confusion matrix shows that the random forest classiﬁer predicts a larger
proportion of the short idle times correctly. Only 65% of the long idle times are
labeled correctly. In contrast, 85% of the short idle times are labeled correctly. While
the classiﬁer still has plenty of room for improvement, the results are reasonable,
especially when considering the diﬃculty of the problem. However, the reason for
this is mainly due to how the data is distributed concerning the TOD feature. As
shown in Fig. 10, a natural division of the data appears at around four hours (240
minutes), where the majority of the evening events are above and the majority of
the morning, midday and afternoon events are below. Thereby, the TOD feature
itself is a good predictor for whether an event will be above or below four hours.
This is further conﬁrmed by examining the top ﬁve most important features for
the random forest classiﬁer in Table 10. A feature is deemed important for the
random forest classiﬁer if a large proportion of the observations traverses through it
in the decision trees. The evening feature has a much higher importance score than
all other features as it is 17 times higher than the second and third most important
features, which are the lagged activity features.
Table 10: Top ﬁve most important features for the random forest classiﬁer Full feature
constellation.
Feature
Importance
Evening
0.665
lag3
0.039
lag2
0.037
Waste-management
0.034
Plug-in time 4H
0.031
42
==PAGE:58==
6
Experiments and Results
6.3
Traditional Regression Methods
The traditional regression methods: linear regression, random forest, neural network
and gradient boosting are trained and tested to get the point estimates for the idle
times.
The results for the one-step approach were also examined in section 6.1
and the results can thus be seen in Table 8, however in Table 11 the results for the
Baseline and Full feature constellations are reproduced to allow for easy comparison.
The results for the two-step approach are shown in Table 12. The results show that
for all models, except for the Baseline linear regression, the results are slightly
improved by the two-step approach. However, all results are still at a similar level
as at maximum 24% of the variance is explained and high predicting errors are
observed. Most noticeable is the decrease in MAE, which decreases between 5 and
15 minutes, and the decrease in MAPE of approximately 70%.
Between the four traditional regression methods, there is no clear winner. For the
single-step approach random forest, neural network and gradient boosting methods
perform almost identically for both feature constellations. For the two-step approach
the three methods also perform similarly for the Baseline feature constellation while
for the Full feature constellation all four methods perform similarly. This again
indicates that predicting idle times with the data at hand is a challenging problem
where traditional regression methods cannot reveal much insight.
Table 11: Results for the traditional regression methods for the single-step approach.
Baseline
Full
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
LR
0.21
424
328
1872
0.20
427
333
1954
RF
0.23
419
321
1804
0.23
420
330
1929
NN
0.24
419
332
1879
0.22
423
329
1859
GB
0.23
418
319
1815
0.23
418
333
1967
Table 12:
Results for the traditional regression methods for the two-step approach,
combined predictions. The RF method is used for classiﬁcation.
Baseline
Full
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
LR
0.09
455
343
1712
0.23
421
322
1831
RF
0.24
417
316
1760
0.23
419
323
1932
NN
0.24
417
317
1833
0.24
417
315
1796
GB
0.24
416
314
1775
0.23
419
318
1881
43
==PAGE:59==
6
Experiments and Results
Compared to the perfect classiﬁer, the results of the two-step approach are sig-
niﬁcantly worse based on all parameters. The main reason is due to the errors made
by the RF classiﬁer, which will act as outliers for the independent models. The
outliers confuse the models and ultimately cause more signiﬁcant prediction errors
than the individual models for the perfect classiﬁer, thereby decreasing the models’
performance compared to the perfect classiﬁer.
The individual results for the short and long idle times for the two-step approach
are shown in Table 13 and 14 and show apparent diﬀerences from the results of the
perfect classiﬁer. For the short idle times, the R-squared is at the same level as for
the perfect classiﬁer however, the RMSE, MAE and MAPE are much higher. For
the long idle times, an increase in the prediction errors are also observed as RMSE,
MAE and MAPE again are increased compared to the perfect classiﬁer. However,
R-squared is also signiﬁcantly reduced for the long idle times. The decrease in the
overall model ﬁts is again due to the classiﬁed data, as several falsely labeled events
will act as outliers for the separate models.
Table 13: Results for the traditional regression methods for the two-step approach for
short idle times, < 4H. The RF method is used for classiﬁcation.
Baseline
Full
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
LR
-0.05
409
310
1942
0.00
399
313
2041
RF
0.00
398
307
2023
-0.03
405
323
2224
NN
0.01
397
310
2117
0.01
398
308
1981
GB
0.00
399
308
2015
-0.02
403
314
2103
Table 14: Results for the traditional regression methods for the two-step approach for
long idle times, ≥4H. The RF method is used for classiﬁcation.
Baseline
Full
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
LR
-0.32
520
397
1361
0.00
453
336
1543
RF
0.04
444
326
1375
0.06
439
316
1471
NN
0.02
448
329
1379
0.03
446
327
1451
GB
0.05
441
320
1487
0.05
442
319
1527
Therefore, it seems peculiar that the R-squared for the combined data is as high
as it is. However, this is again due to the nature of R-squared as the variance of
44
==PAGE:60==
6
Experiments and Results
the data is increased by combining the data of the short and long idle times, as
previously explained in Section 5.3.1.
6.4
Quantile Regression
To further understand the idle times’ behavior and get insight into the certainty of
predictions, both a linear quantile regression and a gradient boosting quantile re-
gression is implemented. For every event the 5%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 95% quantile
of the expected idle time are predicted. As the spatial features, as previously men-
tioned, are very correlated, this causes value errors for the linear quantile regression.
For this reason, the temporal features are left out for this model.
In Table 15 the MIL and ICP for the two methods are showed for a 50% and 90%
conﬁdence interval. When comparing the two methods for the 90% conﬁdence inter-
val, the MIL values are approximately 12% lower for the gradient boosting method,
and the ICP values are closer to the desired 0.9. However, for the 50% conﬁdence
interval, the MIL values are lower for the linear quantile regression method. The
ICP for the 50% conﬁdence interval and Baseline feature constellation is closest to
0.5 for the gradient boosting method. For the Full feature constellation, the ICP of
the linear regression method comes closer to 0.5. There is thus no clear winner to
which of the two methods does a better job.
The results for the two-step approach in Table 16 show the same pattern for
the MIL and ICP values as the single-step approach. Comparing the single and
two-step approach results shows better results for the gradient boosting method for
the two-step approach, where again the simple Baseline feature constellation seems
to perform the best, however, diﬀerences are minimal. The individual results of the
short and long idle times are displayed in Appendix A.4 and show similar perfor-
mance as the combined results.
To allow for comparison between the quantile regression methods and other methods,
the summary statistics of the 50% quantile, the median, are computed and shown at
the bottom of Table 15 and 16. Between the single and two-step approach, the two-
step approach performs the best across both methods and feature constellations.
The gradient boosting method further produces the best results within the two-
step approach as it has signiﬁcantly higher R-squared values and lower or similar
RMSE and MAE compared to the linear method. For MAPE the linear method has
lower values. Between the Baseline and Full feature constellations for the gradient
boosting method, the Baseline feature constellation produces better results, but as
previously seen, diﬀerences are minor between the feature constellations. The best
results are thus produced by the two-step approach for the gradient boosting method
45
==PAGE:61==
6
Experiments and Results
with the Baseline feature constellation.
Table 15: Linear and gradient boosting quantile regression results for the single-step
approach. The MIL and ICP of the 50% and 90% conﬁdence intervals is showed at the
top while the metrics for the median are showed at the bottom.
Linear
Gradient boosting
Baseline
Full
Baseline
Full
MIL (90%)
1433
1424
1266
1254
ICP (90%)
0.863
0.869
0.886
0.878
MIL (50%)
416
474
490
501
ICP (50%)
0.472
0.474
0.477
0.472
R2
-0.07
-0.02
0.13
0.11
RMSE
494
482
445
451
MAE
300
297
285
286
MAPE
1116
1128
1165
1070
Table 16: Linear and gradient boosting quantile regression results for the two-step ap-
proach, combined predictions. The MIL and ICP of the 50% and 90% conﬁdence intervals
is showed at the top while the metrics for the median are showed at the bottom. The
classiﬁcation in the two-step approach is made using the RF classiﬁer.
Linear
Gradient boosting
Baseline
Full
Baseline
Full
MIL (90%)
1407
1399
1227
1253
ICP (90%)
0.835
0.852
0.879
0.861
MIL (50%)
420
426
464
468
ICP (50%)
0.453
0.443
0.479
0.488
R2
0.0
0.0
0.18
0.16
RMSE
470
422
424
430
MAE
293
293
263
267
MAPE
1028
1021
1147
1132
Comparing the best results of the quantile regression methods with the tradi-
tional regression methods, the R-squared is lower for the quantile regression while
the RMSE values are similar. However, the MAE is decreased by approximately 50
minutes, and MAPE decreases signiﬁcantly by 700-900%. Compared to the tradi-
tional regression methods, the big diﬀerence in the RMSE and MAE indicates that
the quantile regression methods more often produce signiﬁcant prediction errors,
46
==PAGE:62==
6
Experiments and Results
as the RMSE penalizes large errors more harshly.
However, as the considerable
decrease in MAPE indicates, the errors are more proportional to the actual values
than for the traditional regression methods.
To generalize and visualize how the diﬀerent quantiles behave for each station over
the day, the quantile predictions are grouped by the station name and time of
day. For the predictions, the Full feature constellation for the single-step gradient
boosting method is used. The results are visualized in Fig. 21. The results generally
show wide 90% conﬁdence intervals of 1000+ minutes (16+ hours) for all stations, as
expected by the previously seen high MIL values. Similar behavior for all quantiles
is observed for the N BOULDER, 1000 WALNUT and 1104 SPRUCE stations. For
these stations the 5% quantile quantile remains stable and low while the 25% and
50% quantile increase signiﬁcant during the evening. The 75% quantile drops for
the midday and increase during the afternoon, where it remains at the same level for
the evening. Lastly, the 95% quantile remains at a stable and high level throughout
the day. The pattern is diﬀerent for the BASELINE station as the 50% and 75%
quantile increase during the midday and afternoon.
The general observations are also conﬁrmed by inspecting the most important
features for each quantile which are found in Appendix A.4. For the gradient boost-
ing method, a feature is considered important if it is used often to make key decisions
in the decision trees. The importance scores show that for the 5% and 95% quan-
tiles, mainly the activity features have high importance, where for the 25% and 50%
the most important feature is the evening feature. For the 75% quantile, the midday
and morning features are the most signiﬁcant features.
Comparing the quantiles for the stations, the N BOULDER station again gen-
erally has lower idle times. This is not surprising as it was previously also found to
have the lowest average idle times.
In Fig. 21 the 50% conﬁdence interval changes throughout the day, while the 90%
conﬁdence interval more or less stays the same for all stations. In other words, this
means that for the shorter and medium idle times, the time of day is very signiﬁcant,
while for the more extreme idle times, very low or very high, the time of day does
not matter as much. To make this more concrete, imagine that a provider wants to
make predictions for the N BOULDER station during midday and evening. With
75% certainty, the model shows that the idle time will be approximately 300 minutes
during midday and more than double that, 750 minutes, in the evening. If higher
certainty is wanted, for instance 95% certainty, the correct estimate would be to
guess that the idle times will not be above 1000 minutes. Thus if higher certainty
in the predictions is needed, the prediction intervals will be very wide. However,
47
==PAGE:63==
6
Experiments and Results
the models still provide relevant information as they add insight beyond the mean
estimates and into the behaviors of the diﬀerent quantiles while producing results
of similar quality as the traditional regression methods.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Idle time (minutes)
N BOULDER
1000 WALNUT
Morning
Midday
Afternoon
Evening
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Idle time (minutes)
1104 SPRUCE
Morning
Midday
Afternoon
Evening
BASELINE
5%
25%
50%
75%
95%
Fig. 21: Predictions for the 5%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 95% quantiles using the gradient
boosting quantile regressor for the single-step approach with the Full feature constellation.
The lines indicate the mean values while the shaded area indicates the 95% conﬁdence
interval.
6.5
Survival Analysis
The ﬁnal method used to predict the idle times is the survival analysis method
which both can produce point estimates and survival curves for each independent
idle time. The two survival analysis methods, CPH and DeepSurv, are used.
For the CPH, the assumption of proportional hazards is often hard to comply
with, and features are accordingly removed. In the case of modeling idle times,
several small and bigger violations of the assumptions were found. However, as sug-
gested in [45] even small violations of the assumptions are often impossible to avoid,
and as the goal is to get the best possible predictions, it is irrelevant exactly how
the predictions are made. For this reason no features are removed.
The results for the single-step approach are shown in Table 17. The CPH outper-
forms the DeepSurv method from a survival analysis perspective as the C-index is
higher for both the Baseline and Full feature constellations. The R-squared is also
much higher for the CPH than the DeepSurv. Furthermore, the Full feature con-
stellation can explain a higher percentage of the variance for both methods, though
48
==PAGE:64==
6
Experiments and Results
still lower than the traditional regression methods. It is particularly worth noticing
that for the DeepSurv method, R-squared becomes negative for the Baseline feature
constellation. According to the deﬁnition of R-squared, this means that SSres is
higher than SStot, meaning that the sum of the squared residuals is larger than the
variance in the data. However, despite the low R-squared, the RMSE and MAE
values are considerably lower than for the CPH and the traditional regression meth-
ods. This means that while the DeepSurv model for the single-step approach does
a worse job of ﬁtting the data, the model produces smaller prediction errors than
the previously seen models and methods.
Table 17: Results of the single-step approach for the CPH and DeepSurv model.
R2
C-index
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
CPH - Baseline
0.14
0.63
442
378
2070
CPH - Full
0.18
0.63
431
350
1863
DeepSurv - Baseline
-0.08
0.59
339
291
1991
DeepSurv - Full
0.08
0.62
314
267
1826
The results for the two-step approach are shown in Table 18. Again, the CPH out-
performs the DeepSurv method as the C-index is higher for both models. However,
the gap is much smaller compared to the single-step approach. Both models also
produce a higher C-index than the single-step approach. This is rather surprising
as the C-index of the individual models in the two-step approach were between 0.52
and 0.6. All results for the individual models are found in Appendix A.5. The big
increase in the C-index is, however, mainly due to the splitting of the data as ex-
plained in section 3.3.5 and not necessarily because the survival curves are estimated
better than for the single-step approach.
Table 18: Results of the two-step approach for the CPH and DeepSurv model, combined
predictions. The classiﬁcation is made using the RF classiﬁer.
R2
C-index
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
CPH - Baseline
0.25
0.65
415
316
1781
CPH - Full
0.25
0.65
421
322
1746
DeepSurv - Baseline
0.21
0.64
425
327
1775
DeepSurv - Full
0.15
0.63
441
344
1951
Concerning R-squared and RMSE, MAE and MAPE, the CPH model also out-
performs the DeepSurv method.
The Baseline feature constellation again shows
slightly better results than the Full feature constellation for both CPH and Deep-
49
==PAGE:65==
6
Experiments and Results
Surv. Compared to the traditional regression methods, the results of the CPH are
very similar with some minor improvements.
Between the two approaches, the CPH models are improved by the two-step ap-
proach. For the DeepSurv model, the answer is more ambiguous as the R-squared
and C-index are improved but the RMSE, MAE and MAPE are worse.
An important aspect of the survival methods is that they can provide predictions
for the survival curves of each independent event. The curves show the survival
probability, the probability that the station will stay idle, as a function of the time
from a station is left idle. To visualize the behaviors of each station, the survival
curves are grouped by each station in Fig. 22. The model for the CPH for the single-
step approach with the Full feature constellation is used to make the predictions.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Life-time (minutes)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Survival probability
N BOULDER
1000WALNUT
BASELINE
1104 SPRUCE
Fig. 22: Survival curves for the four stations with the single-step approach for the CPH
with the Full feature constellation. The lines indicate mean values and the shaded areas
are the 95% conﬁdence intervals.
Fig. 22 shows that the conﬁdence intervals are very wide and overlap each other.
This makes sense as for each station all events are grouped. This means that, for
example, both the longer idle times during the evening and shorter idle times dur-
ing the daytime are combined. Despite the large conﬁdence intervals, the curves do
show diﬀerent behavior. For example, the N BOULDER station has a much lower
probability of survival, and thereby a smaller chance of being idle, than the rest
of the stations. This is similar to what was found by inspecting the Kaplan-Meier
plots in Fig. 16.
By further grouping the survival curve predictions by both the station name and the
time of day, the conﬁdence intervals are reduced as seen in Fig. 23. Furthermore, a
similar ordering of the stations as in Fig. 22, with regard to the survival probability,
50
==PAGE:66==
6
Experiments and Results
is conserved in Fig. 23. The N BOULDER station, situated north of the center,
has the lowest survival probabilities. In contrast, the BASELINE station located
south of the city has the highest survival probabilities and thereby the highest prob-
ability of staying idle. The two stations in the city center, 1000WALNUT and 1104
SPRUCE, have survival probabilities between the N BOULDER and BASELINE
stations. Fig. 23 also shows that the survival probability for all stations generally
increases from morning to evening.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Survival probability
Morning
N BOULDER
1000WALNUT
BASELINE
1104 SPRUCE
Midday
N BOULDER
1000WALNUT
BASELINE
1104 SPRUCE
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Life-time (minutes)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Survival probability
Afternoon
N BOULDER
1000WALNUT
BASELINE
1104 SPRUCE
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Life-time (minutes)
Evening
N BOULDER
1000WALNUT
BASELINE
1104 SPRUCE
Fig. 23: Survival curves for the four stations over the time of day. The lines indicate the
mean values and the shaded areas are the 95% conﬁdence intervals. The predictions are
made using the one-step approach with the CPH method and the Full feature constellation.
From a business perspective, the curves are rather interesting as they show exact
probabilities over time.
When the station is left idle at time zero, there is no
diﬀerence in the survival probability of each station. So as a user, it would, for
example, not matter which station to go to to increase the chance of arriving at
an idle station. However, after two hours (120 minutes), a signiﬁcant drop in the
survival probabilities is observed, and the survival probabilities are very diﬀerent for
each station. This diﬀerence increase until around four hours (250 minutes), where
after the survival probabilities decrease more slowly. However, the magnitude of the
diﬀerence will also depend on the time of day as it is most signiﬁcant during the
morning and minor during the evening hours.
In Table 19 a detailed overview of diﬀerent survival probabilities for the one-step
approach with the CPH and the Full feature constellation for each station is shown.
51
==PAGE:67==
6
Experiments and Results
Table 19: Survival probabilities for the diﬀerent times of the day for every station. The
probabilities are calculated with the single-step approach for the CPH full model with the
Full feature constellation. The probabilities are given at diﬀerent times after a station is
left idle. The mean value of the survival probabilities is given while the ± 95% conﬁdence
interval is given in parentheses.
0.5H
(30 min)
1H
(60 min)
2H
(120 min)
4H
(240 min)
8H
(480 min)
N BOULDER
Morning
0.79 (0.04)
0.66 (0.04)
0.46 (0.06)
0.27 (0.06)
0.15 (0.04)
Midday
0.8 (0.04)
0.68 (0.06)
0.49 (0.08)
0.30 (0.08)
0.17 (0.06)
Afternoon
0.86 (0.02)
0.76 (0.04)
0.61 (0.06)
0.43 (0.08)
0.30 (0.08)
Evening
0.89 (0.02)
0.82 (0.04)
0.70 (0.06)
0.54 (0.06)
0.41 (0.08)
1000 WALNUT
Morning
0.85 (0.04)
0.75 (0.06)
0.59 (0.08)
0.41 (0.10)
0.28 (0.10)
Midday
0.85 (0.02)
0.75 (0.04)
0.59 (0.06)
0.41 (0.08)
0.27 (0.08)
Afternoon
0.89 (0.02)
0.82 (0.04)
0.69 (0.06)
0.54 (0.08)
0.41 (0.10)
Evening
0.92 (0.02)
0.86 (0.04)
0.76 (0.04)
0.62 (0.06)
0.50 (0.08)
1104 SPRUCE
Morning
0.87 (0.02)
0.78 (0.04)
0.64 (0.04)
0.47 (0.08)
0.34 (0.08)
Midday
0.88 (0.02)
0.80 (0.04)
0.66 (0.06)
0.49 (0.08)
0.36 (0.08)
Afternoon
0.91 (0.02)
0.85 (0.04)
0.74 (0.06)
0.60 (0.08)
0.48 (0.08)
Evening
0.93 (0.02)
0.88 (0.02)
0.80 (0.04)
0.68 (0.06)
0.58 (0.08)
BASELINE
Morning
0.91 (0.02)
0.84 (0.04)
0.73 (0.08)
0.59 (0.10)
0.47 (0.12)
Midday
0.91 (0.02)
0.85 (0.04)
0.74 (0.06)
0.60 (0.08)
0.48 (0.08)
Afternoon
0.94 (0.02)
0.89 (0.04)
0.81 (0.06)
0.70 (0.08)
0.59 (0.10)
Evening
0.94 (0.02)
0.90 (0.02)
0.83 (0.04)
0.73 (0.06)
0.64 (0.08)
Table 19 reveals that even within the ﬁrst 30 minutes, there is a considerable
diﬀerence in the survival probabilities. For example, during morning hours, there is
a diﬀerence of 12% in the survival probability between the stations. This diﬀerence
further increases as the time after the stations becomes idle increases, e.g. after two
hours the diﬀerence has increased to 27%. As a user, this can be valuable informa-
tion in order to decide which station to use to increase the chance of the station
being idle at arrival.
52
==PAGE:68==
6
Experiments and Results
The survival curves are also visualized for the two-step approach by grouping all
survival curves for short and long idle times. In Fig. 24 the survival curves for the
short and long idle times for the CPH with the Full feature constellation can be
seen. The survival curves shows that the model predicts the same behavior for each
station, both for long and short idle times. The two subﬁgures of Fig. 24 do however
show a considerable diﬀerence in the behavior of the survival curves. For the events
classiﬁed as short idle times, the survival probability drops very fast within the
ﬁrst 250 minutes (≈4H) and afterward drops more steadily. This is as expected
as the classiﬁcation is supposed to group all idle times below four hours together.
For the long idle times, the survival probabilities drop very slowly within the ﬁrst
500 minutes (8 hours and 20 minutes), which is somewhat in accordance with the
classiﬁcation. After the 500 minute mark, the curves drop rapidly. The main reason
for this behavior is that many long idle times are nighttime events. As the quantiles
in Fig. 10 showed, the majority of these events were above 500 minutes, and as
the Kaplan-Meier plot in Fig. 12 further showed, the survival probability for these
events rapidly drops after 500 minutes as well.
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
2000
Life-time (minutes)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Survival probability
N BOULDER
1000WALNUT
BASELINE
1104 SPRUCE
(a) Short idle times (< 4H)
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Life-time (minutes)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Survival probability
N BOULDER
1000WALNUT
BASELINE
1104 SPRUCE
(b) Long idle times (≥4H)
Fig. 24: Survival curves for the two-step approach of the CPH with the Full feature
constellation.
The lines indicate the mean values and the shaded areas are the 95%
conﬁdence intervals. The RF method is used for classiﬁcation.
The exact values for the survival probabilities of the curves in Fig. 24 at dif-
ferent times are found in Appendix A.5. The probabilities show that if an event
is classiﬁed as short, the probability that the station will remain idle after half an
hour is approximately 85%, whereas it is 10% higher if the event is classiﬁed as a
long idle time. After two hours, the diﬀerence in survival probability between long
and short idle times has increased to 30%. The exact values will of course depend
on the speciﬁc feature values of the events, as seen by the wide conﬁdence intervals.
However, there does seem to be fundamental diﬀerences between the behavior of the
short and long survival curves produced by the model.
53
==PAGE:69==
6
Experiments and Results
Thus, the survival analysis methods can reveal valuable insights that the previous
methods cannot show while producing similar quality point predictions as the tradi-
tional regression methods. With the survival curves, users and providers will be able
to get predictions for the survival behaviors of the stations. For users, this can help
in the decision-making process of which stations to use for charging. For providers,
it provides a detailed view into the behavior of the individual stations and opens for
the possibility of making initiatives based on the speciﬁc survival curves.
6.6
Operational Scenarios
To test the robustness and usage of the methods and models presented, three diﬀer-
ent scenarios, which may be of interest to service providers, are tested. For all three
scenarios, the Full feature constellation is used. For the traditional regression meth-
ods the NN regressor is used, for quantile regression the gradient boosting method
is used, while for survival analysis the CPH is applied. These methods are chosen
as they all produced some of the better results, despite several methods performing
quite closely.
6.6.1
Analysis of Particular Events
In the ﬁrst scenario, speciﬁc idle time events are examined. This is done to give
speciﬁc examples of what the diﬀerent methods can show and what the precise
results are. From both a provider and user perspective, this is interesting as it will
give insights for both parties on how to act. In this example, only the two-step
approach is applied. In total, two diﬀerent events are chosen. The speciﬁcs of the
events are shown in Table 20.
Table 20: Information about the choosen events.
Station name
Start time
TOD
DOW
Actual idle
time (min)
11002
N BOULDER
2019-08-19 12:35
Midday
Midday
183.5
2193
1000 WALNUT
2019-06-08 19:47
Evening
Saturday
947.5
As the stations become idle, the ﬁrst thing to happen is classifying the events
based on the current situation. For the example, both events are correctly classiﬁed
as short and long. With the classiﬁed labels, the data would then be given to the
appointed models. In Table 21 the point estimates of the three methods are shown.
For the speciﬁc example, the quantile regression and survival analysis point estimate
54
==PAGE:70==
6
Experiments and Results
comes close to the actual values where the traditional regression method is further
oﬀ.
Table 21: Results of speciﬁc events.
11002
2193
Traditional regression (min)
419
1287
Quantile regression, median (min)
151
790
Survival analysis (min)
188
725
To understand how certain the models are of the predictions, the results of the
quantiles are given for each event in Table 22. For the 11002 event, the Table shows
that the 50% conﬁdence interval is between 59 and 267 minutes while the 90%
conﬁdence interval is much wider between 2 and 989 minutes. A similar pattern is
seen for the 2193 event. To put it diﬀerently, for event 11002 there is a 75% chance
that the station will be idle for less than 267 minutes, while for event 2193, there
is a 75% chance that the event will be 570 minutes or higher. As a provider, this
knowledge could be distributed to give users the possibility to make the decision on
an informed basis. At the same time, a provider could also try and use the same
knowledge to reduce the predicted idle times by diﬀerent incentives.
Table 22: Results of quantile regression.
5%
25%
50%
75%
95%
11002
2
59
151
267
989
2193
40
570
790
883
1315
As a ﬁnal measure, the survival curves of each event are visualized in Fig. 25. The
survival curve for event 11002 is what a provider might consider a good curve as
the survival probability decreases very rapidly within the ﬁrst hours, which means
there will be a high chance of another vehicle arriving at the station relatively
fast. Contrary, the survival curve for event 2193 drops slowly within the ﬁrst 500
minutes before the probability decreases more rapidly. As a provider, this curve is
not good as it suggests a low chance of the station being used within several hours.
Thus, the survival curves give providers exact predictions of the future behavior of
each independent event which can help in the decision-making processes for how to
respond.
55
==PAGE:71==
6
Experiments and Results
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Idle time (minutes)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Survival probability
11002
2193
Fig. 25: Survival curve predictions for event 2193 and 11002.
6.6.2
Modeling with Another Existing Station
The second scenario is to test how the models and methods perform when testing on
a station that was not a part of the original modeling. This is interesting as it will
give an idea of how the models and methods generalize. As the models are trained
using a binary variable that speciﬁes for which station an event occurs, this will
have to be accounted for when passing data from a diﬀerent station to the model.
Therefore, a station close to one of the existing four stations in the model is cho-
sen as it is assumed that the geographically closest station is most similar. Based
on the example of the two city center stations, 1000 WALNUT and 1104 SPRUCE,
which have shown very similar behaviors throughout the thesis, this seems reason-
able. A diﬀerent approach could be to retrain all models with the inclusion of the
new station, but as the intention is to examine how well the models generalize to
other stations and to allow for comparison of previous results this is not done.
The station used is 1400 WALNUT, just 300 meters east of the 1000 WALNUT
station on the same road and thus in proximity and still within the city center. In
total, the station has 481 events with an average idle time of 1279 minutes, thus
approximately twice as high as any of the stations in the models. In Table 23, the
results of the single and two-step approach are shown.
For all methods and both approaches, the results show that the data ﬁt is bad.
The R-squared is below zero for all methods and both RMSE and MAE are well
above 1000 minutes. The MAPE values are much lower than previously seen. From
examining the data, it was found that the biggest reason for this is that more than
3/4 of the data is long idle times, which means that with RMSE and MAE values
above 1000 minutes, the models will only predict the idle times oﬀby a few hundred
percent. Concerning the survival curves ﬁt, all C-indexes are very close to 0.5, which
indicates a random model. The MIL and ICP values also indicate poor ﬁts as the
56
==PAGE:72==
6
Experiments and Results
MIL intervals are very high while the ICP values are very far from 0.9 and 0.5 as
desired.
Table 23:
Results of the 1104 SPRUCE station.
TRL indicates the traditional lin-
ear regression methods, QR indicates the quantile regression while SA indicates survival
analysis. The classiﬁcation for the two-step approach is done using the RF classiﬁer.
Single-step
Two-step
TLR
NN
QR
GB
SA
CPH
TRL
NN
QR
GB
SA
CPH
R2
-1.16
-1.03
-0.89
-2.15
-1.04
-0.81
RMSE
1538
1491
1436
1553
1494
1407
MAE
1146
1106
1060
1167
1105
1037
MAPE
251
163
377
177
169
372
C-index
-
-
0.52
-
-
0.51
MIL (90%)
-
1314
-
-
1150
-
ICP (90%)
-
0.632
-
-
0.514
-
MIL (50%)
-
442
-
-
405
-
ICP (50%)
-
0.191
-
-
0.189
-
From the experiment, it thus appears that the models do not generalize very well
to other stations that were not used for modeling. However, this should also be
seen in the light of the four most active stations, which also did not show excellent
results. The reason for this may not only lie in the 1400 WALNUT station or the
models, but perhaps in the data, as previously suggested, idle time prediction is a
challenging problem.
6.6.3
Adding a Nonexistent Station
The last scenario is to test the performance of a station in a new location. From a
charging station provider’s perspective setting up a new station inquires a signiﬁcant
investment. Therefore, providers want to minimize their risk by acquiring knowledge
about a station’s performance in a new location before committing. The location and
spatial features of the 1400 WALNUT station are used, and the binary variable for
the 1000 WALNUT station is again activated. As opposed to the previous scenario,
no data is available. Instead, an event for every combination of the time of day
and day of the week is constructed, giving 28 events. As no data is available, no
knowledge about the previous activity is available either. Instead, the mean values
for the activity features from the dataset with the four stations are used. As the
objective is to understand the behavior and not obtain actual predictions, only the
57
==PAGE:73==
6
Experiments and Results
single-step approach is used.
In Fig. 26 the quantiles for the time of day are shown. The behavior of the
diﬀerent quantiles is very similar to the behavior previously seen for the two city
center stations, 1104 SPRUCE and 1000 WALNUT. This is also as expected as the
station is placed in a similar environment and uses the station name binary variable
of 1000 WALNUT.
Morning
Midday
Afternoon
Evening
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Idle times (minutes)
5%
25%
50%
75%
95%
Fig. 26: 5%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 95% quantiles predicted using the gradient boosting
quantile regression with the Full feature constellation for the time of day for the new
station scenario.
In Fig.
27 the predicted survival curves are grouped by the time of day.
The
curves show a similar relationship as previously seen in section 6.5 as the survival
probability increases by the time of day no matter the duration after the station
becomes idle. In Table 24 the exact survival probabilities are given. Compared
to the probabilities in Table 19 the probabilities for the 1400 WALNUT station are
lower than for the two existing city center stations. This means that the new station,
according to the model, will have a lower chance of being idle no matter the time of
day.
Table 24: Survival probabilities for the time of day for diﬀerent times after the station
becomes idle. The mean survival probability is given while the ± 95% conﬁdence interval
is given in parentheses.
0.5H
(30 min)
1H
(60 min)
2H
(120 min)
4H
(240 min)
8H
(480 min)
Morning
0.81 (0.01)
0.68 (0.02)
0.49 (0.03)
0.31 (0.03)
0.19 (0.03)
Midday
0.84 (0.01)
0.73 (0.02)
0.56 (0.02)
0.38 (0.03)
0.26 (0.03)
Afternoon
0.88 (0.01)
0.79 (0.01)
0.65 (0.02)
0.48 (0.02)
0.36 (0.03)
Evening
0.91 (0.01)
0.84 (0.01)
0.73 (0.02)
0.60 (0.02)
0.49 (0.02)
58
==PAGE:74==
6
Experiments and Results
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Idle time (minutes)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Survival probability
Morning
Midday
Afternoon
Evening
Fig. 27: Survival curve predictions made using the CPH with the Full feature constellation
for the time of day for the new station scenario. The lines indicate the mean values and
the shaded areas are the 95% conﬁdence intervals.
The results thus indicate that placing a new station where the 1400 WALNUT
station is placed, the station should have similar idle times and behaviors as the two
city center stations used for modeling, and might have a higher probability of being
used. From a business perspective, it is then up to the company to decide, based on
the results presented, whether deploying a new station would make sense or not.
However, in this case, data is available for the station and has been tested. As the
results in section 6.6.2 showed, the models generally produced poor ﬁts for the data.
Furthermore, it was previously found that the 1400 WALNUT station is idle about
90% of the time, signiﬁcantly more than the two city center stations. Consequently,
the models for the performance of the station should be considered with caution.
59
==PAGE:75==
7
Discussion
7
Discussion
In this section, the results presented in the thesis are discussed and set into the
context of usability and real-life application.
In total, three Machine Learning methodologies were experimented with to predict
idle times of Electric Vehicle charging stations: traditional linear regression, quantile
regression and survival analysis. For this, two feature constellations were separately
used: 1) the Baseline constellation, with only the simplest binary features that
specify the time of day and day of the week, 2) the Full constellation that further
includes activity features, which describe previous plug-in and idle times, and spatial
features. The Baseline feature constellation was found to give as good results as the
Full feature constellation, and often slightly better results, across all methods and
feature constellations. This indicates that the main explanatory feature for the idle
times are the time of day and the day of week, which previously also were found to
be the most signiﬁcant features by [13] and [14].
The experiments involved either of two approaches: single-step and two-step.
The single-step is the most simple approach of the two and simply involves ﬁtting
a single model for the data. Contrary, the two-step approach involves splitting the
data in short (< 4H) and long (≥4H) idle times using a classiﬁer and ﬁtting
independent models for each dataset. The results of the short idle times were signif-
icantly worse than the long idle times and gave indications of semi-random data, as
also suggested by [12]. Combined, predicting idle times is complex and challenging,
and therefore the results cannot be expected to be good.
For all models, the summary statistics for the goodness of ﬁt have been computed,
allowing for comparison between otherwise diﬀerent methods such as the NN for the
traditional regression methods, the gradient boosting for quantile regression and
the CPH for survival analysis. These were also the best methods for the individ-
ual methodologies when considering all metrics for the goodness of ﬁt, R-squared,
RMSE, MAE and MAPE, as well as quantile regression and survival analysis speciﬁc
metrics. For the NN method from the traditional regression methodology the best
results were obtained through the two-step approach for the Full feature constel-
lation. However, the NN only marginally outperforms the other three traditional
regression methods. Contrary, for the gradient boosting quantile regression the best
results were also obtained through the two-step approach but for the Baseline fea-
ture constellation. The results were similar to that of the Full feature constellation,
while the linear quantile regression method showed worse results. Finally, for sur-
60
==PAGE:76==
7
Discussion
vival analysis, the best overall results were achieved for the CPH two-step approach
for the Baseline feature constellation. Here, the results were almost identical to that
of the Full feature constellation, while the DeepSurv results showed noticeably worse
ﬁts. The results of the best models are combined in Table 25.
Table 25: Goodness of ﬁt for the best model for each of the three methodologies. The
Best model column two-step indicates the approach while Baseline and Full indicates the
feature constellations.
Method
Best model
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
Traditional reg.
Two-step, Full
0.24
417
315
1796
Quantile reg.
Two-step, Baseline
0.18
424
263
1147
Survival analysis
Two-step, Baseline
0.25
415
316
1781
The Table shows that the best model for the traditional regression and survival
analysis methods perform very similarly.
The results for the quantile regression
reveals worse R-squared values but better MAE compared to the two other methods.
For all methods and models, the maximum R-squared is 25%, i.e., the variance in the
data is not well explained. Further, the other performance measures show that the
average error has a magnitude of several hours, which from a business perspective
is quite signiﬁcant.
In an experiment to further test how well the models generalize, the models were
applied on an out-of-sample station. The results showed that the models do not
generalize well for this station, as the goodness of ﬁt was signiﬁcantly worse com-
pared to the four stations in the train set. Possible reasons for this are: improper
generalizability of the models; speciﬁc characteristics of the station; or the overall
diﬃculty of the problem, as previously mentioned.
It should also be noted that the best results in Table 25 are made with the two-step
approach. Even though results are very similar between the two approaches this still
indicates that some insight is gained by adding a classiﬁcation step to the modeling
process. From a business perspective, it also makes sense to model the data as de-
pending on the classiﬁcation of an event, so that diﬀerent actions may be taken. The
cutoﬀthreshold was set to four hours, as a compromise between business usage and
classiﬁcation results. However, from a business perspective, the four-hour threshold
is still relatively high, and depending on the speciﬁc usage, it may be necessary to
adjust the threshold.
A beneﬁt of the quantile regression and the survival analysis, compared to the tra-
ditional regression methods, is that they can go beyond point estimates. From a
61
==PAGE:77==
7
Discussion
business perspective, this is much more interesting, as point estimates may discard
of useful information in the full predictive distribution. Quantile regression esti-
mates how sure the models are about their predictions. For a service provider, this
knowledge is more beneﬁcial, as it gives speciﬁc intervals in which the event time is
assumed to be within. In the case of the results of the thesis, the prediction intervals
were generally wide, with 90% conﬁdence intervals above 1000 minutes.
For each event, the survival analysis methods also estimate survival curves, which
show the probability of a station staying idle as a function of the time after the
station becomes idle. The curves were found to change with the time of day, as
the survival probabilities would generally increase from morning to evening. These
curves are again much more interesting from a provider’s point of view, as they give
exact estimates on how likely it is that a station stays idle past a speciﬁc time. The
best survival analysis models in the thesis obtained a C-index of 0.65, which overall
is in the lower end, as a model is considered good if it has a C-index between 0.7
and 0.8.
While the results may be on an unsatisfactory level for the Boulder data used, this
might not be the same case for other datasets. Therefore, the speciﬁc possibilities
of the diﬀerent methods were next examined through operational scenarios.
As mentioned above, all the methods can provide point estimates for a station
as soon as it becomes idle. By supplementing this by both the quantile regression
and survival analysis results, a provider will see how certain the point predictions
are and the probability that the station stays idle past a speciﬁc time. From a
provider’s perspective, the information gives the possibility to increase customers’
satisfaction by, for example, distributing the information via applications to show
each user an optimal place for charging. The predictions further allow providers to
make initiatives for bringing down idle times. For example, suppose a station is left
idle and the conﬁdence interval, point estimate and survival curve indicate that the
station will remain idle for a long time. In that case, the provider could incentivize
users to use the station, thereby preventing long idle time.
The methods can also be extended to predict how the behavior of a nonexistent
station within a new area would be. Speciﬁcally, the quantile regression and survival
analysis predictions can show how the idle times will change during the day. This
information can then help providers decide whether it makes sense to set up a new
station or not and help plan the expansion of the charging station network. For the
Boulder data, the 1400 WALNUT station was used as the nonexisting station. The
models generally found that this station should have similar or even lower idle times
than the two closest stations in the train set. However, for the 1400 WALNUT
station, it had previously been found that it should have much higher idle times
62
==PAGE:78==
7
Discussion
than the other two stations. Therefore, the models’ ability to predict a station’s
behavior in a new area seems limited, which might suggest that the models overﬁt
the speciﬁc stations in the train set.
63
==PAGE:79==
8
Conclusion and Further Work
8
Conclusion and Further Work
Predicting idle times of Electric Vehicle (EV) charging stations can help charging
providers make better decisions when expanding their infrastructure and maximize
potential revenues. To this end, three Machine Learning methodologies – traditional
regression methods, quantile regression and survival analysis – were applied to an
EV charging dataset from the city of Boulder in Colorado, USA.
Experiments involved a single-step and two-step approach. For the single-step ap-
proach, a single model is ﬁtted while for the two-step approach the data is split in
long and short idle times and individual models are ﬁtted. Broadly speaking, the
results show relatively poor ﬁts for all models. The best models are obtained for
the two-step approach but are only able to explain up to 25% of the variance in
the data with average prediction errors of several hours, and the best survival anal-
ysis method produces a concordance index of 0.65. The most signiﬁcant features
for predicting the idle times were found to be the time of day and day of week, as
models with these features alone performed as well as (and some times better than)
models with features about spatial relationships and previous plug-in and idle times.
Therefore, new features should be experimented with. Especially features that show
characteristics for each user could be interesting for further investigation, as such
features are not speciﬁc to the charging supply and have previously been found to
have high predictive powers [12].
For further work, the aforementioned two-step approach could also be used to
study the eﬀects of diﬀerent thresholds. In addition, an interesting experiment could
be to split the data by the time of day instead of the idle time length, as throughout
the thesis, diﬀerent behaviors depending on the time of day have been observed.
The quality of the results were further found to be due to the somewhat ran-
dom nature of the data – particularly so for the short idle time. Consequently, it
is concluded that for the data used, predicting idle times of EV charging stations is
challenging.
Despite the results for this particular case study, the general methods still hold po-
tential as helpful tools for providers. The traditional regression methods produce
point estimates that can be used for quick decisions, whereas the two other methods
give access to a full predictive distribution for more learnt decisions. The quantile
regression methods can show providers how conﬁdent the models are of their predic-
tions, while the survival analysis methods give providers insight into the predicted
survival probability of each event.
64
==PAGE:80==
8
Conclusion and Further Work
Besides being able to provide predictions and recommendations on an event basis,
the methods can also be extended to study the placement of new stations. However,
to do this, the models depend on existing stations’ knowledge that can cause mis-
leading results. For better generalization to out-of-sample stations, models where
the station name-speciﬁc features are not included can be developed. The impact
on idle times when adding more plugs in existing stations can also be explored.
In conclusion, the three modeling techniques did not manage to make good ﬁts for
the idle times of the Boulder dataset. However, the combination of the three tech-
niques can give service providers insights into making better informed decisions in
optimizing the usage and planning of charging stations. Applying the same modeling
techniques to other and larger datasets should thus be considered, to verify whether
similar results are reproduced or if the results are caused by properties of the Boulder
dataset, e.g., the relatively few stations there. Better results would further support
the beneﬁts of the studied methodologies for continuous development of charging
infrastructure.
65
==PAGE:81==
9
References
9
References
[1]
International Energy Agency (IEA), “Global EV Outlook 2020 Entering the
decade of electric drive?,” 2020.
[2]
New York Time, “Charger Desert in Big Cities Keeps Electric Cars From Main-
stream,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/16/
business/electric-cars-cities-chargers.html (visited on 03/18/2021).
[3]
J. Struben and J. D. Sterman, “Transition challenges for alternative fuel vehi-
cle and transportation systems,” Environment and Planning B: Planning and
Design, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1070–1097, 2008.
[4]
H. B. Moon, S. Y. Park, C. Jeong, and J. Lee, “Forecasting electricity demand
of electric vehicles by analyzing consumers’ charging patterns,” Transportation
Research Part D: Transport and Environment, vol. 62, pp. 64–79, Jul. 2018.
[5]
Y. B. Khoo, C. H. Wang, P. Paevere, and A. Higgins, “Statistical modeling of
Electric Vehicle electricity consumption in the Victorian EV Trial, Australia,”
Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment, vol. 32, pp. 263–
277, Oct. 2014.
[6]
B. Yagcitekin and M. Uzunoglu, “A double-layer smart charging strategy of
electric vehicles taking routing and charge scheduling into account,” Applied
Energy, vol. 167, pp. 407–419, Apr. 2016.
[7]
F. Sallabi, K. Shuaib, and M. Alahmad, “Online scheduling scheme for smart
electric vehicle charging infrastructure,” in 2017 13th International Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing Conference, IWCMC 2017, Jul. 2017,
pp. 1297–1302.
[8]
S. H. Chung and C. Kwon, “Multi-period planning for electric car charging
station locations: A case of Korean expressways,” European Journal of Oper-
ational Research, vol. 242, no. 2, pp. 677–687, Apr. 2015.
[9]
R. Gopalakrishnan, A. Biswas, A. Lightwala, S. Vasudevan, P. Dutta, and A.
Tripathi, “Demand Prediction and Placement Optimization for Electric Ve-
hicle Charging Stations,” IJCAI International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, vol. 2016-January, pp. 3117–3123, Apr. 2016.
[10]
K. B. Lee, M. A. Ahmed, D. K. Kang, and Y. C. Kim, “Deep reinforcement
learning based optimal route and charging station selection,” Energies, vol. 13,
no. 23, p. 6255, Nov. 2020.
66
==PAGE:82==
9
References
[11]
S. M. Danish, K. Zhang, H. A. Jacobsen, N. Ashraf, and H. K. Qureshi,
“BlockEV: Eﬃcient and Secure Charging Station Selection for Electric Ve-
hicles,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2020.
[12]
A. Almaghrebi, F. Aljuheshi, M. Rafaie, K. James, and M. Alahmad, “Data-
Driven Charging Demand Prediction at Public Charging Stations Using Su-
pervised Machine Learning Regression Methods,” Energies, vol. 13, no. 16,
p. 4231, Aug. 2020.
[13]
R. Wolbertus, M. Kroesen, R. van den Hoed, and C. Chorus, “Fully charged:
An empirical study into the factors that inﬂuence connection times at EV-
charging stations,” Energy Policy, vol. 123, pp. 1–7, Dec. 2018.
[14]
A. Lucas, R. Barranco, and N. Refa, “EV Idle Time Estimation on Charging
Infrastructure, Comparing Supervised Machine Learning Regressions,” Ener-
gies, vol. 12, no. 2, p. 269, Jan. 2019.
[15]
L. Buzna, P. De Falco, G. Ferruzzi, S. Khormali, D. Proto, N. Refa, M. Straka,
and G. van der Poel, “An ensemble methodology for hierarchical probabilistic
electric vehicle load forecasting at regular charging stations,” Applied Energy,
vol. 283, Feb. 2021.
[16]
T. Herlau, M. N. Schmidt, and M. Mørup, Introduction to Machine Learning
and Data Mining. Course notes for course 02450, DTU, Jan. 2018, pp. 1–309.
[17]
“Scikit-learn - Machine learning in Python.” [Online]. Available: https://
scikit-learn.org/stable/ (visited on 06/14/2021).
[18]
L. Breiman, “Random forests,” eng, Machine Learning, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 5–
32, 2001.
[19]
L. Breiman, Arcing The Edge; Technical report 486. Statistics Department
University of California: Berkeley, Ca, USA, 1997, vol. 4, pp. 1–14.
[20]
“Coeﬃcient of determination - Wikipedia.” [Online]. Available: https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Coefficient%7B%5C_%7Dof%7B%5C_%7Ddetermination
(visited on 05/22/2021).
[21]
A. Mechelli and S. Vieira, Machine learning: Methods and applications to brain
disorders. Elsevier, Jan. 2019, pp. 21–44.
[22]
“Statsmodels - Python library, v0.12.2.” [Online]. Available: https://www.
statsmodels.org/stable/index.html (visited on 06/14/2021).
[23]
F. Rodrigues and F. C. Pereira, “Beyond expectation: Deep joint mean and
quantile regression for spatio-temporal problems,” vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 5377–
5389, Aug. 2018.
67
==PAGE:83==
9
References
[24]
O. O. Aalen, P. Kragh Andersen, Ø. Borgan, R. D. Gill, and N. Keiding,
“History of applications of martingales in survival analysis,” 2013.
[25]
G. Shaﬁpour and A. Fetanat, “Survival analysis in supply chains using statis-
tical ﬂowgraph models: Predicting time to supply chain disruption,” Commu-
nications in Statistics - Theory and Methods, vol. 45, no. 21, pp. 6183–6208,
Nov. 2016.
[26]
B. Larivi`ere and D. Van Den Poel, “Investigating the role of product features
in preventing customer churn, by using survival analysis and choice modeling:
The case of ﬁnancial services,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 27, no. 2,
pp. 277–285, Aug. 2004.
[27]
B. Kostic, “Survival analysis,” slides from 42578 Advanced Business Analytics
(DTU), 2019.
[28]
A. Pandey, “Survival analysis: Intuition
implementation in python,” 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://towardsdatascience.com/survival-analysis-
intuition-implementation-in-python-504fde4fcf8e (visited on 03/25/2021).
[29]
“Pysurvival - Python package for Survival Analysis modeling.” [Online]. Avail-
able: https://square.github.io/pysurvival/ (visited on 06/14/2021).
[30]
“Lifeline - complete survival analysis library, written in pure Python.” [Online].
Available: https://lifelines.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ (visited on
06/18/2021).
[31]
E. Lewinson, “Introduction to survival analysis: The kaplan-meier estimator,”
2020. [Online]. Available: https://towardsdatascience.com/introduction-
to- survival- analysis- the- kaplan- meier- estimator- 94ec5812a97a
(visited on 03/25/2021).
[32]
D. Faraggi and R. Simon, “A neural network model for survival data,” Statis-
tics in Medicine, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 73–82, 1995.
[33]
J. L. Katzman, U. Shaham, A. Cloninger, J. Bates, T. Jiang, and Y. Kluger,
“DeepSurv: Personalized treatment recommender system using a Cox propor-
tional hazards deep neural network,” BMC Medical Research Methodology,
vol. 18, no. 1, Feb. 2018.
[34]
H. Ishwaran, U. B. Kogalur, E. H. Blackstone, and M. S. Lauer, “Random
survival forests,” The Annals of Applied Statistics, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 841–860,
Sep. 2008.
[35]
C. Lee, W. R. Zame, J. Yoon, and M. Van Der Schaar, “Deephit: A deep learn-
ing approach to survival analysis with competing risks,” 32nd Aaai Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Aaai 2018, pp. 2314–2321, 2018.
68
==PAGE:84==
9
References
[36]
I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press, 2016,
http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[37]
F. E. Harrell, “Evaluating the yield of medical tests,” eng, Jama-journal of
the American Medical Association, vol. 247, no. 18, pp. 2543–2546, 1982.
[38]
Y. Amara-Ouali, Y. Goude, P. Massart, J.-M. Poggi, and H. Yan, “A review
of electric vehicle load open data and models,” Tech. Rep. [Online]. Available:
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03028375.
[39]
“City of Boulder Open Data.” [Online]. Available: https://open- data.
bouldercolorado . gov / datasets / 2d8bad4baf274407a674d2ed3c657951 %
7B%5C_%7D0 (visited on 03/01/2021).
[40]
Colorado Energy Oﬃce (CEO), “Colorado Electric Vehicle Plan 2020,” 2020.
[41]
Wikipedia, “Colorado.” [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Colorado (visited on 03/09/2021).
[42]
“Boulder, Colorado EV Charging Stations Info — ChargeHub.” [Online]. Avail-
able: https://chargehub.com/en/countries/united-states/colorado/
boulder.html (visited on 03/11/2021).
[43]
“Boulder, Colorado EV Charging Stations — PlugShare.” [Online]. Available:
https://www.plugshare.com/directory/us/colorado/boulder (visited
on 03/11/2021).
[44]
“OpenStreetMap.” [Online]. Available: https://www.openstreetmap.org
(visited on 06/19/2021).
[45]
“Testing the proportional hazard assumptions — lifelines documentation.”
[Online]. Available: https : / / lifelines . readthedocs . io / en / latest /
jupyter%7B%5C_%7Dnotebooks/Proportional%20hazard%20assumption.
html%7B%5C#%7DConclusion (visited on 06/11/2021).
69
==PAGE:85==
A
Appendices
A
Appendices
A.1
Code
The code for the thesis is written in Python 3 using jupyter notebooks. All notebooks
used to retrieve results and visualizations are combined in the GitHub repository
masterThesis. The repository is also available via the link:
https://github.com/andreas-kaae/masterThesis
A.2
Results for Traditional Regression Methods with Eight
Stations
Table 26: Results for the traditional regression methods for the single-step model with
the eight stations with most events.
Baseline
Full
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
R2
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
LR
0.17
510
400
1618
0.17
510
403
1661
RF
0.17
509
396
1563
0.18
507
396
1626
MLP
0.19
503
387
1572
0.19
504
384
1542
GB
0.19
505
387
1531
0.17
510
405
1711
A.3
Kaplan-Meier Estimators for the Day of Week
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Idle time (minutes)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Survival probability
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Fig. 28: Kaplan-Meier estimator for the DOW.
70
==PAGE:86==
A
Appendices
A.4
Quantile Regression Results
Results for the short and long idle times of the two-step approach.
Table 27:
Linear regression and gradient boosting quantile regression results for the
short idle times (< 4H) of the two-stage approach. The MIL and ICP of the 50% and
90% conﬁdence intervals is showed at the top while the regression metrics for the median
are showed at the bottom.
Linear
Gradient boosting
Baseline
Full
Baseline
Full
MIL (90%)
1178
1175
1189
1214
ICP (90%)
0.841
0.849
0.871
0.857
MIL (50%)
372
373
421
417
ICP (50%)
0.465
0.465
0.462
0.454
R2 (Median)
-0.13
-0.13
-0.1
-0.11
RMSE (Median)
423
422
417
419
MAE (Median)
239
239
238
239
MAPE (Median)
940
911
970
926
Table 28: Linear regression and gradient boosting quantile regression results for the long
idle times (≥4H) of the two-stage approach. The MIL and ICP of the 50% and 90%
conﬁdence intervals is showed at the top while the regression metrics for the median are
showed at the bottom.
Linear
Gradient boosting
Baseline
Full
Baseline
Full
MIL (90%)
1776
1761
1288
1314
ICP (90%)
0.826
0.856
0.892
0.869
MIL (50%)
496
433
535
551
ICP (50%)
0.511
0.408
0.508
0.544
R2 (Median)
-0.52
-0.53
0.0
-0.05
RMSE (Median)
536
539
435
446
MAE (Median)
380
378
303
311
MAPE (Median)
1170
1197
1432
1132
71
==PAGE:87==
A
Appendices
Top ﬁve most important features for each quantile of the single-step ap-
proach.
Table 29:
The top ﬁve most important features for each quantile of the single-step
approach for the gradient boosting quantile regression trained with the Full feature con-
stellation.
5% quantile
25% quantile
Feature
Coeﬃcient
Feature
Coeﬃcient
Plug-in time 4H
0.506
Evening
0.543
lag2
0.115
lag2
0.075
Midday
0.105
lag3
0.066
lag3
0.084
Plug-in time 4H
0.061
Charge energy 4H
0.081
Charge energy 4H
0.046
50% quantile
75% quantile
Feature
Coeﬃcient
Feature
Coeﬃcient
Plug-in time 4H
0.506
Plug-in time 4H
0.506
lag2
0.115
lag2
0.115
Midday
0.105
Midday
0.105
lag3
0.084
lag3
0.084
Charge energy 4H
0.081
Charge energy 4H
0.081
95% quantile
Feature
Coeﬃcient
Plug-in time 4H
0.506
lag2
0.115
Midday
0.105
lag3
0.084
Charge energy 4H
0.081
72
==PAGE:88==
A
Appendices
A.5
Survival Analysis Results
Results for the short and long idle times of the two-step approach.
Table 30: Results of the two-step approach for the CPH. The RF method is used for
classiﬁcation.
R2
C-index
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
Short (< 4H)
Baseline
0.01
0.53
396
309
2008
Full
0.01
0.53
397
310
2001
Long (≥4H)
Baseline
0.04
0.59
443
326
1417
Full
-1.97
0.57
780
690
293
Table 31: Results of the two-step approach for the CPH. The RF method is used for
classiﬁcation.
R2
C-index
RMSE
MAE
MAPE
Short (< 4H)
Baseline
-0.02
0.52
403
317
2047
Full
-0.05
0.53
409
330
2252
Long (≥4H)
Baseline
-0.02
0.6
458
343
1340
Full
-0.17
0.6
489
365
1469
73
==PAGE:89==
A
Appendices
Speciﬁc survival probabilities for the short and long idle times of the
two-step approach
Table 32: Survival probabilities for the diﬀerent times of the day for every station for the
short idle times. The probabilities are calculated with the two-step approach for the CPH
with the Full features constellation. The probabilities are given at diﬀerent times after
a station is left idle. The mean survival probability is given while the ± 95% conﬁdence
interval is given in parentheses.
0.5H
1H
2H
4H
8H
N BOULDER
0.85(0.06)
0.74(0.08)
0.57(0.12)
0.36(0.14)
0.21(0.12)
1000WALNUT
0.85(0.06)
0.74(0.08)
0.56(0.12)
0.35(0.14)
0.20(0.12)
BASELINE
0.85(0.06)
0.74(0.08)
0.56(0.12)
0.34(0.12)
0.20(0.10)
1104 SPRUCE
0.84(0.06)
0.74(0.08)
0.56(0.12)
0.34(0.14)
0.20(0.12)
Table 33: Survival probabilities for the diﬀerent times of the day for every station for the
long idle times. The probabilities are calculated with the two-step approach for the CPH
with the Full features constellation. The probabilities are given at diﬀerent times after
a station is left idle. The mean survival probability is given while the ± 95% conﬁdence
interval is given in parentheses.
0.5H
1H
2H
4H
8H
N BOULDER
0.95(0.06)
0.92(0.08)
0.87(0.12)
0.82(0.16)
0.76(0.20)
1000WALNUT
0.95(0.06)
0.91(0.08)
0.86(0.12)
0.82(0.16)
0.75(0.20)
BASELINE
0.94(0.06)
0.91(0.08)
0.86(0.14)
0.81(0.16)
0.74(0.22)
1104 SPRUCE
0.94(0.06)
0.91(0.08)
0.85(0.12)
0.81(0.16)
0.73(0.20)
74
==PAGE:90==
A
Appendices
A.6
Hyperparameters
The hyperparameters used for the diﬀerent models throughout the thesis are pre-
sented in this appendix. In the list below the Tables with the parameters are brieﬂy
explained.
• Table 34: Hyperparameters for the traditional regression methods for the
single-step. The hyper parameteres for all four feature constellations are given.
• Table 35: Hyperparameters for the traditional regression methods for the
single-step approach with the eight stations with most events.
• Table 36: Hyperparameters for the traditional regression methods for the per-
fect classiﬁer, short idle times.
• Table 37: Hyperparameters for the traditional regression methods for the per-
fect classiﬁer, long idle times.
• Table 38: Hyperparameters for the traditional regression methods for the two-
step approach, short idle times.
• Table 39: Hyperparameters for the traditional regression methods for the two-
step approach, long idle times.
• Table 40: Hyperparameters for the classiﬁcation methods.
• Table 41: Hyperparameters for the survival analysis methods for the single-
step approach.
• Table 42: Hyperparameters for the survival analysis methods for the two-step
approach, short idle times.
• Table 43: Hyperparameters for the survival analysis methods for the two-step
approach, long idle times.
75
==PAGE:91==
A
Appendices
Table 34: Hyperparameters for the traditional regression methods for the single-step
approach.
Method
Feature
constellation
Hyperparameter
values
LR
Baseline
alpha: 15
Activity
alpha: 20
Spatial
alpha: 20
Full
alpha: 20
RF
Baseline
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 2,
min samples leaf: 15, max depth: 7
Activity
n estimators: 300, min samples split: 7,
min samples leaf: 15, max depth: 7
Spatial
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 2,
min samples leaf: 15, max depth: 7
Full
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 3,
min samples leaf: 10, max depth: 7
NN
Baseline
hidden layer sizes: (128,128,128,128),
alpha: 0.001, activation: relu
Activity
hidden layer sizes: (256),
alpha: 10, activation: tanh
Spatial
hidden layer sizes: (64,64,64,64),
alpha: 5, activation: relu
Full
hidden layer sizes: (256),
alpha: 0.001, activation: relu
GB
Baseline
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 2,
min samples leaf: 3, max depth: 2,
learning rate: 0.5
Activity
n estimators: 300, min samples split: 3,
min samples leaf: 5, max depth: 5,
learning rate: 0.01
Spatial
n estimators: 300, min samples split: 3,
min samples leaf: 5, max depth: 5,
learning rate: 0.01
Full
n estimators: 300, min samples split: 3,
min samples leaf: 5, max depth: 5,
learning rate: 0.01
76
==PAGE:92==
A
Appendices
Table 35: Hyperparameters for the traditional regression methods for the single-step
approach with the eight stations with the most events.
Method
Feature
constellation
Hyperparameter
values
LR
Baseline
alpha: 20
Full
alpha: 20
RF
Baseline
n estimators: 300, min samples split: 5,
min samples leaf: 3, max depth: 7
Full
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 3,
min samples leaf: 10, max depth: 7
NN
Baseline
hidden layer sizes: (64,64,64),
alpha: 2, activation: relu
Full
hidden layer sizes: (256),
alpha: 10, activation: relu
GB
Baseline
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 2,
min samples leaf: 3, max depth: 2,
learning rate: 0.5
Full
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 5,
min samples leaf: 5, max depth: 3,
learning rate: 0.01
77
==PAGE:93==
A
Appendices
Table 36: Hyperparameters for the traditional regression methods for the perfect classi-
ﬁer, short idle times.
Method
Feature
constellation
Hyperparameter
value
LR
Baseline
alpha: 20
Full
alpha: 20
RF
Baseline
n estimators: 100, min samples split: 5,
min samples leaf: 15, max depth: 3
Full
n estimators: 1000, min samples split: 3,
min samples leaf: 10, max depth: 5
NN
Baseline
hidden layer sizes: (32,32),
alpha: 0.0001, activation: relu
Full
hidden layer sizes: (256),
alpha: 10, activation: tanh
GB
Baseline
n estimators: 300, min samples split: 5,
min samples leaf: 10, max depth: 2,
learning rate: 0.01
Full
n estimators: 300, min samples split: 5,
min samples leaf: 10, max depth: 2,
learning rate: 0.01
78
==PAGE:94==
A
Appendices
Table 37: Hyperparameters for the traditional regression methods for the perfect classi-
ﬁer, long idle times.
Method
Feature
constellation
Hyperparameter
value
LR
Baseline
alpha: 7
Full
alpha: 3
RF
Baseline
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 2,
min samples leaf: 15, max depth: 7
Full
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 7,
min samples leaf: 15, max depth: 5
NN
Baseline
hidden layer sizes: (64,64,64),
alpha: 2, activation: relu
Full
hidden layer sizes: (256),
alpha: 10, activation: relu
GB
Baseline
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 7,
min samples leaf: 3, max depth: 2,
learning rate: 0.1
Full
n estimators: 100, min samples split: 7,
min samples leaf: 15, max depth: 2,
learning rate: 0.1
79
==PAGE:95==
A
Appendices
Table 38: Hyperparameters for the traditional regression methods for the two-step ap-
proach, short idle times. The RF classiﬁer is used for classiﬁcation.
Method
Feature
constellation
Hyperparameter
value
LR
Baseline
alpha: 20
Full
alpha: 20
RF
Baseline
n estimators: 100, min samples split: 3,
min samples leaf: 3, max depth: 3
Full
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 2,
min samples leaf: 15, max depth: 7
NN
Baseline
hidden layer sizes: (256,256,256),
alpha: 0.1, activation: relu
Full
hidden layer sizes: (256),
alpha: 10, activation: relu
GB
Baseline
n estimators: 100, min samples split: 7,
min samples leaf: 15, max depth: 2,
learning rate: 0.1
Full
n estimators: 300, min samples split: 7,
min samples leaf: 10, max depth: 3,
learning rate: 0.01
80
==PAGE:96==
A
Appendices
Table 39: Hyperparameters for the traditional regression methods for the two-step ap-
proach, long idle times. The RF classiﬁer is used for classiﬁcation.
Method
Feature
constellation
Hyperparameter
value
LR
Baseline
alpha: 15
Full
alpha: 20
RF
Baseline
n estimators: 100, min samples split: 3,
min samples leaf: 15, max depth: 5
Full
n estimators: 100, min samples split: 5,
min samples leaf: 15, max depth: 3
NN
Baseline
hidden layer sizes: (256,256,26),
alpha: 0.1, activation: relu
Full
hidden layer sizes: (32,32),
alpha: 0.0001, activation: relu
GB
Baseline
n estimators: 300, min samples split: 7,
min samples leaf: 10, max depth: 3,
learning rate: 0.01
Full
n estimators: 300, min samples split: 5,
min samples leaf: 10, max depth: 2,
learning rate: 0.01
81
==PAGE:97==
A
Appendices
Table 40: Hyperparameters for the classiﬁcation methods
Method
Feature
constellation
Hyperparameter
value
LoR
Baseline
penalty: l2
Full
penalty: l2
RF
Baseline
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 7,
min samples leaf: 3, max depth: 7
Full
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 2,
min samples leaf: 15, max depth: 7
NN
Baseline
hidden layer sizes: (256),
alpha: 0.001, activation: relu
Full
hidden layer sizes: (64,64),
alpha: 0.0001, activation: logsitic
GB
Baseline
n estimators: 100, min samples split: 7,
min samples leaf: 5, max depth: 3,
learning rate: 0.5
Full
n estimators: 500, min samples split: 5,
min samples leaf: 3, max depth: 3,
learning rate: 0.01
Table 41:
Hyperparameters for the survival analysis methods for the single-step ap-
proach.
Method
Feature
constellation
Hyperparameter
value
CPH
Baseline
learning rate: 0.1,
l2 regularization: 0.01
Full
learning rate: 0.1,
l2 regularization: 0.1
DeepSurv
Baseline
structure: (128,128), num epochs: 100,
learning rate: 0.01, dropout: 0.1,
le regularization: 0.1
Full
structure: (32,32), num epochs: 100,
learning rate: 0.01, dropout: 0.25,
le regularization: 10
82
==PAGE:98==
A
Appendices
Table 42: Hyperparameters for the survival analysis methods for the two-step approach,
short idle times. The RF classiﬁer is used for classiﬁcation.
Method
Feature
constellation
Hyperparameter
value
CPH
Baseline
learning rate: 0.01,
l2 regularization: 0.1
Full
learning rate: 0.01,
l2 regularization: 0.01
DeepSurv
Baseline
structure: (32), num epochs: 10,
learning rate: 0.1, dropout: 0.25,
le regularization: 10
Full
structure: (128,128), num epochs: 100,
learning rate: 0.01, dropout: 0.1,
le regularization: 0.01
Table 43: Hyperparameters for the survival analysis methods for the two-step approach,
long idle times. The RF classiﬁer is used for classiﬁcation.
Method
Feature
constellation
Hyperparameter
value
CPH
Baseline
learning rate: 0.001,
l2 regularization: 1.0
Full
learning rate: 0.1,
l2 regularization: 0.1
DeepSurv
Baseline
structure: (16), num epochs: 1000,
learning rate: 0.0001, dropout: 0.1,
le regularization: 1
Full
structure: (128,128), num epochs: 100,
learning rate: 0.01, dropout: 0.1,
le regularization: 0.01
83
==PAGE:99==
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
