==PAGE:1==
 
 
DTU Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering 
Department of Chemistry 
Synthesis of Chanlcone Derivatives and Its 
Effects on Central Nervous System 
 
Master Thesis 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Synthesis of Chalcone Derivatives and Its Effects on Central Nervous System 
 
 
Master Thesis 
January, 2021 
 
By 
Yue Guo \ Lipin Guan \ Günther H.J. Peters 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Published by: DTU, Department of Chemistry. Building 206, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark 
Phone +008613644303538                                     
www.byg.dtu.dk 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 II 
Approval 
 
This thesis has been prepared over six months at Department of Chemistry, at the Technical 
University of Denmark and Zhejiang Ocean University, in partial fulfilment for the degree 
Master of Science in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering, MSc Eng. The supervisor during 
the project was associate professor Günther H.J. Peters from Department of Chemistry at DTU 
and Guan Liping from Zhejiang Ocean University. Due to the epidemic, I was unable to do 
experiments in the lab, so we decided that I can write a review type paper. And this is 30 ECTS 
points work. I hope that this dissertation has given me the opportunity to gain further insight 
into the field, and that anyone interested in the field can have a little help. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guo Yue – s190039 
 
 
 
 
 
…………………………… 
Signature 
 
 
 
 
…………………………… 
Date 
 
==PAGE:5==
 III 
Acknowledgements 
The person I am most grateful to in my graduate study life is my advisor, Professor Liping 
Guan. Meeting you and becoming your student is the most fortunate thing in my student career. 
Your profound academic skills and excellent moral qualities have had a profound impact on 
me, and your teaching on our study, life and ideological qualities have made me grow up 
quickly, not only to learn scientific knowledge and cultivate scientific thinking, but also to 
understand the attitude towards scientific research and the truth of being a human being. Your 
words and teachings have made me a qualified graduate student in both academic and moral 
aspects. I hope that in the future I can become a good researcher like you and apply what I have 
learned in practice. In the process of my master's project, Ms. Guan's free and easy way of 
teaching me enabled me to develop independent scientific thinking and to complete my tasks 
in an orderly manner at each time stage, which eventually enabled me to successfully complete 
my master's project experiment. After graduation, I will remember your teachings and do my 
research seriously and behave in a down-to-earth way. 
I would also like to thank Günther for giving me the opportunity to return to China to do my 
thesis. Finally, I would like to thank my family for their unconditional support and love, and 
for allowing me to grow up in a good environment and be free to pursue my dreams. I will 
definitely continue to work hard in the future! 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
 IV 
Abbreviations 
AD                                                                       Alzheimer disease 
Aβ                                                                               β-Amyloid 
NFTs                                                               Neurogenic fiber tangles 
ChAT                                                 Choline acetyltransferase 
Ach                                                            Acetylcholine  
 
==PAGE:7==
V    
Contents 
Approval ............................................................................................................... II 
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................. III 
Abbreviations ..................................................................................................... IV 
1 
Introduction .................................................................................................... 1 
1.1 Introduction to Chalcone ............................................................................. 1 
1.1.1 Chalcones from matural sources .......................................................... 4 
1.1.2 Fluorescent characteristics of Chalcones ............................................. 5 
1.2 Synthesis method of Chalcone .................................................................. 7 
1.2.1 Alkaline catalyst .................................................................................. 8 
1.2.2 Claisen-Schmidt ................................................................................... 9 
1.2.3 Coupling Reactions ............................................................................ 10 
1.2.4 Meyer-Schuster Rearrangement ........................................................ 11 
1.2.5 Deamidation of aziridine ................................................................... 12 
1.2.6 Wittig Reaction .................................................................................. 13 
1.2.7 Oxidation of Benzylic Alcohols ........................................................ 13 
1.2.8 Debromination reaction of Virginia dibromide ................................. 14 
1.2.9 New method of green synthesis ......................................................... 14 
2 
Biological activities of Chalcones................................................................ 15 
2.1 Anticancer activity of Chalcone derivatives. .......................................... 15 
2.2 Antibacterial activity of Chalcone derivatives ....................................... 20 
2.3 Anti-leishmanial activity of Chalcone derivatives ................................. 23 
2.4 Anti-inflammatory activity of Chalcone derivatives .............................. 24 
2.5 Antioxidant activity of Chalcone derivatives ......................................... 25 
2.6 Antimalarial activity of derivatives of Chalcone .................................... 31 
2.7 Chalcone derivatives acting in neurodegenerative diseases ................... 33 
2.7.1 The pathogenesis of AD .................................................................... 36 
2.7.1.1 The cholinergic hypothesis ......................................................... 36 
==PAGE:8==
VI    
2.7.1.2 Amyloid cascade hypothesis ....................................................... 37 
2.7.1.3 Another possible pathogenesis.................................................... 38 
2.7.2 Treatment strategies for AD .............................................................. 38 
2.7.2.1 Cholinesterase inhibitors ............................................................. 38 
2.7.3 Synthesis and activity assay of Chalcone derivatives for the treatment 
of AD. ........................................................................................................... 40 
3 Conclusion ....................................................................................................... 50 
4 
Reference ...................................................................................................... 51 
==PAGE:9==
1 
1 Introduction  
1.1 Introduction to Chalcone 
Chalcone aliases are diphenyl propylene ketone, styryl phenyl ketone benzylidene 
acetophenone, molecular formula is C15H12O, molecular weight is 208.26 g/mol. Slightly 
yellowish rhombohedral or prismatic crystals in appearance. Freely soluble in ether, 
chloroform, carbon disulfide and benzene, slightly soluble in alcohol, insoluble in cold 
petroleum ether. Chalcones are a group of natural products widely found in the plant world, 
especially in plants such as licorice and safflower. It has been found to be a class of chemical 
substances with various biological activities, including anti-cardiovascular disease activity, 
anti-inflammatory activity, anti-parasitic activity, antioxidant activity, anti-platelet coagulation 
activity, anti-hepatic virus activity, anti-bacterial activity and anti-tumor activity, and is also 
an important substance for the synthesis of flavonoids in plants[1]. 
 
Figure 1 The different biological activities of chalcones [1]. 
Chalcones are aromatic ketones and alkenones that form the central core of various 
important biological compounds collectively known as chalcones or chalcone analogues. 
Chalcone is a simple chemical scaffold for many natural compounds and is widely distributed 
in vegetables, fruits, tea leaves and other plants. The word "Chalcone" is originated from the 
Greek word "chalcos" meaning "bronze", which is the source of the color of the majority of 
natural Chalcones. Chalcone compounds share a common chemical scaffold, 1,3-diaryl-2-
propen-1-one, also named chalcone, which exists as trans and cis isomers, with the trans isomer 
being thermodynamically more stable[2, 3]. 
==PAGE:10==
2 
 
Figure 2 Structure of Chalcone[4]. 
The presence of a double bond bound to the carbonyl function is thought to be what makes 
chalcones biologically active, since removal of this function renders it inactive. They have a 
propensity to exhibit both cis and trans presence and are readily cyclized by Michael addition 
to form flavonoids. Many synthetic routes have been reported to synthesize chalcones, while 
their general synthesis which involves Claisene-Schmidt condensation is carried out under 
homogeneous conditions in the existence of acids or bases. Strongly basic media including 
natural phosphates, Ba(OH)2, KOH, NaOH, and LiHMDS were reported to be used for their 
synthesis. The availability of several Lewis acids (p-toluenesulfonic acid, B2O3, RuCl3, AlCl3, 
BF3, and dry HCl) was also shown[1, 2]. The chalcone family is of great interest not only from 
a synthetic and biosynthetic point of view, but also because of its extensive and interesting 
biological activity. The application of chalcones for therapeutic purposes dates back thousands 
of years through the use of plants and herbs for the treatment of different medical conditions 
such as cancer, inflammation and diabetes. A combination of aryl substituents, mainly 
hydroxyl, methoxy and alkenyl functions, has been found to be attached to this framework in 
nature. In addition to these functional groups, the synthetically obtained chalcones can be 
containing one or more aryl substituents, like halogen, alkyl, amino, nitro, nitril, acetylamino 
and carboxyl groups, heterocycles, benzene and condensation rings, etc. A number of these 
formal groups affect, to some extent, the specific biological activity displayed by chalcones. 
However, the α,β-unsaturated ketone group is considered to be the major pharmacodynamic 
group, since its total or partial elimination would result in a reduction in lost biological activity. 
In the absence of this group being touched, new biologically active chalcones were synthesized 
==PAGE:11==
3 
by introducing α-substitution, replacing ring A with heterocycles, or embedding double bonds 
within the thiophene ring. The biologically active chalcones and chalcone analogs need to be 
synthesized with an understanding of the biological characteristics of chalcones with 
unmodified backbones. 
According to current literature, at present a few pure carotenoids separated from different 
plants have been used in clinical trials with approval for the management of cancer, viral and 
cardiovascular diseases, or are included as ingredients in cosmetic preparations[4]. Because 
the majority of charcones are readily synthesized, a large number of new compounds are 
reported each year. Most of these compounds are submitted to pharmacological screening, 
along with investigation of their modes of action and structure-activity relationship (SAR). All 
these efforts are aimed at developing novel and effective drugs related to the chalcone 
backbone[4]. In the year 2010, its biological activity was published in 2 articles on chalcone[5, 
6]. They range from: Patent and generic literature published before 2004. Since then, updates 
on specific biological activities such as cytotoxic, chemopreventive, anti-angiogenic, anti-
infective, anti-inflammatory and aldose reductase inhibitory activities have been published in 
some review and mini-review articles[4] [5, 6]. Chalcone has been extensively studied and 
there are many published mini-reviews. Recent advances in the utilization of chalcone as a 
privileged scaffold in medicinal chemistry are currently exposed in the literature and several 
aspects of chalcone use will be summarized, including biosynthesis, synthetic methods and 
applications, biological activity and target exploration. Chalcone mixtures have a general 
chemical composition with two isomers, trans and cis. Metochalcone has been commercialized 
as a cholinester, and sofalcone has been administered as an anti-ulcer and mucosal protective 
drug. Chalcones are one kind of flavonoids, and flavonoids also include flavanones and their 
derivatives. Flavonoids are a class of compounds with phenylhydropyranones as the parent 
nucleus, which have a certain popularity in human diet and are also widely found in many 
medicinal plants. Naturally derived and synthetic flavonoids possess a variety of biological 
activities such as antidepressant and anticonvulsant activities. 
==PAGE:12==
4 
 
Figure 3 Structure of chalcone and chalcone analogues[3]. 
1,3-Diaryl-prop-2-en-1-one, commonly referred to as "chalcone", is an essential core 
structure of the flavonoid family and is the synthetic prerequisite for a wide range of flavonoids 
and isoflavonoids. Among the diverse forms present in nature, the chalconone molecular 
framework encompasses the the existence of an aromatic ring connected by three carbon, i.e., 
α, β unsaturated carbonyl chains. The appearance of chalcones in naturally occurring forms can 
be considered as responsible for floral coloration, due to their highly covalently structured, 
conferring yellow/red pigmentation and thus attracting insects such as bees and butterflies for 
pollination. Plants such as angelica, licorice and pepper are abundant resources of chalcones 
and are widely used by local people for their medicinal potential. In addition, Chalcone has 
attracted many customers due to it is easy to be synthesized, the large amount of substitutable 
hydrogen as well as the ease of synthetic operations. It has attracted the attention and interest 
of organic medicinal chemists worldwide. In recent years, several sources have reported that 
flavonoids and their compounds have antidepressant activity. Many studies have shown that 
flavonoids extracted from plants have been tested in animal experiments and the results have 
shown a good antidepressant effect. The antidepressant effect of these flavonoids was achieved 
by affecting the reversal of the monoamine neurotransmitters 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-
HIAA) and 5-HT, NE, DA and by affecting the gene expression of neurotransmitter receptors 
in mice. 
 
1.1.1 Chalcones from matural sources 
 
==PAGE:13==
5 
Chalcone is at the heart of a few organisms. And chalcones are compounds of natural 
origin that have attracted a great deal of research attention in recent years. A large number of 
natural chalcones have been isolated and structurally elucidated. The word "chalcones", as in 
many articles, is used generically to refer to chemicals with α,β-unsaturated ketone systems. 
As a consequence, the chalcone family is structurally broadly diverse and usually falls into two 
broad categories: simple/classical chalcones and mixed chalcones with 1,3diaryl 2-propen-1-
one as the core scaffold. However imitation chalcones (e.g. piperonyl agave) and fused 
chalcones (e.g. oxachalcone) do not belong to this field.Structurally, they are still traditional 
chalcones in spite of having similar α,β-unsaturated ketone systems or fused forms that are 
extracted from chalcones by specific biosynthetic pathways[3, 6]. 
1.1.2 Fluorescent characteristics of Chalcones 
 
Chalcones are known to possess a conjugated system, so chalcones that have appropriate 
electron-attracting and electron-pushing functionality groups on the benzene ring can generate 
fluorescence, which makes them prospective chemical probes for mechanistic studies and 
imaging/diagnostics. As shown in Figure 4, the diagram depicts the chalcone to electron push 
and pull. 
 
Figure 4 Fluorescence Chalcone's electronic push-pull pair[3]. 
The dimethylamine group is a widespread substitution group utilized in fluorescent probes 
and has been incorporated into fluorescent chalcone compoundFigure 5 Chalcone with 
fluorescent representationFigure 5. 
The use of 4-dimethylamino chalcone 1 as a fluorescent probe for determining micelle 
formation was first described by Jiang et al[3, 7]. Lately, the authors generated a minor library 
of fluorescent chalcone, systematically characterized the effect of structure on its intrinsic 
fluorescence, and evaluated the effect of a few biorelevant environmental factors.The 4-
dimethylamino chalcone compounds showed similar absorption, with Abs λm between 390 
==PAGE:14==
6 
and 460 nm and Emi λm between 450 and 620 nm. ε and ϕ values ranged from 28 000 to 38 
000 and 0 to 0.40, correspondingly. Several compounds exhibited excellent fluorescence 
brightness with values above 6000 M-1 cm-1, comparable to commercial fluorophores[3, 4, 7, 
8]. 
 
Figure 5 Chalcone with fluorescent representation[3]. 
Structure-fluorescence relationship (SFR) studies have shown that.  
(1) For chalcone groups, the planarity of the molecule plays a key role in fluorescence, e.g., 
the insertion of a methyl group at the α-position of an unsaturated ketone leads to fluorescence 
loss. 
(2) For A-rings, weak electron donor groups (e.g., a methoxy group) are favorable for quantum 
yields, while substitution of electron-depleted (e.g., a nitro group) or strong electron donor (e.g., 
a dimethylamino group) can significantly decrease quantum yields. 
(3) For B-rings, the dibutylamino group is of critical importance for fluorescence, as in the case 
of piperidine, piperazine, dimethylamino and diethylamino groups.  
(4) For α,β-unsaturated ketone systems, the prolongation of the double bond reduces the 
fluorescence and gives rise to a red shift in the maximum emission wavelength. The 
fluorescence-environment relationship (FER) revealed that the fluorescence of alkyl halides 
with an intenseness of polarity of the solvent, pH, and their interference with proteins or 
detergents are highly relevant. In an apolar solvent, the fluorescence of chalcone will be lower 
with decreasing solvent polarity, but in an apolar solvent with neutral pH, such as water or 
EtOH, the fluorescence will disappear completely. However, fluorescence can be partially 
restored by the presence of BSA, Triton-X100 or Tween-20. Similar results were also obtained 
in another study, where 4′-N, N-dimethylamino-4-methacryloylaminochalcone, the compound 
2, containing electron-withdrawing and electron-donating groups were synthesized as a 
fluorometric sensor for the measurement of water in organic solvents. There is currently a 
==PAGE:15==
7 
desire to explore the potential of fluorescent chalcones to detect different diseases. Compound 
3 was developed to visualize alkaline phosphatases by emission color changes in living cells 
based on phosphorylated chalcones hybridized with dimethylamino chalcones. Stark et al. have 
reported a number of chalcone analogs, which can be useful for imaging the human histamine 
H3 receptor (hH3R) in stabilized transfected HEK-293 cells [9]. Fluorescent chalcones has also 
been used for imaging of stem cells. For example, Lee et al. have designed a novel library of 
160 fluorescent chalcone amide compounds. Two amides were to be incorporated into these 
chalcones on each of the sides of the scaffold to enhance the fluorescence emission intensity. 
It is interesting to note that CDg4 was used in the detection of novel green fluorescent probes 
for mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs), whose molecular binding target was identified as 
glycogen on the surface of stem cell colonies. These studies have opened up additional new 
possibilities. The use of non-radioactive alternatives in the new binding assay and its use as a 
visual alternative tool to the new method[10]. 
1.2 Synthesis method of Chalcone 
The classical synthesis of chalcone is based on the hydroxyaldol condensation of 
acetophenone and its derivatives with aromatic aldehydes catalyzed by strong bases or acids 
with yields of 10%-70%. In recent years, various catalysts have been discovered and scientists 
have explored a lot of reaction conditions, the synthesis of chalcone has tended to diversify[11]. 
The currently reported synthesis of chalcone is by Photo-Fries rearrangement of phenyl 
cinnamate (route a,Figure 6). The Julia-Kocienski hair oil reaction consists of a single-step 
direct coupling of a heteroaryl sulfone and a carbonyl compound under acidic or basic 
conditions (route b,Figure 6). The Mukaiyama-aldol reaction involves the aldehyde and 
aromatic vinyl halides in the absence of Lewis acid for direct reaction (route c,Figure 6). 
Downey and his coworkers reported a single-tank synthesis of chalcone and his colleagues 
reported the conversion of acetophenone to allylsilane via the Mukaiyama aldol addition 
method from in the absence of TMSOTf and tertiary amines. 
Conversion of acetophenone to allylsilane by Mukaiyama aldol addition in the presence 
of TMSOTf and tertiary amine group (iPr2NEt). The residual TMSOTf-catalyzed Mukaiyama 
aldol addition yielded 90% of the target chalcone. The method of chalcone synthesis 
experienced some limitations such as toxic reagents. The disadvantages of its reaction are harsh 
reaction conditions requiring extended reaction times, strong basic or acidic conditions, low 
selectivity and low yields[11]. 
==PAGE:16==
8 
 
Figure 6 Light-Fries rearrangement, Julia-Kocienski oleation and Mukaiyama-aldol 
reaction[11]. 
 
1.2.1 Alkaline catalyst 
A series of chalcone derivatives were prepared from benzaldehyde and acetophenone 
derivatives in aqueous sodium hydroxide solution at room temperature with yields of 60%-90% 
(Figure 7). This method is simple and easy to operate, but the disadvantage is that the reaction 
system is relatively corrosive to the equipment[12]. 
 
Figure 7 Synthesis scheme of chalcone[13]. 
The synthesis of chalcone catalyzed by Na/NaOH/γ-Al2O3 solid superbase has been 
proposed in the literature. The optimal conditions are: temperature 40 ℃, catalyst dosage of 
7.5% of the total mass of reaction materials, solvent anhydrous ethanol dosage of 50 mL, n 
(acetophenone): n (benzaldehyde) = 1:1.1, the reaction takes 3h, chalcone yield can reach 
96.88%. This system is a more ideal method for the synthesis of chalcone because of its low 
reaction temperature, easy separation of products, recyclable solvent and catalyst, and no 
environmental pollution[14].Twenty-three 2'-hydroxychalcone compounds were synthesized 
from unprotected hydroxyl substituted o-hydroxychalcone and substituted benzaldehyde in 
dilute NaOH/ethanol solution at room temperature in 48%-90% yields(inset in Figure 8). The 
reaction conditions were mild and the procedure was simple, which provided a basis for the 
==PAGE:17==
9 
synthesis of similar compounds. The disadvantage is that the chalcone derivatives are not easy 
to be separated and the contamination of the reaction is serious[15]. The synthesis of chalcone 
using alkaline catalysts is currently the most common method used in laboratories, but the 
product yields are low (10%-70%) and there are many by-products. 
 
Figure 8 Synthesis of chalcone under alkaline catalyst conditions[13]. 
 
1.2.2 Claisen-Schmidt 
The most prominent and frequently chosen route for the synthesis of chalcone is the 
Claisen Schmidt. condensation, which involves the polycondensation of ketones and aldehydes. 
The advantages of choosing such a synthetic method are minimal workload and few by-
products. The most prominent synthesis method is the Claessen-Schmidt condensation method, 
which employs a variety of catalysts such as LiOH and H2O, K2CO3, NaOCH3, KOH, NaOH 
AlCl3, Ba(OH)2, HCl, boric acid, CsOH-γAl2O3, cesium salt of 12-tungsten phosphate, 
H5PMo10 V2O40/SiO2, SiO2- H3PO4, B2O3-ZrO2, and silica-2SO4[11, 16]. 
 
Figure 9 Claisen-Schmidt condensation[13]. 
Aminoacetophenone with substituting benzaldehyde in the absence of sodium hydroxide 
yields 4-aminochalcone, which further reacts with maleic anhydride in toluene in the presence 
of NEt3 to give 80-84% of 1-(4-(3-(aryl)acryloyl)phenyl)-1H-pyrrole-2,5-dione derivative, 
which has the function of controlling the activity of human metabolism. 1-(2-Hydroxy-4-
(tetrahydro-2H-pyran-2-yloxy)phenyl)ethanone reacts with aromatic aldehydes under 
methanolic KOH to form tetrahydropyranyl chalcone, which is further subjected to treatment 
with ethanolic acidic medium to create dihydroxy chalcone with yields of 70-86%[17]. The 
literature reported the use of green conditions and eco-friendly catalysts, such as 65% yield 
==PAGE:18==
10 
with fly ash, 71% yield with poly-N-vinylimidazole, 98% yield with acid resins aberlite-200 
and aberlyst-15 C, and 81% yield with nano-crystalline magnesium oxides (MgONPs). Some 
other active heterocyclic catalysts such as graphene oxide, KF/Al2O3 in glycerol, titanium 
dioxide nanoparticles-SO3H, clay montmorillonite KSF, C/Co@DMAN and deep eutectic 
solvent (DES) media will also be used for Claisen-Schmidt condensation reactions to obtain 
better chalcone yields(inset in Figure 9). The literature reported isomerase catalytic method to 
obtain 74% of E-type chalcone in the presence of D-aminoacetylase and imidazole. Eco-
friendly, green and simple synthetic methods were reported for the formation of 60% and 98% 
chalcone in the presence of zinc, in the presence of Zn(NO3)2. 6H2O and H2ATA (2-amino-
trans-benzoic acid) based heterogeneous metal organic frameworks (IRMOF-3 and ZnO 
nanoparticle catalysts, which formed 60% and 98% chalcone, respectively[18]. The layered 
flower-like magnesium diolate hollow sphere catalyst (99% yield) and MgO nanostructured 
chalcone (83% yield)[11].  
1.2.3 Coupling Reactions 
The reaction routes for the synthesis of chalcones, which proceed through coupling 
reactions. These reaction routes involve C-C and C-heteroatom covalent bonds that are 
eliminated by oxidative addition-transmetallation-reduction(inset in Figure 10). 
 
Figure 10 Coupling reactions[11]. 
==PAGE:19==
11 
 
Figure 11 Coupling reactions[11]. 
 
1.2.4 Meyer-Schuster Rearrangement 
The Mayer-Schuster rearrangement has attracted the attention of researchers in the 
synthesis of chalcone from different reactants like propargyl alcohol, propyl acetate and 
siloxanes in the last decades and it has a different mechanistic arrangement (inset in Figure 12).  
The simple 1,3- shift of the hydroxyl functional group in propargyl alcohol is completely 
of a different order than the Rupe rearrangement. It has used various bases, i.e. trimethylamine, 
KOH, catalysts have also been used such as 1,2,3 triazole ligands of PPh3-Au (TA-Au), 
rhenium complexes [ReOCl3(OPPH3)(SMe2)][19], Ir/Pd complexes and triaAu(III)Cl2 
complexes. The advantages of this method of synthesizing chalcone are that the acetylenic 
alcohol is readily available, inexpensive, and has a good chelating partner with N-
phenoxyacetamide with monodentate -ONHAc ODG. Thus acetyl alcohols were synthesized 
with N-phenoxyacetamide in [Cp*RhCl2]2 and CsOAc in (81-84%) yields of chalcones[11, 20]. 
==PAGE:20==
12 
 
Figure 12 Mayer-Schuster rearrangement[11]. 
 
1.2.5 Deamidation of aziridine 
An alternative approach to synthesize chalcone is to remove the amine group from phenyl 
(3-phenylaziridin-2-yl) methanone (aziridine). Aziridine is an organoternary heterocyclic 
compound with one amine group (-NH-) and two methylene groups (-CH2-)[21]. The reaction 
conditions were in the combined action of N2O4, iodine, PPh3/iodine, organolithium, n-butyl 
nitrite, N-nitroso-3-nitrocarbazole, nitrosochloride (NOCl) and methyl nitrite, and the 
deamination of various aziridines was obtained in appreciable yields.  
 
 
Figure 13 Deamination of aziridine[11]. 
Expensive reagents, high cost of preparation, and tedious working procedures are the 
drawbacks of this synthetic method. Considering these drawbacks, the researchers thus came 
up with some counterparts and proposed to use new alternative catalysts are DEG (diethylene 
glycol)/I2, N-bromosuccinimide (NBS)/cerium(IV) ammonium nitrate (CAN)[22], Fe(NO3)3, 
I2, AgNO3 and RuCl3 (inset in Figure 13). 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
13 
1.2.6 Wittig Reaction 
 
The Wittig reaction is the stoichiometric reaction of an aldehyde or ketone with 
triphenylphosphine hydrazide to obtain olefins and triphenylphosphine oxide. In the Wittig 
reaction, several researchers have proposed to modify the reaction route, especially aqueous 
medium, basic medium and various catalysts such as rasta resin-Ph3, rasta resin-Ph3-NBniPr2, 
RR-Ph3-NBnEt2, FeH-Ph3 and 3-methyl-1-phenylphosphonooxy phenylphospholidine-1-
oxide to to enhance the yield.  
 
Figure 14 Wittig Reaction[11]. 
During the last decades of research, phosphorus was being substituted with arsenic, 
tellurium or antimony, mainly due to the ease of reduction of their oxides due to the strength 
of the bonds and the very serious side effects, which are the high toxicity and carcinogenicity 
of these compounds (Figure 14)[23]. Liu and Tian obtained 60-94% yields of chalcone 
derivatives by a one-pot technique using aldehydes, α-halogenated carbonyl compounds and 
terminal alkene reagents in the synthesis of chalcone derivatives under triphenylphosphine[24]. 
1.2.7 Oxidation of Benzylic Alcohols 
The synthanalysis of chalcone was also investigated by its transformation from benzyl 
alcohol to the corresponding ketone in the presence of an oxidizing agent such as hydrogen 
peroxide (Figure 15).  
 
Figure 15 Oxidation of benzylic alcohol. 
The new catalytic modification was accomplished by the oxidation of benzyl alcohol, i.e. 
9-azabicyclo[3.3.1]nonane-N-oxide (ABNO) providing 95% yield, KBr/O3, TEMPO 99% 
yield, PhI(OAc)2 90% yield, iron(III)-based Lewis acidic ionic liquids (IBLAILs), 
==PAGE:22==
14 
Mn(OTf)2 ,H2O2 in 92% yield and anatase TiO2 (TiO2-A) photocatalyst (60% yield). The poor 
yields of benzyl alcohol oxidation with minority catalysts at Rh2(Msip)4 50% yield and 
TEMPO@PMO-IL (37% yield) were attributed to the formation of mixed products[11]. 
1.2.8 Debromination reaction of Virginia dibromide 
This method is the elimination reaction (E2) of adjacent halogens (e.g. bromine). In the 
presence of different catalysts, namely BiCl3/Indium, bis(cyclopentadienyl)titanium dichloride 
(Cp2TiCl2)/Ga, CoCl2-6H2O/Indium, BiCl3/Ga and NbCl5/In, it was confirmed that the 
bromine group can be removed from the adjacent carbon of 2,3-dibromo-1,3-diphenylpropan-
1-one[25]. 
  
Figure 16 Debromination of vic-bromides[11]. 
 
Since bismuth chloride is cheap, non-toxic, and it is eco-friendly reagent because it is not 
sensitive to water. Therefore, bismuth chloride can be used as a Lewis acid catalyst for 
synthetic transformations. When irradiating the LED with Hantzsch ester and white light, it is 
possible to debrominate Vic-bromides to form alpha,beta-unsaturated compounds of chalcone, 
and there is a very good yield of 80%. The reaction was never previously obtained in the 
absence of Hantzsch ester, base and light irradiation with the desired product (Figure 16)[26]. 
1.2.9 New method of green synthesis 
Shi Xiumei et al. directly synthesized 3, 5-dihydroxychalcone by acylation, Fries 
rearrangement and alcohol-formaldehyde condensation using resorcinol as the starting material, 
and obtained satisfactory yields (80%). This method has the advantages of short reaction time, 
simple operation and high yield(Figure 17)[27]. 
==PAGE:23==
15 
 
Figure 17 New green synthesis method. 
Wu Hao's team investigated a new method for the green and pollution-free synthesis of 
chalcone using the ionic liquid 1,3-dibutyl-2-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([dbmim] 
BF4) as the reaction solvent and hydrotalcite as the catalyst. The results showed that the yield 
of chalcone could reach 98.5% when 0.1 mol of benzaldehyde and 0.1 mol of acetophenone 
were added to 50 mL of [dbmim] BF4 at a temperature of 343 K for 2 h with 2 g of water talc 
as the catalyst. This method can achieve 98.5% yield of chalcone, the reaction system is easy 
to separate the products, and the ionic liquid and hydrotalcite can be recycled, which can realize 
green and pollution-free synthesis[28].  
Flavanones, pyrazolines, chalcone crown ethers and other compounds have a wide range 
of effects, and they are all synthesized from chalcone, so the synthesis method of chalcone is 
particularly important. The previous methods of chalcone synthesis have many drawbacks, 
such as low yield, difficult reaction and expensive raw materials. Nowadays, new and simple 
methods such as microwave radiation combined with classical aldehyde-ketone condensation 
under strong bases have been adopted, which not only speed up the reaction speed but also 
improve the yield greatly. In addition, the discovery of some green and non-polluting catalysts 
also provides new ideas for the synthesis of chalcone compounds, such as hydrotalcite[13]. 
2 Biological activities of Chalcones 
2.1 Anticancer activity of Chalcone derivatives. 
Cancer is a great challenge for the whole world and it is one of the major challenges for 
mankind to solve at present, with abnormal or inconsistent cells which increase in value and 
metastasize uncontrollably. Although the preferred treatment by doctors in various hospitals is 
chemotherapy, it has many drawbacks and causes great suffering for patients. Therefore, more 
and more scientific researchers are focusing on natural compounds. With their structural 
==PAGE:24==
16 
diversity and easy chemical manipulation, many natural and synthetic sources of chalcones 
have been identified as significant therapeutic pathways or molecular targets for modulating 
cancer.  
Currently, several new strategies have been revealed in the literature, namely structural 
manipulation of the aromatic ring in chalcones, by replacing the aromatic ring with a 
heteroaryl/ferrocene core, and by conjugation with other pharmacologically active scaffolds 
to enhance the anticancer properties of chalcones. Reddy et al. have synthesized a number of 
β-carboline-charone conjugates 6 from 1-acetyl-β-carboline 3 and different aldehydes 4 
which were then subjected to N2 alkylation with different alkyl bromides ( 
Figure 18). The cytotoxicity of the synthetic scaffolds was evaluated in vitro in the 
following cancer cell lines: pancreatic cancer (BxPC-3), cervical cancer (HeLa), castration-
resistant prostate cancer (C4-2), human prostate cancer (PC-3), human embryonal cancer (C4-
2), human breast cancer (C4-2). Kidney 293 (HEK293T) and breast cancer (MDA-MB-231) 
cells. The effects of the substituents present on β-choline (-R) and the aryl (-Ar) ring on the 
activity profile ranged from 15.9 to >100 µM IC50s. Compounds with H-substituents on β-
carboline and enones had an intermediate anticancer activity. the IC50s ranged from 65.5-93.0 
µM. The activity loss was the observed 3,4-di-OCH3 group on the aromatic ring of methyl, 4-
OCH3, and alkenone. N2 -alkylated-β-carbonyl- chalcones 6 showed improvements in 
anticancer properties over their unsubstituted analogs 5. The presence of alkylating agent 
Benzyl was obtained as a compound with moderate activity under N2 (IC50 = 15-88 µM)[29]. 
==PAGE:25==
17 
 
Figure 18 β-Carboline-chalcones and their bromine salts synthesis. Reagents and 
conditions[29].  
Reagents and conditions for the synthesis of β-carboline chalcones and their bromine 
salts[29]. 
(a)  acetone aldehyde, TFA, DCM, 30 °C, N2, 48 h. 
(b)  10% Pd/C, xylene, reflux, 24 h.  
(c)  di-tert-butyldicarbonate, THF, DMAP, 24 h.  
(d)  20% NaOH, 50% ethanol-water, 0 °C-25 °C, 16 h. 
(e)  RBr, DMF, 50 °C, 12 h. 
Compound 7 was found to be the most effective scaffold in the series for all cell lines 
tested. (IC50 = 15.9-22.1 µM). This is a promising set of data. The researchers compared the 
activity of the N2-butylated analogs to that of the benzylated analogs and found that the N2-
butylated analogs were less active (IC50 = 25.1->100 µM). When benzylated groups were 
present could significantly induce more cell death of MDA-MB-231 (IC50 = 15.95 µM) cells. 
It is noteworthy that the cytotoxicity of all synthesized compounds is much lower than that of 
doxorubicin and is expected to replace doxorubicin in the future[30]. 
 
==PAGE:26==
18 
 
Figure 19 Synthesis of tri-substituted derivatives of imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine[29]. 
Reagents and conditions required for the synthesis of trisubstituted imidazo[1,2 a]pyridine 
derivatives[29].  
(a) 3-chloro-2,4-pentadione, DCM, reflux, 4 h. 
(b) Ethanol, 40% NaOH, RT, 24 h. 
Kuthyala et al. completed the synthesis of tri-substituted imidazo[1,2-a]pyridines 9 and 
inscribed them into the corresponding chalcones 10 (inset in Figure 19). As shown in Figure 
19, all of the compounds were subjected to screening using MTT assay against A549 cell line 
and the compounds exhibited IC50 ranging from 7-42 µg/mL. The experimental results showed 
the complexes were completed by the effective compounds docked into the proteins (4ph9). 
Moreover, their hematocompatibility was determined by in vitro hemolysis assay analysis. 
Derivative 11 with a methyl substituent on ring-A and a nitro on C-15 demonstrated good 
activity against A549 cell line (IC50=7.0 µg/mL)[31]. 
 
==PAGE:27==
19 
 
Figure 20 The reaction scheme of NAC in synthesis[29]. 
As shown in Figure 19, the researchers investigated the function of this group of 
compounds and found that the hydroxyl group at C-14 showed moderate activity (IC50 = 42 
µg/mL), however the presence of the hydroxyl group at C-16 greatly reduced the activity (IC50 
˃ 50 µg/mL). Also, the researchers compared the sensitivity of the most active compound to 
normal fibroblast cell lines and found it to be several times less than in cancer cell lines (NHLF 
IC50 = 122 µg/mL). 
Some synthetic and natural sources of chalcones are active against tumor cells by 
inhibiting the production of superoxide and lipid peroxidation. Wu et al. reported an anticancer 
chalcone C-1 (Figure 21)[32]. C-2 isolated from Glycyrrhiza glabra as an anticancer chalcone 
with activity against L1210 leukemia and B16 melanoma cells[33]. Edwards et al. proposed a 
novel chalcone C-3 (Figure 21)[34]. As a compound with anticancer activity C-4 (Figure 21) 
is another natural chalcone that inhibits a variety of human cancers in vitro, including breast 
cancer, colon cancer, osteosarcoma and hepatic stellate cells[35, 36]. 
 
 
==PAGE:28==
20 
 
Figure 21 Compound C-1-C-4 structure[37]. 
 
2.2 Antibacterial activity of Chalcone derivatives 
Multidrug resistance in bacteria and fungi as we currently know it is an alarming and re-
emerging threat that will become a major public health problem worldwide[38]. The heavy use 
of antibacterial and antifungal drugs has greatly increased the number of microbial resistance, 
leading to an increase in infections that are difficult to eradicate. The increased incidence of 
bacterial/fungal infections in recent years has attracted more research scholars to develop new 
molecules with improved bioactivity and low resistance index as a research target. It has been 
reported that the α,β-unsaturated carbonyl functional group of chalcone is the key to its 
antibacterial activity. Compounds C-5 and C-6 are two important chalcones isolated from 
psoralen that can be used as antimicrobial agents of natural origin[39, 40]. C-7, a derivative of 
chalcone obtained by the synthetic route, is a chalcone with antibacterial activity. Compound 
C-7 exhibited effective inhibition against human pathogens when it reached a concentration of 
1 µg / mL. The novel heterocyclic thickened chalcone C-8 is proposed because it can be used 
as an antimicrobial scaffold for the treatment of{Andrade,  oral infections. A chalcone 
derivative C-9, containing a fuconazole moiety, is proposed to have a strong inhibitory effect 
on Candida albicans with an IC50 of 0.12 µg/mL[41]. 
==PAGE:29==
21 
  
Figure 22 Structure of compound C-5-C-9[37].  
Compound 1 was reported to contain a 4-nitro group found to be more active against E. 
coli and epidermal cells than the standard drug ciprofloxacin. The structure-activity 
relationship (SAR) indicated that the antibacterial activity was mainly influenced by the 
fluorinated triazoles. The triazoles showed good results over the non-fluorinated compounds 2. 
The introduction of the C-2 position of one of the fluorochalcone containing analogues showed 
good fungicidal activity against both hybrids 3 and 4 and New Delhi metallo-lactamase-1 
(NDM-1)[42, 43]. The addition of methyl to the benzene ring or methoxy to the phenyl ring 
resulted in a loss of antimicrobial activity.SAR studies showed that the antimicrobial activity 
was positively correlated with the length of the alkyl chain. There was a positive relationship 
with the length of alkyl chains, and hydrates with medium alkyl chain length (n = 7) were 
significantly more active than those with long alkyl chain length. The mixture was more active. 
However, the inhibitory activity of cationic molecules was observed to differ greatly due to the 
hydrophobicity of the alkyl chains. The hydrophobicity of the alkyl chains differed. The 
antimicrobial activeness of the compounds reduced with the increase of the spacer length with 
the increase of the spacer length. When introduced pyridine instead of aromatic ring can lead 
to new derivatives with moderate in vitro activity. Further modifications include the 
transformation of the acetamido group into the corresponding thiocarbamate, which can lead 
to compound 5. Chalcones containing triazole groups were synthesized and evaluated for 
chalcone 6. It showed good activity. It was also found to have comparable or better activity 
than the control drugs chloramphenicol and norfloxacin[44]. 
==PAGE:30==
22 
  
Figure 23 A mixture of flourochalcone containing (1-6) showed potent antibacterial activity 
[45]. 
Commercially used antibiotics and antimicrobials are subject to resistance, especially 
multidrug resistance, which is a challenge to human health. Chalcone and its derivatives are 
excellent analogues for the synthetic manipulation, while it has various biological and 
medicinal properties such as antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, anti-ulcer, anti-
cancer, anti-malarial, COX inhibitor, anti-leishmaniasis, anti-HIV, etc. 
  
==PAGE:31==
23 
2.3 Anti-leishmanial activity of Chalcone derivatives 
Leishmaniasis is a common tropical disease caused by protozoan parasites of the genus 
Leishmania and is transmitted to mammals by the bite of sand flies. About 53 leishmaniasis 
species are known to man, 20 of which are pathogenic to humans[46]. The disease is prevalent 
in 97 countries and territories, mainly in the poorest regions, with an estimated 700,000 to 1 
million new cases and 20,000 to 30,000 deaths per year. Latin American countries, but in 
particular Brazil, which experienced a massive epidemic of zoonotic visceral leishmaniasis in 
the rapidly growing periphery of many medium and large cities[47]. Chalcone derivatives for 
use as antiparasitic agents have been extensively studied, to include leishmaniasis. Chalcone, 
or 1,3-diaryl-2-propen-1-one, functions as a bioregenerative agent for flavonoids and 
isoflavonoids in plants[48].  
 
Figure 24 Licochalcone A, a natural chalcone active against L. major[49]. 
Licochalcone A is the first chalcone derivative identified to have antileishmanial activity 
and is derived from the root of Glycyrrhiza glabra (Fabaceae) in China. It has been also 
observed to inhibit the growth of L. major parasites and Amoeba protozoa. At concentrations 
non-toxic to host cells, 5 mg/ml of icochalcone A effectively inhibited the proliferation of 
protozoa in vitro after an incubation period of 20 hours. Scientists then tried to elucidate the 
mechanism of action, and the chalcone derivative was reported to have interfered with the 
mitochondrial structure and function of the parasite it was also active against mice infected 
with L. major parasites. 
==PAGE:32==
24 
 
Figure 25 Structure of compound C-10-C-11[37]. 
Chalcone C-10, isolated from licorice roots, exhibited strong antileishmanial activity[50]. 
Compound C-11 is another important chalcone isolated from Leguminosae with potent 
antileishmanial activity[51]. Leishmaniasis is an easily neglected tropical infectious disease 
caused by more than 20 pathogenic species of Leishmania. Current exposure is limited by the 
available therapeutic approaches, but several natural and synthetic chalcones have been shown 
to have anti-leishmanial activity. 
 
2.4 Anti-inflammatory activity of Chalcone derivatives 
Inflammation is a complex biological process that poses a serious threat to human health. 
The most widely used drugs reported to treat inflammation are non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs), which account for 35% of the global market for painkiller prescriptions[52]. 
Chalcone and its derivatives that have been reported to have demonstrated anti-inflammatory 
activity in acute lung injury and may be able to protect the liver from liver injury by inhibiting 
liver inflammation and fibrosis. Because it is based on its good anti-inflammatory activity, the 
chalcone framework has been used for chemical modification with the aim of finding novel 
derivatives with improved pharmacological or pharmacokinetic profiles. For example, 
naringenin-chalcone C-12 is a natural product that exhibits anti-inflammatory effects by 
inhibiting the production of cytokines. Funakoshi[53] et al. isolated isoflavone C-13 from 
Nepalese propolis, a compound that exerts anti-inflammatory effects by inhibiting 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced expression of nitric oxide synthase (i NOS) and 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). Zhao[54]et al. reported a reduced chalcone C-14, a compound 
identified as an anti-inflammatory agent by inhibiting LPS and interferon-γ (INF-γ)-induced 
NO production by murine microphage cells. Another synthetic chalcone, C-15, is a potent 
cytokine inhibitor that possesses excellent anti-inflammatory activity and can be used as an 
anti-inflammatory agent[48]. 
==PAGE:33==
25 
 
Figure 26  Structure of compound C-12-C-15[37]. 
 
2.5 Antioxidant activity of Chalcone derivatives 
A growing number of research scholars look at developing antioxidants because they can 
reduce or prevent oxidative stress, which is involved in aging, inflammation, cancer, diabetes, 
atherosclerotic ischemic damage and neurodegenerative diseases. Antioxidants play a crucial 
role in human health protection. Hydroxychalcone has been reported to have antioxidant 
potential with isopentenyl substituents on the benzene ring. And the ring of chalcone also has 
antioxidant potential. 3-Hydroxyxanthoangelol (2), isolated from the fruit of Atractylodes 
macrocephala, showed higher 2,2-diphenyl-1-picryhyldrazyl (DPPH) radical scavenging 
activity compared to α-tocopherol[55]. Xanthoangelol B (3a) and xanthokeisminsA (3b), B (4a) 
and C (4b), which were extracted from the origin of Angelica keiskei, which were extracted 
from the origin of Angelica sinensis, were more effective superoxide scavengers (IC50 = 0.5 - 
1.1 µM) than the positive control resveratrol (IC50 = 5.3 µM)[56]. Vogel et al. successfully 
synthesized several natural and non-natural pre-allyl chalcones that showed very good activity 
in the oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC)-fluorescein assay. Xanthohumol (5a), 
desmethylxanthohumol, and 4'-methylxanthohumol (5c) showed 2.3, 3.8, and 3.8 Trolox 
equivalents (TE), respectively, and had more activity than ferulic acid and p-coumaric acid 
(4.47 and 4.51 TE) at concentrations ranging from 0.1 and 2.0 μM, respectively. The swapping 
of the locations of 2'-hydroxyl and 6'-methoxy in the xanthohumol molecule reduces the 
==PAGE:34==
26 
activity (Compound 5d, 5.2TE). The same effect was reported to be achieved when the 
propargyl substituent at C-3' was removed[57, 58].  
 
Figure 27 Structure of antioxidant properties of chalcone derivatives[59]. 
Rao et al. have shown that Prenylated chalcone 3 -prenylisoliquiritigenin (7a) would be a 
superior DPPH radical scavenger than its non-prenylated analogue isoliquiritigenin (7b)[60]. 
Three non-prenylated hydroxychalcone isolated from plants, namely 4',5',4-trihydroxy-6'-O-
glucosylchalcone (8), threochalcone (9a) and butyrospermum (9b), possessed anti-free radical 
activity and showed very good anti-free radical activity against DPPH and 2,2'-azobis(3-
ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) in TE antioxidant capacity assay. The hydroxyl group at 
C-2' in the A ring and the catechol group in the B ring were reported to possess anti-free radical 
activity. However, the lack of α- and β-double bonds reduces its antioxidant capacity[61]. 
Compounds (9b) and isoquercitrin (7b) could demonstrate significant free radical scavenging 
==PAGE:35==
27 
activity of these hydroxychalcone analogues and were found to have similar activity to natural 
hydroxybenzoic and cinnamic acids[62]. 
  
Figure 28 Structure of antioxidant properties of chalcone derivatives[59]. 
2'Omethylisoliquiritigenin (10) isolated from the roots of Dalbergia odorifera was 
reported to exhibit antioxidant activity in lard. This chalcone could show stronger antioxidant 
effects than butylhydroxytoluene (BHT) and α-tocopherol. It was found that similar to α-
tocopherol, compound 10 could also be used to inhibit the decrease in glutathione (GSH) levels 
in the rat lens induced by UV irradiation.The results of this study helped to shed further light 
on the mechanisms underlying the study of cataractogenesis and the future possibility of 
treating cataracts by developing chalcone analogs as antioxidants[63]. Mohamad et al. obtained 
several hydroxychalcone by isolating the ripe dried fruits of Alpinia rafflesiana. Mohamad's 
team found that 2',3',4',6'-tetrahydroxychalcone (11a) exhibited superior DPPH free radical 
scavenging activity than vitamin C and α-tocopherol. The results of this study provide more 
favorable evidence that chalcones will be powerful free radical scavengers. The ineffectiveness 
of the free radical scavengers of flavopiridol B (11b) and rhodopsin (11c) may have resulted 
from the absence of the hydroxyl group at C-3', which led to the inability of ring A to form a 
coplanar configuration with the carbonyl group by forming a 2'-hydroxyl group[64]. 
The figure below is organized for the functional groups of the pharmacological activity of 
chalcone derivatives, and different functional groups present different activities at different 
positions. Except for some natural chalcone derivatives that can be isolated from plants, a better 
activity can be obtained by changing the position of the functional groups. Both natural and 
chemical chalcones possess pharmacological potential of interest, and some of these 
derivatives show no toxicity to normal cells. The main structural features related to the specific 
==PAGE:36==
28 
activity were analyzed (Figure 29). Natural chalcones are currently isolated from plants 
showing one or more pharmacological activities (Figure 30), and all of these compounds can 
be used as very good lead compounds. It is exciting to note that some of the natural chalcones 
are already in the clinic. 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
29 
 
==PAGE:38==
30 
 
 
Figure 29 Functional groups in favor or against pharmacological activity of chalcones[59]. 
==PAGE:39==
31 
 
Figure 30 Pharmacological studies of known naturally occurring chalcones[59].  
2.6 Antimalarial activity of derivatives of Chalcone 
Malaria, which can be caused by Plasmodium, remains a public health problem in need 
of global attention. The World Health Organization (WHO) predicts that approximately 3.3 
billion people worldwide live in areas at risk of malaria transmission, a frightening set of 
figures. With so many people living in areas at risk of malaria transmission, this is another 
major challenge to human health[65]. Although the local population has implemented 
antimalarial drugs and insecticide control in malaria-endemic areas, the current treatment 
programs and preventive measures are generally ineffective and not very satisfactory. The use 
of artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs) has been reported to be highly effective in 
treating malaria. In the 2000-2015 timeframe, global malaria mortality has declined by 60% 
and the count of malaria cases has been reduced by 37%[66]. Artemisinin is the most effective 
anti-malarial drug after ethacrynic acid, chloroquine and primaquine, especially for cerebral 
malaria and chloroquine-resistant malaria, with fast-acting and low toxicity. The mechanism 
of anti-malarial action is mainly through the activation of artemisinin to produce free radicals 
in the process of malaria treatment. The free radicals combine with Plasmodium proteins and 
act on the membrane system structure of Plasmodium, causing damage to the vesicle membrane, 
nuclear membrane and plasma membrane, swelling of mitochondria and shedding of inner and 
outer membranes, thus causing damage to the cell structure and function of Plasmodium. 
More and more patients are suffering from the emergence of drug-resistant malaria, so we 
urgently need to develop new antimalarial drugs. Chalcones have been reported to act as 
cysteine protease inhibitors and aspartate protease inhibitors have been demonstrated. When 
chalcone's compound acts as an amino acid protease, it mediates protein hydrolysis by 
nucleophilic attack on carbonyl groups on susceptible peptide bonds. Also chalcones inhibit 
the permeation pathway of the parasite in the host erythrocyte membrane[67-69].  
==PAGE:40==
32 
Compound 6 with the hexyl chain length being the linker and the best combination of 
unsubstituted phenyl (B-ring) ring showed the highest potency in the series with an IC50 value 
of 0.41 μM and a selectivity index of about 46.7. The submicromolar activity of most of the 
synthesized conjugates suggests that this molecular framework can be used as a promising 
therapeutic template when designing and synthesizing new antimalarials[70]. 
 
Figure 31 Synthesis of compound 6 by compound 3 and compound 4. 
Raj et al. synthesized a library of 4-aminoquinoline-chalcone/N-acetyl pyrazoline 
conjugates. The team found that the antimalarial activity was related to the length of the alkyl 
chain. 4-aminoquinoline-pyrazoline conjugate 9 exhibited good antimalarial activity and no 
cytotoxicity with an IC50 value of 53.7 nM[71]. The chalcone molecule is now seen as a 
potentially valuable substrate for the development of novel antimalarials, and it is exciting to 
think that combining chalcone with other antimalarials would express more significant 
properties in terms of antimalarial activity. An increasing number of chalcone hybrids have 
been screened for in vitro antimalarial activity or in vivo antimalarial activity, which is exactly 
the desired result. 
==PAGE:41==
33 
 
Figure 32 Synthesis of compound 9 by compound 7 and compound 8. 
2.7 Chalcone derivatives acting in neurodegenerative diseases 
Alzheimer's disease is a disease of the brain that causes problems with memory, thinking 
and behavior. Alzheimer's disease is an abnormal phenomenon of aging and is not a mental 
illness. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most prevalent and rapidly increasing 
neurodegenerative disease among the elderly, and there is no effective treatment for it. 
Throughout the development of new drugs in the field of AD, the high failure rate in clinical 
trials has been a deterrent. A complete understanding of the biological basis of AD is the key 
to early diagnosis and intervention of AD, therefore, research on AD is now a "golden period". 
The mechanisms of how AD occurs are not clear. AD is currently regarded as a 
neurodegenerative disease and is thought to be possibly related to multiple factors such as 
genetics and environment. There are several theories regarding the pathogenesis of AD, the 
more influential ones being the β-amyloid (Aβ) waterfall theory, which suggests that an 
imbalance in the production and clearance of Aβ is the initiating event leading to neuronal 
degeneration and dementia, and the tau protein theory, which suggests that 
hyperphosphorylated tau protein allows the formation of neurogenic fiber tangles (NFTs), 
which in turn disrupt neuronal and synaptic normal function. In a nutshell, this means that the 
cause of AD may be due to the deposition of bad proteins in the brain that prevent neurons 
==PAGE:42==
34 
from working properly[72]. The pathological changes of AD include dysfunction of the 
cholinergic system, aggregated lamellipodia, and excessive isoacidification of Tau protein, 
which is mainly manifested by a decrease in choline acetyltransferase and acetylcholine content 
and insufficient synthesis of biochemical parameters.  
 
Figure 33 Cortical plaques and neuronal fiber tangles in patients with Alzheimer's 
disease[73]. 
With the increase of average life expectancy and the acceleration of population aging, 
Alzheimer's disease, mainly AD, has become another major killer after tumors and 
cardiovascular diseases. So far, at least 50 million elderly people in the world are suffering 
from AD, causing serious mental damage and incalculable economic loss to patients and their 
families. Therefore, the development of effective drugs for the treatment of AD has become a 
==PAGE:43==
35 
hot research topic, and the pathogenesis and prevention methods of AD have received great 
attention from various countries[73]. 
Figure 34 The neurofibrillary tangles seen on the Bielshowsky silver stain were originally 
characterized by Alzheimer's[73]. 
The synthesized α, β-unsaturated carbonyl compounds reported as pleiotropic 
cholinesterases for the treatment of AD have the potential to show anticholinesterase potential 
as agents in addition to other activities associated with the neurodegenerative view of AD. The 
synthesized compounds are α, β-unsaturated carbonyl compounds (chalcones) bearing pyrazin-
2-ylamino and quinazolin-4-ylamino groups. These have a good inhibitory effect on AChE, 
BuChE and MAO and induce Aβ aggregation and β-amyloid in PC12 cells[74, 75]. In terms 
of anti-AD, chalcone derivatives have antioxidant, aggregation inhibiting and monoamine 
oxidase inhibiting activities[76]. The structure-effect relationship shows that the retention of 
==PAGE:44==
36 
electron-donating groups such as hydroxyl and methoxy groups on the A and B rings of 
chalcone structure can maintain and enhance the antioxidant and Aβ-binding biological 
activities of the molecule[76, 77]. 
2.7.1 The pathogenesis of AD 
The pathogenesis of AD has been variously described and is still unclear. The main reason 
is that the pathogenesis of AD is a very complex process that is the result of a combination of 
several factors. ad may involve factors such as genetic defects, metabolic disorders, free radical 
damage, neuronal apoptosis, etc. The main pathological features of AD mainly include 
neuronal fiber knots, senile plaques and necrosis and degeneration of neurons (Figure 33). 
There are also many hypotheses about the pathogenesis of AD, such as the acetylcholine 
hypothesis, the β-amyloid precipitation hypothesis, the tau protein hyperphosphorylation 
theory, and the free radical damage hypothesis. 
2.7.1.1 The cholinergic hypothesis 
The cholinergic hypothesis proposed by Davies and Malonely in 1976. The cholinergic 
hypothesis proposes that the main cause of learning and memory loss in Alzheimer's disease 
patients is a deficiency of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine in the brain. 
 
Figure 35 Diagram of the function of the cholinergic nervous system[78]. 
Due to the damage of cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain and the associated 
impaired cholinergic neurotransmission in the cortex and hippocampus, the degradation of 
==PAGE:45==
37 
acetylcholine vinegar enzyme leads to a significant decrease in the interprominent levels of 
ACh, resulting in the failure of nerve cell impulses to be transmitted properly. As a result, 
patients begin to experience a decline in memory and thinking. The cholinergic hypothesis 
occupies an important place in the pathogenesis of AD and is shared by many researchers. 
2.7.1.2 Amyloid cascade hypothesis 
The β-amyloid cascade hypothesis was proposed by John Hardy et al. John proposed that 
β-amyloid is associated with the formation of neurodegenerative patches outside the cell and 
neuronal fiber junctions inside the nerve cell. AD is a gene that directly or indirectly alters 
amyloid precursor protein expression or proteolytic processes due to genetic defects that affect 
the stability of β-amyloid aggregation.  
 
 
Figure 36 The amyloid cascade hypothesis[79]. 
When the balance between Aβ production and clarity is gradually altered, its accumulation 
triggers a complex cascade of reactions. These include loss of neurotransmitters, Tau protein 
==PAGE:46==
38 
phosphorylation' synaptic changes, neurotransmitter proliferation, etc. However neuronal fiber 
tangles also increase, and NFTs cross-link with each other to form microfilaments that are 
deposited in the brain. Eventually neuronal dysfunction, death, and decline can occur[80, 81]. 
2.7.1.3 Another possible pathogenesis 
The pathogenesis of AD is a complex process with multiple mechanisms and factors. In 
addition to the above-mentioned pathogenesis, there are also hypotheses such as the free radical 
damage hypothesis, the metal ion transport hypothesis, the genetic theory, and the 
inflammation theory. With further research on AD, a breakthrough in the study of its 
pathogenesis is sure to occur. The current treatment of AD is mainly based on the cholinergic 
deficiency theory and the amyloid cascade hypothesis. 
2.7.2 Treatment strategies for AD 
Since the pathogenesis of AD is very complex and still unclear, it is easy to see from the 
above-mentioned molecular mechanisms that cause AD that there are great difficulties in the 
treatment process of AD. In addition to reduced acetylcholine levels and Aβ plaque deposition, 
imbalance in calcium ion balance, increased free radicals, and inflammation in the patient's 
brain also influence the development of AD to some extent, and the extent of each factor is 
something we do not yet know. A number of targets are currently proposed regarding AD 
treatment, but the existing treatments are still dominated by pharmacological treatments. The 
main drug targets currently under study are cholinesterase inhibitors, secretase inhibitors, set 
inhibitors of Aβ, neuroprotection and drugs that enhance biofilm stability. 
2.7.2.1 Cholinesterase inhibitors 
Diminished cholinergic transmission is a major feature of the neuropathology of 
Alzheimer's disease, mainly due to early depletion of cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain. 
Cholinesterase inhibitors developed according to AD cholinergic deficiency can 
effectively block the binding of ACh and AChE, thus achieving the effect of increasing the 
amount of acetylcholine in the brain. As shown in the Figure 37 are currently commercially 
available acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. Physostigminetacrine and amiloride as first 
generation AChEI drugs can treat moderate AD. But there are significant side effects that can 
cause sedation and hepatotoxicity. Galanthamine, developed by Shire, is an alkaloid with 
reversible AChEI inhibitory activity, and can easily cross the blood-brain barrier. 
Galanthamine has the advantages of long duration of action, high bioavailability, low toxic 
side effects and good central selectivity. Rivastigmine is a carbamoyl lipid derivative of toxic 
lentil base. Rivastigmine has a dual inhibitory effect on AChE and BuChE and is currently 
widely used for the treatment of mild to moderate AD, with good therapeutic effects in severe 
==PAGE:47==
39 
AD as well. Compared to other cholinesterase inhibitors on the market, its inhibition of AChE 
and BuChE is actually weak, but the carbamoyl lipid structure in its molecule binds covalently 
to the active sites of AChE and BuCE[82]. This special catalytic mechanism slows down its 
hydrolysis by cholinesterase, thus achieving enzyme inhibition and effectively prolonging the 
duration of action.  
 
 
Figure 37 Structure of AChEI drugs. 
==PAGE:48==
40 
 
Figure 38 Lineweaver-Burk curve. 
Cholinesterase inhibitors are substances that bind to the active group or site on the 
cholinesterase molecule, causing a structural change that results in a reduction or complete loss 
of enzyme activity. Depending on the mode of action between the inhibitor and the enzyme 
molecule, cholinesterase inhibitors can be divided into two categories: reversible and 
irreversible. Irreversible inhibition is mainly caused by the covalent bonding of the enzyme 
inhibitor to the enzyme reactive group, resulting in the denaturation and inactivation of 
cholinesterase, which leads to the accumulation of ACh in the body and overexcitation of the 
cholinergic nerve. Therefore, the irreversible AChEI can hardly be developed as a drug 
molecule. It is worth mentioning that carbamoyl vinyl cholinesterase inhibitors can covalently 
bind to the enzyme molecule, but the process is reversible. Lineweaver-Burk curves were used 
to express the enzyme kinetics[83]. As shown in the Figure 38: (2) competitive inhibition; (3) 
non-competitive inhibition; (4) mixed inhibition. The reversible inhibition is mainly 
manifested by the non-covalent bonding of the inhibitor to the enzyme and the reversibility of 
the inhibition process. The strength of an inhibitor depends on its affinity for the enzyme and 
the concentration of the substrate. Depending on the interaction between the inhibitor and the 
enzyme, there are several types of inhibition: competitive, non-competitive, anti-competitive 
and mixed. 
2.7.3 Synthesis and activity assay of Chalcone derivatives for the treatment of AD. 
 
==PAGE:49==
41 
Compounds (3a-e) were synthesized first for subsequent ketone synthesis (5a-e). 2a-e and 
its chlorinated derivative (3a-e) were also synthesized according to the existing method. In 
ethanol, a mixture of 4-aminoacetophenone and 3a-e or 6a-c reacted to produce a solid, which 
was then filtered and recrystallized from ethanol to give the new compounds 5a-e and 7a-c.The 
2-hydroxymethyl-3,5,6-trimethylpyrazine (9) was first obtained by the Boekelheide reaction 
and synthesized by taking ligustrazine. The oxidation of compound (9) yields an intermediate 
(10) and compound (10) is important because it is used in the synthesis of all new compounds. 
 
 
Figure 39 Synthesis of (2a-e) and its chlorinated derivatives (3a-e) (i) HCONH2 (ii) 
POCl3[84]. 
 
Figure 40 Synthesis of compounds (5a-e) and (7a-c), (iii) Reflux, EtOH, ∆[84]. 
For the synthesis of the new compounds a base catalyzed Claisen-Schmidt condensation 
reaction was used. To react various ketones with compound (10). An aromatic aldehyde and a 
==PAGE:50==
42 
ketone were dissolved in ethanol and then stirred for several minutes. A NaOH solution was 
added dropwise to this solution. Reagents and conditions: (i-a) 30% H2O2, acetic acid, 70°C, 
8 hr; (i-b) acetic anhydride, reflux, 2 hr; (i-c) 20% NaOH; (ii) IBX, DMSO, room temperature,  
0.5 hr; (iii) NaOH, EtOH, room temperature (Figure 41). 
 
Figure 41 Synthesis of ligustral (10) and chalcone derivatives[84]. 
Analysis of MAO and ChEs inhibition is required, as well as analysis of the self-induced 
Aβ1-42 aggregation inhibition activity of the compounds, which was assessed by a thioflavin 
T-based fluorometric assay. Donepezil, which is being used for the treatment of Alzheimer's 
disease, was used as a reference compound. Another alternative to the inhibition of MAO-B 
alone, dual inhibition of MAO-A and MAO-B may produce better results in experiments in 
==PAGE:51==
43 
which AD patients develop depressive symptoms. The new derivatives were successfully found 
to inhibit MAO-B more powerfully than MAO-A (inset in Figure 42). 
 Lagurazide derivatives exhibit moderate to strong potency compared to donepezil. It was 
not difficult to find that 11a and 11b showed the strongest activity (62.7% and 59.2%). 
Compound (11a-e) effectively inhibited the aggregation of Aβ, and it is considered as a strong 
AChE inhibitor with a protective effect against Aβ-induced cytotoxicity (inset in Figure 43). 
 
Figure 42 The effect of the synthetic compounds on AChE, BChE and MAO[84]. 
==PAGE:52==
44 
 
Figure 43 The protective effect of an inhibitor of self-induced Aβ1-42 aggregation and 
synthetic compounds against Aβ1-42-induced cell damage[84]. 
A series of carbamoyl-chalcone derivatives were designed and synthesized based on the 
structural characteristics and catalytic sites of AChE and BuChE. In order to synthesize the 
final products, the intermediates M1-M14 were synthesized by parallel synthesis using 
==PAGE:53==
45 
different hydroxyacetophenones and acyl chlorides, and then the intermediates M1-M14 were 
condensed with the corresponding aromatic aldehydes or acid- or base-catalyzed hydroxyl 
aldehydes to finally obtain carbamoyl lipid-chalcone derivatives. 
 
Figure 44 Synthetic route of compounds DDDA-1 ~DDDA-8[85]. 
(a) K2CO3 , K2CO3 / 1. 5 H2O, Pyridine, Ethyl acetate, 70 degrees Celsius, 12-16h, (b) 
37% HCI, hexanol, 70 degrees celsius, 24-36h. 
 
Figure 45 Synthetic routes of DDDA-9 ~12 , DDDA-22 , DDDA-23 compounds[85]. 
(a) 8% KOH, methanol, 70 degrees Celsius, 24-36h. b) Synthesis of DDDA-9~10: 
dimethylaminocarbonyl chloride, K2CO3 , K2CO3 / 1 .5 H2O, Pyridine, Ethanoic acid ethylene 
vinegar, 70 degrees celsius, 12-36 h. c) Synthesis of DDDA-11~12: N-methyl-N-
ethylcarbamoyl chloride, K2CO3 , K2CO3 / 1. 5 H2O, Firatio, hexanoic acid, H2O, 70 degrees, 
12-36 h. d ) Synthesis of DDDA-22: Diethylcarbamoyl chloride, K2CO3, K2CO3 / 1. 5 H2O, 
pyridine, ethyl acetate, H2O, 70 degrees Celsius, 12h. (e) Synthesis of DDDA-23: 
Diisopropylcarbamoyl chloride, K2CO3, K2CO3 / 1. 5 H2O, pyridine, ethyl acetate, H2O, 70 
degrees Celsius, 12-36h. 
==PAGE:54==
46 
 
Figure 46 Synthesis route of DDDA-21 and DDDA-24 compounds[85]. 
(a) Synthesis of M9: diethylcarbamoyl chloride, K2CO3, K2CO3/1.5H2O, pyridine, ethyl 
acetate, H2O, 70°C, 12-36h; (b) Synthesis of M10: diisopropylcarbamoyl chloride, K2CO3, 
K2CO3/1.5H2O, pyridine, ethyl acetate, H2O, 70°C 12-36h; (c) 37% HCl, ethanol, 70 °C, 24-
36h. 
 
Figure 47 Synthesis route of DDDA-21 and DDDA-24 compounds[85]. 
(a) Synthesis of M9: diethylaminocarbonyl chloride, K2CO3, K2CO3/1.5H2O, pyridine, 
ethyl acetate, H2O, 70℃, 12-36 h; (b) Synthesis of M10: diisopropylcarbamoyl chloride, 
K2CO3, K2CO3/1.5H2O, Pyridine, ethylacetate, H2O, 70 ℃, 12-36 h (C) 37% HCl, ethanol, 70°
C, 12-36 h (b) Synthesis of M10: Diisopropylcarbamoyl chloride, K2CO3, K2CO3/1.5H2O, 
Pyridine, ethylacetate, H2O, 70 °C, 12-36 h; (C) 37% HCl, ethanol, 70 °C, 24-36 h. 
Based on the principle of cholinesterase inhibition by carbamoyl lipids and various AD-
related biological activities of chalcone, a series of carbamoyl lipid-chalcone conjugates were 
designed and synthesized by integrating carbamoyl lipid groups and chalcone molecular 
backbones into one molecule based on the principle of molecular backbone jumping. 
==PAGE:55==
47 
 
Figure 48 Carbamoyl ester-chalcone derivatives chemical general formula group 
description[85]. 
 
==PAGE:56==
48 
 
Figure 49 Carbamoyl ester-chalcone derivatives chemical general formula group 
description(Continue)[85]. 
==PAGE:57==
49 
The trend of hAChE inhibitory activity of this compound was significantly different from 
that of hBuC hE: the compound showed good hAChE inhibitory activity only when the 
carbamoyl lipid group was introduced at the 3-position of the benzene ring and the alkyl group 
attached to the nitrogen atom was dimethyl. For example, DDDA-3 and DDDA-9 can exhibit 
good inhibitory activity against hAChE.  
 
==PAGE:58==
50 
Figure 50 Inhibitory activity of compounds on hAChE and hBuChE[85]. 
These compounds showed good hAChE inhibitory activity (DDDA-3 and DDDA-9), 
which was severely reduced when the alkyl group was diethyl, di(methyl)ethyl or diisopropyl. 
The compounds lose the hAChE inhibitory activity (DDDA-1 to 2) when carbamoyl lipid 
groups are introduced at both the 3- and 5-positions of the A-ring of the molecular structure 
species. The best hAChE inhibitory activity was DDDA-3. 
 
Figure 51 Inhibitory activity of compounds on hAChE and hBuChE (Continue)[85]. 
3 Conclusion 
AD is the most common neurodegenerative dementia disease, causing great suffering and 
emotional burden to patients and their families. The search for a cure and drugs for this disease 
has become a worldwide challenge. The current therapeutic drugs for AD are still being 
developed mainly for cholinesterase inhibitors and anti-Aβ aggregation. The drugs that have 
been marketed for AD are mainly acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, while most of the drugs 
developed for Aβ aggregation are still in the development stage, and many of them have already 
failed. Therefore, ChEI is still one of the most effective drugs for the treatment of AD, so it is 
important to design ChEI for AChE and BuChE according to the "cholinergic hypothesis". In 
addition, it is important to In addition, structural modification of active ingredients from natural 
==PAGE:59==
51 
products is also an important strategy to find effective lead compounds. Combined with the 
remarkable biological activity of chalcone derivatives shown in the above pharmacological 
activity study, and the comprehensive analysis of the progress of research on chalcone 
derivatives on nerve centers, we believe that the potential pharmacological activity on chalcone 
summarized in this project has contributed to the development of chalcone. 
 
4 Reference 
 
1. 
Singh, P., A. Anand, and V. Kumar, ChemInform Abstract: Recent Developments in 
Biological Activities of Chalcones: A Mini Review. European Journal of Medicinal 
Chemistry, 2015. 45(45): p. 758-777. 
2. 
侯玲, et al., 新型查尔酮类衍生物的合成. 应用化工, 2014. 000(007): p. 1297-1298. 
3. 
Chalcone: A Privileged Structure in Medicinal Chemistry. Chemical Reviews, 2017. 
117(12): p. 7762. 
4. 
Dimmock, J.R., et al., ChemInform Abstract: Bioactivities of Chalcones. Cheminform, 
2010. 31(6). 
5. 
Liming, et al., Recent advances in therapeutic chalcones. Expert Opinion on 
Therapeutic Patents, 2005. 
6. 
Dimmock, J.R., et al., Bioactivities of Chalcones. Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2000. 
6(12): p. 1125-1149. 
7. 
Jiang, Y.B. and X.J. Wang, Stoichiometric-dependent intramolecular charge transfer 
flourescence of p-dimethylaminochalcone in β-cyclodextrin host—guest systems. 
Journal of Photochemistry & Photobiology A Chemistry, 1994. 81(3): p. 205–209. 
8. 
Jiang, Y.B., X.J. Wang, and L. Lin, FLUORESCENT PROBING OF THE 
RESTRICTION BY AQUEOUS MICELLES OF THE FORMATION OF THE 
PHOTOINDUCED 
BIRADICAL 
STATE 
P-ASTERISK 
OF 
4-
(DIMETHYLAMINO)CHALCONE. Journal of Physical Chemistry, 1994. 98(47): p. 
12367-12372. 
9. 
Miriam, T., et al., Novel Chalcone-Based Fluorescent Human Histamine H3 Receptor 
Ligands as Pharmacological Tools. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 2012. 6: p. 14. 
10. 
ee, L., et al., Development of a fluorescent chalcone library and its application in the 
discovery of a mouse embryonic stem cell probe. Chemical Communications Royal 
Society of Chemistry, 2012. 
==PAGE:60==
52 
11. 
Farooq, S. and Z. Ngaini, Recent synthetic methodologies for chalcone synthesis (2013-
2018). Current Organocatalysis, 2019. 6(3): p. 184-192. 
12. 
董秋静 and 罗春华, 对位取代查尔酮衍生物的合成. 精細化工中間體, 2007. 
37(5): p. 31-33. 
13. 
刘翔峰 and 史道华, 查尔酮合成方法的研究进展. 應用化工, 2009. 38(8): p. 
1210-1213. 
14. 
李修刚, et al., 固体超强碱催化合成查尔酮的研究. 工业催化, 2008. 16(9): p. 71. 
15. 
党珊, 刘锦贵, and 王国辉, 室温下 2’-羟基查尔酮的合成. 2008. 
16. 
Ananthnag, G.S., A. Adhikari, and M.S. Balakrishna, Iron-catalyzed aerobic oxidative 
aromatization of 1, 3, 5-trisubstituted pyrazolines. Catalysis Communications, 2014. 43: 
p. 240-243. 
17. 
Andrade, J.T., et al., Design, synthesis, biological activity and structure-activity 
relationship studies of chalcone derivatives as potential anti-Candida agents. The 
Journal of antibiotics, 2018. 71(8): p. 702-712. 
18. 
Jadhav, A.H., et al., Green solvent ionic liquids: structural directing pioneers for 
microwave-assisted synthesis of controlled MgO nanostructures. RSC advances, 2016. 
6(38): p. 31675-31686. 
19. 
Mattia, E., et al., One‐Pot Consecutive Reactions Based on the Synthesis of Conjugated 
Enones by the Re‐Catalysed Meyer–Schuster Rearrangement. Chemistry–A European 
Journal, 2012. 18(38): p. 11894-11898. 
20. 
Yi, W., et al., Rh (III)-Catalyzed and Solvent-Controlled Chemoselective Synthesis of 
Chalcone and Benzofuran Frameworks via Synergistic Dual Directing Groups Enabled 
Regioselective C–H Functionalization: A Combined Experimental and Computational 
Study. ACS Catalysis, 2018. 8(10): p. 9508-9519. 
21. 
Lee, K. and Y. Hae Kim, A facile deamination of aziridines using N2O4 under very 
mild conditions. Synthetic communications, 1999. 29(7): p. 1241-1248. 
22. 
Zaranek, M., et al., Iridium-catalysed desilylative acylation of 1-alkenylsilanes. Journal 
of Molecular Catalysis A: Chemical, 2017. 426: p. 75-78. 
23. 
O'Brien, C.J., et al., Part I: the development of the catalytic Wittig reaction. Chemistry–
A European Journal, 2013. 19(45): p. 15281-15289. 
24. 
Liu, D.N. and S.K. Tian, Stereoselective Synthesis of Polysubstituted Alkenes through 
a Phosphine‐Mediated Three‐Component System of Aldehydes, α‐Halo Carbonyl 
==PAGE:61==
53 
Compounds, and Terminal Alkenes. Chemistry–A European Journal, 2009. 15(18): p. 
4538-4542. 
25. 
Yoo, B.-W., J.-H. Kim, and M.-H. Yang, A Facile and Efficient Method for the 
Debromination of vic-Dibromides to Alkenes with BiCl 3/Indium System. Bulletin of 
the Korean Chemical Society, 2010. 31(4): p. 791-792. 
26. 
Chen, W., et al., Hantzsch ester as a photosensitizer for the visible‐light‐induced 
debromination of vicinal dibromo compounds. Chemistry–A European Journal, 2016. 
22(28): p. 9546-9550. 
27. 
Thurecht, K.J., D.J. Hill, and A.K. Whittaker, Investigation of spontaneous 
microemulsion formation in supercritical carbon dioxide using high-pressure NMR. 
The Journal of supercritical fluids, 2006. 38(1): p. 111-118. 
28. 
吴浩, 叶红齐, and 陈东初, 绿色合成查尔酮新方法的研. 工业催化, 2006. 14(6): 
p. 34. 
29. 
Rani, A., et al., Recent developments in biological aspects of chalcones: the odyssey 
continues. Expert Opinion on Drug Discovery, 2019. 14(3): p. 249-288. 
30. 
Verónica, R., et al., An Updated Review on Marine Anticancer Compounds: The Use 
of Virtual Screening for the Discovery of Small-Molecule Cancer Drugs. Molecules, 
2017. 22(7): p. 1037. 
31. 
Kerru, N., et al., Recent advances (2015–2016) in anticancer hybrids. European Journal 
of Medicinal Chemistry, 2017. 142. 
32. 
Wu, W., et al., Millepachine, a novel chalcone, induces G 2/M arrest by inhibiting 
CDK1 activity and causing apoptosis via ROS-mitochondrial apoptotic pathway in 
human hepatocarcinoma cells in vitro and in vivo. Carcinogenesis, 2013. 34(7): p. 
1636-1643. 
33. 
Shibata, S., et al., Inhibitory effects of licochalcone A isolated from Glycyrrhiza inflata 
root on inflammatory ear edema and tumour promotion in mice. Planta medica, 1991. 
57(03): p. 221-224. 
34. 
Edwards, M.L., D.M. Stemerick, and P.S. Sunkara, Chalcones: a new class of 
antimitotic agents. Journal of medicinal chemistry, 1990. 33(7): p. 1948-1954. 
35. 
Wang, Y., et al., The plant polyphenol butein inhibits testosterone-induced proliferation 
in breast cancer cells expressing aromatase. Life sciences, 2005. 77(1): p. 39-51. 
36. 
Yit, C.C. and N.P. Das, Cytotoxic effect of butein on human colon adenocarcinoma cell 
proliferation. Cancer letters, 1994. 82(1): p. 65-72. 
==PAGE:62==
54 
37. 
符志杨, 2-甲基-4-苯基喹啉-查尔酮衍生物合成及生物活性研究. 2020, 浙江海洋
大学. 
38. 
Chu, D.T., J.J. Plattner, and L. Katz, New directions in antibacterial research. Journal 
of medicinal chemistry, 1996. 39(20): p. 3853-3874. 
39. 
Oh, K.Y., et al., Glycosidase inhibitory phenolic compounds from the seed of Psoralea 
corylifolia. Food Chemistry, 2010. 121(4): p. 940-945. 
40. 
Qiu, R.-L., et al., Study on the chemical constituents of Psoralea corylifolia. Zhong yao 
cai= Zhongyaocai= Journal of Chinese medicinal materials, 2011. 34(8): p. 1211-1213. 
41. 
Rammohan, A., et al., Chalcone synthesis, properties and medicinal applications: a 
review. Environmental Chemistry Letters, 2020. 18(2): p. 433-458. 
42. 
Chu, W.-C., et al., Synthesis and antibacterial evaluation of novel cationic chalcone 
derivatives possessing broad spectrum antibacterial activity. European journal of 
medicinal chemistry, 2018. 143: p. 905-921. 
43. 
Selvakumar, N., et al., Synthesis, SAR and antibacterial studies on novel chalcone 
oxazolidinone hybrids. European journal of medicinal chemistry, 2007. 42(4): p. 538-
543. 
44. 
Yin, B.-T., et al., Synthesis and biological evaluation of α-triazolyl chalcones as a new 
type of potential antimicrobial agents and their interaction with calf thymus DNA and 
human serum albumin. European journal of medicinal chemistry, 2014. 71: p. 148-159. 
45. 
Purser, S., et al., Fluorine in medicinal chemistry. Chemical Society Reviews, 2008. 
37(2): p. 320-330. 
46. 
Akhoundi, M., et al., A historical overview of the classification, evolution, and 
dispersion of Leishmania parasites and sandflies. PLoS neglected tropical diseases, 
2016. 10(3): p. e0004349. 
47. 
Hawas, M.R., I.A.H.S. Al-Zubaidy, and N.S. Mohamed, MOLECULAR 
IDENTIFICATION OF LEISHMANIASPP. IN CUTANEOUS LEISHMANIASIS. 
48. 
Rozmer, Z. and P. Perjési, Naturally occurring chalcones and their biological activities. 
Phytochemistry reviews, 2016. 15(1): p. 87-120. 
49. 
de Mello, M.V.P., et al., A comprehensive review of chalcone derivatives as 
antileishmanial agents. European journal of medicinal chemistry, 2018. 150: p. 920-
929. 
50. 
Christensen, S.B., et al., An antileishmanial chalcone from Chinese licorice roots. 
Planta medica, 1994. 60(02): p. 121-123. 
==PAGE:63==
55 
51. 
Narender, T., et al., Prenylated chalcones isolated from Crotalaria genus inhibits in vitro 
growth of the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Bioorganic & medicinal 
chemistry letters, 2005. 15(10): p. 2453-2455. 
52. 
Li, J., et al., Design, synthesis, biological evaluation, and molecular docking of 
chalcone derivatives as anti-inflammatory agents. Bioorganic & medicinal chemistry 
letters, 2017. 27(3): p. 602-606. 
53. 
Funakoshi-Tago, M., et al., Anti-inflammatory activity of flavonoids in Nepalese 
propolis is attributed to inhibition of the IL-33 signaling pathway. International 
immunopharmacology, 2015. 25(1): p. 189-198. 
54. 
Zhao, F., et al., Inhibitors of nitric oxide production from hops (Humulus lupulus L.). 
Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 2003. 26(1): p. 61-65. 
55. 
Jayasinghe, L., et al., Geranylated phenolic constituents from the fruits of Artocarpus 
nobilis. Phytochemistry, 2006. 67(13): p. 1353-1358. 
56. 
Aoki, N., et al., C-geranylated chalcones from the stems of Angelica keiskei with 
superoxide-scavenging activity. Journal of natural products, 2008. 71(7): p. 1308-1310. 
57. 
Vogel, S., et al., Natural and non-natural prenylated chalcones: synthesis, cytotoxicity 
and anti-oxidative activity. Bioorganic & medicinal chemistry, 2008. 16(8): p. 4286-
4293. 
58. 
Vogel, S. and J.r. Heilmann, Synthesis, cytotoxicity, and antioxidative activity of minor 
prenylated chalcones from Humulus lupulus. Journal of natural products, 2008. 71(7): 
p. 1237-1241. 
59. 
Batovska, D.I. and I.T. Todorova, Trends in utilization of the pharmacological potential 
of chalcones. Current clinical pharmacology, 2010. 5(1): p. 1-29. 
60. 
Rao, G.V., et al., Synthesis of (±) Abyssinone I and related compounds: Their anti-
oxidant and cytotoxic activities. European journal of medicinal chemistry, 2009. 44(5): 
p. 2239-2245. 
61. 
Cai, Y.-Z., et al., Structure–radical scavenging activity relationships of phenolic 
compounds from traditional Chinese medicinal plants. Life sciences, 2006. 78(25): p. 
2872-2888. 
62. 
Moa, M.J.G., et al., QTAIM electron density study of natural chalcones. Chemical 
physics letters, 2007. 446(1-3): p. 1-7. 
63. 
Yu, X., W. Wang, and M. Yang, Antioxidant activities of compounds isolated from 
Dalbergia odorifera T. Chen and their inhibition effects on the decrease of glutathione 
level of rat lens induced by UV irradiation. Food Chemistry, 2007. 104(2): p. 715-720. 
==PAGE:64==
56 
64. 
Mohamad, H., et al., DPPH free radical scavenger components from the fruits of 
Alpinia rafflesiana Wall. ex. Bak.(Zingiberaceae). Zeitschrift für Naturforschung C, 
2004. 59(11-12): p. 811-815. 
65. 
Wang, T., et al., Monitoring and evaluation of intervals from onset of fever to diagnosis 
before “1-3-7” approach in malaria elimination: a retrospective study in Shanxi 
Province, China from 2013 to 2018. Malaria journal, 2019. 18(1): p. 1-8. 
66. 
Cheng, P., et al., Chalcone hybrids and their antimalarial activity. Archiv der Pharmazie, 
2020. 353(4): p. 1900350. 
67. 
Gutteridge, C.E., et al., In vitro and in vivo efficacy and in vitro metabolism of 1-
phenyl-3-aryl-2-propen-1-ones against Plasmodium falciparum. Bioorganic & 
medicinal chemistry letters, 2006. 16(21): p. 5682-5686. 
68. 
Liu, M., P. Wilairat, and M.-L. Go, Antimalarial Alkoxylated and Hydroxylated 
Chalcones: Structure− Activity Relationship Analysis. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 
2002. 45(8): p. 1735-1735. 
69. 
Chen, M., et al., Licochalcone A, a new antimalarial agent, inhibits in vitro growth of 
the human malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum and protects mice from P. yoelii 
infection. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy, 1994. 38(7): p. 1470-1475. 
70. 
Singh, A., et al., Piperazine‐linked 4‐aminoquinoline‐chalcone/ferrocenyl‐chalcone 
conjugates: Synthesis and antiplasmodial evaluation. Chemical biology & drug design, 
2017. 90(4): p. 590-595. 
71. 
Kumar, S., et al., 4-Aminoquinoline-chalcone/-N-acetylpyrazoline conjugates: 
Synthesis and antiplasmodial evaluation. European journal of medicinal chemistry, 
2017. 138: p. 993-1001. 
72. 
Masters, C., R. Bateman, and K. Blennow, Alzheimer's disease Nature Reviews 
Disease Primers. 2015, Article. 
73. 
Castellani, R.J., R.K. Rolston, and M.A. Smith, Alzheimer disease. Disease-a-month: 
DM, 2010. 56(9): p. 484. 
74. 
Bukhari, S.N.A., et al., Synthesis of α, β-unsaturated carbonyl based compounds as 
acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase inhibitors: characterization, molecular 
modeling, QSAR studies and effect against amyloid β-induced cytotoxicity. European 
journal of medicinal chemistry, 2014. 83: p. 355-365. 
75. 
Zha, G.-F., et al., Biological evaluation of synthetic α, β-unsaturated carbonyl based 
cyclohexanone derivatives as neuroprotective novel inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase, 
==PAGE:65==
57 
butyrylcholinesterase and amyloid-β aggregation. Bioorganic & medicinal chemistry, 
2016. 24(10): p. 2352-2359. 
76. 
Chen, Y.-P., et al., Syntheses and evaluation of novel isoliquiritigenin derivatives as 
potential dual inhibitors for amyloid-beta aggregation and 5-lipoxygenase. European 
journal of medicinal chemistry, 2013. 66: p. 22-31. 
77. 
Chimenti, F., et al., Chalcones: a valid scaffold for monoamine oxidases inhibitors. 
Journal of medicinal chemistry, 2009. 52(9): p. 2818-2824. 
78. 
Terry, A.V. and J.J. Buccafusco, The cholinergic hypothesis of age and Alzheimer's 
disease-related cognitive deficits: recent challenges and their implications for novel 
drug development. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 2003. 
306(3): p. 821-827. 
79. 
Hardy, J.A. and G.A. Higgins, Alzheimer's disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis. 
Science, 1992. 256(5054): p. 184-186. 
80. 
Shi, X., et al., Rat hippocampal proteomic alterations following intrahippocampal 
injection of amyloid beta peptide (1–40). Neuroscience letters, 2011. 500(2): p. 87-91. 
81. 
King Jr, T.E., et al., BUILD-1: a randomized placebo-controlled trial of bosentan in 
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. American journal of respiratory and critical care 
medicine, 2008. 177(1): p. 75-81. 
82. 
Bolognesi, M.L., et al., Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of 
conformationally restricted rivastigmine analogues. Journal of medicinal chemistry, 
2004. 47(24): p. 5945-5952. 
83. 
Lineweaver, H. and D. Burk, The determination of enzyme dissociation constants. 
Journal of the American chemical society, 1934. 56(3): p. 658-666. 
84. 
Wang, M., et al., Synthesis and biological evaluation of new tetramethylpyrazine‐based 
chalcone derivatives as potential anti‐Alzheimer agents. Chemical biology & drug 
design, 2018. 92(5): p. 1859-1866. 
85. 
田艺广, 氨基甲酰酯—查尔酮衍生物作为新型胆碱酯酶抑制剂的设计, 合成, 活
性及作用机制研究. 2016, 华南理工大学. 
 
