==PAGE:1==
Evaluation of Outdoor Electroluminescence
Imaging Methods
Master Thesis
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Evaluation of Outdoor Electroluminescence Imaging Methods
Master Thesis
July, 2021
By
Umesh Saru Thapa
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Photonics Engineering, Risø Campus, Frederiks­
borg 399 building 130, 4000 Roskilde, Denmark Denmark
www.solar.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Solar Energy Group, Department of
Photonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng, in Sustainable energy, study
line Solar energy.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of solar energy.
Umesh Saru Thapa ­ s190036
Signature: Sarumesh Thapa
Date: 16­07­2021
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The electroluminescence imaging is a very useful method to detect the various defects
in the solar module which is greatly affected by external irradiance especially outdoors
as the solar spectrum is higher than that of c­Si luminescence spectrum. While IEC has
set a standard for both indoors as well as outdoors EL imaging[1] and number of stud­
ies are done to obtain a quality EL image, the standards are vague and the studies are
quite specific to the paper and/or are very expensive. With this motivation to document
the performance of both cameras for EL imaging, EL images taken with both cameras for
different irradiance condition and optical filters, are compared in this thesis.
For Si based camera, the exposure time of 15 seconds seems ideal from the study done
for the indoors and for InGaAs camera the ideal documented exposure time for same con­
ditions is 50ms. While the Si based camera needs to use optical filters when an external
source of light is due to its higher sensitivity in IR region the InGaAs camera showed no
effect in its image quality even though filters weren’t used for same conditions. Its expo­
sure time however should be increased to 200ms when bandpass filter is used. For both
cameras, once the natural light is involved image processing is expected to be done but
the number of EL and background (BG) images needed to take is low (only 3 to 5).
As for outdoors EL imaging the Si based camera couldn’t give a proper EL image. The
literatures suggested to use modulation and capture several EL and BG images for pro­
cessing to get a proper EL image when the irradiance exceeds 90W/m2[2][3][4]. While
modulation was not possible with Si based camera due to its slow responsive time, In­
GaAs camera was able to capture a proper EL image without any signal modulation. Only
30 EL and BG images each were taken and processed to get the final EL image at the
exposure time of 5ms.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my main supervisor, Gisele Alves dos Reis Benatto, for her continuous
academic as well as moral support throughout my thesis, for sharing her expertise and
knowledge to help me accomplish all this work.
I would also like to thank my other supervisor Sergiu Spataru for his support and guidance
throughout the project.
I would like to thank the solar energy team of the Photonics Engineering Department,
especially Sune Thorsteinsson, and Thøger Kari Hass. Those weekly meetings were
a real helpful to improve my approach towards the thesis and to see points that I was
missing.
I would also like to thank my fellow students doing thesis under Gisele’s supervison; Fer­
nando Ceballos Alonso, and Mihir Madhves Kallapur who became a great friends along
the way and provided their help as well.
Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends for their continuous support
through these tough times.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
List of Figures
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Methodology
3
2.1
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Image acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Camera types and settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2
Camera filters and irradiance condition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Spectra involved during EL imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Image processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
Background subtraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.2
Histogram equalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Image analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Results
13
3.1
Si based camera results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.1.1
Filter difference results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.1.2
Irradiance difference results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.1.3
Outdoor imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
InGaAs camera results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2.1
Filter difference results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2.2
Irradiance difference results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2.3
Outdoor imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Camera results comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Discussion and Limitations
33
5
Conclusion
34
6
Bibliography
36
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
1.1
Some image of the defects in c­Si solar module that can be diagnosed
performing EL imaging[5].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.1
The basic indoor imaging setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Outdoor setup for imaging. Left to right: Gisele Alves dos Reis Benatto
(main academic supervisor of this thesis) and Fernando Ceballod Alonso
(fellow master thesis student) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Equipment used for both indoors as well outdoors imaging . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
The electroluminescence chart of the camera sensor along with the c­Si
luminescence spectrum. The left axis is for the camera sensors and the
right one is for the c­Si spectrum. The green shaded region area in the
chart is the wavelength of light the bandpass filter lets pass (1150nm­25nm)
through. The faint orange shaded region is the wavelength of light that long­
pass filter of 850nm cuts out, remaining light of higher wavelength passes
through. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
The light spectrum of led light (secondary axis) compared to the spectrum
of a bright room. The led light spectrum is similar to the light inside the lab
which is why it is used in place of medium irradiance room. . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
The light spectrum of bright room (secondary axis) compared to the light
spectrum on a overcast day outdoors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7
Averaging and background subtraction to obtainfinal EL image. For this
image total of 30 EL and 30 background images were averaged and sub­
tracted
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.8
The background subtracted image in fig. 2.8 after histogram equalization to
enhance the contrast and see the image more clearly. A simple histogram
equalization can also improve the image quality making it more readable. . 10
2.9
The histograms of images in fig. 2.8, left side without histogram equalization
and the tight one after histogram equalization. The histogram skewed on
left means the image is underexposed which is in the left side fig. 2.8 which
after equalization spreads out to give more contrast to the image like shown
in right side of the fig. 2.8. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.10 The plot profile of a selected area which is shown in the image on the right
side with yellow line. The encircled pointy sharp drop in gray values are
due to the busbars and gap between cells which are pointed in the image
on the tight. These points are taken as reference to count the busbars and
see where the selected area is located in the reference image. Then the
fall on gray values enclosed in a rectangle are due to the cracks as shown
in the image on the right which are the details needed to be documented.
These fall on gray value depends on the severity of cracks, lower the drop
darker the cracked region meaning severe cracks and vice versa.
. . . . . 12
3.1
Base histogram of image taken without filter in dark room at different expo­
sure time (in sec) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Respective images of the histogram in fig. 3.1 with increasing exposure (in
sec) time from left to right . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
vi
==PAGE:8==
3.3
Base plot of image taken without filter in dark room at different exposure
time (in sec) with the selected region on right hand side . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4
Histogram of the images with same exposure time of 15s but different filters
in a dark room
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.5
Plot profile of the images taken with different filters at same exposure time
of 15s in a dark room with the selected region on right hand side . . . . . . 16
3.6
Side by side comparison of the image taken in medium irradiance room
and dark room with the filter 850nm at 15s of exposure time . . . . . . . . . 17
3.7
Final processed EL image at 0.625s and 1s exposure time in a medium
irradiance room taken without any filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.8
Comparison of images taken is medium irradiance and dark room at 0.625s
and 1s of exposure time respectively without the use of filters . . . . . . . . 18
3.9
Side by side comparison of images taken at exposure time of 15s in a bright
room with different filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.10 Plot profile of EL image taken at 5s and 15s exposure time in a bright room
while using a filter of 1000nm along with the region on right side
. . . . . . 20
3.11 Qualitative comparison of EL image taken at 5s and 15s exposure time in
a bright room while using a filter of 1000nm along with the region on right
side
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.12 The final EL image taken outdoors by the Si based camera . . . . . . . . . 21
3.13 Plot profile comparison of images taken by InGaAs camera in a dark room
without any filters with different exposure time (in ms) with the respective
selected region on the right side
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.14 Plot profile comparison of images taken by InGaAs camera in a dark room
without any filters with different exposure time (in ms) with different selected
region on the right side . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.15 Side by side qualitative comparison of the images taken at exposure time
of 50ms and 100ms in a dark room without using any filters . . . . . . . . . 23
3.16 Comparing plot profile of the images taken at 50ms of exposure time with
different filters; LP is long pass filter of 950nm and BP is the band pass filter
of 1150nm­25nm; in a dark room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.17 Plot profile comparison of the images taken without filter at 50ms exposure
time and with BP filter at 200ms in a dark room. The image on the right
side is the selected region on the EL image. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.18 Qualitative comparison of EL image taken at 50ms without using any filter
in dark and medium irradiance room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.19 Qualitative comparison of EL image taken at 200ms using a BP filter in dark
and medium irradiance room
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.20 Plot profile comparison of the images taken without filter at 50ms exposure
time and with BP filter at 200ms in a bright room. The image on the right
side is the selected region on the EL image. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.21 Plot profile comparison of the images taken without filter at 50ms exposure
time in a dark and bright room with the image of selected region on the right
side
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.22 Side by side comparison of the outdoor EL image with indoors
. . . . . . . 28
3.23 Side by side comparison of the outdoor EL images taken with bandpass
filter at different exposure time at different irradiance . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.24 Side by side comparison of the outdoor EL image with indoors
. . . . . . . 29
3.25 Side by side comparison of the outdoor EL images taken with longpass
filter at different exposure time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
vii
==PAGE:9==
3.26 Side by side comparison of EL images taken by InGaAs camera and Si
based camera in specified setting in dark room . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.27 Side by side comparison of EL images taken by InGaAs camera and Si
based camera in specified setting in bright room
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
viii
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Luminescence is a phenomena of emission of light by various substances which depend­
ing upon the cause can be utilized for different purpose. One such type of luminescence
which occurs when an external current is passed through the substance is called elec­
troluminescence (EL) and this electroluminescence is the result of photons emitted by
radiative recombination of electrons holes in the material, which is usually a semicon­
ductor. If an external detector is setup in such a way that it can detect these emitted
photons then we can study the physical properties and details of the semi­conductor ma­
terial which otherwise would have gone undetected by human eye.
Silicon (Si), which is the most common type of semi­conductor used to produce solar pan­
els with an approximate 95% share on the total solar modules sold in the market[6], also
demonstrates a small amount radiative recombination[7]. An external detector, usually
either silicon based (Si­based) or indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) based detector can
detect the emitted photons and provide the physical informations which is then used to
study the performance of the module. These detectors are usually made to work with
camera lens to capture the picture of the emitted photons during electroluminescence
and this process of capturing image is called electroluminescence imaging or EL imaging
for short. With the EL imaging of a solar module, both cell level as well as module level
diagnosis like cell cracks, PID, disconnected cell interconnect, shunt failure, etc can be
done which helps to review the performance of the module that can be used for future
references.
Figure 1.1: Some image of the defects in c­Si solar module that can be diagnosed per­
forming EL imaging[5].
Two most common type of cameras based on sensor used to do the EL imaging are the
Si­based CMOS modified digital camera and/or indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs) based
raptor owl cameras. These cameras are used both indoors as well as outdoors to do
the EL imaging of the module with different setups. For outdoors its either stationary or
non­stationary methods based on the setup used. The stationary method uses a camera
with a fix stand to capture images while the non­stationary methods uses different types
of movable frame as well as drones usually with fast responsive cameras. The indoors
imaging are easier compared to outdoors as the lab environment are controlled but for
outdoors imaging certain things needs to be considered, the most important one being
the irradiance. Not only the changes in irradiance affects the quality of EL image[8], for
1
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
outdoors EL imaging with higher irradiance value of more than 90W/m2, modulation of
the electric signal as well as use of several electroluminescence as well as background
images should be taken to get a proper EL image[2][3][4]. To be more precise, the change
in irradiance causes disturbance on the signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) value which is used
to quantify the quality of image[8].
IEC has drafts regarding the standards for outdoors as well as indoors EL imaging. It even
states that outdoors EL imaging must be performed when the irradiance is less than 100
W/m2[9][1]. But still a study that documents the performance of cameras with different
settings and filters with regards to different environmental effects, main one being the
irradiance, is still lacking. Number of studies are done for outdoors EL imaging but most of
them are specific to the same study. Not only these methods are specific the instruments
used in these studies are also very expensive. So the aim of this thesis is to document
the performance of Si camera and compare it with the performance of InGaAs camera in
identical conditions with a most basic setup that can be performed with low cost. Also in
doing so, the goal is to catalogue the influence of artificial light as well natural light during
EL imaging based on the sensor type of camera. Different lens filters will also be used
and comparison is done to see the loss in details if there is any and determine the cases
which allows the best EL image acquisition when these lens are used. Also finally study
the limits of details in the EL image that can be captured and determine when the image
processing is needed.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
2
==PAGE:12==
2
Methodology
The experimental setup for image acquisition and post image processing is discussed in
this section. For this thesis a simple stationary method was implemented with fix camera
tripod and a mount for the solar module. The basic setup of the experiment was a module
connected to a power supply unit box. Then a camera is kept in front of module in a tripod
to capture the whole module without any glare or reflection which is then connected to
a laptop using a frame grabber. The psu, laptop, and the camera is then connected to
electric outlets in the room. The setup is further explained in the sections below.
2.1
Experimental setup
For indoors, the camera was setup to get the picture of whole module at a perpendicular
angle to the module. The module was mounted in a stand that was fixed in the wall, i.e.
the inclination angle was 90o with respect to the surface as shown in fig. 2.1. The module
is then connected to a power supply and the image acquisition is started.
Figure 2.1: The basic indoor imaging setup
For outdoors, a movable stand is used to mount the module for imaging. The module
facing the camera is kept in such a way that the irradiance on the module is highest for
the time of the day as seen in fig. 2.2. So the inclination and direction of module face
was not noted, though initially the plan was to keep module facing south direction [citation
khojne]. The camera angle and field of view was also adjusted accordingly to avoid glare
to get a proper final image.
3
==PAGE:13==
2.2. IMAGE ACQUISITION
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
Figure 2.2: Outdoor setup for imaging. Left to right: Gisele Alves dos Reis Benatto (main
academic supervisor of this thesis) and Fernando Ceballod Alonso (fellow master thesis
student)
2.2
Image acquisition
Based on sensor type two cameras were used; silicon based complementary metal–
oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) modified digital camera and another with Indium gallium
arsenide (InGaAs) as its sensor. As for the power supply, it should be able to provide
enough voltage and current for the module was used which in this case was a ”BK Preci­
sion DC Power Supply”.
Figure 2.3: Equipment used for both indoors as well outdoors imaging
2.2.1
Camera types and settings
As mentioned, based on the types of sensors, two cameras were used to acquire images
of the module. These camera types and their settings are discussed in deatails in this
section.
Si based camera
A digital single­lens reflex camera (DSLR) which uses silicon complementary metal­oxide­
semiconductor (CMOS) detectors i.e. modified lens to capture the photons produced
by the module to get the EL imaging. These type of cameras have high resolution (
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
4
==PAGE:14==
2.2. IMAGE ACQUISITION
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
6000×4000 pixels), choices of parameter that can be changed based on requirement and
above all, these cameras are very affordable to InGaAs camera counterpart[10] . With the
modified SI based digital camera parameters like F­stop number and ISO speed number
can also be adjusted. The F­stop number determines the how wide the lens will open;
lower the number wider the lens size allowing more light into the lens[11]. ISO Speed is
the sensitivity of camera’s sensor to light, the higher the number, the more sensitive to
light the camera is[11]. For this study we wanted the camera to be able to capture more
light emitted by the module while at the same time make the camera less sensitive to the
external light so that it won’t affect the final quality of image. For this purpose the value of
both F­stop and ISO Speed value were lowest; f/1.8 and 100 respectively. The software
used for the image capture using this camera was ”digiCamControl” which had the bulb
function allowing the camera to have much longer exposure time (as long as the camera
battery lasts).
The luminescence of silicon ranges between 800nm to 1400nm[7] , any photons or light
which is not within this range of wavelength are considered noise. Since, the digital cam­
eras which are consumer grade, are built to be sensitive towards visible light and because
the infrared (IR) photons are considered noise in EL imaging[10], a filter is used to reflect
or cut the IR lights to get a good EL image. The different camera filters and their usuage
are discussed in brief in section 2.2.2 below.
InGaAs camera
Unlike the Si based camera, the camera which uses Indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs)
as its sensor are not targeted towards normal consumers and are highly expensive com­
pared to them but these cameras has highly sensitive beyond 1000nm resulting in more
detailed EL images of module even in high noise situation. The InGaAs camera used for
this study was a ”Raptor Owl640” which also has and even though the parameters like
F­stop number and ISO Speed were not user defined, there were other options like fps
(frames per second) speed and gain value. The fps number gave number of frames or
pictures the camera can capture in a second; higher the number smoother the resulting
video is but since we only captured still images this number was kept at constant 25 fps.
The gain value however changes the sensitivity of the lens; higher the gain value, more
sensitive the camera is, but while doing so the noises also increases resulting in much
lower quality images which is why the gain value was kept at ”zero” for this study. Even
though the image resolution of InGaAs camera is much lower, 640×512 pixels, these
cameras are much more sensitive to luminescene signal of c­Si and much faster com­
pared to modified digital Si based camera making it the better choice between the two.
µ­manager was the software which was used to capture images using the InGaAs camera
and the longest exposure time it could go was 1s.
2.2.2
Camera filters and irradiance condition
The luminescence signal range of silicon is between 800nm to 1400nm, much of the sig­
nal before 800nm counts as noise in EL imaging of a c­Si solar module. And since, the
Si based camera has higher sensitivity towards the light with wavelength before 800nm,
external source of lights can affect the quality of image that can be taken due to presence
of noise which can be said for InGaAs camera for light beyond wavelength of 1700nm.
But this can be avoided with the use of proper filters to block unnecessary lights. A sets of
both long pass as well as band pass filters can be used to avoid or reduce the noise from
external light as much as possible. A long pass filter cuts light before the given wavelength
whereas the band pass only lets light with certain wavelength to pass through. For exam­
ple a long pass filter of 800nm will cut almost all light that has wavelength less than 800nm
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
5
==PAGE:15==
2.3. SPECTRA INVOLVED DURING EL IMAGING
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
and lets pass light with higher wavelength while a band pass filter of 800nm will only let
light with 800nm to pass through almost completely cutting the light with other wavelength.
For the experiment, long pass filter of 800nm, 950nm and 1000nm were used in the Si
based camera and for the InGaAs camera, a long pass filter of 950nm and a band pass fil­
ter of 1150­25nm (i.e. it lets pass light with wavelength of 1150nm with range of ±12.5nm).
The indoors image were taken with all of these filters and without any filters for a base
reference to compare with. For the outdoors, a stack of all 3 filters was used for Si based
camera as the noise would be needed to reduce as much as possible due to the type
of sensor. As for the InGaAs camera both long pass and band pass filters were used
separately. The spectrum of the camera sensor along with the spectrum of c­Si is shown
in fig. 2.4
Four different irradiance condition were chosen for the experiment, three of which were
indoors and one was outdoors. These three irradiance condition for the indoors were:
• Dark room: All the lights are off and the curtains are closed
• Medium room: Only the light are on with curtains closed
• Bright room: All lights are on along with all windows and curtains open
Whereas for the outdoors, overcast condition at evening was chosen as the irradiance
during that time would be lower compared to a clear sunny day. More details about the
spectra involved in the EL imaging is written in section 2.3.
2.3
Spectra involved during EL imaging
Figure 2.4: The electroluminescence chart of the camera sensor along with the c­Si lu­
minescence spectrum. The left axis is for the camera sensors and the right one is for
the c­Si spectrum. The green shaded region area in the chart is the wavelength of light
the bandpass filter lets pass (1150nm­25nm) through. The faint orange shaded region
is the wavelength of light that longpass filter of 850nm cuts out, remaining light of higher
wavelength passes through.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
6
==PAGE:16==
2.3. SPECTRA INVOLVED DURING EL IMAGING
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
To avoid letting the light of wavelength other than the ones in the range of c­Si lumines­
cence spectra filters are used. This helps to reduce the noise which would have otherwise
be seen in the final EL image affecting the image quality.The longpass filters of 850nm,
950nm, and 1000nm doesn’t seem to cut much of the c­Si spectra when the image is
taken so not much details are expected to be lost if they are even lost at the first place.
But for the bandpass filter,much of the c­Si luminescence spectra is also cut by the band­
pass filter which might also mean loss of some details. This will be interesting to see if
any details are lost when either of the filters are used for imaging. This will be done by
comparing the images taken with filters to the images taken in dark room without any filter.
The c­Si spectra is based on IEA reports on EL and IR whereas the InGaAs camera spec­
tra is given by raptor camera datasheet. The Si based sensor is an assumed spectrum
but it closely follows the spectrum laid out in the literatures[7].
Figure 2.5: The light spectrum of led light (secondary axis) compared to the spectrum of
a bright room. The led light spectrum is similar to the light inside the lab which is why it is
used in place of medium irradiance room.
The irradiance value doesn’t give much information regarding the spectrum of light source.
For the same irradiance the spectrum could be wide depending upon the source of light.
Same is the case for medium room irradiance and bright room. The irradiance doesn’t
give much information other then the strength of light source, so additional spectrum chart
is also needed for further analysis. Although there is not much difference between the
recorded irradiance from the spectrum chart shown in fig. 2.5, its quite clear that the
spectrum of bright room is much wider. This means that for bright room some additional
image processing might be needed to be done in order to get the final El image. The
secondary axis is used because the disparity in the intensity counts is very big and without
the secondary axis the LED light spectrum is not visible at all in the chart.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
7
==PAGE:17==
2.4. IMAGE PROCESSING
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
Figure 2.6: The light spectrum of bright room (secondary axis) compared to the light
spectrum on a overcast day outdoors.
The range of the bright room spectrum is almost as equal to the range of outdoors spec­
trum but the disparity in intensity count is also quite high like in fig. 2.5 which is why the
secondary axis is also used in this chart. This means that if the irradiance level is same
for both conditions then same imaging method and image processing will get same quality
EL image since the spectrum is somehow identical in terms of range. But if the irradiance
is quite high for outdoors, which is usually the case and that’s why the higher intensity
count chart, then regarding image processing, much more images might be needed to be
taken and for image processing and stronger optical filters might also be needed to use
to cut the extra irradiance as much as possible.
The spectrum chart is shown in order to show the difference between the LED light in the
lab and the sunlight (no matter how faint it is). Both spectrum chart and irradiance needs
to be checked for a better analysis. This difference in spectrum range could mean the dif­
ference between needing the extra steps to get final EL image even though the irradiance
might be same which is the case of medium irradiance room and bright room. Finally, the
spectrometer used to take the spectrum reading had its range only upto 1000nm which is
why the signal noise around the 1000nm is very high and should be ignored.
2.4
Image processing
Depending upon the factors like irradiance, bias level, filters used, and so on, the details
of captured images varies and while some images can be analysed right away some
might need further processing. The degree of image processing is determined by the
quality and the amount of details that can be seen in the raw images. Two methods that
are applied in this study were; background subtraction and equalization of histogram to
enhance contrast.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
8
==PAGE:18==
2.4. IMAGE PROCESSING
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
2.4.1
Background subtraction
Background subtraction is simple image processing technique, which as the name sug­
gests,removes or subtract the background image from the foreground image. The back­
ground image in this case was the image taken without any bias given to the module i.e.
the image of module without any luminescence emission which is subtracted from EL im­
age of the module which is the foreground image.
For this minimum two images are taken; one with EL signal which will be the foreground
image and one without EL signal which will be the background image. The EL image of the
module has the luminescence emission of the semiconductor material, c­Si in this case,
which lacks in the background image. Then when the the software subtracts background
image, what it does is it subtracts the respective pixels which are differed by the intensity.
Any pixel with constant or lower intensity is then removed from the foreground picture.
Since the EL image has the luminescence of c­Si as well which is absent in background,
the resulting background subtracted image is ideally a proper EL image of the module.
Figure 2.7: Averaging and background subtraction to obtainfinal EL image. For this image
total of 30 EL and 30 background images were averaged and subtracted
If the resulting image still doesn’t show the proper EL image of the module then the number
of images processed should be increased. In doing so, the images needs to be averaged
before the background subtraction. The intensity of respective pixels are averaged which
could help improve the quality of resulting image.
2.4.2
Histogram equalization
Every images taken, based on the contrast, can be either overexposed or underexposed
or be balanced. This is due to the factors such as irradiance, camera exposure time,
bias level, and so on. Every one of these captured images can be laid out in a histogram
based in the intensity of the pixels. While the overexposed images has histogram with
most of its pixels distributed at right side, the histogram of underexposed images has this
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
9
==PAGE:19==
2.5. IMAGE ANALYSIS
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
distribution at left side meaning the histogram is not balanced. This pixel distribution is
based on the gray value of the individual pixels which is further described in section 2.5.
Either way the contrast of images in these both cases are not so good i.e. the range of
pixel intensity is either quite low or quite high. The amount of details that can be seen
in these types of images with uneven histogram could be lot less compared to that of an
image with evenly distributed histogram. Histogram equalization is a function provided by
the software which evenly redistributes the intensities by stretching the range of image
which results in an image with much better contrast. While every histogram equalized
images won’t automatically be superior in quality it does helps in most of the cases where
the contrast is very low[12].
Figure 2.8: The background subtracted image in fig. 2.8 after histogram equalization to
enhance the contrast and see the image more clearly. A simple histogram equalization
can also improve the image quality making it more readable.
The irradiance outdoors is much higher compared to that of indoors even with the windows
and curtains opened producing higher amount of noises in the image. As for Si based
camera its sensitivity towards the c­Si luminescence range is much lower compared to
that of InGaAs camera. This results in higher amount of noise present in the image taken
by Si based camera than that of InGaAs camera for same irradiance condition (other than
dark room). And since the aim of the image processing is to remove the noises in the
images to see more details, both of the image processing techniques are used mainly for
the images taken outdoors and images taken by Si based camera.
2.5
Image analysis
Even though the quality of images are determined by the amount of details that can be
seen by the user, there are still much of the details that can’t be analysed by the human
participant alone without any use of tools or methods. The images taken in this study
is analysed based on the pixels. The distribution of pixels throughout the image and its
intensity to study the details of the image. The methods used for these analysis in this
study were; histogram analysis, and plot profile. While the histogram analysis gives the
overall picture of the image based on its pixel distribution, the plot profile gives a graphical
representation of a certain selected area, which in this case is a straight line in the image,
in the image which gives further information absent on the histogram.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
10
==PAGE:20==
2.5. IMAGE ANALYSIS
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
Histogram analysis
As mentioned in section 2.4.2, every images taken can be distributed in a histogram. A
histogram is a two­dimensional bar­graph like representation of the numerical data which
in this case is the pixel distribution. The X­axis of the histogram of image is the gray value
which ranges from 0 to 255 and the Y­axis is the pixels amount with respective gray value.
The gray value gives the brightness of the pixels where higher the gray value higher the
brightness of the pixel. The pixel with gray value 0 is dark (black) and 255 is the brightest
one (white) and everything in between is various shades of gray i.e. the left side of the his­
togram is dark area, right side being the bright area, and the middle being more balanced
area. So, the exposure of the images can be determined just by the histogram distribu­
tion. The underexposed images are skewed towards left due to higher concentration of
dark pixels whereas the overexposed images are skewed more towards right because of
the higher number of brighter pixels in the image. The images which has more balanced
exposure has the histogram which is evenly distributed along the X­axis.
Figure 2.9: The histograms of images in fig. 2.8, left side without histogram equalization
and the tight one after histogram equalization. The histogram skewed on left means the
image is underexposed which is in the left side fig. 2.8 which after equalization spreads
out to give more contrast to the image like shown in right side of the fig. 2.8.
With this information from the histogram, it can be adjusted for improved brightness and
contrast to improve image quality which is described in section 2.4.2 which doesn’t nec­
essarily means the resulting image will always be better.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
11
==PAGE:21==
2.5. IMAGE ANALYSIS
CHAPTER 2. METHODOLOGY
Plot profile
Figure 2.10: The plot profile of a selected area which is shown in the image on the right
side with yellow line. The encircled pointy sharp drop in gray values are due to the busbars
and gap between cells which are pointed in the image on the tight. These points are
taken as reference to count the busbars and see where the selected area is located in the
reference image. Then the fall on gray values enclosed in a rectangle are due to the cracks
as shown in the image on the right which are the details needed to be documented. These
fall on gray value depends on the severity of cracks, lower the drop darker the cracked
region meaning severe cracks and vice versa.
The plot profile is also a two­dimensional graphical representation of image based on pixel
distribution but of a more specific area in the image. The gray value in plot profile is given
in Y­axis while the X­axis gives the distance in pixels from top to bottom of the selected
area. With plot profile the change in the intensity of pixels or the brightness of specific
area can be studied which can be compared with multiple images. In doing so the subtle
details and changes can be seen between the images, in this case the difference in details
in the specific area can be studied which is not possible in just histogram analysis. This
helps to further study the difference of image quality based on exposure time, irradiance,
and so on.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
12
==PAGE:22==
3
Results
The results of the image processing and analysis are presented based on the type of
camera used for imaging. First, the images taken by Si based camera are analysed and
then the images taken by InGaAs camera and finally images taken by both cameras are
compared for image quality and their viability as well.
3.1
Si based camera results
The histogram and plot profile of the images taken at different conditions are compared
with a base image which is taken in a dark room without any filter. The images taken in
dark room will have little to none noise due to lack of external source of irradiance and
the absent of filters which means that the lens will capture every photons emitted by the
c­Si module giving a base EL image of the module.
Figure 3.1: Base histogram of image taken without filter in dark room at different exposure
time (in sec)
As mentioned in section 2.5, the image with low exposure tend to skew towards left while
the images with histogram that are more spread out through the X­axis are more balanced
in terms of exposure as well. The fig. 3.1 shows the histogram of the images taken with
different exposure time and the the histogram spreads out more evenly as the exposure
time is increased. The details in the image with the exposure time of 1s can be seen
hardly as majority of the pixels are dark due to being underexposed. With the increase
in exposure time the histogram is further spread evenly but it doesn’t necessarily mean
the image quality will always improve. Even though the histogram is not skewed in right
side as in overexposed image, distributed histogram means comparatively brighter image.
These brighter images could lose some details compared to less bright image and also if
13
==PAGE:23==
3.1. SI BASED CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
all the details can be seen in image with shorter exposure time, then the shorter exposure
time is preferred to save time as well.
Figure 3.2: Respective images of the histogram in fig. 3.1 with increasing exposure (in
sec) time from left to right
Figure 3.3: Base plot of image taken without filter in dark room at different exposure time
(in sec) with the selected region on right hand side
For a more comparative information of specific region, a plot profile is made which laids
out the pixel intensity of the specific region which can’t be seen in histogram. The plot
profile shown in fig. 3.3 gives the pixel distribution of the selected region shown in right
side of the same image. The encircled pointy dip in the line graph are due to the busbars,
and the gaps between the cells. Other than helping to follow the graph with the image,
these dips doesn’t really give much details. The actual details are shown in the rectangle
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
14
==PAGE:24==
3.1. SI BASED CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
region where the drop in the gray value denotes the presence of crack. The worse the
cracks, the higher the drop in the gray value which can be seen in the fig. 3.3 as these
drops shown in the rectangle region corresponds the crack in the image in right side.
Lower dip in the value of the gray value means the crack might not be as severe as it is,
which is why the images with exposure time of 1s and 5s can’t be used for final analysis as
the details given by these images are much less compared to that of images with longer
exposure time. The graphs of 15s and 25s exposure times are identical and also follows
the same to pattern of the graph given by longer exposure time of 40s and 60s along
with the drop in gray value. This means that no new details can be seen even though the
exposure time is increased after 15 seconds.
3.1.1
Filter difference results
The base analysis done from the images taken with no filters in dark room gives the ex­
posure time of 15 seconds. As shown in section 3.1, no new details can be seen in the
image even with longer exposure time and in the shorter exposure time the details are
lost. So for the study of filters affect in the image quality, 15s of exposure time is chosen.
Figure 3.4: Histogram of the images with same exposure time of 15s but different filters
in a dark room
Since the exposure time of 15s is taken after the base analysis was done, the histograms
of the images taken with different filters have similar pattern. As the cutting wavelength
of filters are increased the overall brightness of the image also decreases as these filters
cut more incoming light compared to the filters with lower cutting value. This can be seen
in the fig. 3.4, as the histogram of the image taken when the filter was 1000nm is in the
left side with lower concentration of pixels with higher intensity compared to the images
taken with the filter of 950nm, 850nm, and the one taken without any filter. If the external
irradiance is high then stronger filters can be used reduce the resulting noise.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
15
==PAGE:25==
3.1. SI BASED CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Figure 3.5: Plot profile of the images taken with different filters at same exposure time of
15s in a dark room with the selected region on right hand side
As seen in the histogram in fig. 3.4, the intensity of the pixels are higher in the images
taken with lower filter but the plot profile of every images compared follows the same pat­
tern i.e. no details are lost. The orientation of the camera was different when the images
were taken without any filters using Si based camera as they were not taken at the same
time. This resulted in the graph of the image taken without any filter to shift a little in left
side compared to others.
3.1.2
Irradiance difference results
Dark room vs Medium irradiance room
When the filters are used then there is not much difference between the final image taken
in dark room and medium irradiance room. When the indoor lights are turned on, the only
noticeable change in the quality of image is the visibility of the module frame which are
not seen in the image taken in dark room as seen in fig. 3.6.
The irradiance on the module when the lights are turned on is only 0.55W/m2 which
turned out that the filters used can cut comfortably to give a clear raw EL image without
the need of image processing.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
16
==PAGE:26==
3.1. SI BASED CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Figure 3.6: Side by side comparison of the image taken in medium irradiance room and
dark room with the filter 850nm at 15s of exposure time
But when filters are not used in Si based camera to take images, even the low irradiance
value of 0.55W/m2 will greatly affect the final EL image of the module. The noise is very
high in the final EL image as shown in fig. 3.7, which can’t be removed even after both
background subtraction and histogram equalization.
Not that any details can’t be seen, some of the cracks are still visible. The severe cracks
can be seen even when the noise is very high due to absence of filters while taking image.
The circled portion in the left side image in fig. 3.7 are the cracks in the module. Without
the use of filters, the exposure is high even when it is set to 1 second which can be seen
in the right side image of fig. 3.7. No details can be seen and the two white spots on the
image with 1s of exposure time could be glare or reflection on the module.
Not only much of the details are lost when filters are not used in medium irradiance room,
some information can be misinterpreted as well. The circled part in the right side image
of fig. 3.8 is a healthy region but the same region has dark areas same as in the cracked
area.The enlarged region shown in the square in the same image fig. 3.8, is a clear crack
even though not as severe as C­cracks, is not quite clear in the left side image.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
17
==PAGE:27==
3.1. SI BASED CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Figure 3.7: Final processed EL image at 0.625s and 1s exposure time in a medium irra­
diance room taken without any filters
Figure 3.8: Comparison of images taken is medium irradiance and dark room at 0.625s
and 1s of exposure time respectively without the use of filters
Bright room
The recorded average irradiance on the module in the bright room was 1.02W/m2 with
difference of 0.04W/m2 during the imaging. Also due to the positioning of the module
in the lab, there was a difference of 0.02W/m2 to 0.04W/m2 of irradiance across the
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
18
==PAGE:28==
3.1. SI BASED CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
module. This might explain the plot profile of the compared bright room images; 15s of
exposure time with 3 different filter. A quick comparison as presented in fig. 3.9 shows
that the image taken with the 850nm filter are darker than the one taken by 1000nm filter
which should be opposite should the irradiance be constant as the 1000nm filter cuts light
much more than the 850nm and when an external source of light is involved then the
aim is to cut as much irradiance as possible. Both histogram and the plot profile are not
compared as the result will be the same as in section 3.1.1. The only thing different in this
case would be the position of graph of image taken by the 1000nm filter that should have
been lower or on the left side which would now be flipped due to change in irradiance.
Figure 3.9: Side by side comparison of images taken at exposure time of 15s in a bright
room with different filters
All of these EL images in bright room are processed; first averaged and background sub­
tracted followed by histogram equalization to enhance the contrast of the image. As men­
tioned in section 2.2.2, the aim of filters is to cut the external irradiance which could in­
crease the noise in the final EL image of the module. Also as the base comparison done in
section 3.1, showed no change in the details of the final EL image,the next comparison is
between different exposure time while taking image with 1000nm filter. The image taken
at longer exposure time of 15s is compared with the one taken at shorter exposure time
of 5s and its plot profile is made and compared in fig. 3.10.
The plot profile shows no change in details between both exposure time. A qualitative
comparison done in fig. 3.11 also shows almost equally clear image with all the details.
Since there was no loss on details even when the exposure time was shorter in bright
room condition, 5s seems like an ideal exposure time even for when the irradiance was
higher compared to medium irradiance room. Instead, longer exposure time means the
image might get overexposed which also needs to be avoided making 5s ideal exposure
time in this case.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
19
==PAGE:29==
3.1. SI BASED CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Figure 3.10: Plot profile of EL image taken at 5s and 15s exposure time in a bright room
while using a filter of 1000nm along with the region on right side
Figure 3.11: Qualitative comparison of EL image taken at 5s and 15s exposure time in a
bright room while using a filter of 1000nm along with the region on right side
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
20
==PAGE:30==
3.2. INGAAS CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
3.1.3
Outdoor imaging
One of the main focus of this thesis was the outdoor imaging but the result of the imaging
done during the thesis period is not quite good for Si based camera. To cut the noise in
final EL image, all 3 filters were used at once as the optic density also would help to cut the
irradiance by some extent. The exposure time would be under 1s due to overexposure
and the shortest exposure time used was 0.1s. Even the images taken at the 0.4s was
overexposed and the next lowest times setting in the software was 0.166s, so the final EL
images are taken at 0.1s and 0.166s.
Figure 3.12: The final EL image taken outdoors by the Si based camera
3.2
InGaAs camera results
The next sets of images that are analysed are the images taken using the InGaAs cam­
era. This camera has fast response time with higher sensitivity towards the luminescence
of c­Si and lower sensitivity towards the visible light compared to the Si based camera
resulting in much better EL image quality. Like in section 3.1, first a base image quality
is set using the images taken without any filter in a dark room and then the images taken
with different filters and irradiance conditions are compared.
In fig. 3.13, the plot profile of the images taken at different exposure time as base im­
ages are compared, it looks like the irradiance of the image is very low for images with
exposure time less than 100ms. The intensity of the pixels are very bright compared to
others and it might look like most of the detail regarding the cracks on the module are
lost as the drops in the gray values are not so steep in other images with lower exposure
time. But another plot profile of different region shows the some details are actually lost in
the images taken by exposure time of 100ms as plotted in fig. 3.14. The rectangle in the
plot corresponds to the circled area in the image on the right. While on the images taken
with shorter exposure time, the busbar is visible but it can’t be seen in image taken with
exposure time of 100ms. This is due to the image being overexposed at longer exposure
time which also needs to be avoided.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
21
==PAGE:31==
3.2. INGAAS CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Figure 3.13: Plot profile comparison of images taken by InGaAs camera in a dark room
without any filters with different exposure time (in ms) with the respective selected region
on the right side
Figure 3.14: Plot profile comparison of images taken by InGaAs camera in a dark room
without any filters with different exposure time (in ms) with different selected region on the
right side
A side by side comparison of the raw images taken at the exposure time of 50ms and
100ms in the dark room without using any filter shows that 100ms image is overexposed.
The fig. 3.15 shows the encircled area in the left side image has some of the details due to
the composition of multi c­Si module. This details doesn’t really affects the performance
of the module but the same region and completely white in the right side image. Portions
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
22
==PAGE:32==
3.2. INGAAS CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
of busbars also disappears due to the luminescence of the module which is also shown
in the fig. 3.14. So for further comparison the image taken at the exposure time of 50ms
in a dark room without use any filters in the camera is taken as the base image.
Figure 3.15: Side by side qualitative comparison of the images taken at exposure time of
50ms and 100ms in a dark room without using any filters
3.2.1
Filter difference results
The long pass filter shows almost identical pattern only difference being the slight change
if pixel intensity, meaning that even though the image is less brighter compared to the base
image, the details are not much lost. Same can’t be said for the image taken when there
was the band pass filter in the camera. As expected, the BP filter cuts significant amount
of irradiance which might make it a bit difficult to see some crack due to low brightness.
The pattern of the plot profile is pretty much the same with the difference in the drop of
gray value. This doesn’t necessarily means the image is of lower quality but some details
can be misinterpreted so for BP filter the exposure time can be extended.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
23
==PAGE:33==
3.2. INGAAS CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Figure 3.16: Comparing plot profile of the images taken at 50ms of exposure time with
different filters; LP is long pass filter of 950nm and BP is the band pass filter of 1150nm­
25nm; in a dark room
Figure 3.17: Plot profile comparison of the images taken without filter at 50ms exposure
time and with BP filter at 200ms in a dark room. The image on the right side is the selected
region on the EL image.
When the band pass filter was used, the exposure time needed to be 200ms to get the
almost same irradiance level EL image that was taken in 50ms of exposure time when no
filter was used. fig. 3.17 shows that the details are not lost even when the band pass filter
is used as it cuts most of the luminescence signal of the c­Si. So not only the bandpass
filter filters out much of the unnecesary irradiance but the details are not lost as well. The
small left side shift in the plot profile is because of the slight change of orientation other
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
24
==PAGE:34==
3.2. INGAAS CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
than that the details are not lost and the image is also not overexposed. So for further
comparison of image taken using BP filter, exposure time of 200ms is selected.
3.2.2
Irradiance difference results
Dark room vs Medium irradiance room
The irradiance condition in the medium irradiance room when InGaAs camera was used
is same as when the Si based camera was used. The irradiance on the module due to
the lights on lab was 0.55W/m2, which as it turned out from the final EL image, doesn’t
affect the image quality even when filters are not used when the images are taken with
InGaAs camera. The only visible difference is that the module frame and some structure
of the wall mount can be seen in the final EL image but there’s not much change in the
details that can be observed.
Figure 3.18: Qualitative comparison of EL image taken at 50ms without using any filter in
dark and medium irradiance room
The external structures which were visible when no filters were used in medium irradiance
room are no longer visible when the bandpass filter is used. The sensitivity of the InGaAs
detectors are very low before 800nm and along with the use of bandpass filter the external
structures which were in the final EL image when no filter was used in a medium irradiance
room, are no longer visible in the final EL images as seen in fig. 3.19. The external source
of irradiance in the medium irradiance room is not high enough to affect the final EL image
of the module.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
25
==PAGE:35==
3.2. INGAAS CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Figure 3.19: Qualitative comparison of EL image taken at 200ms using a BP filter in dark
and medium irradiance room
Bright room
The weather of the bright room imaging day was a sunny day with some clouds which
resulted in the irradiance reading inside the lab with all curtains, windows, and lights on
to be in the same range while the imaging was done. Since the both cameras were used
in the same day for bright room imaging the irradiance reading on the module was on the
same range; around 1.02W/m2 with difference of 0.04W/m2 during the imaging and a
difference of 0.02W/m2 to 0.04W/m2 of irradiance across the module due to its posi­
tioning. Like for the bright room images taken by Si based camera, the images taken by
InGaAs camera are also processed to obtain final EL image.
The plot profile comparison of images taken with bandpass filter and without filter is iden­
tical even in the bright room as shown in fig. 3.20. No details are lost due to presence of
external irradiance as shown by the near identical plot profile. This shows that the lower
value of external irradiance doesn’t quite affects the final EL image of module as the qual­
ity and details in the image remains the same as seen in fig. 3.21. The irradiance at same
exposure time is higher when the imaging was done in bright room and this is due to the
image processing that was done which was not done in the images taken in dark room.
The orientation of camera was also changed in bright room to avoid the glare which shifts
some of the details regarding cracks off of the profile of dark room image. A careful look
in the plot profile shows similar trend in the plot profile of both image meaning no details
are lost.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
26
==PAGE:36==
3.2. INGAAS CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Figure 3.20: Plot profile comparison of the images taken without filter at 50ms exposure
time and with BP filter at 200ms in a bright room. The image on the right side is the
selected region on the EL image.
Figure 3.21: Plot profile comparison of the images taken without filter at 50ms exposure
time in a dark and bright room with the image of selected region on the right side
3.2.3
Outdoor imaging
The outdoor imaging was done before dusk in overcast weather condition. The high­
est recorded irradiance during the imaging process was 91.78W/m2 and the lowest was
63.80W/m2 with change of around 3W/m2 to 8W/m2. Since, the position of module
and the camera were adjusted to reduce the glare and reflection in the final EL image,
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
27
==PAGE:37==
3.2. INGAAS CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
both histogram and plot profile would not have given proper quantitative information when
compared to the base image selected in section 3.2. So, a qualitative analysis is done
instead by comparing the images side by side.
Bandpass filter
Figure 3.22: Side by side comparison of the outdoor EL image with indoors
The longest exposure time to take image at highest irradiance condition of 91.78W/m2
and still get details was 5ms which is compared with the base image in fig. 3.22. Given
that the cracks are not dark or crisp enough when compared to the base image, other
details are not lost and we can see same amount of information from the outdoor EL im­
age as well. The bandpass filter effortlessly cuts the unnecessary irradiance compared
to longpass filter as the exposure time didn’t went below decimal even at high irradiance
of 91.78W/m2. Not only the noise was reduced, the details were also not lost giving a
final clear EL image with most if not all details intact.
That being said the position of both module and camera greatly affects the final EL image
when outdoor imaging is done as seen in fig. 3.23. The white smudges that can be seen
in the middle image in fig. 3.23 are the reflections of clouds which clearly removed some
details from the image even in the almost same irradiance condition for same filter. An­
other additional EL image was also taken at 65.60W/m2 when the bandpass filter was
used and seems like the exposure time could be extended with overexposing the final EL
image which is the rightmost image in fig. 3.23.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
28
==PAGE:38==
3.2. INGAAS CAMERA RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Figure 3.23: Side by side comparison of the outdoor EL images taken with bandpass filter
at different exposure time at different irradiance
Longpass filter
Figure 3.24: Side by side comparison of the outdoor EL image with indoors
As expected the long pass filter was not as good as bandpass filter but it still managed
to get some proper EL image with almost equal amount of details. Severe cracks can be
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
29
==PAGE:39==
3.3. CAMERA RESULTS COMPARISON
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
seen with just a basic background subtraction and histogram equalization. Granted the
more fainter cracks needs to be looked carefully to notice but they are still visible. Even
though the reflection during imaging process when the longpass filter was used, couldn’t
be removed from the position adjustment resulting in lost details in and around those area
the details final EL image still had details in other areas not affected by the reflection which
can be seen in fig. 3.24.
For the same irradiance condition of 63.80W/m2, lowest exposure time of 0.3ms was
achieved until which we can still see the details in the EL image of module. Exposure
time of 2ms resulted in overexposed image and of less than 0.1ms resulted in under­
exposed image. For the irradiane of 63.80W/m2 it seems like the ideal exposure time
based on final EL image and the details that can be seen is around 1ms. This side by
side comparison of images at different exposure time is done in fig. 3.25 from which it can
be said that the EL image taken with 1ms of exposure time is better than the one taken
at exposure time of 0.3ms.
Figure 3.25: Side by side comparison of the outdoor EL images taken with longpass filter
at different exposure time
3.3
Camera results comparison
The InGaAs camera can take better EL images due to its sensor, than Si based camera
even though the latter one provides higher resolution but a comparison is done to see
the viability of Si based camera in conditions other than outdoors. The difference in the
resolution made the plot profile not possible to compare between the images taken by
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
30
==PAGE:40==
3.3. CAMERA RESULTS COMPARISON
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
InGaAs camera and SI based camera. Therefore instead of quantitative analysis, qual­
itative analysis is done to show some comparisons between the imaging of both cameras.
The first comparison is done between the base image taken in dark room at the optimal
exposure time mentioned in section 3.1 and section 3.2 with no filter to see the base
difference. Right off the bat, the contrast in the image taken by InGaAs camera can be
seen to be clear with the cracks appearing to be more darker and providing sharper image.
Not that the details are missing in the image taken by Si based camera but some areas like
the encircled one are definitely fainter in comparison. Though these can improved with
enhancing contrast, this comparison was done to see the differencec in the unprocessed
raw image.
Figure 3.26: Side by side comparison of EL images taken by InGaAs camera and Si based
camera in specified setting in dark room
After the dark room base image comparison, another comparison is done with the filters
used in the cameras to see the strength of filters to cut the noise out as done in fig. 3.27.
For this, bright room EL image is chosen which were taken using bandpass filter by the
InGaAs camera and 1000nm longpass filter by the Si based camera. Again the difference
in contrast is clearly visible as the cracked areas are darker in the EL image taken by In­
GaAs camera due to its better sensor compared to the SI based camera. But if images are
processed the difference pointed out in a circle in fig. 3.26 are now not much noticeable
and those areas can be seen easily in both images. Regarding the noise cutting capacity
of filters, though bandpass filter is superior than the longpass filter, for a controlled bright
room the difference was not as big as initial guess.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
31
==PAGE:41==
3.3. CAMERA RESULTS COMPARISON
CHAPTER 3. RESULTS
Figure 3.27: Side by side comparison of EL images taken by InGaAs camera and Si based
camera in specified setting in bright room
But of course if the irradiance is high enough then the image taken by the Si based camera
is not even comparable to the InGaAs camera as the former one couldn’t take a proper EL
image in comparatively lower irradiance while the latter one was able to take a detailed
EL image as shown in fig. 3.22, fig. 3.23, fig. 3.24, and fig. 3.25. Which is why the outdoor
image comparison is not done in this thesis as the image quality can be noticed from miles
away without much effort.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
32
==PAGE:42==
4
Discussion and Limitations
All of the image processing for this study was done using ImajeJ which is an image pro­
cessing software developed at the National Institutes of Health and the Laboratory for Op­
tical and Computational Instrumentation (LOCI, University of Wisconsin)[13][14]. Though
the software itself is quite convenient to view, edit, analyze, process, and so on, the op­
tions are still limited and most of the user defined functions can’t be done. There is a lack
of flexibility regarding the tweaks that can be applied by defining a parameter to process
and analyze the images which could have been accessed by the usage of other powerful
programming language such as Matlab and/or Python. This would’ve helped to improve
the quantitative analysis that was done in this thesis and can be improved upon. The
qualitative analysis done in some cases where the quantitative analysis was not viable,
is dependent upon the reader and it can be interpreted in many ways. This again can be
mitigated by defining a parameter beforehand using a programming language to opt for
quantitative analysis instead.
Regarding the quantitative analysis, it could have been improved upon. A properly de­
fined crop of the image after the perspective correction would have made the histogram
as well as the plot profile more precise and accurate. In terms of image correction, much
more could have been done. The Si based camera uses a wide­angle lens which creates
barrel distortion in the image which could have been corrected before doing the quanti­
tative analysis. The camera, as well as module angle, needed to be changed to avoid
the glare as well as reflection but in doing so the perspective also changes making it diffi­
cult to overlap the images for accurate analysis. Which again could have been achieved
by the use of script either in Matlab and/or Python. While talking about qualitative and
quantitative analysis, the signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) number analysis is missing in this
thesis scope. The SNR number could have improved some of the results and it would
have made the image processing much more descriptive.
Regarding outdoors imaging, it seems like the number of outdoor images and their anal­
ysis left much more to be done. Of course, the time and weather was the main factor but
one of the limitations regarding outdoor imaging with Si based camera was the rigidity of
the camera setting. In terms of exposure time of less than 1 second, the software digi­
CamControl was not as flexible as µmanager which resulted in a lower number of outdoor
images for Si based camera.
33
==PAGE:43==
5
Conclusion
The goal of this thesis was to see how much of the external light affects the EL imaging
of a module especially when done using a Si based camera as it is the low­cost option
compared to InGaAs camera which cost upto 40 times more. And in doing so, also make
a proper guide for the indoors as well outdoors imaging quality with regards the exposure
time, and filters for both cameras. A comparative analysis of both quantitative as well
as qualitative analysis are done for the images taken and the results are discussed in
chapter 3. A sets of images were taken for different irradiance conditions with different
exposure time using different filters on the lens which were then compared to a set base
image for proper analysis.
First talking about the images that were taken without usage of any filters and post image
processing, the Si based camera performed as good as the InGaAs camera but couldn’t
perform the same when any amount of external irradiance was added in the imaging pro­
cess. Without the usage of filters, from this study, the ideal exposure time for Si based
camera was of 15 seconds as longer exposure time didn’t added any new details in the
image and shorter exposure time lacked proper brightness to properly see the details.
As for InGaAs camera, an exposure time of 50ms was enough to get a clear detailed EL
image of the c­Si module with all the details. In terms of contrast, a simple histogram
equalization will make the quality of image taken by the Si based camera as good as In­
GaAs camera.
When filters were used in the camera, the initial speculation was that along with cutting
the noise, some details might be lost as shown in the spectrum chart. But that was not the
case for both cameras for both longpass as well as bandpass filters. Not only the noise
due to external light were minimized but the details were not lost as well. The image taken
with the highest wavelength cutting filter had the same details as the base image which
was taken without any filter in a dark room. For the Si based camera there was not much
change in the exposure time either even for 1000nm filter and even the exposure time of
15 seconds was not too long for it even in a bright room. The controlled irradiance of the
lab didn’t really affected the image quality at all when the filters were used leaving the ex­
posure time same as the base image. As for the bandpass filter used for InGaAs camera,
the exposure time needed to get equal amount of details and brightness was longer than
the base image which comes to be around 200 milliseconds. Given that the bandpass
filter only lets specific wavelength of lights, no details were lost while using the bandpass
filter as well which for this study was 1150nm­25nm. It seems like much of the details of
c­Si are seen around its peak luminescence wavelength even though the luminescence
ranges from around 800nm to 1400nm. This explains why the details were not lost even
though filters were applied that cut off the light with wavelength of 800nm as well as any­
thing but light with wavelength of 1150nm­25nm. For a more controlled irradiance level
condition like the bright room, same thing can be said although a proper image processing
should be done to get a final EL image. Even the Si based camera performed really well
in the bright room without losing any or none details for the same exposure time as dark
room.
34
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION
The irradiance outdoors on the other hand was rather different even though it was antic­
ipated. The Si based camera couldn’t produce a proper EL image even after image pro­
cessing in a comparatively lower irradiance level (around 77W/m2; less than 91W/m2)
compared to InGaAs camera. But the InGaAs camera performed surprisingly good even
in irradiance level at around 90W/m2. Both bandpass as well as longpass filter produced
comparable EL images with major details. For the bandpass filter the exposure time was
even longer than expected, 5 milliseconds, and with the longpass filter the exposure time
of 1 millisecond produced detailed comparable of image as well. This result of outdoor
imaging done by InGaAs camera was interesting as the literatures suggested to use sig­
nal modulation and higher number of EL and BG images to process for final proper EL
image when the irradiance exceed 90W/m2[2][3][4] as mentioned in chapter 1.
Finally, regarding the image processing, both background subtraction as well as histogram
equalization, a good rule of thumb would be to use it once the natural light gets involved
in the source of external irradiance. The light indoors didn’t affected the quality of image
at all once filters were used in the camera. This is due to the broad spectrum of natural
light compared to the lights in the lab. Although, the number of images that needed to
be processed for image processing varied in bright room and outdoors in this study. For
the bright room, processing just 3 background as well as 3 EL images gave the results
but for the outdoors the number of images were 30 in both cases for both cameras which
was enough to get a proper final EL image with InGaAs camera but for SI based camera
it was not enough. And, to check whether the higher number of images can improve the
quality of final EL image, the response time of Si based camera used for the thesis was
not fast enough.
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
35
==PAGE:45==
6
Bibliography
[1] IEC. Iec ts 60904­13 photovoltaic devices ­ part 13: Electroluminescence of photo­
voltaic modules.
[2] Reuter M. Werner J Stoicescu, L. Luminescence imaging of pv modules in daylight.
2014. URL https://doi.org/10.4229/EUPVSEC20142014-5DO.16.2.
[3] Guada et al. Daylight luminescence system for silicon solar panels based on a bias
switching method. 2020. URL https://doi.org/10.1002/ese3.781.
[4] dos Reis Benatto et al.
Drone­based daylight electroluminescence imaging of
pv modules. IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, 2020. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/
JPHOTOV.2020.2978068.
[5] Review of failures of photovoltaic modules. IEA­PVPS, 2014.
[6] Rebecca Jones­Albertus David Feldman Ran Fu Kelsey Horowitz Donald Chung
Dirk Jordan Woodhouse, Michael and Sarah Kurtz. On the path to sunshot: The role
of advancements in solar photovoltaic efficiency, reliability, and costs. 2016. URL
https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy16osti/65872.pdf.
[7] H.­Yamazaki T. Takahashi Y. T. Fuyuki, Kondo and Y. Uraoka. Photographic sur­
veying of minority carrier diffusion length in polycrystalline silicon solar cells by elec­
troluminescence. Applied physics letters, 2005.
[8] dos Reis Benatto et al. Sunlight variation study for drone­based daylight electrolu­
minescence imaging of pv modules. 2019.
[9] M.Köntges et al. Review on infrared and electroluminescence imaging for pv field
applications. IEA­PVPS, 2017.
[10] Goddard Bazzoli, Silverman. Low­cost electroluminescence imaging for automated
defect characterization in photovoltaic modules. 2017.
[11] Photo glossary. https://www.canon.com.au/explore/glossary.
[12] Shreenidhi Sudhakar. Histogram equalization. https://www.towardsdatascience.com/
histogram-equalization.
[13] Imagej news. https://imagej.nih.gov.
[14] Rasband W. Eliceiri K. Schneider, C. Nih image to imagej: 25 years of image anal­
ysis. Nature Methods, 2012. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2089.
36
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 6. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Evaluation of Outdoor ElectroluminescenceImaging Methods
37
==PAGE:47==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Risø Campus, Frederiksborg 399 building 130
4000 Roskilde, Denmark
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.solar.dtu.dk
