==PAGE:1==
Acousto-optic Sound Source
Localisation
Antonio Andrés Figueroa Durán
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Acoustic Technology, Department of Electrical Engineering
Ørsteds Plads, building 352,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3949
www.act.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Aim of this Thesis is to assess the viability of sound source localisation us-
ing the acousto-optic eﬀect as transduction principle. For this purpose Laser
Doppler Vibrometers are used as transducers. The localisation task is posed
ﬁrst as a Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival (TDOA) estimation and then as an opti-
misation problem. The latter is solved using both Tikhonov regularisation and
Simultaneous Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (SOMP).
Numerical and experimental results in an anechoic environment show that TDOA
allows for Direction-of-Arrival estimation when the source in the far ﬁeld with
an error below 3◦. This is applicable across a signiﬁcantly wide frequency band,
covering from 5 kHz to 20 kHz.
DOA estimation by means of optimisation techniques provides satisfactory re-
sults in the simulations. Nevertheless, experimental results show that the ac-
curacy in the wavefront model or correlated noise due to mechanical vibrations
make DOA estimation a challenging task. SOMP provides correct results that
are subject to the noise inﬂuence, and Tikhonov is not able to estimate the DOA
regardless of this.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Elektro in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering Acoustics.
Lyngby, 16-July-2021
Antonio Andrés Figueroa Durán
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to Efrén Fernández Grande and Samuel
A. Verburg Riezu, supervisors of this M.Sc. Thesis. Thank you Efrén for your
insight, guidance and support.
I really enjoyed our meetings, which I never
ﬁnished without feeling I had learned something new. Thank you Samuel for
you advice, knowledge and commitment as a supervisor. If I am writing these
lines on this document today, it is to a great extent thanks to you. I would also
like to thank Salvador Barrera Figueroa for agreeing to co-supervise this work.
During these weird times of face masks and online meetings one needs a home
more than ever. So thanks to everyone who was a part of this wonderful project
called ’Tecnocasa’. I will always remember our weekly dinners not just as a
gathering with ﬂatmates but with friends.
Thanks also to my friends, who added to this adventure. Those much-needed
bits of laugh, happiness and fraternity. This experience would not have been
the same without you all.
My deepest thankfulness to my family, who somehow managed to end up an
entire ocean away. Regardless of the city, the country or even the continent, I
felt supported and motivated, and I cannot be grateful enough.
Finally, not a second of this journey would have been the same without you.
You are in every word of this document and in every memory of this experience.
Thanks for your undoubted support, and thanks for always being there. Thanks
for just being you, Lily Cassandra Paulick.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
List of Symbols
c
speed of sound in the speciﬁc medium
c0
speed of light in vacuum
E
electric ﬁeld
G
Gladstone-Dale constant
H
dictionary of candidate DOAs
k
acoustic wavenumber
k
acoustic wave vector
k0
optical wavenumber in vacuum
L
number of frequency bins
L0
length of the beam under static conditions
M
number of measurements (LDVs)
n
refractive index
n0
refractive index under static conditions
n
additive Gaussian noise vector
N
number of candidate DOAs
p(t)
sound pressure in the time domain
P(ω)
sound pressure in the frequency domain
p0
static pressure
pt
total pressure
r0
position of the laser beam with respect to one
end
ry1y2(p)
cross-correlation function between signals y1
and y2
v(t)
apparent velocity in the time domain
V (ω)
apparent velocity in the frequency domain
v
apparent velocity measurements vector
β
DOA with respect to the x-axis
==PAGE:10==
viii
ˆβ
DOA estimation with respect to the x-axis
γ
speciﬁc ratio of heats
φ
phase of the laser beam
ϕ
angle between LDVs
ω
acoustic angular frequency
ω0
electromagnetic angular frequency
ρ
density of the medium
ρ0
density of the medium under static conditions
τ
Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival between LDVs
ˆτ
estimated Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival between
LDVs
θ
angle between beam normal and impinging wave
==PAGE:11==
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
List of Symbols
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
5
2.1
The acousto-optic eﬀect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
The acousto-optic eﬀect as a physical phenomenon . . . .
5
2.1.2
The acousto-optic eﬀect as a measurement principle
. . .
8
2.2
The acousto-optic beamformer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
The sound source localisation problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival (TDOA)
. . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.2
The optimisation problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Simulations
19
3.1
The beamforming pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.1
Plane waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Spherical waves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Optimisation problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Measurements
37
4.1
Measurement Set I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
Measurement Set II
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
5
Conclusions
55
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
The goal of a non-invasive measurement method in acoustics has been the ob-
ject of multiple investigations. The scattering eﬀect due to the reﬂections on the
surface of the transducers used in the measurement modiﬁes the sound pressure
ﬁeld substantially. Especially at high frequencies, where the wavelength is com-
parable to the dimensions of the transducer, the measurements are distorted
and need a correction to compensate for this phenomenon.
Microphone arrays are used to cover a larger measurement area, obtaining the
acoustic pressure at several points. The information from the transducers can
be combined, giving rise to sound ﬁeld reconstruction and source localisation
techniques. As is described in [1] and [2], these techniques are limited by the
distance between the transducers, giving an upper bound in the frequency range.
So-called spatial aliasing is a limiting factor that needs to be addressed when
measuring at high frequencies.
As an eﬀort to circumvent these two problems -scattering and spatial aliasing-,
Torras-Rosell, Barrera-Figueroa and Jacobsen (2012) presented in [3] sound ﬁeld
reconstruction techniques based on the acousto-optic eﬀect. This phenomenon
takes advantage of the interaction between acoustic sound ﬁelds and electro-
magnetic waves, and sets the basis for a new measurement principle. Therefore,
no transducer needs to be placed inside the sound ﬁeld, allowing remote non-
invasive measurements.
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
Later on, Torras-Rosell et al. (2012) described an acousto-optic beamformer in
[4], also based on the acousto-optic eﬀect. In this paper, the author shows that
spatial aliasing does not aﬀect the measurements when using optic techniques.
This is a consequence of the measurement principle, by which the measured
quantity is the apparent velocity. This magnitude is proportional to the inte-
gral of the sound pressure along the beam of light, being equivalent to obtaining
the beamformer output using an array with inﬁnite microphones. Thereby the
Shannon-Nyquist theorem is not a concern as it would be when using conven-
tional microphone arrays.
On the other hand, the fact that the acousto-optic eﬀect is a rather weak phe-
nomenon remains a considerable drawback of this measurement principle. In
particular, considerable high levels of sound pressure are required to be cap-
tured by the lasers or, at least, to have a large enough SNR. The work available
in the literature and the experiments done in this Thesis make use of Laser
Doppler Vibrometers (LDVs) as measurement devices. Since LDVs are meant
to be used for measuring vibrations this setup is also very sensitive to vibra-
tion noise. Finally, as is described in [3], the measurement method is based
on tomographic principles, meaning that there is no information on where the
wave is interacting with the beam. The lack of this data, normally known when
conventional microphone arrays are used, entails the introduction of an extra
degree of freedom in the problem.
This Thesis tries to solve the problem of sound source localisation making use
of the acousto-optic eﬀect.
To do so, a study of the number of LDVs and
their optimal spatial conﬁguration is carried out.
This is done for free-ﬁeld
conditions, where no reﬂections and scattering are considered. The source is
considered to be ideal, i.e. it generates a spherical waves in near-ﬁeld and a
plane waves in far-ﬁeld. These two models lead to two very distinct problems
in the source localisation task. Here having a source placed at a distance to
the lasers comparable to the length of the beams entails a much more complex
problem.
The techniques used to interpret the output of the vibrometers follow two ap-
proaches: on one hand, a comparison between the two outputs is made in ac-
cordance with the Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival (TDOA) estimation, providing the
Direction-of-Arrival (DOA) of the wave; on the other hand, the outputs are com-
pared to a dictionary that contains the estimated outputs of the LDVs when the
source is place in several candidate positions. There are many algorithms that
allow for putting this latter approach into practice, since it can be formulated
as an optimisation problem. Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (OMP) [5], Com-
pressive Sensing (CS) [6, 7] or Tikhonov regularisation are, among others, very
suitable methods for solving the aforementioned optimisation problem. In this
work, these methods are applied in both simulations and experimental results
==PAGE:17==
3
and their performance is assessed.
Additionally, as has been previously de-
scribed, the complexity of the source localisation problem when the source is
within the measurement domain may require extra information, and depending
on the output of the optimisation algorithms, the number of laser beams is also
revisited.
This Thesis is structured as follows. First, in chapter 2 the theoretical back-
ground is presented. Here the acousto-optic eﬀect is explained as a physical
phenomenon as well as a measurement principle. Then the source localisation
techniques are introduced, making a distinction between TDOA estimation and
optimisation problem. Throughout the simulations, presented in chapter 3, the
performance of the aforementioned algorithms is assessed. Here a preliminary
evaluation of how successful these methods are when localising the source is
obtained. This chapter is followed by experimental measurements, presented in
chapter 4, where the source localisation algorithms are evaluated in free-ﬁeld
conditions. Finally the concluding remarks, along with suggested future lines of
work, comprise chapter 5.
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Theory
In this section, the theoretical background required for a complete understand-
ing of the acousto-optic eﬀect is provided. In addition, a brief discussion on
diﬀerent interferometers and optic measurement methods is carried out. Then
the basics of sound source localisation are presented, where a distinction is
made between Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival (TDOA) methods and the optimisa-
tion problem that can be stated when comparing with a dictionary of Directions-
of-Arrival (DOA).
2.1
The acousto-optic eﬀect
2.1.1
The acousto-optic eﬀect as a physical phenomenon
The fundamental concept behind the acousto-optic eﬀect is the interaction that
occurs when ﬂuctuations in the sound pressure modify the electromagnetic waves
present in the domain. According to Torras-Rosell et al. in [3] this phenomenon
has been widely used in ultrasonic waves and underwater acoustics.
In this
paper acoustic tomography was also applied within the audible frequency range.
Here, the attenuation of the acoustic waves introduced by the diﬀraction in the
air is less signiﬁcant than at higher frequencies, allowing the application of
==PAGE:20==
6
Theory
the acousto-optic eﬀect. In [8] one can ﬁnd acousto-optic imaging applied to
ultrasound, from where a vast range of applications can also be developed.
Under adiabatic conditions, the relationship between the density of the medium
ρ and the total pressure pt can be written as follows
pt
p0
=
 ρ
ρ0
γ
,
(2.1)
with γ being the speciﬁc ratio of heats and p0 and ρ0 the pressure and the
density under static conditions. The pressure ﬂuctuation p oscillates around p0,
hence the total pressure can be expressed as pt = p + p0.
Gladstone and Dale (1863) presented in [9] the ratio between the density ρ and
the refractive index n of several liquids, including the air. This expression is
n −1 = Gρ,
(2.2)
where G is the Gladstone-Dale constant and depends on the liquid in question.
Whilst its value is not of high importance, the linearity of Equation 2.2 helps
with various simpliﬁcations.
Combining the previous equations 2.1 and 2.2, and taking into account that
under static conditions the Gladstone-Dale equation becomes n0 −1 = Gρ0, one
can ﬁnd the dependency of the refractive index with the acoustic pressure,
n = Gρ + 1 = Gρ0
 pt
p0
1/γ
+ 1 = (n0 −1)
 pt
p0
1/γ
+ 1.
(2.3)
This expression can be rewritten and expanded as a Maclaurin series with x =
p/p0 as the variable since the sound ﬁeld fulﬁlls |p| ≪p0 and x ﬂuctuates around
zero. Thereby,
n(x) = (n0 −1)(1 + x)1/γ + 1 = n(0) + n′(0)
1!
x1 + n′′(0)
2!
x2 + ...
= n0 + n0 −1
γ
x + (1 −γ)n0 −1
2γ2 x2 + ...,
(2.4)
and when it is truncated up to the second term, one can obtain a relationship
between the refractive index and the acoustic pressure that behaves linearly
n ≃n0 + n0 −1
γp0
p.
(2.5)
Equation 2.5 explicitly shows the acousto-optic eﬀect. That is, the ﬂuctuations
in the sound pressure p are reﬂected in the electromagnetic ﬁeld as changes in
the refractive index n.
==PAGE:21==
2.1 The acousto-optic eﬀect
7
In light of Equation 2.5, the measuring principle needs to account for the changes
in the refractive index. In order to do so, it is necessary to characterise the
electromagnetic ﬁeld, and express light as an electromagnetic wave E that fulﬁlls
the electromagnetic wave equation
∇2E =
 n
c0
2 ∂2E
∂t2 ,
(2.6)
where ∇2 is the Laplacian operator and c0 the speed of light in vacuum. One
can write the electromagnetic wave in the presence of sound as
E = E0ej(ω0t+φ(x,y,z,t))
(2.7)
under the assumption that the acousto-optic interaction is weak.
In Equa-
tion 2.7, E0 accounts for the amplitude and polarisation of the wave, φ(x, y, z, t)
represents the interaction with the acoustic ﬁeld, and ω0 stands for the angular
frequency of the electromagnetic wave. Weak acousto-optic interaction implies
that the following condition is satisﬁed

1
n
∂n
∂t T
 ≪1,
(2.8)
where T = 2π/ω0 is the period of the electromagnetic wave. Therefore, the
electromagnetic angular frequency ω0 needs to be much larger than the acous-
tic angular frequency (see Appendix B in [3]), and this is always valid within
the audible frequency range. Under such conditions, the interaction between the
acoustic and the electromagnetic ﬁeld is only seen in the phase of the wave, leav-
ing the amplitude unmodiﬁed. This is reﬂected in the term φ in Equation 2.7.
In other words, the phase of an electromagnetic wave is aﬀected by the changes
in the density of the medium, which in turn aﬀect the speed of light, and these
changes are directly related to the pressure. In vacuum the speed of light is at
its maximum and elsewhere, where the medium density is larger, the speed of
light drops down.
Inserting Equation 2.7 into Equation 2.6 leads to the expression for φ [3]
φ = k0
Z
L
ndl = k0n0L0 + k0
n0 −1
γp0
Z
L
p(x, y, z, t)dl,
(2.9)
where k0 is the electromagnetic wave number, L0 is the distance travelled by
the light following a path L. In absence of sound, the phase term is φ = k0n0L0,
which corresponds to the phase shift of a plane wave in a homogeneous quiescent
medium.
==PAGE:22==
8
Theory
2.1.2
The acousto-optic eﬀect as a measurement principle
Equation 2.9 shows that one can measure the integral of the sound pressure
by measuring the phase shift of the light beam. Several techniques have been
developed along the years that serve this purpose. As one can ﬁnd in the third
chapter of [10], there are three quantities that can be measured to assess the
disturbance of a beam introduced by the medium. These are
• the distance (displacement) between the points where the disturbed and
the undisturbed beam impinges,
• the angular deﬂection between both rays,
• and the phase shift.
The last case is of our interest. If this phase shift is due to the diﬀerent path
lengths, it can be captured by the Mach-Zehnder interferometer, being sensi-
tive to absolute changes of the medium density. In this type of interferometer
the phase shift is obtained by simple comparison between the disturbed light
beam with an undisturbed reference ray. Other options such as the Michelson
interferometer [11] were also considered, where the changes in the medium are
reﬂected in an interference pattern.
In this thesis the chosen measurement device is the Laser Doppler Vibrometer
(LDV). According to the Doppler eﬀect a frequency shift is introduced into the
beam if the object where it is reﬂected on is moving. This shift is measurable
by interferometry, i.e. the LDV generates an interference pattern between the
reﬂected beam and the reference beam with a modulation frequency of 40 MHz.
If the object moves towards the interferometer the modulation frequency in-
creases and vice versa. This information provides not only the velocity but also
the direction of movement. Mathematically,
v(t) =
1
k0n0
dφ
dt ,
(2.10)
where it is readily seen that in absence of sound the velocity is v(t) = dL0/dt
since φ = k0n0L0. That is, the velocity is proportional to the change in the
distance to the reﬂecting point. No contribution from the acousto-optic eﬀect
is measured.
On the other hand, if the reﬂecting surface is fairly stable, in
presence of an acoustic ﬁeld one can rewrite Equation 2.10 as follows
v(t) = n0 −1
γp0n0
d
dt
Z
L
p(x, y, z, t)dl

.
(2.11)
==PAGE:23==
2.2 The acousto-optic beamformer
9
This equation shows that the apparent velocity measured with an LDV is pro-
portional to the time diﬀerentiation of the integral of the sound pressure along
the beam. This diﬀerentiation can be circumvented by using the Fourier trans-
form as is further explained in the next section. The coeﬃcient of the amplitude
depends solely on the medium.
The integral of the pressure along the path L in Equation 2.11 explains why this
method is also called acoustic tomography. No information of depth is obtained
by the LDV, solely the integral along the line. This may be an inconvenience
once algorithms as TDOA are to be applied, as is explained in subsection 2.3.1.
On the other hand, the spatial aliasing linked to the Shannon-Nyquist theorem is
avoided. This is one of the most important features the LDVs allow for. When
using a conventional microphone array the distance between the transducers
limits the highest frequency that can be sampled. Conversely, performing the
integral of Equation 2.11 is equivalent to placing an inﬁnite number of micro-
phones along the path L, which in turn is equivalent to having a spatial sampling
frequency of inﬁnity. Therefore, no spatial aliasing is present in measurements
using acoustic tomography.
Another remarkable advantage of applying the acousto-optic eﬀect as a measure-
ment method is the absence of scattering and disturbance in the sound ﬁeld.
According to the fundamentals of this new principle, the acoustic measurements
are obtained indirectly by measuring the changes in the electromagnetic ﬁeld.
This is translated into potentially non-invasive measurements, in the sense of
the light beam not modifying the sound ﬁeld. Evidently, to take the most ad-
vantage of this method, the LDVs need to be placed outside the measurement
domain to avoid scattering from the devices, leaving only the laser inside of it.
Lastly, the fact that no devices are needed to be placed within the measurement
domain can be interpreted as a possibility of taking remote measurements. Only
a stable reﬂecting point where the laser is pointing at becomes necessary, allow-
ing for measurements in inaccessible places.
2.2
The acousto-optic beamformer
The output of a conventional Delay-and-Sum (DS) beamformer comprised of M
microphones is [2, 4]
bDS(θ) =

M−1
X
m=0
wm˜pmp∗
m(θ)

2
,
(2.12)
==PAGE:24==
10
Theory
where wm is the weighting coeﬃcient of the mth microphone, ˜pm is the pressure
measured at the mth microphone in the frequency domain, and p∗
m(θ) is the
complex conjugate of a theoretical plane wave arriving at the mth microphone
from a direction θ. Here the source is assumed to be in far ﬁeld. Therefore
the sound arriving at the beamformer can be modelled as plane waves and it is
suﬃcient to only analyse the phase mismatch between them.
As is stated in the previous section, Equation 2.12 is linked to spatial alias-
ing. This problem arises as a consequence of the limited number of transducers
utilised in the beamformer. The Shannon-Nyquist theorem states that the lowest
wavelength that can be sampled is twice the distance between the microphones.
Below this, artifacts are seen in the beampattern.
Since the origin of the spatial aliasing problem is the limited number of micro-
phones a mathematical solution is to substitute the sum in Equation 2.12 for
an integral. Hence, the ideal output of a beamformer is
bDS(0) =

1
L0
Z
L
P(x, y, ω)dl

2
,
(2.13)
when no delay is applied (θ = 0). Here the resemblance to Equation 2.11 is
clear. If one performs the Fourier transform of this latter equation,
V (ω) = jω n0 −1
γp0n0
Z
L
P(x, y, ω)dl

,
(2.14)
and combines it with the beamformer output, this leads to
bAO = bDS(0) =

1
L0
γp0n0
n0 −1
V (ω)
jω

2
.
(2.15)
Equation 2.15 shows the output of an acousto-optic beamformer. V (ω) can be
measured using an LDV. In order to aim at a diﬀerent steering direction, it is
necessary to change the position of the laser manually since the output of the
beamformer is only measured at θ = 0. That is, the direction which the LDV is
aiming at.
In Figure 2.1 two examples of simulated beampatterns are depicted [4]. The
output from Equations 2.12 and 2.15 are shown in (a) and (b) respectively. In
both cases, the source is placed at 0 degrees. To obtain the Delay-and-Sum
beamformer output, 19 microphones were displayed in a linear array with a
distance of 3.75 cm between them. Above 9 kHz, artifacts due to spatial aliasing
are seen. This is not the case for the acousto-optic beamformer. Here no aliasing
eﬀect is noticed regardless of the frequency.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 The sound source localisation problem
11
(a) Delay-and-Sum beamformer output bDS
(b) Acousto-optic beamformer output bAO
Figure 2.1: Examples of beamformer patterns. The aliasing artifacts can be
noticed in the DS beamformer. See also Figures 3 and 4 in Torras-
Rosell et al. (2012) [4].
2.3
The sound source localisation problem
The investigations performed in [4] are taken as a starting point for this Thesis,
but the aim of this work is to localise a sound source by using a low number of
measurements, e.g. 2 LDVs. Thereupon, it becomes necessary to characterise
the source localisation problem, and this can be done from several approaches
as the reader can ﬁnd in this section. These approaches are based on techniques
meant to be used with microphones and adapted to take advantage of the ben-
eﬁts of the LDVs, in particular the possibility of remote measurements and the
lack of spatial aliasing and scattering.
First, the Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival (TDOA) technique is presented, where the
estimation is based on a comparison between measurements. Then, the local-
isation problem is stated as an optimisation problem, where the measurements
are compared with a theoretical dictionary of Directions-of-Arrival (DOA) and
the most suitable candidate is chosen. In this second approach, the dictionary
is generated based on the knowledge of the analytical expression of the expected
output of the LDVs.
Finally, it is worth noting that when the source is placed in the far ﬁeld, only
the DOA can be estimated. This is due to the fact that far from the source
the sound ﬁeld is locally plane.
If the source is close enough to the LDVs,
a diﬀerent problem arises since the wavefront is not plane anymore, and the
distance is another variable to be taken into account.
==PAGE:26==
12
Theory
2.3.1
Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival (TDOA)
The Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival technique is based on the idea that the diﬀerent
transducers placed in the measurement domain receive a delayed version of
the same signal. This delay is introduced by the distance the transducers are
from each other and the position of the source, giving information about the
orientation of the source with respect to the LDVs. This assumption then allows
for comparing the signal received at the lasers and estimating the DOA.
The simplest scenario compounds two transducers and a single source in a free-
ﬁeld environment. Evidently, the complexity of the DOA estimation task be-
comes much greater when noise, reverberation or multiple sources, among oth-
ers, are considered. In this section, the techniques to obtain the TDOA are
presented ﬁrst. The relationship between the delay and the DOA is explained
in detail later on, since the approach changes depending on whether the source
is in the far ﬁeld or near ﬁeld.
The Cross-Correlation method
The simplest method of TDOA estimation is based on the cross-correlation
function between the signals. In this scenario only two sensors and one source
are considered, placed in a free-ﬁeld environment. The cross-correlation function
(CCF) between the two outputs of the LDVs y1(k) and y2(k) at an instant k is
rCC
y1y2(p) = E[y1(k)y2(k + p)],
(2.16)
where each output can be written as the sum of a source signal s(k) attenuated
by αn and an additive noise term vn(k), yn(k) = αns(k −t −τn) + vn(k), with
n = 1, 2 the corresponding LDV. t is the propagation time between the source
and the beam, and τn is the TDOA with respect to the ﬁrst laser, i.e. τ1 = 0
and τ2 = τ. Using lasers, one needs to take into account that the propagation
time t is not the same for each point along the beam, and depending on the
scenario diﬀerent approximations can be made. Details on this are given later
in this section.
Looking at Equation 2.16, it is clear that when p = τ the cross-correlation
function reaches its maximum [2]. Therefore, the TDOA can be obtained as
follows
ˆτ CC = arg max
p
rCC
y1y2(p),
(2.17)
with p ∈[−τmax, τmax], where τmax is the maximum possible delay between
LDVs.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 The sound source localisation problem
13
As an eﬀort to improve the performance of the TDOA algorithms, several
transformations are introduced in order to increase the robustness against non-
stationary signals. For that purpose, the generalised cross-correlation (GCC)
method follows the same aforementioned principles but in the frequency domain.
Hence, the formulation of the problem now becomes
ˆτ GCC = arg max
p
rGCC
y1y2 (p).
(2.18)
Here,
rGCC
y1y2 (p) = F−1[Ψy1y2(f)]
(2.19)
is the generalised cross-correlation function in time domain, and
Ψy1y2(f) = ϑ(f)φy1y2(f)
(2.20)
is the generalised cross-correlation function in the frequency domain, where
ϑ(f) is a frequency-weighting function and φy1y2(f) = E[Y1(f)Y ∗
2 (f)] is the
cross-correlation between the spectra from the LDV signals.
If the weighting coeﬃcients are set to 1, the GCC problem is identical to the
classical cross-correlation method. However, better results are achieved if only
the phase of the signals is considered. In this way, the robustness against non-
stationary sound ﬁelds is increased. Since the amplitude of the apparent ve-
locity measured with the LDVs is very sensitive to medium ﬂuctuations (cf.
Equation 2.11), throughout this work the so-called phase transform (PHAT)
has been implemented. This entails setting the frequency-weighting function as
follows
ϑ(f) =
1
|φy1y2(f)|.
(2.21)
Source in the far ﬁeld
Putting the focus now on how to obtain the DOA from the time delay, it is
necessary to distinguish between the source being in the far ﬁeld and in the
near ﬁeld. In the ﬁrst case, the sound ﬁeld can be regarded as locally plane,
and the wavefront is perpendicular to the direction-of-arrival.
Figure 2.2 shows an sketch of the DOA estimation problem in 2-dimensional
space. The two LDVs are considered to be identical, and the source is placed
far from the measurement domain. Therefore the wavefront can be modelled
as plane and forms an angle β with the x-axis. The x-axis is considered to be
in the same direction as one of the LDVs, taken as the angle reference -LDV 1
in the ﬁgure-. For the sake of simplicity the beams are perpendicular to each
==PAGE:28==
14
Theory
x
y
O
LDV 1
a
LDV 2
b
d
β
β
Wavefront
β
Figure 2.2: DOA estimation using two lasers with the source in the far ﬁeld.
other, and a and b are considered to be the distances between the origin and
the end of the rays.
If the position of the source is ranging between 0◦and 90◦, the wavefront ar-
rives ﬁrst at the points (a, 0) and (0, b). This case then is equivalent to having
two microphones placed at the aforementioned points, where d is the distance
between them. By trigonometry, the angle β is related to the positions of the
LDVs by
β = 90◦−arctan b
a −arcsin
τc
√
a2 + b2 ,
(2.22)
where c is the speed of sound in the speciﬁc medium.
Note that here the
distances a and b are independent of the the origin of the lasers and the length
of the beams.
If the LDVs are placed in such a way that the angle between them is not 90◦
but ϕ, a more generic formula can be derived. In this case,
β = 90◦−arcsin
b sin ϕ
√
a2 + b2 −arcsin
τc
√
a2 + b2 .
(2.23)
This can be used in cases where the lasers cannot be placed perpendicular to
each other or when several measurements are taken, covering diﬀerent angles
between 0◦and 90◦. The latter case is explained later on.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 The sound source localisation problem
15
Source in the near ﬁeld
If the source is close to the LDVs a diﬀerent approach needs to be used since the
plane wave assumption is not valid anymore. On the contrary, the wavefront is
more accurately modelled as spherical waves, meaning that the wavefront does
not necessarily interact with the laser at its end but at any other point along
the beam. According to the principles of acousto-optic tomography this point
cannot be determined.
x
y
O
LDV 1
a
LDV 2
b
Source
Figure 2.3: DOA estimation using two lasers with the source in the near ﬁeld.
Two diﬀerent situations can be modelled depending on the relative position of
the lasers and the source. Namely, the source can be within the measurement
domain, i.e. between the two beams; or the source can be outside this domain
when the lasers form an acute angle leaving the source aside.
Figure 2.3 depicts the ﬁrst case with two lasers at 90◦and a source emitting
spherical waves within the measurement domain. It can be seen that the ﬁrst
interaction with each LDV is not at the end of it. Therefore if Equation 2.23
is used an error is introduced since the setup is no longer equivalent to placing
microphones at the points (a, 0) and (0, b). Nevertheless, this expression can be
used to obtain an approximation of where the source is.
A better grasp of how this error behaves can be achieved by analysing the
diﬀerent positions of the source with respect to the lasers. If the source is along
the bisector the error is zero, regardless of the distance to the origin. On the
other hand, having the source towards one of the beams increases the error.
==PAGE:30==
16
Theory
The second case is shown in Figure 2.4. The LDVs are at ϕ degrees from each
other, with the source aside. Following the same reasoning as before, Equa-
tion 2.23 gives an approximation of the source position. Then other algorithms
might be used to reﬁne the estimation, such as the so-called optimisation algo-
rithms. These are presented in the following section.
x
y
O
LDV 1
a
LDV 2
b
ϕ
Source
Figure 2.4: DOA estimation using two lasers forming an acute angle with the
source aside.
If the equipment and nature of the measurement allow it, a third measurement
can be included, adding information that can be used to localise the source po-
sition more precisely. Algorithms such as the Multichannel Cross-Correlation
Coeﬃcient (MCCC) [2] can be applied in order to take advantage of the re-
dundancy between the measurements, but this lies outside of the scope of this
Thesis and it is proposed as an interesting future line of work to be investigated.
2.3.2
The optimisation problem
A diﬀerent approach to the source localisation problem is presented here. In
this section, the localisation task is posed as an optimisation problem where
the objective is to ﬁt the measured data with a dictionary of candidates. De-
pending on the considered problem -far or near ﬁeld- the candidates are simply
Directions-of-Arrival or 2D-positions.
The optimisation approach requires knowing the analytical expression of the
output of the LDVs, and this is the major diﬀerence with the already-known
TDOA method. In order to generate the dictionary of candidate positions or
==PAGE:31==
2.3 The sound source localisation problem
17
candidate DOAs, one needs to model the sound ﬁeld and the acousto-optic eﬀect
as best as possible. In this way, the performance of the method is expected to be
better since the measurements more closely resemble the dictionary. Following
this idea, the measurements can be modelled as a series of coeﬃcients that
weight the diﬀerent entries or atoms of the dictionary. Hence,
v = Hx + n,
(2.24)
where v ∈CM is the apparent velocity measured with M LDVs, H ∈CM×N is
the sensing matrix whose columns corresponds to the N atoms or candidates,
x ∈CN are the coeﬃcients to be obtained, and n represents additive Gaussian
noise.
The process of estimating the coeﬃcients ˜x entails solving Equation 2.24, but
in most cases N > M which leads to an ill-posed problem. In the following,
diﬀerent methods to solve this underdetermined problem are presented.
Least-Squares & Tikhonov regularisation
The simpler approach is the Least-Squares (LS) method. The corresponding
optimisation problem can be stated as
minimize
x
||x||2
subject to
v = Hx,
(2.25)
where ||·||2 stands for the l2-norm. In a general way, the lp-norm can be deﬁned
as ||x||p = (Pn
i=1 |xi|p)1/p. It is readily seen that the LS solution is the one
with the minimum energy, and this solution is granted given the fact that the
l2-norm is a convex function.
Even though the LS method is simple and eﬀective in most cases, when noise is
taken into account other approaches such as the Tikhonov regularisation provide
a better performance. Here, a regularisation term λ is introduced in order to
reduce the solutions that the LS criterion can reach, by limiting or shrinking
the space that is searched. The regularisation task can be stated now as follows
min
x
||x||2
s.t.
||Hx −v||2 ≤ε,
(2.26)
where ε is an upper bound for the noise norm [7]. Equivalently, making use of
Lagrange multipliers one can pose the problem in terms of the aforementioned
regularisation parameter λ,
min
x
||Hx −v||2
2 + λ||x||2.
(2.27)
==PAGE:32==
18
Theory
The regularisation parameter controls the importance given to ﬁtting the data
and the energy of the coeﬃcients, and needs to be determined empirically. The
most common methods are L-curve criterion and the generalised cross validation
(GCV). These methods aim at ﬁnding the optimal λ by ﬁnding the right balance
between the two terms previously described. Details can be found in [12].
Sparsity-aware models
In sparsity-aware models, the assumption is that most of the unknown coor-
dinates are zero. For instance, in an ideal DOA estimation task with a single
source only one of the multiple atoms of the dictionary corresponds to the true
DOA. Hence, the corresponding coeﬃcient has a speciﬁc value and the rest are
zero.
As has been stated, by choosing the appropriate regulariser one can promote
certain solutions over others. To exploit the sparsity properties of the model the
l0-norm is to be minimised, which by deﬁnition counts the number of non-zero
elements of the vector. Nonetheless the l0-norm is not convex, which does not
grant that the obtained solution corresponds to the global minimum.
In order to overcome the non-convexity drawback frameworks such as compres-
sive sensing (CS) are developed, where also suﬃcient incoherence between the
atoms of the sensing matrix is required [7]. It can be proved that fulﬁlling this
condition the l0-norm can be substituted by a l1-norm, which is the closest con-
vex norm that promotes sparsity. Consequently, the optimisation problem can
be posed as follows
min
x
||Hx −v||2
2 + λ||x||1.
(2.28)
Another approach can be seen in the so-called greedy algorithms, where the local
minimum is chosen at each stage. Note that this heuristic approach can result in
the algorithm not ﬁnding the optimal solution. In this project, the Simultaneous
Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (SOMP) is implemented.
At each stage, this
algorithm selects the atom of the dictionary with the highest correlation with
the measurements along all the frequencies simultaneously. The entries of the
dictionary are orthogonal. Applied to the sound source localisation problem,
SOMP selects a DOA corresponding to a source in every stage. In the case
studied, only one iteration is necessary since only one source is searched. More
details of the algorithm can be found in [13] and in section 3.3.
==PAGE:33==
Chapter 3
Simulations
In this chapter the simulations carried out during the project are presented. The
numerical results aim at showing the theoretical behaviour of the LDVs and the
acousto-optic eﬀect. These results work as a model which will subsequently be
validated through measurements in chapter 4.
The simulations of the sound ﬁeld captured by the LDVs were performed on
the software Matlab using symbolic variables to improve the accuracy of the
calculations. The function vpaintegral, which is used to evaluate the integral,
provides a relative tolerance of 1e-6 and an absolute tolerance of 1e-10 by default
[14]. Additionally, the results from the numerical calculations were compared
to the analytical solution when possible.
3.1
The beamforming pattern
Equation 2.11 is the analytical expression that represents what is expected as
the output of the LDVs. It is clear that a diﬀerent output is obtained when the
sound ﬁeld is formed eminently by plane waves or by spherical waves. Therefore,
a ﬁrst step in the characterisation of the LDVs is the simulation of a beamforming
pattern for each case.
==PAGE:34==
20
Simulations
x
y
L0
α
r0
k
θ
Figure 3.1: Sketch of an LDV placed in a generic position in a sound ﬁeld
characterised as plane waves coming from a single direction.
3.1.1
Plane waves
Analytically, when the source is far from the measurement point, a sound ﬁeld
can be expressed as a sum of plane waves. Each of these plane waves is repre-
sented by the expression P(x, y) = P0ejk·r, where P0 is the amplitude, k is the
wavevector, r is the position vector and j is the imaginary unit. If an LDV of
length L0 is placed in such way so its origin is given by a vector r0 and its beam
forms an angle α with the x-axis (see Figure 3.1), the output in the frequency
domain can be obtained by means of Equation 2.14.
The direction of the LDV can be expressed by the unit vector ψ = [cos α, sin α]
as illustrated in Figure 3.1. Hence, a point of the laser is represented by rLDV =
r0 + lψ, where l ∈[0, L0] is a variable that runs along the beam. The integral
of the pressure from Equation 2.14 is then
Z
L
P(x, y)dl =
Z
L
P0ejk·rdl = P0
Z
L
ejk(r0+lψ)dl = P0ejk·r0 ejlk·ψ
jk · ψ

L0
0
= P0ejk·r0 ejk·ψL0 −1
jk · ψ
= P0L0 sinc

k · ψ L0
2

ejk(r0+ψ L0
2 ),
where sinc(x) represents the so-called sinc function, deﬁned as sinc(x) = sin (x)/x.
Inserting this result into the apparent velocity expression gives
V (ω) = jωP0L0
n0 −1
γp0n0
sinc

k · ψ L0
2

ejk(r0+ψ L0
2 ),
(3.1)
==PAGE:35==
3.1 The beamforming pattern
21
which is the theoretical output of the LDVs when the source is in the far ﬁeld.
In order to have a better understanding of the meaning of Equation 3.1, it might
be helpful to analyse a simpler case. Assuming that the LDV is placed at the
origin of coordinates and the beam is parallel to the x-axis, i.e. r0 = 0 and
α = 0◦as Figure 3.2 depicts, Equation 3.1 results in
V (ω) = jωP0L0
n0 −1
γp0n0
sinc
kL0
2
sin θ

ej kL0
2
sin θ.
(3.2)
x
y
L0
k
θ
Figure 3.2: Sketch of an LDV placed in a the origin of coordinates parallel to
the x-axis with a source emitting plane waves.
From Equation 3.2 it is readily seen that when the source is perpendicular to the
beam, θ = 0◦and the sinc function reaches its maximum, leading the apparent
velocity to its maximum in consonance. On the other hand, if the source is
placed along the same direction of the beam, the apparent velocity is zero. The
physical explanation of this phenomenon can be explained by the direction of
incidence of the wavefronts. That is, if the wavefront arrives perpendicularly
to the beam, the integral of the pressure results in a constant since the wave
has the same phase along all the points of the laser. However, if the wavefront
arrives from the same direction the LDV is aiming at, the phase ﬂuctuations
at diﬀerent points of the laser lead to cancellations in the integration process,
resulting in a value close to zero. This is the fundamental principle on which
the acousto-optic beamformer is based.
Equation 3.2 also contains a phase term that varies according to the relative
position of the laser with respect to the source, reﬂected in the angle θ. This
phase shift can also be used as a cue to feed the source localisation algorithms
developed later on. Note that if the integral along the beam is performed with
l ranging from −L0/2 to L0/2, this phase term does not appear. This is due to
the fact that the phase shift introduced in one half of the laser is cancelled out
with the phase shift introduced in the other.
Figure 3.3 illustrates the beamformer output obtained from Equation 2.15 as
==PAGE:36==
22
Simulations
(a) Magnitude of the beamformer output.
(b) Phase of the beamformer output.
Figure 3.3: Beamformer output for a plane wave. The source is placed at 45◦,
and the laser length is L0 = 59 cm.
a function of the angle θ. The so-called beampattern is obtained by rotating
the laser so that its normal covers the range [−90◦, 90◦].
The amplitude is
normalised at each frequency component. In this simulation, the laser is placed
at the origin of coordinates, and has a length of L0 = 59 cm. The rotation is
performed with a resolution of 1 degree. The source is located at 45◦in the far
ﬁeld.
==PAGE:37==
3.1 The beamforming pattern
23
Figure 3.3 depicts both the magnitude and the phase of the beamformer out-
put. Above, the magnitude clearly shows the position of the source in agreement
with the result from Equation 3.2. According to this expression, every frequency
component follows a sinc shape, where the main lobe corresponds to the position
of the source. The secondary lobes are easily distinguishable and, as it was said
in previous sections, no presence of spatial aliasing artifacts is seen. As a func-
tion of the frequency, the main lobe becomes narrower according to a smaller
wave length.
Consequently the beamformer is more selective the higher the
frequency. Below, the phase of the beamformer output also provides informa-
tion of the position of the source, though it is less clear than in the magnitude.
However the phase shows a clear pattern that can be predicted and utilised in
algorithms that make use of a dictionary of candidates, such as Tikhonov reg-
ularisation or Simultaneous Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (SOMP). Therefore,
this information should not be interpreted as a standing-alone localisation cue
but a complement to the magnitude to improve the DOA results.
In Figure 3.4, the apparent velocity from Equation 2.14 is analysed for the case
previously described, where the laser is placed at the origin and the beam is
parallel to the x-axis (Figure 3.2). In this case, to ease the analysis, the am-
plitude has been normalised by its maximum. Above, the apparent velocity is
shown as a function of the angle for diﬀerent frequencies. As expected, the main
lobe is centered at 0◦and 180◦, illustrating the front-back ambiguity. Addition-
ally, the main lobe is obtained when the source is perpendicular to the beam
regardless of the frequency. As the frequency increases more secondary lobes
appear, and the crosses by zero can be obtained by looking at the sinc function
deﬁnition. Thereby, sin(θ)kL0/2 = mπ are the values that make the sinc zero,
where m = ±1, ±2, ... is a dummy index. Therefore the zeros of the apparent
velocity at a given frequency f are found at sin θ = mc/(fL0). As a matter of
fact, this relationship illustrates the dependency of the width of the main lobe
with the length of the beam. The longer the beam the narrower the main lobe
is, obtaining a more selective beamformer. It is worth noting that this would
hinder the localisation at high frequencies in a non-ideal environment, since a
very large angular resolution is required. The same expression can be rewritten
as f = mc/(L0 sin θ) to calculate the crosses by zero along the frequency as Fig-
ure 3.4 (b) shows. The spectrum of the apparent velocity can be seen as a comb
ﬁlter when the laser is not placed perpendicularly to the source, i.e. θ = 0◦.
The number of dips of the ﬁlter increases as the laser is rotated towards θ = 90◦.
Recall that due to the normalisation the amplitudes between the diﬀerent values
of θ are not comparable.
==PAGE:38==
24
Simulations
(a) Normalised apparent velocity as a function of θ.
(b) Normalised apparent velocity as a function of frequency.
Figure 3.4: Magnitude of the apparent velocity normalised to its maximum
captured with a laser with a length of L0 = 50 cm.
3.1.2
Spherical waves
If the source is placed at a distance comparable to the length of the LDVs, the
plane waves assumption does not model the sound ﬁeld accurately. Instead the
waves can be considered spherical, and the source would be ideally regarded as
==PAGE:39==
3.1 The beamforming pattern
25
a point in the space. Mathematically, a spherical wave can be written as
P(x, y) = A
r ejk·r,
where r is the distance to the source and A is a constant related to the amplitude
of the wave given in Pa · m.
If a similar analysis as before is performed, the integral of the pressure from
Equation 2.14 cannot be solved analytically for spherical waves. Therefore in
this project numeral methods have been used to overcome this drawback. The
vpaintegral function in Matlab was utilised.
Figure 3.5 illustrates the numerical results when a point source is placed close
to the LDV. The laser has a length of L0 = 59 cm and the source is placed at
0◦, 80 cm away from the origin of the laser. The implementation was validated
by placing the point source in the far ﬁeld obtaining a similar beampattern as
the one depicted in Figure 3.3 with the main lobe at 0◦, showing that the sound
ﬁeld from a point source in the far ﬁeld can be regarded as locally plane waves.
As before, Figure 3.5 shows both magnitude and phase of the beamformer out-
put. Here, the front-rear ambiguity is resolved since the sound ﬁeld presents
more energy close to the source. The main lobe is slightly shifted, and this can
be explained by knowing that the origin of the LDV is placed at one end of
the beam. Therefore, when θ = 0◦the laser is shifted towards one side and
the energy does not arrive equally at every point of the ray. This also modiﬁes
the shape of the main lobe in the beampattern, and the sinc function does not
describe the ideal beamformer output as with plane waves (cf. Figure 3.3). The
smearing eﬀect seen along the main lobe is due to the spherical wavefront sym-
metry, which cause the integral of the pressure from Equation 2.11 to not give
a clear maximum as was seen with plane waves, when the wavefront and beam
symmetry correspond. In order to improve these results the shape of the beam
needs to be adapted better to the wavefront symmetry.
Comparing with the plane waves case, two major diﬀerences need to be remarked
from a computational point of view. First, the fact that there is no analytical
solution when using spherical waves implies that computing Equation 2.14 re-
quires a large amount of time. Conversely, when plane waves are used to model
the sound ﬁeld, Equation 3.1 can be used. Second, two variables need to be
considered: distance and angle. If a dictionary of candidate positions is to be
created, the number of atoms is drastically larger than when only the angle is
taken into account. These consequences make the spherical wave model less
suitable for posing the source localisation task as a optimisation problem.
Various potential solutions to overcome the computational load of generating
==PAGE:40==
26
Simulations
(a) Magnitude of the beamformer output.
(b) Phase of the beamformer output.
Figure 3.5: Beamformer output for a spherical wave. The source is placed at
0◦with r = 80 cm, and the laser length is L0 = 59 cm.
a dictionary with such a dimension were considered. For instance, the scope
of the near ﬁeld can be reduced by reducing the length of the beam, which
allows for using a plane wave approximation. This however is to the detriment
of the beamformer selectivity.
Another option is to store the dictionary so
that its computation is not necessary. In this case only the predeﬁned atoms
comprise the dictionary, and taking into account that the length of the beam
also inﬂuences the solution of Equation 2.14, a diﬀerent dictionary should be
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival
27
generated for a diﬀerent laser.
On the other hand, this method allows the
algorithm to focus on the minimisation task, alleviating the computational load
considerably.
3.2
Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival
Whilst the beamforming pattern makes use of a large number of measurements
to localise the source, in this Thesis a localisation method with fewer measure-
ments is sought.
The ﬁrst approach to the source localisation task is to obtain the Time-Diﬀerence-
of-Arrival (TDOA) between the beams. As explained in subsection 2.3.1 this
method allows for obtaining the DOA when the source is in the far ﬁeld by a
simple comparison between the output of the LDVs.
The simplest case comprised of two lasers placed at the origin forming 90◦
between them and a single source in the far ﬁeld is considered. A schematic can
be found in Figure 2.2.
(a) Classical Cross-Correlation Method
(b) Phase Transform (PHAT)
Figure 3.6: Estimated DOA as a function of the source position. The ideal
result is a line at 45◦, marked here with a dashed red line.
Figure 3.6 shows the results of the DOA estimation using the aforementioned
setup. In this simulation the LDVs are considered to have a length of L0,1 =
93.0 cm and L0,2 = 88.7 cm in accordance with the measurements taken during
the Set I further explained in section 4.1.
Equation 2.22 is used to obtain
the LDV outputs. An additive Gaussian noise has been added at the output
of the LDVs, obtaining a SNR of 5 dB. The considered frequency bandwidth
encompasses the range from 3 kHz to 15 kHz.
Note that the Gaussian noise added here is uncorrelated with the apparent ve-
==PAGE:42==
28
Simulations
locity, which eases the DOA estimation once the cross-correlation is performed.
This is not the case when measurements in real life are carried out. Here the
inﬂuence of mechanical vibrations and scattering eﬀects are partially correlated
with the source, introducing a correlated component in the noise.
A better
model of the noise is needed if these elements are to be taken into account.
Figure 3.6 (a), on the left, illustrates the results when using the so-called Clas-
sical Cross-Correlation method. That is, the frequency-weighting function from
Equation 2.20 is set to 1, taking both magnitude and phase into account. The
results diﬀer from the ideal DOA estimation, and this can be explained by
analysing the cross-correlation function, depicted in Figure 3.7 (a). This ﬁgure
shows the cross-correlation function when a source is placed at β = 18◦. Here,
a peak is seen at τ = 0 s with a similar if not larger amplitude than the peak
around τ = 18 ms. This may lead the algorithm to estimate the DOA at 45◦,
which corresponds to τ = 0 s.
On the other hand, when the phase transform is implemented the algorithm
becomes much more robust towards low SNR values.
SNRs around −14 dB
are necessary to mislead the algorithm towards wrong estimations. The better
performance of the PHAT method is readily seen in Figure 3.6 (b), where the
estimated DOA is very close to the true position of the source; and in Figure 3.7
(b), where the peak at τ = 18 ms is easily distinguishable as the maximum, in
addition to much larger values of the overall cross-correlation function.
From the presented results one can conclude that the phase information is of
great help in the source localisation task, whilst the magnitude of the apparent
velocity can lead the algorithm to wrong DOA estimations.
This is mainly
caused by the non-stationary nature of the signal, introduced in this case by the
Gaussian noise.
To improve the accuracy of the TDOA estimation from the cross-correlation
function, Gaussian ﬁtting is implemented in order to localise the peak with
higher precision. In practice the TDOA, τ, is an arbitrary value and the precision
of estimation that can be obtained from the GCC function depends on the
sampling frequency Fs. Therefore, it can be written as τ = τε +p0/Fs, where τε
is the fractional part and can be estimated as τε = ε/Fs, and p0 is the sample
index of the GCC maximum. According to [15], the best estimation can be ﬁnd
applying
ε =
ln rGCC
V1V2 (p0 + 1) −ln rGCC
V1V2 (p0 −1)
4 ln rGCC
V1V2 (p0) −2 ln rGCC
V1V2 (p0 −1) −2 ln rGCC
V1V2 (p0 + 1).
(3.3)
To gain a better grasp of the accuracy of the PHAT method, in Figure 3.8 the
absolute error is shown as a function of the true DOA for diﬀerent SNR values.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival
29
(a) Classical Cross-Correlation Method
(b) Phase Transform (PHAT)
Figure 3.7: Cross-Correlation function between the apparent velocity obtained
from the LDVs. The source is at β = 18◦.
The absolute error is deﬁned as
Error = |β −ˆβ|,
(3.4)
where β is the true position of the source and ˆβ is the estimation. As can be
seen, the larger error is around 0.5◦for SNR = −10 dB, and for the rest of
the curves the error does not exceed 0.2◦. Overall, the error is around 0.1◦,
presenting the TDOA with PHAT transform as a very reliable method.
==PAGE:44==
30
Simulations
Figure 3.8: Relative error of the estimated DOA as a function of the source
position for diﬀerent SNR values.
If more than 2 LDVs are considered, the estimated DOAs can be combined in
order to triangulate the source position if it is located in the near ﬁeld, or to
reﬁne the localisation when it is in the far ﬁeld.
3.3
Optimisation problem
Knowledge of the theoretical output of an LDV can be useful in this second
approach to the source localisation problem. As explained in subsection 2.3.2,
the localisation task can be posed as an optimisation problem. Here, the mea-
surements are compared to a dictionary whose atoms are the predicted LDV
outputs for several candidate source positions.
Throughout these simulations, the algorithms Tikhonov regularisation and Si-
multaneous Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (SOMP) have been implemented.
Similarly to section 3.2, the simulated setup is comprised of two LDVs form-
ing an angle of 90◦and a source placed in the far ﬁeld. The beams are located
at R0,1 = (20.1, 0) cm and R0,2 = (0, 38.5) cm with lengths of L0,1 = 72.9 cm
and L0,2 = 50.2 cm respectively. Both position and length are taken from the
Set I of measurements presented later in section 4.1.
It is necessary to mention that in the near ﬁeld case, where the sound ﬁeld is
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Optimisation problem
31
modelled with spherical waves, was not considered due to time limitations. In
this scenario, the atoms of the dictionary cannot be obtained from an analytical
expression but by means of numerical methods, meaning a larger amount of
computational load. However, some tests have been performed using a very
coarse grid of candidate positions in combination with approximated results
from TDOA expressions. This is proposed as a future line of work.
Tikhonov regularisation is applied along with the L-curve method, and its main
strength relies on the good performance against noisy environments, when the
SNR acquires very low values. On the other hand, SOMP exploits the sparse
properties of the setup and depending on how it is carried out some other
properties can be taken advantage of. Details are explained in the following.
Let vj ∈CM be the vector of measurements and Hj ∈CM×N the dictionary
of DOAs at the jth frequency bin. This dictionary is calculated by means of
Equation 3.1. Since the sound ﬁeld is modelled as plane waves the only variable
to take into account is the DOA. Therefore, for each frequency an atom is deﬁned
as
Hmn = sinc

kn · ψm
L0,m
2

e
jkn

r0,m+ψm
L0,m
2

,
(3.5)
where kn represents the wavevector for the plane wave impinging from the
nth direction on the mth laser beam. Since the direction of the beam is here
deﬁned through ψ, which is referred to the normal of the beam, the angle of the
candidate DOAs is θ ∈[−pi/2, 0] when the beam lies over the x-axis. This is
equivalent to having β ranging within [0, π/2], as it was previously deﬁned for
the TDOA algorithm.
The optimisation problem can be posed as follows,
min
x
L
X
j=1
||vj −Hjx||2
2
s.t.
|supp(x)| ≤K,
(3.6)
where K is the number of sources, L is the number of frequency bins, and
supp(x) stands for the support of the vector x.
Alternatively, the notation
||·||0 = |supp(·)| can be use to denote the size of the support, i.e. the number of
non-zero elements. This formulation of the optimisation task takes advantage of
the sparsity since it only allows K number of elements in the set of coeﬃcients
x. Nevertheless, the amplitude of the coeﬃcients are not necessarily the same
for every frequency even though the number of non-zero elements remains the
same. For this reason, a diﬀerent coeﬃcient is considered for every frequency
==PAGE:46==
32
Simulations
bin, xj, and the optimisation task is now rewritten as
min
xj
L
X
j=1
||vj −Hjxj||2
2
s.t.
||x1||0 = ||x2||0 = . . . = ||xL||0 ≤K.
(3.7)
The SOMP algorithm can be applied to solve the optimisation problem 3.7, and
it works as follows:
1. Initialise the residual r0 = [v1 v2 . . . vL] and the support s ∈NK. The
index p accounts for the iterations.
2. Obtain the orthogonal projection cj = ⟨rj,p,Hj⟩= HH
j rj, where HH
j
denotes the Hermitian transpose of Hj.
3. Select and store in sp the index that maximises PL
j=1 |cj|.
4. Compute the coeﬃcients xj(sp) = H+
j (sp)vj, where H+
j is the Moore-
Penrose inverse of Hj.
5. Update the residual rj,p+1 = rj,p −⟨rj,p,Hj(sp)⟩.
As a matter of fact, only one iteration is needed in this scenario since only one
source is searched for. More sources can be included but the coherence of the
signals need to be taken into account.
If the signal bandwidth is known to be broad, an alternative to step 3 is proposed
as an eﬀort to minimise the inﬂuence of outliers. For very low values of SNR,
large cj values are seen at angles that do not correspond to the true DOA at
a few frequencies. Since the introduced SOMP algorithm chooses the support
according to the sum |cj|, an outlier of such characteristics can mislead the
algorithm towards wrong DOA estimations albeit the correct DOA is selected in
a larger number of frequency bins. Therefore, if the third step consists instead in
computing the mode of the indices that maximises |cj|, a more robust algorithm
is obtained.
This is depicted in Figure 3.9, which represents an example of the support of the
SOMP algorithm when the source is placed at 6◦. Here one can see that while
there is a clear accumulation of points around the true DOA, the classic SOMP
algorithm chooses the incorrect DOA, as there are strong outliers around 0◦. On
the other hand the SOMP Mode algorithm counts the amount of points without
taking into account the strength of |cj|, providing the correct estimation.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Optimisation problem
33
Figure 3.9: Example of SOMP support when the source is at 6◦with an
SNR of 5 dB. Whilst the classic SOMP algorithm estimates the
DOA around 0◦due to strong outliers, the SOMP Mode algorithm
counts the number of occurrences estimating the DOA successfully.
Figure 3.10: Estimated DOA as a function of the source position.
Three
methods are compared, showing outliers spotted by the classi-
cal SOMP algorithm.
==PAGE:48==
34
Simulations
In Figure 3.10 the DOA estimation can be seen as a function of the true position
of the source. Here, Tikhonov regularisation, the classical SOMP algorithm and
the revisited SOMP algorithm base on the mode of the projection are compared.
The SNR value utilised in this simulation is 5 dB. Whilst for Tikhonov and
SOMP with mode the results are very close to the true DOA of the source,
the classical SOMP algorithm shows wrong estimations at very extreme angles.
Close to 0◦and 90◦, the wavefront arrives perpendicularly at one laser and
parallel to the other. As shown in Figure 3.4, the information when θ = 0◦or
close to that value has limited information in frequency, leaving the localisation
task to the other beam.
In Figure 3.11 the diﬀerence between the estimated and the true DOA is shown
for the three methods previously described. For SNRs of 5 dB and 0 dB Tikhonov
and SOMP with Mode criterion present deviations under 1◦, whereas classical
SOMP is mislead towards wrong estimations when the source is placed close to
0◦and 90◦. For larger values of SNR the overall performance of the three algo-
rithms is aﬀected negatively, in particular the classical SOMP. The performance
of Tikhonov and the revisited version of the SOMP are similar, with the latter
giving slightly better estimations when SNR is −10 dB.
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Optimisation problem
35
(a) Tikhonov Regularisation
(b) Classic SOMP Algorithm
(c) SOMP Algorithm and Mode criterion
Figure 3.11: Absolute error in degrees as a function of the true DOA for
the three methods: Tikhonov regularisation (top), classic SOMP
(middle) and SOMP Mode (bottom). The results are obtained
for diﬀerent values of the SNR.
==PAGE:50==
36
Simulations
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 4
Measurements
Throughout this Chapter the experimental results taken from two sets of mea-
surements are presented. The ﬁrst set aims at studying the viability of source
localisation by using only two LDVs. The algorithms presented in chapter 3
are applied.
The second set utilises a larger number of beams and has the
main objective of investigating the performance of algorithms such as SOMP
or Tikhonov regularisation as a function of the number of measurements. In
both cases reverberation was not taken into account, and the experiments were
performed under free ﬁeld conditions.
4.1
Measurement Set I
Setup
The measurements were taken in the Large Anechoic Chamber in Building 354
at DTU, which is a fully anechoic room of about 1000 m3.
The source was
a loudspeaker Type BM6 (Dynaudio, Skanderborg, Denmark) (cf. Figure 4.2
(b)) whose position was varied with respect to both the angle and distance.
The LDVs were placed so that an LDV Type OFV-505 (Polytec, Waldbronn,
Germany) is located at 0◦, with its beam along the x-axis, and an LDV Type
==PAGE:52==
38
Measurements
PDV 100 (Polytec) is parallel to the y-axis, forming 90◦with the other. Two ac-
celerometers Type 4344 (Brüel & Kjær, Nærum, Denmark) were used to monitor
the vibrations of the reﬂectors and the LDVs’ stand. The data was sent through
a Data Acquisition card Type 4431 (National Instruments, Austin, USA) to a
computer with the software Matlab, from where the measurements were con-
trolled. In addition a free-ﬁeld microphone Type 4133 (Brüel & Kjær) with
the corresponding microphone ampliﬁer Nexus were used to have an idea of the
relative levels and sound ﬁeld behavior.
x
y
r0,1
L0,1
r0,2
L0,2
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
S6
Figure 4.1: Sketch of the experimental setup and the diﬀerent source positions.
A sketch of the setup is shown in Figure 4.1, whilst Figure 4.2 (a) illustrates a
picture of the setup with the source in the position S6. The lasers are located
at R0,1 = (20.1, 0) cm and R0,2 = (0, 38.5) cm with lengths of L0,1 = 72.9 cm
and L0,2 = 50.2 cm. The simulations performed in section 3.3 were made based
==PAGE:53==
4.1 Measurement Set I
39
on this setup. The diﬀerent source positions are collected in Table 4.1. Here,
r is the distance to the origin of coordinates and β is the angle with respect to
the x-axis. The selection of the source positions are purely based on the spot
availability in the anechoic chamber.
r in m
β in deg
S1
3.505
6.8◦
S2
3.660
36.1◦
S3
3.680
46.5◦
S4
3.485
83.0◦
S5
2.000
47.5◦
S6
1.886
76.1◦
Table 4.1: Source positions.
(a) Measurement Setup
(b) Sound source
Figure 4.2: On the left, the measurement setup. The LDVs form 90◦with
each other and the beams are co-planar with the source.
The
source was moved around to measure several positions. The entire
structure was covered with absorbent material to avoid scattering
eﬀects. The source is illustrated on the right.
A well-known problem related to acousto-optic measurements is the noise due
to vibrations since the equipment is meant to measure mechanical vibrations
and not the acousto-optic interaction. By inspection of Equations 2.9 and 2.10,
it is clear that any variation of the beam length L0, i.e. vibrations, is translated
into noise. For this reason, a considerable amount of weight was included in
the setup in order to reduce the vibrations from both the LDVs’ stand and the
reﬂectors. The poles where the reﬂectors are mounted were ﬁlled with a bar of
brass to reduce the resonances of the structure, as well as rubber being used in
==PAGE:54==
40
Measurements
the joints to prevent the vibrations from the metallic grid propagating towards
the reﬂectors. Additionally, the metallic grid was covered with a carpet to avoid
the acoustic eﬀects of the cells, and the poles where the grid stands on were tied
to each other to improve their stability. Regarding scattering, even though the
entire structure was covered with absorbent material, the weights used to reﬂect
the ray modiﬁed the sound ﬁeld as the results show in the following sections.
The atmospheric conditions were measured throughout the days the experiments
lasted in order to ensure that these were stationary. The relative humidity was
RH = 30.5 ± 0.1 % and the temperature was T = 22.5 ± 0.1 ◦C, both measured
with a Humidity/Temperature meter Type 1366 (RS, Corby, England). The
atmospheric pressure was p0 = 755 ± 1 mmHg, obtained with a barometer Type
UZ-0001 (Brüel & Kjær). From these values, the density of air ρ, the speed of
sound c and the speciﬁc ratio of heats γ were obtained by using the equations
and coeﬃcients provided by Rasmussen (1997) in [16].
The loudspeaker was driven with a logarithmic sine sweep from 1 kHz to 20 kHz
and duration 30 s. 80 averages were performed in order to reduce the uncorre-
lated components of the noise. The recording was carried out with a sampling
frequency of fs = 48 kHz.
As a control measurement, the Impulse Response (IR) between the loudspeaker
ampliﬁer and the lasers was calculated. By doing this, it was found that the
LDV Type PDV 100 introduces a delay of 61 samples when fs = 48 kHz with
respect to the LDV Type OFV-505. This is relevant in case experiments that
involve Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival techniques are to be done. In the following
results, this is already taken into account and a correction was implemented.
Background noise and measurement example
To have a better grasp of the minimum apparent velocity that can be measured
with this setup, the background noise is shown in Figure 4.3. 20 independent
spectra were averaged in order to obtain clearer curves. Both LDV systems
were set to have a sensitivity of 5 mm/s/V. It is readily seen that the PDV 100
presents a lower background noise despite of the fact that it is an older device
than the OFV-505, which on the other hand shows a very ﬂat response along
the entire frequency range of interest.
These curves represent the minimum
detectable apparent velocity, which would be measured with an SNR of 0 dB
in the most ideal conditions. The corresponding minimum sound pressure level
can be obtained by means of Equation 2.11.
It is worth noting that if the
direction the wave is not impinging perpendicularly to the beam the integral of
the pressure will drop considerably.
==PAGE:55==
4.1 Measurement Set I
41
Figure 4.3: Background noise captured by the two LDVs with a sensitivity
of 5 mm/s/V. The length is speciﬁed in the Setup section. The
spectra were averaged 20 times in order to gain a clearer view of
the curves.
The vibrations from both the reﬂectors and the central stand where the LDVs
were laying are considered the main noise source while measuring.
For this
reason Figure 4.4 illustrates the velocity that was obtained through the ac-
celerometers. The data was averaged 10 times to smooth the curves and the
measurements were taken with the source on, driven with the aforementioned
logarithmic sweep. The vibrations of the main body of the central stand were
reduced signiﬁcantly from the directions of both x- and y-axis. Regarding the
reﬂectors, there is a noticeable peak in the post at 90◦at around 9.2 kHz which
corresponds to a wavelength of approximately 3.7 cm. Given the dimensions
of the posts, this peak can be attributed to a transverse resonance, which is
also seen in the other reﬂector but to a lesser extent. Overall, the level of the
mechanical vibrations are below the background noise level captured from the
LDVs in Figure 4.3, leaving the latter as the limiting factor. As a side note, it
is an acknowledged fact that the eﬀorts to reduce mechanical vibrations were
detrimental to the scattering eﬀects, despite the amount of absorbent material
used later on.
The analysis of the background and vibration noises leads to conclude that
reliable measurements can be obtained from approximately 2 kHz.
However,
the loudspeaker utilised during the experiments was designed with a crossover
frequency of 3 kHz according to the speciﬁcations. Above this frequency the
==PAGE:56==
42
Measurements
(a) Vibrations of the reﬂectors
(b) Vibrations of the LDV middle stand
Figure 4.4: Velocity of the mechanical vibrations obtained with the accelerom-
eters.
The measurements were taken at (a) the reﬂectors and
(b) the LDVs’ stand, in both directions x and y -0◦and 90◦
respectively-. The curves are the result of the average of 10 inde-
pendent spectra. The source was driven by a logarithmic sweep
from 1 kHz to 20 kHz.
acoustic center of the source is considered to be at the tweeter, which was
aligned with the beams and thus shared the same plane. Below this frequency
the source is not granted to be co-planar with the lasers. Regarding an upper
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Measurement Set I
43
bound for the frequency range, the coloration in the spectrum due to diﬀraction
from the edges of the source does not suppose a problem for the localisation task
when using TDOA techniques, but it can be a factor to be taken into account
when analysing the optimisation problem results.
Finally, an example of a measurement from the LDVs is given in Figure 4.5. The
source is place at position S2, forming β = 36.1◦with the x-axis. A comparison
with Figures 4.3 and 4.4 shows that the velocity measured with the LDVs is pri-
marily due to acousto-optic interactions since the level is comparatively higher
than the background noise. The dips in the apparent velocity are in agreement
with the position of the source, inasmuch as this is located close to the 45◦line,
from where the spectra are expected to be theoretically identical.
Figure 4.5: Example of the apparent velocity measured with the LDVs. The
source is place at position S2 (cf. Table 4.1).
The diﬀerences in level in Figure 4.5, such as the boost seen between 6 −8 kHz
for the PDV 100, are likely due to scattering eﬀects and the distance of the
source. The former was checked by analysing the IR, where late reﬂections were
seen to arrive at one beam with a delay that corresponded to the distance to
the opposite reﬂector; and the latter implies that the wavefront cannot be fully
regarded as locally plane.
==PAGE:58==
44
Measurements
TDOA results
In this section, the TDOA algorithm described in subsection 2.3.1 in combi-
nation with the PHAT transform is applied over experimental results.
The
frequency bandwidth covers the range from 5 kHz to 20 kHz, and the DOA es-
timation ˆβ is obtained with Equation 2.22.
r in m
β in deg
ˆβ in deg
S1
3.505
6.8◦
8.8◦
S2
3.660
36.1◦
35.1◦
S3
3.680
46.5◦
46.4◦
S4
3.485
83.0◦
86.0◦
S5
2.000
47.5◦
47.0◦
S6
1.886
76.1◦
78.1◦
Table 4.2: TDOA with PHAT transform estimation results for diﬀerent source
positions.
Figure 4.6: Absolute error |β −ˆβ| as a function of the true DOA. Black trian-
gles represent the positions far from the source. Gray circles are
positions close to the setup.
Estimated DOAs are presented in Table 4.2 and the absolute error simply de-
ﬁned as |β −ˆβ| is shown in Figure 4.6. The error increases towards the angles
0◦and 90◦, where the lasers are receiving the signals under very extreme condi-
tions. Even in the worst case, the error is of 3◦at a distance of approximately
==PAGE:59==
4.1 Measurement Set I
45
3.5 m. These results lead to conclude that DOA estimation algorithms based
on TDOA techniques are viable when the acousto-optic eﬀect is used as trans-
duction principle and the source is far from the measurement setup.
When
the source is closer to the lasers the error is expected to be higher since the
wavefront cannot be considered as locally plane anymore. This was illustrated
in Figure 2.3. Source positions S5 and S6 are closer to the LDVs yet outside
the measurement domain, where Equation 2.22 is still a good approximation as
seen in the gray curve of Figure 4.6. Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that a
considerable source of error is the methodology by which the source position was
measured. A higher precision in determining the true DOA will be translated
into a lower error oﬀered by the TDOA algorithm.
The utilised bandwidth covers a wide range. Reducing this parameter implies
reducing the provided information to the algorithm. This situation can be en-
countered when the source does not emit in broadband. Figure 4.7 represents
the error in degrees when the bandwidth is narrowed down to 1 kHz and 5 kHz,
starting in both cases at 5 kHz. The error increases when comparing with Fig-
ure 4.6, reaching its maximum for position S6 and ∆f = 1 kHz with 10◦of
deviation.
In general it is observed that the algorithm performs better the
wider the bandwidth is.
Figure 4.7: Absolute error |β−ˆβ| as a function of the true DOA. Two diﬀerent
bandwidths are tested, namely in black triangles the frequency
bandwidth is ∆f = 1 kHz, whereas gray circles represent ∆f =
5 kHz.
The accuracy of the TDOA method when the source is in the near ﬁeld is yet to
==PAGE:60==
46
Measurements
be investigated, as well as the setup depicted in Figure 2.4. These are proposed
as interesting future lines of work since they are the most common scenarios
when the algorithm is applied inside a real room.
Evidently, scattering and
reverberation are phenomena that need to be considered.
Optimisation problem
The experimental results from the optimisation problem solved via both Tikhonov
regularisation and Simultaneous Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (SOMP) are pre-
sented in the following.
Figures 4.8 and 4.9 illustrate the DOA estimation using the aforementioned
algorithms for positions S2 and S4 respectively. First, Tikhonov regularisation is
applied to every frequency bin, giving independent estimations as the frequency
varies. These estimations are depicted in Figures 4.8 (a) and 4.9 (a). Even
though there are diﬀerences between the results, none of them show a clear
pattern where the source is expected to be. Second, the results of the SOMP
algorithm are shown in Figures 4.8 (b) and 4.9 (b). The pattern is unaltered
when the source position is modiﬁed, meaning that the algorithm is not sensitive
to changes in the true DOA. This behaviour is also seen with data obtained for
the rest of the source positions.
The stated above allows to infer that neither Tikhonov regularisation nor SOMP
are algorithms capable of localising the source in this scenario. Various factors
need to be taken into account to explain the discrepancies between simulated and
experimental results. First of all, the setup is composed of only two lasers which
may not be enough measurements to solve the ill-posed inverse problem. A study
of the minimum number of beams needed to successfully localise the source is
carried out with the measurement Set II. Second, modelling the wavefront as a
plane wave or as a spherical wave is an assumption whose accuracy depends on
both the distance and how ideal the source is. Increasing the distance to the
source is a way of improving the plane wave model, and during these experiments
the source was not far enough in comparison with the length of the beams.
This was a factor only checked during the data post-processing. On the other
hand, the source is also far from being an ideal point source, and the edges
of the loudspeaker box (cf.
Figure 4.2 (b)) cause diﬀraction that is in turn
translated into a directivity pattern. If the source is not far enough, this will
be captured by the LDVs provoking the measurements to diﬀer from the ideal
dictionary.
In addition, the measurement principle is substantially diﬀerent
from a conventional microphone array in the sense that measurements are taken
along a line instead of at a speciﬁc point. This enhances the diﬀerences in the
measured wavefront with the plane wave model, since the pressure is less likely
==PAGE:61==
4.1 Measurement Set I
47
(a) Tikhonov regularisation
(b) SOMP Algorithm
Figure 4.8: DOA estimation results using Tikhonov regularisation (above) and
SOMP algorithm (below). The source is placed at position S2,
with a true DOA of β = 36.1◦. No recognisable pattern at this
angle is seen for neither of the methods.
to behave as a plane wave at every point along the beam. Hence, the integral
from Equation 2.11 is aﬀected.
Finally, the LDVs used in the experiments
were diﬀerent.
These diﬀerences are not considered in the simulations, and
can hinder the comparison with a dictionary. An adopted solution was feeding
the algorithms with only phase information in order to avoid level diﬀerences
==PAGE:62==
48
Measurements
(a) Tikhonov regularisation
(b) SOMP Algorithm
Figure 4.9: DOA estimation results using Tikhonov regularisation (above) and
SOMP algorithm (below). The source is placed at position S4,
with a true DOA of β = 83.0◦. No recognisable pattern at this
angle is seen for neither of the methods. Additionally, the results
from the SOMP are independent of the position of the source.
introduced by the LDVs, but the results still show that the localisation was not
possible.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Measurement Set II
49
4.2
Measurement Set II
Setup
The room used for this measurement set was the Small Anechoic Chamber in
Building 354 in DTU. The chamber has a free space of about 60 m3, which limits
the distance the source is placed at. The source was the same loudspeaker used
during Set I. The chosen LDV was the PDV 100 for the lower background level
presented in Figure 4.3. The beam was mounted on a turntable Type 9640 (Brüel
& Kjær) controlled from a Matlab routine. Similar considerations regarding
scattering and vibrations were considered as with Set I, but in this case the
structure rotates, making the vibrations more diﬃcult to mitigate. The setup
is illustrated in Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Measurement setup. The beam and the tweeter are co-planar.
The experimental setup was mounted on a turntable and ranged
180◦in steps of 1◦. The entire structure was covered with ab-
sorbent material to prevent from scattering eﬀects as seen on the
right.
The laser was rotated 180◦with a resolution of 1◦. In total, 181 measurements
were taken. The loudspeaker was driven with a 10 s logarithmic sine sweep cov-
ering the range 1 −15 kHz. 25 independent spectra were averaged to reduce the
uncorrelated components of the noise. The data was recorded with a sampling
frequency of fs = 48 kHz through an Acquisition Card Type 4431 (National
Instruments).
The source was placed at approximately 17◦, at a distance of 2.811 m. The laser
has a length of 59 cm, and the rotation axis was set to be the origin of the beam.
==PAGE:64==
50
Measurements
Beamformer output
The apparent velocity was measured covering a range of 180◦with 1◦of reso-
lution. The beamformer output was obtained according to Equation 2.15 and
represented in Figure 4.11. The frequency bandwidth covers the range from
3 kHz, where the crossover ﬁlter yields the acoustic center of the source to the
tweeter, to 15 kHz, where the logarithmic sweep ends.
Figure 4.11: Measured beamforming pattern. The source was placed at ap-
proximately 17◦.
By analysing Figure 4.11 it is clear that, despite of the eﬀorts put into reducing
mechanical vibrations, there is still a high noise level at low frequencies. From
approximately 5 kHz the main lobe of the sinc function is easily recognisable at
around 20◦.
The beamforming pattern was obtained in order to conﬁrm the validity of the
measurements before feeding the optimisation problem. Therefore the perfor-
mance of the algorithms can be assessed in an isolated manner.
Optimisation problem
Once the measurements are validated by the generation of a beamforming pat-
tern, the optimisation problem is attempted again with a larger number of
==PAGE:65==
4.2 Measurement Set II
51
(a) Tikhonov regularisation
(b) SOMP Algorithm
Figure 4.12: DOA estimation results using Tikhonov regularisation (above)
and SOMP algorithm (below). The source is placed at approxi-
mately 17◦. 181 measurements are used to feed the localisation
algorithm. 3 diﬀerent DOA estimation patterns are seen with
Tikhonov regularisation, though none of them is the true DOA.
On the other hand, SOMP algorithm shows a clear point cumu-
lation around the the position of the source between 10 kHz and
15 kHz.
==PAGE:66==
52
Measurements
measurements. First, the entire set of measurements is utilised in order to ver-
ify that such a task is solvable. Results are presented in Figure 4.12.
Here
one can observe that Tikhonov regularisation does not provide a correct DOA
estimation, resulting in three diﬀerent point cumulations that however do not
correspond to the true position of the source. On the other hand, SOMP algo-
rithm presents a clear pattern at around 25◦that corresponds to the true DOA
in the range 10 −15 kHz.
In the following the SOMP Mode is used as the optimisation algorithm and the
bandwidth is limited to 10 −15 kHz.
Figure 4.13: Absolute error as a function of the number of LDVs. The LDV
selection is done randomly from the 181 available measurements,
including one new position at every iteration.
An study of the number of measurements needed to localise the source is carried
out. For that purpose the SOMP algorithm is fed with an increasing number of
measurements, starting with 2 and adding one at every iteration. The new LDV
is chosen by a random process, avoiding repetition. Results of the absolute error
in degrees are shown in Figure 4.13. An error of about 12◦can be explainable
by combination of the uncertainty when measuring the true source position in
the laboratory, and the error introduced by not having the source far enough
from the LDV system. Errors below this value are found for a very few sets
of LDVs. The ﬁgure also illustrates drastic changes in the TDOA estimation
provoked by the inclusion of data from a single new beam. Scattering eﬀects
and mechanical vibrations are responsible for misleading the algorithm towards
wrong estimations.
That is, the apparent velocity from a new LDV can be
==PAGE:67==
4.2 Measurement Set II
53
signiﬁcantly contaminated by correlated noise, leading the algorithm away from
estimating the true DOA. From this we can conclude that, even though DOA
estimation is possible using the SOMP algorithm, it is not a robust method
against correlated noise.
==PAGE:68==
54
Measurements
==PAGE:69==
Chapter 5
Conclusions
This Thesis has dealt with the sound source localisation task using the acousto-
optic eﬀect as a transduction principle. Simulations were carried out in order
to have a better grasp of the performance of the algorithms, followed by exper-
imental work where they were tested in real life measurements. The scenario
considered throughout this study was purely in free ﬁeld and did not considered
the inﬂuence of reﬂections. This last chapter presents the concluding remarks
as well as suggestions for future work.
First, simulations to characterise the output of an LDV were made using both
plane and spherical waves. The analytical expression when a plane wave im-
pinges the beam is obtained and utilised later on during the generation of dic-
tionaries. In the case of spherical waves no analytical solution was found, which
enlarges the computational load signiﬁcantly.
Second, the estimation based on the Time-Diﬀerence-of-Arrival (TDOA) pro-
vides good estimations of the Direction-of-Arrival (DOA) when two lasers are
perpendicular to each other and the source is outside the measurement domain.
During the simulations an uncorrelated Gaussian noise was added at the out-
put of the laser beams, which the cross-correlation function is able to ﬁlter out.
Nevertheless, the correlated components of the noise due to scattering and me-
chanical vibrations found in real life experiments reduced the accuracy when
the source was close to the direction of one of the LDVs.
==PAGE:70==
56
Conclusions
The frequency bandwidth also seem to be an important factor in the TDOA
estimation.
Results from experiments show that a better localisation occurs
when a broader bandwidth is given. Deviations between 0.1◦and 3◦are achieved
for broadband and a maximum error of 10◦when the bandwidth was narrowed
down to 1 kHz.
The TDOA estimation was applied in combination with the Phase Transform
(PHAT). This method solely relies on the use of the phase of the apparent
velocity, proving that the phase information contains an important cue that can
be used in combination with the magnitude for localisation purposes.
Third, the source localisation task can also be posed as an optimisation problem.
For this case it is necessary to know the theoretical output of the LDVs, since a
dictionary is generated and matched with the measured apparent velocity. This
is the main diﬀerence with the TDOA method, where the signals are compared
to each other. The optimisation is performed via Tikhonov regularisation and
Simultaneous Orthogonal Matching Pursuit (SOMP).
Simulations of both Tikhonov regularisation and SOMP show promising results
for low values of SNR when using 2 LDVs. Again recall that no correlated noise
was added during the simulations. A revisited SOMP was proposed based on
the mode providing a more robust method against outliers. Only positions of
the source in the far ﬁeld were considered during these simulations.
Two sets of measurements were taken during the experimental study of the op-
timisation problem. In the ﬁrst case, with only 2 LDVs, no accurate results
were found. This is explained ﬁrst by the low number of beams utilised. Sec-
ond, the source was not suﬃciently far to consider the wavefront locally plane.
Additionally the scattering and vibration noise worsened the estimation.
The second set was taken with a single LDV rotating 180◦. A beamforming
pattern was obtained to verify the validity of the measurements in order to
isolate the algorithm performance. Even with the entire set of measurements
Tikhonov regularisation could not ﬁnd the true DOA, whereas SOMP presented
good results between 10 kHz and 15 kHz.
This was followed by a study of how many LDVs were needed in order to localise
the source successfully. The algorithm applied was SOMP Mode. The results
show that drastic changes in the estimation occur by the addition of a single
new beam. Therefore we can conclude that this method is not robust towards
the inﬂuence of noise and scattering. Also the positioning of the LDVs seems to
be crucial.
In summary, TDOA provides a reliable DOA estimation method even when only
==PAGE:71==
57
two beams are deployed. On the other hand, SOMP needs a very clean set of
measurements to estimate the DOA reliably. Although it is possible to localise
the source, improvements need to be done to achieve a better performance of
this algorithm.
There are many possible lines of future work. Technology is one of the major
drawbacks in the application of the acousto-optic eﬀect. The use of LDVs makes
the measurements very sensitive towards mechanical vibration, and a more sta-
ble device can be developed in order to obtain cleaner measurements. Similarly,
the laser beam presents a high directivity, and if a diﬀerent direction is to be
measured the beam needs to be manually steered. Finally, the idea of measur-
ing several directions at the same time entails being in possession of as many
LDVs, the cost of which is remarkably high. Splitting a ray into several beams
by diﬀraction is a way of reducing the number of needed devices.
Localisation in the near ﬁeld is another interesting line of work. By including
extra beams one can triangulate the source position or use the redundancy in
the measured apparent velocity to improve the results here presented with the
TDOA method.
In regards to the SOMP method implemented, the main drawback was seen to
be caused by scattering eﬀects and mechanical vibrations. Speciﬁcally including
a model of this diﬀraction in the dictionary would improve the results. Thus
a further study is suggested in regards to the improvement of the robustness
towards noise levels.
==PAGE:72==
58
Conclusions
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1] M. Brandstein and W. Darren, Microphone Arrays. Springer, 2001.
[2] J. Benesty, C. Jingdong, and Y. Huang, Microphone Array Signal Process-
ing. Springer, 2008.
[3] A. Torras-Rosell, S. Barrera-Figueroa, and F. Jacobsen, “Sound ﬁeld recon-
struction using acousto-optic tomography,” The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, vol. 131, no. 5, pp. 3786–3793, 2012.
[4] A. Torras-Rosell, S. Barrera-Figueroa, and F. Jacobsen, “An acousto-optic
beamformer,” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, pp. 144–149,
2012.
[5] S. Theodoridis, Machine Learning: A Bayesian and Optimization Perspec-
tive. Academic Press, 2020.
[6] S. A. Verburg and E. Fernandez-Grande, “Reconstruction of the sound ﬁeld
in a room using compressive sensing,” The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, vol. 143, no. 6, pp. 3770–3779, 2018.
[7] A. Xenaki, P. Gerstoft, and K. Mosegaard, “Compressive beamforming,”
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 136, no. 1, pp. 260–
271, 2014.
[8] G. Wissmeyer, M. A. Pleitez, A. Rosenthal, and V. Ntziachristos, “Look-
ing at sound: optoacoustics with all-optical ultrasound detection,” Light:
Science and Applications, vol. 7, no. 1, 2018.
==PAGE:74==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[9] J. H. Gladstone and T. P. Dale, “Researches on the refraction, dispersion,
and sensitiveness of liquids,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Soci-
ety of London, pp. 317–343, 1863.
[10] W. Merzkirch, Flow Visualization. Academic Press, 1974.
[11] P. Giacomo, “The Michelson interferometer,” Mikrochimica Acta, vol. 93,
no. 1-6, pp. 19–31, 1987.
[12] P. C. Hanse, Regularization Tools: A Matlab Package for Analysis and
Solution of Discrete Ill-Posed Problems. Technical University of Denmark,
2008.
[13] G. Chardon and L. Daudet, “Optimal subsampling of multichannel damped
sinusoids,” 2010 IEEE Sensor Array and Multichannel Signal Processing
Workshop, SAM 2010, no. 1, pp. 25–28, 2010.
[14] “vpaintegral Matlab documentation.”
https://se.mathworks.com/
help/symbolic/vpaintegral.html. Accessed: 2021-07.
[15] L. Zhang and X. Wu, “On cross correlation based discrete time delay es-
timation,” ICASSP, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing - Proceedings, vol. IV, no. 2, pp. 981–984, 2005.
[16] K. Rasmussen, “Calculation Methods for the Physical Properties of Air used
in the Calibration of Microphones - A Proposal for a uniﬁed Procedure to
be used among European Metrology Laboratories,” no. PL-11b, 1997.
