==PAGE:1==
 
Cultivation of Gracilaria in Danish 
estuaries- from spores to harvestable 
resources 
 
 
 
 
Masters thesis 
by 
Susanne Linda Nielsen 
s082981 
Department 
National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark 
 
 
Masters thesis, DTU,  Juli 2021 
 
Supervisors:  
Susan Løvstad Holdt (suho@food.dtu.dk) 
Mette Møller Nielsen (menie@aqua.dtu.dk) 
Peter Søndergaard Schmedes (peson@aqua.dtu.dk)  
 
 
==PAGE:2==
2
Table of Contents 
1. PREFACE 
4 
2. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
4 
DANSK RESUMÉ 
5 
SUMMARY 
8 
MOTIVATION 
10 
1. INTRODUCTION 
12 
1.1 BIOLOGY OF GRACILARIA 
12 
1.1.1. LIFE CYCLE OF GRACILARIA 
12 
1.1.2. MORPHOLOGY AND TAXONOMY OF GRACILARIA 
14 
1.1.3 MORPHOLOGY AND IDENTIFICATION OF SPECIES 
18 
1.1.4. FINDING A USER-FRIENDLY METHOD FOR IDENTIFICATION OF GRACILARIA IN DENMARK 
20 
1.2. CULTIVATION METHODS 
20 
1.2.1. OPTIMIZATION OF PRODUCTION MAY BE ACHIEVED BY DEVELOPING NEW METHODS OF 
VEGETATIVE PROPAGATION? 
23 
1.2.2. OPTIMIZATION OF PRODUCTION MAY BE ACHIEVED BY DEVELOPING NEW METHODS OF SEXUAL 
PROPAGATION? 
24 
2. AIM OF PROJECT AND HYPOTHESES 
30 
2.1. AIM 
30 
2.2. HYPOTHESES 
30 
3. MATERIAL AND METHODS 
33 
3.1. COLLECTING BIOLOGICAL MATERIAL 
33 
3.2. METHODS FOR MICROSCOPIC OBSERVATION 
33 
3.3. EXPERIMENTS 
34 
3.3.1. ASSUMPTIONS 
34 
3.3.2. ESTIMATING FERTILITY IN NATURE 
34 
3.3.3. IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION OF COLLECTED GRACILARIA SPECIES 
36 
3.3.4. SPORULATION - RELEASE OF SPORES 
37 
3.3.5. SPORE GERMINATION RATIO AND SPECIFIC GROWTH RATE OF SEEDLINGS 
40 
3.3.5. VEGETATIVE PROPAGATION 
43 
3.3.6. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 
46 
4. PRESENTATION OF RESULTS (AND DISCUSSION) 
51 
4.1. ESTIMATING FERTILITY IN NATURE 
51 
4.1.1. SEASONALITY IN FERTILITY 
51 
4.1.2. PHENOLOGICAL SIGNS OF FERTILITY 
52 
4.1.3. WHEN IS THE TIME FOR COLLECTING GRACILARIA FROM WILD POPULATIONS FOR SPORE 
RELEASE IN A HATCHERY.( ARE THERE MONTHS WHEN THE THALLI HAS THE MOST CYSTOCARP)? 55 
4.1.4. AVAILABILITY OF CYSTOCARPS - HOW MANY GRACILARIA THALLI WITH CYSTOCARPIC 
BRANCHES SHOULD I COLLECT? 
57 
4.1.5. SHORT RESUME 
58 
4.2. IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION OF COLLECTED GRACILARIA SPECIES 
58 
4.2.1. THE CUSTOMIZED EASY TO USE GUIDE 
59 
4.2.2. PRESENTATION OF COLLECTED THALLI FROM NYKØBING SJÆLLAND 
60 
==PAGE:3==
3
4.3. SPORULATION - RELEASE OF SPORES 
71 
4.3.1. DISCUSSION OF THE “NULL-RESULT” 
71 
4.3.2 SHORT RESUME 
79 
4.4. VEGETATIVE PROPAGATION 
80 
4.4.1. HOW DID GRACILARIA GROW IN NYKØBING MORS AND IN NYKØBING SJÆLLAND? 
80 
4.4.2. WHY WAS THE GAIN IN BIOMASS DIFFERENT BETWEEN THE TWO PLACES? 
82 
4.4.3.IN SHORT 
89 
4.5. SEXUAL PROPAGATION WITH CARPOSPORES 
90 
4.5.1 GERMINATION RATIO OF SPORES SETTLED ON THIN STRINGS AND THICK STRINGS 
90 
4.5.2. GERMINATION ON THE THICK STRING SEEDED SEMI-VERTICAL 
101 
4.5.3. WHAT COULD HAVE CAUSED THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN GERMINATION RATIO WITH 10°C 
AND 20°C FOR BOTH THE THIN AND THE THICK STRING? 
102 
4.5.4. THE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR LIGHT, TEMPERATURES AND NUTRIENT FAVORING 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE SPORES INTO SEEDLINGS 
103 
4.5.5. SPECIFIC GROWTH RATE OF GERMINATIED SPORES ON STRINGS 
104 
5. CONCLUSION 
111 
REFERENCES 
112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
4
 
1. Preface  
This report is a master´s thesis conducted at Technical University of Denmark, 
DTU, Lyngby, 2021. The report represent 30 ECTS points. The project is part of 
TangGro -a collaboration between the company “Danish Seaweed, DTU food and 
DTU Aqua. 
 
The aim of the project is to investigate the species of Gracilaria in the waters of 
Tang-Gro,  and in Kloster Bugt and to investigate two different cultivation 
methods, i.e., by propagating vegetative tissue and sexual spores. Furthermore to 
investigate different approaches for  a “sea-based cultivation of Gracilaria.  
The project seeks to create initial lab-based investigations focusing on important 
steps in the development of a user-friendly cultivation protocol including tasks 
covering spore relase and seeding of substrates using the gametophytic 
generation. The project additionally seeks investigate the potential for 
production of biomass in the waters of Tang-Gro and in Kloster Bugt. The 
introduction serves as background literature for the reader to gain insight in 
conditions about Gracilaria in Denmark 
2. Acknowledgements  
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisors, Susan Holdt, Mette Møller 
Nielsen and Peter Schmedes for in their own way making this a memorable and 
learningfull experience.  
Thank you for professional supports both with Teams meeting, comments to the 
report and collecting of seaweeds for the different experiments. 
Thanks to Claus Marcussen and Simon Weber from the company “Danish 
Seaweed” who help collecting some of the seaweed, lent out their waders and 
provided local informations. 
A special thanks to Ruth Nielsen and Rebecca who participated on the field trips 
to Nykøbing Sjælland. Rebecca, what a great girl you are. And Ruth, I don’t know 
what to say. 
Thanks to Claus Falconi for always being available with comments and good 
advises and thanks to Claus Reesbøll for helping out whenever something is 
needed on DTU. Thanks to Mikkel who kindly lent me his new climate chamber. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
5
Dansk resumé  
Følgende eksperimenter blev udført for at svare på de nedenfor opstillet 
hypoteser: 1) Estimering af fertiliten for Gracilaria over et ½ år, 2) Identifikation 
og beskrivelse af Gracilaria, 3) Sporulering- frigivelse af karposporer under 
forskellige betingelser, 4) Bestemmelse af spirrings graden af karposporer og 
væksthastigheden af spirer under forskellige kombinationer af lys, temperature 
og næring samt vegetative propagation i net-rør i såvel Nykøbing Bugt og i 
Nykøbing Mors. 
 
De undersøgte hypoteser: 
1. Identifikation af Gracilaria-arter.  
Gracilaria arter i Danmark er svære at skelne fra hinanden.  Korrekt 
artidentifikation er vigtig for at undgå dyrkning af den invasive Gracilaria-art.  
Hvordan:  Alt indsamlet thallus fra Isefjorden analyseres morfologisk vha felt 
guide og ved mikroskopi. Hvis han-gametangier er til stede udføres et tværsnit 
og dybden af spermatangia måles for at identificere, hvilken af de tre tangarter, 
den undersøgte thalli tilhører. 
Forventning: Hvis jeg undersøger morfologien for de opsamlede thalli og 
kombinere med mikroskopi af tværsnit af gametangier, kan jeg udvikle en 
brugervenlig metode, hvor det er muligt at skelne mellem arterne fra 
morfologiske karakteristika, på en ikke- eksklusiv måde. For at identificere de tre 
Gracilaria-arter er jeg nødt til at undersøge tværsnit af mandlig gametangia 
under et mikroskop. 
 
2. Fertilitet i naturen   
Formålet med denne opgaver er at afdække højsæsonen for indsamling af modne 
frugtbare cystokarpiske planter af Gracilaria og at vurdere tvunget frigivelse af 
sporer i laboratoriet.  
Hvordan: Indsamling af Gracilaria thalli månedligt i Nykøbing Sjælland og 
evaluering af forholdet mellem frugtbare individer fra antal thallus med 
cystokarper, antal thallus med spermatangia og tetrasporangia, visuelt og med 
mikroskopi. Baseret på flere feltsamlinger vil jeg plot sæsontrenden i 
fertilitetsforekomsten for lokationen.    
Forventning:  Månedlige data for fertilitet kan fortæller mig, hvornår jeg kan 
indsamle  cystokarpiske gracilaria mest effektive til såning af sporestrenge i et 
rugeri 
 
3. Vurdering af tvungen frigivelse af spor i laboratoriet.    
Det kræver meget mindre biologisk materiale (frugtbare planter som 
sporedonorer) til substratpodning for at muliggøre en ny produktion af thalli.   
Det er derfor relevant at vide, hvordan en moden cystocarp ser ud, og hvordan 
man frigør sporene på den mest effektive måde.   
Hvordan: 1) Forskellige laboratorieskala testopsætnings kombinationer af 
forskellige faktorer: lys, temperatur, udtørring og omrøring for at teste 
potentialet for frigivelse af carpospores. 2) Sporfrigørelse kontrolleres under et 
stereolupmikroskop 3) De opsamlede cystokarper kontrolleres for modenhed 
ved at måle deres diameter og kontrollere udseendet af deres ostioler. 4) tælle 
de frigjorte sporer fra bunden af petriskålene med et stereolup-mikroskop.   
==PAGE:6==
6
Forventninger:  Ved at ændre miljøparametrene er det muligt at frigive sporer i 
en ikke-sæsonbestemt sammenhæng i et rugeri. 
 
4. Estimering af den daglige frigivelse af spor over en længere periode.   
For at optimere produktionen, fra seksuel propagering fra sporefrigivelse fra 
cystocarpic Gracilaria, er det relevant at vide, hvordan sporulation af 
carpospores sker.   
Hvordan: Se mønsteret for frigivelse af spor fra moden cystocapic thalli og 
beregne forholdet mellem spiring og specifik vækst af kimplanter   
Forventning: Jeg kan dokumentere, hvordan carpospores fra Gracilaria frigiver 
sporer over tid. 
 
5. Seksuel propagering - Testning af såning på forskellige substrater med 
forskellig orientering.  
Forskellige substrater kan sås med carpospores.   
At undersøge mulighederne med forskellige substrater holdt horisontalt og skråt 
med hensyn til såning af carpospores 
Hvordan: To substrater testes. Polyethylensnor (Kuralon) med en diameter på 
1,2 mm liggende vandret og multi-flettet polypropylentov med en diameter på et 
6 mm holdt semi-lodret såes med carpospores Spiringsforhold og specifik 
vækstrate beregnes og sammenlignes.   
Forventning: Det er muligt at optimere væksten af sporer og kimplanter ved at 
ændre miljøfaktorer som lys, næringsstoffer og temperatur. Hvis jeg inokulerer 
to forskellige slags substrater, herunder 6 mm og flerflettet polypropylen og 1,2 
mm kuralonstrengestreng og holder dem i forskellige retninger under såning og 
tidlig vækst af sporer og spirer, vil mængden og levedygtigheden af sporer, der 
spirer, være forskellige, hvilket favoriserer 6 mm og flerflettet polypropylen der 
holdes skråt. 
 
6. Vegetative propagation 
Gracilaria vokser fra en apikal meristem, placeret på spidsen af hver gren. 
Væksten fra forskellige dele af thalli vil blive sammenlignet med hinanden fra 
samme sted og mellem to de steder.   
Hvordan: Den delte thalli dyrkes i plastrør. Væksten estimeres ved at veje dem. 
Forøgelsen i vægt og den specifikke vækstrate beregnes.  Forventning: Jeg vil se 
den samme vækstrate uanset hvilken del af thallus fragmenterne er taget. Hvis 
jeg dyrker Gracilaria-fragmenter to forskellige steder, vil jeg se forskellig gevinst 
i biomasse og forskellige specifikke vækstrater på grund af lokale forhold. 
 
Resultaterne som svarer på hypoteserne: 
Formålet med denne rapport var at undersøge muligheden for at udvikle en 
brugervenlig guide til indsamling af Gracilaria fra naturen med den hensigt at 
benytte den indsamlede biomasse til både vegetativ og seksuel propagation. En 
brugervenlig guide omfatter dels en manual til indsamling af Gracilaria fra 
naturen samt angivelse af hvorledes de tre arter af Gracilaria i Danmark kan 
skelnes fra hinanden ved hjælp af tværsnit af gametangier under mikroskop.  
Desuden var formålet at undersøge muligheden for at optimere dyrkning af 
Gracilaria vegetativt og fra karposporer. Forsøg med dyrkning af fragmenter af 
==PAGE:7==
7
Gracilaria i plastic net rør i vandoverfladen viser at væksten af alle dele af 
Gracilaria planten under disse betingelser er ens. 
Væksten mellem Nykøbing Sjælland og Nykøbing Mors var forskellig på grund af 
forskelle i lokale miljø faktorere. Den største vækst sker i sommer og sensommer 
månederne. Begroeninger kan være et problem, som evt. kan løses ved at sænke 
net-rørene ned under vandet. Sporulering af karposporer fra Gracilaria er 
muligvis betinget af sæson. På trods af  indsamling og brug af cystocarps med 
tegn på fertilitet var jeg ikke i stand til at fremtvinge sporulation ved at ændre 
faktorer som temperatur, udtørring, lys eller omrøring. Mere forskning er 
nødvendigt. Ikke at vide, om den indsamlede Gracilaria var i stand til at frigive 
sporer, hvis Gracilaria blev styret af sæson, gør det ikke muligt fra disse 
resultater at fortælle, hvilken måned der er den bedste at indsamle i med det 
formål at innoculere sporer liner. Det var ikke muligt at se et mønster for 
frigivelse af sporer i dette projekt, da frigivelse af carpospores kun blev set i juni 
før eksperimentets start. De bedste måneder til at indsamle cystocarps var fra 
juli til oktober. Formålet var desuden at undersøge effekten på spirringsgraden 
og væksten af spirer ved at ændrede biologiske faktorer. Det er muligt at ændre 
graden af spiring og længden af spirer ved at ændre de betingelser som spiringen 
foregår under. Det drejer sig om ændringer af temperature, lys intensitet og 
tilsætning af næring. Såning af karposporer kan ske både på horisontale og semi-
vertikale liner.. Spiringsforholdet og væksten er højest på kuralon såstrenge, der 
ligger vandret under 20 ° C. Over tid bliver spiring graden den sammen, men 
spiringen sker senere på de semi vertikale sporerliner. Formålet var tillige at 
undersøgen muligheden for at dyrke Gracilaria udendørs i Nykøbing Sjælland og 
i Nykøbing Mors. De biologiske betingelser er tilstede for at dyrke Gracilaria 
udendørs både fra sporer liner og fra vegetativt væv i både Klostebugten og 
Nykøbing Bugt, men de lovgivningsmæssige rammer skaber hindringer for 
dyrkning af Gracilaria udendørs i danske vande.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:8==
8
Summary  
The following experiments were performed to answer the hypotheses set out 
below: 1) Estimation of the fertility of Gracilaria over a ½ year, 2) Identification 
and description of Gracilaria, 3) Sporulation-release of carpospores under 
different conditions, 4) Determination of the degree of germination of 
carpospores and the growth rate of sprouts under different combinations of 
light, temperature and nutrition as well as vegetative propagation in net pipes in 
both Nykøbing Bay and in Nykøbing Mors. 
 
Following hypotheses was examined: 
1. Identification of Gracilaria species.  
Gracilaria species in Denmark are difficult to distinguish from each other. Proper 
species identification is important to avoid culturing the invasive Gracilaria 
species.    
How: All collected thalli from the Isefjord are analyzed morphologically using a 
field guide and by microscopy. If male gametangia are present, a cross-section is 
performed and the depth of spermatangia is measured to identify which of the 
three species of seaweed the thalli examined belongs to.   
Expectation: If I examine the morphology of the collected thalli and combine 
with cross-sections of gametangia, I can develop a user-friendly method where it 
is possible to distinguish the species from morphological characteristics, in a 
non-exclusive way. To identify the three Gracilaria species, I need to examine 
cross-sections of male gametangia under a microscope. 
 
2. Fertility in nature 
The purpose of this task is to uncover the high season for the collection of 
mature fertile cystocarpic plants of Gracilaria and to assess the forced release of 
spores in the laboratory.  
How: Collection of Gracilaria thalli monthly in Nykøbing Sjælland and evaluation 
of the relationship between fertile individuals from number of thallus with 
cystocarp, number of thallus with spermatangia and tetrasporangia, visually and 
with microscopy. Based on several field collections, I will plot the seasonal trend 
in the fertility occurrence for the location.  
Expectation: Monthly fertility data can tell me when I can collect cystocarpic 
gracilaria most effective for sowing spores in a hatchery 
 
3. Assessment of forced spore release in lab. 
It requires much less biological material (fertile plants as spore donors) for 
substrate inoculation to enable a new production of thalli.   
It is therefore relevant to know how a mature cystocarp looks and how to release 
the spores in the most effective way. 
How: 1) Different lab scale setup testing combinations of different factors : light, 
temperature , desiccation  and stirring to test the potential for release of 
carpospores . 2) Spore release will be checked under a stereo lup microscope  
3)The collected cystocarps will be checked for maturness by measuring their 
diameter and checking the appearances of their ostioles. 4) counting the released 
spores from the bottom of the petri dishes with a stereo lup microscope. 
Expectations:By changeing the environmental parameters it is possible to 
release spores in a non-seasonal context in a hatchery. 
==PAGE:9==
9
 
4.  Estimating the daily spore release over an extended period. 
To optimize production, from sexual propagation from mature cystocarpic 
Gracilaria, it is relevant to know how sporulation of carpospores happens.  
How:  See the pattern of spore release from mature cystocapic thalli and 
calculate Ratio of Germination and Specific Growth rate of seedling   
Expectation:  I can document how carpospores from Gracilaria release spores 
over time. 
 
5. Sexual propagation -Testing seeding on different substrata kept with different 
orientation. 
To investigate the possibilities with different substrata kept differently in regard 
to propagation of carpospores 
How: Two substrates will be tested. Polyethylene string (Kuralon) with a 
diameter of 1.2 mm lying horizontal and multi braided polypropylene rope with 
a diameter of a 6 mm kept semi-vertical will be seeded with carpospores Ratio of 
germination and specific growth rate will be calculated and compared. 
Expectation: It is possible to optimize the growth of spores and seedlings by 
changing environmental factors such as light, nutrients and temperature.  
If I inoculate two different kinds of substrata including the 6 mm and multi 
braided polypropylene and the 1.2 mm kuralon string string and have them in 
different orientations the amount and viability of spores settled would differ 
favouring the and multi braided polypropylene rope with a diameter of a 6 mm 
kept semi-vertical under highest temperature. 
 
6. Vegetative propagation 
Gracilaria grows from an apical meristem, placed at the tip of each branch.  
The growth from different parts of thalli will be compared with one another from 
the same location and between locations.    
How: The divided thalli will be cultivated in plastic net tubes. The growth will be 
estimated by weighing them. The gain in weight and the specific growth rate will 
be calculated. 
Expectation:  I will see the same growth rate regardless off from which part of 
the thallus the fragments are taken. If I grow Gracilaria fragments at two 
different places I will see different gain in biomass and different specific growth 
rate due to local conditions. 
 
The results that correspond to the hypotheses:  
The purpose of this report was to investigate the possibility of developing a user-
friendly guide for the collection of Gracilaria from nature with the intention of 
using the collected biomass for both vegetative and sexual propagation. A user-
friendly guide includes a manual for collecting Gracilaria from nature and an 
guide  to how the three species of Gracilaria in Denmark can be distinguished 
from each other by means of cross-sections of gametangia under a microscope. 
In addition, the aim was to investigate the possibility of optimizing the 
cultivation of Gracilaria vegetatively and from carpospores. Experiments with 
the cultivation of fragments of Gracilaria in plastic net pipes in the water surface 
show that the growth of all parts of the Gracilaria plant under these conditions is 
the same. The growth between Nykøbing Sjælland and Nykøbing Mors was 
==PAGE:10==
10
different due to differences in local environmental factors. The greatest growth 
occurs in the summer and late summer months. Overgrowth can be a problem, 
which may be solved by lowering the net tubes under the water.  
Sporulation of carpospores from Gracilaria may be seasonal. Despites collecting 
and using cystocarps with sign of fertility I was not able to force sporulation by 
changing factors like temperature, desiccation, light or stirring. More research is 
needed. The best months to collect cystocarps were from July untill October.  
Not knowing if the Gracilaria collected were able to release spores if Gracilaria 
were ruled by season makes it not possible from these resullts to tell which 
month are the best to collect with the aim of innoculating spore developing lines. 
The pattern of sporerelease was not possible to estimate in this project as 
releases of carpospores were only seen in June before the start of the 
experiment. The aim was also to investigate the effect on the degree of 
germination and the growth of seedling by changing biological factors. It is 
possible to change the degree of germination and the length of seedlings by 
changing the conditions under which germination takes place. These are changes 
in temperature, light intensity and the addition of nutrients. Seeding of 
carpospores can be done on both horizontal and semi-vertical lines. The 
germination ratio is the same over time but germination occurs later on the semi 
-vertical spore lines. The germination ratio and growth are highest on seeding 
strings lying horizontal under 20°C.  The purpose was also to investigate the 
possibility of growing Gracilaria outdoors in Nykøbing Sjælland and in Nykøbing 
Mors. The biological conditions are present for growing Gracilaria outdoors both 
from spore lines and from vegetative tissue in both Klostebugten and Nykøbing 
Bugt, but the legal framework creates obstacles for growing Gracilaria outdoors 
in Danish waters. 
Motivation  
One of the UN's global goals is to stop hunger and one of the main issues is to 
provide enough protein in a sustainable way. The way we produce protein today 
strains the climate and takes place on a non-vegan basis. The company ”Danish 
Seaweed” works on the basis of the UN's world goals and wants to provide 
climate friendly food. Using Gracilaria as a raw material or ingredient can be a 
new source of protein for a healthy and sustainable food production including 
vegan consumers. Furthermore, “Danish Seaweed” delivers seaweed to 
restaurants and retailers and is experiencing increasing demands from both 
restaurants and the general population after the red seaweed Gracilaria. 
To meet those demands, ”Danish Seaweed”, as part of the “Tang-gro” project, 
wants to cultivate Gracilaria. Gracilaria is easy to propagate, grow with a high 
growth rate, accept many different environmental conditions, have a long 
growing period and have high commercial value even with the possibility to 
increase in the future. This makes Gracilaria to a very good candidate for 
aquaculture. 
The tradition of growing seaweed in Denmark is relatively new and is primarily 
aimed at growing brown algae. There is a lack of knowledge about growing red 
algae, including Gracilaria, and therefore “The Danish Seaweed Lines” project has 
allocated funds for this. 
==PAGE:11==
11
In Denmark, there are two native Gracilaria species, Gracilaria gracilis and 
Gracilariopsis longissima. In recent years, a non- native species, former named 
Gracilaria Vermiculophyllum recently named Agaraphyton vermiculophylla (Guiry, 
2020) has appeared in the inner Danish waters.  The non-native species, 
Agaraphyton vermicullophylla is listed as an invasive species in Denmark.  
As it is difficult to distinguish between the three species and because it is not 
legal to cultivate the invasive species, it is relevant to find out if it is possible to 
develop a user-friendly method, which can be presented in a guide and used 
when collecting Gracilarai from wild populations that can distinguish between 
the three specieses so Gracilaria/ Agaraphyton collected from nature can be used 
for cultivation in Denmark within the current legal framework. For the rest of my 
assignment, I will continue to use “Gracilaria vermiculophyllum ”as much Danish 
literature has used the former genus name . 
Gracilaria is grown vegetatively and from spores in Asia and other countries, e.g. 
Chile on a large scale. Experience from these countries shows that cultivation 
from spores is both economically and environmentally most sustainable.  
It would therefore be interesting to investigate the possibility to cultivate 
Gracilaria vegetatively in net tubes and to use collected mature material to 
produce sporelines in the waters of “Tang-Gro”. This raises a number of 
questions such as: when it is optimal to collect sexually mature material from 
nature to gain access to sexually mature material that releases spores, is it 
possible to provoke release of spores by applying different environmental 
treatments in a hatchery in a non-seasonal context, what is the growth rate of 
Gracilaria when grown vegetatively in net tubes in the waters of “Tang-Gro”, 
which environmental conditions such as light intensity, nutrient and 
temperature favor an optimal growth rate for Gracilaria spores / seedlings, 
developed on different cultivation lines and which cultivation substrate placed in 
different orientations provides the optimal development and growth of spores 
and seedlings in the hatchery? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
12
1. Introduction  
Gracilaria use and production  
Historically, seaweed including Gracilaria has been important as part of human 
nutrition, addition to livestock feed and as fertilizer in agriculture. Today, 
seaweed is found in many everyday products, such as toothpaste, soap, medical 
products, where seaweed biochemical like agar and carrageenan is used as 
gelling agents.  Globally, 221 species out of a total estimate of 10000 macroalgal 
species are used in a commercial context (Ferdouse et al., 2018). According to 
Pereira & Yarish (2008), there are about 150 species within the genus Gracilaria 
globally, but only a few are cultivated and exploited commercially. Gracilaria spp. 
is only farmed outside Europe with China being the main producer (White & 
Wilson, 2015; Ferdouse et al., 2018).  Gracilaria is traditional cultivated by 
vegetative propagation using simple structures with rafts and ropes in many 
tropical coastal areas (Santelices, 2014).  
Gracilaria spp. the third most farmed seaweed species in the world reached a 
production of 3.9 million tonnes (wet weight) globally in 2015 (Ferdouse et al., 
2018). The production of Gracilaria species has increased over the years and 
reached in 2016 about 4.149. 524 tons. 
Gracilaria has potential as a bio fertilizer with its content of natural growth 
hormones, Nitrogen (nitrate- or ammonium nitrogen), Phosphor (fosfat) 
and potassium (NPK) and organic micronutrients (Battacharyya, et al., 2015; 
Chitra & Sreeja, 2013; Torres et al., 2018). It is further used in the cosmetics 
industry as it has anti-aging and antioxidant rich properties. The use of 
Gracilaria in cosmetics is basically due to thickening, stabilizing or gelling 
properties of agar (Pereira, 2018). Because seaweeds take up nutrients from the 
surrounding water, especially species of Gracilaria have been used to test its 
cultivation in systems connected to animal aquaculture, like shellfish, shrimps or 
fed fish, which is denoted integrated multi-trophic aquaculture or IMTA (Chopin 
et al. 2001; Pereira & Yarish 2008).  
1.1 Biology of Gracilaria 
Why is proper species identification relevant and what are the challenges? 
Proper species identification is important as some species are listed on the 
invasive lists and are not allowed to be cultivated per se in Denmark. Gracilaria 
vermicullophyllum is classified as an invasive species in Denmark 
(Naturstyrelsen, 2009; Miljøstyrelsen 2017). According to the Danish 
Environmental Protection Agency, invasive species are defined as: Invasive 
species are animals and plants that spread to areas that they would not be able 
to spread to, and which have a negative effect on the original biodiversity 
(Miljøstyrelsen, 2021). Therefore it is important to know which species of 
Gracilaria are possible to collect in the wild populations in Tang-Gro water and 
to be able to identify them from one another. 
 
Below are presented text about the three  Gracilaria species' way of life and 
morphology in an attempt to narrow down the knowledge required for species 
identification of the Gracilaria species in Denmark. 
1.1.1. Life cycle of Gracilaria 
==PAGE:13==
13
The genus Gracilaria, belongs to the group of red seaweed, the Rhodophyta and 
is part of the class Florideophyceae (Guiry, M.D., 2019).   
Gracilaria completes its life cycle (See figure 1) through 3 generations: (1) the 
tetrasporophytic phase, (2) the reproductive phase where the fertilization takes 
place and (3) the gametophytic phase.  
The diploid tetra sporophyte and the haploid gametophyte phases are 
morphologically identical therefore Gracilaria life history is named a 
"Polysiphonia-type" life history (Redmond et al., 2014). At reproductive 
maturity, tetra sporophytes (a) develop tetra sporangia (b) all over the fronds 
surface. Tetra sporangia are a specialized organ where haploid tetra spores are 
produced by the process of meiosis. Completing the meiosis, each tetra 
sporangium contains four haploid (n) cells each with half the original amount of 
genetic material.  
From each tetra sporangium two male and two female spores (n) are released 
(c). The tetra spores germinate and two male and two female gametophytes 
develop (d). The male gametophyte grows spermatangial branches that bear the 
male reproductive structures, called spermatangium, from which non-motile 
sperm is released (e) (Redmond et al., 2014; Nyberg, 2007). The spermatangia 
are not visible by the eye and are not always found in the wild population 
(Santelices, 2014; Xu et al., 2008).  
The female gametophyte produces carpogonial branches that bear the female 
reproductive organs, the carpogonium (f) (Redmond et al., 2014).  Fertilization 
happens (2): the mature female gametophyte receives non-motile spermatia 
from the water. After fertilization of the eggs the cystocarp structure starts to 
develop as “buds” (g) and female gametophyte now carries the next generation; 
the carposporophyte (Xu et al., 2008). Thus, the carposporofyte develops inside 
the “buds” on the female gametophyte and produces the next type of spores to 
finalize the life cycle i.e., the diploid carpospores. Cystocarps (h) are the fruiting 
structure from which carpospores (2n)(i) are released (Xu et al., 2008). The 
cystocarps can be seen bye the eye. The carpospores released into the water (j), 
attaches to a substrate, develops into diploid carposporelings (2n) that grow into 
a discoid micro thallus (k). The discoid micro thallus germinate and develops 
into diploid carposporelings (2n) which then develops into and become a new 
generation of tetra sporophytes (a). The life cycle is then completed.   
  
==PAGE:14==
14
  
Figure 1. Life cycle of Gracilaria (Rhodophyta, Gracilariales) (Redmond et al., 2014).  
 
In the remainder of the report, I use the word fertility when I see thallus with 
structures of cystocarps, thallus with spermatangia and thallus with 
tetrasporangia. The word mature fertility or maturity will be used when the 
thallus with structures of these is ready to release spores or sperm.  
1.1.2. Morphology and taxonomy of Gracilaria 
The two Gracilaria species Gracilaria longissima and Gracilaria gracilis are 
endemic to Danish waters. A third species, Gracilaria Vermiculophyllum, an 
introduced species to Danish waters, is also part of the Family Gracilariaceae, but 
belongs to the genus Agarophyton (Guiry, 2020). Gracilaria Vermiculophyllum 
appears very similar to Gracilaria longissima and Gracilaria gracilis and is often 
mistaken as either Gracilaria longissima or Gracilaria gracilis  (Nielsen and 
Lundsteen, 2019). 
Originally, Gracilaria vermiculophyllum was endemic to tropical pacific regions 
and cultivated in Asia but introduced to Europe in 2003.  Gracilaria 
Vermiculophyllum was later spotted in several Danish estuaries in areas with 
high eutrophication and calm, shallow waters (Thomsen et al., 2007; Kim et al., 
2010; Nejrup & Pedersen, 2010; Nejrup, 2012). Nielsen and Lundsteen, (2019) 
describe a key to distinguish between the three Gracilaria species. 
 
Common morphological and ecological characteristics for all three species 
 
How can Gracilaria be described? 
==PAGE:15==
15
According to Nielsen and Lundsteen, (2019) Danish species of Gracilaria are 
branched and cylindrical. Common for the three species are that one or several 
fronds arise from a small, fleshy, perennial discoid holdfast and have erect 
annual thallus  (Steentoft et al., 1995; Nyberg, 2007; Martín et al., 2011; Abreu et 
al., 2011; Nielsen and Lundsteen, 2019). Thalli have a branching morphology and 
may look very bushy. Older thalli can become less bushy (Nielsen and Lundsteen, 
2019). The branches are about 1- 2 mm in diameter at the basis (Nielsen and 
Lundsteen, 2019).  
 
Where can Gracilaria be found? 
The three species lives especially on sandy shores in the intertidal and subtidal 
zone in wave and tidally sheltered sites (Steentoft et al., 1995; Nyberg, 2007; 
Connor et al., 2004; Guiry, W, 2019). Thalli grow on stones and gravel (Steentoft 
et al., 1995; Nyberg, 2007; Nielsen and Lundsteen, 2019), which can be found in, 
drift transporting the fronds to places otherwise lacking acceptable substrate 
(Steentoft et al., 1995). Commonly germlings attach to the old plants as 
conspecific epiphytes (Ahlgren, 2005). 
 
 
How does Gracilaria look? 
Below are three examples of how Gracilaria can look. Morphology of Gracilaria is 
highly variable and grows in many forms depending on the environmental 
conditions and age (Yamatomoto, 1978). 
Gracilaria gracilis, in Danish, “Tynd gracilariatang” (Nielsen and Lundsteen, 
2019) is cartilaginous seaweed, with cylindrical, dull purple fronds, up to 33 cm 
long difficult to break (See picture 1). 
 
Picture 1.Picture of Gracilaria gracilis Photo by: Vivian Husa from 
https://seaweeds.uib.no/?art=760 visited 2 march 2020 
==PAGE:16==
16
 
The branching is very irregular and more or less intense and the branches have 
curved tips. The older branches have a narrowing at the basis. 
 
Gracilariopsis longissima, in Danish “Lang pseudogracilaria” (Nielsen and 
Lundsteen, 2019) colour is red-brown (Nielsen and Lundsteen, 2019). The 
branches are tough, leathery and fleshy (Steentoft et al., 1995) (see picture 2).  
 
Picture 2. Picture of Gracilaria longissima borrowed from txmarspecies.tamug.edu. Source: 
https://txmarspecies.tamug.edu/vegdetails.cfm?scinameID=Gracilariopsis%20longissima 
 
The branches are repeatedly and regularly dividing (Nielsen and Lundsteen, 
2019). According to Nielsen and Lundsteen, (2019) the branches of Gracilariopsis 
longissima can be 45 cm long and are uncurved distally at the tips. 
 
Gracilaria Vermiculophyllum in Danish, “Brunlig Gracilaria tang” (Nielsen and 
Lundsteen, 2019) is brown coloured. The branches have a rough texture and 
tendency to break when taken up from the water (Nielsen and Lundsteen, 2019; 
personnel conversation with Ruth Nielsen, December 17th, 2019)(see picture 3).  
 
 
==PAGE:17==
17
  
Picture 3. Picture of Gracilaria Vermiculophyllum. Photo by Jonas Ribergaard Rasmussen 
 
Gracilaria Vermiculophyllum is irregularly branched and can reach 1 m in length. 
The diameter of the erect branches can be from 1-10 mm (Nielsen and 
Lundsteen, 2019). 
 
 
Where does Gracilaria grow? 
Gracilaria gracilis grows on 1 - 6 m depth water (Nielsen and Lundsteen, 2019).   
Gracilariopsis longissima can grow down to 15 m (Steentoft et al., 1995). 
Gracilaria vermiculophyllum grows unattached on sandy or muddy bottoms in 
shallow bays (Wallentinus et al., 2004; Nyberg, 2007) and is also often seen as 
free-floating individuals, which can build up to thick algae mats (Nejrup, 2012). 
All three Gracilaria species grow attached to pebble and mussel or as epiphytes 
on other algaes (Steentoft et al., 1995; Nielsen and Lundsteen, 2019) 
 
 
Morphological and ecological differences between the three species 
As can be seen the Gracilaria species have some differences. They differ in 
length. Specific finding a very long frond (around 1 m) identify the specimen as 
Gracilaria vermicullophyllum. The colors also shift between red and brownish 
nuances. The textures and branching vary between two of the Gracilaria species 
and the curve of the tips also separates two of the species.  
According to Nielsen and Lundsteen, (2019) the three different species of 
Gracilaria found in Denmark can be distinguished morphological but this is 
contradicted by Yamatomoto (1978), Wu (1990) and others, who believes 
propper identification can only happen from gametangia on male gametophytes.  
 
==PAGE:18==
18
1.1.3 Morphology and identification of species 
According to Yamatomoto (1978) and Wu, (1990) a more conclusive way of 
sorting between collected fronds of Gracilaria needs a microscope. Gracilaria 
species can be separated from each other by their spermatangial pattern that is 
from the organization and structure of their spematangia 
 
Table 1. Characteristics for gametangia in Gracilaria species. 
Gracilaria 
vermiculophyllum:  
150 - 200 µm deep gametangia crypts penetrating 
subcortex (Picture 6). 
Gracilaria gracilis: 
 
50µm deep superficial depressed spermatangial 
conceptacles (Picture 5) 
Gracilaria longissima: 
The spermatangia are superficial and not depressed 
(Picture 4) 
According to Nielsen and Lundsteen, (2019); Santelices, (2014) and Wu, C., (1990) 
 
The Gracilaria species differ in how deep their gametangia are. According to 
Yamatomoto, (1978) and Wu, (1990) this property of their gametangia can be 
used to identify Gracilaria species. 
 
Spermatangium 
 
How does the gametangia look?  
Spematangia can be seen with a hand lens as pale spots on the surface of brittle 
younger lateral branches slightly highlighted (Steentoft et al., 1995). 
Spermatangia on the male gametophytes from Gracilaria are globular or oval, 
spread over the surface of the thallus (Yamamoto, 1978; Wu, C., 1990; Xu et al., 
2008). The Gracilaria species can be divided into three basic types characterized 
by the width and deepness of their gametangia (Yamamoto, 1978; Wu, C., 1990; 
Xu et al., 2008): 
Type 1 (Chorda Type) represented by Gracilariopsis longissima have 
spematangia transformed from outer cortical cells.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
19
Picture 4. Spermatangial pattern for the Chorda Type represented by Gracilaropsis longissima 
(Dreckmann, and Sentíes, 2009). 
The spermatangia on Gracilariopsis longissima are superficial and the 
spermatangial conceptacles are not depressed (Santelices, 2014) 
 
Type 2 (Textorii Type) represented by Gracilaria gracilis has 50 µm deep  
spermatangial conceptacles in the cortex.   
 
 
  
Picture 5. Spermatangial pattern for the Textorii Type represented by Gracilaria gracillis 
(Dreckmann, and Sentíes, 2009). 
The spermatangia in Gracilaria gracilis are 50µm deep superficial depressed  
(Nielsen and Lundsteen, 2019; Wu, C., 1990). 
and type 3 (Verrucosa Type) represented by Gracilaria vermiculophyllum has 
150 - 200 µm deep spermatangia crypts, penetrating subcortex (Yamamoto, 
1978; Xu et al., 2008; Nielsen and Lundsteen, 2019). 
 
Picture 6. Spermatangial pattern for the Verrucosa Type represented by Gracilaria 
vermicullophyla (Dreckmann, and Sentíes, 2009).  
 
To use this information for species identification a cross section of the 
gametangia on the frond is necessary.  
==PAGE:20==
20
1.1.4. Finding a user-friendly method for identification of 
Gracilaria in Denmark 
Identification of Danish Gracilaria species  
Due to the presence of an invasive Gracilaria species in Danish waters, that is 
difficult to recognize from the two native species and following a caution 
principle, one of the main obstacles for using wild Gracilaria material as starters 
for cultivation in nature is to ensure that it is the native species that are use as 
the basis for cultivation.  At the same time as the cultivation must be 
commercially profitable, it is important that the method proposed is user-
friendly. A user-friendly method is here understood as a method that can be used 
directly or easily when Gracilaria is collected in nature and which distinguishes 
the three species precisely. 
Several authors have tried to distinguish different species of Gracilaria living in 
Danish waters based on following features: Anatomical and vegetative 
characters, like the texture and colour of the branches, the thickness of the 
branches, the branching design, the circumference of the main axis, to what 
extend the branches were constricted at the base, graduation of cell size of the 
medulla cells from the out towards the center seen in cross section and the 
features of the nutritive cell seen in the mature cystocarps (Nielsen and 
Lundsteen, 2019; Dawson, 1949; Ohmi, 1958). The challenge is that the 
morphology of Gracilaria is highly variable and grows in many forms depending 
on the environmental conditions and age which makes identification by using the 
mentioned features difficult (Yamatomoto, 1978). It seems as if there is no easy 
way to find a user-friendly method that distinguishes conclusively between the 
species in the field. It is possible to distinguish between the species from visual 
field characteristics but not in an exclusive way. According to several authors 
including Yamamoto, (1978) and Wu, (1990) the location and type of 
spermatangia are the key points for identification of Gracilaria species. To 
distinguish between the species it is therefore necessary to use a microscope and 
have specific tissue sections from spermatangia on male gametophytes and this 
can only happen when the male gametophytes are fertile with spermatangia. It 
may be possible to distinguish between Gracilariopsis longissima and Gracilaria 
gracilis by differences in the bark layer, but this method doesn't separate the 
Gracilaria vermiculophylla and it too needs a microscope. Further, according to 
Nielsen and Lundsteen, (2019) Gracilariopsis longissima has not been seen, or 
recorded being seen, since 1976 in Denmark (Nielsen and Lundsteen, 2019).  
 
Under those circumstances it is interesting to investigate which cultivation 
methods are applicable in a Danish context and how or if the cultivation methods 
can be adjusted and optimized to Danish conditions  
1.2. Cultivation methods 
How are Gracilaria cultivated? 
Cultivation of macroalgae, such as the red alga Gracilaria, is globally based on 
two methods – propagating vegetatively or propagation from spores  (Ferdouse 
et al., 2018). 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
21
Propagating vegetatively. 
Most farmers cultivate Gracilaria spp, by propagating clone i.e., frond fragments 
obtained from harvested biomass vegetative (Zhou et al., 2016). 
Gracilaria grows from the apical meristem, located at the tip of each branch 
(Peng et al., 2009), which means it can reproduce, by a process called “vegetative 
propagation” (Kain and Destombe, 1995). By breaking up single fronds in a lot of 
pieces, a process called continual fragmentation, hundred or thousands of 
fragments can grow and develop into new fronds. The fragmented stems are 
then applied to a long line after which the tissue fragment grows back. The stems 
that are being fragmented are the haploid gametophytes, the diploid cystocarpic 
plants or the diploid tetra sporophytes. 
 
Sexual propagation: 
Gracilaria can also reproduce by making spores (Peng et al., 2009; Nielsen and 
Lundsteen, 2019). 
Thalli with carpospores can be recognized in Gracilaria by either ”buds” 
(cystocarps) developing on branches of female gametophytes (Nielsen and 
Lundsteen, 2019).  Further Gracilaria develops tetrasporangia with tetraspores, 
which can be recognized as red spots scattered all over the thalli (Wu, 1990) 
(Nielsen and Lundsteen, 2019). Propagation from spores requires knowledge of 
the life cycle of Gracilaria (see figure 1 above) (Yarish et al., 2012). The method 
utilizes either the asexual diploid spores (carpospores), which are released from 
the carposporophyte stage of the female gametophyte, and grow up as tetra 
sporophytes or the haploid spores (tetra spores) released from the 
tetrasporophytic stage as male and female haploid gametophytes, so identical 
until maturity that they cannot be distinguished from each other. These spores 
can be cultivated in a nursery for approximately 2-3 months to produce 1-2 mm 
plants that can be planted out in the sea, or in a tank system (Yarish et al., 2012).  
Some advantages and disadvantages by use of the different methods are listed 
below in table 2. 
 
Table 2: Advantages and disadvantages between different cultivation techniques when using 
vegetative propagation or propagation from spores for cultivation of Gracilaria. 
Inocula 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Fragments of thalli 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Spores 
- 
Less vulnerability to    
fouling 
- 
Getting a higher 
production at a 
shorter amount of 
time 
- 
Allow for cultivation 
of identical crops 
(clones) 
 
 
 
 
 
- 
Less demanding in 
- 
Need a high number 
of “hands” for 
planting. 
- 
The demand for high 
biomass to start 
cultivation. 
- 
Decrease in yield 
after 2-3 years 
- 
Continuous use of the 
same culture area can 
activate the spread of 
pests 
 
 
- 
Mature plants and a 
==PAGE:22==
22
 
 
 
 
 
regard to amount of 
labor otherwise 
needed in the seeding 
phase. 
- 
Crops eiter haploid 
(n) or diploid(2n) 
- 
Much less demand for 
biomass needed for 
seeding 
- 
less prone to sickness 
hatchery is needed 
for inoculation to 
start up cultivation 
- 
The genome of the 
plants varies, which 
means that the crop is 
not uniform  
- 
The time in sea is 
longer to achieve the 
same biomass and 
thereby also the 
possibility for more 
fouling on the 
biomass 
After to Buschmann et al., (1995), Oliveira et al., (2000), Peng et al., (2009) and Redmond et al., 
(2014) 
 
Using spores as propagations units instead of using a massive amount of 
vegetative fragments has one main advantage, i.e., it requires much less 
biological material (fertile plants as spore donors) for substrate inoculation to 
enable a new production of thalli (Alveal et al., 1997) and it produces uniform 
seedlings with a wanted ploidy (Manti et al., 2009).  
Further sexual propagation with spores are much less labor intensive in the 
seeding period which could make this method more cost effective compared to 
vegetative propagation in Denmark. Alveal et al., (1997) suggest that the 
continous use of sporegenerate new stocks may solve the problem of aging and 
epiphytic fouling. Old plants growing in an area and harvested continously may, 
due to the repeated harvest,  be  exposed to epiphytic outbreaks  as is suggested 
by (Gonzalez et al., 1993). 
 
 Disadvantaged by using spore seeding are several. The incubation time, the time 
it takes to grow spores into juvenile seedlings ready for out planting in the sea 
(according to Redmond et al., (2014), 1-3 cm high) are up till two months in the 
hatchery. In this period they need to be nursed with nutrient, water and light and 
the spore lines twisted around coils need to be turned around regularly 
(Redmond et al., 2014).  If the biomass is aimed for at specific commercial use, 
say as provider of a certain amount of a bioactive compound for the cosmetic 
industry there may be a  need for uniformity in the biomass. Using non-genetical 
identical fronds could therefore be less optimal (Redmond et al., 2014). Another 
disadvantage according to Oliveira et al., (2000) is the longer outgrow in the sea, 
which can mean a higher load of epiphyte. Both the time of the year where the 
seedling are put out in the ocean, the amount of time they crow in the sea and the 
harvest time is therefore worth considering.  
 
Advantages of vegetative propagation are the high output of biomass in a short 
time, which can give at clean crop ready to use for food. Further the thalli consist 
of identical thallus – clones, which could be an advantages for the cosmetic 
industry or other industries wanting a homogene and identical biomass e.g. for 
==PAGE:23==
23
extraction of bioactive compounds or other high value compounds (Redmond et 
al., 2014). 
1.2.1. Optimization of production may be achieved by developing 
new methods of vegetative propagation? 
Is there a need for optimizing and adapting the vegetative propagation methods to 
local conditions in Denmark?  
Countries used to cultivate Gracilaria have experienced problems when using 
vegetative propagation when they cultivated Gracilaria. 
Many Gracilaria farmers using vegetative propagation have experiences a 
decrease in yield after 2-3 years and it could be due to the method they are using 
(Alveal et al., 1997; Peng et al., 2009). Normally the farmers remove the top of 
the fronds repeatedly during several on each other following harvesting periods 
and thereby the apical meristem from which Gracilaria grows. Results are that 
only the old part of the plant is left behind, which may be the reason for declining 
growth rates as a consequence of aging (Oliveira et al., 2000).  Other authors like 
Capo et al., (1999) and Buschmann et al., (1994) find aging isn’t the problem. 
Rather local geographical problem stemming from changes in sediment 
composition and increase of contaminating organisms, such as grazing 
polychaetes and mussels (Buschmann et al., 1997) and epiphytes, such as other 
green, red, and brown seaweeds or microalgae, which can result in a drop in the 
productivity of cultures over time (Alveal et al., 1997; Buschmann et al., 1997, 
Redmond et al., 2014).  Jara, (1990) mentions herbivorous fish, gastropods, and 
polychaetes as damaging to Gracilaria production. It has also been seen that the 
natural populations of Gracilaria in the last twenty years have become scarce 
due to human disturbance and excessive sampling (Alveal et al.,1997; Zhou et al. 
2014). Further, according to Buschmann et al., (1995) the continuous use of the 
same culture area can activate the spread of pests and thereby affect the 
production of Gracilaria negatively.  
Another issue for using out planting of fragments, in the traditional ways that are 
commonly used in Asia, is the high need for labor. The cost for labor in Denmark 
is high compared with the cost for labor in Asia and planting out biomass needs 
lot of labor. Therefore, there is a need to provide a commercially viable and user-
friendly method adopted to local Danish condition which does not result in a 
decrease in yield after a few years but rather the opposite an increased yield that 
also is cost effective.  
 
In this project the focus is on growth of different segments of the Gracilaria thalli 
in plastic tubes ancored on a robe aiming on providing information about how 
does Gracilaria grow and how fast does Gracilaria grow? This information 
might be used to avoid a decrease in yield over time and further increase yield. 
Gracilaria has a branching frond. That characteristic may be useful when trying 
to increase yield, as it could be interesting to see if different part of the fronds 
grow with different growth rate and find out if it is the new or the old part of the 
fronds that grows fastest? Further the use of plastic tubes makes it possible to 
changes between cultivation areas and to secure uniform and even amounts of 
sunlight on the entire stem.  
 
==PAGE:24==
24
Besides vegetative propagation also sexual propagation by spores were 
investigated in this project. 
1.2.2. Optimization of production may be achieved by developing 
new methods of sexual propagation? 
Manti et al., (2009) wrote: “Estimating the spore potential and understanding 
early developmental pattern are the most crucial steps that determine the 
success of spore-based cultivation method. 
 
1.2.2.1 Developing a local adapted protocol for colleting of mature 
cystocarpic thalli 
As no one have tried to cultivate Gracilaria from spores in Denmark I decided to 
focus on carpospores as the cystocarpic fronds are easily recognizable in the 
nature. One step by using sexual propagation from carpospores as a cultivation 
method includes release of spores from a biomass of mature carposporophytes. 
It is therefore relevant to know when the spores are release in the wild 
population and how a mature cystocarp looks like.  
 
When are Gracilaria female gametophytes mature and ready for spore 
release? 
In this project one of the focuses was to collect carposporophytes from wild 
populations in the waters of “Tang-Gro” where Gracilaria had been found 
growing nearby the shore and find out when the cystocarps were fertile and 
mature over the course of a year. The goal was to gain knowledge about when it 
was most optimal to collect mature fertile female Gracilaria fronds from wild 
populations and use them in the hatchery for spore release. This information 
could give knowledge about when Gracilaria is reproductive in Denmark and 
especially in the water of “Tang-Gro” and help developing a local adapted plan 
for cultivation of Gracilaria.  
 
What do mature carpospic plants look like? 
Mature Gracilaria carposporic plants are easyly recognize by cystocarps  which 
looks like buds on their branches (see picture 7).  
==PAGE:25==
25
 
Picture 7. Cystocarpic Gracilaria plant collected in waters of “Tang-Gro”. Photo, DTU, October, 
2020. 
 
When the cystocarps are mature and ready to release the carpospores the 
ostioles appears on the top of the cystocarps. The ostiole looks like a round and 
smooth steamed bun (see picture 8 and 9), and it is from there the carpospores 
are released (Xu et al., 2008).  
 
==PAGE:26==
26
 
Picture 8. The released carpospores are seen as a white cloud in front of the ostioles of a 
cystocarp. From Gracilariopsis lemaneiformis seen through a light microscope (Xu et al., 2008).  
 
 
Besides the appearance of the ostiole protruding highly upwards on top of the 
cystocarp another sign of matureness of the carpospores is the diameter of 
cystocarps, which when mature measure from 0,8 – 1,8 mm in diameter (Lyer et 
al. 2004). According to Oza & Krisnamurthy (1968) Gracilaria cystocarps are 
mature and ready for release of spores when the cystocarps are measuring 
between 0,45-0,5 mm in diameter. 
 
 
How does the  cystocarps look when no longer mature? 
When no longer mature, the cystocarps have transparent and kind of white 
colored pores. If there is a big white spot with pores then the cystocarps 
probably already have released its spores (Wu, 1990) (see picture 9). 
  
==PAGE:27==
27
Picture 9. Empty cystocarp. The red arrow point at the ostiole. Photo, DTU, 2020. 
 
How to achieve spores for mass production of Gracilaria 
These observations could be a way to recognize when the fertile female 
gametophytes can be used for spore release in a hatchery by screening the 
collected biomass and use those observations as an indication for the state of 
samples collected in the wild, or it could be used with the purpose of research in 
lab with minor samples. Only a good handhold magnifier or a ruler would be 
necessary.  
Another and more simple way of achieving spores could be by using a significant 
high amount of fertile female thalli with a lot of mature cystocarps as Alveal et 
al., (1997) did.  Alveal et al., (1997) collected mature cystocarpic fronds from 
nature that were ready for and would release their carpospores. This procedure 
though wouldn’t allow the possibility to achive spores out of season. 
 
1.2.2.2. Inducing release of carpospores by controlling environmental 
factors? 
In seaweed cultivation, the limited seasonal spore availability is one of the 
biggest challenges. 
The need for control of the life cycle and thereby the possibility of achieving 
spores year round out of season raises the next question: Under what conditions 
is it possible to stress the fertile mature carposporic plants to get ready to 
release of their carpospores?  
Several autors have suggested change of environmental factors like light, 
temperature, dessiccation and stirring to have an effect on release of 
carpospores (Zheng et al., 1987; Wu, 1990; Yarish et al., 2012; Redmond et al., 
2014). The focus here were if it were possible to find a combination of light, 
temperature, dessiccation and stirring that would induce release of spores in the 
autumn from the fertile biomass collected in the wild regardless of season, 
anticipating summer to be the natural time for release of spores. It was 
important to make it happen out of season because otherwise it may just be in 
their natural rhythm that now they become mature and releases spores. 
When were the spores released under these different treatments (combination 
of light, temperature, dessiccation and stirring) and under which condition were 
the highest amounts of carpospores released? By knowing how long time it took 
before the cystocarps started release of carpospores, did they settle and grow, 
how many spores did they release over time, in the different treatment, it would 
be possible to get an estimate of which treatment was the most effective way to 
get the spores released and by knowing how many spores in average would one 
cystocarp release it would be possible to make an estimate of how much biomass 
was needed for seeding to achieve a certain amount of biomass. By holding the 
daylenght and salinity constant under several different treatments it might be 
possible to see if release of carpospores from Gracilaria could be triggered by 
those environmental factors. 
In the existing literature, it has been argued that algae are adapted to climatic 
conditions (Liu et al., 2017). Reproductive phenology in seaweed is seen to 
change with the environment. Many seaweed species follow patterns that are 
related to latitude or climatic region, i.e. reproduction confined to summer to 
early autumn in cold temperate and polar regions (Hofmann, 1987). As an 
==PAGE:28==
28
example, in temperate regions, sporophytes of native species, such as Saccharina 
latissima, are observed to form spore tissue in autumn and over winter (Lüning 
& Dieck, 1989). It is also known that species that live in the tropics where the 
season is the same, form reproductive spores all year round (written 
conversation with Peter Schmedes, DTU Aqua, spring 2021). According to 
(Lünning and Dieck, 1989) algae are genetically modified and express light 
receptors which they use to respond to their environment to regulate the 
formation of reproductive spores in the part of the season that is optimal for 
survival. 
Kain (1989) describes the phenology of subtidal algae as either being Season 
Responders or Season Anticipators. Season Responders react to environmental 
conditions and grow and reproduce when those are favorable. In contrast, 
Season Anticipators react on a trigger and grow and reproduce in a strategic 
annual rhythm appropriate for the species not as a response to suitable 
environmental conditions.  
Kain & Destombe, (1995) categorized Gracilaria into the group of season 
responders because Gracilaria grow when the environmental conditions are 
optimal and not as a response to a trigger. But Kain & Destombe, (1995) also 
reported that fertile Gracilaria plants collected in India didn’t always shed spores 
in the laboratory meaning that spore shedding could be seasonally adjusted. This 
could mean that the phenology of Gracilaria in regard to reproduction can be 
described as being a Season Anticipator. By gaining insight in this it could help to 
explain and develop a local adjusted user-friendly protocol for cultivating of 
Gracilaria biomass from spores collected from water of “Tang-Gro” and to 
investigate whether it is possible to produce spores in the fall, which are out of 
high season, which is considered to be summer. 
 
1.2.2.3 Optimization of production may be achieved by developing a local 
adapted protocol for seeding and growth in a hatchery  
Release of carpospores from mature cystocarps for mass cultivation  
Another focus was to investigate the growth of carpospores released on different 
substrates placed in seawater with different orientations to see if the spores 
grow and settled differently. 
In this project the Gracilaria biomass, now collected in Limfjorden, Denmark 
developed mature cystocarps following their natural rhytm and spores were 
released in June. Those spores were seeded on different kinds of robe twisted 
around coils either oriented horizontal or semi-vertical in ponds with seawater.  
Alveal et al., (1997) collected mature carposporic plants from wild populations 
for spore release and incubation on lines in tanks in a hatchery. By using 200 
gram of mature plants per 150 liters seawater Alveal et al., (1997) managed to 
get 400 spores per cm2, according to Alveal et al., (1997), half the amount would 
have been enough. By counting numbers of spores and seedling on the different 
strings with different orientations and compare their numbers and growth it 
could give information about how to optimize early growth of spores and 
seedlings in the early times in the nursery. The focus here was to investigate the 
germination ratio, under constant daylenght and salinity, to see which 
combination between temperature, light intensity, nutrient, added or not, and 
==PAGE:29==
29
thick rope hold semi-vertical when seeded and under the early development of 
the spores and thin rope hold horizontal under seeding and early development of 
the spores. Which circumstances would lead to the earliest and highest growth of 
seedlings? Further to see under which combination of temperature, light 
intensity and nutrient the seedlings grow fastest?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:30==
30
2. Aim of project and hypotheses 
This project is part of TangGro -a collaboration between the company “Danish 
Seaweed, DTU food and DTU Aqua. 
This master project seeks to provide knowledge on: 
- 
Species differentiation 
- 
Optimal timing for collection of fertile thallus 
- 
Spore release and settlement using cystocarpic tissue and different 
growth substrates 
- 
Temporal span of cycstocarpic spore release 
- 
Growth rate of different tissue sections using vegetative propagation 
method 
- 
Ratio of germination of carpospores 
- 
Growth rate of seedlings from carpospores on different seeding strings 
with different orientation. 
to promote future work on cultivation of Gracilaria species in Denmark 
 
2.1. Aim 
The aim of the project is to investigate the species of Gracilaria from a batch of 
collected specimen in the area of Tang-gro farm site and from a batch of collected 
speciment in the area of Kloster Bugt. Furthermore, I aim to investigate two 
different cultivation methods, i.e., by propagating vegetative tissue and sexual 
spores and to investigate different approaches for  a “sea-based cultivation of 
Gracilaria.  
The project seeked to create initial lab-based investigations focusing on 
important steps in the development of a user-friendly cultivation protocol 
including tasks covering spore relase and seeding of substrates using the 
gametophytic generation. Additionally, I performed small-scale field growth 
experiment with vegetative fragments during summer, autumn and winter 
months to investigate the potential for production of biomass in the waters of 
Tang-Gro and in Kloster Bugt. 
 
2.2. Hypotheses 
Following hypotheses was examined: 
1. Identification of Gracilaria species.  
Gracilaria species in Denmark are difficult to distinguish from each other. Proper 
species identification is important to avoid culturing the invasive Gracilaria 
species.    
How: All collected thalli from the Isefjord are analyzed morphologically using a 
field guide and by microscopy. If male gametangia are present, a cross-section is 
performed and the depth of spermatangia is measured to identify which of the 
three species of seaweed the thalli examined belongs to.   
Expectation: If I examine the morphology of the collected thalli and combine 
with cross-sections of gametangia, I can develop a user-friendly method where it 
is possible to distinguish the species from morphological characteristics, in a 
non-exclusive way. To identify the three Gracilaria species, I need to examine 
cross-sections of male gametangia under a microscope. 
 
==PAGE:31==
31
2. Fertility in nature 
The purpose of this task is to uncover the high season for the collection of 
mature fertile cystocarpic plants of Gracilaria and to assess the forced release of 
spores in the laboratory.  
How: Collection of Gracilaria thalli monthly in Nykøbing Sjælland and evaluation 
of the relationship between fertile individuals from number of thallus with 
cystocarp, number of thallus with spermatangia and tetrasporangia, visually and 
with microscopy. Based on several field collections, I will plot the seasonal trend 
in the fertility occurrence for the location.  
Expectation: Monthly fertility data can tell me when I can collect cystocarpic 
gracilaria most effective for sowing spores in a hatchery 
 
3. Assessment of forced spore release in lab. 
It requires much less biological material (fertile plants as spore donors) for 
substrate inoculation to enable a new production of thalli.   
It is therefore relevant to know how a mature cystocarp looks and how to release 
the spores in the most effective way. 
How: 1) Different lab scale setup testing combinations of different factors : light, 
temperature , desiccation  and stirring to test the potential for release of 
carpospores . 2) Spore release will be checked under a stereo lup microscope  
3)The collected cystocarps will be checked for maturness by measuring their 
diameter and checking the appearances of their ostioles. 4) counting the released 
spores from the bottom of the petri dishes with a stereo lup microscope. 
Expectations:By changeing the environmental parameters it is possible to 
release spores in a non-seasonal context in a hatchery. 
 
4.  Estimating the daily spore release over an extended period. 
To optimize production, from sexual propagation from mature cystocarpic 
Gracilaria, it is relevant to know how sporulation of carpospores happens.  
How:  See the pattern of spore release from mature cystocapic thalli and 
calculate Ratio of Germination and Specific Growth rate of seedling   
Expectation:  I can document how carpospores from Gracilaria release spores 
over time. 
 
5. Sexual propagation -Testing seeding on different substrata kept with different 
orientation. 
To investigate the possibilities with different substrata kept differently in regard 
to propagation of carpospores 
How: Two substrates will be tested. Polyethylene string (Kuralon) with a 
diameter of 1.2 mm lying horizontal and multi braided polypropylene rope with 
a diameter of a 6 mm kept semi-vertical will be seeded with carpospores Ratio of 
germination and specific growth rate will be calculated and compared. 
Expectation: It is possible to optimize the growth of spores and seedlings by 
changing environmental factors such as light, nutrients and temperature.  
If I inoculate two different kinds of substrata including the 6 mm and multi 
braided polypropylene and the 1.2 mm kuralon string string and have them in 
different orientations the amount and viability of spores settled would differ 
favouring the multi braided polypropylene rope with a diameter of a 6 mm kept 
semi-vertical r highest temperature. 
==PAGE:32==
32
 
6. Vegetative propagation 
Gracilaria grows from an apical meristem, placed at the tip of each branch.  
The growth from different parts of thalli will be compared with one another from 
the same location and between locations.    
How: The divided thalli will be cultivated in plastic net tubes. The growth will be 
estimated by weighing them. The gain in weight and the specific growth rate will 
be calculated. 
Expectation:  I will see the same growth rate regardless off from which part of 
the thallus the fragments are taken. If I grow Gracilaria fragments at two 
different places I will see different gain in biomass and different specific growth 
rate due to local conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
33
3. Material and Methods 
Four experiment were set up to provide information about 1) the possibility of 
cultivation of Gracilaria in Denmark and 2) strategies to optimize the biomass 
yield of Gracilaria by the use of a hatchery 3) strategies to optimize the biomass 
yield of Gracilaria by vegetative growth of fragments of Gracilaria thalli. 
The four experiments are described below. Not all experiments succeded in a 
manner they were expected to. The experiments 3.3.4.Sporulation – release of 
spores came out with a null-result, which never the less provided important 
informations. 
3.1. Collecting biological material  
Biological samples for examination were sporadically collected in different 
intertidal populations on half a meter water depth in Nykøbing Bugt near 
Nykøbing Sjælland in the Isefjord (Zealand, Denmark, 55 ° 54'086 "N, 11 ° 
40'124" E) once per month from July to December 2020 (see picture 10).  Some 
biological samples were collected in Kloster Bugten near Nykøbing Mors in June 
(56 ° 78'8033 "N, 8 ° 87'5089" E) by Peter S. Schmedes and Mette M. Nielsen.  
 
3.2. Methods for microscopic observation  
All materials were kept in seawater before examination. Tissue sections were 
made by hand using a razor blade. 
The procedures for the assessment of reproductive organs partly follow protocol 
described by Yamamoto (1978) 
1. Cystocarpic conceptacles: widths were estimated at the point of 
maximum external diameter 
2. Spermatangial concptacle: widths were estimated at the point of 
maximum internal diameter, depths between the conceptacle tip and the 
conceptacle floor 
3. The widths and lengths of the gametangia on the branches were 
measured 
 
The sizes of the diameter of the cystocarps were measured for all the cystocarps 
present on the fragments, used for the sporulation experiments, with a ruler.  
The spermatangia, used to identify the species, were measured by a micrometer 
in the ocular with 10 x magnification meaning the physical length of 1 the marks 
on the scale was equal to 0,01 mm equal to 10 µm. The widths and lengths of 3 
gametangia on a branche were measured and averages and standard deviations 
were calculated. From the same branch three crosssections were made and the 
dephts of 3 spermatangial conceptacle were measured from each of three cross 
section.  Averages and standard deviations were calculated.  
 
Microscope and Stereolupe 
Microscopy was performed by using an Olympus SZ1145TR zoom 
stereomicroscope and Olympus SZ11 dissecting microscope (stereolupe). 
==PAGE:34==
34
3.3. Experiments 
Precautions have been taken to secure cultivation happens inside the legal frame 
set up by the autorities in regard to cultivation of invasive species. 
 
Presentation of data 
All data is presented as mean +/- SD unless otherwise specified 
 
3.3.1. Assumptions 
Four assumptions were made prior to the set up of the experiments: 
 
Assumption 1: when Gracilaria branches showed signs of fertile structures such 
as cystocarps, tetrasporangia and germatangia Gracilaria were at a stage where 
Gracilaria were ready to shed their spores i.e. sign of fertility like cystocarps, 
tetrasporania and germatangia were identical with mature fertility or maturity. 
Mature cystocarps are described in the literature with a diameter of 0.45 - 1.8 
mm.  
Assumption 2: when there were most mature cystocarps on the seaweed plants, 
it would be optimal, in terregard tocultivation, to collect thallus. 
Assumption 3: Cystocarps were evenly distributed throughout the thallus 
because collected thalli with female signs of fertility immediately visually 
appeared thus. 
Assumption 4: release of spores happens in a non - seasonal manner. 
 
3.3.2. Estimating fertility in nature  
To calculate the percentage of fertile plants, 3 x 20 individuals (three replikates) 
were collected. The three replicates were collected monthly, for 6 months from 
three spots in Nykøbing Bugt (see picture 10, below).  
 
 
==PAGE:35==
35
 
Picture 10. The research area in Nykøbing Bugt near Nykøbing Sjælland in the Isefjord (Zealand, 
Denmark, 55 ° 54'086 "N, 11 ° 40'124" E). Location of the sampling sites 1, 2 and 3. 
 
Transport of thalli 
Thalli were drained and then refrigerated for transport to the laboratory. 
Healthy thallus, that is without having bleached areas and with low epiphyte 
loads were preferred.  
 
Sign of fertility showed the course of the fertility season.  
Signs of fertility are defined as: that one can observe the structure, i.e. 
tetrasporangium in fertile sporophytes or cystocarp outgrowth or male 
gametangia in fertile gametophytes and vegetative fronds with no such signs. 
 
 
To show the course of the fertility season the amounts of fertile individuals were 
evaluated for both the third generation sporophyte (carposporophyte), which is 
observed as cystocarpic tissue, known as "nodules". In addition, data from 
collections on tetrasporophyte and male gametophyte counts were displayed.  
together with vegetative fronds. The amounts of fertile individuals were 
evaluated from the number of thallus with cystocarps assessed visually and the 
number of thallus with spermatangia and tetrasporangia, which were assessed 
visually and with microscopy.  
 
Number of cystocarp 
Also, numbers of cystocarps were evaluated monthly by counting number of 
cystocarps on a 5 cm long piece of the frond and measure the total length of the 
frond. A random area of 5 cm was selected and the average lenght of the thalli 
==PAGE:36==
36
with cystocarps were measured. Average number of cystocarps collected 
monthly (Cystocarpsmonth) were calculated as: 
 
 Cystocarps month =  𝐶𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑐𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑝𝑠∗𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑔ℎ𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑡ℎ𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑖/5  
 
 
 
Picture 11. Cystocarpic branches on female Gracilaria gametophyte. Collected October, 2020, 
Odsherred 
 
The goal was to gain knowledge about when it was most optimal to collect 
mature fertile female Gracilaria fronds from wild populations and use them in 
the hatchery for spore release and to estimate numbers of cystocarps per meter 
of thalli. 
 
 
Cystocarpic stock - fertile branches with cystocarps to assess the release of 
carpospores  
From the 60 individuals, collected August 2020, healthy cystocarpic thalli, that is 
without having bleached areas and with low epiphyte loads, and with mature 
cystocarps (0.45 – 1.8 mm in diameter) were selected and kept as a “cystocarpic 
stock”. This cystocarpic stock was kept in a plastic container containing 0,2 µm 
filtered UV treated, well nourish seawater with a salinity on 30 psu, at 20 °C, 
under a light intensity of 15 μmol photons m−2 s−1, and with a 12:12 L/D light 
cycle. 
3.3.3. Identification and description of collected Gracilaria species 
==PAGE:37==
37
Twenty individual thallus of Gracilaria were collected monthly at Odsherred in 
Nykøbing Bugt, Denmark in summer, autumn and winter 2020 in triplicates.  
 
Thallus were drained and then refrigerated for transport to the laboratory. 
Healthy thalli, that is without having bleached areas and with low epiphyte loads 
were preferred.  
The thalluses were inspected morphologically by looking at their appearance 
and by microscopy. Both the morphological and the microscopic examination 
were evaluated following protocols already described in literature by, Yamamoto 
(1978), Wu, C, (1990), Steentoft et al., (1995), Lyer et al., (2004), Nielsen and 
Lundsteen, (2019), and Xu et al., (2008) then customized to  a user-friendly 
guidance for collecting fronds to cultivation of Gracilaria (see table 4). If male 
gametangia were present the thallus were investigated further by making a cross 
section and measuring the depth of the spermatangia to identify which of the 
three Gracilaria species the examined thallus belonged to. If cystocarps were 
present matureness were estimated by measuring the width of the cystocarp and 
the appearance of the ostiole.  
There was great variation in the length of the plants. I could have settled for 3 
individuals to make one replikat, but because there was so much variability 
between the lenght of the plants and I would like to have this variability plotted 
(standard deviation). I chose to take the average of 20 individuals as a basis for 1 
replicate to the description of length of collected plants. Further I wanted to 
estimated % of fertile fronds which I couldn’t if I only took 3 individual. 
3.3.4. Sporulation - release of spores 
Different lab scale test setups testing: 
• light (no light or dim light),  
• temperatures (20 or 25°C),  
• desiccation (4 hours) (gentle desiccation no desiccation) and  
• mechanical disruption  (No stirring or stirring)  
were tested in seawater-containing petri dishes and beakers to test the effect  of 
different pre-treatments and combinations of conditions on spore release from 
mature cystocarpic tissue as described below: 
 
To find out which condition would support release, attachment, survival and 
germination of carpospores in a hatchery under Danish conditions, conditions 
from nature were imitated supported with information from literature.  
Spore release with pretreatment were set up with light condition at 15µmol 
photons m^-2s^-1 in a 12:12 L/D light cycle and kept at 20°C. The temperature 
was imitating summer. The day length was adopted from literature and the low 
light intensity was imitating condition at the bottom of Nykøbing Bugt where 
spores settles on small mussel and stones in the shadow of other seaweed plants.  
Different pre-treatments were applied to speed up spore release 
The release of carpospores was investigated on long and short time scales 
because spore release may take place at once, or can occur over several days.. 
The salinity was kept constant through all the experiments. The experiments 
were performed in triplicate. 
==PAGE:38==
38
Seawater for the experiments with "Sporulation" and "Spore germination rate 
and growth rate germinate", rich in nutrients, was collected NE of Ven from 40 m 
deep water with a salinity of 30 ppt. The seawater was transported to DTU, 
where it was filtered (0.2 µm) and UV-treated. 
3.3.4.1. Effect of pre - treatments on sporulation 
From the cystocarp stock triplicate sections of thalli ~ 2 cm with known number 
of cystocarps (5 “buds”) were prepared with four different pre - treatments in 
petri dishes (d=9 cm) containing 30 ml seawater with a salinity of 30 psu and 
lidded (n=3) and a glass slides on the bottom. Light condition was similar 
(15µmol photons m^-2s^-1) in a 12:12 L/D light cycle and kept at 20°C. 
Cystocarpic tissue came from the same batch. The four pre-treatments were: 
 
The following methods were examined: 
1. Tissue sections were directly submerged into sterilized seawater under 
dim light (no pre-treatment, Control).  
2. Tissue section were first covered in damp paper towels and stored in a 
closed plastic bag for a few hours in darkness. Then, the tissues were 
submerged into sterilized seawater (gentle dessication, no light). 
3. Tissue section were first left to dry for 4 hours and then placed in 
sterilized seawater (dessication, under dim light, no stirring). 
4. The tissue section were first left to dry for 4 hours before submerged in a 
little glasscontainer with 30 ml seawater and stirred strongly. Afterwards, 
the tissue were placed in the petri dish over glass slides incl. the 30 ml 
seawater (dessication under dim light, stirred). 
 
Every third day the fragments were transferred to a new petri dish and new 
fresh seawater was added. The previous petri dishes were left undisturbed for 
24 hours to allow any spores to settle and then spores were counted. After nine 
days of continuation of the experiment, a total of 36 petri dishes were provided. 
Spore releases were checked under a stereolup microscope.  
 
Amount of spores released from each test setup were estimated by counting 
every third day in nine days to see how the amount of spore releases changed 
over the whole spore release period. 
3.3.4.2. Estimation of carpospores output and viability  
Fragments, from the stock with cystocarps, with ten mature cystocarps were 
placed in 30 ml seawater (30 psu salinity) in petri dishes and kept in the culture 
at 20 ± 1 °C under daylight white fluorescent lamps at 15 µmol photons/ m^2/s 
irradiance under a 12:12 h light/dark cycle. 
Every second hours, during a 12 hours period, from 7 am to 7 pm in the first 
three days the cystocarps were moved into a new petri dish and covered with 
seawater given a total of 21 petri dishes pr day.  
The previous petri dishes were left for 24 hour to let the spores settle after 
which the spores settled on the bottom of the petri dish were counted 
After the 3 first days the cystocarps were only transferred every 24 hours into 
new plates and covered with seawater. This was done for seven days.  
Since no release of spores was observed the same procedure as just described 
above was followed with fragments with cystocarps placed with a temperature 
==PAGE:39==
39
of 25°C in Erlenmeyer glasses (see below). The experiments were performed in 
triplicate. 
 
Viability and growth 
The plan for the experiment was then to investigate the three last petridishes 
with released spores. The expected released spores were meant to be left 
undisturbed in 14 days, only changing their waters every third day, and after 14 
days to count how many of them were attached to the bottom of the petridishes 
and to measure their growth either by measuring their diameter or by 
measuring their length.  
 
3.3.4.3. Seeding on different substrata with different orientation  
The fragments with mature cystocarps, with no pre-treatment, were kept with a 
temperature on 20°C under a light intensity of 15 µmol photons/ m^2/s, in 30 
psu 0,2 µm filtrete UV- treated saltwater with a 12:12 L:D cycle with 1,2 mm 
Kuralon string and net tubes which each were kept in two different orientations. 
 
One L beakers with 800 ml seawater, aerated, were set up with 32 fragments, 
around 2 cm of length, with mature cystocarpic Gracilaria, each bearing 5 
cystocarps, taken from the stock with cystocarps: 
• 
One beaker with 3.2 m Kuralone string lying horizontal in the bottom  
• 
One beaker with 3.2 m Kuralon line twisted around a glass tube keeping it 
held oblique 
• 
One with 8 cm net tube lying horizontal in the bottom  
• 
One beaker with 8 cm net tube with a glass tube down through  keeping it 
held oblique 
The length of the kuralon string was determined from an estimated length of 
how much 8 cm net tube would correspond to. 
Glass slides were placed at the bottom of each beaker to recognize spore release. 
The experiments were performed in triplicates giving a total of 12 glass beakers.  
 
Which amount of tissues with cystocarps gives the best cultivation yield? 
To estimate the best amount of fertile cystocarpic tissues per m of Kuralon 
string, two 1 L beakers with 800 ml seawater aerated were set up with 32 
fragments of mature cystocarpic Gracilaria each bearing 10 cystocarps: 
• 
One with 3.2 m Kuralon string lying horizontal on the bottom 
• 
One with 3.2 m Kuralon string held oblique 
Glass slides were placed at the bottom of each beaker to recognize spore release.  
The experiments were performed in quintuplicate under the same conditions as 
described above. The amounts of spores settled from respectively 32 fragments 
with 5 cystocarps and from 32 fragments with 10 cystocarps were compared. 
 
The beakers with cystocarpic fragments were held under condition for 
sporulation in three days or until sporulation were recognized on the glass slides 
placed at the bottom of each beaker. Releases of spores were controlled by 
microscopy of the glass slides under a stereolup after three days and then daily.  
Since no release of spores happened the experiment stopped after eighteen days. 
==PAGE:40==
40
3.3.4.4. Adjustments to lab scale test setups  
Since no spores were observed from either of the experiments above, alternative 
options were investigated to induce releases of spores. Adjustments to those 
above describe setups was made:  
The fragments were moved to 1 L beakers with 800 ml seawater, with glass 
slides at the bottom and air was added because the temperature was increased. 
Further length of day and light intensity were changed, as described below: 
To induce matureness of the carpospores 
• Temperature was raised to 25°C for six days. 
• 
Temperature was kept at 25°C, but daylenght and light intensity was 
changed respectively to 16:8 (L:D) and to 45 µmol photons m^-2s^-1  for 
eighteen days. 
To induce release of spores 
• 
Temperature was kept at 25°C and light cycle was kept on 16:8 (L:D) but 
the light intensity was lowered to 15 µmol photons m^-2s^-1  for 6 days. 
 
After around one and a half months the experiments ended without any release 
of spores. 
 
Germination 
The continual plan for the experiment was then to remove the cystocarpic 
tissues, when the Kuralon string and nets were inoculated. Then the inoculated 
substrate were going to be kept under growth conditions for germination: 
Light intensity would have been increased to 45µmol photons /m^2/s, 
Temperature raised to 25°C, air would have been added and water changed 
every third day. Measurements of linear growth (V(l) would have been 
calculated from L= length of thallus end, L(0)=length of  thallus start = 0 and T= 
lenght of cultivation in days by the equation V(l) = L/T µm/day. 
3.3.5. Spore germination ratio and specific growth rate of seedlings  
As mentioned above the experiments about release of spores didn't went as 
expected. Therefore I made this experiment instead.   
Small pieces of two different materials were tested as suitable cultivation 
substrates: A polyethylene string (Kuralon) with a diameter of 1.2 mm and a 6 
mm multi braided polypropylene rope (see picture 12). The Kuralon string and 
the multi braided polypropylene string was seeded June 25, 2020 with 
carpospores at the Danish Shellfish Center, DTU, Nykøbing Mors.  
 
==PAGE:41==
41
 
Picture 12. Polyethylene string (Kuralon) with a diameter of 1.2 mm and multi braided 
polypropylene rope with a diameter of a 6 mm, both seeded with carpospores from cystocarps 
collected in Kloster Bugten, Nykøbing Mors, achieved from the Danish Shellfish Center at DTU 
from Peter Schmedes and Mette Nielsen. 
 
Several branches of gametophytes with mature cystocarps collected in Kloster 
Bugten were used monitor the duration of carpospores release from one batch 
and to attempt seeding of different string types with carpospores. The fronds 
with cystocarps were kept in containers and high barrels to see if the 
carpospores settled on string in respectively horizontal or semi-vertical position. 
The seeded strings were kept at low germination conditions with ambient light 
(5-30 PAR) and day length. In the beginning of August 8-10 m 1.2 mm ethylene 
string (Kuralon) seeded with carpospores in a container and 8-10 m 6 mm multi 
braided polypropylene string seeded with carpospores in a high barrel were 
achieved from the Danish Shellfish Center at DTU.  
 
Both types of substrates were cut into 36 fragments 2 cm long with a soldering 
iron (see picture 13).  
==PAGE:42==
42
 
Picture 13. Manufacturing of fragments, 6 mm multi braided polypropylene string seeded with 
carpospores, around 2 cm long with a soldering iron. Photo, DTU, 2 of November 2020. 
 
Carpospores and seedling 
To evaluate the influence on germination of carpospores and length growth of 
seedlings , of two temperatures,  at three different light intensities in seawater 
with and without added nutrient fragments from the Kuralon string and  
fragments from the polypropylene rope were placed in six 0.8 L beakers with 30 
psu 0.2 μm filtered UV-treated brine, aerated and under a lid. The beakers were 
kept at 20 ° C during a 12:12 L: D cycle and under different conditions of light 
and nutrition: Three beakers with 0.1 ml nutrient medium / L seawater (see 
below) and the fragments were kept under: 
 • Low light, 15 µmol photons m ^ -2s ^ -1 
 • Intermediate light, 60 µmol photons m ^ -2s ^ -1  
• High light, 120 µmol photons m ^ -2s ^ -1  
The same design was set up for three beakers with seawater not added nutrient. 
The experiments were performed in triplicate. The same procedure was 
followed with a temperature of 10 ° C. 
 
Numbers of spores and seedlings were counted under a stereolup with a 
mechanical counter and with a 0,5 x 0,5 grid. Number of spores and seedlings 
were counted on 0,5 cm of the most seeded part of each fragment prioritized as 
follows: 
• The most germinated area was chosen. 
• The number of germinated spores were counted and registered as 
seedlings.  
==PAGE:43==
43
• If there were any spores, which were not, yet germinated from the same 
area they were counted and registered as spores. 
• If there was no spores from this area it was registered as zero 
• If there on another part of the fragment were spores ten spores were 
randomly chosen and their diameter were registered. 
Seedlings and spores are therefore not necessarily from the same area even 
though they are registered the same day 
• 
If there were no spores, which were germinated the area with the highest 
number of spores, were counted.  
 
According to Hughes et al., (2014) spores settle in clumps. Therefore high-
density regions were choosen as methods that assume a homogeneous 
distribution would be inappropriate (Glenn et al. 1998). 
Randomly chosen, the length of ten sprouts and the diameter of ten spores, or as 
many as possible, were measured on each fragment with a microscope with an 
ocular with a measuring scale. Numbers and length of seedlings or number and 
width of spores were counted and measured at the beginning of the experiment 
(day zero) and then every ten days to calculate the growth rate of the spores and 
the seedlings and the germination rate. At the end of the experiment fouling on 
some of the fragments made it difficult to count spores and seedlings. To remove 
filamentous algae, mostly green algae those fragments were dipped into water 
with chlorine <5% hydrochloride, with a concentration of chlorine/water equal 
to 0,001 in 1 minute and rinsed in two times of water.  
The following day the diameter of the spores and the length of the seedlings 
were measured.  
 
Nutrient  
Stock  
Nutrient media 
 
1 kg ready mixed F/2 media per 10 liters 
seawater 
Dose: 1 ml stock per L of seawater in the 
cultivation tank 
 
After Tørring and Nielsen, (2014). NB. Only filtrete and UV treated seawater was used. 
 
Growth, measured by length, was evaluated as described below anticipating the 
initial growth in length happens only in one direction.  
3.3.5. Vegetative propagation  
Vegetative propagation with fragments in nettubes was performed in 
Klosterbugten in Limfjorden and in Nykøbing Bugt in Isefjorden: 
3.3.5.1.Isefjorden and Limfjorden 
Denmark has two large estuarine complexes, e.g., the Limfjord and the Isefjord-
Roskilde Fjord complexes, which cover areas of respective c. 1,500 km2 and 420 
km2 (Conley et al., 2000). The penetration of light as measured by secchi depth, 
==PAGE:44==
44
is relatively high in Danish estuaries. In limfjorden and Isefjorden secchi depth 
was measured till 4-5 m (Conley et al., 2000).  
 
The vegetative propagation experiment was performed in Klosterbugten in 
Limfjorden and in Nykøbing bugt in Isefjorden (see red marks with black spot in 
picture 14) 
  
  
Picture 14. Klosterbugten (left) in Limfjorden. Nykøbin bugt (right) in Nykøbing Sjælland.  Google 
map. 
 
Local condition Limfjorden 
Limfjorden (left) binds the North Sea and Kattegat together. It covers and area of 
about 1500 km2. Limfjorden is, in average 4.9 m deep. Seawater runs into the 
Limfjorden from Kattegat and from the North Sea bringing the salinity in 
Klosterbugten up in a range between 24 – 32  ‰ (Pedersen, 1995).  The water 
level in Limfjorden flucturate only ± 10 cm but can be larger in case of windy 
weather.  
The bottom of Limfjorden is covered with sand together with stones and 
boulders. Stones larger than 10 cm in diameter (hard substrate) are mostly 
found in the western and central part of Limfjorden (Pedersen, 1995.  
The Limfjord is supplied with nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, 
primarily as run-off from agriculture. 
(https://mst.dk/naturvand/vandmiljoe/vandomraadeplaner/vandplaner-2009-
2015/hoeringer/hoering/basisanalyser/1-2-limfjorden/ visited 5 of Juli 2021). 
Stratification of the water column and oxygen depletion was seen in Limfjorden 
in several places due to the quiet and warm weather in June, 2020. However, not 
around Klosterbugten. In the first half of July the water column was mixed due to 
a low pressure passed with strong winds and gusts of storm force resulting in 
good oxygen conditions throughout the Limfjord. Varm summer weather in the 
end of July resulted from the beginning of August in stratification of the water 
column and high water temperatures. This resulted in widespread vigor oxygen 
depletion in the Limfjord. This time, Klosterbugten was affected. Moderate to 
heavy oxygen depletion was seen in the area around Klosterbugten at the end of 
the experiment in week 30, 2020 (Hansen & Rytter, 2020).  
 
 
==PAGE:45==
45
Local conditions in Isefjorden 
Isefjorden is located in Northwest Zealand, and has its outlet in the Kattegat 
between Hundested and Rørvig. The Isefjord is on average 5-7 meters deep. 
Mean water depth at the study site was 1.0 m (variability 0.2-1.8 m). Seawater 
runs into the Isefjorden from Kattegat.  Isefjorden is a eutrophic shallow estuary 
with a mean salinity around 20 ‰(Conley et al., 2000). The bottom of Isefjorden 
is covered with sand together with mudd, stones and boulders. The water 
exchange freely between the southern Kattegat, the southern part of Isefjord and 
the northern part of Roskilde Fjord. The change of water in the area is primarily 
controlled by the transport of salt water between Kattegat and Isefjorden, but 
also to a certain extent from the two adjacent fjord areas. The nutrient load of 
Isefjord from nitrogen and phosphorus originates primarily from agriculture. 
Most of the nitrogen load comes from leaching from agricultural areas, while the 
phosphorus load both comes from agricultural areas and natural contributions 
(https://mst.dk/naturvand/vandmiljoe/vandomraadeplaner/vandplaner-2009-
2015/hoeringer/hoering/22-isefjord-og-roskilde-fjord/, visited 5 of Juli, 2021). 
No oxygen depletion was registered for Isefjorden in the course of the 
experiment 2020 (Hansen & Rytter, 2020). 
 
3.3.5.2. Vegetative propagation in net tubes 
Nykøbing Sjælland 
Gracilaria fronds were collected from three spots in Nykøbing Bugt and 
Nykøbing Sjælland, Denmark sampling for three replicates. 
Three plastic net tubes in triplikates of 1 meter long with 30 g Gracilaria from 
respectively the basal, the middle and the apical part of the Gracilaria frond were 
cultivated. 
Every plastic net tube (nine in total) was attached to a common rope separately 
securing that they were not able to touch each other and hanged in a random 
order. 
The rope was hung right below the water surface and the plastic net tubes were 
floating on the surface horizontally thereby ensuring they were receiving 
maximal light. 
The plastic net tubes were weighed every 3-4 weeks from middle of Juli until 
start of December. The socks were folded in half and swung ten- twenty times 
until no water was released and then weighed with a handheld 50 Kg Mini 
Portable Electronic Scale Weight with 5g readability for weigh between 0-10 kg. 
 
Nykøbing Mors 
A similar experiment was done at the Danish Shellfish Center, in Nykøbing 
Mors. Starting biomass for each “basal, middle, and distal” part of segments were 
35 g. The plastic net tubes were weighed every 1-2 week from end of June until 
the middle of August. The average growths from each segment of the fronds 
were then calculated and compared, both within the same month and between 
different months to see if the different segments grew differently and if there 
were changes over time. Data from the “Danish Shellfish Center” and data from 
the waters of “Tang-Gro”were compared to see if local conditions and time of 
experiment could have any impact on Total Growth (TG). The Specific Growth 
==PAGE:46==
46
Rates (µ) were also compared to see if Gracilaria grew differently at the two 
places and if there were exponential growths. 
The Total Growth (TG) and The Specific Growth Rate (µ) was calculated as 
follows: 
 
Total Growth in percentage was calculated as: 
𝑇𝐺= 𝑁𝑒𝑤 𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡 – 𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑔𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡  
, and tells gain in biomass per meter. This can be use to compare performance 
between different fragments from different part of the fronds or between the 
two places, and compare performances between different time interval and to 
realize how much extra biomass are gained 
The specific growth rate period is defined as the rate of increase of biomass of a 
cell population per unit of biomass concentration. In the sigmoid curve it occurs 
between the lag and stationary phases where cell growth follows a straight-line  
The specific growth rate (µ) was calculate as 
µ= ln (𝑡!) −ln (𝑡0)
𝑡
 
t0 = Weight at time of the beginning,  t1= Weight at time of the end, and t = t1 – t0. 
The specific growth rate tells about the increase in biomass per day between the 
lag phase and the stationary phases. 
3.3.6. Statistical analysis 
All statistic was performed in R. Results were expressed in terms of mean ± 
standard deviation. As a thumb of rule great overlap between standard 
deviations were seen as an indicator for the numbers being not significant 
different.  
3.3.6.1. Test of null hypothesis  (H0) and alternative hypothesis (HA ). 
One-way analysis of variance (One- way ANOVA) was used to determine whether 
there were any statistically significant differences between the means of three or 
more independent groups. The null hypothesis were tested: 
𝐻!: µ! = µ! = µ! = µ! = ⋯µ!  
where,  µ = group mean and k = number of groups. If, however, the one-way 
ANOVA returned a statistically significant result, the alternative hypothesis (HA), 
was accepted, which means that there are at least two group means that are 
statistically significantly different from each other (statistic, 2021; Brockhoff et 
al., 2015).  P- values less than 0.05 indicate significance (Brockhoff et al., 2015). 
3.3.6.2. Check of Assumptions 
Normal distribution: 
==PAGE:47==
47
Before using the One-way ANOVA the assumptions for Normal distribution of 
data and Homogene of variance were tested. The Normal distribution of data was 
tested by use of a Normal Q-Q-normal plot test that tests the samples residuals 
against the theoretical expected quantiles. To decide if the plots were close 
enough to a straight line a Wally plot were performed. Eight simulated normal Q-
Q plot, where normality are known to be met, was compared with the plot based 
on the observed data. If the observed plot did not deviate and looked worse than 
the plots with known normality (the theoretical expected quantiles) then 
normality was accepted for the observed data.  If the assumption of normality 
was not met the data was log transformed and again checked for normal 
distribution. . A p value less than 0.05 indicate a violation of the assumptions. 
(Brockhoff et al., 2015). 
Homogene of variance: 
The Homogene of variance was tested by boxplot from height of boxes and 
Bartlett test (Brockhoff et al., 2015; Statistic, 2021a; Statistic2021a1). The 
Homogene of variance test investigated if all comparison groups had the same 
variance, based on the assumption that all group size was equal. If heterogeneity 
of variance was found, the Welch One-way ANOVA was performed instead of the 
One-way ANOVA. A p value less than 0.05 indicate a violation of the assumptions.  
Post hoc test: 
When significance were found from either The One-way Anova test or The Welch 
One-way ANOVA test a post hoc test was performed to find out which of the 
group means that were statistically significantly different from each other. For 
the One-way ANOVA test, where the assumption for Homogene of variance was 
met, a post hoc test with bonferronni correction was performed to single out 
which groups were significant different from each other (Brockhoff, 2015). For 
the Welch One-way ANOVA test where the assumption for Homogene of variance 
was not met a post hoc test like Welch paired t-test was performed (Statistc 
2021a; Statistic, 2021b). 
3.3.6.3.  Spore germination rate and specific growth rate of seedlings  
As more than one factor influenced the variables examined in this experiment 
(lengt and germination) interaction between the factors (: temperature (Cold 
/varm), Light intensity (Low/Middle/High), Nutrient (with/with out) and 
Trickiness of the seeding string (thin /thick) ) influencing the  variables could be 
studied and therefore a two- or multi- way ANOVA was needed.  
 
From the standard deviations it could be seen that the spread between 
observations were large.  Together with few or lack of observation, this could 
mean that the conclusions from data was vague due to lack of homogeneity of 
variance and non-normally distributed data.  As the assumptions for homogene 
of variance and normal distribution were not met a two or multiple-ways Welch 
ANOVA with non-normal data and heterogeneity of variance needed to be done 
to compare variance between groups. This ANOVA further needed to be adjusted 
due to  
==PAGE:48==
48
• Sampling size are different and in best cases 20. According to the central 
limit theorem (CLT) at least 30 observations are the minimum for a 
normal distribution of observations. 
• The design is unbalanced e.g. the four factors are divided into unequal 
numbers of groups: temperature (Cold /varm), Light intensity 
(Low/Middle/High), Nutrient (with/with out) and Trickiness of the 
seeding string (thin /thick) giving a design of 2x3x2x2  
Although an opportunity to learn, it was decided from conversation with Peder 
Backer, associated professor, DTU Compute and Supervisors on the project 
(Peter Schmedes and Susan Holdt, just to compare between different 
temperature (10°C and 20°C) with a certain amount of light and nutrient using 
Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples. A more skilled statistician 
was needed to make a generalized linear model. 
 
3.3.6.4. Exception from the trend from Nykøbing Mors (see section 9.3.5. 
“Vegetative propagation). 
The gain in biomass was significant different between the basal, middle and 
distal fragments measured day 43. As can be seen from the data plotted, and the 
boxplot below in figure 2, for treatment 1 and 2 the medians did not always lay 
in the middle of the box, together with the means. The data are therefore 
asymmetric distributed, which indicate the observations are screwed and the 
assumption of normal distribution violated.  For treatment 3 the collected data 
are nicely distributed around the mean, as the mean and the median are equal. 
All data was log transformed and then tested as normal distributed. 
 
Figure 2. Fragments from Nykøbing Mors measured day 43. Treatment 1 
are fragments from the basal part of the frond, Treatment 2 are fragments from the middle part 
of the fronds and treatment 3 are fragments from the distal part of the fronds. Data are plotted 
==PAGE:49==
49
(left). Boxplot are performed (right). The red empty dots in the boxplot are the mean. The bold 
lines are the median. The end of the low and high tail is respectively the minimum and the 
maximum of gain in net tubes recorded since day 0, n=3. 
 
Homogene variance was confirmed by Bartlett’s test.  To single out which 
fragments were significant different from each other a pairwise t-tests with 
Bonferroni's correction was perform.  It turned out that the significant 
differences was found between the bottom and the middle fragments, and the 
boxplot showed that fragments from the basal part had lower gain in biomass 
compared to the fragments from the middle part of the frond. Differences in gain 
of biomass from fragments from different part of the fronds were also seen from 
measurements performed day 29 at Nykøbing Mors.  The One-way ANOVA 
turned out a p-value (0.03505<0.05). A Post hoc test with a Bonferroni 
correction did not give significant differences (lowest p-value = 0.063) between 
any of the fragments. This can be due to small sample size with screwed data. 
From the data plotted in fig.3, (left) and from the boxplot in fig. 3, (right), about 
the weigh of the fragments from day 29 at Nykøbing Mors it can be seen that the 
biggest differences are between the fragments from the distal and the basal part 
of the frond. Further, in general, performing statistic with groups less than 30 
observation are below the limits, which secure that data meet the assumptions 
for using One-way ANOVA, which are: data are normal distributed and 
homogene of variance. In this case with small sample (n=3), makes the data less 
reliable, but the data can still be relevant as they can give or point at a trend 
(personal telephone conversation with Peder Bacher, DTU, Compute, 20 of June 
2021).  
 
 
Figure 3. Fragments from Nykøbing Mors measured day 29. Treatment 1 is fragments from the 
basal part of the frond; Treatment 2 is fragments from the middle part of the fronds and 
==PAGE:50==
50
treatment 3 are fragments from the distal part of the fronds. Data are plotted (left). Boxplot are 
performed (right). The red empty dots in the boxplot are the mean. The bold lines are the 
median. The end of the low and high tail is respectively the minimum and the maximum of gain in 
net tubes recorded from day 0, n=3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
51
4. Presentation of Results (and Discussion) 
4.1. Estimating fertility in nature  
Thalli with reproductive organs were determined for the collection of Gracilaria. 
By showing how the amount of fertile plants was distributed over the course of 
the fertility season (see figure 4) and by calculating the proportion of the signs of  
fertility on the collected plants each month, I wanted to show seasonal change in 
the percentage of fertile Gracilaria and in the percentage of reproductive 
phenology of Gracilaria from July till December(see figure 5) 
As Cystocarps were present all 6 months I wanted to show which month(s) 
would be the most effective month to collect cystocarpic branches from wild 
populations with cultivation in mind (see es 6-10) and to estimate the amount of 
starting biomass that was needed. Those information would give me an updated 
status about the present situation in the population and the possibility to asses 
the availability of carpospores for spore culture development in the future. 
 
4.1.1. Seasonality in fertility  
In total 292 Gracilaria thalli were collected from July until December 2020. 
 
Table 3. Amount of collected fronds from the three spots (the three replicates) , 
Nykøbing Bugt, 2020 
Collection 
place 
July 
August 
September October 
November December 
1 replicate 
20 
20 
15 
19 
20 
16 
2 replicate 
20 
20 
20 
14 
0 
10 
3 replicate 
20 
20 
20 
20 
2 
16 
 
A maximum of 20 individuals/replicate were picked but this could be difficult to 
find during the winter months. The numbers of collected thalluses, each month 
in total, were in the range from 22 – 60 with lowest amount collected in 
November 2020. 
 
The percentages of thalli with sign of fertility (cystocarpic branches, male 
gametangia and tetrasporangia) was from 23.3 ± 25.2% till 43.3 ± 17.6% in the 
months from July until December (fig. 4). The lowest percentages was collected 
in November and the highest procentages in July from different spots. 
==PAGE:52==
52
Figure 4. Proportion of fertile Gracilaria thalli collected from August until December, 2020, 
Odsherred. Data represent average of the three replicates ± Standard deviation, n=3 .   
 
It seems that there is a trend with the highest amounts of thalli with signs of 
fertility in the summer months July to September, and that the proportion of 
fertile thalli falls until and including November, after which a decrease is seen. 
However, the changes in the proportion of thalli with signs of fertility during the 
6 months are not significant, due to the large biological variation (p-value 
(0.7282) from the Welch ANOVA test). Therefore it is not possible to determine a 
particular month to have a significant peak fertility, compared to the other 
months examined.  
4.1.2. Phenological signs of fertility  
Reproductive types like cystocarp outgrowth and male gametangia in fertile 
gametophytes or tetrasporangium in fertile sporophytes or vegetative fronds 
were observed from July to December. Seasonal changes in the proportions of 
thalli with different reproductive signs were determined for the collection of  
==PAGE:53==
53
 
Figure 5. Seasonal change in thalli with signs of fertility from July till December, showing 
percentage of reproductive phases: vegetative Gracilaria fronds, fertile sporophytes (n), 
gametophytes with cystocarps (2n) and gametophytes with male gametangia (n) 
 
It seems as if there were mostly vegetative thalli through the period. The 
percentages of vegetative thalli were the same through out the period (p-value 
(0.7645) from the Welch ANOVA test). The amounts of cystocarpic thalli during 
the period were equal when comparing between the six months period (p-value 
(0.1054) from the One-Way ANOVA test).  
Conducting a One-Way ANOVA test for the two months with thalli having 
gametangia gave a p-value = 0.4918 > 0.05. 
The amounts of fronds with male gametangier, the two months they were 
present, were equal.  This indicates that the proportions of the different fronds 
with sign of fertility are the same at least for the vegetative and the cystocarpic 
fronds.  
 
Are the different reproductive phases present at the same time? 
The collection of Gracilaria over the six months revealed cystocarpic 
gametophytes (2n) which were seen  in all 6 months whereas gametophyte with 
male gametangia (n) only were spotted in September and October. No 
tetrasporophytes (n) with sign of tetrasporangia were found. The percentages of 
cystocarpic fronds (2n) out of total collected biomass were in the range from 
16.7 – 43.3%, highest in July, lowest in October. The Gracilaria fronds with signs 
of male gametangia (n) constituted from 7.3 – 11.1 % out of all thallus collected. 
This corresponded to 4 out of 22  fronds collected in September 2020 and 6 out 
of 15 fronds with sign of fertility collected in October.  
==PAGE:54==
54
The number of vegetative fronds with no sign of fertility (n) ranged from 56.7 – 
75% highest in November and lowest in July.   
The reproductive thalli in this experiment are not coexcisting over the course of 
the months. It looks like the gametophytes and the tetrasporophytes are parted 
in exclusive alternatination between those two phases. This is in contrast to 
(Kain &Destombe, 1995; Martín et al., 2011) which observed coexcisting 
between the reproductive phases. 
 
Why did I see so few male gametophytes with gametangia and no tetrasporopytes 
with tetrasporangia?  
An average of 32.8 % were cystocarpic branches and 3.06% were male 
gametophytes of the total collected biomass (292 thallus). The estimated sex 
ratio (malegametophyte/male gametophyte+female gametophyte) was between 
0-0.4 (max. in October) when estimated monthly. Results from the temperate 
part of Argentina showed sex ratio between 0.2 – 1 for Gracilaria seaweed 
(Martín, et al., 2011). Martín, et al., (2011) estimated the average sex ratio to 
0.54 .The results from this project were in the range within these results from 
Argentina but lower. Further the absence of branches with tetraspores from July 
until December differs from the recordings from Argentina (Martín, et al., 2011). 
Differences are also seen regarding male gametophytes. The presence of male 
only in September and October, as recorded from Nykøbing Bugt, differs from 
Argentina where male were present all months except in September. From the 
lifecyclus a ratio of 1:1 female and male gametophyte would have been expected. 
But deviations from the ratio 1:1 are not unusual. In a survey presented by Kain 
& Destombe, (1995) populations with no males or very few males were seen 
from India (1969 and 1986) and Chile (1988). According to Kain & Destombe, 
(1995) the absence of male could be due to some of the male gametophytes were 
contained in the numbers for vegetative fronds that may contain som male 
gametophytes which were not recognized. Some of the vegetative fronds may 
also be tetrasporophytes (2n) without tetrasporangier which cannot be 
recognized from the male gametophytes (n). According to Martín et al., (2011) it 
is possible that most of the thalli appearing as vegetative thalli actually were 
undifferentiated tetrasporophyte.  
Also according to De Wreede & Klinger, 1988; Santelices, 1990 and Richerd et al., 
1993 differences in the ratio between haploid (male gametophytes) and diploid 
(cystocarpic and tetrasporic brances) individuals in a population could be due to 
variations in fertility and their ability to survive. This could also affect the sex 
ratio recorded and the differences in generations. 
In this project, some of the thalli registered from July till December with no sign 
of sex could have been terasporophytes, male gametophytes or female 
gametophytes not yet with visual cystocarps. This is supported by Peter 
Schmedes, who was able to get tetraspores in June from a small project 
performed at Nykøbing Mors, 2020 (personal conversation, June 2020).  
Furthermore, I did not look at gender. I only looked at matured sex. In principle, 
all the vegetative tissue could be anything and thus still ensure this 1: 1 ratio 
between sexes.  
 
Does local conditions affect which phases are present? 
Based on the present field collections, gametophytes were the dominant 
==PAGE:55==
55
generation of sex in these Gracilaria species. This relationship in sexes has been 
observed in other populations, such as in Sri Lanka, Mexico and Chile (Kain & 
Destombe, 1995). According to Aguilar Rosas et al., (1993) phases survival can 
be caused by local condition. If the substrates are suitable for attachments of 
spores like pebbles and mussels this favors development of diploids like 
tetrasporophytes and carposporophytes because spores are able to settle. 
However, if the substrates are soft bottom it favor vegetative propagation with a 
single phase developed from fragmentation of thalli. In the case of Nykøbing bugt 
the bottom was a combination of stones, pebbles, mussels and soft bottom with 
plenty of opportunities for spores to settle. Free-floating thalli were not the 
dominant form of the Gracilaria, which were present. This support the idea that 
some of the vegetative fronds may also be tetrasporophytes (2n) 
 
4.1.3. When is the time for collecting Gracilaria from wild 
populations for spore release in a hatchery.( Are there months 
when the thalli has the most cystocarp)? 
The amount of cystocarpic thalli collected all of the six months are shown below 
(see figure 6)  
 
 
Figure 6. Average number of cystocarpic thalli collected in Nykøbing Bugt, 2020.  
Data represent average number of the three replicates ± standard deviation, (n=3)  
 
 
The average nummer of thalli with cystocarps were from 2±2 till 9±4 . 
==PAGE:56==
56
The numbers of collected cystocarpic fronds looked the same over the 6 months. 
To see if this was correct an Anova-test were run. It came out with a p-value = 
0.1054. The numbers of collected cystocarpic fronds collected in different 
months were the same through out the period. It is therefore possible to find 
equal amounts of cystocarpic fronds through out the period. 
One of the goals for this experiment was to show the course of the amount of 
cystocarps avaiable from nature illustrated by a graph that shows when peak 
amounts of cystocarps over the year (see fig. 7), with cultivation in mind. 
 
 
Figure 7. Average number of cystocarp collected each month from July – December. Data 
represent average number of the three replicates ± standard deviation, (n=3).  
 
The average collected cystocarps monthly were from 15±19 till 199±63. The 
collected amounts of cystocarp counted on 5 cm was from 1 cystocarp counted 
twice from the months November and December up to 55 cystocarp counted on 
5 cm on a fthallus collected in July. The cystocarps collected in October were 
from 6 - 33 cystocarps on 5 cm from differnt tthallus having differences in 
lenghts from 20 – 53 cm. By calculating available numbers of cystocarps in total 
(length of cystocarpic frond/5 cm x amounts of cystocarps counted on 5 cm) it 
can be seen the total number of cystocarps collected follow a decreasing trend 
until December, where the numbers of cystocarps starts to increase again, except 
for October. An Anova test (assumptions about Homogenity of variance and 
normal ditribution, was met) was perfomed. The p-value was 0.005559 meaning 
the differences were significants, the null hypothesis was rejected. This means 
that allthough you could find the same amounts of cystocarpic fronds in some 
months, there was less cystocarps on them.  
==PAGE:57==
57
A post hoc (Bonferroni) was performed to single out the months that were 
different. The only significant difference was between the months : 
August and November and October and November. This means collecting fronds 
with cystocarps  could be done  with the same effectivness the whole period 
except November which is significant low compared to the other months. 
 
4.1.4. Availability of cystocarps - How many Gracilaria thalli with 
cystocarpic branches should I collect? 
Beneath in figure 9 are shown how many cystocarps were present per 
centimeter of cystocarpic branches collected monthly. This illustrate visually 
which month would it be the most effective to collect from, anticipating no limits 
of fronds each month and the assumption: Numbers of spores released per 
cystocarp and how many spores are to be used per meter line are known and 
release of spores are non - seasonal manner. 
 
 
Figure 8. Average numbers of cystocarps through the months July – December. 
Data represent average number of the three replicates ± standard deviation, (n=3). 
 
Average numbers of cystocarps/cm were in the range from 0.6 ± 0.6 per cm till 
4.9±1.0 per cm. Average numbers of cystocarps/cm are higher in the months of 
July, August, September and October compared with the months of November 
and December. Performing an Anova test  a p-value = 0.0006638 was found and 
therefore significantly different. This shows that it would be more effective to 
collect cystocarps in summer and  autumn compared to winter time and support 
results found above and illustrated in figure 7 and 8.  A post hoc test was 
==PAGE:58==
58
performed to see which months was significant different. In five cases significant 
differences between the months of numbers of cystocarps/cm were found: 
- 
August and November (p-value= 0.0297) 
- 
 Juli and December (p-value= 0.0095) 
- 
October and November (p-value= 0.0128) 
- 
September and November (p-value=0.0143) 
- 
Juli and November (p-value = 0.0010) 
Looking at figure 9 and the p-values shows that November and December are the 
months with lowest amounts of cystocarps/cm on cystocarpic fronds. 
This means that in November the numbers of cystocarps/cm are lower 
compared with Juli, August, Septemper and October where fronds with equal 
amounts of cystocarps can be collected. The numbers of cystocarps/cm in Juli is 
also significant different from the numbers in December whereas the numbers of 
cystocarps/cm in December is not significant different from November or any  
other month except Juli. This indicates that the numbers of cystocarps/cm 
deviates and are higher in Juli compared with the he number of cystocarps/cm 
from the other months (August, September, October) although not in a 
significant way. The most effective month to collect cystocarps from these wild 
populations are in Juli, August, September and October. December can be 
compared with August, September and October but not with Juli, which are 
better (see figure 8 and p-values). November is the month with the lowest  
amounts of cystocarps/cm and therefore the month where most fronds need to 
be collected. In Juli fewest fronds has to be collected from the wild populations. 
4.1.5. Short resume  
• All months showed same % of fertile fronds per fronds collected. as an 
Welch Anova test showed differences was not significant   
• The fertile fronds with sign of fertility were primaryly cystocarpic fronds 
• The numbers of cystocarpic fronds were not the same through the 
months as an Anova test showed the differences were significant  
• The total amounts of cystocarps were significantly decreasing from July 
till December, and it was harder to find cystocarpic fronds.  
The best months to collect cystocarps were from July untill October.  
Not knowing if the Gracilaria collected are releasing spores in a seasonal 
manner makes it not possible from these resullts to tell which month are 
the best to collect with the aim of innoculating spore developing lines.  
This will be discussed later as experiments about releasing of spores 
ended without sporerelease. Is release of spores strongly controlled by 
season?  
4.2. Identification and description of collected Gracilaria species 
Since it is difficult to distinguish between the three species, and because it is not 
legal to grow the invasive species, it is relevant to find out if it is possible to 
develop a user-friendly method that can distinguish between collected Gracilaria 
species, so that Gracilaria collected from nature can be used for cultivation in 
Denmark within the current legal framework. The aim with this section was to 
find out what species did I work with? - Could the three species be separated 
morphologically and could the individual species be identified? 
==PAGE:59==
59
4.2.1. The customized easy to use Guide 
From the literature, I set up a customized user-friendly guide based on field 
characteristics that could be used for the first sorting of collected Gracilaria from 
wild populations (see Table 4). 
   
Table 4.  The customized easy to use Guide, Some field characteristic for 
Gracilaria vermiculophylla, Gracilaria gracilis and Gracilariopsis longissima. After 
(Steentoft et al., 1995; Nejrup, 2012; Nielsen and Lundsteen, 2019) 
Gracilaria vermiculophyllum:  
Can be up to 1 m in length in 
Denmark. 
- Red brown-dark brown or red brown-reddish 
branches 
- Often breaks when taken up from the water.  
- Very rougher texture than the other two.  
- Enormous compared to the other two, can 
easily cover two herbarium blades.  
- Diameter of the erect branches can be from 1-
10 mm 
- Often seen as free-floating individuals, which 
can build up to thick algae mats 
Gracilaria gracilis: 
Can be up to around 33 cm in 
length in Denmark 
 
- Branching is very irregular  
- The branches have curved tips. 
 - Cartilaginous seaweed 
- Dull purple fronds 
- Branches difficult to break 
- Grows on 1 - 6 m deeps 
Gracilariopsis longissima: 
Can be up to around 45 cm in 
length in Denmark 
 
- Branches have uncurved tips. 
- Branches are tough, leathery and fleshy 
- Grow down to 15 m 
- Were latest seen in 1976 in Hirtshals 
After (Steentoft et al., 1995; Nejrup, 2012; Nielsen and Lundsteen, 2019). 
 
Table 4. is divided into sections for each Gracilaria species. The species are 
named in the left column together with maximum length and the characteristics 
are listed in the right column.  Each species are described with different field 
characteristics, which they can be roughly separated with, including color, 
texture, length, thickness of branches, organization of the branches, and in what 
context they appear 
 
Standing in the water trying to identify the newly collected species of Gracilaria 
using the field guide. 
 
To use the guide the six questions below can be asked: 
1.  One must be assure if it is Gracilaria? Gracilaria are characterized as 
macroscopic algae’s from about 0.1 to about 1 m long in Denmark.  Gracilaria 
algae are seen in different nuances of red and brown-yellowish and are 
branched. The branches of Gracilaria found in Denmark, are all cylindrical. 
==PAGE:60==
60
Gracilaria can appear bushy, a little rigorous and with comparably short 
branches, or delicate, with long thin branches.  
2. If possible measure how long is the collected frond? Does it exceeds the 
maximum length of G. Gracilis and G. Longissima? If the collected frond are 0,5 m 
long, then it may be an indicative sign that it is G. vermiculophyllum - the invasive 
species. 
3.  How is the texture of the branches? Are it difficult to break them. If yes, it’s 
probably either Gracilaria gracilis or Gracilariopsis longissima and not Gracilaria 
vermiculophyllum, which are known to break easily. 
4. How deep is the water where the specimen is collected. If it is found below 6 m 
it is probally not Gracilaria gracilis 
5. Are the tips curved? If yes, this is one of the sign for Gracilaria gracilis. 
6. Does it form thick free floating algae mats then it is probally G. 
vermicullophyllum 
4.2.2. Presentation of collected thalli from Nykøbing Sjælland 
Next I would like to show some of the seaweed thalli that were collected in 
connection with the fertility experiment. Here, in this experiment, the thalluses 
were used to describe Gracilaria morphologically and for identification of 
species.  
 
, but first three quick ones: 
How to use the collected material to identification of species? 
Some, not all of the collected, Gracilaria seaweed plants have been presented. 
The aim was not to show them all, but rather to give an idea of how to use the 
collected material to identify which species were present in the collected 
biomass. First following the customized guide presented in Table 4, which can be 
used to come up with a qualified guess from field characteristics, then by looking 
at the cross section of some reproductive male gametophytes with gametangia 
with a microscope to identify.  
 
Why pictures of mature cystocarps? 
Another goal for the project was to induce spore release from reproductive 
female gametophytes bearing cystocarpic branches. Therefore, I will show 
pictures of mature cystocarps both as they are seen in the field and from pictures 
taken under microscope. 
 
Why show Gracilaria from different time of the year? 
The material presented comes from different times of the year as there need to 
be Gracilaria in different phases of the life cyclus incl. reproductive male 
gametophytes with gametangia to identify, but also to show in which phases 
Gracilaria can be collected.  
 
Therefore, the material are presented in following order: 
• How does the Gracilaria seaweed look? Female and male gametophytes 
and vegetative fronds are presented 
==PAGE:61==
61
• Which species of the Gracilaria seaweed were collected? Branches with 
spermatangia and cross sections showing the spermatangial conceptacle 
and their pattern are pictured 
• How was matureness of female gametophytes estimated? Cystocarps with 
ostioles and cystocarps being measured are presented and spore release 
captured under microscope showing release of carpospores from the 
ostioles are shown 
4.2.2.1. How does the Gracilaria Seaweed look? 
Length of thalli 
The first field sign, which separate the three species, are the differences in 
maximum length (see table 4).  
 
 
Figure 9. Average lenght of Gracilaria collected from July – December 2020, Nykøbing Bugt. Data 
represent average number of the three replicates ± standard deviation, (n=3). 
 
The high standard deviation in November (±14.3) was due to no collected fronds 
for replicate 2 giving a high spread between only two replicates.  The average 
lengths of collected Gracilaria were decreasing from July until December. The 
average lengths of the fronds were between 11.4 ± 1.6 cm in December up till 
34.6 ± 3.9 cm in July. Homogeneity of variances was not met; therefore a Welch 
one-way Anova was performed. The average lengths of the thalli were not equal 
between the six studied groups. (p-value (0.0001627) from the Welch's ANOVA).  
This figure shows that identification from length may not be possible in the 
whole period as the average length are not the same in all months meaning long 
fronds possibly will not be present the whole period. Furthermore, the thalli has 
to be significant above 45 cm, which is the maximum length for the non-invasive 
==PAGE:62==
62
Gracilaria species to be able to distinguish the invasive Gracilaria 
vermiculophyllum from the other two Gracilaria species (non-invasive). Here the 
maximum average length was 34.6 ± 3.9.  From data it was possible to find thalli 
much longer than 45 cm, but not that often that it had an effect on the average. 
This means that the length is not a secure way to distinguish the invasive 
Gracilaria from the non- invasive Gracilaria because most of the fronds will have 
a length, which makes it possible that the fronds can be any of the Gracilaria 
species. The only way to identify from length is to find a very long fronds around 
60 cm or more then it most likely a Gracilaria vermicullophyllum. This is 
illustrated below in the use of field guide. 
 
Use of field guide 
The average length covers a broad spectrum of fronds with length from 2 – 83 
cm. This indicates that identification might be possible from the length of the 
single fronds but not from the average measured length. The longest Gracilaria 
frond was collected in October. It had cystocarps, broke easily and was 83 cm 
long. (See picture 13). 
 
 
 
Picture 13. Gracilaria female thallus, probally A. vermiculophyllum, 83 cm long, collected in 
Nykøbing Bugt, October 2020. 
 
 
Looking into table 4 and trying to estimate which Gracilaria species was 
pictured, from the information of the length, it could look like that the Gracilaria 
in picture 13 was G. vermicullophyllum as the length of the frond clearly exceed 
the other two species maximum length. This were supported by 
the color of the branches which was mostly light brown, but some were dark 
brown and the texture of the branches which were easily broken.    
==PAGE:63==
63
Another specimen was found in September 2020. It was 21 cm long. It had dark 
brown, purple greenish branches and the tips where slightly curved. The 
branches were leathery and a little difficult to break.  Furthermore, the 
branching was very irregular.
 
Picture 14. Gracilaria, with branches bearing male gametangia, collected September 2020, 
Odsherred 
 
From the description in Table 4 it could be assumed the specimen belonged to 
the G. gracilis species as the length were below 33 cm and some of the tips were 
curved. It had dull purple fronds and the branches were difficult to break. Being 
difficult to break could also be a sign for G. longissima but it hadn’t been seen 
since 1976. On the other hand, it looked like some of the branches had been 
broken, so it could have been longer and some of the branches looked a little big 
thicker than the other ones. In addition, the texture of the frond was a little bit 
rough so it could indicate it was G. vermicullophyllum. 
 
4.2.2.2. Which species of the Gracilaria Seaweed were collected 
The specimen from picture 14 was examined under the microscope and 
gametangier was found (see picture 15). 
==PAGE:64==
64
 
Picture 15. Gracilaria male gametophyte with gametangia on frond. Collected September 2020, 
Odsherred. Picture taken through the ocular of the stereomicroscope, enlarged X10, DTU 
 
 
Very few branches with gamatangia were found in Nykøbing Bugt. In total 10 
branches with gametangia were found through the collection period and they 
were mostly found in October (9 branches) and 1 branches in September. The 
goal of the project was to show how to identify a male gametophyte from its 
spermatangial pattern not to estimate the frequens of the particulat species in 
the total biomass. Therefore results are only presented for one plant. The widths 
and lenghts of the spermatagia on the frond measured from 30-50 µm (0.03-0.05 
mm) in width and from 70 – 100 µm (0.07 – 0.1 mm) in lenght. Cross section 
from the branch with gametangia is shown in picture 16. The depths of the 
conceptacle were measured. The depths were in the interval from 220-250 µm 
(0.220 – 0.250 mm) and the widths were in the interval from 100-110 µm (0.100 
– 0.110 mm).  
The average of the depth of the spermatangia were calculated to 233.3 µm ± 15.2 
µm (0.233±0.152 mm). The spermatangial pattern looked like type 3 (Verrucosa 
Type (see section 1.1.3.) where the spermatangia penetrate subcortex.  This 
pattern is seen in Gracilaria vermiculophyllum. The collected Gracilaria species 
could therefore, from those characteristica, be identified as Gracilaria 
vermicullophyllum but identification was in this case not possible from the length 
of the frond. 
 
==PAGE:65==
65
 
Picture 16. Cross-sections of Gracilaria vermicullophyllum male gametophyte branches with 
spermatangia (see picture 15). The depths of the spermatagia were around 200 µm. The 
spermatangial pattern is similar to type 3 (Verrucosa Type) and the spermatangia are 
penetrating subcortex. Picture taken through the ocular of the stereomicroscope, enlarged X10, 
DTU 
 
Another specimen was collected in November 2020, Nykøbing Bugt. It was dark, 
red brownish and bushy. 
==PAGE:66==
66
 
Picture 17. Unidentified vegetative, 15 cm long Gracilaria frond with no visual signs of sex. 
Collected November 2020, Nykøbing Bugt. Photo, DTU. 
 
The branches were thinner compared to the other two Gracilaria shown above 
and it appeared darker. It felt smoother compared to the other two, the texture 
were cartilaginous and the branches were difficult to break which according to 
table 4 could exclude Gracilaria vermicullophyllum. Some of the tips were curved, 
the branching were very irregular which could point at Gracilaria gracilis. . It 
could either be a gametophyte or a tetrasporophyte.  No sign of sex were found. 
The specimen therefore could not be identified. 
4.2.2.3. How was matureness of female gametophytes estimated?  
Cystocarpic fronds (see Picture 18) probally Gracilaria vermicullophyllum, 
judged from the length of the stem and it broke easily, were collected in October 
in Nykøbing Bugt.  
 
 
==PAGE:67==
67
 
Picture 18. Cystocarpic frond, broke easily and 53 cm long, collected October, 2020, Nykøbing 
Bugt, Odsherred. Photo, DTU. 
 
Some part of the frond was still dark brown, but it had been bleached, so it 
appeared greenish and light yellow.  The color changes were properly due to the 
sunlight. 
 
The maturenesses of the cystocarps were estimated from the size of the 
diameter of their cystocarps (see picture 19) and the sign of ostioles (see picture 
20) as described by (Oza & Krisnamurthy, 1968; Wu, 1990; Lyer et al., 2004). 
The sizes for ripe cystocarps from India were found by Oza & Krisnamurthy, 
1968 to be 450—500 μ (0.45 -0.5 mm) in diameter. Lyer et al., 2004 found 
mature cystocarps from South Africa ready to release their carpospores with 
diameter from 0.8 – 1.8 mm.  No literature were found about which size 
cystocarps need to have to be mature and be ready for release of carpospores in 
Denmark. In this experiment a roughly measurement of sizes of diameter of the 
cystocarps were performed. 
==PAGE:68==
68
 
Picture 19: Mature cystocarp measuring 1 mm in diameter. Collected August 2020, Odsherred. 
Photo, DTU. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:69==
69
 
Picture 20. Mature cystocarps with visual ostioles (nibbles on top of the cystocarps (red arrow)) 
on unidentified branches of Gracilaria. Collected August 2020, Nykøbing Bugt. Photo, DTU. 
 
All cystocarps applied in the sporulation experiment were measured and all 
were ≥ 0,8 mm in diameter, well above the 0.45-0.5 mm, which was the lower 
limits for when the cystocarps were found to be mature. The ostioles also 
protruded highly upwards. Those signs were both suggested by authors as signs 
of mature cystocarps ready for spore release (Oza & Krisnamurthy, 1968; Wu, 
1990; Lyer et al. 2004).  Further Peter Schmedes got release of carpospores from 
cystocarpic fronds collected in June Nykøbing Mors. The cystocarpic fronds used 
in this experiment were collected, August, Nykøbing Bugt. This indicate size of 
collected cystocarps were in the range for cystocarp being mature as the 
cystocarps had got at least 1 month more to grow and mature. 
 
The beginning of the sporulation were captured by microscope from a 
cystocarpic frond collected September 2020, Nykøbing Bugt  (see picture 21). 
The white secretes released from the ostiole are the beginning of the release of 
carpospores. Oza & Krisnamurthy, 1968 described how the carpospores always 
were covered with slimy mucilage in the form of a tiny white ball just before 
release of carpospores. 
 
==PAGE:70==
70
 
Picture 21. Gracilaria with mature cystocarps in the beginning of releasing carpospores (red 
arrow) collected September 2020, Nykøbing Bugt, Odsherred. Photo, DTU. 
 
4.2.3. Short resume  
The purpose of this section was to show that it is possible to get an idea of what 
species has been collected, based on morphological features but that it is only by 
using a cross section from reproductive male gametophytes with gametangia 
that it is possible to identify the species of the collected seaweed plant. Further 
the invasive species is present in Nykøbing Bugt, so it is therefore relevant to be 
able to identify the collected seaweed plants. Different life phases were seen over 
the course of the collecting period. In total I have taken more than 100 of 
pictures. It is a really difficult process to identify species  or even phases from 
field charakteristics. Gametophyte with male characteristic is nessesary if you 
want to identify the species and they aren’t avaiable year round but only 
according to my data two months a year. And even though there are examples in 
litterature that tetrasporangia can be seen by the naked eye holding the seaweed 
up against the sun I didn’t managed to find any. What I found were thalli which 
when examined under microscope ende up showing the red spots were red algae 
growing as epiphytes. Cystocarps and thalli without sign of fertily have been 
present all of the months. Those thalli aren’t usable to identify the Gracilaria 
species. Due to legistration it is not allowed to culture an invasive species. And 
one out of 3 Gracilaria spiecies in Denmark is invasive. Therefor the possibility 
that the collected Gracilaria is a invasive species makes these thalli not usefull in 
a context of cultivation neither with vegetative propagation or sexual 
propagation before they are identified, The same goes for fronds with 
tetrasporangia.  
Building a stock in a nursery  which is usefull for spore development is difficult 
and not in according with a user friendly protocol, easy to use, fast and cheap 
==PAGE:71==
71
because such a stock needs to be build from a unialgal cultured grown from 
identified “parent” as descreibed by Redmond et al., 2014.  And also if a stock is 
builed from spores. If carpospores the thalli will be diploid tetrasporophytes. If 
tetraspores the thalli will be haploid gametohytes. But to identify the species the 
fronds has to be mature so male gametophytes appears to determine the sex and 
from there be able to identify the species. 
From this presentation it also appeared that some Gracilaria looked different but 
never the less belonged to the same species (comparing picture 13 and picture 
14). Trying to seperate the species using the customized guide is not unique and 
there are many nuances. Cross section could identify gametophytes with male 
spermatangia. So a guide to identify Gracilaria species must include a guide to 
distinquis the different species from crossections of gametangia. More 
sophisticated methods, e.g. using DNA sequencing may be necessary to identify 
the other ones. 
 
 
4.3. Sporulation - release of spores  
Spore release was examined using a stereo magnifier and a microscope either on 
the bottom of a petri dish or on a glass slide. It was found that there was no 
response, in the form of release of spores, by any of the selected combinations of 
temperature, light intensity and day length from any of the different 
pretreatments. The "null result" means that it was not possible, with this 
particular collected material from the month of August, to provoke the release of 
carpospores at the selected conditions for temperature, aeration, light intensity 
and day length and with the selected pretreatments. 
 
4.3.1. Discussion of the “null-result” 
Below is a discussion of what might controls / lacks to achieve mature fertility 
and trace release of carpospores: 
 
From the literature, we know that factors such as temperature, light intensity, 
and day length influence when Gracilaria releases its spores (Garza-Sa´nchez et 
al.,2000; Michetti et al., 2013) . The purpose of these experiments were to find 
out when Gracilaria discards its carpospores and can the release of carpospores 
from Gracilaria be optimized by turning on these environmental factors? It is 
possible to find Gracilara who look sexually fertile (Gracilaria with cystocarps 
having a diameter abover 0,45 and with protuding ostioles) in the field, and it is 
also possible in literature to find reports about how these fertile looking 
cystocarp (cystocarpic fronds) are not spreading their spores. Knowledge is 
lacking about if fertile Gracilaria  seaweed (Gracilaria with cystocarps having a 
diameter abover 0.45 and with protuding ostioles)then just  can  be taken in 
from wild populations and whether it is possible to get them to throw their 
spores. The question is: are they mature – will they release their spores? This is 
interesting because it could make it possible to make spore lines for next season 
and perhaps to make the spore lines ready for an early season next year? 
 
==PAGE:72==
72
To evaluate how to most effectively stress a mature fertile plant to shed its 
spores different pretreatments combined with different combinations of light, 
temp and day length were evaluated based on the questions: 
•            How many carpospores does a cystocarp shed?  
•            How long does it take before they start throwing their carpospores?  
• 
Does different species perform differently? 
 
4.3.1.1. How to induce sporerelease from Gracilaria 
The purpose of this section was to find out how to optimize release of 
carpospores from mature cystocarpic fronds collected in the wild and make 
spore development lines in a hatchery. From search in the literature, several 
methods were found and the goal with this experiment was then to adjust those 
to Danish conditions and to find out which one of the different treatments would 
first result in releasing of carpospores and to the highest amount of carpospores. 
 
Why were those treatments chosen? 
Treament 1, no pre - treament under dim light, was used as control and chosen 
partly because of its simplicity partly due to results from Michetti et al., (2013) 
who got highest amount of sporerelease from cystocarpic fronds in an 
experiment with no pre-treament and under dim light and partly because 
released spores will settle in dim light and start to grow (Michetti et al., 2013) 
 
Treatment 2, gentle dessication and no light, were preposed by Yarish et al., 
(2012) who suggested that release of spores could be stimulated by covering the 
mature branch in damp paper towels, and then stored it in a closed plastic bag a 
few hours or overnight in darkness or dim light. The use of darkness was 
supported by Kain and Destombe (1995) and Oza and Krisnamurthy (1968) who 
found that darkness improved the amount of carpospores released from 
Gracilaria species. Also Redmond et al., 2014 supported use of darkness but 
together with a gentle desiccation to stimulate release of spores. Further this 
method were chosen because it was simple and possible to perform for every 
one, it related to experiences from release of spores from sugar kelp (dark) and 
experinces from experiments performed by Michetti et al., (2013)(see above). 
Further it were performed by Yarish et al., (2012) in a temperature interval 
similar to Danish summer conditions and because Gracilaria is a warm water 
species.  Also use of no light would minimize production cost and the storing in 
plastic bags, hours or the whole night time, could give the working process in the 
hatchery some flexibility. 
 
Treatment 3, dessication in four hours under dim light and no stirring. Several 
reserchers have suggested this method to stimulate release of carpospores (Wu, 
1990; Zheng et al., 1987; Yarish et al., 2012, Redmond,et al., 2014). The method 
is simpel and is performed within temperatures for seawater that can be 
achieved in Denmark. In nature the temperature of seawater between 20 - 25 °C 
in Isefjorden is from June till September (collected on internet first of March, 
2020 https://swimout.dk/september-2019/). According to Zheng et al., (1987) 
this temperature also coincide with natural reproductive seasons  
==PAGE:73==
73
Dim light imitate natural conditions for sporerelease and settlement because 
spores released in nature sinks to the bottom where they settle on stone etc.. The 
time of dessication was set a little bit higher in this experiment than suggested 
by Zheng et al., 1987, expecting a low summer temperature in Denmark and 
therefore a longer time before the cystocarpic fronds would be dried and non-
regular wrinkles would be seen (Wu, 1990; Yarish et al., 2012). Non-stirring 
where chosen as to limit the amounts of working processes. 
 
Treatment 4, dessication under dim light, stirred. This method add mechanical 
stimulation to the effect of dessication and speed up the sporerelease event 
(Zheng et al., 1987). 
4.3.1.2. Is release of spores strongly controlled by season in Gracilaria? 
The cystocarps were collected in early August, one of the months with the most 
plants and most cystocarps, in my experiment. Based on the hypothesis that you 
could just collect where there were most because then there had to be even more 
spores. This was not the case. Spores were not released despite the cystocarps 
being exposed to temperature, light intensities, day lengths and pretreatments 
which in literature have been shown to lead to stimulation and release of spores. 
This naturally led to the next question: Do they release spores just because they 
have the fertile structures (cystocarps)? 
But first the condition and the expectation for spore release in this experiment 
were examined:  
 
Did fouling on the cystocarps cause the “null-result”? 
No fouling was observed on the cystocarps. Fouling couldn’t be the reason as 
supposed by Redmond et al., 2014. One of the main obstacles for producing 
spores in a hatchery are the development of fouling, which according to 
Redmond et al., 2014 decreases productivity by contaminating, inhibiting or 
destroying a culture. 
 
Were the experimentel conditions not supporting release of spores? 
 
Light and temperaure 
Several researchers have examined releases of carpospores from Gracilaria. In 
this experiment release of carpospores were suppose to happen at temperatures 
at 20°C and light intensity of 15 μmol photons/ m2/ s, which was supported by 
Zhou et al., 2013, and who presented those conditions as the most optimal 
conditions. Temperature was the same but lightintensity were set higher in 
experiments performed by Garza-Sa´nchez et al., (2000) and Michetti et al., 
(2013). According to Garza-Sa´nchez et al., (2000) cystocarps shed most spores 
at 20°C and a lightintensity on 140 μmol photons/ m2/ s from cystocarps 
collected both winter and autumn. Also Michetti et al., (2013) found highest 
release of carpospores from cystocarps collected in autumn which released the 
carpospores at a temperature of 18± 1°C and with a light intensity above this 
experiment on 30 μmol photons/ m^-2/s^-1.  
 
The differences in light intensity could maybe explain no release of carpospores 
in this experiment. But this was contradicted by Michetti et al., (2013), which 
==PAGE:74==
74
investigated the influence of the light intensity at 60 μmol photons m^−2 
s^−1  (high), 30 μmol photons m^−2 s^−1  (medium), and 10 μmol photons 
m^−2 s^−1 (low) irradiance and found no differences between release of 
carpospores per cystocarp per day. Also Zhou et al., 2013 found light intensity 
less importanted than temperature. Due to the ”null result” temperature was 
raised to 25°C, but without any effect on release of spores. This temperature was 
shown by Zhou et al., (2013), Zheng et al., (1987) and Wu (1990) to cause release 
of carpospores from Gracilaria. Also the ligh intensity was raised from 15 till 45 
μmol photons m^−2 s^−1 with a temperature of 25°C in an attempt to let the 
cystocarps mature under conditions that would not kill the spores if 
sporerelease happened (Zhou et al., 2013). So other researchers to get a positive 
release of spores from cystocarps from Gracilaria had used the temperatures and 
the light intensities.  
 
Daylenght  
Michetti et al., (2013) found the highest release of spores with a day length of 
12/12 (L/D). The same day length was applied by Zhou et al., (2013) which also 
got release of spores. Also Garza-Sánchez et al., (2000) applied a 12/12 
photoperiod and got spore release under temperature and light conditions 
comparable to conditions used in this experiment. So the experimental 
conditions were supporting release of carpospores.  
Did I look at the wrong time for spores? 
In another experiment (3.3.4.2. Estimation of carpospores output and viability) 
release of carpospores from mature cystocarps were followed from 7 am until 7 
pm for a week and then every once a day in 1 ½ month. No carpospores were 
released. Normally release of carpospores happens within a week (Zhou et al., 
2013). My result is also not in according with Michetti et al., (2013) who found 
release of carpospores from mature cystocarps may take place at once, or can 
occur over several days and the release of carpospores fluctuates during the day.  
Nor is it in according to Zheng et al., (1987) who found most carpospores were 
released in the morning from 8 to 10 or to Garza-Sánchez et al., (2000) who 
observed the highest amount of carpospores were released on day 3 or 4. Zhou 
et al., 2013 observed carpospores release from day 1 increasing with a maximum 
at day 4 then decreasing till day 6. 
This result led to the next question 
 
Do they release spores just because they have the fertile structure? 
According to Garza-Sánchez et al., (2000), release of carpospores from mature 
cystocarps were influenced by light intensity, temperature and season. It is clear 
looking into the the results from Garza-Sánchez et al., (2000), that carpospores 
are released in a different amount, at the same temperature and light intensities, 
but at different time of the year. This could point to release of carpospores from 
Gracilaria being impacted by season and could give an explanation to why I 
didn’t see any release of spores 
Cystocarps were present all six months but no release of carpospores from 
cystocarpic fronds collected in August were seen. Experimental condition did 
support release of spores, and fouling did not inhibit the cystocarps. They were 
==PAGE:75==
75
in well nourish seawater and aerated when temperature were raised to 25°C. 
Further, the cystocarps were all evaluated as being mature before applied for the 
spore release experiments. Were the cystocarps just exposing signs of fertility   
and even signs of being mature without being able to release carpospores due to 
not being in the right time of the year that is being out of season? In the 
experiment ”9.3.1. Estimating fertility in nature” the amounts of cystocarpic 
frond out of total collected fronds lay in the range from 23,3 – 43, 3% in the 
months from July until December (fig. 4). In connection with how many of them 
actually release spores it were clear there was no connection between amount of 
apparently mature cystocarpic fronds tested morphologic and release of spores. 
 
 Therefore, even though there were found morphological estimated and mature 
looking cystocarpic fronds the collected fronds were not mature. 
One is that cystocarps had the buds, but cystocarps were apparently not entirely 
mature as they did not shed their carpospores? 
I had studied the fertility before I selected them for the experiments. I measured 
the diameter and looked for the appearance of the ostiol on each and every 
cystocarp. Based on these signs of maturity, the cystocarps used were 
determined to be mature. It turned out that there is a difference between 
possessing sex structures and sexual maturity understood as the release of 
spores. Structurally, there were branches with cystocarps that appeared mature, 
but these cystocarps did not shed their spores. 
Incidentally, this has been supported by Schmedes et al., (2020), who saw a 
similar picture for another red algae, Palmaria palmata: that despite the fact that 
the proportion of fertile leaves with tetrasporangia was high, one did not see a 
match with the release of tetraspores. Schmede's et al., (2020),  data thus also do 
not confirm our hypothesis that the presence of a high number of fertile fronds 
means that it spills out with spores - it does not. Gracilaria can thus appear 
fertile mature with cystocarps and gametangia on male gametophytic branches, 
this may also apply to tetraspores, but this does not mean that they shed their 
spores or sperm. It may be that there are more and more plants, but it just does 
not make a spore release. Schmedes et al., 2020 have seen the same for Palmaria 
palmata that there is a graph for the proportion of fertile and a graph for the 
release of spores and there may unfortunately be a mismatch. 
 
When is the season for when Gracilaria have spore release?   
Were there possibly other conditions that could apply. It could look like 
Gracilaria were in control of the season. Given the “zero result”, Gracilaria was 
certainly not in season from July to December. At the same time, natural release 
of spores has been seen previously, twice, from material collected in Denmark in 
the month of June (not published), which could also indicate that the release of 
spores from Gracilaria is strongly controlled by season. 
 
Manchetti et al., 2013 have just collected their biomass during the months when 
they were aware that Gracilaria was fertile in their regions and have thus 
succeeded in tracking release of carpospores in the laboratory. As there is no 
literature from Denmark which shows when Gracilaria naturally has a season for 
the release of spores and I only know of two cases (not published) where 
Gracilaria released its spores (June) it can be assumed that the reason why 
==PAGE:76==
76
Gracilaria with the mature cystocarps not releasing it’s carpospores can be 
founded in that Gracilaria is ruled by season.  
Kain & Destombe (1995) reported that fertile Gracilaria plants collected in India 
didn’t always shed spores in the laboratory meaning that spore shedding could 
be seasonally adjusted. 
In the existing literature, it is claimed that algae are adapted to the climatic 
conditions, e.g in temperate regions sporophytes of native species, such as 
Saccharina latissima, are observed to form spore tissue in autumn and over 
winter (Lüning & Dieck, 1989). It is also known that species that live in the 
tropics where the season is the same, form reproductive spores all year round 
(Liu et al., 2017). Algae are genetically modified, and express light receptors that 
they use to respond to their environment to regulate the formation of 
reproductive spores in the part of the season that is optimal for survival (Liu et 
al., 2017). Algae are thereby genetically disposed for being controlled by season. 
This is also supported by Lünning and Dieck (1989) which divided the different 
types of seaweed into categories according to what controlled their 
reproductivity: 1. Directly controlled by primary environmental factors 
becoming beneficial (non-seasonal), 2.  Mostly controlled by photoperiod and 
also but to a minor degree a narrow temperature interval (proximate factors 
(semi-seasonal) and 3. Controlled by its annual clock together with a zeitgeber 
(synchronizes an organism's biological rhythms to the Earth's 24-hour 
light/dark cycle and 12-month cycle (Andersen, 2005) (seasonal).  
It is well known in the literature that the inner clock is difficult to overrule even 
though it is shown by some species e.g. the inhibiting of the production of a 
putative sporulation inhibitor in the meristematic region of kelps (Lüning et al., 
2000; Pang and Lüning 2004). 
Kain, (1989) describes the phenology of subtidal algae as either being Season 
Responders or Season Anticipators. Season Responders react to environmental 
conditions and grow, and reproduce when those are favorable. In contrast, 
Season Anticipators react on a trigger and grow and reproduce in a strategic 
annual rhythm appropriate for the species not as a response to suitable 
environmental conditions. Kain (1989) described Gracilaria as a Season 
Responders it grows when it can. Reproduction has been coupled with the 
highest amount of fronds by Garza-Sanchez et al., (2000) and Subbarangaiah, 
(1984). Studies did confirmed the maximum production of carpospore and their 
survival coincided with the highest growing season of cystocarpic thalli (Mantri 
et al. 2009). Those observations could potential contradict the results in this 
project unless a higher amounts of fronds were seen in some other months than 
from July till December e.g. June where spore release were seen twice. So the 
research are not unique regarding Gracilaria being ruled seasonal or not 
therefore how to reproduce the reproduction of Gracilaria is difficult which 
make it very difficult to set up experimental conditions for release of spores. 
Does spores help Gracilaria survive the winter? 
Observation in this project only indicated that Gracilaria is being ruled by season 
as no releases of spores were seen. The amounts of Gracilaria macrothalli were 
cleary decreasing from summer towards winter but not in a significant way. New 
thalli first seemed to appear around late April start May the following year 
==PAGE:77==
77
(Telephone conversation with Simon Weber, April, Dansk Tang).  It could be that 
Gracilaria are releasing their spores in June. The spores make the plant survive 
through summer, autumn and winter after which it starts to grow early spring 
April, May to get ready to spore release in June. This could be in accordance with 
that the decrease in day length is happens most fast in autumn together with 
water temperature is falling and the replenishment of ambient nutrient then 
happens early spring constituting the seasonal effect in algae reproduction 
(Bartsch et al. 2008, de Bettignies et al., 2018).   Hay & Norris, (1984) saw a delay 
between the reproductive peak and the increase in plant density of 4-5 months 
Cararibian and explained the delay as a way for the plant to survive stressful 
periods of the dry season. Being a spores wasn’t as stressful as being a 
macrothalli when season came with low light intensity. This could be the case for 
Gracilaria in temperate regions. The delay is just extended due to other 
conditions in the temperate regions than in Cararibean where two seasons are 
seen yearly. New experiments have to be performed to find out. 
How is season ruling the change from vegetative state into the reproductive state? 
Boraso de Zaixo (1987) saw seasonality imposes limits to the reproductive 
activity in G. gracilis with a maximum of cystocarpic thalli in summer and 
autumn. This is in contrast to Kain & Destombe (1995) which descreibed 
Gracilaria as a Season Responder, but in accordance with the “null result” in this 
project. Other researchers have reported about seasonality in macroalgae. 
According to Cortel-Breeman and Hoopen, (1978), Dring, (1984) and Agrawal, 
(2012) growth and reproduction of macroalgae are depending on season. 
Growth and reproduction are controlled because the macroalgae senses changes 
in the environment, particularly changes in day length, which they detect by 
using their photoreceptors and stored nutrient reserves.  
The process from being  vegetative tissues and changed into the reproductive 
state are descreibed in detail by Van der Meer and Todd, (1980); Kain, (1986); 
Henry, 1988 and Guiry and Dawes, (1992).   
 
4.3.1.3. Other factors involved in controlling seaweed fertility induction and 
spore release (two separate processes)  
What could stop the mature looking cystocarps from releasing their spores? 
Garcia-jiménez et al., (2018) worked with the involvement of metabolites like 
polyamines in red algae reproduction. According to Guzmán-Urióstegui et al., 
(2002) naturally occurring levels of polyamines like putrescine, spermidine, and 
spermine changed at different stages of cystocarp maturation. Tissues from the 
early post-fertilization stage had the highest amounts of polyamines. When the 
cystocarps matured, the values of polyamines decreased. Guzmán-Urióstegui et 
al., (2002) showed that use of Spermine in incubation experiments induced 
cystocarp maturation and release of carpospores within 4 to 7 days. Also 
Schmedes et al., 2020 investigated the potential of polyamines being involved in 
the maturation process for Palmaria palmata. A high content of Tyramine, a 
vasoactive compound, were suggested to be involved in the softening of thallus, 
which are expected to be an early event in the red algae reproduction. Inducing 
fertility by exogenous administrated metabolites could be useful for aquaculture, 
but according to Kumar et al., (2015); Uji et al., (2016) and García-Jiménez and 
==PAGE:78==
78
Robiana, (2015) more research is needed as the metabolites coupling to algae 
environmental sensing isn’t well enough documented and thereby their 
influences on the onset of algae reproduction.   
 
4.3.1.4.Contradicting results or what? 
From picture 21 a sporulation cystocarp collected in September are releasing 
carpospores. How could this fit with Gracilaria being seasonal fit in June because 
I didn’t find any spores released in the experiments and spores were seen 
released twice in Denmark in June?  
 
What if Experimental designs were ok but the execution was not sufficient? 
According to literature, it was possible to get release of spores from mature 
cystocarps with the conditions used in those experiment. What if the cystocarps 
had been mature but circumstances under the experiments haven’t been 
performed in a proper way? 
Redmond et al., 2014 list several factors, where the fronds can be stressed, 
before the actually experiment: 
1. It is important to minimize stress: 
Transport from collection place till lab:  The fronds were transported in plastic 
bags in a car for several hours. The environment in the car wasn’t cooler or 
similar to the environment the fronds were collected from and the fronds 
weren’t transported in moist paper towels or gauze. This could have stopped the 
sporulation process because the plants were stressed. Peter Schmedes managed 
to get spore release in June just by taking a handful of cystocarpic fronds. It could 
be due to catching the “right” seasonal time or it could have been due not to 
stress the plants by keeping them in a similar environment from where they 
were found. 
2. The cleaning process. When collecting fronds from wild populations the fronds 
would be contaminated with a host of microscopic organisms (diatoms, 
protozoans, fungi, other micro, macroorganisms, or cyanobacteria). These 
microscopic organisms can potentially inhibit developments in cultures. 
Therefore a cleaning process described by Redmond et al. 2014 for spore release 
could have been performed to optimize the chances for release of spores. In 
short. A sterile working place should have been set up and then: 
Each frond could have been cleaned in sterile seawater wiped down with a 
sterile cotton tipped swap followed by an agar drag through a prepared agar 
plate to drag off left over microscopic contaminants. Adding germanium dioxide 
(GeO2) could also have decreased the load of contamination. I didn’t see any 
fouling but it didn’t mean microscopic organisms couldn’t be present. Under 
microscope several microorganisms were seen. 
 
Which environmental variables weren’t controlled? 
Yaris and Pereira (2008) describes one of the major scientific challenges for 
growing Gracilaria in tanks with successful results as control of the 
environmental variables including temperature, pH or CO2 availability, light and 
salinity. I expect setting up experiments in beakers and petri dishes also require 
control with those environmental variables:  
 
==PAGE:79==
79
Temperature 
The experiments were started in the basement where temperature was 
measured to 20°C. Temperature can have fluctuated during the experiment time 
without it being registered. It can have warmed up the water stressing the 
cystocarpic fragments and thereby have inhibited release of spores. 
Zhou et al. , 2016 and Redmond et al. 2014 recommended temperature around 
20°C and Garza-Sánchez et al., 2000 recommended temperature around 21°C for 
release of carpospores in hatchery. According to Wu, 1990 carpospores are 
released with temperature above 20°C. According to Oza & Krisnamurthy, 1968 
shedding of carpospores starts only when the temperature falls within a 
required range. This could mean that the temperature could have been to high 
for release of carpospores.  
 
pH or CO2 
Gracilaria grows well with pH in (>7.5–8.0). The petri dishes were left without 
any added air or circulation as it was expected the temperature were low enough 
so there wouldn’t be any changes. Neither the pH or the CO2 were measured and 
the pH therefor could have shifted causing a more alkali environment when the 
algae used the CO2  
 
Light 
Covering the petri dishes and the beakers with tyl-fabric to achieve the wanted 
light intensity controlled amounts of light. The light was then measured with a 
light meter.  It was difficult to get the same light intensity all over the experiment 
and to get the desired intensity. Light might therefore have been to high at some 
part, which might have stopped the sporulation process. Also light might have 
increased the temperature. 
 
Salinity 
According to Rueness et al., (1987) Gracilaria tolerates a wide range in salinity 
(15-30 psu). The specimens were collected in Nykøbing Bugt where the salinity 
was around 16- 22 psu. In the experiment water collected from Ven were used 
with salinity on 30 psu. This change in salinity might have stressed the 
cystocarpic fronds not to release spores. 
 
Other factors which could have stopped the sporulation process  
The Ornithine decarboxylase (GiODC) genes in Gracilaria has been shown to 
regulate carpospores maturation and release of carpospores (Guzm.n-Uri.stegui 
et al. 2002, 2012; Sacramento et al. 2004; Garc.a-Jim.nez et al. 2009, 
Reviewed in Garc.a-Jim.nez and Robaina 2015). Levels of GiODC were found to be 
decreased in mature tissues (Garc.a-Jim.nez et al. 2009). It is out of the scoope 
for this project to investigate this, but a future project could. 
4.3.2 Short resume  
In this section I have been discussing what controls / lacks to achieve mature 
fertility and track release. Release of spores aren’t just controlled by  
combinations of environmental factors like temperature, light intensity and 
daylenght but may also be controlled by endogenous factors like polyamines and 
may also be controlled by season. This makes it difficult to set up experimental 
==PAGE:80==
80
designs to achieve sporerelease as differences also occur between regions and 
Gracilaria reproduction phenology hasn’t been investigated in Denmark, yet. 
Also environmental variables tested in lab and stress of the fronds may have 
influenced the release of spores. Therefor it can not be  concluded that Gracilaria 
did not released it’s spores due to it being ruled by season. More researc is 
needed. 
 
4.4. Vegetative propagation 
The experiments were started at different times at Nykøbing Sjælland and 
Nykøbing Mors and with different amounts of biomass. The experiment started 
on 23 June 2020 in Nykøbing Mors. The experiment started on 13 July 2020 in 
Nykøbing Sjælland. Start biomass was 30 g per net tube at Nykøbing Sjælland 
and 35 g per net tube at Nykøbing Mors. 
4.4.1. How did Gracilaria grow in Nykøbing Mors and in Nykøbing 
Sjælland? 
Examing gain in biomass from different types of fragments 
The biomass seperated into basal, middle and distal fragments was measured 
weekly in Nykøbing Mors and monthly in Nykøbing Sjælland. The gain in 
biomass per meter net tubes are shown below in fig. 10a and fig. 10b 
 
 
Figure 10a. 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
81
Figure 10b.  
Figure 10a (above) and 10b (below). Amount of biomass (basal, middle and distal fragments) in 
net tubes weighed weekly in Nykøbing Mors for a period of 2 months and monthly in Nykøbing 
Sjælland for a period of 5 months. Data are represented as mean (n=3).  
Notice the different time intervals on the x-axis. 
 
The gain in biomass for all the different types of fragments (basal, middle and 
distal) increased through out the period in Nykøbing Mors till the end of the 
experiment, day 57 with a maximum of gain in biomass 357 ± 28 g (day 57± 
standard deviation). The gain in biomass of all the fragments increased till day 
79 in Nykøbing Sjælland and then decreased till the end of the experiment, day 
143. The maximum of gain in biomass at Nykøbing Sjælland was 121.9±41.4 g 
(day 79 ± deviation). 
 
Were the growth different in the basal part, the middle part or the distal part  of 
the thallus within the same month? 
 
Trend for gain in biomass from fragments. 
There were no differences in gain of biomass between the fragments from 
different parts of the thalli (One Way ANOVA test gave p-values from 0.448 to 
0.9919; fig. 10a,b). At Nykøbing Mors most of the gains in biomass were similar 
comparing the basal, middle and distal fragments, but in two observations the 
fragments grew different (p-values ranging from 0.01938 to 0.7351) (For futher 
details see section under Statistics).  
 
In total most of the statistic made from the measurements from Nykøbing Mors 
and Nykøbing Sjælland did not give p-values below 0.05. This confirmed the 
impression that all fragments had the same gain in biomass, regardless from 
==PAGE:82==
82
which part of the frond they were taken, what day they were measured and from 
which place they were piched. The gains in biomass were then examined for the 
beginning and for the end of the experiment in detail.  
 
 
4.4.2. Why was the gain in biomass different between the two 
places? 
As the different types of fragments from the same day of measuments had the 
same gain in biomass the data was pooled and further examination was for the 
whole thallus (See figure 10a and 10b). 
The growth of biomass followed an exponential growth line from Nykøbing Mors 
whereas the growth followed a linear growth line from Nykøbing Sjælland   
 
4.4.2.1. Growth rate 
How did the growth developed from Juli till August, which are covered in both 
experiments? 
 
Nykøbing Sjælland 
Data from Nykøbing Sjælland and Nykøbing Mors was plotted with start biomass 
respective 30 g and 35 g (see figure 11 and 12) 
 
 
 
 
Figur 11. Linear growth of biomas from Nykøbing Sjælland  with trend line for the first 79 days, 
(n=9). 
==PAGE:83==
83
 
Two trend lines were plotted. The linear trend line hade a R2(1)=0.96135. The 
equation for the linear trend line was y=1.2148x + 33.51621.147.  The equation 
for the trend line for the exponential line was  𝑦= 32.151𝑒!.!"##! with 
R2(2)=0.93861. The growth from Nykøbing Sjælland thereby had the best fit with 
the linear trend line. In theory, the growth should follow the exponential trend 
line. I will therefore subsequently treat it as exponential.Assuming growth 
followed an exponential growth the average specific growth rate were calculated 
for Nykøbing Sjælland as (µ)Nykøbing Sjælland=  0.0202 ± 0.00031 day^-1.  
 
Nykøbing Mors. 
Plotted data for growth from Nykøbing Mors can be seen below in figure 12.  
 
 
Figur 12.Biomass (g) from Nykøbing Sjælland  with exponential trend line and linear trend line 
for the first 79 days, (n=9). 
 
Two trend lines were plotted. The linear trend line hade a R2(3)=0.89637. The 
equation for the linear trend line was y=5.4492x-21.147.  
The equation for the trend line for the exponential line was  𝑦= 28.062𝑒!.!"#"! 
with R2(4)=0.96376. The growth from Nykøbing Mors thereby had the best fit 
with the exponential trend line (R2(4)> R2(3)).  
Comparing specific growth rates between Nykøbing Mors and Nykøbing Sjælland 
showed (µ)Nykøbing Mors > (µ)Nykøbing Sjælland.. . The specific growth rate following 
exponential growth from Nykøbing Mors was significant higher compared with 
the specific growth rate from Nykøbing sjælland. This was confirmed by a Welch 
Two Sample t-test giving a p-value = 2.171e-09.  
==PAGE:84==
84
4.4.2.2. What regulate the growth of Seaweed? 
According to Lobban & Harrison, (1994) temperature and light regulate the 
growth of seaweed. This was supported by Nejrup et al., (2013) who did find 
significant interactions between light and temperature on the growth of 
Gracilaria vermicullophylla 
 
Several factors could have had an impact on the specific growth rates from 
Nykøbing Sjælland and Nykøbing Mors: 
 
Light intensity 
The most obvious explanation for the decrease in growth at Nykøbing Sjælland 
was the heavy fouling. Heavy fouling was observed already in august, 2020 at 
Nykøbing Sjælland. The net tubes with the fragments were laying on the surface 
of the water and drifting seaweeds covered them and thereby diminished the 
amount of light they received by shading. It could have decreased their growth 
and their gain in biomass (see picture 22) because without enough light, a plant 
cannot photosynthesis very quickly - even if there is a suitable temperature. 
According to Andersen, (2005), seaweed grows exponential, but at low light 
intensity the growth becomes linear. The growths observed at Nykøbing 
Sjælland were linear, not exponential the first 79 days and therefore might be 
explained influenced by low light caused by fouling.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
85
 
Picture22. Fouling on net tube, Nykøbing bugt,. Photo 7th of August, Nykøbing Sjælland. 
 
This was supported by Rueness et al (1987) who suggested that heavy fouling 
above 3 m might have been the factor reducing growth in shallow water in his 
experiment performed in Norway. 
Alternative, too much light could have cause photo inhibiting of the maximum 
photosynthesis resulting in a decrease in growth (Lobban and Harrison, 1994). If 
this was the case, the fouling was then diminishing the light intensity and caused 
the growth to be better than it would have been without the fouling.  High light 
intensity and high temperature could cause diminished growth. From my 
==PAGE:86==
86
experiment with spores and sprouts white sprouts were observed, under 
conditions of high light intensities and high temperatures, less gain in length was 
observed, when compared to colored sprouts. None of the fragments appeared 
white at the end of the experiment so I do not think photo inhibition happened 
 
Fragmentation 
As the Gracilaria fronds were cut up in smaller parts and divided into different 
net tubes loss caused by fragmentation could also happen if the mesh size 
of the net tubes was too big. Some fragments may have been lost in that way, but 
it was not recorded. This could give the impression that the gain in biomass was 
less than it actually was. 
 
Normal life cycle decay or change of development stage 
Alternative, according to Hay and Norris, (1982) it was normal for Gracilaria 
species to change from the macro thalli phase till the spore phase when the 
environmental conditions changed. In this project I observed that Gracilaria did 
nearly disappear in wintertime and then appeared again around May. A similar 
pattern was observed by Hay and Norris, (1982). Seasonal reproduction and 
abundance of species of Gracilaria were delayed by 4-5 months. Most plant were 
seen 4- to 5-month after spore release (Hay and Norris, 1982). This pattern was 
explained by Richardson, (1979, 1981). Richardson, (1979, 1981) explained how 
seaweed survived changes in season by adapting physical to changed 
environmental conditions. Instead of being present as macro thalli the seaweed 
adapted to changes in the environment by being present as spores. By changing 
from one phase to another, the macro thalli disappearing and the spores 
appearing, the seaweed could survive because conditions stressful for macro 
thalli were less stressful for the spore development stage. Therefore, the 
decrease in biomass gain could be due to normal life cycle decay or change of 
development stage for Gracilaria species. 
 
 
Did depth of cultivation of the net tubes impact specific growth rate? 
Cultivation of fragments in net tubes happened on the surface of the water. At 
the depth of 0 m the specific growth rate was registered from Nykøbing Mors as 
(µ)Nykøbing Mors= 0.0406 day^-1 and for Nykøbing Sjælland as (µ)Nykøbing Sjælland=  
0.0202 day^-1. 
Rueness et al., (1987) did some growth field experiments with ropes hanging 
from rafts. Maximum relative growth rate was seen at 1 m with 0.09 day ^-1.  
This was supported by Molloy & Bolton (1996). Molloy & Bolton (1996) did field 
experiments with fragments 10 cm long attached with 10 cm intervals into ropes 
hanging down. All of the thallus hanging from the ropes survived from 0,5 m and 
down to the bottom (6 m). At 0 m (water surface) all thallus bleached and died. 
The specific growth rates was measured from around 0.03 to 0.10 day^-1 
respectively at 10 cm and 130 cm depth. In this experiment the net tubes were 
grown at the water surface. The Gracilaria didn’t die, but it might have impacted 
the growth as the measured specific growth rates from Nykøbing Mors 
compared with specific growth rates from literature (Rueness et al., 1987; 
Molloy & Bolton, 1996) were in the lower range.  
 
==PAGE:87==
87
Local conditions: 
According to Andersen (2005) it would be expected that the specific growth 
rates were similar provided condition for growth were favorable in regard to 
light, nutrient, temperature, salinity etc. This means that local conditions do have 
an impact on growth and indicate that local conditions in Nykøbing Sjælland and 
Nykøbing Mors are different. From Teams meeting with supervisors especially 
the high load of nutrients in Limfjorden has been mentioned in relation to 
increase in growth.  
Conley et al., 2000, reported about Total N- load, DIN (dissolved inorganic 
Nitrogen), Total P-load and DIP (dissolved inorganic phosphor from Limfjorden 
and from Isefjorden from 1989 till 1995. In all categories the number were 
higher for Limfjorden compared to Isefjorden. Oxygen depletion was reported in 
Limfjorden from the mid of August 2020 (Hansen & Rytter, 2020). Higher 
concentration of nutrient like N and P in the water column in Nykøbing Mors was 
further expected because oxygen depletion is following a load of nurtient in the 
water column due to increased decomposition. Together with the fact that 
Limfjorden in general are reported with a higher load of nutrient compared with 
the Isefjorden I find it safe to assume the load of nutrient was higher in 
Limfjorden than in Isefjorden. Increase in growth related to N concentration was 
supported by Rueness et al., (1987) who found the specific growth rate increased 
with larger N concentration up to around 23 μΜ. The highest specific growth rate 
was seen in algae grown in N-sufficient medium with 22—43 μΜ. Differences in 
nutrient therefore could be part of the explanation about why the specific 
growth rate was higher in Nykøbing Mors compared to Nykøbing Sjælland. The 
impact of nutrient availability may also be a factor here but in an opposite way.   
The specific growth rate in Gracilaria from Nykøbing Sjælland (0.0202 ± 0.0003 
day^-1(when assuming exponential growth) was well below the specific growth 
rate registered by Nejrup et al., (2013).  Oxygen depletion was not registered in 
Nykøbing Mors. This could indicate that the availability of nutrients especially 
that of N was low. According to Conley et al. 2000 the availability for DIN are low 
in the months from June until September. This could, according to Bird et al 1982 
inhibit the growth of marine plants as a lower uptake of inorganic nutrients from 
the water column was followed by lower intracellular pools of nutrients. Below a 
critical point, pigments and enzyme would be restricted and thereby the 
photosynthetic capacity (Pmax) followed by a lower growth rate (Hanisak 1979). 
The growth rate at Nykøbing Sjælland therefore could be limited by N-limitation 
and by fouling, as discussed above. 
Another factor, which do have an impact on growth, is salinity. According to 
Conley et al., (2000) salinity was registered between 24-32 ‰ at Klosterbugten 
and around 20‰ at Nykøbing Sjælland from 1989-1995. 
According to Nejrup & Pedersen, (2012) the growth rate were diminished when 
salinity were below 15 ‰. The best growth was between 15 – 30 ‰. This was 
supported by Rueness & Tananger (1984) who found that Gracilaria gracilis had 
highest relative growth rate with a salinity on 30‰, lower with a salinity on 
25‰ and lowest relative growth rate with a salinity on 20‰. The lower salinity 
in Nykøbing Sjælland compared to Nykøbing Mors could therefore also have an 
impact on the specific growth rate. 
 
Temperature and light also have an impact on growth rate. Summer 2020 was 
==PAGE:88==
88
warm both at Nykøbing Sjælland and Nykøbing Mors. 
Varm weather can increase the temperature of the seawater (Hansen & Rytter, 
2020).  The temperature was in average above 27°C in June and Juli increased till 
31°C in August and was around 27°C in September in Odsherred (collected on 
internet 6 of Juli, 2020 https://www.dmi.dk/vejrarkiv/). The temperature was 
in average above 29°C in June 22°C in Juli increased till 31°C in August and was 
around 22°C in September in Limfjorden (collected on internet 6 of Juli, 2020 
https://www.dmi.dk/vejrarkiv/). This had an effect on the temperature in the 
surface water and was reflected in the temperature of the bottom water in inner 
Danish water. Until mid-June the temperature of the bottom water was over 
three degrees higher than the long-term average (1961-1990).  Then follow a 
period untill mid-Juli where the temperature of the bottom water was the same 
as expected from the long-term medium (1961-1990) whereafter the 
temperature of the bottom water raised above the long-term medium 
again(Hansen & Rytter, 2020).  
The specific growth rate observed from Nykøbing Mors (0.041 ± 0.001 day^-1) 
was a bit lower than the specific growth rate registered by Nejrup et al., (2013) 
who found that the combination of 20°C and 225 μmol photons m^-2 s^–1 gave 
the highest growth rate 0.045±0.001 day^-1. This could be due to temperature 
and light intensity in nature was higher in summer 2020. This was supported by 
Macchiavello et al., (1998) which found that increasing light intensity increased 
the specific growth rate. But, at high temperatures specific growth rate declined 
with higher light intensity.  
The specific growth rate in Gracilaria from Nykøbing Sjælland (0.0202 ± 0.0003 
day^-1(when assuming exponential growth) was well below the specific growth 
rate registered by Nejrup et al., (2013).  Oxygen depletion was not registered in 
Nykøbing Mors. This could indicate that the availability of nutrients especially 
that of N was low. According to Conley et al. 2000 the availability for DIN are low 
in the months from June until September. This could, according to Bird et al 1982 
inhibit the growth of marine plants as a lower uptake of inorganic nutrients from 
the water column was followed by lower intracellular pools of nutrients. Below a 
critical point, pigments and enzyme would be restricted and thereby the 
photosynthetic capacity (Pmax) followed by a lower growth rate (Hanisak 1979). 
The growth rate at Nykøbing Sjælland therefore could be limited by N-limitation. 
Fouling diminishing light availability might influence growth as well, as was 
experience by Rueness et al (1987) and confirmed by Peckol & Rivers, (1996), 
who found: If light is low and temperature high it can give a lower growth for 
temperate seaweed during summer months. 
 
Does sex have an effect on specific growth rate? 
The biomass collected at the two places were different. The biomass collected at 
Nykøbing Mors were mostly vegetative (personal conversation with Peter 
Schmedes) as opposite to the biomass collected at Nykøbing Bugt (Nykøbing 
Sjælland), which were mostly cystocarpic fronds. This led to another question, 
“Is it important that the plants are in the same phase ie either fertile or not fertile 
when comparing growth ?” 
Several researchers have described how life cycle stage impact the growth rate: 
Zhang & van der Meer, (1988) found that female gametophytes (n) grew faster 
and appeared more suitable for vegetative propagation than male gametophytes 
==PAGE:89==
89
(n) and tetrasporophytes (2n). The specific growth rate decreased when the 
female gametophytes needed to use some of its energy on developing cystocarps 
after fertilization. Growth happened when the female gametophyte was mainly 
in the vegetative state. Then growth from the female gametophyte exceeded both 
the growth of male gametophytes and tetrasporophytes. 
Also Destombe, (1987) saw that the growth rate was affected in Gracilaria 
gracilis by sex. According to Destombe, (1987), the growth rate declined less for 
male gametophytes after reproduction compared with female gametophytes and 
tetrasporophytes. Hoyle, (1978) found from experiments with two Gracilaria 
species that the female cystocarpic gametophytes grew significantly slower than 
did the male gametophytes or tetrasporophytes. 
So, in short  
• Growth rate for haploid female gametophytes > male 
gametophytes and tetrasporophytes after reproduction 
• Decline in growth rate after fertilization for male gametophytes < 
female gametophytes and tetrasporophytes 
• The growth rate of female cystocarpic plants  < males or 
tetrasporophytes plants 
According to those researchers, growing cystocarps cost on the growth rate and 
therefore might be a part of the explanation about the observed differences in 
specific growth rates calculates between the two places.  The growth in 
Nykøbing Sjælland was significant lower than the growth from Nykøbing Most 
with mostly vegetative fronds. 
 
It seems as many factors may affect the growth in Gracilaria and therefore need 
to be investigated before starting cultivation of Gracilaria in net tubes. 
 
4.4.3.In short 
The same gain in biomass from all fragments regardless which day the fragments 
were collected, and from where the fragments were collected and from which 
part of the frond the fragments were collected were observed. Therefore, 
observations were pooled. Statistic was made for indepent observations, as the 
samples were indepent both from the same place and when comparing between 
places (Nykøbing Sjælland and Nykøbing Mors).  
The gain in biomass over time from Nykøbing Sjælland and Nykøbing Mors 
follows linear trend lines. The growth in Nykøbing Mors followed an exponential 
growth line whereas the growth in Nykøbing Sjælland followed a linear growth 
line. The growth rate was higher in Nykøbing Mors (57 days) than in Nykøbing 
Sjælland (79 days).  The gain in biomass was higher in Nykøbing Mors the first 
57 days compared with Nykøbing Sjælland the first 54 days. The higher gain in 
biomass from Nykøbing Moss was probably du to the growth followed an 
exponential growth line. The different growth types between the two places 
might be caused by local environmental factors, and also might be influence by 
the biomass was in different lifecyclus phases (vegetative from Nykøbing Mors) 
and  (fertile cystocarpic from Nykøbing Sjælland).  
 
 
==PAGE:90==
90
 
4.5. Sexual propagation with carpospores 
4.5.1 Germination ratio of spores settled on thin strings and thick 
strings   
To see if there were any differences in germination ratio in between the 
temperatures, in between the three treatments with different light intensities 
and in between thin and thick strings the germination ratio was calculated and 
illustrated in figure 13 below.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
91
 
 
 
Figure 13. Germination percentage ± standard deviation, n=3: Development over time, 
differences between treatments and differences between substrates for temperatures 10°C (Left 
column) and 20°C (Right column) under low (15 µmol m^-2s^-1), middle (60 µmol m^-2s^-1) 
and high (120 µmol m^-2s^-1) light intensity.  Green line: Thin strings, no added nutrient, Blue 
==PAGE:92==
92
line: Thin strings, added nutrient. Orange line: Thick strings, no added nutrient, Red line: Thick 
strings, added nutrient.    
 
The germination ratios are illustrated with 10°C left column and 20°C right 
column. The first row are with a light intensity at 15 µmol photons m^-2s^-1. 
Next row is for light intensity at 60 µmol m^-2s^-1 and last row is for light 
intensity at 120 µmol photons m^-2s^-1.  The germination ratios on the thin 
strings are plotted with the colors green (with no added nutrient) and blue (with 
added nutrient) respectively, and on the thick strings with the colors orange (no 
added nutrient) and red (added nutrient) respectively. 
 
Is it possible to change the germination ratio - how many % spores started to 
germinate  by changing environmental factors like temperature, nutrient, light and 
seeding substrates?   
Both the thin and the thick strings were seeded the 25th of June 2020. The thin 
strings were positioned horizontal opposed to the thick strings, which were 
positioned semi-vertical. 
As can be seen from data in figure 13 germination happens mostly on the thin 
string at 10°C and 20°C at all light intensities through out the period. Very little 
carpospores germinated on the thick string and only at 20°C and then the 
germination happened in the late period of the experiment. Besides the 
differences in diameter of the string and the material the orientation of the 
strings were different.  
 
4.5.1.1. Germination at low light  
Both kinds of strings, regardless of the temperatures, were covered by single 
threaded multicellular algae (epiphyte) at the end of the experiment when 
grown with added nutrient. No germination was seen on the thick strings with 
temperature at 10°C. Differences in germination pattern were observed between 
the thin strings either grown with, or without nutrient at different temperatures. 
At 20°C, in the first half of the experiment, the thin strings with no nutrient 
added had a higher ratio of germination compared to the thin strings with added 
nutrient. At 10°C no differences were observed taking the spread (standard 
deviations) in the observations into consideration. With temperature at 20°C, 
germinations were also observed on the thick strings. Germination was seen 
later on the thick string with added nutrient compared with thick strings without 
added nutrient. Germination started at the end of the period for the thick strings 
regardless of nutrient regime. 
 
a. Low light intensity at 10°C 
Germination of carpospores on the thin strings were seen throughout the whole 
period for the thin strings with or without added nutrient except for the thin 
string with added nutrient from December 14. Due to growth of epiphytes on the 
string covering the seedlings, the strings had been brushed to remove epiphytes. 
Unfortunately, also seedlings and not only epiphytes on these strings were lost 
under the clean up. White seedlings were observed on thin strings with added 
nutrient at the end of the experiment. 
 
b. Low light intensity at 20°C. 
==PAGE:93==
93
Germination of spores first started in the last half of the experiment on the thick 
strings opposed to the thin strings where germination was seen through out the 
whole period. Besides the fact that the carpospores were germinated later on the 
thick strings, then the Ratio of Germination, did not differ between the thick and 
thin string, at the end of the experiment (when comparing ratio of germination, 
between the thin and thick strings, from the time the seedlings were observed, 
on the thick string at 20°C). The ratio of germinated carpospores on the thick 
string were the same at 20°C with or without added nutrient compared to thin 
strings at 20°C with and without added nutrient when considering the later start 
on the thick strings (Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples; p-
values in the range from 0.2019 till 0.2876). 
The thick strings with no added nutrient had germinated carpospores December 
5, but not on December 14. This is probably caused by loose of seedling that fell 
of while brushing the strings, because of heavy fouling.  From this follows that 
differences in the quality and orientation of spore seeding lines may not affect 
the germination ratio under low light at 20°C, but affect the start of germination.  
 
Detailed results in brief 
The results are summed up in table 5 below. 
  
Table 5: Effect on Ratio of germination on strings under low light regime with change of 
temperature from 10°C till 20°. Yellow: No effect, Green: Yes, increase, Red: No decrease. 
Numbers are referring to results from Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples 
reported below in footnote. 
 
 
20°C 
 
 
 
Thin strings 
Thick strings 
 
 
10° 
 
 
No added 
nutrient 
Added 
nutrient 
No added 
nutrient 
Added 
nutrient 
Thin 
strings 
No added 
nutrient 
3 
7 
2 
2 
Added 
nutrient 
5 
7 
2 
2 
Thick 
strings 
No added 
nutrient 
4 
6 
1 
1 
Added 
nutrient 
4 
6 
1 
1 
Footnote. Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples revealed that changing 
temperature from 10 to 20°C returned following p-values: 
1. p-value= 0.3739, 2. p-values between 0.003757 till 0.0424, 3. p-value = 0.0004127, 4. p-value 
at 8.416 x 10^-6, 5. p-value=0.1769, 6. p-value 0.008913, 7. p-values = 0.7302 till 0.9104  
 
From table 5 it can be seen that increasing temperature from 10°C till 20°C will 
have an effect on ratio of germination under low light intensity for:  
• Increasing temperature for thin strings with no added nutrient positioned 
horizontal (3). 
• Changing thick strings with and without added nutrient positioned semi-
vertical to thin strings with and without added nutrient positioned 
horizontal (4 and 6). 
From table 4 it can be seen that increasing temperature from 10°C till 20°C will 
have no effect on ratio of germination under low light intensity for the 
==PAGE:94==
94
combinations: 
• Increasing temperature for thick strings regardless of nutrient regime 
(1). 
• Increasing temperature and adding nutrient for thin string regardless of 
nutrient regime (7).  
• Increasing temperature and remove nutrient for the thin string with 
added nutrient (5). 
From the table it can be seen that increasing temperature from 10°C till 20°C will 
have decreasing effect on ratio of germination under low light intensity for the 
combinations: 
• Changing of seeding strings from thin strings hold horizontal to thick 
strings hold semi-vertical regardless of nutrient regime (2).  
 
From this follows that guidelines for germination of carpospores at low light 
intensities can be set up, and adapted to local conditions and that it is possible to 
change the germination ratio (how many % spores started to change to 
seedlings) by changing environmental factors like temperature, nutrient and 
seeding substrates/seeding orientation.   
4.5.1.2.Germination at middle light 
The germination on thin and thick strings followed the same pattern as 
described above under low light with no germination observed on the thick 
strings with 10°C, and later start of germination on thick strings with a 
temperature at 20°C. At 20°C germination was observed at the same time on 
thick strings regardless of nutrient regime. Germination on thin strings at 10°C 
were significant higher with added nutrient compared to thin strings with no 
added nutrient. This was confirmed by Welch Two Sample t-test with 
independent samples (p-value = 0.01909). This pattern was not seen with 20°C. 
Here the germination did not differ regardless nutrient regime the spores were 
grown (Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples; p-values = 0.9402). 
Differences ratio of germination on thin strings between with or without added 
nutrient was seen at 10°C, but not at 20°C. The germination ratio was highest on 
thin strings with or with out added nutrient regardless of temperature, 
compared with the germination ratio on thick strings with or with out added 
nutrient. This was partly confirmed by Welch Two Sample t-test with 
independent samples except between thin strings without added nutrient at 
10°C and thick strings at 10°C and 20°C with added nutrient. Here the 
germination ratios were the same.  
 
a. Middle light intensity at 10°C. 
Germination of carpospores disappeared in the middle of the period on thin 
strings without a supply of nutrient (see figure 13). From photos it can be seen 
that the thin strings were heavily covered in green algae, which made it 
impossible to count the numbers of spores and seedlings. On the picture 1A it is 
possible to see the top of some seedling as either white or brownish red tiny tips. 
 
==PAGE:95==
95
 
Picture 1 A. Thin strings seeded with carpospores covered with green single 
treaded algae. Small tips of seedlings are seen (blue arrows). Photo, DTU 
November 2014, 2020. 
 
b. Middle light intensity at 20°C. 
The germination percentages were high for the whole period for the thin string 
with and without added nutrient.  At the end of the period, in December, 
germination is registered for the thick strings, with and without, nutrient but to a 
lesser extent than seen for the thin strings. Again it was investigated if there 
were any differences between ratio of germination comparing thin and thick 
strings. Again the spores germinate to the same degree on the thick strings as on 
the thin strings at 20°C, but germination just started later on the thick strings. 
This was confirmed by the Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples 
(p-values in the range from 0.08357 till 0.1105). The ratio of germinated 
carpospores on the thick were the same at 20°C with or without added nutrient 
compared to thin strings at 20°C with and without added nutrient when 
considering the later start on the thick strings. Same conclusion as above: that 
differences in the quality and orientation of spore seeding lines may not affect 
the germination ratio under middle light at 20°C, but affect the start of 
germination. 
 
Results in brief 
==PAGE:96==
96
The results are summed up in table 6 below: 
 
Table 6: Effect on Ratio of germination on strings under middle light regime with 
change of temperature from 10°C till 20°. Yellow: No effect, Green: Yes, increase, 
Red: No decrease. Numbers are referring to results from Welch Two Sample t-
test with independent samples reported below in footnote.  
 
 
20°C 
 
 
 
Thin strings 
Thick strings 
 
 
10° 
 
 
No added 
nutrient 
Added 
nutrient 
No added 
nutrient 
Added 
nutrient 
Thin 
strings 
No added 
nutrient 
1 
1 
3 
3 
Added 
nutrient 
1 
1 
2 
2 
Thick 
strings 
No added 
nutrient 
1 
1 
4 
4 
Added 
nutrient 
1 
1 
4 
4 
Footnote. Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples revealed that changing 
temperature from 10 to 20°C returned following p-values: 1. p-value from 7.04 x 10^-7 till 
0.002573, 2. p-values from 0.004051 till 0.006245, 3. p-values from 0.4472 till 0.6122 4. p-
values>0.05. 
  
From table 6 it can be seen that changing temperature would have an effect on 
ratio of germination under middle light intensity for:  
• Changing temperature from 10°C till 20°C for thin and thick strings with 
and with out nutrient till thin strings with or without nutrient would 
significant increase ratio of germination.  
• Changing thin string with added nutrient at 10°C till thick string with and 
without nutrient at 20°C would decrease ratio of germination. 
• Changing thin string with out added nutrient under 10°C till thick string 
with and without nutrient at 20°C would neither increase nor decrease 
ratio of germination. 
• Increasing temperature from 10°C till 20°C for thick string regardless of 
nutrient regime would not have any effect on ratio of germination. 
4.5.1.3. Germination at high light 
No germination was observed on the thick strings at 10°C and was first observed 
for both conditions of nutrient at the end of the experiment at 20°C (see figure 
13). Observations on germination thereby followed the same pattern as with 
previous described light intensities. In average germination were not highest on 
the thin string with no added nutrient at 10°C compared to thin string with 
added nutrient at 10°C. This was confirmed by the Welch Two Sample t-test with 
independent samples (p-value=0.1802). There were also no differences between 
ratio of germination when comparing the thin string with and with out nutrient 
at 20°C. This was confirmed by the Welch Two Sample t-test with independent 
samples (p-value=0.3532) (see figure 13). No effect was observed when 
increasing temperature from 10 to 20°C, and adding nutrient for thin strings 
(Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples; p-value=0.9486). Effect 
seen as increased ratio of germination on thin strings when changing 
==PAGE:97==
97
temperature from 10 till 20°C and skipping adding of nutrient was confirmed by 
the Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples (p-value=0.002508).  
 
a. Ratio of germination under high light intensity at 20°C. 
The thin strings all carried germinated carpospores the whole period but it was 
first in the end of the period seedlings were seen on the thick strings with and 
without nutrient. 
Germination on thin strings at 20°C with added nutrient started on the same 
level as the spores cultivated on thin strings at 20°C without added nutrient, but 
decrease early on (see figure 13).  
In average the ratio of germination were significant higher between the thin 
strings (20°C, regardless of nutrient regime) compared with ratio of germination 
on the thick strings (20°C, regardless of nutrient regime). This was confirmed by 
the Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples (p-value between 1.539 
x 10^-5 till 0.0026). 
No differences was observed between ratio of germinated spores cultivated at 
20°C on thin strings with and with out nutrient. This was confirmed by the Welch 
Two Sample t-test with independent samples (p-value = 0.3532). 
 
Results in brief. 
The results are summed up in table 7 below. 
  
Table 7: Effect on Ratio of germination on strings under high light regime with 
change of temperature from 10°C till 20°. Yellow: No effect, Green: Yes, increase, 
Red: No decrease. Numbers are referring to results from Welch Two Sample t-
test with independent samples reported below in footnote. 
 
 
20°C 
 
 
 
Thin strings 
Thick strings 
10°C 
 
 
No added 
nutrient 
Added 
nutrient 
No added 
nutrient 
Added 
nutrient 
Thin 
strings 
No added 
nutrient 
1 
1 
5 
5 
Added 
nutrient 
2 
3 
5 
5 
Thick 
strings 
No added 
nutrient 
4 
4 
6 
6 
Added 
nutrient 
4 
4 
6 
6 
Footnote. Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples revealed that changing 
temperature from 10 to 20°C returned following p-values:: 1. p-values from 0.5671 till 0.9486, 2. 
p-values = 0.002508, 3. p-values = 0.07641, 4. p-values from 0.0001455 till 0.003621, 5. p-values 
from 0.005863 till 0.01903, 6. p-values from 0.3443 till 0.3739. 
 
From table 7 it can be seen that change of temperature would have an effect on 
ratio of germination under middle light intensity for:  
1. Changing temperature from 10°C till 20°C for thin strings with no added 
nutrient till thin strings with added or not added nutrient would not have any 
significant effect in regard to the ratio of germination.  
2. Changing temperature from 10°C till 20°C for thin strings with added nutrient 
till thin strings with no added nutrient would significant increase ratio of 
==PAGE:98==
98
germination.  
3. Changing temperature from 10°C till 20°C for thin strings with added nutrient 
till thin strings also with added nutrient would have no significant effect on ratio 
of germination.  
4. Changing thick strings with or without nutrient at 10°C till thin strings with or 
without nutrient would significant increase ratio of germination. 
5. Changing thin strings regardless of nutrient regime at 10°C till thick strings at 
20°C regardless of nutrient regime will significantly cause a decrease in ratio of 
germination. 
6. Changing thick string at 10°C regardless of nutrient regime till 20°C regardless 
of nutrient regime will have no significant effect. 
 
As for the two other light intensities (low and middle) it was investigated if there 
were any differences between ratio of germination comparing thin and thick 
strings when considering the later start on the thick strings. Even though, the 
carpospores were germinating later on the thick strings, the results for the 
germination ratio did not differ between the thick and thin string at the end of 
the experiment. This when comparing the thin and thick strings from the time 
the seedlings were observed at the thick string at 20°C (Welch Two Sample t-test 
with independent samples; p-values in the range from 0.1199 till 0.3726). The 
ratio of germinated carpospores on the thick string were the same at 20°C with 
or without added nutrient compared to thin strings at 20°C with and without 
added nutrient when considering the later start on the thick strings. Same 
conclusion as above: that differences in the quality and orientation of spore 
seeding strings may not affect the germination ratio under high light at 20°C, but 
affect the start of germination. 
 
4.5.1.4. Differences between germination ratio on the thin string with no 
added nutrient under different light regimes (green line) at 10 °C: 
A Welch Two Sample t-test revealed: 
Thin string with no added nutrient had highest germination ratio with low light 
intensity through out the period compared with germination ratio for the string 
under middle light intensities (p-value = 0.001885), but not compared with the 
string under high light intensity. The thin string under high light intensity had 
the same ratio of germination as the thin strings under low light intensity (p-
value = 0.613).  The thin string under high light intensity had higher ratio of 
germination compared with similar condition under middle light intensities (p-
value = 0.02503). 
The treatment under 60 µmol photons m^-2s^-1 returned the lowest amount of 
spores that germinated into seedlings, whereas treatments with 15- and 120 
µmol photons m^-2s^-1 returned the same ratio of spores germinated till 
seedlings for thin strings with no added nutrient. 
 
4.5.1.5. Differences between germination ratios on the thin string with added 
nutrient under different light regimes (blue line) at 10°C 
A Welch Two Sample t-test revealed: 
The thin string under high light intensity had same ratio of germination as the 
==PAGE:99==
99
thin string under middle light intensity (p-value = 1). The observations were 
identical. 
The were no significant differences between the germination ratio for spores 
under low light intensity compared with the germination ratio of spores under 
respective middle and high light intensities (p-value= 0.359)  
The different light intensities had no effect on the ratio of germination on the 
thin strings with added nutrient. The same amount of spores germinated into 
seedlings regardless of under which light regime they were cultivated.  
 
 
Differences between germination ratio on the thin string with and with no added 
nutrient (blue and green line) examined under the same light regimes at 10 °C: 
 
A Welch Two Sample t-test revealed: 
When comparing ratio of germination under low light intensity significant 
differences was not confirmed between added and no added nutrient under low 
light intensity as the Welch Two Sample t-test returned a p-value = 0.9037. The 
ratio of germination was nearly identical under the two treatments regardless of 
nutrient.  
When comparing ratio of germination under middle light intensity between the 
two nutrient regimes significant differences was confirmed (p-
vale=0.01909<0.05). The spores with added nutrient germinated with a 
significant higher ratio compared to those spores kept under middle light 
intensity with no added nutrient.  
When comparing ratio of germination for spores under treatments with high 
light the differences between added and no added nutrient treatments was not 
significant (p-value = 0.1802).  
It was only for thin strings at 10°C kept under middle light regime different ratio 
of germination was observed under different nutrient regime. 
4.5.1.6. In short for thin strings at 10°C: 
Thin strings at 10°C kept without or with added nutrient do not have significant 
different ratio of germination under high or low light intensities. The ratios of 
germination under middle light intensity all though are significant lower. 
Thin strings at 10°C kept with added nutrient have the same ratio of germination 
regardless under which light regime they are cultivated 
Thin strings kept under middle light regime have significant higher ratio of 
germination when cultivated with added nutrient compared to germinated 
under no added nutrient. Thin strings under middle light regimes needs to 
develop under added nutrient to have the same ratio of germination as the 
strings under low and high light regimes. 
 
All spores were kept in seawater without nutrient limitation. From this 
experiment it seemed as if adding nutrient into seawater already rich in nutrient 
did not have any effect on the ratio of germination except under 60µmol photons 
m^-2s^-1 no added nutrient. This could be due to the spores having their 
requirement for nutrient met or it could be due to conditions limiting the 
germination.   
Fouling was a problem specific in the end of the experiment and made it 
==PAGE:100==
100
impossible to count spores and seedlings. This was experienced for both 
conditions with and without added nutrient. According to Redmond et al. 2014 
fouling can hinder development of spores into seedlings. Zheng et al. 1987 found 
that temperature and light had an effect on the development of spores into 
seedlings with light ≥ 57 mol photons m^-2s^-1 providing the highest rate of 
germination and growth of spores. The shading by fouling might have decreased 
the light and thereby delayed the development of spores to seedlings. I would 
have expected lower ratio of germination under condition with added nutrient 
compared to no added nutrient as adding nutrient also increase fouling due 
providing nutrient to these algae’s. Comparing with development of spores 
under other light conditions and with fouling to, might just show that these other 
spores despite also being hindered by fouling do have a better combination of 
light and temperature proving a better foundation for spores developing into 
seedlings  
 
4.5.1.7. Differences between germination ratio on the thin string with and 
without added nutrient (green line and blue line) examined under the same 
light regimes at 20 °C: 
Welch Two Sample t-tests gave p-values between 0.06348 and 0.9402.  
No significant differences were observed regardless of which nutrient regime or 
under which light regime the spores were germinated under at 20°C. Neither 
comparing between nutrients added or not revealed any significant differences 
between ratios of germination under the different light regimes.  
Differences was seen under 10°C but not under 20°C. Fouling was a bigger 
problem on the strings with temperature at 20°C compared to temperature at 
10°C because at 20°C epiphytic brown alga’s were seen together with epiphytic 
green algae’s. The higher temperature might have provided conditions, which 
could not be counter, acted by light conditions thereby providing the spores 
condition more similar and therefore resulting in the same development of 
spores into seedlings.   
 
4.5.1.8. What is the best temperature and irradiance for seeding 
polyethylene string (thin) horizontal and polypropylene string (thick) semi-
vertical in indoors conditions to get the highest germination percentage 
from carpospores? 
Under low light regime it was favorable to change from 10°C till 20°C 
for the thin strings with no added nutrient to get a higher ratio of germination. 
Further it was favorable to change cultivation of spores from the thick strings till 
the thin strings regardless of nutrient regime to increase ratio of germination. 
Under middle light regime it was favorable to change from 10°C till 20°C  
for thin and thick strings with and with out nutrient till thin strings with or 
without nutrient to increase ratio of germination. 
Under high light regime it was favorable to change from 10°C till 20°C for thin 
strings with added nutrient till thin strings no added nutrient. Further changing 
thick strings with or without nutrient at 10°C till thin strings with or without 
nutrient at 20°C would increase ratio of germination. 
Under all light conditions and for all seeding strings changing temperatures from 
10°C till 20°C, the thin strings lying horizontal regardless of nutrient regime 
==PAGE:101==
101
would favor germination of carpospores except for two situations: 1. Changing 
from thin strings with no added nutrient under low light intensity and 2. 
Changing from thin strings with added nutrient under high light regime. In both 
situations changing till thin strings with no added nutrient would favor 
germination. 
For the thick strings under all light regime there was no gain in changing 
temperature from 10 till 20°C regardless of nutrient. The ratio of germination 
was the same. 
 
4.5.2. Germination on the thick string seeded semi-vertical 
No germination were seen for the carpospores on thick strings with temperature 
at 10°C regardless of the supply of nutrient and the level of light intensity.  
Germination on thick strings of carpospores only happened on strings placed 
with temperature at 20°C and happened under all light intensities, but not to a 
lesser extent just later than on the thin strings. This means that if the thick 
strings seeded semi-vertical are chosen for cultivation the temperature has to be 
20°C and the development into seedling will take longer time compared with 
carpospores on the thin string hold horizontal. These differences in development 
may be useful as it can be advantages to get seeded material over a longer period 
potential making it possible to exploit housing facilities for at longer period   
 
4.5.2.1.What could have caused the differences between germination rate on 
the thin and the thick string? 
According to Zhoue et al. (2016) spores’ attachment, their growth and 
development are affected by the inoculated substrates. Literature present 
several options, which may have an impact on how well, settled spores 
germinate: 
Hughes et al., (2014) found differences between pebbles, being less suitable than 
shells for Gracilaria spores, to be inoculated on. They suggested the differences 
could be due to the ease for spores to settle and the availability for the spores to 
find shelters for water movements (degree of being exposed) and grazers. This 
was supported by Glenn et al., 1996 who found spores more easily settled on 
coral fragments compared to pebbles and explained the differences with 
carpospores and seedlings being more protected from predators not being so 
easily available due to holes in the coral fragments. Also Romo and Alveal (1995) 
suggested that more rough surfaces would provide a better substratum for the 
spores to adhere, compared to a smoother surface. 
I would therefore have expected a higher germination rates on the thick string 
compared to the thin string, because the thick string has a bigger diameter 
thereby providing a bigger surface, and the string were twisted less hard 
compared to the thin string, thereby providing more cavities to settle in. This 
characteristic would had given better opportunities for spores to settle and 
adhere, in more sheltered places and for being less exposed to grazers 
Comparing texture would therefore favor the thick string compared to the thin 
string for getting higher germination percentages as the thick string provide 
better opportunities for settlement and survival, but this was not the case.  
 
==PAGE:102==
102
4.5.2.2. Orientation matters 
The thin and thick strings were hold in different orientation while seeded and in 
the early growth phase. The thick string were hold semi-vertical under seeding 
and growth at the Danish shellfish Center in contrast to the thin string which 
were laying horizontal on the bottom of the container. 
This differences in orientation of the substrates under seeding and development 
of the spores may have had an impact on the carpospores attachment, 
development and growth. Those carpospores that did attached may have been 
hindered by the thickness and vertical orientation of the string as it may have 
provided a more shadowed environment for settled spores. This is supported by 
Glenn et al., (1996) who found that carpospores developing on lines had a 
shorter lag period compared to carpospores settled on coral fragments and 
pebbles. Glenn et al., (1996) explained the differences in lag phase by the degree 
of which the carpospores were covered by sand and silt. The Carpospores on 
coral fragments and pebbles were more covered by sand and silt as they were 
lying on the bottom. Seeded lines were kept free of silt when floating in the water 
thereby providing better conditions for the initial growth of the settled 
carpospores. 
This differences in orientation of the substrates under seeding and development 
of the spores may have had an impact on their attachment, development and 
growth. Those spores that did attached may have been hindered by the thickness 
and vertical orientation of the string as it may have provided a more shadowed 
environment for settled spores.  
 
4.5.3. What could have caused the differences between 
germination ratio with 10°C and 20°C for both the thin and the 
thick string? 
The carpospores on the thin string lying horizontal germinated with both 10°C 
and 20°C, the most with 20° C under certain conditions.  
The carpospores on the thick string held semi-vertical only germinated with 
20°C. This indicates that temperature and light intensity both had an impact on 
germination percentages. The percentages of germination are lower for the thin 
and thick string with 10°C regardless of light intensity compared with the strings 
with 20°C regardless of light intensity. This impact of temperature was 
supported by Zheng et al., (1987) stating that temperatures below 15°C would 
have an impact on growths of carpospores, and thereby their germination into 
seedlings regardless of other environmental conditions being suitable for the 
growths of the carpospores. With temperature below 15 °C the carpospores 
would survive but they would grow less fast. The germination on the thick 
strings was lower compared to the germination on the thin strings within both 
temperatures and within all light regimes (germination on the thick string was 
not seen at all at 10°C). Furthermore, was the impact of light intensity also 
supported by Zheng et al., (1987) who found that raising the light intensity from 
dark to or above 57 µmol m^-2s ^-1 increased the ratio of germination and 
growth of spores. The impact of temperature and light are illustrated in figure 
14. 
 
==PAGE:103==
103
 
Figure 14. Total percentages of germination± standard deviation on the thick and thin strings 
throughout the whole period with 10°C (left) and 20°C (right), n=5. 
 
Other researchers, like Edding et al., (1987) also supported those observations 
about the influence of light and temperature on the development and growth of 
carpospores. Edding et al., (1987) found that extreme temperatures like 5°C and 
30°C had and impact, decreasing the growth and development of carpospores 
and light intensity increased growth with a maximum at 90µmol photons m^-
2s^-1.  
According to Glenn et al., (1996) carpospores settles very easy on nearly all types 
of material.  By showing different percentages of germination for carpospores 
seeded on different substrates in different orientation with different 
temperatures and supply of nutrient I have showed that germination ratios can 
be changes by environmental factors like temperatures, light intensities, 
orientation of substrates. As long as the carpospores did not experience nutrient 
depleted water adding of nutrient did not seem to have any effect on the rate of 
germination.  
4.5.4. The recommendations for light, temperatures and nutrient 
favoring development of the spores into seedlings 
Under all light conditions and for all seeding strings (thin and thick), changing 
temperatures from 10°C till 20°C, choosing the thin strings lying horizontal with 
no added nutrient would favor germination. Because no significant differences 
were observed regardless of under which light regime the spores were 
germinated under at 20°C chose of light regime would be optional.  
The recommendations for choose of orientation of seeding strings: As ratio of 
germination was delay on thick strings compared to thin strings but otherwise  
==PAGE:104==
104
presented same ratio of germination, seeding on strings kept semi-vertical could 
be a favorable option if thereby housing facilities was exploited more effective. 
 
4.5.5. Specific growth rate of germinatied spores on strings 
To see if there were any differences in length in between the temperatures and 
in between the three treatments with different light intensities and different 
nutrient regime the Specific Growth Rate were calculated. Three out of four data 
were missing from December 14. I therefore decided to calculate the Specific 
Growth Rate between November 4 until December 5, 2020.  One assumption was 
made: The growth would be only in one direction, due to length measurements. 
Therefore, it would be appropriate to use the equation for the exponential 
specific growth rate (see Materials and Methods). This assumption was not met, 
as I saw seedlings with branches (see picture 24).  
 
 
 
Picture 24. Sprout with side branches taken November 25, 2020, DTU. Magnification X10. 
 
 
4.5.5.1.The biomass progression. How does the seedlings grow over time? 
The biomass progressions under different light intensities are illustrated below 
in three figures (figure 15 (low light intensity), figure 16 (middle light intensity) 
and figure 17 (high light intensity)). 
==PAGE:105==
105
Figure 15. Average biomass progression for seedlings± standard deviations on different seeding 
substates, and with or without nutrients added (0.1g/ml) with 15 µmol photons m^-2 s^-1, n=3. 
 
No biomass progression for spores on thick strings. Why were there no seedlings on 
the thick string I could measure? 
There were no lengths measured for any seedlings on the thick strings, except 
for one seedling under 20°C. However, all the thin fragments had seedlings, 
which I was able to measure.  
As shown above in figure 13 it was possible to calculated germination ratios for 
the thick string from December 5 and 14. It would therefore be expected to see 
measured lengths for those similar days, but this is not the case except for one 
situation with the thick string on the December 14. This is because of fouling 
covering the seedlings. It was possible in some cases to see the seedlings, but not 
to measure them because they were fully covered in epiphytes 
 
Growth of seedlings under low light intensity (see figure 20): 
Overall, seedlings at 20 degrees showed best growth at the end of the 
experiment, whereas the effect of added nutrition was more unclear 
Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples revealed that: 
1. Seedling germinated and grown with 20°C was significant longer than 
seedlings germinated and grown with 10°C without added nutrient (p-
value=0.0002856). 
2. Seedling germinated with 10°C with added nutrient had the same length as 
seedlings germinated and grown with 20°C without added nutrient.  
3 Seedling germinated and grown with or without nutrient at 10°C had the same 
length as seedlings germinated and grown with 20°C with added nutrient.  
 
==PAGE:106==
106
The same pattern, as seen with ratio of germination for the thin strings (see table 
5), was seen for the length of the seedlings. It seems, as ratio of germination are 
positive correlated with length of seedlings. 
The only gain in length from changing temperature from 10°C to 20°C was seen 
for spores germinated and grown without added nutrient at 10°C. Adding 
nutrient did not increase growth even when increasing temperature.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 16.. Average biomass progression for seedlings± standard deviations on thin string 
seeding substrate and with or without added nutrients with 60 µmolphotons m^-2 s^-1, n=3. 
 
Growth of seedlings under middle light intensity (see figure 16): 
Overall, seedlings at 20 degrees showed best growth during the experiment, 
whereas the effect of added nutrition was more unclear. 
Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples revealed that: 
1. Seedling germinated and grown with 10°C regardless of nutrient regime 
gained in length if they were germinated and grown with 20°C regardless of 
nutrient regime (p-values from 0.02112 to 0.0305). Adding or not adding 
nutrient were equally favorable when increasing the temperature in regard to 
growth, which indicated that growth was govern by temperature and to a lesser 
extent by nutrient. The seedlings were kept in well nourish seawater and this 
might explain why there was no effect of adding nutrient. This was confirmed by 
Sfriso & Sfriso (2017) who found that growth of biomass without nutrient 
limitations were influenced by light availability and not by nutrients. This was 
supported by Ruesness et al., (1987), who found that algae grown in N-sufficient 
medium did not respond to adding more nutrients by increasing growth. The 
==PAGE:107==
107
influence of temperature on growth was confirmed by Macchiavello et al., 
(1998). They found that the specific growth rate increased with temperature. 
Same pattern was seen for ratio of germination (table 6). Increasing the 
temperature regardless of nutrient regime increased the ratio of germination 
and it seems, as this might be the same for growth reflected in the length of the 
seedlings.  
 
 
Figure 17. Average biomass progression for seedlings± standard deviations on thing string 
seeding substrate and with no or added nutrients at 120 µmol photons m^-2 s^-1, n=3. 
 
Growth of seedlings under high light intensity (see figure 17): 
Overall, seedlings at 10 °C without added nutrient showed best growth at the 
end of the experiment, whereas the effect of increasing temperature was more 
unclear.  Adding nutrition seems to decrease growth. 
Welch Two Sample t-test with independent samples revealed that: 
1. Regardless of nutrient regime seedlings germinated and grown at 10°C would 
not benefit of germinating and growing with 20°C regardless of nutrient regime. 
Many white seedlings were seen under high light intensity. It seemed as the 
seedlings had lost their pigmentations, due to the high light intensity and loose of 
pigments might have decreased the growth of the seedlings.  This was 
contradicted by Nejrup et al., (2013), who found the combination of 20°C and 
225 μmol photons m^–2 s^–1 gave the highest growth rate (0.045 ± 0.001 day-
1). In contrast Yokoya et al., (1999) found maximum growth with light intensity 
between 80 - 100 µmol/m^-2 s^-1, which Beer and Levy (1983) and Friedlander 
et al. (1987) did support as they found optimal growth at 100 µmol/m^-2 s^-1. It 
is therefore not clear to what degree light intensity might have influenced the 
growth, but I expect it to have had an impact due to the white seedling all though, 
==PAGE:108==
108
some of them were quiet long. Rather the combination of temperature and light 
intensity might have influenced the growth. This was confirmed by Macchiavello 
et al., (1998). They found that overall growth was increase by increasing light 
intensity but differently depending on temperature. If temperature was high in 
combination with high light intensity growth could decrease. If temperature was 
low in combination with high light intensity growth could increase.  
 
4.5.6. How does different environmental factors affect growth of seedlings ? 
The specific growth rates for seedlings under different treatments and 
temperature with 10°C and 20°C are illustrated below in figure 18. The growth 
rate equals the average increase in length from November 4 to December 5. 
Figure 18. Specific Growth Rate for seedlings at 10°C and 20°C, under different light regime with 
and without nutrient.  
 
It was only possible to calculate the specific growth rate for the thin string, due 
to heavy bio fouling on the thick strings. The specific growth rates are mostly 
positive for the seedlings under the three light intensities. For some seedlings 
the specific growth rate are negative. This happens for seedlings growing under 
the middle (60 µmol photons m^-2 s^-1) light intensity at 10°C with added 
nutrient and high (120 µmol photons m2 s^-1) light intensities at 20°C with 
added nutrient. The lowest specific growth rate were measured for the thin 
strings with seedlings growing under 20°C, with added nutrient under 120 µmol 
photons m^-2 s^-1 light intensity. The highest specific growth rate were 
measured for seedlings growing under 20°C with added nutrient (the same 
conditions), but under 15 µmol photons m^-2 s^-1 light intensity.  
Overall, it seems as temperature and light intensity in combination had an effect 
on the specific growth rate, whereas the effect of added nutrient was unclear. 
==PAGE:109==
109
 
A One-Way ANOVA test revealed that: 
1. No differences in average Specific growth Rate of growth at different light 
intensities was seen between seedlings grown under 10°C compared to seedling 
grown with 20°C with or without added nutrients regardless of light intensity 
and nutrient when increasing light intensity for strings with and without added 
nutrient (p-value = 0.5695). 
 
This is illustrated in figure 24 below: 
 
Figure 19. Left: the four different treatments: (10°C/no added nutrient, 10°C/added nutrient, 
20°C/no added nutrient, 20°C/ added nutrient) are depictured as dots in three column (1.0, 2.0 
and 3.0). Column 1.0 = low light intensity, Column 2.0 = middle light intensity and Column 3.0 = 
high light intensity. Right: the four treatments are plotted in a box plot. 
 
As can be seen from the boxplot (figure 19) none of the treatments returns 
specific growth rates significant different form neither of the others even though 
some spread in data were seen from the max and minimum values revealed by 
the box plot. 
 
This is in contrast to Macchiavello et al., (1998) as described above, but can be 
due to condition under the experiment. Under the experiment it was clear that 
growth of epiphytes increased as light intensity and temperature increased 
making it difficult to measure the lengths of the seedlings, which might have 
increased the uncertainty of the results.   
 
4.5.6.1. Which one of the treatments had the highest growth rate for the 
seedlings? 
The growth rates for the seedlings developed under 15 µmol photons m^-2 s^-1 
at 10 and 20°C were from 0.007±0.022 d^-1 till 0.059±0.026 d^-1. This was in 
the range found by Rueness & Tananger, (1984), who found Specific growth rate 
from 0,045 day^-1 (10°C) to 0.1 day^-1 (24°C) with a light intensity at 37 μmol 
m-2 s -1   
==PAGE:110==
110
The growth rates for the seedlings developed under 60 µmol photons m^-2 s^-1 
were in the range from - 0.014±0.001 d^-1 till 0.035±0.025 d^-1. This was below 
data from Macchiavello et al., (1998) which found Specific Growth rates between 
0.06-0.08 at temperatures 10°C and 20°C under a light intensity at 60 µmol 
photons m^-2 s^-1.  
The growth rates for the seedlings developed under 120 µmol photons m^-2 s^-
1 were from - 0.021±0.043 d^-1 till 0.020±0.003 d^-1. The specific growth rates 
found under the highest light intensity in this experiment were among the lowest 
compared with values from lower and middle light intensities. This was in 
contrast to Nejrup et al., 2013 who found highest specific growth rates under 
20°C and with light intensity at 225 µmol/m^2/s^-1.  
According to Molloy & Bolton, 1996 and McLachlan and Bird, 1986 the found 
specific growth rate in this experiment were in the lower range for typical 
specific growth rates for Gracilaria species (0,014 - 0.10 day^-1). The differences 
might be due to heavy fouling as mentioned before. 
 
As the pattern for the length of seedling on strings followed the pattern for 
germinated strings that is: the most germinated strings had the longest seedlings 
then I assume that I would find the highest Specific growth rates on those strings 
that is on strings kept at 20°C with no nutrient added seeded and grown lying 
horizontal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
111
5. Conclusion 
The results that correspond to the hypotheses:  
The purpose of this report was to investigate the possibility of developing a user-
friendly guide for the collection of Gracilaria from nature with the intention of 
using the collected biomass for both vegetative and sexual propagation. A user-
friendly guide includes a manual for collecting Gracilaria from nature and an 
guide  to how the three species of Gracilaria in Denmark can be distinguished 
from each other by means of cross-sections of gametangia under a microscope. 
In addition, the aim was to investigate the possibility of optimizing the 
cultivation of Gracilaria vegetatively and from carpospores. Experiments with 
the cultivation of fragments of Gracilaria in plastic net pipes in the water surface 
show that the growth of all parts of the Gracilaria plant under these conditions is 
the same. The growth between Nykøbing Sjælland and Nykøbing Mors was 
different due to differences in local environmental factors. The greatest growth 
occurs in the summer and late summer months. Overgrowth can be a problem, 
which may be solved by lowering the net tubes under the water.  
Sporulation of carpospores from Gracilaria may be seasonal. Despites collecting 
and using cystocarps with sign of fertility I was not able to force sporulation by 
changing factors like temperature, desiccation, light or stirring. More research is 
needed. The best months to collect cystocarps were from July untill October.  
Not knowing if the Gracilaria collected were able to release spores if Gracilaria 
were ruled by season makes it not possible from these resullts to tell which 
month are the best to collect with the aim of innoculating spore developing lines. 
The pattern of sporerelease was not possible to estimate in this project as 
releases of carpospores were only seen in June before the start of the 
experiment. The aim was also to investigate the effect on the degree of 
germination and the growth of seedling by changing biological factors. It is 
possible to change the degree of germination and the length of seedlings by 
changing the conditions under which germination takes place. These are changes 
in temperature, light intensity and the addition of nutrients. Seeding of 
carpospores can be done on both horizontal and semi-vertical lines. The 
germination ratio is the same over time but germination occurs later on the semi 
-vertical spore lines. The germination ratio and growth are highest on seeding 
strings lying horizontal under 20°C.  The purpose was also to investigate the 
possibility of growing Gracilaria outdoors in Nykøbing Sjælland and in Nykøbing 
Mors. The biological conditions are present for growing Gracilaria outdoors both 
from spore lines and from vegetative tissue in both Klostebugten and Nykøbing 
Bugt, but the legal framework creates obstacles for growing Gracilaria outdoors 
in Danish waters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:112==
112
References 
Abreu, M. H., Pereira, R., Buschmann, A. H., Sousa-Pinto, I., & Yarish, C. (2011). 
Nitrogen uptake responses of Gracilaria vermiculophylla (Ohmi) Papenfuss 
under combined and single addition of nitrate and ammonium. Journal of 
Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 407(2), 190-199. 
 
Aguilar-Rosas, R., Marcos-Ramirez, R., Lobo-Niembro, J. M., & Zertuche-González, 
J. A. (1993). Seasonal variation of reproductive and vegetative phases of 
Gracilaria pacifica Abbott, in Estero de Punta Banda, Baja California, Mexico. 
Ciencias Marinas, 19(2), 219-228. 
 
Agrawal, S. C. (2012). Factors controlling induction of reproduction in algae—
review: the text. Folia microbiologica, 57(5), 387-407. 
 
Ahlgren, H. (2005) On the Gracilariaceae found in Sweden. M Sc thesis. 
Department of Marine ecology, Marine botany, Göteborg University. Contribution 
no. 266, 9 pp 
 
Alveal, K. H. C. E. C., Romo, H., Werlinger, C., & Oliveira, E. C. (1997). Mass 
cultivation of the agar-producing alga Gracilaria chilensis (Rhodophyta) from 
spores. Aquaculture, 148(2-3), 77-83. 
 
Andersen, R. A. (Ed.). (2005). Algal culturing techniques. Elsevier. 
 
Bartsch, I., Wiencke, C., Bischof, K., Buchholz, C. M., Buck, B. H., Eggert, A., ... & 
Wiese, J. (2008). The genus Laminaria sensu lato: recent insights and 
developments. European journal of phycology, 43(1), 1-86. 
 
Battacharyya, D., Babgohari, M. Z., Rathor, P., & Prithiviraj, B. (2015). Seaweed 
extracts as biostimulants in horticulture. Scientia Horticulturae, 196, 39-48. 
 
Bhatia, S., Sharma, K., Dahiya, R., & Bera, T. (2015). Modern applications of plant 
biotechnology in pharmaceutical sciences. Academic Press, from 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/agricultural-and-biological-
sciences/specific-growth-rate visited May 15, 2021  
 
Bird, K. T., Habig, C., & DeBusk, T. (1982). Nitrogen allocation and storage 
patterns in Gracilaria tikvahiae (Rhodophyta) 1. Journal of Phycology, 18(3), 344-
348. 
 
Borum, J., Pedersen, M. F., Kær, L., & Pedersen, P. M. (1994). Vækst-og 
næringsstofdynamik hos marine planter. Havforskning fra Miljøstyrelsen, (41). 
 
Brockhoff, P. B., Møller, J. K., Andersen, E. W., Bacher, P., & Christiansen, L. E. 
(2015). Introduction to Statistics-eNotes. Chapter 3. Visited 23 of June, 2021. 
 
Buschmann, A. H., Mora, O. A., Gómez, P., Böttger, M., Buitano, S., Retamales, C., ... 
& Gutierrez, A. (1994). Gracilaria chilensis outdoor tank cultivation in Chile: use 
==PAGE:113==
113
of land-based salmon culture effluents. Aquacultural Engineering, 13(4), 283-
300. 
 
Buschmann, A. H., Westermeier, R., & Retamales, C. A. (1995). Cultivation of 
Gracilaria on the sea-bottom in southern Chile: a review. Journal of Applied 
Phycology, 7(3), 291-301. 
 
Buschmann, A. H., Briganti, F., & Retamales, C. A. (1997). Intertidal cultivation of 
Gracilaria chilensis (Rhodophyta) in southern Chile: long term invertebrate 
abundance patterns. Aquaculture, 156(3-4), 269-278. 
 
Capo, T. R., Jaramillo, J. C., Boyd, A. E., Lapointe, B. E., & Serafy, J. E. (1999). 
Sustained high yields of Gracilaria (Rhodophyta) grown in intensive large-scale 
culture. Journal of Applied Phycology, 11(2), 143-147. 
 
Chitra, G., & Sreeja, P. S. (2013). A comparative study on the effect of seaweed 
liquid fertilizers on the growth and yield of Vigna radiata (L.). Nature 
Environment and Pollution Technology, 12(2), 359. 
 
Chopin, T., Buschmann, A. H., Halling, C., Troell, M., Kautsky, N., Neori, A., ... & 
Neefus, C. (2001). Integrating seaweeds into marine aquaculture systems: a key 
toward sustainability. Journal of Phycology, 37(6), 975-986. 
 
Conley, D. J., Kaas, H., Møhlenberg, F., Rasmussen, B., & Windolf, J. (2000). 
Characteristics of Danish estuaries. Estuaries, 23(6), 820-837. 
 
Connor, D. W., Allen, J. H., Golding, N., Howell, K. L., Lieberknecht, L. M., Northen, 
K. O., & Reker, J. B. (2004). The Marine Habitat Classification for Britain and 
Ireland. Version 04.05 Infralittoral Rock Section. Peterborough: Joint Nature 
Conservation Committee (JNCC). 
 
Cortel-Breeman, A. M., & Ten Hoopen, A. (1978). The short day response in 
Acrosymphyton purpuriferum (J. Ag.) Sjöst.(Rhodophyceae, Cryptonemiales). 
Phycologia, 17(2), 125-132. 
 
Dawson, E. Y. (1949). Studies of northeast Pacific Gracilariaceae. Allan Hancock 
Found. Publs Occ. Pap., 7, 1-105. 
 
de Bettignies, T., Wernberg, T., & Gurgel, C. F. D. (2018). Exploring the influence 
of temperature on aspects of the reproductive phenology of temperate seaweeds. 
Frontiers in Marine Science, 5, 218. 
 
de Zaixso, A. B. (1987). Gracilaria verrucosa in Golfo Nuevo, Chubut, Argentina. 
Biological parameters and environmental factors. In Twelfth International 
Seaweed Symposium (pp. 239-244). Springer, Dordrecht. 
 
De Wreede RD, Klinger T (1988). Reproductive strategies in algae. In Lowett 
Doust J, L (eds), Plant Reproductive Ecology: Patterns and Strategies. Oxford U.P., 
Oxford: 267-284. 
==PAGE:114==
114
 
Destombe, C. (1987). Biologie des populations de l'algue rouge Gracilaria 
verrucosa (Hudson) Papenfuss (Gigartinales): intérêt et implication en aquaculture 
(Doctoral dissertation, Lille 1). 
 
Dreckmann, K. M., & Sentíes, A. (2009). Gracilaria, subgenus Textoriella 
(Gracilariaceae, Rhodophyta) in the Gulf of Mexico and the Mexican Caribbean. 
Revista mexicana de biodiversidad, 80(3), 593-601. 
 
Dring, M.J. (1984). Photoperiodism and phychology. Prog. Phycol. Res.3: 159-92 
 
Engel, C. R., & Destombe, C. (2002). Reproductive ecology of an intertidal red 
seaweed, Gracilaria gracilis: influence of high and low tides on fertilization 
success. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, 82(2), 
189-192. 
 
Ferdouse, F., Holdt, S. L., Smith, R., Murúa, P., & Yang, Z. (2018). The global status 
of seaweed production, trade and utilization. Globefish Research Programme, 124, 
I. 
 
García-Jiménez, P., García-Maroto, F., Garrido-Cárdenas, J. A., Ferrandiz, C., & 
Robaina, R. R. (2009). Differential expression of the ornithine decarboxylase 
gene during carposporogenesis in the thallus of the red seaweed Grateloupia 
imbricata (Halymeniaceae). Journal of plant physiology, 166(16), 1745-1754. 
 
García-Jiménez, P., & Robaina, R. R. (2012). Effects of ethylene on 
tetrasporogenesis in Pterocladiella Capillacea (Rhodophyta) 1. Journal of 
phycology, 48(3), 710-715. 
 
García-Jiménez, P., & Robaina, R. R. (2015). On reproduction in red algae: further 
research needed at the molecular level. Frontiers in plant science, 6, 93. 
 
Garcia-Jimenez, P., & Robaina, R. R. (2019). Insight into the mechanism of Red 
Alga reproduction. What else is beyond Cystocarps development? In Systems 
Biology. IntechOpen. 
 
Garza-Sanchez, F., Zertuche-Gonzalez, J. A., & Chapman, D. J. (2000). Effect of 
temperature and irradiance on the release, attachment and survival of spores of 
Gracilaria pacifica Abbott (Rhodophyta). 
 
Guiry, M. D., & Dawes, C. J. (1992). Daylength, temperature and nutrient control 
of tetrasporogenesis in Asparagopsis armata (Rhodophyta). Journal of 
experimental marine Biology and Ecology, 158(2), 197-217. 
 
Guiry, W.  in Guiry, M.D. & Guiry, G.M. (2019). AlgaeBase. World-wide electronic 
publication, National University of Ireland, Galway. http://www.algaebase.org; 
searched on 26 December 2019. 
 
==PAGE:115==
115
Guiry, W.  in Guiry, M.D. & Guiry, G.M. (2020). AlgaeBase. World-wide electronic 
publication, National University of Ireland, Galway. http://www.algaebase.org; 
searched on 26 November 2020.  
 
Gorman, L., Kraemer, G. P., Yarish, C., Boo, S. M., Kim, J. K. (2017). The effects of 
temperature on the growth rate and nitrogen content of invasive Gracilaria 
vermiculophylla and native Gracilaria tikvahiae from Long Island Sound, USA. 
Algae, 32(1), 57-66.  
 
Guzmán-Urióstegui, A., García-Jiménez, P., Marián, F., Robledo, D., & Robaina, R. 
(2002). Polyamines influence maturation in reproductive Structures of Gracilaria 
cornea (Gracilariales, Rhodophyta) 1. Journal of phycology, 38(6), 1169-1175 
 
Guzmán-Urióstegui, A., Robaina, R., Freile-Pelegrín, Y., & Robledo, D. (2012). 
Polyamines increase carpospore output and growth during in vitro cultivation of 
Hydropuntia cornea. Biotechnology letters, 34(4), 755-761. 
 
Hay, M. E., & Norris, J. N. (1984). Seasonal reproduction and abundance of six 
sympatric species of Gracilaria Grev.(Gracilariaceae; Rhodophyta) on a 
Caribbean subtidal sand plain. In Eleventh International Seaweed Symposium (pp. 
63-72). Springer, Dordrecht. 
 
Henry, E. C. (1988). Regulation of reproduction in brown algae by light and 
temperature. 
 
Hoyle, M. D. (1978). Reproductive phenology and growth rates in two species of 
Gracilaria from Hawaii. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 
35(3), 273-283. 
 
Hu, Z. M., & Juan, L. B. (2014). Adaptation mechanisms and ecological 
consequences of seaweed invasions: a review case of agarophyte Gracilaria 
vermiculophylla. Biological invasions, 16(5), 967-976. 
 
Jara, F. (1990). Epidemic outbreaks of herbivorous annelid worms (Polychaeta: 
Nereididae) in the south of Chile. Medio Ambiente, 11, 65-75. 
 
Jens Würgler Hansen & David Rytter. 2020. Iltsvind i danske farvande – juli-
august 2020. Aarhus Universitet, DCE – Nationalt Center for Miljø og Energi, 25 s. 
Rådgivningsnotat nr. 2020|52 
https://dce.au.dk/fileadmin/dce.au.dk/Udgivelser/Notatet_2020/N2020_52rev.
pdf 
 
Kain, J. M. (1986). Plant size and reproductive phenology of six species of 
Rhodophyta in subtidal Isle of Man. British Phycological Journal, 21(2), 129-138. 
Kain, J. M. (1989). The seasons in the subtidal. British Phycological Journal, 24(3), 
203-215. 
 
 
==PAGE:116==
116
Kain, J. M., & Destombe, C. (1995). A review of the life history, reproduction and 
phenology of Gracilaria. Journal of applied phycology, 7(3), 269. 
 
Kim, S. Y., Weinberger, F., & Boo, S. M. (2010). Genetic Data Hint at A Common 
Donor Region for Invasive Atlantic And Pacific Populations of Gracilaria 
Vermiculophylla (Gracilariales, Rhodophyta) 1. Journal of phycology, 46(6), 1346-
1349. 
 
Kim, J. K., Yarish, C., & Pereira, R. (2016). Tolerances to hypo-osmotic and 
temperature stresses in native and invasive species of Gracilaria (Rhodophyta). 
Phycologia, 55(3), 257-264. 
 
 
Kumar, M., Reddy, C. R. K., & Ralph, P. J. (2015). Polyamines in morphogenesis 
and development: a promising research area in seaweeds. Frontiers in plant 
science, 6, 27. 
 
Liu, X., Bogaert, K., Engelen, A. H., Leliaert, F., Roleda, M. Y., & De Clerck, O. 
(2017). Seaweed reproductive biology: environmental and genetic controls. 
Botanica Marina, 60(2), 89-108. 
 
Lobban, C.S. and Harrison, P.J. (1994): Seaweed ecology and physiology. 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Lüning, K., & Tom Dieck, I. (1989). Environmental triggers in algal seasonality. 
Botanica Marina, 32(5), 389-397. 
 
Lüning, K., A. Wagner and C. Buchholz. 2000. Evidence for inhibitors of 
sporangium formation in Laminaria digitata (Phaeophyceae) during the season 
of rapid growth. J. Phycol. 36: 1129–1134. 
 
Lyer, R., De Clerck, O., Bolton, J. J., Coyne, V. E., & Sym, S. D. (2004). Morphological 
and taxonomic studies of Gracilaria and Gracilariopsis species (Gracilariales, 
Rhodophyta) from South Africa. South African journal of botany, 70(4), 521-539. 
 
Macchiavello, J., De Paula, É. J., & Oliveira, E. C. (1998). Growth rate responses of 
five commercial strains of Gracilaria (Rhodophyta, Gracilariales) to temperature 
and light. Journal of the World Aquaculture Society, 29(2), 259-266. 
 
Mantri, V. A., Thakur, M. C., Kumar, M., Reddy, C. R. K., & Jha, B. (2009). The 
carpospore culture of industrially important red alga Gracilaria dura 
(Gracilariales, Rhodophyta). Aquaculture, 297(1-4), 85-90. 
 
Martín, L. A., de Zaixso, A. L. B., & Leonardi, P. I. (2011). Biomass variation and 
reproductive phenology of Gracilaria gracilis in a Patagonian natural bed 
(Chubut, Argentina). Journal of Applied Phycology, 23(4), 643-654. 
 
Michetti, K. M., Martín, L. A., & Leonardi, P. I. (2013). Carpospore release and 
sporeling development in Gracilaria gracilis (Gracilariales, Rhodophyta) from the 
==PAGE:117==
117
southwestern Atlantic coast (Chubut, Argentina). Journal of applied phycology, 
25(6), 1917-1924. 
 
Miljøstyrelsen, 2017. Faktaark for invasive arter – From www.mst.dk. Visited 
03.05.2021. Brunlig Gracilariatang (Gracilaria vermiculophylla) 
 
Miljøstyrelsen, 2021. Hvad er invasive arter? -  From https://mst.dk/natur-
vand/natur/national-naturbeskyttelse/invasive-arter/hvad-er-invasive-arter/ 
visited 03-05-2021 
 
Molloy, F. J., & Bolton, J. J. (1996). The effect of season and depth on the growth of 
Gracilaria gracilis at Lüderitz, Namibia. Botanica marina, 39(1-6), 407-414. 
 
Naturstyrelsen, 2009. Handlingsplan for invasive arter – from 
https://naturstyrelsen.dk/publikationer/2009/mar/handlingsplan-for-invasive-
arter/ visited 3 of May, 2021. 
 
Nejrup, L. B., & Pedersen, M. F. (2010). Growth and biomass development of the 
introduced red alga Gracilaria vermiculophylla is unaffected by nutrient 
limitation and grazing. Aquatic biology, 10(3), 249-259. 
 
Nejrup, L. B. (2012). Studies of the ecological performance of the invasive red 
macroalga Gracilaria vermiculophylla (Ohmi) Pappenfuss: Regulation and the 
potential for further spread in Scandinavia and the Baltic region. Roskilde 
Universitet. 
 
Nejrup, L. B., & Pedersen, M. F. (2012). The effect of temporal variability in 
salinity on the invasive red alga Gracilaria vermiculophylla. European journal of 
phycology, 47(3), 254-263. 
 
Nejrup, L. B., Staehr, P. A., & Thomsen, M. S. (2013). Temperature-and light-
dependent growth and metabolism of the invasive red algae Gracilaria 
vermiculophylla–a comparison with two native macroalgae. European Journal of 
Phycology, 48(3), 295-308. 
 
Nielsen, R. and Lundsteen, S. (2019).  Danmarks havalger bind 1. Rødalger 
(rhodophyta). The Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters, 5-398 
 
Nyberg, C. D. (2007). Introduced marine macroalgae and habitat modifiers: Their 
ecological role and significant attributes. Department of Marine Ecology. 
Ohmi, H. (1956). Contributions to the knowledge of Gracilariaceae from japan. 
On a new species of the genus Gracilariopsis, with some considerations on its 
ecology. Bulletin of the faculty of fisheries Hokkaido university , 6 (4), 271-279. 
 
Oliveira, E. C., Alveal, K., & Anderson, R. J. (2000). Mariculture of the agar-
producing Gracilarioid red algae. Reviews in fisheries science, 8(4), 345-377. 
 
Oza, R. M., & Krishnamurthy, V. (1930). Carpospore germination and early stages 
of development in Gracilaria verrucosa (Huds.) papenf. 
==PAGE:118==
118
 
Oza, R. M., & Krishnamurthy, V. (1968). Studies on carposporic rhythm of 
Gracilaria verrucosa (Huds.) Papenf. 
 
Pang, S.J. and K. Lüning. 2004. Breaking seasonal limitation: year round 
sporogenesis in the brown alga Laminaria saccharina 
by blocking the transport of putative sporulation inhibitors. 
Aquaculture 240: 531–541. 
 
Peckol, P., & Rivers, J. S. (1996). Contribution by macroalgal mats to primary 
production of a shallow embayment under high and low nitrogen-loading rates. 
Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 43(3), 311-325. 
 
Peng, C., Hong-BO, S., Di, X., & Song, Q. (2009). Progress in Gracilaria biology and 
developmental utilization: main issues and prospective. Reviews in Fisheries 
Science, 17(4), 494-504. 
 
Pereira, R., & Yarish, C. (2008). Mass production of marine macroalgae In: 
Jørgensen, SE, Fath, BD (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Ecology. 
 
Pereira, L. (2018). Seaweeds as source of bioactive substances and skin care 
therapy—Cosmeceuticals, algotheraphy, and thalassotherapy. Cosmetics, 5(4), 
68. 
 
Redmond, S., Green, L., Yarish, C., Kim, J., & Neefus, C. (2014). New England 
seaweed culture handbook. PDF file. URL: 
http://seagrant.uconn.edu/publications/aquaculture/handbook.pdf. 92 pp.) 
 
Retamales, C. A., Martínez, A., and Buschmann, A. H. (1994). Produce on large 
scale Gracilaria 850 chilensis for agar in Chile. Rev. Biol. Mar. Valparái so, 29, 
251–261.)  
 
Richardson, J. P. (1979). Overwintering of dictyota dichotoma (phaeophyceae) 
near its northern distribution limit on the east coast of north america 1. Journal 
of Phycology, 15(1), 22-26. 
 
Richardson, J. P. (1981). Persistence and development of Dasya baillouviana 
(Gmelin) Montagne (Rhodophyceae, Dasyaceae) in North Carolina. Phycologia, 
20(4), 385-391. 
 
Richerd, S., Couvet, D., & Valéro, M. (1993). Evolution of the alternation of 
haploid and diploid phases in life cycles. II. Maintenance of the haplo-diplontic 
cycle. Journal of Evolutionary Biology, 6(2), 263-280. 
 
Rueness, J., & Tananger, T. (1984). Growth in culture of four red algae from 
Norway with potential for mariculture. In Eleventh International Seaweed 
Symposium (pp. 303-307). Springer, Dordrecht 
 
==PAGE:119==
119
Rueness, J. H. A. T., Mathisen, H. A., & Tananger, T. (1987). Culture and field 
observations on Gracilaria verrucosa (Huds.) Papenf.(Rhodophyta) from Norway. 
Botanica marina, 30(3), 267-276. 
 
Rueness, J. (2005). Life history and molecular sequences of Gracilaria 
vermiculophylla( Gracilariales , Rhodophyta), a new introduction to European 
waters. Phycologia , 44 (1), 120-128. 
 
Sacramento, V., Endler, M., Rubinsztejn, H. K., Lima, L. S., Gonçalves, K., 
Nascimento, F. N., & Bueno, G. A. (2004). MoCA: A middleware for developing 
collaborative applications for mobile users. IEEE Distributed systems online, 
5(10), 2-2. 
 
Santelices, B. (1990). Patterns of reproduction, dispersal and recruitiment in 
seaweed. S. Ocearrogr. AMar. Biol, 471h, Rez, 28, 177-276. 
 
Santelices, B. (2014). Gracilaria spp. FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Department. 
Rome. 
 
Schmedes, P. S., Petersen, J. K., Nielsen, M. M., Canal-Vergés, P., Reitan, K. I., 
Jacobsen, C., ... & Stanley, M. S. (2020). Investigating hatchery and cultivation 
methods for improved cultivation of Palmaria palmata. 
 
Sfriso, A. A., & Sfriso, A. (2017). In situ biomass production of Gracilariaceae and 
Ulva rigida: the Venice Lagoon as a study case. Botanica marina, 60(3), 271-283. 
Statistic (2021), One way ANOVA. Visited 23 of June, 2021, file:///Volumes/X-
Files/STATISTIK%20fora%CC%8Ar%202017/ONEWAY%20ANOVA/One-
way%20ANOVA%20%20An%20introduction%20to%20when%20you%20shou
ld%20run%20this%20test%20and%20the%20test%20hypothesis%20|%20Lae
rd%20Statistics.html 
Statistic (2021a), Assumptions. Visited 23 of June, 2021, 
https://www.statisticssolutions.com/the-assumption-of-homogeneity-of-
variance/ 
Statistic (2021a1), Visited 23 of June, 2021, https://www.statology.org/equal-
variance-assumption/ 
 
Steentoft, M., Irvine, L. M., & Farnham, W. F. (1995). Two terete species of 
Gracilaria and Gracilariopsis (Gracilariales, Rhodophyta) in Britain. Phycologia, 
34(2), 113-127. 
 
Subbarangaiah, G. (1984). Growth, reproduction and spore shedding in 
Gracilaria textorii (Sur.) J. Ag. along Visakhapatanam coast. Phykos, 23, 246-253. 
 
Surget, G., Le Lann, K., Delebecq, G., Kervarec, N., Donval, A., Poullaouec, M. A., ... & 
Stiger-Pouvreau, V. (2017). Seasonal phenology and metabolomics of the 
introduced red macroalga Gracilaria vermiculophylla, monitored in the Bay of 
==PAGE:120==
120
Brest (France). Journal of applied phycology, 29 (5), 2651-2666. 
 
Thomsen, M. S., & McGlathery, K. J. (2007). Stress tolerance of the invasive 
macroalgae Codium fragile and Gracilaria vermiculophylla in a soft-bottom turbid 
lagoon. Biological invasions, 9(5), 499-513. 
 
Torres, P., Novaes, P., Ferreira, L. G., Santos, J. P., Mazepa, E., Duarte, M. E. R., ... & 
dos Santos, D. Y. (2018). Effects of extracts and isolated molecules of two species 
of Gracilaria (Gracilariales, Rhodophyta) on early growth of lettuce. Algal 
research, 32, 142-149. 
 
Uji, T., Matsuda, R., Takechi, K., Takano, H., Mizuta, H., & Takio, S. (2016). 
Ethylene regulation of sexual reproduction in the marine red alga Pyropia 
yezoensis (Rhodophyta). Journal of Applied Phycology, 28(6), 3501-3509. 
 
van derMeer, J. P., & Todd, E. R. (1980). The life history of Palmaria palmata in 
culture. A new type for the Rhodophyta. Canadian Journal of Botany, 58(11), 
1250-1256. 
 
Wallentinus, I., Nyberg, C., & Rueness, J. (2004). Gracilaria vermiculophylla in the 
Göteborg archipelago. In Programme & Abstracts, 13th International Seaweeds 
Symposium, Bergen, Norway (p. 138). 
Weinberger, F., Buchholz, B., Karez, R., & Wahl, M. (2008). The invasive red alga 
Gracilaria vermiculophylla in the Baltic Sea: adaptation to brackish water may 
compensate for light limitation. Aquatic Biology, 3(3), 251-264. 
Wendy Guiry in Guiry, M.D. & Guiry, G.M. 2021. AlgaeBase. World-wide electronic 
publication, National University of Ireland, Galway. http://www.algaebase.org; 
searched on 13 November 2021. 
 
White, W. L., & Wilson, P. (2015). World seaweed utilization. In Seaweed 
Sustainability (pp. 7-25). Academic Press. 
 
Wu, C. (1990). Training Manual on Gracilaria Culture and Seaweed Processing in 
China. China: FAO Fishery Technical Paper. 
http://www.fao.org/3/AB730E/AB730E01.htm#chI.1.a 
Assessed 20 november  
 
Xu, D., Zhu, J., He, Y., Cheng, X., Zhang, W., & Zhang, X. (2008). Structure of 
reproductive apparatus of Gracilaria/Gracilariopsis lemaneiformis 
(Gracilariaceae, Rhodophyta). Science in China Series C: Life Sciences, 51(12), 
1137-1143. 
 
Yamamoto, H. (1978). Systematic and anatomical study of the genus Gracilaria in 
Japan. Memoirs of the faculty of fisheries Hokkaido university, 25(2), 97-152. 
 
Yarish, C., Redmond, S., & Kim, J. K. (2012). Gracilaria culture handbook for New 
England. Wrack Lines 72. 
==PAGE:121==
121
 
Yokoya, N. S., Kakita, H., Obika, H., & Kitamura, T. (1999). Effects of 
environmental factors and plant growth regulators on growth of the red alga 
Gracilaria vermiculophylla from Shikoku Island, Japan. Hydrobiologia, 398, 339-
347. 
 
Zheng, C. K., Wang, S. J., & Liu, S. J. (1987). Phycoculture. Shanghai House of 
Science and Technology Publication, 225-254. 
 
Zhou, W., Sui, Z.H., Wang, J.G., Hu, Y.Y., Kang, K., Oh, J., Kim, S.C., Huang, J.H., Wang, 
P.Y. (2014). Biomass and carbon storage of Gracilariopsis lemaneiformis 
(Rhodophyta) in Zhanshan Bay, Qingdao, China. Chin. J. Oceanol. Limnol. 32, 
1009–1015. 
 
Zhou, W., Sui, Z., Wang, J., Hu, Y., Kang, K. H., Kim, H. B., & Niaz, Z. (2016). Mass 
cultivation of economically important red alga Gracilariopsis lemaneiformis 
(Gracilariaceae, Rhodophyta) from tetraspores and carpospores. Aquaculture, 
460, 25-31. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
