==PAGE:1==
Machine Learning Applications of Graph
Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
Master Thesis
DTU Physics
QPIT
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sam-
pler
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Mathias Hoeg Boisen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, QPIT, Fysikvej, Building 307, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months under the research group Quantum Physics
and Information Technology, Department of Physics, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge of quantum mechanics and quantum
optics.
Mathias Hoeg Boisen - s164000
Signature
Date
ii
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
A Gaussian boson sampler (GBS) has recently been used to be able to perform a calculation
thought to be beyond the capabilities of classical computers. The calculation performed by
a GBS, is currently not thought to have many applications and even fewer of those applica-
tions are related to problems of practical interest. This thesis provides an overview of the
current applications of GBS and tests these applications on the X8 chip, an 8-mode GBS
chip made by the company Xanadu. The thesis introduces a solution to the problem ’inde-
pendent set’ on a GBS and performs benchmarking of the GBS algorithm for solving graph
isomorphism/similarity. Ultimately, the thesis tries to use graph similarity on kernel matri-
ces to improve the machine learning model Gaussian process regression (GPR). To this end,
an approximation to GPR is developed, optimized and benchmarked, and the approximation
is shown to be asymptotically faster than exact GPR and more readily parallelizable. GBS
graph similarity measures are presented for kernel matrices from the GPR, but ultimately it
is found that a GPR can not be optimized using graph similarity methods when using only
the kernel matrices.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my two main supervisors Ulrich Busk Hoff and Ulrik Lund Andersen.
Without their encouragement and guidance, this thesis would never have been made. When
I was filled with doubt, worried about the project or just frustrated with working at home
during the second corona lock-down, my spirits were always lifted after our weekly meetings.
A very warm thank you also goes out to Jonathan Foldager for providing the idea for trying
to link Gaussian processes and graph similarity and for helping me along the way with new
ideas, sanity checks and very fun brain storms. A thank you also goes out to Professor Lars
Kai Hansen for assisting me and Jonathan during the process.
I would also like to thank my head of studies Rafael Taboryski.
He helped me remove
administrative road blocks, which in many ways made this thesis possible.
A special thank you also goes out to my dear friend Benjamin Lundgren Larsen, he knows
why.
I would like to thank my parents for their support, my friends for being a consistent source
of interesting discussions, joy and laughter in my life.
Last, but not least, I would like to thank my girlfriend for her love and support, both during
the thesis and the years leading up to it.
iv
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Fundamentals of Gaussian Boson Sampling, Complexity Theory and the
Quest for Quantum Supremacy
3
2.1
Computability and Quantum Complexity theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Gaussian Boson Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Xanadu and the X8 chip . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Existing Applications of Gaussian Boson Sampling
21
3.1
Graph Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Vibronic Spectra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Quantum Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Solving the Independent Set Problem
29
4.1
Reducing Independent Set to Max Clique
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Solving the Independent Set Problem using a GBS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5
Graph Isomorphism and similarity using a GBS
33
5.1
Graph Isomorphism - An Introduction to the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Solving Graph Isomorphism using a GBS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3
Graph Similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Gaussian Processes Boosted by Gaussian Boson Sampling
45
6.1
Gaussian Process Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Gaussian Process Regression and Graph Similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3
The Idea for an Approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
v
==PAGE:8==
6.4
Deriving Optimal Weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.5
Results of the GP approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.6
Linking Optimal Weights with GBS Similarity Measures . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.7
GBS Graph Similarity and Optimal Weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
7
Discussion and Concluding Remarks
67
7.1
Discussion of the Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
7.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Bibliography
71
vi
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Quantum computing as a field has seen an enormous amount of growth during the last couple
of years. During the last two years, we have witnessed two historical and remarkable examples
of a quantum advantage[6, 58] where quantum computers have performed calculations in
seconds/minutes which would take classical computers up to 2.5 billion years to compute.
For anyone with just a passing interest in either classical or quantum computing, it is hard
not to be drawn in by these results and the possibilities they point towards. With these
results we are slowly entering what is known as the NISQ era, the age of Noisy Intermediate
Scale Quantum[46], where quantum devices might be able to have early applications.
Quantum advantage might seem promising, but the current two examples of quantum advan-
tage have been on fairly artificial problems with very few known applications, besides beating
a classical computer.
The purpose of this thesis is to investigate existing and new possible applications of one
of the two platforms used to achieve a quantum advantage[58], known as Gaussian boson
sampling (GBS). Gaussian boson sampling was chosen because it is a fascinating new type
of quantum computer which we now know can beat a classical computer at a task, but not
if it can actually perform an application of practical use.
There already exists a wealth
of possible applications such as graph isomorphism[14], chemical docking[9] and simulating
molecular vibrational excitations vibrational [ahangiri2020quantum]. In addition to this it
was recently made possible to run some of those applications on an actual user programmable
Gaussian boson sampler built by the Canadian start-up Xanandu[4]. It is still unsure if any
of the proposed applications will be able to compete with classical methods, but the field is
moving fast and it might be closer than we think.
The applications we will primarily deal with in this thesis, is to use Gaussian boson sampling
to perform graph similarity to find patterns in data and speed up a machine learning model
known as Gaussian process regression. The hope is to be able to predict a function more
efficiently using a Gaussian boson sampler.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
1
==PAGE:10==
Before reading the thesis, it will be helpful to have an overview of the different chapters. The
project has been very exploratory and some of the chapters are almost self contained.
The first chapter, you are here.
The second chapter will introduce the reader to the theory of boson sampling and extends that
to the theory of Gaussian boson sampling. To support and motivate the theory behind GBS,
a brief overview is provided of complexity theory, this section also pertains to chapter 4. The
end of the second chapter describes and characterizes Xanadu’s X8 chip, which implements
GBS.
The third chapter provides an overview of possible applications of GBS and some of the short-
comings of those applications. This section mostly stands alone, except for the explanation
of the maximum clique problem used for chapter 4.
The fourth chapter contains a small novel application in the form of a solution of the inde-
pendent set problem using a GBS. Except for references to the third chapter and comments
on the importance of the mean photon number, this chapter mostly stands alone.
The fifth and sixth chapter are connected. The fifth chapter outlines the proposal to use
a GBS to solve the problems of graph isomorphism and similarity and compares simulated
results with data collected from a real Gaussian boson sampler. The sixth chapter outlines
the theory of Gaussian process regression, derives an approximation for Gaussian process
regression and tries to link the approximation to graph similarity.
2
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:11==
2
Fundamentals of Gaussian Boson
Sampling, Complexity Theory and
the Quest for Quantum Supremacy
This section will outline the fundamentals and motivations of the theory of Gaussian boson
sampling1. The first part will talk generally about computability of quantum systems and
quantum complexity theory. This will serve as the motivation for the development of boson
sampling. The second part will deal with the theory of Gaussian boson sampling and current
implementations. A knowledgeable reader can skip this section.
2.1
Computability and Quantum Complexity theory
2.1.1
Quantum Computability and Quantum Supremacy
The current overall goal of quantum computing could be formulated as proving that a quan-
tum computer can perform a computation outside of the reasonable grasp of a classical
computer. We usually call this quantum supremacy or quantum advantage, a term coined
by John Preskill[45].
This was also the main motivation when Feynman originally proposed the construction of
a quantum computer to efficiently simulate quantum systems[22], which is thought, but not
proved, to be computationally hard. What was less expected was that a quantum computer
might also be able to beat a classical computer at computational tasks which were not directly
related to quantum systems. The subsequent discovery of quantum algorithms which were
asymptotically faster than the best known classical algorithms[11] for problems of a non-
quantum nature gave us reason to suspect that there are tasks in which a quantum computer
could beat a classical computer.
Of course it was not certain that the problem of decoherence could be overcome. Moreover
1For brevity, we’ll use the shorthand GBS
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
3
==PAGE:12==
the no-cloning theorem means that the classical way of fault-tolerance, by redundancy en-
coding was not feasible. Novel error correction codes were nevertheless developed, notably
the Steane code[52]. Another fear was that errors would propagate out of control, but with
the formulation of the Quantum Fault-Tolerance Theorem, it was shown that if an error ϵ is
sufficiently small, it is still possible to perform calculations and correct errors[2, 36].
Quantum algorithms for large error corrected quantum devices have also sparked a huge
interest in the field. The most obvious example of this is probably Shor’s algorithm2. Shor’s
algorithm is a remarkable result, because it is a quantum algorithm for factoring numbers
which is super-polynomially faster than the most efficient classical algorithms3. In this case,
the fastest known classical algorithm is the general number field sieve algorithm[39] giving a
run-time bounded by O

e1.9(log N)1/3(log log N)2/3
compared to Shor’s algorithm which runs in
polynomial time using O
 (log N)2(log log N)(log log log N)

quantum gates.
A short note on complexity theory
To help guide us further, we will need a short note on complexity classes. In fig. 2.1 some
of the, for our purposes, most important classes in what we call PSPACE is shown. Here
PSPACE refers to all decision problems which can be solved using a polynomial amount of
memory using a Turing machine. A decision problem is any problem which can be answered
by a simple true or false. An example could be ’given some integers S1, is it possible to choose
a subset of the integers in S1 such that the sum is T’?
In PSPACE we have problems that belong to NP, which are all decision problems solvable in
non-deterministic polynomial time, or conversely, any problem whose solution can be verified
in polynomial time. The two most important classes in NP are the NP-complete problems
(a group of very hard problems) and P problems (solvable in deterministic polynomial time).
Around P, but with a very fuzzy border to adjacent complexity classes, we have a larger
group of problems which are in BPP, where BPP are problems solvable in bounded-error
probabilistic polynomial time.
Integer factorization is not known to belong to either P, BPP or NP. It is however shown
2shor1999polynomial
3Big O notation will be used to describe algorithms throughout this thesis. Big O describes an asymptotic
upper bound on the running time or the space requirements for a given algorithm as a function of the size of
the input
4
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:13==
NP
BQP
P
NP-Complete
PSPACE
Figure 2.1: A figure showing the (thought to be true) relation between the complexity classes BQP, P and
NP in PSPACE. Note that it is known that P ⊆BQP, which means that BQP might be equal to P.
with Shor’s algorithm that we can factorize an integer with a bounded-error probability on a
quantum device, leading to the creation of the complexity class BQP. This leads us to the next
section, where we will formalize what we mean when we talk about a quantum advantage.
As a small side note, NP-complete problems can in principle be solved faster using a quantum
computer. This is because Grover’s algorithm[26] tells that we can perform an exhaustive
search which is quadratic faster than a classical computer. This is of course interesting, but
a very small speed-up compared to Shor’s algorithm.
Formalizing Quantum Advantage
The existence of Shor’s algorithm indicates that we could use a quantum computer to solve
problems no classical computer currently is known to be able to solve.
This can be stated more formally as the extended Church Turing thesis[11]. It posits that
all computational problems which can be efficiently solved on a physical device can also be
efficiently solved by a probabilistic Turing machine. This is of course suspected to not be true,
given as mentioned above the existence of Shor’s4 algorithm, which gives a faster solution for
a problem on a quantum computer.
4shor1999polynomial
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
5
==PAGE:14==
The path towards disproving the extended Church Turing thesis is hard if we want to do so
by factoring a very large number. Several experimental implementations of Shor’s algorithm
already exist[54, 40, 38], but the current world record[41] still stands at factoring the number
21 into 3 × 7, which is of course a far cry from what we can achieve classically. Attempts
at larger numbers have been met with problems with accumulating errors[3]. Estimates for
factoring a large enough number to prove quantum advantage is ∼106 physical qubits[24], a
far cry from the 56 physical qubits that Google used to show a quantum advantage[6].
The above problem is of course the most obvious, but in addition, we do not have a proof
that factoring numbers is actually a strict superset of the complexity class of BPP. The
class BPP is the classical equivalent of BQP, and if BQP ⊆BPP, we would be able
to solve any problem in BQP in polynomial time on a Turing machine with a probability
greater than 2/3. A proof that BQP ⊆BPP would of course be groundbreaking, and is
generally believed to not be true, but it would not upset the greater complexity hierarchy as
we currently understand it, unlike eg. P = NP.
The above is an introduction to the most standard of complexity classes, but we will need the
complexity class of a different type of problems as well. We will in the next section discover
that the problem of boson sampling, surprisingly, belongs to the group of problems know as
sampling problems. Simply described, instead of asking for the existence of a certain solution
to a problem, we instead ask for samples of solutions to a given problem, given some bound.
A simple example could be: What are the solutions for f(x) > 0 given f(x) = x?
2.1.2
The Computational Complexity of Linear Optics
Aaronson and Arkhipov suggested a different approach to disprove the extended Church Tur-
ing thesis and thus show a quantum advantage[1]. The central plan of attack they propose is
to look for examples of a quantum system, which is both within reach of current experiments
and can be defined as performing a calculation. What they propose is a generalization of the
famous Hong-Ou-Mandel dip[28]. To illustrate the idea, we will first follow the general expo-
sition in[1] and then discuss the disadvantages of using boson sampling to give a motivation
for the theory of Gaussian boson sampling.
Boson sampling first requires us to generate n indistinguishable photons and input them into
a unitary interferometer with m modes, which we can described with an m × m = O(n2)
6
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:15==
unitary matrix U, the remaining m −n modes are vacuum. In practice, the unitary will be
implemented as an array of beam splitters and phase shifters.
We can write our generated single photons as a general Fock state of the form:
|Ψin⟩= |11⟩|12⟩|13⟩. . . |1n⟩|0n+1⟩. . . |0m⟩
(2.1)
We will now introduce sj ∈{0, 1}, and write the state using creation operators:
|Ψin⟩= |s1, s2, s3 . . . sn . . . sm⟩=
m
Y
i=1
(a†
i)si
√si! |0⟩⊗m
(2.2)
The interferometer, described by a unitary matrix, will transform the creation operators as
follows:
U


ˆa†
1
...
ˆa†
m


=


Pm
k=1 u1,kˆa†
k
. . .
Pm
k=1 um,kˆa†
k


(2.3)
After the state passes through our interferometer, the output state will be in a superposition
of all possible outputs. The output state can be written as
|Ψout⟩=
X
S
γS
n(S)
1 , . . . , n(S)
m
E
(2.4)
Where S denotes all possible permutations of Fock states which have a total number of
photons equal to the input, in our case n. We have a probability for measuring S given by
|γS|2 and finally the number of photons in the input state ni. The size of the possible problem
is already becoming apparent, since the size of S will be given by the binomial coefficient
 m+n−1
n

.
The probability of measuring a given output state |γS|, can be shown[1] to be equal to the
following:
|γS|2 =
Per(US)
n(s)
1 ! . . . n(s)
m
(2.5)
The important new objects here is the permanent of a matrix, which for a n × n matrix is
defined as
Per(U) =
X
σ∈Sn
n
Y
i=1
ai,σ(i)
(2.6)
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
7
==PAGE:16==
Sn denotes that the sum runs over the products of all permutations of the numbers 1, . . . , n.
The permanent is the same as the determinant, except that all the numbers are added.
The permanent is taken over a sub-matrix of U, given by the output state. The sub-matrix of
U is made by keeping the first n columns, and for each measured photon in an output mode,
n(s)
i , the i’th row chosen n(s)
i
times. The intersection between the n columns and n rows is
the matrix Us. Where the full matrix U was an m × m matrix, Us will be an n × n matrix.
It has been shown that it is a #P problem to calculate the permanent[53], more precisely it
is in the #P-complete class of problems, which is a class of counting problems. Solving #P-
complete problems are hard and a polynomial time algorithm for any #P-complete, would
prove that P = NP. But boson sampling does not calculate the permanent. As was shown
above, the probability of measuring outputs followed distributions which were linked to the
permanents of submatricies.
Aaronson and Arkhipov showed that the sampling problem was in the sampling class of
problems P #P [1], and that even approximating the problem to within a constant factor was
also in the complexity class P #P. The best known classical algorithms[19] to perform the
sampling tasks have a time complexity of O(n2n + mn2).
In addition to this, if it turned out that one could perform boson sampling in polynomial
time on a classical computer, Aaronson and Arkhipov[1] demonstrated that it would collapse
the polynomial hierarchy. This would equate a number of complexity classes with each other
and have far reaching consequences on the order of P = NP.
The fact that a quantum advantage can be reached using just linear optics, photon detectors
and single photon sources is a great advantage compared to trying to build a large gate based
quantum computer to factor a large number. There is however a few trade-offs, since we are
no longer dealing with a problem in NP. This means that we can’t easily verify that a given
solution is correct. If we built a quantum computer and tried to factor 42 and it returned
(2, 3, 7) we could easily check the result since 42 = 2 × 3 × 7 and the factors are all prime. If
we perform boson sampling, the way to verify the distribution is to either calculate it exactly
or calculate e.g. a distribution from thermal states and compare this to the results from the
sampling[56].
The next problem in performing a large scale boson sampling experiment is the lack of good
8
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:17==
deterministic single photon sources. Most of the good single photon sources that exist are not
deterministic and use a heralded photon to signify the generation of a photon. The probability
of the generation of a large number of single photon sources will be exponentially decreasing.
This presents a large obstacle in actually performing a successful boson sampling experiment,
especially if the goal is to achieve quantum supremacy, since estimates for this threshold is
around 50-100[19]. In the next section we will go through Gaussian boson sampling as a
solution to poor single photon sources.
2.2
Gaussian Boson Sampling
Gaussian boson sampling uses Gaussian states instead of single photons.
The following will give the reader an overview of Gaussian boson sampling and Gaussian
states [37, 27] and discuss some of the advantages of Gaussian boson sampling, but first we
will define a Gaussian state, as well as define some useful operators.
2.2.1
A Very Brief Description of Gaussian States
To perform a Gaussian boson sampling, we will replace the single photons with Gaussian
states. The reason they are called Gaussian states, is that if the state is mapped into phase
space, the so called Wigner function, it will be shaped like a Gaussian and have no negative
values. The phase space is given by the dimensionless field quadratures, the position (X1)
and momentum operators(X2):
c
X1 = 1
2(ba† + ba),
b
X2 = i
2(ba† −ba)
(2.7)
A plot of the Wigner function of a vacuum state can be seen in fig. 2.2, the shape of the
Wigner function can be thought of as representing the uncertainty relations in phase space.
We can represent a Gaussian state using only a co-variance matrix Σ. The covariance is
the said to be the covariance of a normal distribution we draw what we call the complex
amplitudes α from. They are equal to: [23, 31]:
α =
1
√
2¯h
(c
X1 + ic
X2)
(2.8)
For Gaussian boson sampling, the basic resource will be squeezed light, squeezed light is light
where one of the quadratures has been made smaller, which forces the other quadrature to
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
9
==PAGE:18==
X2
−4
−2
0
2
4
X1
−4
−2
0
2
4
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
Figure 2.2: The Wigner function of a vacuum state, which is an example of a Gaussian state since it is
always positive. The plot was generated using the software Pennylane [35]
become larger. Squeezed light will have the shape of an ellipsis in phase space. The squeezing
operator can be written as[23, eq. 7.10]:
ˆS(z) = exp
1
2(z∗ˆa2 −zˆa†2)

,
z = r eiθ
(2.9)
In the next section we will set θ = 0 Gaussian boson sampling will use squeezed light. Another
important operator we can use in phase space is the displacement operator D, which can be
written as[23]:
ˆD(α) = exp(αˆa† + α∗ˆa)
(2.10)
where α = (X1 +iX2)/2 and is the complex amplitude. If one uses the displacement operator
on a vacuum state we get:
ˆD(α)|0⟩= |α⟩
(2.11)
Which generates another Gaussian state, a coherent state where we can write α = |α|eiθ and
with a mean photon number of ¯n = |α|2. We can think of this operation as displacing the
Wigner function in phase space away from origo.
The final operator which we should mention is the rotation operator. The rotation operator
rotates a the Wigner function of a state. For a vacuum state the rotation will do nothing,
10
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:19==
but it will have an effect if the state is squeezed. It can be written as:
R(θ) = eiθa†a
(2.12)
These are some of the most important operators, which can help us read fig. 2.3. We will
cover these again when we get to some of the applications in the next chapter.
2.2.2
Gaussian Boson Sampling and the Hafnian
To guide us in describing Gaussian boson sampling, we can look at an illustration of a
GBS circuit in fig. 2.3. We can see that instead of the single photon detectors we now a
series of squeezing gates, which implement the operator from eq. (2.9). The following linear
interferometer will work exactly the same as in boson sampling, but now on a squeezed
Gaussian state. The last measurement is a Fock state measurement which counts the number
of photons in each of the outputs from the interferometer. It was shown in [27], that the
probability of measuring a given output S = [s1, s2, . . . , sm] can be written as:
Pr(S) =
1
det(Q)
As
s1!s2! . . . sm!
(2.13)
We can write Q and A up as a function of the covariance matrix of our Gaussian state[27]:
Q ≡Σ + I2M/2
(2.14)
A ≡


0
IM
IM
0

(I2M −Q−1)
(2.15)
The submatrix in eq. (2.13), As, is constructed differently compared to the one from boson
sampling. It depends only on the measured output photons, given a measurement si > 0 it
will take the rows and coloumns corresponding to i and i + m and repeat them si times, and
for any output mode where sj = 0 the rows and coloumns (j and j + m) are deleted.
Just like for boson sampling we have a new function, this time it is the Hafnian instead of
the permanent. The Hafnian is defined in the following way[16]:
Haf(A) =
X
π∈PMP
Y
(i,j)∈1
Aij
(2.16)
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
11
==PAGE:20==
Squeezing
Linear Interferometer
Photon Detection
S
S
S
S
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
BS
BS
BS
BS
n
n
n
n
BS
Figure 2.3: A quantum circuit showing an implementation of Gaussian boson sampling over 4 modes[16]
The hafnian counts the number of so called ’perfect matching permutations’, which why
we sum over π ∈PMP.
An interesting relation to boson sampling can be found, since
the permanent is a special case of the Hafnian. The Hafnian counts the number of perfect
matchings in a general graph, while the permanent counts the in a bipartite[27]5
Perm(G) = Haf



0
G
Gt
0


,
(2.17)
The link to boson sampling is already highly suggestive of the fact that GBS is actually
a hard problem, and it is in fact also in #P. It is actually the case that one can prove
that a special case of GBS is equivalent to a heralded scheme known as scattershot boson
sampling[37]. When squeezed light is produced, one will get two frequency modes sharing
a single temporal mode. If one of the two frequency modes is just allowed to pass through
an identity unitary, while the other is let through a random linear interferometer, it will be
exactly the same as a heralded scheme where one just measures the herald simultaneously
with the signal.
5A bipartite graph is a graph with two sets of nodes, where nodes are only connected with a node that it
does not share a set with.
12
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:21==
Gaussian boson sampling has the large advantage that it does not need heralding of pho-
tons[27].
Since the exponential factor inherent in the probability of N non-deterministic
single photon sources spoiled the prospects of performing large scale experiments, Gaussian
boson sampling has a very large scaling advantage. This is also the reason why it was possible
to reach a quantum advantage using a GBS compared to a boson sampler.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
13
==PAGE:22==
2.3
Xanadu and the X8 chip
In the following section we will take a look at the X8 optical chip made by Xanadu, which
will later be used to test two applications of GBS: graph isomorphism and independent set.
The content is mainly based on the newly published article[4].
The X8 chip is an 8-mode optical chip which is able to perform Gaussian boson sampling. The
amount of modes is of course less than in the GBS used to show a quantum advantage[58],
but the main difference between the two setups is that Zhong et al. implemented one specific
unitary and measured on that unitary. Xanadu has the goal of making a GBS which can
implement any given unitary and specific squeezing on the different modes. This is also the
only way any of the applications described in chapter 3 can be realized.
A general schematic of the X8 chip can be seen in fig. 2.4. If we start on the left hand side,
we see that there are a total of 8 input modes. These input modes are in pairs, where (0, 4),
(1, 5), (2, 6) and (3, 7) each occupy a single spatial mode. This is because the chip generates
squeezed light using 4 silicon nitride microring resonators[53]. When the microring resonators
are pumped with a pulsed laser, they generate a signal/idler pair of two different wavelengths
into one spatial mode. This means that the 8 modes are actually 4 spatial modes which each
carry 2 frequency modes. Each of the 4 microring resonators has a squeezing parameter ri
and are in fig. 2.4 denoted by S(ri).
For each of the signal/idler pairs, they are entangled upon generation, which corresponds
to a 50/50 beam splitter. Afterwards, the pump laser is filtered out of the spatial modes.
The next part is the programmable unitary, denoted U4, which is an implementation of a
Mach–Zehnder interferometer. In fig. 2.3 we can see an example of how the implementation
would look (excluding the squeezers and photon detectors). The U4 transformation will be
comprised of several beam splitters, separately interfering the signal modes with each other
and the idle modes with each other. In addition to this, the rotation gates are also a part of
U4. They have been implemented as tunable phase shifters[16]. The unitary can not be set
independently for each of the two frequency modes, since the unitary acting on the signal is
the same as for the idle states, since they share the same spatial mode.
At the end of the chip, the states reach the photon number resolving detectors and the output
is measured.
14
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.4: A schematic of the X8 GBS chip[4] built by Xanadu, showing the different operations performed
on the input.
2.3.1
Embedding a Graph on the X8 chip
In this thesis we will mostly be dealing with solving graph problems, hence it is important
that we understand how to go from an arbitrary graph to a valid embedding on a GBS.
Defining a Graph
Let’s first, define what we mean by a graph. A graph in our case is a set of points (nodes),
where some of the nodes are connected to other points with some weight (edges which have an
edge weight). An example of a simple graph can be seen in fig. 2.5. Sometimes the problem
we are trying to model with a graph, does not require edge weights, in which case we do
not need to specify those. A graph can also have edges which have a direction, this means
that when traversing the graph we can only travel along a specific direction of an edge. An
important type of representation of a graph is the adjacency matrix, for the undirected graph
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.5: An example of an undirected graph with 4 nodes and 3 edges
in fig. 2.5 the adjacency matrix is:


0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
0
1
1


(2.18)
In the case of a undirected graph, the adjacency matrix will always be symmetric. If a graph
is directed it will have an asymmetric adjacency matrix (eg. A[i, j] = 1 but A[j, i] = 0 if there
is a directed edge going from node i to j).
Programming a GBS
When we want to program something onto a GBS, we can do this by specifying the matrix A
which defines the GBS probability distribution (see eq. (2.13)). A has to be symmetric[16].
The GBS distribution can be used to find the unitary that we need to implement, by per-
forming a Takagi-Autonne decomposition[16]
A = Udiag(λ1, λ2, . . . , λm)U T
(2.19)
Here U is the unitary matrix which specifies the linear interferometer of the GBS[14, 31].
The λi values are related to the squeezing parameter[16] ri via. the relation tanh(ri) = λi,
where 0 ≤λi < 1. For our output distribution, we will have a mean photon number, ¯n, given
by [16]:
¯n =
M
X
i=1
λ2
i
1 −λ2
i
.
(2.20)
When we wish to encode a graph we can indirectly control the squeezing and the mean photon
number by rescaling the graph via a parameter cA. This will change λi →cλi and thus also
16
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:25==
the mean photon number.
This is often very desirable, since a problem might require a
very large amount of squeezing. Another useful property is that some applications work by
sampling specific parts of the graph more frequently. If one chooses ¯n so it is close to the size
of the subgraph we wish to sample, the algorithm will have a higher chance of success. We
will look further into this in chapter 4.
To summarize, we can now, given a symmetric matrix A, find squeezing parameters ri =
tanh−1(cλi) and a unitary U. Where the unitary U specifies the linear interferometer. This
means that we can now program the GBS device with a specific symmetric matrix and it will
return samples from the distribution:
Pr(S) ∝ck |Haf(AS)|
s1! . . . sm! ,
(2.21)
The obvious choice for a symmetric matrix, will of course be an adjacency matrix for a
undirected graph, since it will be symmetric. A direct encoding of any arbitrary graph onto
the X8 chip has a couple of limits. The first is that one would expect us to be able to embed
a graph with 8 nodes onto a GBS, but because of the setup of the spatial/frequency modes
it is only possible to embed a bipartite graph of size 8 or a general graph of size 4. A general
graph can be embedded by transforming it into a bipartite graph of size 8, where the resulting
adjacency matrix will have off-diagonal blocks which contain the edge weights that connect
nodes in the separate parts of the graph.
The next challenge is that the degree of squeezing is limited on the chip. It is currently limited
to binary ri ∈{0, 1}, which means either we have squeezing or we just have vacuum. This of
course will limit the validity of the embedding, since we will have to force the squeezing to
be either 0 or 1.
2.3.2
Characterization and Sampling from the X8
Xanadu has performed characterization of the chip to estimate the error and the non-
classicality of the states. They have done this by measuring the second order correlation
between the two entangled outputs of each squeezer, where the unitary is set to the iden-
tity transformation6. They use this setup to measure the second order correlation, which we
6This is exactly equivalent to a Hanbury Brown and Twiss interferometer
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
17
==PAGE:26==
remind ourselves is defined as:
g(2)(τ) = ⟨n(t)n(t + τ)⟩
⟨n(t)⟩2
.
(2.22)
They obtain a g(2) ≈1.79 which is close to 2 giving us highly bunched light. This is ex-
pected, since ideally the two-mode squeezed light should occupy a single temporal mode and
be described as two single mode thermal-state[4]. They estimate that around 15% of the mea-
sured photons are noise caused by Raman scattering from the fiber components or unwanted
temporal modes being populated by the squeezers which can not be separated.
In addition to this, they estimate the transmission efficiency to be around 15%. The low
transmission efficiency is worrying for the performance of the chip. For example, if two states
should interfere on a given beam splitter, but one of them is lost, then the output of the
beam splitter will be altered and this error could propagate to the entire system, altering the
output.
We can see this effect by creating an embedding for a graph with 4 nodes given by the
following adjacency matrix7:
C1 =


0.0826
0.1231
0.0789
−0.1969
0.1231
0.1834
0.1176
−0.2935
0.0789
0.1176
0.0754
−0.1882
−0.1969
−0.2935
−0.1882
0.4697


(2.23)
The squeezing parameters were set to be 0 if |ri| < 10−2 when defining the embedding giving
the squeezing [1, 0, 0, 0]. Thus using eq. (2.20), we have that ¯n ∼1.37.
We can now simulate the resulting distribution[35] and compare it to samples from the X8
chip. Results can be seen in fig. 2.6. Here, the probability of measuring each permutation
of outputs, with a sum of 4 photons, has been calculated both for the samples from the
simulated distribution and from the X8 chip. These have been color coded in ’orbits’. The
first color shows all possible outputs with 4 single photons detected. This will be denoted
{1, 1, 1, 1}, and an example of an output belonging to this orbit is [1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0]. The
color coding for the orbits is explained in fig. 2.6. The distribution for the samples from the
7The graph was, for benchmarking purposes, chosen to be the same as the one shown in the example found
here https://strawberryfields.ai/photonics/demos/tutorial_X8_demos.html
18
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:27==
Pattern
−0.12
−0.10
−0.08
−0.06
−0.04
−0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
Probability
Figure 2.6: Spectrum of all possible output combinations measuring a total of 4 photons for the X8 chip
(top, 3.8×104 samples out of 106) and simulated with 0 loss (bottom, 11×105 samples out of 7.9×106).
From left to right, the colors indicate the orbits: {1, 1, 1, 1},{1, 1, 2},{3, 1}, {2, 2} and {4}
X8 are positive and the distribution from the simulated samples are negative, for presentation
purposes.
For the results from the X8, we find that the average photon number on the output is 1.17,
which is surprisingly close to the expected mean photon number. We can see the effect of
photon losses and noise on the distribution. The two distributions share some of the same
features, but outputs are measured on the X8 which do not seem possible given the simulated
data. Notably, the measurement of the orbit {3, 1} on the X8 is not possible without noise or
loss, since an ideal GBS would not sample an odd number of photons from a single mode[14,
Lemma 6]. For the simulated samples, we also note that a larger proportion of the total
samples are 4 photon events, indicating that losses are removing some of the 4 photon events
we should otherwise expect to see.
We can also generate samples from the distribution with a loss of 0.8, which will hopefully
model the losses we know exist in the X8 chip. The results of this can be seen in fig. 2.7,
which shows a much closer agreement to the experimental results. The ratio of 4 photon
samples are also closer, where 2.8% of the samples contain 4 photons for the X8 chip and
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.7: Spectrum of all possible output combinations measuring a total of 4 photons for the X8 chip
(top, 2.8×104 samples out of 106) and simulated with 0.8 loss (bottom, 2.2×104 samples out of 1.7×106).
for the simulated samples the ratio is 1.2%. It is fairly surprising that the X8 chip has more
4 photon events, since the loss parameter for the simulations has been set to 0.8 compared
to the estimated value of 0.85(1)[4].
The explanation might be noise, which increases 3
photon events to 4 photon events. Finally, we note that the most likely 4 photon sample for
the simulated samples is noticeably less likely in the X8 samples fig. 2.7, this might again
indicate that noise is generally increasing otherwise unlikely events.
20
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:29==
3
Existing Applications of Gaussian
Boson Sampling
The overall goal of this thesis is to investigate novel applications of GBS. To this end, it is
important to go through some notable existing applications. This section will do that, by
outlining a variety of proposed applications of GBS, giving an overview of what GBS can do
today.
3.1
Graph Applications
3.1.1
Perfect Matchings in a Graph
The first graph problem is also the most fundamental and will be used in several of the
other applications.
It is the problem of perfect matching and it is an NP-hard problem.
The problem is to find the maximum number of different ways each unique node can be
connected to another unique node in an unweighted graph. See fig. 3.1 for an example of
perfect matchings in a graph. It is true, almost by definition, that the number of perfect
matchings in a graph is equal to the hafnian of the adjacency matrix[10].
It would therefore seem obvious as a first application to embed an adjacency matrix onto a
GBS and use it to count the number of perfect matchings. A valid encoding scheme was first
shown by[15]. Bradler et al. showed that by taking an adjacency matrix A, one could embed
the matrix cA⊗2 = cA ⊗A on a GBS, where c is a scaling parameter. This of course means
that one needs a circuit which is twice as large as the total number of nodes in the graph
(which we will denote as 2M). The amount of squeezing for each input state is determined
by the eigenvalues (λk) of the adjacency matrix, where λk = 0 means that the input in mode
k should be vacuum.
Since the number of perfect matchings is equal to the full hafnian of A, one needs to find the
probability of measuring outputs in all 2M modes as to sample the full matrix A and not
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
21
==PAGE:30==
just a submatrix:
PrcA⊗2(1, . . . , 1) =
2M
Y
k=1
q
1 −c2λ2
khaf[c(A ⊗A)]
(3.1)
It is worth considering the complexity of the computational problem we are trying to solve.
In this case, the above will correspond to actually calculating a hafnian, a task which we know
is in the complexity class #P, even on a GBS. It is thus not surprising that the probability of
obtaining the measurement PrcA⊗2(1, . . . , 1) falls exponentially with the largest eigenvalue of
the graph. This is not surprising since no efficient solutions of any of the NP-hard problems
have yet been found. Also, a GBS can efficiently sample from a hafnian distribution, but not
calculate the actual hafnian efficiently. But still, this might be a more energy efficient and
faster way of calculating perfect matchings, and since these problems are hard by nature, an
exponential solution might be the best we can hope for.
The next implementations will build on the insights from the perfect matching problems.
Figure 3.1: Figure from [15]. The first graph a) is the total graph and the following graphs show the
different perfect matchings that exist
3.1.2
Dense Subgraph Identification
To define the maximum subgraph density we start by defining density. The density is the
number of edges (|E|) divided by the number of nodes (|V |). For a subgraph (S) of some
graph G, this can simply be written as d(S) =
|ES|
|VS| , for an example see fig. 3.2. A crucial step
in solving this type of problem on a GBS is noting that subgraphs with a large number of
perfect matchings will have a large hafnian. It has been shown that graphs with a very large
number of perfect matchings also have a high density[5].
This fact can be exploited, since the probability of obtaining a sample from the GBS grows as
a function of the hafnian, a sample from the graph is more likely to be output if it has a large
22
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:31==
number of perfect matchings, and thus if it is very dense. Thus, by embedding an adjacency
matrix on a GBS and sampling from it, we will have a larger probability of obtaining a dense
subgraph than by random sampling.
Unlike the previous application, the proposed algorithm is a hybrid-algorithm, since it pro-
poses that we concatenate dense subgraphs from the GBS as a start for a local search. It
has been shown[5] that GBS provides what seems’to be a superior starting point compared
to classical stochastic algorithms, but this problem is also NP-hard and has few applications.
Figure 3.2: Figure from [5]. The densest subgraph with 10 nodes is highlighted in the graph.
3.1.3
Maximum Clique
The next application also deals with an NP-hard problem, in this case the related problem
of finding a maximum clique in a graph.
Here we understand a clique as a collection of nodes in a graph, called an induced subgraph,
in which all nodes are connected to each other. Such a subgraph is also called a complete
graph. The maximum clique problem is then the task of finding the largest clique in a given
graph. A variant of the problem exists where the task is to find the maximum weighted
clique, this variant is also solvable on a GBS.
This type of problem is also NP-hard, and a GBS can’t solve it deterministically, but it has
been shown that the hybrid-algorithm can yield good results[9].
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
23
==PAGE:32==
Similar to the densest subgraph problem, we can sample from a graph using a GBS to get
the parts of the graph which has the largest density. These parts of the graph are very good
places to perform local searches for a clique.
The algorithm works by embedding a graph onto the GBS and sampling from it. When
a selection of dense samples are obtained from the GBS, they are concatenated with other
adjacent dense samples. One can now in polynomial time (O(V )) traverse the subgraph and
remove the least dense edges, which are not connected to all of the others, to shrink the
subgraph until a valid clique is obtained.
After this, we can grow the clique by adding nodes which are connected to all of the other
nodes in the subgraph (O(V )). This is of course a probabilistic algorithm, but it has been
shown to perform well[9]
One related problem to maximum clique is the maximum independent set problem, which we
will return to in chapter 4.
24
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:33==
Molecular Docking
Maximum clique has several applications, but one example which has been shown to be
solvable on a GBS is molecular docking.
Docking is the task of finding the spatial orientation of a molecule when binding to a larger
protein.
The molecular docking problem can be reduced to a maximum weighted clique
problem[9]. For a given receptor (with n possible binding sites) and a ligand (with m sites),
a graph is created with nm nodes, each representing a possible binding interaction. Some
of the binding interactions are not possible because of distances not matching up (see the
figure fig. 3.3), which means that the edges are removed. A valid binding pose will be a fully
connected subgraph in the graph, where all of the different sites have been matched.
3.2
Vibronic Spectra
Calculating vibronic spectra is another application of GBS. The method for calculating vi-
bronic spectra on a GBS[30] is the Franck-Condon (harmonic) approximation. The approx-
imation states that the probability of an electronically-allowed vibronic transition at zero
Kelvin is given by
FCP(ωvib) =
X
m
| ⟨m| UDok |0⟩|2δ

ωvib −
M
X
k=1
mkω′
k


(3.2)
Where | ⟨m| UDok |0⟩|2 is called the Franck-Condon factor and ωk is the frequency at the
vibrational mode k. The operator UDok is the Doktorov operator[21] and the state |m⟩=
|m1, . . . , mM⟩denotes the number of phonons in each of the M vibrational modes.
In the original proposal[30], the observation was made that there exists a mathematical equiv-
alence between N photons in M optical modes and N phonons in M vibrational modes. This
is also what underlies the hardness of calculating Franck Condon Profiles (FCP), since the
hardness of sampling the matrix elements is as hard as sampling from a hafnian distribution.
To re-cast the problem of calculating FCP into a problem which can be solved on a GBS, one
needs to recast the Doktorov operator into operations we can perform on our GBS. It can be
split into the operations:
UDok = D(α)R(CL)S( )R(CR)
(3.3)
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.3: Figure from [9]. Panel A shows the ligand and receptor. The contact potential gives the
interaction strength between different nodes. Panel B shows the construction of the binding interaction
graph, where the geometrical limitations shown in panel C limits the number of edges in the interaction
graph. Panel D shows the most likely binding poses, corresponding to a maximum clique.
These can be seen as a displacement (D(α)), rotation (R(CL)) and squeezing (S(σ)). The
diagonal matrix   and the unitary matrices CL and CR are obtained from the ground state
and excited frequencies of a given molecule. The specifics of obtaining the exact unitaries are
outside of the scope of this overview, but the general idea is that one can rewrite a specific
unitary into several Gaussian unitaries which can be mapped to a GBS.
The results of a calculation compared to experimental results from Xanadu’s implementation
of a GBS can be seen in fig. 3.4.
It should be noted that FCP at different temperatures can also be calculated using this
method.
26
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.4: The vibronic spectra[30] of formic acid (11A →12A′), where FCP are given by the black
histogram and the red curve is experimental data
A closely related application is the simulation of molecular vibrational excitations[32, 51].
3.3
Quantum Machine Learning
A GBS can be trained by using gradient descent. This is fairly surprising, since the GBS
distribution itself is intractable to calculate, but one can approximate the gradient of the
GBS and thus change the output to some target distribution[8].
One example of this is training a GBS to sample from low energy states of an Ising model
and output samples from the ground state of the Ising model. The Ising model is interesting
because it is an NP-hard problem, thus it can be transformed to several different problems.
In [8] it’s shown that one can encode a maximum clique problem by transforming the problem
into an Ising problem and then train a GBS to sample nodes which have the lowest energy
(see fig. 3.5). The lowest energy solutions will be sampled with higher probability and are
solutions to the Ising problem and (because of the construction of the Ising model used) a
maximum clique in the target graph.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.5: A figure from [8] showing the probability of sampling a max-clique sub-graph as a function of
number of steps of the fitting procedure.
28
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:37==
4
Solving the Independent Set
Problem
In this section we will look at the algorithm to solve maximum clique and show how the
algorithm can be used to solve the independent set problem by reduction to maximum clique.
We have seen that a GBS can be used in a hybrid algorithm to help solve the maximum clique
problem. It was remarked that there will still be an exponential scaling of the problem, but
this is hardly surprising since maximum clique is an NP-complete problem[33] in the decision
version of the problem and NP-hard in the optimization version of the problem.
We are however interested in any speed-up we can get for any of the problems which are NP-
hard, since a speed-up for one of these problems can help solve other NP-hard problems. This
is of course true, since all NP-hard problems can be reduced to each other in polynomial time,
so any polynomial algorithm for one of them would yield a polynomial algorithm for all of
them. An example of a reduction being used on a quantum computer, is solving the maximum
clique problem on the D-wave quantum annealer by reduction to an Ising model[17].
Similarly, we can do the same for a GBS, but instead of performing a reduction going from
maximum clique to the Ising model, we can perform a reduction from independent set to
maximum clique[33]. In the next section we will define exactly what an independent set is
and reduce it to an instance of maximum clique. The primary aim of this section is to outline
a simple novel application which shows the power of being able to solve one NP-hard problem.
But it should be noted that there is still a notable lack of investigation into whether or not
sampling dense subgraphs is a superior starting point than a classical heuristic[5].
4.1
Reducing Independent Set to Max Clique
For convenience sake, we will deal with the definition of the decision version of an independent
set, which is the following:
Def.:Given an integer of size k, does there exist a set of vertices in a given graph G(V, E) of
size k, such that no pair of vertices in the set are connected by an edge.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
29
==PAGE:38==
For the applications section we saw a brief definition of maximum clique, but let’s remind
ourselves how it looks:
Def.:Given an integer of size k, does there exist a set of vertices in a given graph G(V, E) of
size k, such that all pairs of vertices in the set are connected by an edge.
To perform the reduction we will start with an instance of the independent set problem, ie.
we have a graph G(V, E) and an integer k.
Based on the definitions above, we can see there is a very slight difference between the two
problems which gives a hint to how we can perform the reduction. For the independent set
problem, we are looking for the vertices which are not connected to each other in the set.
This is not the case in maximum clique, where we are looking for vertices connected to all of
the others in the set.
We can thus take the graph G(V, E) and create what is called the complement graph. The
complement graph G′ of G is a graph where vertices are connected if, and only if, they are
not connected in G. This can be done in polynomial time (at most O(V 2) edges need to
be added). From the definition of a complement graph, we can see that if there exists an
independent set of size k in G, the edges in the set will by definition not be connected to any
of the others. In the complement graph G′ they will be connected to each other and thus
form a clique of size k.
It is straightforward to see that if k is the size of the largest independent set in G, the
independent set will also be a maximum clique in G′, since if there existed a clique of greater
size in G′, there would also exist an independent set of greater size in G.
Thus, the GBS algorithm for solving maximum independent set is simply to perform the
reduction, which can be done in polynomial time, and run the earlier described hybrid al-
gorithm section 3.1.3 for maximum clique. The next section will look at the results from a
simple implementation based on simulated results and compare the results with a uniform
sampling from a graph.
30
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:39==
1
2
3
4
5
1
3
4
5
2
Figure 4.1: A simple example of a graph, denoted G, on the left hand side and on the right hand side the
complement of the graph. Note that the largest independent set in graph G, marked with red, contains
the same vertices as the largest clique in the graph on the right hand side.
4.2
Solving the Independent Set Problem using a GBS
Given a simple graph, see fig. 4.1, we first find the complementary graph G′ after which we
can produce GBS samples. By running the earlier described hybrid algorithm, section 3.1.3,
a set of samples are obtained. In this case, we end up sampling exactly the clique, but the
number of vertices is of course fairly small and 5000 samples are produced, so it should be
expected. In addition to this, the shrinking/local search on the small graph means that the
clique is almost instantly found. Performance benchmarking will be dealt with in greater
detail when we get to graph isomorphism, but there are a couple of interesting things which
are worth looking into, even for the small graph in fig. 4.1.
In fig. 4.2 the average density of the samples from the graph we obtain are shown for two
embeddings on the GBS[35] and a uniform sampling. As mentioned earlier, the maximum
clique quantum algorithm works by sampling dense parts of the graph with a higher proba-
bility. We can clearly see this effect, although it is fairly modest in fig. 4.2, since the samples
obtained by a uniform sampling have a smaller density than those obtained from the GBS.
For the sampling, we have the choice of a mean photon number for the distribution we are
sampling. For the isomorphic problem, we will see that the mean photon number becomes
a free parameter that should scale with the size of the graph. In the case for independent
set/maximum clique, we can see from fig. 4.2 that for n = 3 we get more dense samples and
the number of times the clique itself is sampled is greatly increased. Thus, it confirms earlier
work[9], that a good choice of the mean photon number is close to the suspected size of the
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
31
==PAGE:40==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Density
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Samples
Density of GBS Samples, n=3
Density of GBS Samples, n=1
Density of Uniform Samples
Figure 4.2: The density of two sets of 5000 samples obtained from a lossless simulation of a GBS of the
test graph G. Note that two different mean photon numbers have been used for the GBS. These are then
compared with a uniform sampling of the different edges of the graph G.
maximum clique.
It also means that the decision problem could use the mean photon number to ease the search
even more, although we are rarely interested in solving the decision problem.
Besides illustrating the workings of the maximum clique algorithm and how the mean photon
number can influence the quality of solutions, it also shows how a GBS can be used to solve
related applications which might be more applicable than maximum clique.
32
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:41==
5
Graph Isomorphism and similarity
using a GBS
In the following section we will first introduce the problem of Graph Isomorphism and show
how this problem can solved using a GBS. We will also run some instances of graphs on
Xanadu’s X8 chip to determine the capabilities of the current hardware.
The graph isomorphism application will be the problem we will try to relate to Gaussian
process regression, which will be covered in section 6.1.
5.1
Graph Isomorphism - An Introduction to the
problem
The graph isomorphism problem can be formulated, not surprisingly, as determining if two
graphs are isomorphic.
This means that given some graphs G1 and G2, is there a valid
permutation of the nodes of e.g. G1 so one can obtain the graph G2. In other words, the
question is whether or not it is possible to change the labels of the nodes in graph G1 in such
a way that one obtains G2.
An example of two graphs, G1 and G2, which are not obviously isomorphic can be seen in
fig. 5.1. In the case of G1 and G2 in fig. 5.1, the nodes actually match each other in both
graphs without permutation, so the graphs are identical. We can see that two graphs can look
very different and actually be the same, we can easily verify that the node a in G1 connects
to the same nodes as in G2, and so on.
Based on fig. 5.1, we can also verify a solution given to us by checking all nodes, and seeing
if their neighbours match the neighbours in the corresponding graph. This means that the
problem is in the complexity class NP, but it’s interesting to note that it is not known whether
the problem is NP-complete or in the class P. Before Shor’s algorithm, integer factorization
was also not known to be either NP-complete or in P. The solution to graph isomorphism
using a GBS is sadly not a solution, which places the problem into the class BQP, as we
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
33
==PAGE:42==
a
b
c
d
e
a
d
c
b
e
Figure 5.1: An example of two isomorphic graphs which are not obviously isomorphic, note that the node
labels have been chosen so the two graphs match each other.
shall see, but it might still provide a sizable constant time speed up for an otherwise difficult
problem.
5.2
Solving Graph Isomorphism using a GBS
When solving graph isomorphism using a GBS, it is possible to simply embed a graph on
a GBS and sample the output. This result builds on the proof that if we have the output
probability distribution from a GBS made using the embedding of two graphs, the two dis-
tributions will be related by a permutation if, and only if, the two graphs are isomorphic.
Furthermore, it was also shown that it is possible to create a coarse grained partitioning
of the distribution which can be used to check if two GBS distributions are related by a
permutation in O(n log n) time [14, Theorem 18 and Lemma 19].
The challenge is now that if we wish to exactly distinguish two graphs, we might have to
perform a very large number of samples.
In addition to this, if we work with the full GBS distribution, it will grow double factorially
as a function of the photon count. This makes working with a full distribution unwieldy, and
it is necessary to separate the measurements into orbits[14]. We have already briefly covered
orbits when we introduced the X8 chip and looked at losses in section 2.3.2, but we can define
what we mean by orbits a bit more formally. An orbit can be written as On = {perm(n)}
and contains all permutations of n with a length equal to the number of modes. For n = [1]
over 4 output modes, we would have the permutations On = {1} which would give [1, 0, 0, 0],
[0, 1, 0, 0], [0, 0, 1, 0] and [0, 0, 0, 1]. The probability of a given orbit will simply be[49]:
34
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:43==
p(On) =
X
n∈On
p(n)
(5.1)
In other words, the probability for the orbits is simply the sum of all the individual proba-
bilities. It must be the case that if two isomorphic graphs share the same output probability
distribution from a GBS, then they will also share the same orbit distribution, although this
is fairly coarse grained and might have aliasing problems[14]. Orbits on the other hand have
the advantage that they can be made into feature vectors to describe and compare graphs.
The number of orbits will rapidly grow in size as a function of |n|, where |n| is defined as a
sum of all photons in n. The scaling is the same as the number of ways one can partition
the numbers 1, . . . , n into a sum which has at most M terms and is equal to |n| [49], where
M is the number of modes. There is no closed form solution1 but the number of terms grows
rapidly and might be worrying, but luckily, in a real GBS the probability of high photon
counts will be vanishingly small.
In the case of the isomorphism problem, it was suggested to choose orbits corresponding to
a small |n| and increase the number of orbits until one could distinguish between a number
of graphs[14].
Using orbits in this way to coarse-grain the probability distribution, it was shown to be
possible to distinguish between 3854 different graphs of the same size and closely related
types2[14].
This solution is of course far from optimal, since no known threshold for the number of orbits
to distinguish non-isomorphic graphs has been found or proposed. In addition to this, if
distinguishing between two graphs requires orbits with a larger |n|, the probability might be
very small to obtain the given orbit, unless one increases the mean photon number and thus
the squeezing. It is suspected that the size of |n| required is dependent on the size of the
graph[14]. As mentioned before, given that graph isomorphism is still not known to be in
either P or NP-complete, it is not surprising that the GBS might give us a bad scaling in the
time complexity. The algorithm described might still be a valid solution even if the scaling
1https://oeis.org/A000070
2A family of so called ’strongly regular graphs’ were investigated[25]
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
35
==PAGE:44==
is poor. A saving grace might also be the fact that samples can very quickly be obtained
from a GBS (∼105 pr. second[49]), and offer a constant time speed up compared to classical
methods.
The next section will go through how to solve the graph similarity problem, which will
become very important in section 6.1. The problems with scaling will still exist as for the
graph isomorphism problem.
5.3
Graph Similarity
The graph similarity problem is a related problem to graph isomorphism.
The problem
can be summarized as finding some similarity metric, which can distinguish graphs and
tell us something meaningful about the differences between them.
Graph similarity has
several applications within machine learning and classification of data, but as with graph
isomorphism, the problem is in some instances very hard to efficiently solve[12].
Recent
results show that using a GBS to perform graph similarity in some cases beats classical
methods in accuracy on real datasets[49].
If we wish to create a similarity measure, we can do this by creating what is known as a
feature vector, based on the output distribution from a GBS. A feature vector is simply a
vector quantifying the graph along different dimensions in some way.
When creating a feature vector from the outputs of a GBS, we would like to find some
meaningful metric to sum up the output distribution of the GBS. The situation here is
analogous to the graph isomorphism problem, in that it is not practical to create a feature
vector using the full distribution since the size of the feature vector grows double factorially
as a function of the number of photons. As mentioned in the previous section, orbits are an
obvious way to generate feature vectors to characterize different graphs and compare them.
Another related method, which will be used later, is a small modification of orbits, introduced
by[48], called events. Events contain all orbits of size |n|, where no detector counts more than
s photons. Events are helpful in creating an even more coarse grained split and giving an
additional parameter, which can be used to exclude unlikely orbits from a feature vector.
The final step in creating the feature vector is choosing a maximum number of photons we
will use to define our orbits. The maximum number of photons will define the dimensions of
36
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:45==
the feature vector and is a free parameter chosen based on the problem.
A similarity measure can now be defined, given two feature vectors f and f’ from two graphs.
There are several possibilities for similarity measures, but two possibilities are:
k(G, G′) = ⟨f, f ′⟩
(5.2)
k(G, G′) = exp
 
−||f −f’||2
2l2
!
(5.3)
These two choices are known as the linear kernel and the radial basis function (rbf) kernel,
respectively. Both are well known kernel functions and we will be working more with the rbf
kernel in section 6.1.
There are several nice features of using a GBS to create a similarity measure. First of all
it has a clear relation to the class of classical similarity methods called Graphlet sampling
kernels [50, 49], where instead of counting the existence of specific sized subgraphs/graphlets,
the GBS sums over squares of perfect matching counts in subgraphs.
It can also easily
be extended to weighted graphs, although existing characterization of this feature has been
lacking. The similarity measure has, as mentioned earlier, also been benchmarked favorably
compared to existing classical methods in classification of data over a wide variety of data
sets [49]. Notably in [49] it was shown that changing the displacement of the Gaussian state
could have positive effects. We could do the same by choosing the mean photon number, but
this has not been investigated. It should also be noted that the speed of sampling from a GBS
could provide a constant time speed up compared to existing classical similarity measures.
5.3.1
Sampling from a GBS
Earlier work has expressed concern over the effects of photon loss and errors on the ability
of a GBS to distinguish different graphs[49]. In addition to this, there are no estimates for
the number of samples needed to identify isomorphic graphs.
This section aims to investigate if a GBS can actually distinguish simple isomorphic graphs,
and the effects the number of samples and losses has on distinguishing between the different
graphs. The graphs we will use can be seen in fig. 5.2. The 8 graphs have been created by
making 4 small graphs and permutating their nodes 1 →2, 2 →3, 3 →4, 4 →1.
The first thing we will look at is the case without loss on an ideal simulated GBS, the results
can be seen in fig. 5.3. It has been chosen to use events as our feature vectors, where we
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
37
==PAGE:46==
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Figure 5.2: The above shows 4 graphs, and for each of them an isomorphic graph has been created by
permutating the node labels 1 →2, 2 →3, 3 →4, 4 →1
compare the probability of obtaining a 2 photon event and 4 photon event across the different
graphs. We can see in fig. 5.3 that we can successfully distinguish between the graphs because
the same colored points (representing pairs of isomorph graphs) closer to each other than to
graphs of a different color, which they are not isomorphs of. This will provide us with a
benchmark to compare the other samples.
Moving on to a less optimal case; in fig. 5.4
two adjustments have been made. First of all we assume that the loss is η = 0.5 and the
squeezing is set to binary values to mimic the capabilities of the X8 chip. We can see a very
clear effect from both the adjustment of the squeezing and the added losses, which decreases
the probabilities of 2 and 4 photon events and shifts the probabilities. For the graphs, the
squeezing for graphs 2 and 3 were adjusted to be identical and likewise for 1 and 4, making
them much harder to distinguish. Of course, in the near term when several levels of squeezing
might be available this will be less of a concern. At a loss of η = 0.5 we can also see that we
have lost the ability to distinguish between isomorphic and non-isomorphic graphs, because
the distance between one of the points representing graph 2 is closer to a point representing
graph 3 than to the other isomorphic graph 2.
If we now compare fig. 5.4 with fig. 5.5, we see that the real GBS is not able to distinguish
between all of the graphs, since the distance between isomorphic graphs (the points of the
same color) is larger than between non-isomorphic graphs. This is of course disappointing,
but given that losses are around 86% and that around 15% of the detections are noise, it is
not surprising. Because of the time required to obtain the samples for higher losses, a directly
comparable example of η = 0.85 was not created.
38
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:47==
0.2525
0.2550
0.2575
0.2600
0.2625
0.2650
0.2675
0.2700
0.2725
Events=[2]
0.124
0.126
0.128
0.130
0.132
Events=[4]
Graph Similarity 0.5 million samples Simulated No Loss
Graph 1
Graph 2
Graph 3
Graph 4
Figure 5.3: For each of the graphs in fig. 5.2, 0.5 million samples have been simulated from a GBS, without
loss and with a full amount of squeezing used. Probability of a 2 photon event (x-axis) and a 4 photon
event (y-axis)
0.1450
0.1475
0.1500
0.1525
0.1550
0.1575
0.1600
0.1625
Events=[2]
0.075
0.080
0.085
0.090
0.095
0.100
0.105
0.110
Events=[4]
Graph Similarity 0.5 million samples Simulated η = 0.5
Graph 1
Graph 2
Graph 3
Graph 4
Figure 5.4: For each of the graphs in fig. 5.2 0.5 million samples have been simulated from a GBS, with a
loss of η = 0.5 and with squeezing of ri ∈{0, 1}. Probability of a 2 photon event (x-axis) and a 4 photon
event (y-axis)
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
39
==PAGE:48==
0.180
0.182
0.184
0.186
0.188
0.190
0.192
Events=[2]
0.08
0.09
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
Events=[4]
Graph Similarity 4 million samples X8
Graph 1
Graph 2
Graph 3
Graph 4
Figure 5.5: 4 million samples taken from the X8 chip for each of the 8 graphs and the probability of a 2
photon event (x-axis) and a 4 photon event (y-axis). Squeezing of ri ∈{0, 1}
We will now look at two important factors: the number of samples required to distinguish
between graphs and the effects of loss. As we have seen in fig. 5.5 and fig. 5.4, the effects of
loss are quite large.
The Effects of Loss
As mentioned earlier, to distinguish between isomorphic and non-isomorphic graphs, we need
to have a smaller distance between two isomorphic graphs compared to the distance between
any two non-isomorphic graphs. In fig. 5.6, we require that ’maximum isomorph’ is larger
than ’minimum different’, where ’maximum isomorph’ is the maximum distance between two
of the 4 isomorphic graph pairs and ’minimum different’ is the distance between any two
non-isomorphic graphs. The effects are noticeable, and when using 0.5 million samples, we
lose the ability to distinguish the graphs at a loss of around 0.3. When we compare it with
the results of 4 million samples from the X8 chip, we can see that it is a lot worse than any of
the simulations and was not able to distinguish graphs, which could also be seen in fig. 5.5.
Because of very large computational times, just 0.5 million samples were simulated.
40
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:49==
0
0.1
0.3
0.5
GBS
Loss Coeﬃcient or Type
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Distance Between Feature Vectors
Maximum Isomorph
Minimum Diﬀerent
Figure 5.6: A comparison of the maximum distance between known isomorphic graphs (red) and the
minimum distance between non-isomorphic graphs (yellow-green) compared across different losses for 0.5
million samples. Note that at the far right, 4 million samples from the GBS has been used.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
41
==PAGE:50==
104
5 × 104
105
5 × 105
2 × 106
5 × 106
7 × 106
Samples
0.000
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
Distance Between Feature Vectors
Feature Vector Distance as a Function of Samples
Maximum Isomorph
Minimum Diﬀerent
Figure 5.7: The above shows how the number of samples changes the maximum measured distance between
two feature vectors for isomorphic graphs (maximum isomorph, red), compared to the the minimum distance
between non-isomorphic graphs (minimum different, green). Samples have been taken with no loss
5.3.2
The effects of the Number of Samples
When we look at the effects of the number of samples collected in fig. 5.7, we see that the
maximum difference between isomorphic graphs decreases as a function of the number of
samples taken, while the minimum difference between non-isomorphic graphs grows. The
number of samples required are around 105 for an ideal GBS device.
In the original proposal to use GBS to create similarity measures, an estimate of around 104
samples was given, if we wanted to sample up to 8 orbits[49]. There are a couple of reasons
why we require to increase the sample size by an order of magnitude. The first is that in the
original estimate, the average differences between distributions was very conservative and the
allowed error was very large. Here we have used events rather than orbits and the graphs
are very similar, which means that the distance for our distributions is orders of magnitudes
smaller than in [49]. In the end, the effect of the distance between the distributions dominates
and requires many samples to compensate, even for an ideal no-loss GBS. It is also not a small
detail that the distributions will be close, since we exactly need to differentiate graphs which
seem to be close to each other if we want to solve a non-trivial instance of graph similarity.
42
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:51==
This might have been mitigated by choosing orbits for our feature vector, to fine-grain our
comparison of the distributions.
One very interesting aspect of the estimate of the number of samples we are required to take
[49], is that it depends only on the error we are willing to make, the distance between the
distributions and the number of orbits we wish to include in our feature vector. If our graph
becomes larger, it would only be the size of the GBS which would grow and not the number
of samples required, but as noted in [14] the growth in the number of orbits required to
characterize large graphs is not known. The fact that the number of samples will not grow
quickly as a function of the size of the graph is also essential if this method is to have a
speed-up over classical methods, since a real GBS device can take 105 samples pr. second.
Optimization of the feature vectors would most likely improve the performance significantly.
A full study into the myriad of effects that will dictate the number of samples we need to
take into account (loss, distance between distributions and required number of orbits as a
function of graph size) is outside of the scope of this thesis.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
43
==PAGE:52==
44
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:53==
6
Gaussian Processes Boosted by
Gaussian Boson Sampling
The following investigates a possible new application of Gaussian boson sampling to create a
fast approximation of Gaussian processes.
The first part will provide an overview of the theory of Gaussian process regression and show
some results from an implementation made in python. The next section presents the idea of
using graph similarity to create an approximation of a full Gaussian process. The second part
will derive an optimized Gaussian process, which shares similarities to a mixture of experts
model, with a time complexity of O(n2 + n3/2) = O(n2). In the third part we will go through
some of the ways that a GBS might be incorporated to boost the approximation, and we will
discuss the shortcomings of the approaches.
6.1
Gaussian Process Regression
The following walkthrough will primarily be based on[47] and [13] and is meant to give the
reader some background and intuition behind Gaussian process regression.
A Gaussian process regression is a general type of machine learning model that takes some
dataset as input D = {(xi, yi)|i = 1, . . . , n} and makes predictions for new input values x.
A Gaussian process has the distinct advantage that it is a non-parametric machine learning
model, which means that we do not have to specify a specific model to fit the data with,
unlike for example an OLS regression where we specify a model, e.g. f(x) = ax + b.
Instead of using a specific model, a Gaussian Process regression starts out by using what is
called a prior distribution over the functions. A prior here contains our belief of what the
possible functions look like that created some unknown data. When a Gaussian Process is
then fed some data set D, the new information is combined with our prior to create what is
known as a posterior. This is also what makes Gaussian Process regression a Bayesian model.
An example of this can be seen by creating a Gaussian process, and taking 3 samples from
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
45
==PAGE:54==
−4
−2
0
2
4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Three samples from the GP prior
Figure 6.1: 3 samples from the prior of a GP with k0 = 1, giving an uncertainty for our prior of ±2√k0 = 2
−4
−2
0
2
4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Three samples from the GP posterior
Figure 6.2:
3 samples from the posterior of a GP with 5 points drawn from the function f(x) =
sin (2x + x2), with a confidence interval of ±2σ
46
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:55==
the prior1. The results of this can be seen in fig. 6.1, where the prior has been set to µ = 0,
which means that we expect the function that created our data is on average 0. This can be
compared to samples obtained from a posterior seen in fig. 6.2. Here we should note that our
uncertainty is reduced when we get closer to our samples.
6.1.1
Gaussian Processes
A general Gaussian process can be defined as a collection of random variables of which any
finite number have a joint Gaussian distribution[47].
A helpful example of a Gaussian process is Brownian motion. As in Brownian motion, we
can think of a random variable as the value at a given x of some function f(x).
A Gaussian process can now be defined by a mean function µ(x) = E and a covariance
function k(x, x′) →R:
k(x, x′) = E[(f(x) −m(x))(f(x′) −m(x′))]
(6.1)
We can write a Gaussian process down based on the mean function and the covariance
function:
f(x) ∼GP(µ(x), k(x, x′))
(6.2)
To fully specify a Gaussian process, we will need to choose fitting mean functions and co-
variance functions. For our purposes, we will be testing the model on data drawn from a
smooth and well-behaved function, and will thus be able to pick a simple mean function and
covariance function. In this case, with the squared exponential function as our covariance
function and µ(x) = 0 as our mean function, these are also the same choices used to generate
fig. 6.2 and fig. 6.1.
We can thus write our covariance function as:
k(x, x′) = k0 exp
 
−(x −x′)2
2l2
!
(6.3)
The above will also be known as our kernel. Ultimately we will want to calculate a covariance
matrix, where we can calculate all n2 points as:
Knm = k(xn, xm)
(6.4)
1Plots were recreated based on plots in [47]
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
47
==PAGE:56==
It should be noted that the above is for noise-free data, but we can add noise for each point,
giving:
C = K + σ2In
(6.5)
By defining the covariance function, we now have three parameters, k0, σ, l, which are free, and
which we at this point can not directly assign a value. In the literature[47] k0 is known as the
signal variance, σ2 is the noise variance and l is the length-scale. These are hyperparameters
which need to be estimated.
We can start by taking a look at the signal variance k0, this controls our prior variance. An
example of this can be seen in fig. 6.1, where k0 = 1, this gives rise to the confidence interval
µ(x)±2√k0. When fitting our data, k0 does not matter, but when estimating our uncertainty,
it has a large effect. The noise variance, σ2, controls the amount of noise we think the data
has. Finally, we have l2. When the length scale is small, we prioritize points which are closer
to each other when we perform a prediction. Conversely, when l is large we let points far
away influence the prediction, in this limit we find a linear regression.
6.1.2
Predicting Data and Uncertainty
Now that we have specified the Gaussian process, we would like to perform a prediction given
some observations without noise (f, x) to predict a test point (f∗, x∗). We can first note that
the probability of obtaining f ∗given x∗is a Gaussian, specified by the covariance. We can
write this as:
p(f∗|x∗) = N(0, K(x∗, x∗))
(6.6)
The nice properties of Gaussians, mean that the joint distribution can be written as a new
multi-variate Gaussian:


f
f

∼N



0,


K(x, x) + σ2In
K(x, x∗)
K(x∗, x)
K(x∗, x∗)






(6.7)
Skipping the full derivation, see [47], one can, given certain test cases, use the joint distribu-
tion of the two random variables to find the distributions of predictions as:
p(f∗|x∗, x, f) = N( ¯f ∗, cov(f∗))
(6.8)
48
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:57==
Where the mean  f∗and the covariance cov(f∗) are given by:
 f∗= K(x∗, x)C(x, x)−1f
(6.9)
cov(f∗) = K(x∗, x∗) −K(x∗, x)C(x∗, x)−1f
(6.10)
The final step is to clean the above expressions up to make them a bit clearer. If we have
just one test point x∗, we will have a vector k∗= K(x∗, x) of length n. Here x∗might be
multidimensional but the kernel ensures that we get a vector. We will denote k = K(x, x)
which is n × n matrix. Our training data will give us some y = f values, which means that
we can write a prediction y∗and the variance as:
y∗(x∗) = k∗⊤(k + σ2In)−1y
(6.11)
σ2
y = K(x∗, x∗) −k∗⊤(k + σ2In)−1k∗
(6.12)
The above is the central result of this overall walkthrough. It gives us the two things we were
looking for. First of all, we are now able to make a prediction of the function value given an
x-value (X∗) based on some learning data. The second is the covariance, this allows us to give
an idea of the uncertainty of our models predictions which goes towards the hyperparameter
k0 when we try to predict far away from our training data. Generally we can see that when
we predict far away from our data, the model returns our prior distribution. This is a distinct
strength of the Gaussian process, since traditional kernel based methods often underestimate
the uncertainty of predictions far away from data(see [13]
We can also already identify one of the main issues with using a Gaussian process regression
model. We will need O(n3) time to invert the C matrix, which means that for a large amount
of data, it will quickly become intractable to perform the calculation.
We now just need one final thing, optimizing the earlier mentioned hyperparameters, which
will be the subject of the next and final theory section.
6.1.3
Hyper-parameter tuning
To choose good hyper-parameters, there are different approaches. The simplest is of course
to choose values which makes sense compared to the data set. An example could be that if
we are interested in the elevation change of a road it will probably be fairly correlated over
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
49
==PAGE:58==
short distances (meters) but uncorrelated over very long distances (kilometers). Another way
is by performing cross-validation and minimizing the error of the fit.
In this project, it was chosen to perform hyperparameter tuning by maximizing the marginal
log-likelihood([47, section 4.5.1]). The idea is that if we have a set of hyperparameters θ, we
would like to first find the probability of θ given some data t. We can use Bayes’ theorem to
get:
P(θ|t) = P(t|θ)P(θ)
(6.13)
The above is the posterior distribution of the hyperparameters. It is often not possible to
use the full posterior distribution, so instead we can maximize the likelihood P(t|θ) We can
write P(t|θ) using the prior distribution P(y|θ):
P(t|θ) =
Z
P(t|y)P(y|θ)dy
(6.14)
The prior prediction for our data points will follow a noise free Gaussian with mean 0,
P(t|y) = N(y|0, K). While we assume that the data we draw, t, is noisy with a variance of
σ2 and given by the distribution P(t|y) = N(t|y, σ2In). We can thus write up eq. (6.14) as:
P(t|θ) =
Z
N(y|0, K)N(t|y, σ2In)dy = N(t|0, K + σ2In) = N(t|0, C)
(6.15)
Where we use results from Appendix A in [47] to find the resulting Gaussian. Finally we can
write up the log marginal likelihood based on the likelihood:
log
 P(t|θ)

= log
 N(t|0, C

(6.16)
= −1
2 log
 det(C)

−1
2t⊤C−1t −N
2 log (2π)
(6.17)
The logarithm is used to ensure numerical stability when dealing with small changes.
The final steps are now to maximize the log marginal likelihood, which can be done by taking
the derivative of the log marginal likelihood for each of the three hyper-parameters and
setting them to zero. Afterwards, a gradient descent can be used to maximize the function.
Alternatively, a simple minimization algorithm can be run directly on the negative of the
above function. For our purposes, a BFGS minimization algorithm has been used [55] for
ease of implementation, while still maintaining decent performance. The implementation of a
full Gaussian process regression will be showed alongside the approximation scheme developed
in the following sections.
50
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:59==
6.2
Gaussian Process Regression and Graph Similarity
After the walk through in section 6.1, we are ready to motivate the possible link between
Gaussian process regression and graph similarity. The first thing we can note is that there is a
significant problem with using a Gaussian process regression, namely the time complexity of
the inversion of large matrices, which is O(N 3) and the space requirements which are O(N 2).
This is mainly a problem when training the model, since for the prediction we can cache the
inverted C matrix and just perform a matrix multiplication. This puts a practical limit on
the size of the training data set. Without any approximation one can use around [47] n < 104
observations, with a new record shown to be around[57] n ∼106.
There exists several exact and approximation schemes to shrink the computational complexity
and space usage of Gaussian process regression. A notable type of approximations seeks to
split the data set into several subsets and perform computationally intensive operations on the
subsets[57, 20]. This will both reduce the memory requirements, decrease the time complexity
and allow for parallelization of the computation. This general idea is the inspiration for the
idea to find a connection between graph similarity with Gaussian processes.
6.3
The Idea for an Approximation
If we start with a certain dataset D = {(xi, yi)|i = 1, . . . , n}, an approximation to a full
Gaussian process could be to first split the dataset into p partitions and calculate an exact
Gaussian process regression for each of the p partitions. To illustrate the idea, we can first
write the full matrix C up:
C =


k(x1, x1)
k(x1, x2)
. . .
k(x1, xN)
kx2, x1
k(x2, x2)
. . .
k(x2, xN)
...
...
...
...
k(xN, x1)
k(xN, x2)
. . .
k(xN, xN)


+ σ2In
(6.18)
We remember that the inversion of the kernel matrix is the most computationally expensive
part of using a Gaussian process, so if we simply split the data set into smaller parts the
inversion can be made faster.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
51
==PAGE:60==
The kernel matrices can now be written as:
C →


Cp
0
. . .
0
0
C2
. . .
0
...
...
...
...
0
0
. . .
Cp


(6.19)
For the approximation, if we want to make a prediction of ytest when we know xtest, we could
calculate the value as a weighted sum of prediction:
ytest =
p
X
i
aik(xi, xtest)⊤C−1
i yp(x)
(6.20)
Here we have introduced the prediction as a weighted sum using ai as weights for each of
the p partitions. It should be noted that this approximation is similar to mixture of experts
models, where separate models are trained on different parts of a data set and used to predict
values close to itself [44, 18].
6.3.1
Complexity Analysis
We can now look at the time complexity of the approximation.
If we choose to let p =
O(
√
N), it means that we will only have to perform inversions of O(
√
N) of matrices with
each O(N/
√
N) = O(
√
N) observations. The inversions of these matrices will thus take the
time of:
O(
√
N(
√
N)3) = O(N 2)
(6.21)
A very nice bonus is that the approximation is parallizable, since we can split up the inversion
of each of the submatrices, giving an extra speed boost. For each of the p matrices, we will
have to store a
√
N ×
√
N matrix, making us use O(N 3/2) space. Note the assumption that
p = O(
√
N) is a choice, and depending on the speed/quality of the solution, it can be changed
at the expense/gain of speed and memory.
6.3.2
A possible link between weights and graph similarity
Naively, we could set it equal to ai = 1/p, but since we know the value of xtest, we would
ideally want kernels that have points that are similar, i.e. close to xtest, to have a larger
weight than kernels which contain points that are not similar to the point we are trying to
52
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:61==
predict. We could calculate the exact distance between our point and every point in our data
set and estimate which kernels contain the most points similar to the point we are trying to
predict. For a single point this would not be intractable, since we would have to perform
O(N) distance measurements. If, however, we wished to do a large number of predictions,
this could quickly become intractable. Instead, if we had some knowledge of the similarity
between the different kernels, we could first sample a few points used to calculate each kernel
and check the distance to our test point xtest. Afterwards we could let kernels with points
similar to the test points, predict with a heavier weight than less similar kernels. We could
also add kernels which are similar to the kernels which are close to the test point xtest.
This brings us to the central idea that we will investigate in the next couple of sections.
Instead of performing a comparison between all test points with all training points, one could
use a GBS to obtain graph similarities between the different kernel matrices to obtain the
same information. This would build on the fact that one can view the kernel matrix C as
an adjacency matrix for an undirected graph with the small difference that the diagonal
elements will be equal to k0 + σ2. The graph encoded by C will have the essential property
that Cn,m = Cm,n, and none of the edges will be negative.
It is helpful to remember the form of the full C matrix, and what we did when we made an
approximated Gaussian process. The approximation essentially removed the ’global’ infor-
mation between the different kernels, and only kept the local information of each kernel by
itself. The goal is now to try and restore some of the global information by using a graph
similarity measure.
Before we investigate this idea further, we will try to formulate a more stringent classical
approximation and find the optimal weights for our approximation.
6.4
Deriving Optimal Weights
We will first restate the approximation of the Gaussian process regression:
ytest =
p
X
i
aik(xi, xtest)⊤C−1
i yp(x)
(6.22)
What we now wish to find is the optimal weights, denoted by a. The optimal weights will
create predictions as close to the true value as possible. If we have Nval points, we could
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
53
==PAGE:62==
formulate an expression for a using a loss function, since we wish to find a vector a so that
we minimize the prediction error we are making to our set of Nval points:
a = argmina





1
Nval
Nval
X
n=1




p
X
j=1
aj k⊤
njC−1
j yj
|
{z
}
hj(xn)
−yn




2




(6.23)
To simplify the expression, we have written k(xn, xj) = knj where n is the point we are
predicting. yj and xj are the x- and y-values chosen to be in the j’th partition. The kernel
matrix Cj is likewise the kernel matrix made using the x-values xj. We can now start the
derivation by further simplifiyng the notation and expanding the squared sum
a = argmina





1
Nval
Nval
X
n=1




P
X
j=1
aj k⊤
njK−1
j yj
|
{z
}
hj(xn)
−yn




2




(6.24)
a = argmina


1
Nval
Nval
X
n=1


p
X
j=1
ajhj(xn) −yn


2


(6.25)
= argmina




1
Nval
Nval
X
n=1




p
X
j=1
ajhj(xn)


2
+ y2
n −2
p
X
j=1
yn(ajhj(xn))






(6.26)
We can remove y2
n, since it’s a constant and independent from a:
a = argmina




1
Nval
Nval
X
n=1




p
X
j=1
ajhj(xn)


2
−2
p
X
j=1
yn(ajhj(xn))






(6.27)
Finally, we get:
a = argmina


1
Nval
Nval
X
n=1

2
p
X
j=1
X
j′<j
ajaj′hj(xn)hj′(xn) +
p
X
j
a2
jh2
j(xn)
−2
p
X
j=1
yn(ajhj(xn))





(6.28)
54
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:63==
Without loss of generality, we choose a certain ak and minimize over it. Then all parts of the
sum which do not contain ak will be 0 and can be removed:
0 =
∂
∂ak
1
Nval

2
p
X
j=1
X
j′<j
ajaj′hj(xn)hj′(xn)δ(j −k) +
Nval
X
n=1
p
X
j
a2
jh2
j(xn)δ(j −k)
−2
Nval
X
n=1
P
X
j=1
ynajhj(xn)δ(j −k)


(6.29)
0 =
∂
∂ak
1
Nval


2
Nval
X
n=1
p
X
j′<k
akaj′hk(xn)hj′(xn) + a2
k
Nval
X
n=1
h2
k(xn)
|
{z
}
(I)
−2
Nval
X
n=1
ynakhk(xn)δ(j −k)
|
{z
}
(II)


(6.30)
We can remove 1/Nval and find the derivative for each of the two parts:
∂
∂ak
(I) = 2
Nval
X
n=1
p
X
j′<k
aj′hk(xn)hj′(xn) + 2ak
Nval
X
n=1
h2
k(xn)
(6.31)
∂
∂ak
(II) = 2
Nval
X
n=1
ynhk(xn)δ(j −k)
(6.32)
We can insert the above back into eq. (6.30), which can now be combined and written as:
2
Nval
X
n=1
ynhk(xn)δ(j −k) = 2
p
X
j′<k
aj′
Nval
X
n=1
hk(xn)hj′(xn) + 2ak
Nval
X
n=1
hk(xn)2
(6.33)
Nval
X
n=1
ynhk(xn)δ(j −k) =
p
X
j′≤k
aj′


Nval
X
n=1
hk(xn)hj′(xn)(1 −δ(j′ −k)) +
Nval
X
n=1
hk(xn)2δ(j′ −k)


(6.34)
The above is of course only for one specific ak, but it will depend on aj′. To find all the
aj values, it is natural to translate the sums into a matrix formulation of the problem. For
readability of the final result, we will let the summations be implicit, so PNval
n=1 hi(xn) = hi
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
55
==PAGE:64==
and PNval
n=1 hi(xn)hj(xn) = hi,j:


ynh1
ynh2
...
ynhp


=


h2
1
0
. . .
0
h1,2
h2
2
. . .
0
...
...
...
...
h1,p
h2,p
. . .
h2
p




a1
a2
...
ap


(6.35)
We can now just invert the matrix to find the optimal weight a
a =


ynh1
ynh2
...
ynhp


=


h2
1
0
. . .
0
h1,2
h2
2
. . .
0
...
...
...
...
h1,p
h2,p
. . .
h2
p


−1 

2ynh1
2ynh2
...
2ynhp


(6.36)
Before we go on and see the results of the implementation of both the approximation and
the full Gaussian process regression, we can note a few things about the final solution. First
of all, we are adding a small overhead to the original approximation, since we will need to
perform another (small) matrix inversion and a sum, this does not however change the overall
complexity of the solution. Another thing we note is that the choice of the training data is
up to us, it does not have to be the full training set and in fact in section 6.5.5 we will see
how the approximation can be made much better by optimizing a using data similar to our
input.
In addition to this, the results in eq. (6.36) seem promising for creating a link between graph
similarity and approximating good weights. This is because hihj can be viewed as a form of
covariance of predictions for µ = 0, which will be large when predictions are large and similar
for the same points, and small when predictions are not similar. This can be seen as a type
of similarity measure between model predictions which are intimately linked to the kernels
C−1. We will return to this when we investigate the samples from the GBS.
6.5
Results of the GP approximation
In the following section, we will first look at the output of the implementation of a Gaussian
process regression on a simple test case. Afterwards, the results from the Gaussian process
regression approximation will be shown and compared to the exact result.
56
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:65==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
x
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
y
GP ﬁt to 2x2 −4.4x + 2sin(10x)
GP µ
Train
Test
GP ±σ
Figure 6.3: A Gaussian process regression implemented in Python fitting the function 2x2−4.4x+2 sin 10x
over 90 data points. The root mean squared error to the test points is 0.4. Red points are training data
and blue points are test data.
6.5.1
Exact Gaussian process
In fig. 6.3 the fit of a Gaussian process regression on the function f(x) = 2x2 −4.4x+2 sin 10x
can be seen. It has been implemented based on the outlined theory in the previous sections
and finds the same fit and uncertainty as the library scikit-learn[43].
The fit is over 90 data points, with an additional 10 data points added as test points. When
generating the data, a Gaussian noise term multiplied by 0.4 has been added to f(x). The fit
is very good, as would be expected with the amount of training points, and the root mean
square error of the test points is equal to the added noise of 0.4.
6.5.2
Choices in the Implementation
Before we test the approximation, it will be necessary to outline some of the choices made
in the implementation. The strategy for running the optimization of the hyperparameters
has not been explicitly discussed, and there are two viable strategies one can pick. The two
options are to either find a single set of hyperparameters which will be valid for all of the
smaller kernel models which we sum over in the approximation (eq. (6.20)). The other option
is to optimize the hyperparameters for each model. In the implementation it has been chosen
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
57
==PAGE:66==
to do the latter, so instead of three scalar hyperparameters we will instead have a vector
(l, k0, σ) →(l, k0, σ). It is far from difficult to optimize a single set of hyperparameters for all
models and thus decrease the number of fitting parameters substantially. This is not desirable
in our case, because we aim to find similarities and differences between the different kernels
and pick the optimal weighting of our models to predict specific data points. This means
that we want the single kernel models in the approximation to fit as well as possible to the
training data that is in their domain and afterwards use the a coefficients or GBS similarity
measures to choose a good mix of the models for specific data points.
6.5.3
Naive: Equal proportions
To create a baseline, we will first investigate the naive solution, which is to let each of the
different kernels have an equal weight in predicting f(x)
The same function and dataset has been used as in section 6.5.1, as well as the same split
between test points and training points. The results of this can be seen in fig. 6.4, where the
root mean squared error (RMS) of 0.78 is a lot worse than in the exact Gaussian process.
This is not surprising, since a model fitted using only 10 randomly sampled points will not
include a lot of global information. One interesting observation is that if we have a lot of
samples n, we will have ai →1/p, since the partitions will end up containing a lot of samples
from the entire function domain and will all provide the same predictions.
6.5.4
Refined: Optimized a Coefficients
We can now test how the refined approximation works. The refined approximation tries to
find an optimal mixture of the models for predicting the data set. To find the optimized a
values, we will use the 90 training points and plug them into eq. (6.36). The results can be
seen in fig. 6.5 and there is a clear increase in the model’s ability to predict the test data
points. The RMS value is 0.48 compared to 0.4 for the full model and 0.78 for the naive
model. This is quite a large improvement, although there are some problems with the model
going towards 0 on the far right of the data range, and if there had been a test point here,
the performance would have suffered. It is still fairly good, when we remind ourselves of the
roughness of the approximation.
58
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:67==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
x
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
y
GP Equal Propoortions a=1/p
GP µ, RMS=0.78
Train
Test
GP ±2σ
Figure 6.4: A Gaussian process regression using the approximation to fit the function, 10 random partitions
have been made and 9 of the partitions are equally used to predict the members of the 10th. Red points
are training data and blue points are test data.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
x
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
y
GP Optimized a Proportions
GP µ, RMS=0.48
Train
Test
GP ±2σ
Figure 6.5: A Gaussian process regression approximation with the optimized a-coeﬀicient to find the
optimal weights of the models to fit the data. Note the RMS value of 0.48 which is vastly improved over
the non-optimized model. Red points are training data and blue points are test data.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
59
==PAGE:68==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
x
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
y
GP Optimized local a Proportions
GP µ, RMS=40.46
Train
Test
GP ±2σ
Figure 6.6: A Gaussian process regression approximation with the optimized a-coeﬀicient based on similarity
to points that are close to the input. The RMS value of 0.43 is very close to the exact model. Red points
are training data and blue points are test data.
6.5.5
Refined: Optimized a Coefficients Based on x-values
To both illustrate how the approximation works, and motivate section 6.6, we can look at a
variant of the approximation, where we increase the computational cost of a prediction, but
gain a much better approximation.
The idea is that when given some data point x, we find some points in our training data set
which are similar/close to the point x. We can then use that subset of the training data to
find the optimal weights a.
The results of this can be seen in fig. 6.6. In this limit we find a fit which is, not surprisingly,
much closer to the exact Gaussian process regression.
This is at a great cost though, a
prediction will normally be O(n2) to perform the vector/matrix multiplication, but here we
will have to perform a matrix inversion of O(√n
3) every time we need to get new optimal
weights a. We could subset the training data set into chunks and calculate optimal weights for
each of the chunks, and then check membership of the chunk for a given x. This would save
some time on comparing distances and calculating new optimal weights a. The approximation
also has very large parallelization benefits compared to the exact Gaussian process regression.
60
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:69==
6.6
Linking Optimal Weights with GBS Similarity
Measures
In the following chapter, we will try and link the optimal weights a with similarity measures
between the kernel matrices.
Originally, the guiding research question was if graph similarity between kernel matrices (Ci)
could help us return some global information about a dataset back into an approximation
using a weighted sum of small Gaussian process regression models. The idea was to measure
a single distance between the point we wanted to predict (x) and a random point in each of
the kernel matricies C. If our point was close to a point in matrix Ci and matrix Ci was
similar to Cj, we should give both of the kernel matrices a higher weight when performing
our prediction, even if the random point sampled from Cj was far away from the point x.
When deriving the optimal weights a, it was noticed that the lower off-diagonal elements of
the matrix in eq. (6.36) had the form:
Nval
X
n=1
hi(xn)hj(xn)
(6.37)
Where hi(xn) is the prediction of point xn by the model i. Instead of measuring the distance
of a prediction point to a matrix, we could instead measure similarity of the kernel matrices to
measure similarity in the predictions made by these kernels. This can be done since the term
in eq. (6.37) will exactly end up measuring a form of similarity since the sum will be higher if
two kernels predict the same points similarly. Now instead of looking for similarity between
the kernel matrix C, we are searching for similarity between the inverse kernel matrix C−1
and trying to relate eq. (6.37) to the GBS similarity measurement in the following way:
GBS(Ci, Cj) ∝
Nval
X
n=1
hi(xn)hj(xn)
(6.38)
In the next section, we will test this idea by using the GBS to give us a graph similarity
measure between the different inverse kernel matrices.
6.7
GBS Graph Similarity and Optimal Weights
The first step in comparing the GBS similarity with the sum in eq. (6.38) is to calculate
the similarities on the right hand side of the sum in eq. (6.38). The results for the similarity
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 6.7: The similarity measures obtained from simulations from an ideal lossless GBS. The similarity
measure has been normalized to be between [0,1], where 0 is the highest similarity and 1 is the least similar.
The red dots show which partition each line belongs to.
measures for the GBS can be seen in fig. 6.8, which shows the values of the similarity measures
for each of the partitions compared to the others. To compare the similarity measure from
the GBS with the similarity measure from the sum in eq. (6.38) is to calculate it and rescale
it to be comparable with the GBS similarity. The results can be seen in fig. 6.8. It is very
important to note that in fig. 6.8, 0 indicates the highest degree of similarity, but in fig. 6.8, 1
indicates the highest degree of similarity. Different events and kernels were tried to calculate
the GBS similarity but none of the tried methods produced any correlation and the similarity
measures obtained from the GBS could not be used instead of the similarity measures from
the sums to calculate the optimal weights.
This result is not mysterious. As we saw in the derivation of a, the similarity measure should
contain the predictions from the different partitions. This means that the object we should
be looking for similarities between is:
hj = k⊤
njC−1
j yj
(6.39)
When we only look for similarities between kernel matrices, the only thing we will get is
62
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:71==
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Classical Similarity (cosine)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
GBS Similarity (cosine)
Correlation Between GBS Similarity and hi,j
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Figure 6.8: A scatter plot correlating the similarity measures from the GBS (maximum similarity 1, minimum
similarity 0) with the similarity between predictions from eq. (6.37) (maximum similarity 1, minimum
similarity 0). No discernible correlation is obtained
similarities in the distribution in our x-coordinates, since there is no information in the
kernel about the values of the y-training data. We can remind ourselves of the definition of
the kernel elements:
k(x, x′) = k0 exp
 
−(x −x′)2
2l2
!
(6.40)
We can see that the information is thus only the relative distances between the x-values. Since
the data is randomly generated over x, and we sample randomly from x, we are left with only
k0 containing any information, and the information only concerns the signal variance. The
next fundamental problem is that matrix elements hi,j will work similarly to a covariance, but
the maximum is not guaranteed to be at hi,i. This is because some of the kernels predict much
higher values than the others and we can thus have a situation where for some j: hi,i < hi,j.
This also destroys a straightforward relation to a similarity measure. This might be fixed by
a normalization scheme, but the previous mentioned problem means that this has not been
investigated.
The next section will outline an attempt at solving the problem, which shows that it is difficult
to construct a viable graph-like object which can tell us anything meaningful about the data.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.9: A sine wave, where p partitions have been chosen to each be a Gaussian process regression
model and to be used in the approximation derived in section 6.3
6.7.1
Creating a Naive Graph
To sum up the problem; the object we would really like to find a similarity measure is either
the predictions, or alternatively:
C−1
j yj.
(6.41)
Since we need both the information about the x-values from the training set and the corre-
sponding y-values, to have an idea of how close the different models will predict. The object
in eq. (6.41) is however a vector. One plan of attack was instead of creating the partitions
based on random points, one could stratify the x-values and create the p partitions explicitly
from points in x that are close to each other. An example of such a stratification can be seen
in fig. 6.9. This would serve the purpose of maximizing the similarity of neighbour partitions,
hopefully making it easier to find similar partitions.
Now, instead of predicting on the kernels, one could predict on a graph-like object with the
information we are trying to find similarities between. This could be done by creating a
sample of points and create predictions for each of the p different partitions, and inserting
them into p different matrices and measure a graph similarity between them. The idea would
64
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:73==
be that the partitions that predict the same points similarly would have a similar connectivity
in parts of the graph. It would also be easy to test, because we know that partitions that are
close to each other would predict more similarly than partitions far from each other.
There are several issues with doing this, but the primary is that there is no useful information
encoded in the graph, which means that the problem could just as well be to find similarity
between different vectors. This task is easy - it can be done by simply calculating a distance,
and is exactly the problem the GBS reduces the graph isomorphism problem to, by creating
a feature vector.
It was investigated if one could find periodicity in a periodic signal predicted using stratified
partitions. The idea would be that by making a stratified model, we would have partitions for
different parts of the graph which would end up predicting similarly, but for a set of points
divided by a period. This would be useful if we wanted to gain some global information which
we lose when creating the approximation. The problem with this idea is that by encoding
predictions into a symmetric matrix, the same function translated along the x-axis will have
different graph structures which are not isomorphic. With these caveats in mind, it is not
surprising that GBS similarity measures between the partitioned stratified sine model, also
failed to show a correlation.
In the end, several things were tried, but ultimately the problem persisted and it was not
possible to create a graph-like object which was meaningful to perform graph similarity on.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:75==
7
Discussion and Concluding
Remarks
This chapter contains a short discussion of the overall results of the thesis and points toward
what could be done next. This will be followed by a conclusion.
7.1
Discussion of the Results
The initial characterization of the X8 chip made by Xanadu showed us that the loss of the
system is still quite large and indicated that noise played a role in generating parts of the
signal we saw. This also caused problems in chapter 5, where we found that the GBS was not
able to distinguish between graphs that were isomorphic and non-isomorphic to each other
because of noise. This is of course not the same as saying that it can not distinguish between
any pairs -it was able to distinguish between two pairs of non-isomorphic graphs. It does
however raise questions of the number of samples required to solve the graph isomorphism
problem and even the time it takes to obtain the samples (estimated to take around 1 second)
compared to just using a classical algorithm. Using finer grained orbits instead of events could
probably have helped, but the issues of noises in a real GBS will still be present. This issue
is compounded by the fact that squeezing can only be set to 0 or 1. Xanadu have proposals
to scale the X8 to a 16 mode chip, and it will be interesting to see if loss and noise will also
be lowered and squeezing can be set to other values than 0 or 1.
Because of a focus on trying to link GBS and Gaussian process regression, benchmarking
comparing the GBS graph isomorphism and similarity algorithm was not performed. Both
the graph similarity and isomorphism algorithms only claim a possible constant time speed-up
compared to the existing exponential methods. However, in 2016, László Babai [7] claimed to
have found a quasi-polynomial1 solution to the graph isomorphism problem, although the final
paper has yet to be published. This raises the bar needed to be cleared to prove a superior
solution. In addition to this, there are still the large unknowns of the scaling in the number of
1Quasi-polynomial is slower than polynomial, but faster than exponential time
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
67
==PAGE:76==
orbits/events and samples needed to distinguish or identify large isomorphic graphs. These are
interesting and necessary problems to be solved, if solving graph isomorphism and similarity
is to be deemed a useful application.
The application of maximum clique is very interesting, because if it is faster, it would be
the first algorithm since Grover’s[26], which gives us a speed up for NP-complete problems.
During the inital stages of the project, no obvious applications of maximum clique were found,
which made us look into related problems and gave rise to chapter 4. It is the author’s opinion
that the application of maximum clique is the most promising of the mentioned applications
in this thesis, but yet again it should be noted that benchmarking against a classical heuristic
would be the obvious next step in trying to determine if the algorithm could prove useful.
The primary results for using a Gaussian boson sampler to improve Gaussian process regres-
sion seems less than promising. It was not possible to get meaningful information out of
the kernel matrix or the inverse of the kernel matrix, since it only depended on the relative
distances between x-values in a given partition.
The interest in trying to perform graph
similarity on the parts of a Gaussian process hinged on the graph-like structure of the ker-
nel matrices, which means that we would have to find a new graph-like object to perform
similarity calculations on, if we wanted to use a GBS to improve the model.
For the approximation to Gaussian process regression, we found that if we wanted to optimize
the model a kind of similarity between the different kernels did present itself. This similarity
measure was however not possible to encode as a graph similarity and even if it was, it would
be making a fairly easy problem of summing some numbers and inverting a small matrix into
a possibly exponential problem.
On a positive note, the approximation to Gaussian process regression worked surprisingly
well and the scheme allowed for efficient parallelization, while still giving either fairly decent
predictions if one only calculated a single set of weights (a) parameters, or very accurate
predictions if one chose to calculate weights (a) based on the similarity between the prediction
point and the training data.
This brings me to the final point of the discussion, several types of graphs have been shown to
be amenable to efficient heuristics which have a small time complexity (eg. [42]) and proven
polynomial time solutions for large classes of important graphs, such as planar graphs[29]
68
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:77==
and trees [34]. In a similar vein, it would have been an interesting angle to try and link
GBS graph similarity with some classical measure of graph similarity on a weighted graph.
Especially because this thesis contains the only example, to the authors knowledge, of a work
dealing with weighted graph similarity. This could also give some useful bounds on the actual
complexity of the problem we are solving with a GBS.
7.2
Conclusion
The father of boson Sampling, Scott Aaronson, recently commented that he still viewed the
problem of finding applications for boson sampling as an open problem2. This thesis is largely
in agreement with this statement.
Overall, it is shown that the X8 chip from Xanadu produces an output distribution very
similar to a simulated Gaussian boson sampling distribution. The simulated distributions’
most probable events were more likely than the corresponding events measured on the X8.
Xanadu states that 15% of the measured photons will be noise. This effect is not included in
the simulation and it seems likely that including this effect would make the simulation match
the output of the X8 better.
An overview is provided of several of the existing applications of GBS, but none of them have
a clear, well proven edge over a classical algorithm. The high costs of simulating a GBS also
makes it hard to look into performance differences.
Based on the different applications, it is shown how one can solve the independent set problem
using the existing GBS application of maximum clique. This was primarily done to show the
hidden breadth of the existing applications in solving related problems and showing strategies
to find a real life application. It also served as a good example of the effects of the mean
photon number, and how it influences the quality of solutions.
The two last sections deal with graph isomorphism. An example of the GBS algorithm for
graph isomorphism has been implemented and run on some simple graphs and isomorphs of
the graphs. It is shown that graph isomorphism is sensitive to the number of samples. It is
worrying that the number of samples required to find a difference between the chosen graphs
would take around 1 second to collect on a real GBS device. But this problem might be
2See the blog post on Shtetl-Optimized https://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/?p=4447
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
69
==PAGE:78==
minimized by choosing a finer grained comparison of the outputs from the GBS. Losses were
shown to very harmful to the ability to distinguish graphs, and at a loss of 0.3 using 5 × 105
samples, it was already almost impossible to distinguish the graphs. The X8 chip was not
able to separate all of the generated graphs. The performance might increase if squeezing
can be set more freely, rather than just binary as the current capabilities are.
In the last chapter, we try to perform GBS graph similarity on kernel matrices used in
Gaussian process regression to improve predictions. To this end, a good approximation is
developed which is parallelizable, and in the current implementation has a time complexity
of O(N 2 +
√
N
3/2 and space usage of O(N 3/2), compared to the non-approximated Gaussian
process regression which uses O(N 3) time and O(N 2).
The approximation was shown to
produce good predictions when compared to the exact version.
No helpful information was found when using the GBS to perform graph similarity between
the kernel matrices. It was argued that since the kernel matrices only contained informa-
tion about the differences in the x-values, and not information on the link between (x, y), a
graph similarity measure could not help in making better predictions. The similarity mea-
sure required could be performed using vectors, which can be done efficiently using classical
methods.
70
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
Scott Aaronson and Alex Arkhipov. “The computational complexity of linear optics”.
In: Proceedings of the forty-third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing.
2011, pp. 333–342.
[2]
Dorit Aharonov and Michael Ben-Or. “Fault-tolerant quantum computation with con-
stant error rate”. In: SIAM Journal on Computing (2008).
[3]
Mirko Amico, Zain H Saleem, and Muir Kumph. “An Experimental Study of Shor’s
Factoring Algorithm on IBM Q”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.00768 (2019).
[4]
JM Arrazola et al. “Quantum circuits with many photons on a programmable nanopho-
tonic chip”. In: Nature 591.7848 (2021), pp. 54–60.
[5]
Juan Miguel Arrazola and Thomas R Bromley. “Using Gaussian boson sampling to find
dense subgraphs”. In: Physical review letters 121.3 (2018), p. 030503.
[6]
Frank Arute et al. “Quantum supremacy using a programmable superconducting pro-
cessor”. In: Nature 574.7779 (2019), pp. 505–510.
[7]
László Babai. “Graph isomorphism in quasipolynomial time”. In: Proceedings of the
forty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing. 2016, pp. 684–697.
[8]
Leonardo Banchi, Nicolás Quesada, and Juan Miguel Arrazola. “Training Gaussian
Boson Sampling Distributions”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04770 (2020).
[9]
Leonardo Banchi et al. “Molecular docking with gaussian boson sampling”. In: Science
Advances 6.23 (2020), eaax1950.
[10]
Alexander Barvinok. “Polynomial time algorithms to approximate permanents and
mixed discriminants within a simply exponential factor”. In: Random Structures &
Algorithms 14.1 (1999), pp. 29–61.
[11]
Ethan Bernstein and Umesh Vazirani. “Quantum complexity theory”. In: SIAM Journal
on computing 26.5 (1997), pp. 1411–1473.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
71
==PAGE:80==
[12]
Elie Bienenstock and Christoph von der Malsburg. “A neural network for invariant
pattern recognition”. In: EPL (Europhysics Letters) 4.1 (1987), p. 121.
[13]
C.M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Information Science and
Statistics. Springer, 2006. isbn: 9780387310732. url: https://books.google.dk/books?
id=qWPwnQEACAAJ.
[14]
Kamil Bradler et al. “Graph isomorphism and Gaussian boson sampling”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1810.10644 (2018).
[15]
Kamil Brádler et al. “Gaussian boson sampling for perfect matchings of arbitrary
graphs”. In: Physical Review A 98.3 (2018), p. 032310.
[16]
Thomas R Bromley et al. “Applications of near-term photonic quantum computers:
Software and algorithms”. In: Quantum Science and Technology 5.3 (2020), p. 034010.
[17]
Guillaume Chapuis et al. “Finding maximum cliques on the d-wave quantum annealer”.
In: Journal of Signal Processing Systems 91.3 (2019), pp. 363–377.
[18]
Sotirios P Chatzis. “A latent variable Gaussian process model with Pitman–Yor process
priors for multiclass classification”. In: Neurocomputing 120 (2013), pp. 482–489.
[19]
Peter Clifford and Raphaël Clifford. “The classical complexity of boson sampling”. In:
Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algo-
rithms. SIAM. 2018, pp. 146–155.
[20]
Marc Deisenroth and Jun Wei Ng. “Distributed gaussian processes”. In: International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2015, pp. 1481–1490.
[21]
EV Doktorov, IA Malkin, and VI Man’Ko. “Dynamical symmetry of vibronic transitions
in polyatomic molecules and the Franck-Condon principle”. In: Journal of Molecular
Spectroscopy 64.2 (1977), pp. 302–326.
[22]
Richard P Feynman. “Simulating physics with computers”. In: Feynman and computa-
tion. CRC Press, 2018, pp. 133–153.
[23]
C. Gerry, P. Knight, and P.L. Knight. Introductory Quantum Optics. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2005. isbn: 9780521527354. url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=
CgByyoBJJwgC.
72
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:81==
[24]
Craig Gidney and Martin Ekerå. “How to factor 2048 bit RSA integers in 8 hours using
20 million noisy qubits”. In: Quantum 5 (2021), p. 433.
[25]
Chris Godsil and Gordon Royle. “Strongly regular graphs”. In: Algebraic graph theory.
Springer, 2001, pp. 217–247.
[26]
Lov K Grover. “A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the twenty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing. 1996,
pp. 212–219.
[27]
Craig S Hamilton et al. “Gaussian boson sampling”. In: Physical review letters 119.17
(2017), p. 170501.
[28]
Chong-Ki Hong, Zhe-Yu Ou, and Leonard Mandel. “Measurement of subpicosecond
time intervals between two photons by interference”. In: Physical review letters 59.18
(1987), p. 2044.
[29]
John E Hopcroft and Jin-Kue Wong. “Linear time algorithm for isomorphism of planar
graphs (preliminary report)”. In: Proceedings of the sixth annual ACM symposium on
Theory of computing. 1974, pp. 172–184.
[30]
Joonsuk Huh et al. “Boson sampling for molecular vibronic spectra”. In: Nature Pho-
tonics 9.9 (2015), pp. 615–620.
[31]
Soran Jahangiri et al. “Point processes with Gaussian boson sampling”. In: Physical
Review E 101.2 (2020), p. 022134.
[32]
Soran Jahangiri et al. “Quantum algorithm for simulating molecular vibrational exci-
tations”. In: Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 22.44 (2020), pp. 25528–25537.
[33]
Richard M Karp. “Reducibility among combinatorial problems”. In: Complexity of com-
puter computations. Springer, 1972, pp. 85–103.
[34]
Paul J Kelly. “A congruence theorem for trees.” In: Pacific Journal of Mathematics 7.1
(1957), pp. 961–968.
[35]
Nathan Killoran et al. “Strawberry Fields: A Software Platform for Photonic Quantum
Computing”. In: Quantum 3 (2019), p. 129. doi: 10.22331/q-2019-03-11-129. arXiv:
1804.03159.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
73
==PAGE:82==
[36]
Emanuel Knill, Raymond Laflamme, and Wojciech H Zurek. “Resilient quantum com-
putation”. In: Science 279.5349 (1998), pp. 342–345.
[37]
Regina Kruse et al. “Detailed study of Gaussian boson sampling”. In: Physical Review
A 100.3 (2019), p. 032326.
[38]
Ben P Lanyon et al. “Experimental demonstration of a compiled version of Shor’s algo-
rithm with quantum entanglement”. In: Physical Review Letters 99.25 (2007), p. 250505.
[39]
Arjen K Lenstra et al. “The number field sieve”. In: The development of the number
field sieve. Springer, 1993, pp. 11–42.
[40]
Chao-Yang Lu et al. “Demonstration of a compiled version of Shor’s quantum factoring
algorithm using photonic qubits”. In: Physical Review Letters 99.25 (2007), p. 250504.
[41]
Enrique Martin-Lopez et al. “Experimental realization of Shor’s quantum factoring
algorithm using qubit recycling”. In: Nature photonics 6.11 (2012), pp. 773–776.
[42]
Hiroyuki Ogata et al. “A heuristic graph comparison algorithm and its application to
detect functionally related enzyme clusters”. In: Nucleic acids research 28.20 (2000),
pp. 4021–4028.
[43]
F. Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python”. In: Journal of Machine
Learning Research 12 (2011), pp. 2825–2830.
[44]
Emmanouil A Platanios and Sotirios P Chatzis. “Gaussian process-mixture conditional
heteroscedasticity”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence
36.5 (2013), pp. 888–900.
[45]
John Preskill. “Quantum computing and the entanglement frontier”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1203.5813 (2012).
[46]
John Preskill. “Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and beyond”. In: Quantum 2
(2018), p. 79.
[47]
C.E. Rasmussen and C.K.I. Williams. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning. Adap-
tative computation and machine learning series. University Press Group Limited, 2006.
isbn: 9780262182539. url: https://books.google.dk/books?id=vWtwQgAACAAJ.
[48]
Maria Schuld et al. “A quantum hardware-induced graph kernel based on Gaussian
boson sampling”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12646 (2019).
74
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
==PAGE:83==
[49]
Maria Schuld et al. “Measuring the similarity of graphs with a Gaussian boson sampler”.
In: Physical Review A 101.3 (2020), p. 032314.
[50]
Nino Shervashidze et al. “Efficient graphlet kernels for large graph comparison”. In:
Artificial intelligence and statistics. PMLR. 2009, pp. 488–495.
[51]
Chris Sparrow et al. “Simulating the vibrational quantum dynamics of molecules using
photonics”. In: Nature 557.7707 (2018), pp. 660–667.
[52]
Andrew Steane. “Multiple-particle interference and quantum error correction”. In: Pro-
ceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engi-
neering Sciences 452.1954 (1996), pp. 2551–2577.
[53]
Varun D Vaidya et al. “Broadband quadrature-squeezed vacuum and nonclassical pho-
ton number correlations from a nanophotonic device”. In: Science advances 6.39 (2020),
eaba9186.
[54]
Lieven MK Vandersypen et al. “Experimental realization of Shor’s quantum factoring
algorithm using nuclear magnetic resonance”. In: Nature 414.6866 (2001), pp. 883–887.
[55]
Pauli Virtanen et al. “SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in
Python”. In: Nature Methods 17 (2020), pp. 261–272. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
[56]
Hui Wang et al. “Boson sampling with 20 input photons and a 60-mode interferometer in
a 1 0 14-dimensional hilbert space”. In: Physical review letters 123.25 (2019), p. 250503.
[57]
Ke Alexander Wang et al. “Exact Gaussian processes on a million data points”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.08114 (2019).
[58]
Han-Sen Zhong et al. “Quantum computational advantage using photons”. In: Science
370.6523 (2020), pp. 1460–1463.
Machine Learning Applications of Graph Similarity using a Gaussian Boson Sampler
75
==PAGE:84==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 307
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
