==PAGE:1==
M. Sc. Thesis
Perception of nonlinear distortion
in headphones
Magn´us Orri Dagsson
DTU Elektro, Institut for Elektroteknologi, The Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Bygning 348, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
magnusdagsson@gmail.com
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors, Jeremy Marozeau, Sidsel Marie Nørholm
and Konstantinos Gkanos for their unwavering and expeditious support. Your collective expertise
was to me a tremendous resource which enabled me to elevate my work to a higher level.
I would like to thank GN Audio A/S for providing the resources necessary to complete this project.
I would also like to thank my girlfriend, Silja R´os Ragnarsd´ottir, for being there through the easy
times and the hard ones, for the evening sunset walks, and for her ability to put things in a healthy
perspective.
Lastly, I would like to thank Mauro Patricelli, who sold me a Rhodes MkII 1981 Stage Piano which
has provided invaluable intervals of musical serenity throughout the writing of this thesis.
Preface
This thesis is split into two main parts: ”Paper” and ”Supplemental Material”.
”Paper” is a condensed research paper formatted like those one might ﬁnd in scientiﬁc journals.
”Supplemental Material” is less condensed and serves to expand upon the material presented in
”Paper”. It also provides some additional information, relevant to a M. Sc. thesis but less so to a
research paper.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
Paper
1
1
Introduction
1
2
Methods
2
2.1
Stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Participants and Test Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Results & Discussion
6
4
Conclusions
8
Supplemental Material
10
1
Project Aim & Reﬁnement
11
2
Background
11
2.1
Dynamic (Moving-coil) Headphones
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Nonlinearities in headphones
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.1
Bl(x) Factor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Voice coil Inductance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.3
Suspension Stiffness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.2.4
Rigidity of Diaphragm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Distortion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.1
Total Harmonic Distortion (THD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.3.2
Intermodulation Distortion (IMD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Methods
20
3.1
Stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.1
THD Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
THD Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.3
IMD Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.4
Sine Input Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.5
Even-order vs. Odd-order Harmonics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
3-AFC discrimination test
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Listening Test Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Results & Discussion
28
5
Conclusions
31
==PAGE:4==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 1 of 33
DTU
Perception of nonlinear distortion in headphones
Magn´us Orri Dagsson
DTU Elektro, Institut for Elektroteknologi, The Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Bygning 348, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
magnusdagsson@gmail.com
Abstract:
The generation of undesired nonlinear distortion is an unavoidable
aspect of headphone audio reproduction. However, below a certain threshold
this distortion becomes inaudible and inconsequential. In this study, the focus
was set on determining this perceptual threshold in music as well as its de-
pendence on the frequency range in which the distortion is present. To this
end, THD at seven percentages and eight frequency conditions was added to
three music clips and used in a discrimination listening test with trained listen-
ers. The results indicate a strong frequency-dependence and thresholds ranging
from 15% or below up to 45% or above, depending on the frequency range.
1. Introduction
In the pursuit of increased sound quality in headphones, relating the measured sound quality of
music, such as frequency response (FR) and total harmonic distortion (THD), with personal per-
ception of quality is an important goal, the attainment of which allows headphone designers to
make more informed and effective design decisions. With the knowledge of which factors are the
most impactful on perceived quality, designers and researchers are able to focus their efforts in the
most effective way. The fact that perceived quality is, in many respects, subjective does compli-
cate this pursuit but correlation has nevertheless been found between certain measurable quantities
and perceived sound quality. In a double-blind listening test study, the most preferred headphones
had the least timbral coloration, i.e. the most balanced FR.Olive and Welti(2012) In another listening test
study, target FR simulating the in-room response of a room-calibrated loudspeaker system has been
found to increase perceived sound quality, when applied to a pair of reference headhones, above
both the unequalized headphones as well as the oft-assumed optimal free-ﬁeld and diffuse-ﬁeld re-
sponses.Olive et al.(2013)Olive, Welti, and McMullin FR can be equalized and manipulated through digital signal
processing (DSP) and there are even user-friendly software products on the market which can equal-
ize the FR of any headphone the customer desires.Strogis et al.(2015)Strogis, Bems, and Popelis THD, however,
has also been linked to headphone sound quality rating in listening testsTemme et al.(2014)Temme, Olive, Tatarunis, Welti, and McMullin
but its presence is the result of an optimization process which compromises between factors such
as perceived sound quality, cost, weight, size, and maximal output.Klippel and Werner(2011) As such,
it cannot readily be minimized through DSP and therefore its reduction is a focus for compa-
nies in the ﬁeld of headphone design. Complicating matters is the fact that different factors re-
sult in distortion in different frequency ranges. For example, in most consumer dynamic head-
phones, the nonlinear nature of the suspension stiffness, Kms(x), and the force factor, Bl(x), as
a function of voice coil displacement, x, produce harmonic distortion in the low-end while break-
up modes occurring at higher frequencies in the diaphragm resulting in its deformation are re-
sponsible for distortion in the high-end.Klippel(2006) Additionally, it is well established that the hu-
man ear has evolved to become more sensitive to sound in some frequency ranges than in oth-
ers.Houser et al.(2017)Houser, Yost, Burkard, Finneran, Reichmuth, and Mulsow
These ﬁndings warrant the question: What is the threshold of perception of nonlinear distortion in
music? In other words, what is the lowest discernible level of distortion while listening to music?
This project aims to determine this threshold with a listening test as well as to investigate the corre-
lation between this perceptual threshold and the frequency range in which the distortion is present.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:5==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 2 of 33
DTU
The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, the methods of the project are discussed. These
include the nature and creation of the stimuli used in the listening test (Section 2.1), the procedure
of test itself (Section 2.2) and the participants of the test and the test setup used (Section 2.3). The
results of the listening test are presented, analyzed and discussed in Section 3 and in Section 4 the
conclusions of the project are presented along with suggestions on further work.
2. Methods
2.1. Stimuli
The approach taken to simulating the nonlinear distortion in the music clips is based on using the
following form of the logistic function:
f(x) =

L
1 + e−k(x−x0) −L
2

(1)
as a transfer function where x is the audio input, L is the maximum value of the output, k is the
steepness of the sigmoid and x0 is its midpoint on the x-axis. In this project, a maximum value of
L = 1 was chosen corresponding to the maximum absolute value of amplitude of the input audio
and an x-axis midpoint of x0 = 10−5 was chosen in order to introduce a small amount of asymmetry,
resulting in the generation of even-order harmonics in addition to the odd-order harmonics induced
by the steepness of the sigmoid. However, it should be noted that the even-order harmonics gener-
ated were low in amplitude compared to the odd-order harmonics. The drop-off in amplitude from
one harmonic to the next depends on the steepness and decreases with increasing steepness. As an
example, the drop-off from the fundamental to the ﬁrst harmonic, from the ﬁrst harmonic to the
second and from the second to the third in decibels is [−16, −14.2, −11] for a 10 Hz sine wave passed
through the logistic function in Eq. 1 with a steepness of k = 3.523, corresponding to 15% THD. In
contrast, the same drop-off values for 45% THD, measured in the same way, are [−3, −4.5, −9.6].
Fig. 1. The distortion processing implemented in MATLAB
A script which takes an audio ﬁle as input and auto-
matically ﬁnds the steepness, k, of the logistic func-
tion (eq. 1) which results in the desired THD per-
centage in the conﬁgured frequency range in the out-
put audio was written in MATLAB. The script then
performs the following steps which can be seen in
the ﬂowchart in Figure 1.
1. The original sound is ﬁltered into the fre-
quency band/bands which is/are to be dis-
torted.
2. The ﬁltered signal is passed through the logis-
tic function (eq. 1) to generate nonlinear dis-
tortion.
3. Negative gain, G, is applied to the distorted,
ﬁltered signal such that its RMS value equals
that of the undistorted, ﬁltered signal.
4. The undistorted, ﬁltered signal is subtracted
from the distorted, ﬁltered signal, leaving only
the distortion.
5. The nonlinear distortion of the desired fre-
quency bands is added to the original sound
resulting in the ﬁnal distorted sound.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:6==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 3 of 33
DTU
The application of negative gain in step 3 was done in an effort to eliminate the the boost that was
otherwise effectively applied to the processed frequency range(s) which resulted in a audible timbre
change which was irrelevant to the THD perception investigation. It was decided that seven THD
percentages in eight different frequency range combinations were to be used in the listening test.
The frequency range conditions chosen were the following:
1. Low (20 - 200 Hz)
2. Mid (200 - 1000 Hz)
3. High (1000 - 8000 Hz)
4. Low & Mid (20 - 1000 Hz)
5. Mid & High (200 - 8000 Hz)
6. Low & High (20 - 200 Hz & 1000 - 8000 Hz)
7. Low & Mid & High (20 - 8000 Hz)
8. Natural (modelled by the THD measurement
in Figure 2)
Fig. 2. Condition 8: Headphone THD measurement
The lowest THD percentage tested was 15%
and the highest was 45%. These percentages
were based on the author’s judgement on what
percentage would result in a 0% success rate
in the case of the most audible condition (Low
& Mid & High) and a 100% success rate in
the case of the least obvious frequency condi-
tion (Low), respectively. In other words, 15%
was deemed as the highest low- & mid- & high-
frequency THD percentage that no participants
would be able to tell from its undistorted coun-
terpart and 45% was deemed as the lowest low-
frequency THD percentage that everyone would
be able to differentiate. The other ﬁve levels
were equally spaced between those, resulting
in a resolution of 5% between 15% and 45%.
For simplicity’s sake, the percentages were kept
the same for all 8 frequency conditions. With
the ﬁrst seven conditions, the THD applied was
a ﬂat, even percentage over all of the speci-
ﬁed range(s). The eighth condition, however,
was modelled after a THD measurement of con-
sumer headphones and was included to represent a more natural spectral shape of THD which you
might ﬁnd in some consumer headphones. Figure 2 shows this measurement and the THD modelled
after it. This proﬁle was scaled up to generate the seven THD percentage levels, referred to the
relatively ﬂat area in the low-end.
It should be noted that the logistic function also produces intermodulation distortion (IMD) in ad-
dition to THD. Figure 3 shows two swept measurements of the low and high frequency conditions.
The spikes in the measurements occur when a number of the measured intermodulation frequencies
coincide with harmonic distortion frequencies, resulting in both types of distortion. The steps occur
because some of the measured intermodulation frequencies come into the audible spectrum as the
swept sine wave crosses certain frequencies. Furthermore, from measurements of the the power of
the distortion vs. the power of the input signal for the different THD percentages and frequency
conditions it is evident that the IMD increases linearly with increasing THD.
Three clips of music, 4 seconds in length each, were chosen and processed to obtain the 7 THD
percentage points at each of the 8 frequency conditions listed above. This amounts to 7 · 8 = 56
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:7==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 4 of 33
DTU
Fig. 3. Swept IMD measurements for the low- and high-frequency case
THD proﬁles applied on three clips which totals 56 · 3 = 168 distorted clips. The original clips were
chosen from loud passages in the following orchestral pieces of music:
• Dvoˇr´ak - Symphony No. 9 in E minor, Op. 95, ”From the New World” - IV. Allegro con fuoco -
Chicago Symphony Orchestra (1990), conducted by Sir Georg Solti
• Holst - The Planets, Op. 32 - I. Mars, the Bringer of War - London Philharmonic Orchestra
(2012), conducted by Sir Adrian Boult
• Tchaikovsky - Marche Slave, Op. 31 - Chicago Symphony Orchestra (1982), conducted by
Daniel Barenboim
Spectrograms of these 3 clips can be seen in Figure 4.
Fig. 4. Spectrograms of music clips used in listening test
These three clips were cut, using the program Audacity, from stereo ﬁles and gain was applied to
each of the clips until the loudest sample in the clip was at 1 in amplitude. A fade-in and fade-out
of 0.1 seconds was added to the beginnings and ends of the clips, respectively, to eliminate audible
pops when the clips start and stop and to lessen the jarring effect that the sudden playback of a
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:8==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 5 of 33
DTU
fortississimo passage from a loud orchestral piece of music can have on a person, especially since
the listening test involved listening to a total of 504 clips (168 rounds, three clips each round).
After the processing, the clips that were sourced from audio ﬁles which had a sampling frequency
of 92 kHz were downsampled to 44.1 kHz, 1411 kbps to match the rest and to ensure that all of the
clips had the same bit rate and sampling frequency. Finally, negative gain was applied to all of the
clips so that their acoustic loudness (in sones, using the Zwicker methodISO 532-1()) was equal with
their corresponding undistorted clip. Figure 5 shows spectrograms of the Tchaikovsky clip where
45% THD, and accompanying IMD, has been added in the low, mid and high frequency ranges,
respectively.
Fig. 5. Tchaikovsky clip with 45% THD in the LF, MF and HF ranges
2.2. Procedure
Fig. 6. The Listening Test GUI
The experiment was performed via a custom-developed MATLAB program, the graphical user inter-
face (GUI) of which can be seen in Figure 6. At the start of the test, participants were asked to input
their initials so that the results could more easily be attributed to each participant. The test type
chosen was the three alternative forced choice type (3AFC). In each round, they were presented
with three clips, labeled ’A’, ’B’, and ’C’. Two of these were an undistorted music clip and one was
distorted at a certain percentage at a certain frequency range, or combinations of ranges. Partici-
pants were able to listen to each of the clips only once and then choose the distorted one, at which
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:9==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 6 of 33
DTU
point they advanced to the next round. Limiting their listens to once per clip was done partly to keep
the duration of the test within a manageable limit and partly to force participants to go with their
ﬁrst impression. A random gain of +0, +1, +2 or +3 dB, of which the participants were notiﬁed,
was applied to each of the clips to further minimize the effect of volume on their choice. The order
of rounds was randomized as well as which label (’A’, ’B’ or ’C’) the distorted clip had in each round.
2.3. Participants and Test Setup
The participants were a group of 19 trained listeners, of which 3 were in the age range of 40-45
years old, 8 in 35-40, 5 in 30-35, and 3 in 25-30. 5 were female and 14 were male. Headphones
used were the Sennheiser HD650 and the audio interface was the RME Fireface UC.
3. Results & Discussion
Fig. 7.
The 3AFC psychometric function
ﬁtted to the LFMFHF results from
participant #7
The circles in Figure 7 show the results from participant #7
in the LFMFHF case where nonlinear distortion was applied
in the low, mid and high frequency ranges (20-8000 Hz). The
success rate was averaged over the three different clips of mu-
sic. We can see from the ﬁgure that this participant correctly
distinguished the distorted clip for all three clips of music for
the THD levels of 45%, 40%, 35% and 30%, while getting 2 of
the 3 rounds correct for 25% and 20% and 1 out of 3 rounds
for 15% THD. The sigmoid curve plotted on top of the data
points is the 3AFC psychometric function which was ﬁtted to
the points by ﬁnding the center (knee point) and slope of the
sigmoid which minimizes the sum of the squared error where
the error is the difference between a data point and the value
of the curve at each data point. This was performed for all 19
participants for all 8 frequency conditions and the knee points
of the sigmoids, corresponding to a success rate of 66%, were
further analysed as representations of the participants’ discrim-
ination ability.
In Figure 8 we can see a box plot showing the distribution of the knee points of all participants
for all of the frequency conditions. The central mark in the boxes indicates the median of the knee
points for each condition while the upper and lower edges of the box indicate the 75th and 25th
percentiles, respectively. The dotted lines extend to the most extreme data points, excluding outliers
which are plotted with the ’+’ symbol.
Fig. 8. Distribution of knee points for all 8 frequency conditions
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:10==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 7 of 33
DTU
A one-way repeated measures ANOVA14 was then performed on the data (comprising the partici-
pant labels, the frequency condition labels and the kneepoint values) to determine the statistical
signiﬁcance of the test. After verifying that the data fulﬁls the assumption of sphericity, this assump-
tion being that the variances of the differences between all combinations of the knee points for the
different conditions are approximately equal, we ﬁnd that the differences in the results, based on
the frequency condition variable, are indeed statistically signiﬁcant, F(7, 126) = 45.77, p < 0.0001.
The following Tables 1 to 4 show the p values of comparisons between the knee points of different
frequency range conditions using paired t-tests with Bonferroni correction.
Table 1. Pairwise comparisons between LF, MF and HF
HF
LF
LF
0.038
-
MF
0.011
1.000
In Table 1 we see that the differences between HF and LF (p = 0.038) and between HF and MF
(p = 0.011) are both signiﬁcant as, compared to the generally used 5% signiﬁcance threshold, there
is only a 3.8% chance that the observed difference in discrimination between HF and LF occured
randomly and only a 1.1% chance the observed difference between HF and MF occurred randomly.
However, we note that the observed difference between LF and MF (p = 1.000)) is not signiﬁcant
enough for us to infer that there exists a perceivable difference between nonlinear distortion in
these frequency ranges.
Table 2. Pairwise comparisons: LF, MF and LFMF (left) - LF, HF and LFHF (middle)
and MF, HF and MFHF (right)
MF
LF
LF
1.00
-
LFMF
0.15
0.22
HF
LF
LF
0.038
-
LFHF
1.000
0.013
HF
MF
MF
0.01051
-
MFHF
0.00018
2.7e-7
In Table 2 we can see comparisons of the conditions where nonlinear distortion is present in two
frequency ranges with the conditions of their constituent frequency ranges. We saw in Figure 8 that
the knee points of LFMF were a bit lower in our experiment than those of LF and MF. However,
the left subtable of Table 2 shows us that neither the perceptual difference between LF and LFMF
(p = 0.22) nor the difference between MF and LFMF (p = 0.15) is signiﬁcant enough for us to infer
any perceptual difference between them.
In the middle subtable of Table 2 we see a clear difference between LF and LFHF (p = 0.013) in-
dicating that the combination of low and high frequency distortion is indeed more audible than
low frequency distortion alone, like Figure 8 suggests. Furthermore, we can not infer a perceptual
difference between HF and LFHF (p = 1.000) which indicates that the addition of low frequency
distortion to high frequency distortion does not increase or decrease the audibility of the distortion.
This suggests that high frequency distortion is more easily perceived than low frequency distortion
which matches previously mentioned research on the sensitivity of the human ear to sound in dif-
ferent frequency ranges.Houser et al.(2017)Houser, Yost, Burkard, Finneran, Reichmuth, and Mulsow
In the right subtable of Table 2 we see a signiﬁcant difference between MF and MFHF (p = 2.7e−7)
as well as between HF and MFHF (p = 0.00018), indicating that the addition of MF or HF distor-
tion has indeed an constructive effect on the human ability to perceive auditory nonlinear distortion.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:11==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 8 of 33
DTU
Table 3. Pairwise comparisons: LFMF, HF and LFMFHF (left) - LFHF, MF and
LFMFHF (middle) and MFHF, LF and LFMFHF (right)
HF
LFMF
LFMF
1.00
-
LFMFHF
7.4e-8
2e-9
MF
LFHF
LFHF
0.0013
-
LFMFHF
1e-10
9.2e-10
LF
MFHF
MFHF
7.1e-8
-
LFMFHF
8.9e-10
0.00039
In Table 3 we can see comparisons between the all-inclusive frequency condition (LFMFHF), the
double range conditions (LFMF, LFHF, MFHF), and the condition of the frequency range not present
in those double conditions (HF, MF, LF). In the left subtable we see a signiﬁcant difference between
LFMF and LFMFHF (p = 2e−9), indicating a strong constructive perceptive effect from the addition
of high-frequency THD to low- and mid-frequency THD. In the middle subtable we also see a signif-
icant difference between LFHF and LFMFHF (p = 9.2e −10), indicating the same for the addition
of mid-frequency THD to low- and high-frequency THD. Interestingly, in the right subtable we also
see a signiﬁcant difference between MFHF and LFMFHF (p = 0.00039), indicating that the addition
of low-frequency THD to mid- and high-frequency THD also has an constructive effect on the hu-
man ability to perceive auditory THD. This seems to contradict the absence of difference observed
between MF and LFMF (p = 0.15) and between HF and LFHF (p = 1.000) but can perhaps be ex-
plained by the subharmonic and/or intermodulation distortion content from MF and HF distortion
which will be present in the LF range and, when LF distortion is added, may increase the audibility
of the overall distortion in the LF range beyond that of just the LF distortion itself.
Table 4. Pairwise comparisons between LF, HF and Natural
HF
LF
LF
0.038
-
Natural
1.000
0.010
In Table 4 we can see comparisons between LF, HF and the ”Natural” frequency condition, the spec-
tral content of which can be seen in Figure 2. We see that the difference between HF and ”Natural”
(p = 1.000) is not such that we can infer any perceptual difference. However, the difference between
LF and ”Natural” is signiﬁcant (p = 0.010), suggesting that the high-frequency content present in
the range from 1.5 - 6 kHz in the ”Natural” frequency condition makes a measurable difference in
the human ability to perceive auditory nonlinear distortion.
4. Conclusions
The aim of this project was to determine the human perceptual threshold of nonlinear distortion
in music and the dependence of this threshold on the frequency range in which the distortion is
present. The distribution of the knee points of the 3AFC psychometric function ﬁtted to the success
rate of the answers from the listening test (Figure 8) shows that this threshold is highly frequency-
dependent and, for the distortion simulation method employed in this project, extends from 25% or
below in the case of distortion in the whole investigated range of 20-8000 Hz to 42.5% or above in
the case of distortion in only 20-200 Hz, using the 75th and 25th percentile, respectively.
An investigation on the inﬂuence of the spectral content and temporal nature of the pieces of music
used in listening tests of this type could further shed light on the nature of human perception of
nonlinear distortion. The music clips used in this project, although all loud passages of the orchestral
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:12==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 9 of 33
DTU
variety where all sections of the orchestra are playing at once, were somewhat diverse in terms of
spectral content and temporal nature. The ﬁrst was a continuous, sustained chord without cymbals
(Dvoˇr´ak), the second was a staccato, rhythmic passage, also without cymbals and less low-frequency
content than the other two (Holst) and the third was a legato rhythmic passage with loud cymbals
(Tchaikovsky). The resolution of the listening test results did not allow for analysis of the differences
between these clips, relating to perception of nonlinear distortion, so further research connecting the
inﬂuence of the program material and possibly investigating frequency masking effects is warranted.
References
Houser et al.(2017)Houser, Yost, Burkard, Finneran, Reichmuth, and Mulsow Houser, D. S., Yost, W., Burkard, R., Finneran,
J. J., Reichmuth, C., and Mulsow, J. (2017). “A review of the history, development and ap-
plication of auditory weighting functions in humans and marine mammals,” The Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 141(3), 1371–1413, https://doi.org/10.1121/1.4976086,
10.1121/1.4976086.
ISO 532-1() ISO 532-1 (2017). “Acoustics — Methods for calculating loudness — Part 1: Zwicker
method,” Standard.
Klippel(2006) Klippel, W. (2006). “Tutorial: Loudspeaker nonlinearities—causes, parameters, symp-
toms,” J. Audio Eng. Soc 54(10), 907–939, http://www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?elib=
13881.
Klippel and Werner(2011) Klippel, W., and Werner, R. (2011). “Measurement and perception of regular
loudspeaker distortion,” Voice Coil 24(7), 5–12, https://pearl-hifi.com/06_Lit_Archive/15_
Mfrs_Publications/40_Voice_Coil/2011/Voice_Coil_2011_Compilation.pdf.
Olive and Welti(2012) Olive, S., and Welti, T. (2012). “The relationship between perception and mea-
surement of headphone sound quality,” in Audio Engineering Society Convention 133, http:
//www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?elib=16486.
Olive et al.(2013)Olive, Welti, and McMullin Olive, S., Welti, T., and McMullin, E. (2013). “Listener preferences
for different headphone target response curves,” in Audio Engineering Society Convention 134,
http://www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?elib=16768.
Strogis et al.(2015)Strogis, Bems, and Popelis Strogis, K., Bems, H., and Popelis, M. (2015). “Method of and ap-
paratus for determining an equalization ﬁlter, US Patent no. 20160366518A1” .
Temme et al.(2014)Temme, Olive, Tatarunis, Welti, and McMullin Temme, S., Olive, S., Tatarunis, S., Welti, T., and Mc-
Mullin, E. (2014). “The correlation between distortion audibility and listener preference in head-
phones,” in Audio Engineering Society Convention 137, http://www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.cfm?
elib=17441.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:13==
Perception of nonlinear distortion in headphones
Supplemental Material
Magn´us Orri Dagsson
DTU Elektro, Institut for Elektroteknologi, The Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Bygning 348, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
magnusdagsson@gmail.com
==PAGE:14==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 11 of 33
DTU
1. Project Aim & Reﬁnement
Originally, the project proposal from Jabra was about investigating the headphone parameters that
can inﬂuence music quality, such as frequency response, total harmonic distortion (THD), intermod-
ulation distortion (IMD), and impulse response and ﬁnding out which of these are the most relevant
or inﬂuential.
In the ﬁrst few weeks of the project, literature review was conducted. Through this investigative
work, these parameters, the physical factors inﬂuencing them, and the perceptive aspects which
they, in turn, inﬂuence were linked together in a graph which can be seen in Figure 9. This graph
enabled the author, in consultation with his supervisors, to decide on a subject area to focus on, the
purpose of which was to allow for a reasonably in-depth study while still keeping the project scope
within a manageable limit. In the end, the interests of the supervisors and of the author converged
in the relationship that THD and IMD have with timbre. This is represented by the red arrows in
Figure 9. The relationships behind the blue arrows are covered in Section 2.2.
Fig. 9. Headphone parameter graph used in reﬁning the focus of the project
2. Background
This section serves to provide some technical background and theory on the concepts and technology
in the paper.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:15==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 12 of 33
DTU
2.1. Dynamic (Moving-coil) Headphones
The most common type of headphones are dynamic headphones, more descriptively called moving-
coil headphones. They have two drivers, one for each ear, which convert audio signals in the form
of varying voltage into mechanical motion of a lightweight but stiff diaphragm which results in the
creation of acoustic waves, i.e. air pressure oscillations that propagate out from a source. This is
achieved by the use of a metal coil, often called voice coil, which is suspended in a magnetic ﬁeld,
within a magnetic assembly, and connected to the diaphragm. If an alternating current (AC) electri-
cal signal, such as audio, is passed through the coil it will generate an AC magnetic ﬁeld. This ﬁeld
interacts with the magnetic ﬁeld of the permanent magnet resulting in a force which moves the coil,
depending on the direction the current is ﬂowing and equivalently the direction of the AC magnetic
ﬁeld. This results in the voice coil moving back and forth in proportion to the signal which results
in the diaphragm moving air, creating acoustic waves that correspond to the signal. A cross-section
diagram of a typical moving-coil headphone driver can be seen in Figure 10 The diaphragm can
be made from various materials including but not limited to paper, plastic, bio-cellulose, aluminum
and beryllium. The choice of material is the result of a compromise between efﬁciency and sound
quality with ease of fabrication and material cost. Stiffness must be as high as possible, for high
sound quality, while maintaining the weight as low as possible, for efﬁciency.1
Fig. 10. Cross-section of a typical moving-coil headphone driver2
In Figure 11 we cen see a similar view of a typical moving-coil loudspeaker which is essentially the
same design as a typical moving-coil headphone driver. We note the surround at the front edge of
the diaphragm, connecting it to the basket, and the spider connecting the basket and the former,
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:16==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 13 of 33
DTU
Fig. 11. Cross-section of a typical loudspeaker3
around which the voice coil is wound. Together, the surround and the spider form the suspension
of the speaker, the combined purpose of which is to guide the voice coil and diaphragm in a back-
and-forth motion (axial), while not allowing side-to-side motion (lateral). The spider also provides
a restoring force which works to bring the diaphragm back to its neutral position whenever it is
displaced and the surround forms a necessary seal around the edge of the diaphragm. The surround
also serves to eliminate vibrations propagating through the diaphragm. The moving mass of the
speaker along with the suspension determines the free-air resonance of the driver.1
2.2. Nonlinearities in headphones
In the following subsections the four most impactful causes of harmonic distortion in moving-coil
loudspeakers are covered. These are the relationships between the physical aspects of headphones
and THD and IMD represented by the blue arrows in Figure 9. The information in this section is
largely based on a technical report by Wolfgang Klippel.4
2.2.1. Bl(x) Factor
Also called force factor or electro-dynamic coupling factor, the Bl(x) factor is the product of the per-
manent magnetic ﬂux density B (magnetic ﬁeld strength) and the voice coil length l. It describes the
coupling between the electrical and the mechanical domains of the driver, indicating the amount of
force it can generate. Its units are the Tesla-meter (T·m) or, equivalently, Newton per Ampere, (N/A).
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:17==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 14 of 33
DTU
(a) Motor with overhang
(b) Force factor example of overhang and equal-length
conﬁgurations
Fig. 12. Bl(x) factor: overhang4
There are two ways in which the Bl(x) factor can cause nonlinear distortion and both of these are
due to its dependence on the displacement of the voice coil.
The ﬁrst is the relationship between the voice coil height, hcoil, and the depth of the air gap, hgap. If
the windings of the voice coil leave the air gap during a displacement of the coil and diaphragm the
force factor decreases in a nonlinear way as seen from the symmetrical sigmoid curves on either side
of 0.0 mm on the x-axis in Figure 12b resulting in failure to reproduce the input signal which mani-
fests itself as audible distortion in the output audio. To mitigate this and increase the displacement
tolerated from low frequency stimuli before the number of windings in the air gap decreases, coils
are often made taller than the depth of the air gap, hcoil > hgap, so that the number of windings in
the gap stays the same even with large displacements caused by low-frequency input. This is known
as overhang and it results in a higher possible displacement before the reduction of the force factor
causes distortion. However, it does decrease efﬁciency as a smaller number of the coil windings are
being used effectively. A diagram of this physical conﬁguration can be seen in Figure 12a.
The second is the relationship between the back electromotive force (EMF) generated by the move-
ment of the coil and the voice coil displacement. The amount of this back EMF is dependent on
the velocity of the voice coil and it can act in opposition of the output by causing nonlinear varia-
tion of the electrical damping in the drivers, ultimately manifesting in distortion in the output audio.
Both of these effects cause harmonic and intermodulation distortion in the low frequency range
where displacement and current is high.4
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:18==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 15 of 33
DTU
2.2.2. Voice coil Inductance
There are two dependencies by which the voice coil inductance can cause nonlinear distortion.
The ﬁrst of these is the nonlinear relationship between the voice coil impedance and its displace-
ment, referred to by the symbol Le(x). This can be observed in Figure 13 where the impedance has
been measured at three positions by clamping the voice coil at a negative and positive displacement.
Fig. 13. The dependence of the voice coil inductance on displacement4
We note that the resonant peak does not appear in the displaced conﬁgurations and that the
impedance is considerably higher for the negatively displaced voice coil above the resonance whereas
it is lower for the positively displaced coil. This nonlinearity can be explained by varying inductance
in the voice coil due to the current running through it. The magnetic ﬁeld created by this current
depends on the displacement because it meets more magnetic resistance at a positive displacement,
where it is surrounded by air, than at a negative displacement, where it is surrounded by metal.
The second dependency, sometimes referred to as ﬂux modulation, exists between the voice coil
inductance and the input current, i. It is referred to by the symbol Le(i) and can be explained by
the nonlinear relationship between the magnetic ﬁeld strength, H, and the ﬂux density, B = µ(i)H.
We can see this relationship in Figure 14 where the permeability, µ(i = 0), of the magnetic circuit
establishes the working point of the B −H characteristic. When the input current is increased how-
ever, the iron becomes more saturated and the permeability, which equals the slope of the dashed
black line in this graph, decreases, compressing, thus distorting, the waveform. Likewise, when the
input current is decreased, the permeability increases, stretching the waveform.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:19==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 16 of 33
DTU
Fig. 14. The dependence of the voice coil inductance on input current4
These effects can be signiﬁcantly reduced by using so-called ”shorting rings”. These rings are made
out of conductive material and placed close to the voice coil where they reduce the inductance of
the voice coil. This is because counter ﬂux is generated in them, due to the magnetic ﬁeld generated
from the voice coil, which reduces the total ﬂux and thus the inductance of the coil. If placed
correctly, this can also dramatically reduce the displacement dependency of the inductance (Figure
13) as well as reducing ﬂux modulation due to the reduction of the total magnetic ﬁeld.
The displacement dependency produces relatively low THD but can produce high IMD if a low fre-
quency tone provides enough displacement and a high frequency tone enough current. The current
dependency, however, produces moderate THD and IMD.4
2.2.3. Suspension Stiffness
The stiffness, Kms, or inversely the compliance, of the suspension in a driver varies with the dis-
placement, x, of the voice coil. In Figure 15 we can see the displacement dependency of total
suspension stiffness as well as the individual stiffnesses of the spider and the surround. We see that
the stiffness is almost linear at small excursions of the voice coil but highly nonlinear at larger ex-
cursions. It is for this reason that nonlinear suspension stiffness, much like the Bl(x) factor related
nonlinearities, causes THD at low frequencies where the displacement is high. It does not, however,
produce signiﬁcant IMD.4
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:20==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 17 of 33
DTU
Fig. 15. The stiffness of the suspension as a function of displacement4
2.2.4. Rigidity of Diaphragm
At low frequencies, the diaphragm behaves as a rigid body as it moves back and forth in response
to the electrical input signal. However, at higher frequencies and with high enough force, the di-
aphragm begins to exhibit so called ”break-up” modes in which it starts deforming perpendicular to
the axial direction, causing distortion in the acoustic output. We can see this simulated with ﬁnite
element method in Figure 16 where the dashed line represents the diaphragm in the neutral position
and the solid line represents the diaphragm when excited by a certain force at a certain frequency,
both speciﬁed above each subﬁgure. We note that the transition point of where the deformation
starts to happen in the cone moves closer towards its center with increasing frequency. We also note
that the length of the break-up ”waves” on the x-axis decrease with increasing frequency.5
The material used for the diaphragm is supremely important in mitigating this issue. In Figure 17
we see a comparison of the displacement amplitude over frequency for two different diaphragms,
one made out of paper and the other of metal. We see that the metal diaphragm exhibits piston
motion up to 5 kHz, meaning that the cones, suspension, voice coil and dust cap vibrate together
as a unit, with no dips or peaks in the displacement amplitude. The paper diaphragm, however, is
not as rigid as the metal one which results in the motion of the voice coil at higher frequencies not
being transferred to the entire diaphragm. This accounts for the peaks we see at frequencies above
1 kHz in the paper diaphragm response.6
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:21==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 18 of 33
DTU
Fig. 16. Simulation of diaphragm deformation at 100 Hz, 2 kHz, 3 kHz, and 10
kHz5
Fig. 17. Comparison of vibration characteristic between metal & paper diaphragm6
Figure 18 shows an overview of the frequency bands in which the different nonlinearites we’ve dis-
cussed produce harmonic distortion. Diaphragm deformation is here referred to as ”Cone Vibraton”.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:22==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 19 of 33
DTU
Fig. 18. Overview of which nonlinearities produce THD in which frequency bands
2.3. Distortion
2.3.1. Total Harmonic Distortion (THD)
THD is the measure of how much harmonic distortion is present in a signal. It is deﬁned as the
ratio of the sum of the power of the harmonics introduced by the distortion to the power of the
fundamental frequency from which the distortion is generated. If we denote the fundamental as V1
and the distortion harmonics as V2, V3, V4, ..., Vn then the THD of a signal is deﬁned by the following
expression
THD =
pPn
i=2 V 2
i
V1
=
p
V 2
2 + V 2
3 + V 2
4 + ... + V 2
n
V1
(2)
where n is the number of harmonics to include in the calculation.
2.3.2. Intermodulation Distortion (IMD)
IMD, much like THD, involves the presence of unwanted spectral components, which are not present
in the input signal, caused by nonlinearities in the system. However, IMD is caused by two or more
input frequencies and the resulting distortion frequencies are not multiples of the input frequencies
but placed at a distance from the input frequency equalling the difference and sum of the input fre-
quencies. For example, if we denote the input frequencies as f1 and f2, intermodulation distortion
would occur at f1 ± f2, 2f1 ± f2 and f1 ± 2f2, among others.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:23==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 20 of 33
DTU
3. Methods
3.1. Stimuli
3.1.1. THD Simulation
Figure 19 shows a ﬂowchart of the nonlinear distortion simulation implementation which was de-
veloped in MATLAB and employed in this project. In reference to the numbered sections in the
ﬂowchart, the following steps are performed:
Fig. 19. The THD simulation implemented in MATLAB
1. Depending on which frequency range(s) are to be distorted, the original sound is passed
through one or more of three band-pass ﬁlters which ﬁlter it down to the desired frequency
range(s). The frequency ranges chosen for the band-pass ﬁlters (BPF) were:
• BPF 1: 20 −200 Hz
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:24==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 21 of 33
DTU
• BPF 2: 200 −1000 Hz
• BPF 3: 1000 −8000 Hz
2. For each active branch of the ﬂowchart, the ﬁltered signal is passed through a logistic function,
the steepness, k, of which has been found to result in the desired amount of distortion for the
frequency range for which the BPF of that branch is conﬁgured. The logistic function is the
integral solution to the logistic equation which was ﬁrst devised by Pierre Franc¸ois Verhulst in
1838 as a tool to describe human population growth.7,8 The logistic function has the following
form:
f(x) =
L
1 + e−k(x−x0)
(3)
where L is the maximum value of the curve, k is its steepness and x0 is its midpoint on the
x-axis. It has a multitude of uses but is most often used to predict population growth and in
machine learning as an activation function. In this project, a slightly expanded version of the
function was used:
f(x) =
L
1 + e−k(x−x0) −L
2
(4)
As for the connection between the logistic function and real-life system transfer functions, it
bears a similarity to the nonlinearity of loudspeaker voice coil peak displacement,9 especially
for the lower values of steepness, k, used in this project, as well as the nonlinear distortion in
microphones caused by various limitations in the system.10
3. Negative gain is applied to the distorted, ﬁltered signal so that its root-mean-square (RMS)
level is equal to that of the undistorted, ﬁltered signal. This is done in order to avoid effectively
boosting the frequency range in which the distortion is being applied in the ﬁnal output audio
which would skew the judgement of the listening test participants. The root-mean-square level
of a vector of values, x, is calculated in the following way:
xRMS =
v
u
u
t 1
N
n
X
i=1
|xi|2 =
r
1
N (x2
1 + x2
2 + ... + x2
N)
(5)
where N is the number of values in the vector and xn is the n-th value in the vector.
4. The undistorted, ﬁltered signal is then subtracted from the distorted, ﬁltered signal, leaving
only the generated harmonic distortion.
5. The harmonic distortion from all active branches are added together and ﬁnally added to the
original sound, resulting in the ﬁnal harmonically distorted sound.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:25==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 22 of 33
DTU
3.1.2. THD Measurement
In this project, THD was chosen as the measure of how distorted a signal is. In validation of this
choice, we can see in Figure 20 that the ratio of the power of distortion to the power of the clean
input signal increases in an approximately linear manner with increasing steepness of the logistic
function on the x-axis, here denoted by the resulting THD percentage. The legend speciﬁes which
excitation sines were used as an input for each frequency condition in order to produce both THD
and IMD.
Fig. 20. Ratio of distortion power to input power vs. steepness of logistic function
As computational resources were not limited in this project, a brute force method was employed in
MATLAB for ﬁnding the appropriate steepness of the logistic function resulting in the desired %THD.
This was done to increase the script’s ease of use, as well as to expedite the distortion simulation
process, and involved deﬁning a range of possible steepnesses for which the script deﬁnes a set
of logistic functions. The resulting %THD of each of these was measured by passing a sine in the
appropriate frequency band through the logistic function and then calculating the following:
M = harmonic magnitude
√
2
(6)
where harmonic magnitude is the fundamental and harmonics in the frequency domain of the
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:26==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 23 of 33
DTU
distorted sine, obtained via the fast Fourier transform. The %THD was then found using eq. (2) in
the following way:
%THD = 100
pPn
i=2 M 2
i
M1
(7)
where M1 is the fundamental and Mi, i = 2, 3, 4, ..., 50 are the harmonics generated by the logistic
function.
3.1.3. IMD Measurement
To determine the amount of IMD also induced by the logistic function, the following IMD measure-
ment method was employed. First, two sine waves were created, the frequencies of which depended
on the frequency range of the frequency condition being measured. Next, steps 1 to 3 in Section
3.1.1 were performed on these two sine waves. Then, the amplitude of the following intermodula-
tion frequencies was added together:
• f2 −f1
• f1 −2(f2 −f1)
• f1 −(f2 −f1)
• f1 + 2(f2 −f1)
• f1 + 3(f2 −f1)
• f1 + f2
• 2f1 + f2
• 2f2 + f1
where f1 and f2 are the frequencies of the two sine waves. Depending on these frequencies, some of
these intermodulation frequencies can be outside of the audible spectrum (20-20000 Hz) in which
case they would not be included in the calculation. Lastly, to obtain the IMD percentage, the sum of
the amplitudes of the intermodulation frequencies was divided by the sum of the amplitudes of f1
and f2 and then multiplied by 100.
3.1.4. Sine Input Examples
In Figure 21 we can see an example of THD generated with a sine. The parameters of the logistic
function shown here are L = 1, k = 7.966, and x0 = 0.00001. By using the logistic function as a
transfer function for audio we can generate harmonic distortion as we see in the frequency-domain
and time-domain subﬁgures of Figure 21. We note in the time-domain that the processed sine starts
to resemble a square wave more and more as the steepness of the logistic function is increased. This
is reﬂected in the frequency-domain where we see large odd-order harmonics (as well as some small
even-order harmonics due to the x-axis offset, x0). Note that the distorted output also contains the
fundamental of the input, it is just nearly identical to the input and behind it in this graph.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:27==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 24 of 33
DTU
Fig. 21. Top left: The logistic function compared to x. Top right: Frequency domain
of a distorted sine compared to a pure sine. Bottom: Time-domain of a distorted
sine compared to a pure sine
In Figure 22 we can see another example of THD, this time generated with 6 sines at 10, 100, 500,
1000, 4000, and 8000 Hz. In Subﬁgure 1 we see the unaltered sines. In Subﬁgure 2 we see the
sines ﬁltered with BPF1 (20 - 200 Hz) and in Subﬁgure 3 we see them ﬁltered with BPF3 (1 - 8
kHz). In Subﬁgure 4 we see the ﬁltered sines from Subﬁgure 2 which have been passed through a
logistic function with k = 7.966, resulting in 30% THD and the ﬁltered sines in Subﬁgure 2 have
also been subtracted which is evident from the 22 dB difference between the fundamental at 10 Hz
in Subﬁgure 2 and 4. Subﬁgure 5 shows the same thing for the sines in Subﬁgure 3 and ﬁnally in
Subﬁgure 6 we see the THD from Subﬁgures 4 and 5 added to the original sines in Subﬁgure 1.
The undistorted music clips, along with some examples of the added distortion for a few different
frequency conditions and percentages can be found here.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:28==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 25 of 33
DTU
Fig. 22. Example of several sines processed with BPF1 & BPF3 and 30% THD
3.1.5. Even-order vs. Odd-order Harmonics
Having seen the frequency domain of harmonic distortion generated with a sine wave (top right
of Figure 21 and Subﬁgures 4 & 5 in Figure 22), we can imagine the effect of this process on an
audio ﬁle, which can be thought of as many sine waves of different frequencies and magnitudes
superimposed on each other. The application of the logistic function will result in the generation of
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:29==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 26 of 33
DTU
harmonics from each of these superimposed sine waves and the perceptual result, especially in the
case of odd-order harmonics, can manifest as a certain auditory harshness. This is a matter of some
controversy but the most common consensus is that odd-order harmonics sound more objectionable
to the ear than even-order harmonics.11 One way in which this can perhaps be understood is by ex-
amining the pitch relationships between odd-order harmonics and their fundamental on one hand,
and between even-order harmonics and their fundamental on the other. The ﬁrst ﬁve odd-order
harmonics have the following pitch interval relationship to the pitch of the fundamental frequency:
• 3rd harmonic - Octave + ﬁfth
• 5th harmonic - Two octaves + third
• 7th harmonic - Two octaves + minor seventh
• 9th harmonic - Two octaves + ninth
• 11th harmonic - Three octaves + augmented fourth
whereas the ﬁrst ﬁve even-order harmonics have the following musical pitch interval relationship to
the pitch of the fundamental frequency:
• 2nd harmonic - Octave
• 4th harmonic - Two octaves
• 6th harmonic - Two octaves + ﬁfth
• 8th harmonic - Three octaves
• 10th harmonic - Three octaves + third
We note that three of the ﬁrst ﬁve even-order harmonics (2nd, 4th and 8th) are octaves above the
fundamental in pitch while all of the ﬁrst ﬁve odd-order harmonics have more complex musical
pitch intervals to the fundamental. When we then take into account that most music consists of
many musical notes played at once, we can deduce that the ﬁrst ﬁve odd-order harmonics of each
of these notes will likely clash much more with the other notes being played, as well as their har-
monics, than the ﬁrst ﬁve even-order harmonics will, because of their three octave-based intervals.
The term ”clash” is here used to represent a nonmusical pitch interval relationship and the effect
is that the odd-order harmonics will often sound more ”harsh” to the ear than even-order harmonics.
The number of harmonics investigated here is somewhat arbitrary and it should be noted that even-
order harmonics having a pitch corresponding to perfect octaves of the fundamental becomes less
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:30==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 27 of 33
DTU
frequent with increasing order of harmonics. However, due to the amplitude drop-off with increasing
frequency which usually exists in real-life systems, only the ﬁrst few harmonics are audible while
higher-order harmonics present in the signal are too low in amplitude to be perceivable.
3.2. 3-AFC discrimination test
The three alternative forced choice (3-AFC) test, which was used in this study, is a type of dis-
crimination test. It is commonly used in sensory testing of consumer products where the aim is to
determine the difference or similarity of a certain attribute of a product.
The 3-AFC test consists of presenting the participant with three experienceable items, two of which
are identical, the other one being different in some way. The 3-AFC test is directional, meaning
that the participant is informed of the nature of the difference they are supposed to try to perceive.
The nondirectional counterpart of the 3-AFC test is the Triangle test, in which the participant is not
informed of the nature of the difference, only that one of the three items is different in some way.
The 3-AFC was chosen over the Triangle because fewer participants are needed for the 3-AFC to
obtain the same statistical & analytic power.12
3.3. Listening Test Program
Fig. 23. The opening screen of the listening test program
Figure 23 shows the opening screen of the listening test program developed to perform the 3-AFC
discrimination test. Upon starting the test for the ﬁrst time, participants were asked to input their
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:31==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 28 of 33
DTU
initials, which were then automatically written into the ﬁlename of the results text ﬁle, to allow for
easier distinction between participants. This screen can be seen in Figure 24.
Fig. 24. Input of initials in the listening test program
After the input of initials, participants were presented with the window in Figure 6 and the test
was started. Participants were able to listen to each of the three clips in the order they wished.
After listening to the last of the three clips, the ”Choose” buttons became active and they were able
to choose the clip they perceived as distorted. The label for the distorted clip (’A’, ’B’, or ’C’) was
randomized for each round and was written in the results ﬁle after round #168. The other items
written in the results ﬁle were the clip chosen in each round, the randomized order of rounds,
randomized labels for each round, coded ﬁlename for the distorted clip in each round, time taken
to choose a clip for each round and the randomized gain applied to each clip in each round. Due to
scheduling issues, which prevented some participants from completing the whole test in one sitting,
pausing functionality was implemented into the program which allowed participants to pause their
session at any time and continue from where they left off at a later time.
4. Results & Discussion
The ﬁrst step of the results analysis consisted of ﬁnding the success rate of each participant for each
THD percentage for each frequency condition and averaging over the three pieces of music tested.
Next, this averaged success rate of each participant was plotted against THD percentage and the
3AFC psychometric function was ﬁtted to the points. The result of this process for the frequency
condition ’MFHF’ can be seen in Figure 25.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:32==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 29 of 33
DTU
Fig. 25. Results from MFHF with ﬁtted psychometric functions
The 3AFC psychometric function used in this project is a form of the logistic function:
f3AF C(x) =
0.666
1 + e(−x+kp)·s + 0.333
(8)
where kp is its knee point, corresponding to the center of the curve, and s is its slope, or how elon-
gated the curve is along the x-axis.13
The function was ﬁtted to each plot by ﬁnding the knee point and slope which together minimize
the sum of the squared error of the value of the curve and the data points:
SSE =
n
X
i=1
(f3AF C(x) −Sr(x))2
(9)
where n is the number of THD percentages, n = 7, x is a vector of the THD percentages, x =
[15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45], and Sr(x) is the success rate of a given participant for a given THD per-
centage.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:33==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 30 of 33
DTU
These knee points were then plotted in a box plot so that their distribution could be better visu-
alized. This box plot can be seen in Figure 8. The second step of the analysis was to perform a
one-way repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA)14 on the results. This is a statistical test
developed by Sir Ronald Aylmer Fisher in the early 20th century and is used to determine if a set of
3 or more related groups are signiﬁcantly different for a given variable of interest. This test’s main
output value is called the F-statistic; it is the ratio of the variation of the means of the different
groups to the variation of the datapoints within the groups. A F-statistic of 1 means that there is
no difference between the groups for a given variable of interest and the higher the F-statistic, the
more likely it is that the groups are truly different in terms of this variable. By looking up in an
F-table corresponding to the degrees of freedom of our data (7 for the frequency condition, 126
for the participants) we ﬁnd that, for an alpha level of α = 0.01, meaning a 1% chance of making
a type I error (determining that there are perceptual differences between frequency conditions if
there were none), the F-statistic must be at least 2.80. In our case, the F-statistic was calculated as
45.77 and the simultaneously calculated likelihood of observing this F-statistic if there were in fact
no perceptual differences between the different frequency conditions is less than 0.01%.
Having established a signiﬁcant difference between the frequency conditions using the one-way re-
peated measures ANOVA, we move to the third step of the analysis: t-tests. These are comparisons
between speciﬁc groups and return a value called the p-value which is the likelihood of observing
the given data randomly, i.e. if there were no true difference between the groups. It works by ﬁrst
calculating the mean of the differences between the two groups, then calculating the standard devi-
ation of the differences, then using that to ﬁnd the standard error of the mean difference. Next, the
t-statistic is found by dividing the mean difference by its standard error and ﬁnally the t-statistic is
looked up in t-distribution tables which gives the p-value.
The t-tests performed in this project and their corresponding p-values can be reviewed in Section 3
in the ﬁrst part of this thesis (”Paper”). The t-tests reported there include the Bonferroni correction
which is a type of p-value adjustment which are used when multiple statistical tests are being per-
formed at the same time. The Bonferroni is generally regarded as the most conservative correction
and works by multiplying the obtained p-value by the number of comparisons, the rationale being
that the more comparisons are made at once, the higher is the likelihood of observing a rare event
and incorrectly accepting a false hypothesis.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:34==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 31 of 33
DTU
5. Conclusions
Looking back to the learning objectives / project plan we can determine the degree to which the
objectives were met and how successful the plan was:
1. Describing how headphones work by translating energy from the electrical domain to the
mechanical domain and then to the acoustic domain.
This ﬁrst learning objective was addressed in Section 2 of the supplemental material wherein
the moving-coil loudspeaker was presented, followed by sections on the four main causes of
harmonic distortion in it.
2. Selecting and describing a set of electroacoustic parameters in headphones to investigate
based on literature review and interests of collaborators at GN Audio.
The project started with this deliberation & selection process, the result of which is presented
in Section 1 of the supplemental material. In the end, the relationship between the measurable
quantities of ”Total Harmonic Distortion” and ”Intermodulation Distortion” and the perceptual
aspect of ”Timbre” was chosen as the subject of this project. The main physical/mechanical
causes of THD and IMD were also explored and presented in Section 2.2 in the supplemental
material.
3. Determining the ranges of the parameters that shall be tested based on physical constraints
and literature.
The chosen THD ranges and conditions are discussed in Section 2.1 of the paper. The chosen
frequency conditions were based on the three frequency ranges of 20 - 200 Hz (LF), 200 -
1000 Hz (MF) and 1 to 8 kHz (HF). All combinations of these ranges were used as well as
one frequency condition which was modelled after a THD measurement of a pair of consumer
headphones (see Figure 2). The THD percentages for each of these frequency conditions were
chosen based on the author’s judgement of the best compromise between obtaining the full
discrimination success rate of 0% to 100% from participants in the listening test while still
trying to keep the resolution of the percentages low enough to end up with meaningful results.
The IMD which was generated along with the THD was also discussed.
4. Simulating these parameter ranges on a pair of reference headphones using signal processing
and measurements in the facilities of GN Audio.
This process is explained in Section 2.1 of the paper and in more detail in Section 3.1 of the
supplemental material.
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:35==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 32 of 33
DTU
5. Designing and performing a subjective listening test on a human subject group available to
GN Audio, combining dissimilarity testing and preference testing.
The design of the listening test is discussed in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 of the supplemental ma-
terial. Preference ended up being left out of the design in order to obtain a reasonably high
resolution in the dissimilarity results while keeping the workload of the participants within a
manageable limit.
6. Analyzing results of tests and determining the degree of correlation between the parameters
and perceived dissimilarity & preference.
The results and analysis are presented and discussed in Section 3 of the paper. They are also
discussed in more detail in Section 4 of the supplemental material.
Besides the preference aspect having been excluded from the listening test to decrease workload
for the participants, the original learning objectives have been met and it is the author’s opinion
that the knowledge gained during the research phase was successfully internalized and applied in
the investigation of the perceptual threshold of nonlinear distortion in music in headphones and its
dependence on frequency.
References
1 J. Borwick, Loudspeaker and Headphone Handbook.
Focal Press, 2001. [Online]. Available:
https://books.google.dk/books?id=9DeZqnsjetgC
2 A.
Farahat.
(2016)
Electric
equipment
–
headphone
types.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//machineryequipmentonline.com/electric-equipment/headphonesheadphone-types/
3 A.
Fox.
(2021)
Why
do
loudspeakers
need
enclosures?
[Online].
Available:
https://
mynewmicrophone.com/why-do-loudspeakers-need-enclosures/
4 W. Klippel, “Tutorial: Loudspeaker nonlinearities—causes, parameters, symptoms,” J. Audio Eng.
Soc, vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 907–939, 2006. [Online]. Available: http://www.aes.org/e-lib/browse.
cfm?elib=13881
5 G. Ni, S. Elliott, and A. Langley, “Dynamics and waves in loudspeaker cones,” 09 2012.
6 Y. Hu, X. Zhao, T. Yamaguchi, M. Sasajima, T. Sasanuma, and A. Hara, “Effects of the cone and
edge on the acoustic characteristics of a cone loudspeaker,” Advances in Acoustics and Vibration,
vol. 2017, p. 2792376, May 2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/2792376
June 25, 2021
==PAGE:36==
M. Sc. Thesis
page 33 of 33
DTU
7 P. F. Verhulst, “Notice sur la loi que la population poursuit dans son accroissement,” Correspondance
Math´ematique et Physique, vol. 10, pp. 113–121, 1838.
8 J. Cramer, “The early origins of the logit model,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, vol. 35,
no. 4, pp. 613–626, 2004. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S1369848604000676
9 W. Klippel, “assessment of voice-coil peak displacement xmax,” journal of the audio engineering
society, vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 307–324, may 2003.
10 DPA
Microphones.
(2018)
The
basics
about
distortion
in
mics.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.dpamicrophones.com/mic-university/the-basics-about-distortion-in-mics
11 G. Davis, G. Davis, R. Jones, and Y. Corporation, The Sound Reinforcement Handbook,
ser. Recording and Audio Technology Series.
Hal Leonard, 1989. [Online]. Available:
https://books.google.ca/books?id=d7ft6F8ZUdcC
12 N. Zacharov, Sensory Evaluation of Sound.
Boca Raton: Taylor Francis Group, 2018.
13 B. Treutwein and H. Strasburger, “Fitting the psychometric function,” Perception & Psychophysics,
vol. 61, pp. 87–106, 01 1999.
14 R. Fisher, Statistical Methods for Research Workers, ser. Biological monographs and manuals.
Oliver and Boyd, 1925. [Online]. Available: https://books.google.dk/books?id=I0NBAAAAIAAJ
June 25, 2021
