==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
University of Copenhagen
MSc Thesis
Physical Stability and In Vitro Performance of Lipid ­ Based
Formulation Adsorbed onto Functionalized Calcium
Carbonate (FCC) to Enable Delivery of Poorly Water Soluble
Drugs
Author:
Jumana Merchant (s192183)
Supervisors:
Anette Müllertz ­ Professor
Jacob Bannow ­ Postdoc
June,2021
==PAGE:2==
Physical Stability and In Vitro Performance of Lipid ­ Based Formulation Adsorbed onto
Functionalized Calcium Carbonate (FCC) to Enable Delivery of Poorly Water Soluble
Drugs
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Jumana Merchant
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
Physiological Pharmaceutics Group, Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2100 Copenhagen,
Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Preface
The work presented in this thesis has been produced over five months in the Physiological
Pharmaceutics Group, Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health and Medical Science at the
University of Copenhagen (KU), as a 30 ECTS requirement for the fulfilment of the MSc in
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering, under Technical University of Denmark (DTU).
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
There are several people whose kind support I would like to acknowledge. First of all, I would
like express my sincere gratitude to my supervisor Professor Anette Müllertz, for giving me the
opportunity to work on this project and trusting me with the project. A very special thanks to my
supervisor Jacob Bannow for his unconditional support and motivation throughout the project.
Thank you for always being available for any kind of discussions and questions. Without his
continual guidance, encouragement and patience, I would not have been able to complete this
project.
I would also like to thank the members of the Physiological Pharmaceutics for always being
available to help in the lab. Furthermore, I would like to extend my gratitude towards lab tech­
nician Yang Hwan Yun for always helping and troubleshooting issues in the lab. I would also
like to thank Tobias Palle Holm for his help and invaluable inputs with the DSC.
I would also like to thank my friends especially Munira and Pavithra for their constant motivation
and support through all the ups and downs.
Last but not the least, great thanks goes to my family especially my parents and my brother for
their constant support, encouragement and love throughout my studies as well as this project
and any other hurdles that I may face in life.
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of Abbreviations
Table 1: Nomenclature and in­text abbreviations summary.
Abbreviations
Term
aDS
Apparent degree of supersaturation
BCS
Biopharmaceutics classification system
CRV
Carvedilol
DLS
Dynamic light scattering
DSC
Differential scanning calorimetry
FaSSIF
Fasted state stimulated intestinal fluid
FCC
Functionalized calcium carbonate
FDA
Food and Drug Administration
FFAs
Free fatty acids
GI tract
Gastrointestinal tract
GRAS
Generally recognized as safe
HPLC
High performance liquid chromatography
LbDDS
Lipid­based drug delivery system
LFCS
Lipid formulation classification system
MC
Medium chain
MMT
Montmorillonite
NPs
Nanoparticles
ODTs
Orally dispersible tablets
PLM
Polarized light microscopy
PWSDs
Poorly water­soluble drugs
Seq
Equilibrium solubility
SEDDS
Self­emulsifying drug delivery system
SEM
Scanning electron microscopy
SLH
Silica­lipid hybrid
SMEDDS
Self­microemulsifying drug delivery system
SNEDDS
Self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery system
Super­SNEDDS
Supersaturated self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery system
Tg
Glass transition temperature
TGA
Thermogravimetric analysis
XRPD
X­ray powder diffraction
iv
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery systems (SNEDDS) can circumvent the low aqueous solu­
bility of poorly soluble drugs and increase their oral absorption. SNEDDS are often chemically
unstable and costly to manufacture, adsorption onto solid carriers has been suggested as a
way to minimize these issues. This study investigates the potential of functionalized calcium
carbonate (FCC) as a solid carrier for solidifying SNEDDS. The study evaluates the physio­
chemical stability and in vitro performance of solidified SNEDDS (SNEDDS FCC) in comparison
to its liquid counterparts.
Conventional SNEDDS containing carvedilol (CRV) at 80% (80%­SNEDDS liquid) of the equi­
librium solubility (Seq) and supersaturated SNEDDS (200%­SNEDDS liquid) containing CRV at
200% of Seq were produced by employing heating and cooling cycle. The 80%­SNEDDS liquid
and 200%­SNEDDS liquid were loaded onto FCC via physical mixing in three ratios 2.5:1, 3.0:1
and 3.5:1 (w/w) (FCC: SNEDDS liquid). Six SNEDDS FCC formulations containing drug loads
from 0.8 to 2.6% (w/w) were developed. They were evaluated based on self­emulsification prop­
erties and droplet size measurements, solid state analysis, in vitro digestion, and dispersion
testing. Physical stability assessment and drug release studies of SNEDDS FCC formulations
were conducted over a storage period (25°C at dry conditions) of 10 and 8 weeks respectively.
SNEDDS FCC formulations formed nanosized droplets after emulsification in HCl solution (0.2M,
pH 1.6). Incorporation of FCC increased the droplet size to 100­120 nm compared to its liquid
counterparts (30­40 nm). Solid state analysis confirmed transformation of the crystalline form of
the drug to molecular non­crystalline form. SNEDDS FCC achieved improved rates and extents
of drug release when compared to the crystalline CRV. FCC was able to rapidly release the
SNEDDS liquid even after 8 weeks of storage and showing the same extent of drug release as
freshly prepared samples. The 200%­SNEDDS liquid were stable for 6 ± 0.5 days, whereas
solidification with FCC stabilized the supersaturated state of the drug and the ratio 3.0:1 and
3.5:1 was stable for at least 10 weeks. Supersaturation greatly improved the drug loading in
the presence of FCC and showed enhanced in vitro drug release behavior compared to the
conventional systems.
In conclusion, SNEDDS liquid was successfully adsorbed onto FCC, creating a solid powder
from which SNEDDS liquid was rapidly emulsified into the aqueous media. FCC retained the
supersaturated state of CRV in its solubilized form for at least 10 weeks and showed optimal
drug release behavior for tested period of 8 weeks. FCC showed promising results as a solid
carrier for solidifying SNEDDS.
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
List of Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abstract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Project Aims
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical Background
4
2.1
Oral Drug Delivery of Poorly Soluble Drugs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Poorly Soluble Drugs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Biopharmaceutics Classification System (BCS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Formulation Strategies for Poorly Soluble Drugs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Lipid­Based Drug Delivery System (LbDDS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Self­Nanoemulsifying Drug Delivery System (SNEDDS) . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Limitations associated with LbDDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Solidification of SNEDDS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Rationale for Solidification of SNEDDS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.2
Overview of Solidification Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.3
Limitations with Current Solid Carriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Functionalized Calcium Carbonate (FCC) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Model Drug . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Analytical Techniques in Solid State Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6.1
Thermal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6.2
Diffraction Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.6.3
Microscopic Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3
Materials and Methods
21
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.1
Preparation of Formulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2.2
Solidification Efficiency
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2.3
Self­emulsification, Droplet size and Polydispersibility Index (PDI) analysis 24
3.2.4
Solid State Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.5
In Vitro Dispersion of SNEDDS FCC and SNEDDS liquid . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.6
Dynamic In Vitro Lipolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.7
Stability of SNEDDS liquid Formulations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.8
Physical Stability of SNEDDS FCC Formulations over Storage . . . . . . .
29
3.2.9
HPLC Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.10 Polarized Light Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
vi
==PAGE:8==
3.2.11 Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4
Results and Discussion
30
4.1
Development of SNEDDS FCC Formulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Solidification Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
Self­emulsification, Droplet size ad PDI measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
Solid State Characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.1
Morphological Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4.2
X­ray Powder Diffraction Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.4.3
Thermal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.5
In Vitro Digestion Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6
In Vitro Dispersion of SNEDDS FCC and SNEDDS liquid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.7
Stability of CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.8
Physical Stability of SNEDDS FCC Formulations over Storage . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.9
Drug Release from SNEDDS FCC Formulation over Storage . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.10 General Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Conclusion
56
6
Future Perspectives
57
References
58
A Appendices
65
A.1 Visual Appearance of the Developed SNEDDS FCC Formulations . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2 Self­emulsification and Droplet Size Distribution assessment
. . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.2.1
Visual Assessment of Emulsions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.2.2
Droplet Size Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.3 XRPD Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.4 Thermal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The oral drug delivery route is the most favored route of drug administration for its potential
advantages including patient compliance, cost­effectiveness, and noninvasiveness (Alqahtani
et al. 2021). More than 40% of new drug candidates emerging from pharmaceutical industry
are insoluble in water (Dening et al. 2016). Poor aqueous solubility leads to a poor and er­
ratic bioavailability from traditional dosage forms. Hence, enabling formulation strategies are
needed to improve the bioavailability of poorly water­soluble drugs (PWSDs) after oral admin­
istration. Lipid­based drug delivery systems (LbDDS) offer solution for mitigating the inherent
slow dissolution and poor bioavailability of hydrophobic drugs (Pouton 2000). Amongst the var­
ious LbDDS, self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery systems (SNEDDS) have particularly attracted
significant attention, because of their ability to improve the oral bioavailability of PWSDs (Gur­
soy and Benita 2004). SNEDDS consists of drug dissolved in a mixture of various excipients
including lipids, surfactants, co­surfactants, and co­solvents which form a nanoemulsion upon
dispersion in aqueous media (Krstić et al. 2018). SNEDDS is an attractive strategy due to its
capacity to solubilize lipophilic drugs and circumvent the dissolution step in the gastrointestinal
fluids (N. Thomas, Rades, and Müllertz 2013). Conventional SNEDDS usually have a drug
load between 50 to 90% of the drugs Seq in the SNEDDS preconcentrate to avoid drug precip­
itation during storage. The low drug loading of conventional SNEDDS potentially results in the
administration of several dosage units affecting patient compliance negatively (Park, Ha, and
M. S. Kim 2020). In this context, supersaturated SNEDDS (super­SNEDDS) containing drug
loads at supersaturated concentrations have shown to be suitable alternatives due to their abil­
ity to lead to an equal or higher bioavailability compared to the conventional SNEDDS (Nicky
Thomas et al. 2013).
Despite the advantages of SNEDDS, some limitations still exist. The most compelling issues in­
clude a) high production cost; involving costly and complex equipment employed with the man­
ufacturing of soft gelatin capsules, b) low drug loading levels in case of conventional SNEDDS,
c) risk of drug precipitation in case of liquid supersaturated systems due to their thermody­
namic instability, d) physicochemical instability during storage, and e) lack of predictive in vitro
protocols (Joyce et al. 2019; Tan, Rao, and Prestidge 2013; Inugala et al. 2015 ).
Solidification of these liquid SNEDDS onto chemically inert solid carriers enabling the produc­
tion of solid dosage forms has attracted substantial interest in recent years. The general hy­
pothesis applied, is that the development of these hybrid formulations could combine the ad­
vantages of the liquid SNEDDS (solubility and dissolution enhancement) with the high physical
stability from solid dosage forms. Moreover, the ease of manufacturing, associated with low
costs and the possibility of producing a range of dosage forms e.g. sachets, powder filled into
capsules or compressed into tablets makes solidification attractive from an industrial perspec­
tive. (Mandić et al. 2017; Joyce et al. 2019).
Solidification has presented new opportunities in harnessing the potential of SNEDDS in en­
hancing or retaining the biopharmaceutical performance of lipophilic drugs (Joyce et al. 2019).
1
==PAGE:10==
A plethora of research is devoted to the transformation of liquid SNEDDS into solid dosage
forms with a focus on various solidification techniques as well as on the selection of solid car­
rier excipients. The solidification methods most commonly employed are physical adsorption,
spray drying, melt granulation and melt extrusion (Mandić et al. 2017). Selection of the appro­
priate carrier excipient for the solidification process has further implication in the resulting in
vivo performance and the physicochemical properties of the resulting formulation (Joyce et al.
2019). A wide range of carriers for adsorption of SNEDDS have been investigated including
silicon dioxide, magnesium aluminometasilicate, calcium silicate, and porous dibasic calcium
phosphate (Dening et al. 2016). However, the current set of studies and reviews suggest a
conflicting evidence as to whether the solidified SNEDDS will preserve, enhance or decrease
the biopharmaceutical performance of the original liquid SNEDDS (Dening et al. 2016).
Neusilin®, a mesoporous magnesium aluminometasilicate product has demonstrated signifi­
cant potential as a solid carrier for SNEDDS firstly due to its ability to develop solidified SNEDDS
by simple blending and secondly due to its ability of direct compression allowing the manufac­
turing of tablets (Suhas G Gumaste et al. 2013). However, the suitability of Neusilin® as a
solid carrier for SNEDDS has been controversial. Incomplete drug release is a major issue
with formulations containing Neusilin® as a solid carrier excipient (Van Speybroeck et al. 2012;
Suhas G. Gumaste, Dalrymple, and Serajuddin 2013). This in turn leads to lower oral drug
absorption compared to the liquid SNEDDS. A further reduction of drug release over long­term
storage from the solidified SNEDDS has been another striking concern. (Williams et al. 2014).
The above mentioned limitations, strive the need for investigating new carriers to solidify SNEDDS.
Functionalized calcium carbonate (FCC) was recently identified as a novel pharmaceutical ex­
cipient for PWSDs (Preisig, Haid, et al. 2014). Because of its high intraparticle porosity and
ability of rapid liquid uptake, FCC is a potential solid carrier for solidifying SNEDDS (N. Thomas,
R. Holm, et al. 2012).
2
==PAGE:11==
1.1
Project Aims
The work presented in this thesis focuses on investigating FCC as a solid carrier for solidify­
ing SNEDDS. The feasibility of FCC as a solid carrier will be investigated by loading FCC with
conventional (80%­SNEDDS liquid) and supersaturated (200%­SNEDDS liquid) SNEDDS and
evaluating the physiochemical stability and in vitro performance of the developed SNEDDS
FCC formulations and comparing its performance to its liquid counterparts.
Consequently, the aims of this project are:
­ To formulate and optimize the solidification method for loading 80%­SNEDDS liquid and 200%­
SNEDDS liquid onto FCC to ensure homogeneous drug distribution within the solid carrier.
­ To determine the self­emulsification properties and droplet size of the SNEDDS FCC formula­
tions compare to its respective SNEDDS liquid.
­ To determine the physical state of the drug in the SNEDDS FCC formulations and evaluate its
physical stability over long­term storage.
­ To evaluate whether FCC stabilizes the supersaturated state of the drug and its effect on in
vitro performance.
­ To determine the extent of drug release from the SNEDDS FCC formulations and compare it
to its respective SNEDDS liquid and crystalline drug form and to investigate the extent of drug
release from the SNEDDS FCC as a function of time upon storage.
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Oral Drug Delivery of Poorly Soluble Drugs
2.1.1
Poorly Soluble Drugs
The oral drug delivery route is characterized by its ease of administration, supporting the in­
dependence of patients, and promoting drug therapy adherence. Moreover, established man­
ufacturing and development processes for oral delivery systems make them attractive for the
pharmaceutical industry (Kuentz, René Holm, and Elder 2016; Pathak 2021). However, after
the administration of an oral dosage form, oral drug absorption is mainly influenced by two pa­
rameters: solubilization of the drug in the gastrointestinal (GI) fluids and permeation through the
GI membrane (Kataoka et al. 2006). Since permeation occurs at the molecular level, the drug
first needs to dissolve to overcome the mucosal barrier by passive diffusion or active transport
(Artursson and Karlsson 1991). Recent trends in drug discovery, have resulted in the devel­
opment of new drug candidates with greater lipophilicity and poor water solubility (Kalepu and
Nekkanti 2015). As repeatedly documented, 40% of drugs with market approval and nearly
90% of all new drug candidates in the pipelines of the pharmaceutical industry are practically
insoluble in water and thus face a limited bioavailability after oral administration (Loftsson and
Brewster 2010).
2.1.2
Biopharmaceutics Classification System (BCS)
Amidon et al. (1995) provided a scheme for the estimation of the extent and rate of drug absorp­
tion after oral administration of drugs, by developing the biopharmaceutics classification system
(BCS) (Amidon et al. 1995). As seen from Figure 2.1 the BCS classifies drugs according to their
in vitro solubility and GI permeability into four classes. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
defines a drug as highly soluble if the highest clinically relevant dose is freely soluble in 250 mL
aqueous media throughout the physiological pH range of 1.2­6.8. For a drug to be defined as
highly permeable, the extent of the intestinal absorption of the administered dose of the drug
has to be 90% or higher (Dahan, Miller, and Amidon 2009).
Later, Butler and Dressman (2010) used the BCS as a reference point and developed a revised
classification system for the oral delivery of drugs with a greater focus on drug developability
(Butler and Dressman 2010). Low aqueous solubility and low dissolution rate are a matter
of concern for BCS class II drugs (low solubility and high permeability) (Pathak 2021). This
compensatory nature of solubility and permeability of BCS class II drugs is taken into account
leading to its further division into dissolution rate­limited (class IIa) and solubility limited (class
IIb) drugs. Hence, a significant amount of research has been done in developing formulation
techniques for BCS Class IIa and IIb drugs to improve their aqueous solubility and dissolution
rate (Pouton and Porter 2008).
4
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2.1: The biopharmaceutics classification system dividing the drugs according to their solubility
and permeability (Amidon et al. 1995). Elements added by Butler and Dressman are labelled in orange
(Butler and Dressman 2010).
2.1.3
Formulation Strategies for Poorly Soluble Drugs
Several formulation strategies have been developed to enhance the drug solubility and disso­
lution rate after oral administration to enable sufficient bioavailability of PWSDs.
Formulation strategies have been adapted that modify the physicochemical properties of the
drug on the molecular, colloidal, and particulate levels. One of the approaches include particle
size reduction by microionization, salt formation, and design of prodrugs (Buckley et al. 2013;
Kuentz, René Holm, and Elder 2016). However, these methods have their own drawbacks.
For example, salt formation is not a feasible option in the case of neutral compounds. Particle
size reduction becomes inconvenient when dealing with very fine powders, where handling dif­
ficulties and poor wettability are a major concern (Gursoy and Benita 2004). In order to mitigate
these limitations, various other formulation techniques have been developed (see Figure 2.2)
including the use of nanoparticles (NPs), cyclodextrins, solid dispersions, and use of polymeric
and lipid excipients (Buckley et al. 2013 ; Gursoy and Benita 2004).
A formulation strategy that modifies drug properties on a colloidal level and plays a profound
role in improving the solubilization and absorption of PWSDs is the use of LbDDS. Due to their
inherent lipophilic nature, lipids provide options for developing systems that are well suited for
the drug delivery of highly lipophilic drugs.
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Formulation strategies employed on the molecular, colloidal and particulate level for PWSDs
to improve the drug solubility and dissolution rate.
2.2
Lipid­Based Drug Delivery System (LbDDS)
The utilization of lipid systems for enhancing the absorption of PWSDs has attracted remarkable
interest and is well documented in the literature (Feeney et al. 2016).
LbDDS are a diverse group of formulations ranging from simple solutions of drugs in triglyceride
oils to more complex mixtures including partial glycerides, lipophilic surfactants, hydrophilic
surfactants, and co­solvents (Pouton 2000). In 2000, Pouton proposed, the lipid formulation
classification system (LFCS) as a working model to help identify critical performance charac­
teristics of lipid­based systems (Pouton 2000). The LFCS divides the LbDDS into three classes
(Type I, Type II, and Type III). Type III class is further sub­divided into Type IIIa and Type IIIb.
Later in 2006, Pouton amended the LFCS by including an additional category of LbDDS called
Type IV (Pouton 2000; Pouton 2006). The LFCS is shown in Table 2.1. It was classified based
on the amount and type of excipients, and morphology of lipid aggregates formed during di­
lution in aqueous media (Krstić et al. 2018).The LFCS primarily assists in identifying the most
suitable formulations of lipid carriers for specific drugs in relation to their physicochemical char­
acteristics. It also enables better interpretation of in vivo studies (Pouton 2006; Krstić et al.
2018).
Briefly, Type I formulations are non­dispersing LbDDS typically containing oils with no surfac­
6
==PAGE:15==
tants. Type II formulations are oils with water­insoluble surfactants. Hence, retaining their
solvent capacity upon dispersion (Pouton and Porter 2008). Type III systems are mixtures of
oils with surfactants and co­solvents forming self­emulsifying drug delivery systems (SEDDS)
or self­microemulsifying drug delivery systems (SMEDDS). Type III formulations may lose their
solvent capacity upon dispersion due to the hydrophilic surfactants being dissolved in the aque­
ous phase (Pouton and Porter 2008). Type IV formulations are a mixture of water­soluble sur­
factants with co­solvents that include no oil (Pouton 2006). Type IV formulations are not easily
digested due to the absence of lipids (Pouton and Porter 2008).
Table 2.1: The lipid formulation classification system (LFCS) showing typical composition and properties
of various types of lipid formulations (Pouton 2006)
The main rationale for using LbDDS is to improve the oral bioavailability of PWSDs. The poten­
tial ways how lipids can alter the drug absorption are a) circumventing the critical dissolution
step and thereby presenting the drug in a dissolved state (N. Thomas, Rades, and Müllertz
2013), b) increased lymphatic transport, c) decreased cytochrome P450 metabolism, d) inhibi­
tion of membrane efflux transporters, and e) alterations in membrane fluidity may contribute to
improving the bioavailability (Kalepu, Manthina, and Padavala 2013). In addition, the LbDDS
may reduce the food effects associated with PWSDs, potentially resulting in a food­independent
drug product (Charman et al. 1993).
2.2.1
Self­Nanoemulsifying Drug Delivery System (SNEDDS)
Several LbDDS have been developed to improve the oral delivery of lipophilic drugs. Recently,
incorporating the drug into a SEDDS, with particular emphasis on SNEDDS has been the most
prevalent approach.
A SNEDDS preconcentrate consists of an isotropic mixtures of natural or synthetic oils, water­
soluble or water­insoluble surfactants, co­solvents, and the dissolved drug substance (Gursoy
7
==PAGE:16==
and Benita 2004). On mild agitation and further dilution, in an aqueous media, such as upper
GI fluids, these systems tend to form spontaneous oil­in­water (O/W) emulsions with a particle
diameter of 200 nm or less (Cherniakov, Domb, and Hoffman 2015). The digestive motility of
the stomach and intestine provides the necessary agitation for self­emulsification allowing the
formulations to spread rapidly in the GI tract and generating a high surface area of interaction
between the formulations and GI fluids (Gursoy and Benita 2004).
Conventional SNEDDS
Most of the studies investigating SNEDDS have incorporated drug usually between 50­90%
of the Seq of the drug in SNEDDS preconcentrate (Ørskov Christensen et al. 2004). These
formulations have been termed conventional SNEDDS (Nicky Thomas et al. 2013).
For conventional SNEDDS, the process of self­emulsification is governed by several factors in­
cluding oil/surfactant ratio, various physiological conditions, such as temperature and pH under
which self­emulsification occurs (Park, Ha, and M. S. Kim 2020). After oral intake, SNEDDS
are subjected to various changes in GI tract. The lipids are primarily hydrolysed by the gastric
and pancreatic lipases. In the stomach, the gastric lipase initiates the hydrolysis of the tria­
cylglycerols into surface­active digestion products (diglycerides, partially ionized fatty acids)
which subsequently empties into the duodenum. These digested products are then readily sol­
ubilized by the biliary lipids secreted in the bile (Krstić et al. 2018). The secretion of bile has two
impacts on GI lipolysis. It firstly acts as a surfactant triggering lipolysis by removing digestion
products from the oil­in­water interface. This in turn leads to ensuring the second function of
forming mixed micelles which drives the transportation of the digested lipids towards intestinal
epithelium where they are absorbed by the enterocytes. Hence, the formation of the micellar
association enhances lipid solubilization supporting lipid absorption (N. Thomas, Rades, and
Müllertz 2013). Consequently, this increases the apparent solubility of the drug in the GI fluid,
increasing the drug absorption and bioavailability. Moreover, micro­emulsified drugs are eas­
ily absorbed through lymphatic pathways bypassing the first­pass metabolism (Park, Ha, and
M. S. Kim 2020).
In Vitro Lipolysis
The in vitro performance of SNEDDS is commonly assessed through lipolysis studies. The most
frequently used model is the pH­stat lipolysis, consisting of a temperature­controlled (37°C)
vessel with digestion media and relevant enzymes (fasted or fed state intestinal fluid, prepared
with an appropriate pH, as well as concentrations of bile salts and phospholipids), a pH­stat for
addition of sodium hydroxide and a titration unit for addition of CaCl2 (Berthelsen et al. 2019)
(see Figure 2.3). SNEDDS are added into the vessel, and after a period of dispersion, digestion
is initiated by addition of digestive enzymes, commonly pancreatic lipase. Digestion of lipids
results in the release of free­fatty acids (FFAs), causing the pH to drop in the digestion media.
Compensation of the pH is attained by addition of sodium hydroxide which gives an estimate
of the rate and extent of digestion. Accumulation of FFAs at the oil droplet surface leads to
inhibiting pancreatic lipase. In vivo, the removal of fatty acids occurs by absorption through the
intestinal wall. In vitro, this is done by adding of Ca+2 which acts as sink for FFAs, by removing
them through forming insoluble Ca+2 soaps which precipitate in the digestion media (Berthelsen
et al. 2019; Krstić et al. 2018). During lipolysis, samples are taken at pre­determined time
8
==PAGE:17==
points and centrifuged to separate the upper lipid phase, intermediate aqueous phase and
pellet phase. The aqueous phase is used to determine the drug concentration and estimate
the extent of the drug that has remained solubilized (Krstić et al. 2018). Pellet phase can be
characterized with various solid state techniques to determine the solid form of the precipitate
(Nicky Thomas et al. 2013; Bannow et al. 2020).
Figure 2.3: General setup of the in vitro lipolysis model used for assessment of SNEDDS. SNEDDS
and digestive enzyme are added into the lipolysis vessel, and are samples taken throughout the lipol­
ysis. After centrifugation drug distribution between lipid, aqueous and pellet phase can be determined.
(Berthelsen et al. 2019)
Although conventional SNEDDS have proven advantageous in improving the bioavailability of
PWSDs, there are certain drawbacks. An undesirable outcome after administration is in vivo
drug precipitation in the GI tract. As stated above, SNEDDS undergo spontaneous emulsifi­
cation when in contact with GI fluids. SNEDDS preconcentrate may have high concentrations
of water­miscible excipients, this results in supersaturation of the drug exceeding the Seq in GI
fluid since the solubilizing power of the SNEDDS vehicle is lost during dilution. Hence, to ob­
tain thermodynamically stable formulations during storage and mitigate the risk of precipitation
of the drug after administration in the GI tract, the utilized drug loads in SNEDDS preconcen­
trate usually range between 50­90% of the Seq. This results in administrating large amount of
formulation to reach the therapeutic dose, negatively affecting the patient compliance.
In an attempt, to increase the drug loading in SNEDDS preconcentrate. The concept of super­
saturated SNEDDS (super­SNEDDS) was developed.
9
==PAGE:18==
Supersaturated SNEDDS
Super­SNEDDS is relatively unexploited and unexplored method of increasing the drug loads
in SNEDDS (Schultz et al. 2018). Super­SNEDDS is characterized by containing solubilised
drug well beyond its Seq in the SNEDDS preconcentrate. In theory, the supersaturated state
of the drug could increase the driving force for the flux of the drug across the GI membrane,
hence achieving enhanced drug absorption (Park, Ha, and M. S. Kim 2020).
Thomas et al. developed the liquid super­SNEDDS using the heating and cooling method. The
liquid super­SNEDDS developed for halofantrine and fenofibrate demonstrated equal or im­
proved in vitro and in vivo performance compared to the conventional SNEDDS (Nicky Thomas
et al. 2013; N. Thomas, R. Holm, et al. 2012). A common approach to describe supersaturation
is through the apparent degree of supersaturation (aDS). The aDS can be calculated by dividing
the concentration of the drug in a supersaturated solution (csupersaturation) by the concentration
of the drug in a saturated solution (cequilibrium) in the same media (Bannow et al. 2020).
aDS = (csupersaturation)/(cequilibrium)
(2.1)
However, a major drawback of supersaturated systems is their thermodynamic instability and
the concern of drug recrystallization during storage or after oral administration in GI tract (Ier­
volino, Raghavan, and Hadgraft 2000). Hence, the physical stability of supersaturated SNEDDS
is extremely challenging, hindering its practical utility.
2.2.2
Limitations associated with LbDDS
Despite, the proven efficacy and potential of LbDDS for improving the biopharmaceutical per­
formance of PWSDs, there are only a few products that have reached the market. (Dening et
al. 2016). The oral LbDDS have been marketed for over 2 decades (Savla et al. 2017). How­
ever, the current global pharmaceutical marketplace commands just 2–4 % of the total LbDDS
products (Hauss 2007). Nonetheless, this disparity suggests that the oral LbDDS suffer from
various drawbacks hence limiting their widespread application.
The liquid formulations that are currently marketed are either filled into soft gelatin capsules
(Sandimmune Neoral®, Norvir®, Rocaltrol®, Convulex®) and hard gelatin capsules (Lipirex®,
Gengraf®) (Kalepu, Manthina, and Padavala 2013).
The capsule filling approach has been the simplest and the most common technique used to
encapsulate liquid or semi­solid LbDDS for oral delivery (Mandić et al. 2017). Over the years,
capsule filling has proven its suitability for low­dose high potent drugs; enabling relatively high
drug loading (up to 50% w/w) and the possibility for high lipid exposure (up to 99% w/w) (Jannin,
Musakhanian, and Marchaud 2008). Despite the above mentioned advantages, recent stud­
ies suggest shortcomings in the stability and safety of soft gelatin capsule based formulations
(Jannin, Musakhanian, and Marchaud 2008).
The chemical stability of liquid LbDDS has been a major concern due to the interaction be­
tween the capsule shell and the filling (Tan, Rao, and Prestidge 2013). The presence of the
alcoholic or other co­solvents in the SNEDDS possibly causes their migration into the capsule
10
==PAGE:19==
shells, resulting in the precipitation of the drug (Inugala et al. 2015). Nevertheless, the potential
risk of leaking through or leaching of components out of the capsule shell is another concern
associated with liquid LbDDS (Inugala et al. 2015). Moreover, the storage conditions of these
formulations needs to be monitored, to avoid drug precipitation at low temperatures (Jannin,
Musakhanian, and Marchaud 2008).
Apart from the practical limitations, there is a considerable drawback in terms of manufacturing
capacity. The manufacturing of the liquid dosage forms are often encountered with handling
difficulties and scale­up issues. Additionally, most pharmaceutical companies lack or have
limited number of in­house capability to manufacture soft gelatin capsules. Thus, most of the
development and manufacturing activities is contracted via external source, which may cause
some business interests to be derailed (Suhas G. Gumaste, Freire, and Serajuddin 2017).
The discrepancy highlights the need for better application of LbDDS in order to permit the
successful commercialization of smarter and more efficient oral dosage forms for delivery of
PWSDs. A potential way to generate more efficient and effective dosage forms would be the
production of free­flowing powders that may be transferred into solid compacts which then can
be further processed into a capsule or tablet. Solidification of LbDDS particular emphasis on
SNEDDS onto high surface area carriers has attracted substantial interest in recent years. This
approach combines the solubilization and dissolution enhancing properties of lipids with the
stabilizing effects of the solid carrier materials (Joyce et al. 2019). These hybrid dosage forms
have proved to be highly efficient in harnessing the potential of SNEDDS by optimizing the
biopharmaceutical performance of PWSDs as well as availing the benefits of liquid SNEDDS
(Dening et al. 2016).
2.3
Solidification of SNEDDS
2.3.1
Rationale for Solidification of SNEDDS
Solidification ensures a) precise dosing, b) ease of transfer and storage, c) prolonged shelf
life, and d) better patient compliance (Tan, Rao, and Prestidge 2013). Apart from the practical
advantages, a number of biopharmaceutical benefits can be imparted to the liquid SNEDDS
by solidification, including a) prolonged gastric residence, b) improve drug permeability, and c)
improved intestinal solubility (Joyce et al. 2019). (see Figure 2.4)
Enhancing Drug Solubilization
The thermodynamic instability of super­SNEDDS over storage has been a major concern. So­
lidification can prove as a viable means in mitigating this drawback. Loading liquid super­
SNEDDS onto a solid carrier can be a potential way of stabilizing the supersaturated state of
the drug and hence enhancing the drug solubilization.
Porous silica has been successfully utilized to stabilize the supersaturated state of the drug.
Schultz et al. (2018) successfully demonstrated that supersaturation greatly improves drug
loading, by developing supersaturated silica­lipid hybrids (SLH) using ibuprofen as the model
drug. The supersaturated lipid solution was prepared by loading ibuprofen within lipids at a
concentration 4­fold greater than its Seq, by heating the lipid solution at the temperature of up
11
==PAGE:20==
to 60°C. The study suggested that the supersaturated lipid was well confined within porous
silica matrices enabling spontaneous redispersion into submicron emulsion droplets and silica
particles within the GI media. According to the study, the super­SLH formulation has the poten­
tial to provide high drug loading, corresponding to greater drug absorption and bioavailability
(Schultz et al. 2018).
However, to fully validate the ability of these supersaturated systems long­term stability studies
are required. Investigation of the physical state of the drug over a long­term storage period is
important to ensure that the supersaturated state of the drug is retained in its solubilized state
during storage and no recrystallization of the drug molecule has occurred.
Controlling Drug Release
Drug release from emulsified liquid SNEDDS upon dispersion in aqueous media is typically fast
and diffusion and /or digestion dependent. Adsorption of the liquid SNEDDS onto the solid car­
rier can offer potential ways to deliver drug compounds through multiple release mechanisms.
Solidification ideally leads to slow release kinetics of the PWSDs to a) preventing drug crys­
tallization during GI transit, and b) maintaining the drug in solubilized form throughout the GI
transit (Joyce et al. 2019). Therefore, solid carriers present the ability to precisely fine­tune the
drug release kinetics depending on the material characteristics of the solid carrier (Tan, Rao,
and Prestidge 2013).
Agarwal et al. (2009) studied the in vitro drug release behavior of griseofulvin from SEDDS
and solid SEDDS. The study involved the use of magnesium aluminum silicate [5 and 80 µm],
calcium silicate [25 µm], and silicon dioxide [3.6, 20, and 300 µm] as carriers of different chem­
ical nature, specific surface area, and particle sizes. The study reported that the release of
the SEDDS from the carriers was dependent on two factors: specific surface area and particle
size. The liquid SEDDS had an average cumulative release of 86.5% in 15 min whereas the
micronized griseofulvin powder dissolved in 15 min to an extent of 8.6%. However, SEDDS,
adsorbed onto Neusilin® UFL2 (5µm) at 1.1 ratios had sustained release kinetics with 86%
release achieved in 30 min. On the contrary, Neusilin® US2 silicate with larger particle size
(80µm) at 1.1 ratios, the release was significantly reduced to less than 40% in 60 min.
The findings indicates the appropriate selection of a solid carrier based on it size and specific
surface area and can help modulate the release mechanism of the PWSDs.
12
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.4: Rationale for transforming liquid SNEDDS into solid dosage forms (Joyce et al. 2019).
2.3.2
Overview of Solidification Techniques
Several techniques already known to pharmaceutical science have been adapted for the solid­
ification of SNEDDS. The most commonly employed methods are physical adsorption, spray
drying, freeze­drying, melt granulation, and melt extrusion. Selection of the solidification tech­
nique is primarily dependent on the physicochemical properties of the drug (solubility, ther­
mal stability), composition and content of oily excipients and compatibility with other excipients
(Mandić et al. 2017). A good solidification technique can either preserve or even enhance the
drug release and biopharmaceutical performance of SNEDDS from their solidified forms.
The section below briefly reviews the solidification methodologies for transforming liquid SNEDDS
into their solid dosage forms focusing primarily on physical adsorption onto solid carriers since
the method has been employed for the present work of the thesis.
Physical adsorption onto solid carriers (lipids are loaded onto solid inert carriers obtaining a free­
flowing powder); spray drying (spraying the liquid semi­solid dispersion into hot air chamber
following immediate evaporation of organic solvent); freeze­drying (sublimation of the frozen
aqueous phase at reduced temperature and pressure); melt granulation and pelletization (one­
step process with high shear mixing in presence of a meltable binder transforming powder mix­
ture into granules or spheronized pellets); melt extrusion­spheronization (converting raw mate­
rials with plastic properties into a product of uniform shape and density by passage through a
13
==PAGE:22==
die under controlled temperature product flow and pressure conditions) (see Figure 2.5). For all
the methods mentioned above, a common principle is followed, a chemically inert solid carrier
is incorporated for optimizing or enhancing the physical stability of the liquid SNEDDS facilitat­
ing the production of solid dosage forms (Tan, Rao, and Prestidge 2013; Jannin, Musakhanian,
and Marchaud 2008).
Figure 2.5: Overview of solidification techniques commonly employed for transforming liquid SNEDDS
into effective solid dosage forms (Tan, Rao, and Prestidge 2013)
Physical Adsorption onto Solid Carriers
Physical adsorption onto solid carriers is recently the most intensively investigated technique
to obtain solid SNEDDS (Dixit and Nagarsenker 2008; Verma et al. 2014; Dash et al. 2015).
The adsorption process is simple and involves manually loading the liquid SNEDDS onto the
solid carrier via physical mixing (Yeom et al. 2016; Seo et al. 2015). A number of solid car­
riers have been investigated for the adsorption of liquid SNEDDS. Commonly used carriers
for solidification of liquid SNEDDS are: a) silicon dioxide; e.g. fumed silica under trade name
Aerosil® with different grades of specific surface, b) micronized amorphous silica under trade
name Sylysia® with different grades of pore volume, and c) magnesium aluminometasilicate
under trade name Neusilin® with different surface properties (alkaline or neutral) and particle
size. These carriers are recognized as safe based on (GRAS status) and have been effectively
being used as carriers to produce solid dosage forms (Mandić et al. 2017).
The benefit of the physical adsorption technique is the absence of organic solvent. A key
advantage is also good content uniformity of the produced powders or granules as well as the
possibility for high lipid exposure up to 80% (w/w) (Beg, Katare, et al. 2016). Moreover, the
process is simple, requires a small number of excipients for the final dosage form, minimal
investment in equipment, and facilitates the formation of a smarter and efficient dosage form.
However, a downside of the physical adsorption method is the reduced drug loading levels and
the reason for it is amount of drug loaded onto the carrier is limited by the solubility of the drug
14
==PAGE:23==
in the liquid SNEDDS. In which case, the method can be best suited in the case of drugs with
a low dose and high potency (Ito et al. 2005 ; D. W. Kim et al. 2012; Boltri et al. 1997).
2.3.3
Limitations with Current Solid Carriers
An appropriate selection of the solid carrier for solidification of SNEDDS should enable the high­
est possible lipid (and drug) loading efficiency, adequate flowability and mechanical strength
for tablet compression, as well as an efficient redispersibility after administration (Tan, Rao,
and Prestidge 2013; D. W. Kim et al. 2012). An important question to be addressed and thor­
oughly investigated is whether the transformation of the liquid SNEDDS into solid dosage form
would alter its in vitro performance and thereby affecting the biopharmaceutical performance
compared to the liquid SNEDDS (Dening et al. 2016).
In order for the loaded poorly soluble drug to be released from the solid carrier, it requires a) the
lipid component of the solid dosage form to either desorb from the solid carrier and partition into
the aqueous phase, or b) the solid carrier to be solubilized within the GI tract (Joyce et al. 2019).
However, over the past years, various solid carriers have been investigated with respect to its
role in preserving or enhancing the biopharmaceutical performance over the liquid SNEDDS.
Figure 2.6 represents the most commonly used categories of excipients and their associated
limitations.
Mesoporous silicates and/or nanosized materials have gained tremendous momentum in re­
cent years as solid carriers for the solidification of SNEDDS. However, these carriers have
shown varying drug release performance from the solidified SNEDDS. While several researchers
reported complete drug release (Sander and P. Holm 2009; Beg, Swain, et al. 2012; Beg,
Katare, et al. 2016; Deshmukh and Kulkarni 2014; Janga et al. 2013; Ito et al. 2005). Other in­
vestigators reported incomplete drug release suggesting the liquid formulation can be trapped
within the silicate pores (Sander and P. Holm 2009; Agarwal et al. 2009; Kang et al. 2012;
Milović et al. 2012).
Ito et al. (2005) developed solid SMEDDS for lansoprazole (LPZ) utilizing various silicates:
porous silicon dioxide (Sylysia® 550, 320) and magnesium aluminometasilicate (Neusilin® S2,
NS2N, US2,). Solid SMEDDS containing Sylysia® 550 as the carrier had a release rate of
100% within 1 hour. While the release of LPZ from Sylysia® 320, Neusilin® S2, and Neusilin®
NS2, systems were slow that is the time required for 50% drug release (T 50%) was more than
1 hour (Ito et al. 2005).
Speybroeck et al. (2012) analyzed two formulations (based on medium­chain and long­chain
lipids) solidified by adsorption onto Neusilin® US2. The study highlighted the challenges asso­
ciated with limited drug release in vivo and thereby reduce oral bioavailability. (Van Speybroeck
et al. 2012).
Gumaste et al. (2013) previously reported that incomplete drug release from the solid dosage
forms could be related to the formation of the gels by the lipid­surfactants mixtures once in
contact with the water. The study involved the investigation of different liquid SEDDS adsorbed
onto Neusilin® US2, a porous silicate. It was previously postulated that SEDDS tend to form a
gel when in contact with the aqueous medium. Gumaste et al. showed that gel formation might
15
==PAGE:24==
clog the pores of Neusilin® US2, hindering the release of the liquid SEDDS. On the contrary,
complete drug release was observed from the formulations that do not form gels (Suhas G.
Gumaste, Dalrymple, and Serajuddin 2013).
However, it was soon also realized that the drug release could decrease with time as a function
of long­term storage of the formulations. This was further validated by two sets of studies
discussed below.
Williams et al. (2014) studied the effect of storage on drug release for the solidified SEDDS.
The study investigated the extent to which the drug desorption of SEDDS from Neusilin® US2
occurs. Limited desorption of the liquid SEDDS from Neusilin® US2 particles was a feature
of all the drugs and liquid SEDDS tested. The study suggested that the labile liquid SEDDS
fraction migrates to the carrier free region during the storage, possibly entrapping the drug deep
within the pore network of Neusilin® US2, therefore, reducing the desorption of the drug from
the carrier (Williams et al. 2014).
To further investigate the above issue, Gumaste et al. (2017) hypothesized a potential strategy
of blocking the pores of Neusilin® US2 by adsorbing PVP K­90 before adsorbing liquid SEDDS.
Possibly assuming that the liquid SEDDS will not penetrate deep within the pores since they
are blocked by PVP K­90 and therefore, expecting a complete drug release over long­term
storage. On day one, complete drug release (> 80%) was observed for all the formulations;
however, the extent of drug release decreased with time. After 60 days of storage (40°C/60%
RH), less than 10% of the drug was released from Neusilin® US2. It is only when the Neusilin®
US2 was precoated with PVP K­90 complete drug release (> 80%) was observed even after 6
months of storage (Suhas G. Gumaste, Freire, and Serajuddin 2017).
Various clay­based materials including montmorillonite (MMT) and laponite materials have re­
ceived attention in recent years as solid carriers for solidifying SNEDDS (Dening et al. 2016).
Dening et al. (2017) developed montmorillonite lipid hybrid (MLH) particles and investigated
their performance during biorelevant in vitro lipolysis at pH 7.5. In vitro lipolysis suggested
about 55­90% of all the lipid species were retained within MLH particles. The study laid proof
that clay­based hybrid materials confined lipid within its pores and hence lipid and drug des­
orption was incomplete (Dening et al. 2017).
In the summary, it could be said that the current set of carriers might be an effective vehicle
for SNEDDS. However, its use is accompanied by the risk of incomplete drug release from the
carrier, irrespective of the model drug used. Hence, careful considerations and optimization
are required when selecting the appropriate solid carrier for particular liquid SNEDDS in order
to overcome limitations associated with lipid and drug retention.
Due to the aforementioned limitations, the need to investigate new carries to solidify the liquid
SNEDDS is highly needed. Functionalized calcium carbonate (FCC) was recently introduced
as a viable pharmaceutical excipient for the delivery of PWSDs (Preisig, Haid, et al. 2014).
16
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.6: Overview of the various solid carrier excipients employed for solidification of SNEDDS, with
corresponding limitations. (Joyce et al. 2019)
2.4
Functionalized Calcium Carbonate (FCC)
FCC is a microparticle material ranging from 5­15 µm in size (Stirnimann, Atria, et al. 2014).
Ridgway et al. modified a natural calcium carbonate by etching the calcium carbonate particles
and reprecipitating the modified surface structure with CO2 supplied in situ or externally in
the form of carbonic acid (Levy et al. 2015). FCC is a co­precipitate obtained from calcium
carbonate and calcium phosphate mixed at different ratios ranging from 13­87 % (w/w), calcium
phosphate content (Stirnimann, Atria, et al. 2014). This leads to the formation of microporous
particles with a specific lamellar surface area of 40–80 m2/g (Stirnimann, Atria, et al. 2014) and
a porosity of approximately 60% (v/v) (Stirnimann, Di Maiuta, et al. 2013). This modified FCC
is able to absorb water at a faster rate and absorbs 10 times more fluid than the conventional
calcium carbonate (Stirnimann, Di Maiuta, et al. 2013). Hence, the key factor that outstands
FCC from other available pharmaceutical excipients is the lamellar structure of particles, which
forms a porous meshwork (intraparticle porosity), which results in a high specific surface area
available for particle bonding and rapid liquid uptake.
The striking physical attributes of FCC has led to exploring FCC in the field of excipient research
leading to the development of several innovative drug delivery systems. To mention, FCC has
been investigated as orally disintegrating or floating tablets (Stirnimann, Di Maiuta, et al. 2013
; Wagner­Hattler et al. 2017 ; Eberle et al. 2014), mucoadhesive delivery systems for colon
targeting (Preisig, Roger Roth, et al. 2016), delivery of proteins (R. Roth et al. 2018), stabilizing
17
==PAGE:26==
amorphous systems (Liu et al. 2020), and loading of various small molecule drugs (Preisig,
Haid, et al. 2014).
Whilst FCC has not been investigated as a pharmaceutical excipient for SNEDDS. FCC could
prove as a highly useful solid carrier for solidifying SNEDDS given the excellent biocompatibility
and biodegradability of calcium carbonate (Dening et al. 2016). Hence, loading of FCC with
liquid SNEDDS might offer a potential approach of solidifying SNEDDS and in turn, lead to over­
coming the limitations associated with the present solid carriers used for solidifying SNEDDS.
2.5
Model Drug
CRV a BCS Class II drug was chosen as the model drug due to its low aqueous solubility
and high lipophilicity. The physicochemical properties and chemical structure of the model
drug used in this work is presented in Table 2.2 and Figure 2.7 respectively. CRV is a non­
selective β­adrenergic antagonist used in the treatment of hypertension and ischemic heart
diseases (Yue et al. 1992). Studies suggest that the absolute bioavailability of CRV is 20­
25%, pre­systemic elimination by the first­pass metabolism being the major reason for this low
bioavailability (Dunn, Lea, and Wagstaff 1997).
Table 2.2: Physiochemical properties of the model drug (Beattie, Phadke, and Novakovic 2013)
Figure 2.7: Chemical structure of Carvedilol (CRV) (Hamed et al. 2016)
18
==PAGE:27==
2.6
Analytical Techniques in Solid State Characterization
The section provides a brief overview of the analytical techniques employed in the course of
the thesis for solid state analysis of the solidified SNEDDS.
2.6.1
Thermal Analysis
Thermal analysis requires a very small amount of sample (typically ranging in few milligrams)
to acquire data. A drawback with thermal techniques is the destructive nature as compared to
the nondestructive nature of XRPD. (Munson 2009).
a) Differential Scanning Calorimetery (DSC)
DSC is one of the most commonly employed analytical techniques used for solid state analysis.
The difference in the heat flow between the sample and the reference pan is measured to detect
thermal events in the analyzed samples. The heat capacity of the sample remains relatively
constant throughout the analysis, unless the sample undergoes a form change (Munson 2009).
In this case, an exothermic event is associated with recrystallization while endothermic events
are associated with melting of samples (Qi 2016). The presence of a melting endotherm during
DSC analysis of previously dissolved drugs is an indication for crystallization in the initially
fully solubilized samples during heating. In SNEDDS, the drug is present in a solubilized form,
when loaded onto carriers, the drug is suspected to be present in a dissolved form within the
solidified SNEDDS and thus not show a melting endotherm. Therefore, the absence of a melting
endotherm peak can be an indication of the presence of the drug in a dissolved state in the
solidified SNEDDS. Hence, DSC can serve as a platform for assessing the physical stability
of solidified SNEDDS, particularly when the liquid supersaturated state of the drug is loaded
onto suitable carriers. Moreover, the presence of the Tg could also be an indication of the
conversion of the crystalline form of the drug to its amorphous form in the solidified SNEDDS
(Munson 2009).
b) Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA)
TGA is primarily used to monitor loss of solvent or decomposition reactions. A sample in an
open pan is heated at a specific rate, and the weight gained or lost by the sample is monitored.
TGA is used for thermal stability analysis of pharmaceutical materials (Munson 2009; Qi 2016).
2.6.2
Diffraction Methods
a) X­ray Powder Diffraction (XRPD)
XRPD is a front­line technique for the analysis of polymorphism in crystalline solids. The gen­
eral principle behind XRPD is based on Bragg’s equation: (see equation 2.2) where λ cor­
responds to the wavelength of the X­rays, d corresponds to the spacing between reflection
planes, and θ is the angle between the incoming X­ray and the reflection plane (Munson 2009).
It describes the scattering of a monochromatic X­ray beam by different planes of the crystalline
lattice. The presence of crystalline materials causes constructive interference of the diffracted
X­ray beam leading to a characteristic diffractogram (Hitchcock 1990). Hence, XRPD can dif­
ferentiate amorphous materials from crystalline and in most cases exhibit differences between
different crystalline forms based on peak positions and intensities. XRPD is commonly also
19
==PAGE:28==
used to perform physical stability studies for new drug entities over storage to anticipate any
form of changes that may occur (Qi 2016).
nλ = 2dsinθ
(2.2)
2.6.3
Microscopic Methods
Applications of microscopy include differentiating between crystalline and amorphous form,
monitoring of form changes with temperature, and particle size and morphology determination
(Munson 2009)
PLM can help to rapidly distinguish the crystalline and amorphous forms of the materials. The
presence of crystalline solids causes the display of birefringence which interacts with the po­
larized light and creates contrast with the background while amorphous solid usually do not
display birefringence (Munson 2009).
Scanning electron microscope (SEM) uses electrons as a source of illumination which can
provide images with higher magnification and resolutions. (Roussel et al. 2009).
20
==PAGE:29==
3
Materials and Methods
3.1
Materials
Functionalized calcium carbonate (FCC) (Omyapharm® 500­OG) were obtained from Omya
International AG (Oftringen, Switzerland). Carvedilol (CRV) were purchased from Cipla Ltd.
(Mumbai, India). Capmul MCM C8 EP/NF (medium chain (MC) mixed glycerides) and Captex
300 EP/NF (MC triglycerides) from Abitec (Columbus, OH, USA) were kindly provided by Bar­
entz (Odense, Denmark). Kolliphor RH40 (polyoxyl 40 hydrogenated castor oil) were donated
by BASF (Ludwigshafen, Germany). Transcutol were kindly donated by Gattefossé (Saint­
Priest France). Bovine bile extract (B­3883), porcine pancreatic lipase extract (P­1625), maleic
acid and tris base were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO, USA). Sodium hydrox­
ide, calcium chloride dihydrate and sodium chloride were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt,
Germany). Potassium phosphate monobasic and potassium chloride were purchased from
(Sigma­Aldrich, Germany). Hydrochloric acid 37% and acetonitrile (HPLC grade) were pur­
chased from VWR Chemicals (Herlev, Denmark). High purity Milli­Q water was used through­
out the study.
21
==PAGE:30==
3.2
Methods
3.2.1
Preparation of Formulations
The composition of SNEDDS utilized in this work were previously developed by a former col­
league including the determination of the Seq of CRV in the SNEDDS composition.
Preparation of Liquid SNEDDS (SNEDDS liquid)
The MC mixed glycerides (Capmul MCM C8) and the surfactant (Kolliphor RH40) were freshly
molten at approximately 50°C before they were blended in dust­free, sealed glass vials on a
vortex mixer with the MC triglycerides (Captex 300 EP/NF). After equilibration to room temper­
ature, the co­solvent (Transcutol) was added to the mixture followed by a second mixing step
forming an isotropic mixture consisting of 51% (w/w) lipid (Capmul MCM C8 – 18% (w/w)) and
(Captex 300 EP/NF – 33% (w/w)), 43% (w/w) surfactant (Kolliphor RH40) and 6% (w/w) co­
solvent (Transcutol). The generated Blank­SNEDDS liquid were subsequently left for overnight
stirring at 37°C and further stored at 25°C.
The Seq of CRV in the Blank­SNEDDS liquid were defined as the value attained when consec­
utive solubility values differed by ≤5%. The Blank­SNEDDS liquid were loaded with 47 mg/g of
CRV, corresponding to 80% and 200% of the Seq of CRV in the Blank­SNEDDS liquid.
The CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid including; 80%­SNEDDS liquid and 200%­SNEDDS liquid corre­
sponding to 80% and 200% of the drugs Seq, respectively were produced using a heating and
cooling cycle. Based on the drug load, required amount of CRV and Blank­SNEDDS liquid were
accurately weighed into dust­free glass vials containing a magnetic stirring bar. The mixtures
were vortexed at room temperature for 30 seconds and subsequently ultrasonicated for 15 min
at room temperature in a Branson 5510 ultrasonic bath (Branson Ultrasonics, Danbury, CT,
USA). To facilitate complete dissolution of the drug, the obtained suspensions were placed in
a silicon oil bath (60°C) and stirred for 1 h (Arex Digital PRO, Heating Magnetic stirrer, VELP®
Scientifica). After the end of the heating cycle, the prepared formulations were allowed to slowly
equilibrate to 27°C inside the oil bath resulting in isotropic CRV­loaded 80%­SNEDDS liquid and
200%­SNEDDS liquid formulations. The magnetic stirring bar was removed and the vials were
further stored at 25°C. The complete dissolution of the CRV after the heating and cooling cycle
in all CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid was assessed using polarized light microscopy (PLM) (see
below).
Fabrication of CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid onto FCC (SNEDDS FCC)
Solidification of CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid via Physical Mixing
In this work, solidification of SNEDDS liquid was achieved via physical adsorption onto FCC, by
simple mixing using a mortar and a pestle. At first, the adsorption capacity was studied through
addition and mixing of FCC and SNEDDS liquid in a ratio of 1:1 (expressed as weight ratio of
FCC : SNEDDS liquid). The amount of FCC was gradually increased until a free­flowing powder
were obtained.
The prepared SNEDDS liquid (80%­SNEDDS liquid and 200%­SNEDDS liquid) corresponding to
80% and 200% of the drug’s Seq, respectively were loaded onto FCC and mixed together using
22
==PAGE:31==
a mortar and a pestle. The following ratios of FCC:SNEDDS liquid were evaluated: 2.5:1, 3.0:1,
3.5:1 (w/w). Briefly, 100 mg of SNEDDS liquid (corresponding to 3.76 mg of CRV for 80%­
SNEDDS liquid and 9.4 mg of CRV for 200%­SNEDDS liquid) were loaded onto 250 mg, 300
mg, and 350 mg of FCC. The resulting mixture were gently mixed in a mortar for 3 min to
obtain a free­flowing powder. The efficiency of the loading were evaluated based on visual
inspection of the powder’s appearance and flowability. Six SNEDDS FCC formulations were
produced with a final weight of 350 mg, 400 mg, and 450 mg each corresponding to 3.76
mg of CRV for 80%­SNEDDS liquid and 9.4 mg of CRV for 200%­SNEDDS liquid. Table 3.1
represents the abbreviations of six SNEDDS FCC formulations produced indicating the drug load
and its corresponding ratio for each formulation system. The six SNEDDS FCC formulations are
henceforth referred as per the abbreviations represented in Table 3.1 throughout the thesis.
The use of word ’Blank’ refers to drug­free formulations throughout the thesis. Blank­SNEDDS
liquid refers to drug­free SNEDDS liquid and Blank­SNEDDS FCC refers to Blank­SNEDDS liquid
loaded onto the FCC.
Table 3.1: Abbreviations of the developed SNEDDS FCC formulations indicating the drug load and the
corresponding ratio for each formulation system
3.2.2
Solidification Efficiency
Drug load quantification
The uniformity of the drug distribution in the SNEDDS FCC formulations was validated by quanti­
fying the CRV load using HPLC (see below). For, 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations
(20mg) was placed in a 5 mL volumetric flask and for 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formu­
lations (20mg) were placed in a 10 mL volumetric flask. They were respectively suspended in
4 mL and 9 mL of phosphate buffer (0.02M, pH 2) and acetonitrile (55:45%) v/v)) mixtures, and
ultrasonicated for 20 min in a Branson 5510 ultrasonic bath (Branson Ultrasonics, Danbury, CT,
USA). After sonication, phosphate buffer (0.02M, pH 2) and acetonitrile (55:45%) v/v)) mixtures
were added to a final volume of 5 mL and 10 mL. FCC suspensions were centrifuged for 15
min at 13,300 rpm (MicroCL 17 Centrifuge, Thermo Scientific). The obtained supernatant were
analyzed directly and quantified for CRV drug load using HPLC (see below). CRV concentra­
tion was obtained from the calibration curve of the drug in phosphate buffer (0.02M, pH 2) and
acetonitrile (55:45%) v/v)) mixtures, and drug contents were represented as measured mass
of CRV (mg) obtained from HPLC compared to the theoretical mass of CRV (mg). Samples for
each drug load corresponding to the ratio were prepared in triplicates, and each sample was
measured in triplicates; thus, the total number of measurements was n=9.
23
==PAGE:32==
3.2.3
Self­emulsification, Droplet size and Polydispersibility Index (PDI)
analysis
Assessment of Self­emulsification
Visual observations were made of the resulting dispersion upon the dilution of the SNEDDS
liquid ­ (Blank­SNEDDS liquid, 80%­SNEDDS liquid, and 200%­SNEDDS liquid) and the SNEDDS
FCC formulations ­ (Blank­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5, 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5, and
200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5) into the Milli­Q water and HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6).
The resulting dispersion were then evaluated for the rate at which the formulation forms the
emulsion and the appearance of the emulsion; categorized as translucent, slightly bluish, and
turbid.
Droplet Size and PDI measurements
The droplet size after dispersion of all the formulations mentioned above were measured by
dynamic light scattering (DLS). A USP type II apparatus (Erweka DT600 dissolution tester,
Erweka GmbH, Heusenstamm, Germany) were used to promote emulsification in Milli­Q water
and HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6).
Media: Milli Q water
SNEDDS FCC
Briefly, 100 mg of SNEDDS FCC were dispersed in 100 mL of the preheated Milli­Q water at
37 °C. The emulsions were stirred at 100 rpm for 30 min at 37°C. After 30 min, 1 mL aliquots
were withdrawn from the vessel and the turbid dispersion were centrifuged at 13,300 rpm for 15
min. After centrifuging, the particle size of the resulting supernatent were immediately analyzed
without further dilution.
SNEDDS liquid
Breifly, 100 mg of SNEDDS liquid were dispersed in 100 mL of the preheated Milli­Q water at
37°C. The emulsions were stirred at 100 rpm for 30 min at 37°C. After 30 min, the particle size
of the resulting dispersion were immediately analyzed without further dilution.
Media: HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6)
SNEDDS FCC and SNEDDS liquid
SNEDDS FCC and SNEDDS liquid corresponding to 100 mg were dispersed in 100 mL of the
preheated HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6) at 37°C. The emulsions were stirred at 100 rpm for
30 min at 37°C. After 30 min, the particle size of the resulting dispersion were immediately
analyzed without further dilution.
For all the above experiments, the particle size were analyzed using a Zetasizer Nano (Malvern,
Worcestershire, UK) operated at 37°C. The measured droplet size and polydispersibility of three
independent measurements per formulation is reported as mean z­average value (nm) and PDI,
respectively.
24
==PAGE:33==
3.2.4
Solid State Characterization
Morphological Characterization
To study the surface morphology of pure CRV, pure FCC and SNEDDS FCC formulations scan­
ning electron microscopy (SEM) images were acquired using a Hitachi TM3030 tabletop mi­
croscope (Hitachi High­Technologies Europe GmbH, Krefeld, Germany) operated at an ac­
celerating voltage of 15 kV. Samples were sputter­coated with gold (Cressington 108 auto,
Cressington Scientific Instruments, Watford, UK) prior to SEM analysis.
X­ray Powder Diffraction (XRPD)
The powder crystallinity of pure CRV, pure FCC, physical mixtures and SNEDDS FCC formu­
lations were assessed by XRPD. XRPD measurements were performed using a PANalytical
X’Pert PRO X­ray diffractometer (PANalytical, The Netherlands) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.542
Å, current 40 mA, voltage 45 kV), operated in reflection mode. The physical mixtures for esti­
mating the limit of detection of CRV were prepared by mixing 100 mg of Blank­SNEDDS liquid,
350 mg FCC and the calculated amount of CRV were spiked from top. The samples were placed
on aluminum sample holders and scanned from 5 to 35° (2θ) using a scan speed 0.067335°
(s−1) and step size of 0.0262606°(2θ) at a scanning rate of 3.6° (2θ/min). Table 3.2 represents
the scan properties of the modified XRPD scans developed to detect the crystalline patterns of
CRV in the physical mixtures.
Table 3.2: Scan properties of the modified XRPD scans
Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC)
The thermal characteristics of pure CRV, pure FCC, physical blends, physical mixtures for
estimating the limit of detection of CRV and SNEDDS FCC formulations were analyzed using
differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) using a Discovery DSC (TA Instruments, New Castle,
DE, USA). The physical mixtures for estimating the limit of detection of CRV were prepared
by mixing 100 mg of Blank­SNEDDS liquid, 350 mg FCC and the calculated amount of CRV
were spiked from top. A sample mass of 3­5 mg were transferred to standard aluminum pans
and sealed with pierced hermetic lids. All measurements were carried out using a heating rate
of 10°C/min from a starting temperature of 10°C kept on isothermal for 2 min to an end tem­
perature of 130°C under a nitrogen gas flow of 50 mL/min. The obtained thermograms were
analyzed with TRIOS software (TA Instruments, New Castle, DE, USA).
25
==PAGE:34==
3.2.5
In Vitro Dispersion of SNEDDS FCC and SNEDDS liquid
Media:HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6)
Dispersion profiles for SNEDDS FCC formulations and dissolution profile of crystalline CRV were
obtained using a standard USP type II apparatus consisting of a set of mini glass vessels with
rotating mini paddles (Erweka DT600 dissolution tester, Erweka GmbH, Heusenstamm, Ger­
many) under sink conditions. The paddle rotation speed were 100 rpm maintained at 37 ±
0.5°C in 100 mL dissolution medium. A 3 mL volume of the aliquots were withdrawn at prede­
termined time points (1, 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40 and 60 min) and the volume were replaced by
fresh media. The samples were filtered through a filter membrane (0.45 µm, Phenex RC). The
first millilitre of the filtrate were discarded and the rest of the filtrate were diluted appropriately in
phosphate buffer (0.02M, pH 2) and acetonitrile (55:45%) v/v)) mixtures and were subsequently
analysed for CRV concentration by HPLC (see below).
Media: Tap water (pH 7.5)
Dispersion profiles for SNEDDS FCC and SNEDDS liquid and dissolution profiles for crystalline
CRV were obtained using a standard USP type II apparatus consisting of a set of mini glass
vessels with rotating mini paddles (Erweka DT600 dissolution tester, Erweka GmbH, Heusen­
stamm, Germany) under sink conditions. The paddle rotation speed were 100 rpm maintained
at 37 ± 0.5°C in 100 mL dissolution media. A 3 mL volume of the aliquots were withdrawn at
predetermined time points (1, 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40 and 60 min) and the volume were replaced
by fresh medium. The first millilitre of the filtrate were discarded and the rest of the filtrate were
centrifuged at 13,300 rpm for 1 min. The obtained supernatent were diluted appropriately in
phosphate buffer (0.02M, pH 2) and acetonitrile (55:45%) v/v)) mixtures and were subsequently
analysed for CRV concentration by HPLC (see below).
The SNEDDS liquid formulations ­ (80%­SNEDDS liquid ­ 100 mg and 200%­SNEDDS liquid ­
40 mg) amount equivalent to 3.76 mg of CRV were added to the vessel. Physical mixtures of
crystalline CRV and FCC dosed at 3.76 mg CRV were prepared and added to the vessel. Table
3.3 and Table 3.4 represents the SNEDDS FCC formulations and the corresponding weight of
the formulation added to the vessel, indicating the amount of FCC present in each formulation
system, amount of the SNEDDS liquid present in each formulation system and the amount of
CRV present in the respective SNEDDS liquid indicating the amount of CRV present in the vessel.
All the measurement were carried out in triplicates. The amount of cumulative drug released
into the media were calculated and accordingly, the percentage of drug released were calcu­
lated and plotted against time points.
Drug Release Studies from SNEDDS FCC Over Storage
Drug release studies from SNEDDS FCC formulations ­ (80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5) and
(200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5) were performed in tap water (pH 7.5) over storage period
of 8 weeks. The samples were stored in a desiccator under dry conditions over silica gel at
25°C and investigated for percent CRV drug release as a function of time over storage. The
drug release studies were performed using the method mentioned above for tap water (pH 7.5).
The drug release studies for SNEDDS FCC were performed for freshly made samples (Week
0), after 3 weeks, 6 weeks and 8 weeks of storage. SNEDDS FCC formulations used for over
26
==PAGE:35==
storage drug release assessment were produced in triplicates.
Table 3.3: 80%­SNEDDS FCC formulation system indicating the weight of formulation added to the
vessel and further specifications of the amount of FCC, amount of SNEDDS liquid and the amount of
CRV present in each formulation system.
Table 3.4: 200%­SNEDDS FCC formulation system indicating the weight of formulation added to the
vessel and further specifications of the amount of FCC, amount of SNEDDS liquid and the amount of
CRV present in each formulation system.
27
==PAGE:36==
3.2.6
Dynamic In Vitro Lipolysis
Dynamic in vitro lipolysis were carried out as described by (Zangenberg et al. 2001) with minor
modifications. SNEDDS FCC formulations ­ (80%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC and 200%­3.0­SNEDDS
FCC) and SNEDDS liquid formulations ­ (25 mg ­ 80%­SNEDDS liquid and 10 mg ­ 200%­SNEDDS
liquid) were added to a temperature­controlled glass vessel (37°C) resulting in the same amount
of CRV during every lipolysis run. Table 3.5 indicates the amount of samples added to the
vessel for SNEDDS FCC formulations. A dispersion step was employed to facilitate complete
dispersion of the formulations before the start of digestion. For, SNEDDS FCC formulation, HCl
solution (0.1M) was added during the dispersion step to maintain the pH at 6.5. At time 0 min, 25
mL of FaSSIF (bile salt 2.95 mM, phospholipids 0.26 mM, sodium chloride 50 mM, tris­maleate
buffer 2 mM pH 6.5) were added to the lipolysis vessel equipped with an electrical stirrer. After
15 min of dispersion, 5 mL of freshly prepared pancreatic extract (600 USP/mL) was added to
the intestinal media to initiate lipid digestion. The rate of lipid digestion was controlled by the
continuous addition of calcium (0.5 M) at a rate of 0.01 mL/min. A pH­stat apparatus (Metrohm
Titrino 744, Tiamo Version 1.3, Herisau, Switzerland) was used to maintain a pH of 6.5 during
the total run time of the experiment, dosing 0.4M NaOH solution to compensate for the drop in
pH caused by the release of FFAs. The digestion profiles were represented as amount of FFAs
(µmol) generated over a period of 45 min of digestion. All the measurement were carried out
in triplicates.
Table 3.5: Weight of formulation added to the vessel for SNEDDS FCC formulations for lipolysis study and
further specifications of the amount of FCC, amount of SNEDDS liquid and the amount of CRV present
in each formulation system.
28
==PAGE:37==
3.2.7
Stability of SNEDDS liquid Formulations
The CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid were stored in sealed glass vials at 25°C to assess their phys­
ical stability. The vials were analyzed in regular intervals for possible precipitation of the dis­
solved drug by both visual observation and PLM (see below). To ensure the chemical stability
of the CRV after the employed heating cycle the content of CRV was quantified using HPLC
(see below) directly after the equilibration to 25°C. Formulations used for the physical stability
assessment were produced in triplicates.
3.2.8
Physical Stability of SNEDDS FCC Formulations over Storage
Physical stability of SNEDDS FCC ­ (80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5;3.0;3.5) and (200%­SNEDDS FCC
­ 2.5;3.0;3.5) samples were determined using Discovery DSC (see above). The samples were
stored in a desiccator under dry conditions over silica gel at 25°C and investigated for the CRV
recrystallization over a period of 10 weeks. Samples were regularly analyzed by Discovery
DSC (weekly for the first 4 weeks, and every 2 weeks thereafter) until recrystallization of CRV
was detected from the DSC thermograms. Week 0 refers to DSC thermograms recorded for
freshly prepared samples. SNEDDS FCC formulations used for the physical stability assessment
were produced in triplicates. The DSC thermograms shown for the weekly recorded samples
represent the results for one of the triplicate.
3.2.9
HPLC Analysis
The quantification of CRV in samples obtained from solidification efficiency, chemical sta­
bility and dispersion studies were performed using an Ultimate 3000 Ultraviolet (UV) detec­
tor, UltiMate 3000 autosampler, UltiMate 3000 pump Thermo Scientific (Waltham, MA, USA)
equipped with an ACE Excel 5 C18­AR column (Advanced Chromatography Technologies Ltd.,
Aberdeen, Scotland). The mobile phase consisted of phosphate buffer (0.02M, pH 2) and ace­
tonitrile (55:45%) v/v)). The injection volume was 20 µL at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min. The eluted
CRV was detected at a wavelength of 240 nm.
3.2.10
Polarized Light Microscopy
CRV­loaded liquid were analyzed for undissolved crystalline CRV after heating and cooling cycle
and for crystalline precipitate upon storage using a Leica DM LM microscope equipped with
cross polarizers (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany). Images were acquired using a Media
Cybernetics Evolution MP digital camera and the Image­Pro Insight software version 8.0 (Media
Cybernetics).
3.2.11
Statistical Analysis
Statistical analyses were carried out using GraphPad Prism (Version 9.1.2, GraphPad Soft­
ware, San Diego, CA, USA). Unpaired Student’s t tests were applied to determine statistically
significant differences (p = 0.05) between two groups, whereas analyses of variance (ANOVA)
following Tukey’s post­test were utilised for differences between more than two groups (p =
0.05).
29
==PAGE:38==
4
Results and Discussion
The CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid were prepared by using the heating and cooling cycle. The
amount of drug in the 200%­SNEDDS liquid is greater compared to 80%­SNEDDS liquid. To
address the concern of chemical degradation of CRV after the heating cycle, the CRV content
in 200%­SNEDDS liquid was determined. After the heating cycle, an average of 99.7 ± 3.3% of
the claimed CRV amount was found in 200%­SNEDDS liquid indicating complete stability of the
CRV after the employed heating and cooling cycle.
4.1
Development of SNEDDS FCC Formulations
The method employed for solidification of the SNEDDS liquid was physical adsorption via simple
mixing in a mortar and a pestle. Initially, SNEDDS liquid were loaded onto FCC in a ratio 1:1
(w/w). The aim was to generate a free­flowing powder without any large lumps or paste­like
appearance. Based on visual inspection, the ratio 2.5:1, 3.0:1, 3.5:1 (w/w) (FCC:SNEDDS
liquid) generated free­flowing powders and were selected for further evaluation. The visual ap­
pearance of the SNEDDS FCC powders are reported in the Appendix A.1. Based on visual
appearance of the SNEDDS FCC formulations, for both the drug loads and its corresponding
ratio the developed powders were free­flowing and there were no signs of large lumps or paste­
like appearance. Hence, 100 mg of SNEDDS liquid were loaded onto 250 mg, 300 mg and 350
mg of FCC. The obtained mixture were gently mixed for 3 min in a mortar and a pestle.
4.2
Solidification Efficiency
To validate the above solidification method, it was important to ensure that the drug is homo­
geneously distributed throughout the powder. Accordingly, CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid were
loaded onto FCC. The developed SNEDDS FCC formulations had final weight of 350 mg , 400
mg and 450 mg each containing 100 mg of SNEDDS liquid which corresponded to 3.76 mg of
CRV for 80%­SNEDDS liquid and 9.4 mg of CRV for 200%­SNEDDS liquid, respectively. The
solidification method was validated by quantifying the theoretical amount of CRV (mg) (assum­
ing a homogeneous distribution) to the measured amount of CRV (mg) obtained after HPLC
analysis.
Figure 4.1 and 4.2 represents the CRV quantification for 80%­SNEDDS FCC and 200%­SNEDDS
FCC. As seen from the figure, for both the drug loads and its corresponding ratios (2.5:1, 3.0:1,
and 3.5:1) (w/w) the theoretical amount of CRV (mg) corresponded to the measured amount
of CRV (mg). Statistically, it was further justified that there was no significant difference in the
theoretical amount of CRV (mg) and the measured amount of CRV (mg) in the three ratios (p
< 0.05).
Hence, uniform distribution of CRV was obtained in the developed SNEDDS FCC formulations
for both the drug loads and its corresponding ratio. The findings from this experiment validated
the solidification method utilized for developing the SNEDDS FCC formulations.
30
==PAGE:39==
80%-2.5-SNEDDS FCC
80%-3.0-SNEDDS FCC
80%-3.5-SNEDDS FCC
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Mass of CRV (mg)
Theoretical mass of CRV (mg)
Measured mass of CRV (mg)
Figure 4.1: Quantification of the amount of CRV (mg) in the 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formula­
tions to ensure homogeneity of CRV validating the solidification method. Theoretical mass of CRV (mg)
(white column) and measured mass of CRV (mg) determined by HPLC quantification (grey column) are
shown. Results are represented as mean ± SD (n=9).
200%-2.5-SNEDDS FCC
200%-3.0-SNEDDS FCC
200%-3.5-SNEDDS FCC
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Mass of CRV (mg)
Theoretical mass of CRV (mg)
Measured mass of CRV (mg)
Figure 4.2: Quantification of the amount of CRV in the 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations to
ensure homogeneity of CRV validating the solidification method. Theoretical mass of CRV (mg) (white
column) and measured mass of CRV (mg) determined by HPLC quantification (grey column) are shown.
Results are represented as mean ± SD (n=9).
31
==PAGE:40==
Table 4.1 indicates the developed SNEDDS FCC formulation and % (w/w) amount of CRV
present in the each SNEDDS FCC formulation system.
Table 4.1: Amount of CRV (% w/w) present in each SNEDDS FCC formulation system
4.3
Self­emulsification, Droplet size ad PDI measurements
The self­emulsification could be estimated by the rate at which the emulsion is formed and
the droplet size distribution. The droplet size of SNEDDS has a great influence on the drug
absorption (Alghananim et al. 2020).
In this study, the aim was to evaluate self­emulsification properties of the SNEDDS FCC and an­
alyze whether solidification retains/enhances/decreases the self­emulsification properties and
if the incorporation of FCC causes a change in the droplet size of the emulsion when compared
to its original SNEDDS liquid.
The media initially selected to evaluate the self­emulsification characteristics was Milli­Q­water.
Accordingly, 100 mg of SNEDDS liquid and SNEDDS FCC formulations (Blank SNEDDS, 80%
drug load SNEDDS, and 200% drug load SNEDDS) were dispersed in 100 mL of Milli­Q­water.
The Blank­SNEDDS liquid and 80%­SNEDDS liquid emulsified completely within 1 min having
a translucent appearance. The 200%­SNEDDS liquid emulsified completely in 1 min but had a
slight bluish appearance. The 200%­SNEDDS liquid dispersion had a slightly bluish appearance
within the first min of the emulsification which was retained throughout the 30 min of the studies.
There were no signs of recrystallization of CRV observed at the end of the 30 min. This was
validated by observing the dispersion after 30 min in PLM for any signs of recrystallized CRV.
Hence, the increase in drug load for 200%­SNEDDS liquid formulation might be the reason for
the slightly bluish appearance.
All the SNEDDS FCC formulations had a turbid appearance throughout the 30 min of dispersion.
FCC did not dissolve in Milli­Q­water which contributed to the turbid appearance of the disper­
sion. The visual appearance of the dispersion for the all the formulations in the Milli­Q­water is
summarized in the Appendix section A.2.
The droplet size of all the formulations were determined in Milli­Q water. Since the SNEDDS
FCC formulations were turbid, the dispersion were centrifuged to obtain a clear supernatant.
This was done to assess if the SNEDDS liquid is released from the FCC and if the released
32
==PAGE:41==
SNEDDS liquid readily forms a nanosized emulsion which is evaluated based on the droplet
size and PDI measurement.
Figure 4.3 represents the mean emulsion droplet size (z­average (nm)) and PDI of SNEDDS
liquid and SNEDDS FCC formulations when dispersed in Milli­Q­water.
The droplet size for the Blank and CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid were found to be in the range
of 30­40 nm, which indicated that droplet size are in the nanoemulsion range. The Blank­
SNEDDS liquid and 80%­SNEDDS liquid have no statistically difference in the observed droplet
sizes. However, in case of 200%­SNEDDS liquid an increase in the drug load above the Seq
resulted in a significant increase in droplet size (p < 0.05). This is in agreement with the studies
done by Bannow et al. (2020) demonstrating significant increase in the droplet size (p < 0.05)
for drug loads above the Seq (Bannow et al. 2020). Higher PDI values of CRV­loaded SNEDDS
in comparison to the Blank­SNEDDS liquid can be related to the presence of the CRV at the
interface (Milović et al. 2012).
Blank­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5, 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5, and 200%­SNEDDS
FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 showed a statistical difference (p < 0.05) in the droplet size measurement
when compared to its original SNEDDS liquid. No statistical difference (p < 0.05) in the droplet
size measurement was observed amongst the three ratios of SNEDDS FCC – 2.5; 3.0; 3.5
formulations (Blank, 80% drug load and 200% drug load SNEDDS).
The droplet size distribution of all the formulations in Milli­Q­water is reported in the Appendix
section A.4; A.5 and A.6. For all the formulations, one sharp peak is observed for the SNEDDS
liquid, the peak shape gets broader with CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid due to the presence of
CRV. Nonetheless, when compared to their solid counterparts, the SNEDDS FCC formulations
followed the same trend as its original SNEDDS liquid, showing peak in the same size distribu­
tion.
Overall, it can be said that SNEDDS liquid along with the drug was released from FCC which then
dispersed in the Milli­Q water forming nanosized emulsions. Based on the droplet size distribu­
tion and droplet size measurement, the released SNEDDS liquid retained its self­emulsification
properties when compared to its original SNEDDS liquid.
However, to take into account, the effect of FCC on the droplet size and PDI measurement,
the dispersion media was changed to HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6). The reason for choosing
the acidic media, was firstly to ensure that FCC is completely dissolved and the dispersion is
particle free and second to stimulate the gastric pH.
All the SNEDDS liquid emulsified completely within 1 min and had a translucent appearance.
All the SNEDDS FCC formulations had a translucent appearance as well in HCl solution (0.2M,
pH 1.6). Hence, the SNEDDS liquid and the SNEDDS FCC formulations when dispersed in HCl
solution (0.2M, pH 1.6) formed dispersion having a translucent appearance.
The droplet size of all the resulting translucent dispersion in HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6) were
directly analyzed without any further dilutions. Figure 4.4 represents the mean emulsion droplet
size (z­average (nm)) and polydispersibility (PDI) of SNEDDS liquid and SNEDDS FCC formula­
33
==PAGE:42==
tions when dispersed in HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6).
The droplet size for Blank and CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid in HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6) were
found to be in the range of 30­40 nm , which indicated that droplet size are in the nanoemulsion
range. However, for all the SNEDDS FCC formulations the incorporation of FCC increased
the droplet size of the emulsion between 100­120 nm and the PDI ranged between 0.3­0.35.
Blank­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5, 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5, and 200%­SNEDDS FCC
­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 showed a statistical difference (p < 0.05) in the droplet size measurement when
compared to its original liquid counterparts. No statistical difference (p < 0.05) in the droplet
size measurement was observed amongst the three ratios of SNEDDS FCC – 2.5; 3.0; 3.5
formulations when dispersed in HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6) (Blank, 80% drug load and 200%
drug load SNEDDS).
The droplet size distribution of all the formulations in HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6) is reported
in the Appendix section A.7; A.8 and A.9.For all the formulations Blank SNEDDS, 80% drug
load SNEDDS and 200% drug load SNEDDS, one peak is observed for the SNEDDS liquid,
indicating the SNEDDS liquid produced monodisperse system. Solidification altered the droplet
size distribution having a wider droplet size distribution. The incorporation of FCC, generated
polydisperse system as seen from the droplet size distribution peaks which is also indicated
with the higher PDI values obtained for all the SNEDDS FCC formulations.
To summarize, incorporation of FCC generated emulsions with droplet size higher than its orig­
inal SNEDDS liquid. The generated emulsions with FCC were polydisperse unlike the original
monodisperse SNEDDS liquid. Hence, solidification of the SNEDDS liquid did alter the emulsi­
fication properties when compared to the original SNEDDS liquid. However, the SNEDDS FCC
did have droplet size in range of 100­120 nm which indicates that the droplet size are in still in
nanoemulsion range and solidification with FCC enabled the formation of a nanoemulsion.
34
==PAGE:43==
Blank-SNEDDS liquid
Blank-2.5-SNEDDS FCC
Blank-3.0-SNEDDS FCC
Blank-3.5-SNEDDS FCC
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
z-average (nm)
PDI
z-average (nm)
PDI
(A) Blank SNEDDS
80%-SNEDDS liquid
80%-2.5-SNEDDS FCC
80%-3.0-SNEDDS FCC
80%-3.5-SNEDDS FCC
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
z-average (nm)
PDI
z-average (nm)
PDI
(B) 80% drug load SNEDDS
200%-SNEDDS liquid
200%-2.5-SNEDDS FCC
200%-3.0-SNEDDS FCC
200%-3.5-SNEDDS FCC
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
z-average (nm)
PDI
z-average (nm)
PDI
(C) 200% drug load SNEDDS
Figure 4.3: Droplet size (columns) and PDI (red dots) measured after dispersion of 100 mg of formulation
in 100 mL of Milli­Q water at 37°C.
(A) Droplet size and PDI measurement for Blank SNEDDS from left Blank­SNEDDS liquid to right Blanks­
SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 in the respective order.
(B) Droplet size and PDI measurement for 80% drug load SNEDDS from left 80%­SNEDDS liquid to right
80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 in the respective order.
(C) Droplet size and PDI measurement for 200% drug load SNEDDS from left 200%­SNEDDS liquid to
right 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 in the respective order.
Results are represented as mean ± SD (n=9)
35
==PAGE:44==
Blank-SNEDDS liquid
Blank-2.5-SNEDDS FCC
Blank-3.0-SNEDDS FCC
Blank-3.5-SNEDDS FCC
0
50
100
150
200
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
z-average (nm)
PDI
z-average (nm)
PDI
 (A) Blank SNEDDS
80%-SNEDDS liquid
80%-2.5-SNEDDS FCC
80%-3.0-SNEDDS FCC
80%-3.5-SNEDDS FCC
0
50
100
150
200
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
z-average (nm)
PDI
z-average (nm)
PDI
(B) 80% drug load SNEDDS
200%-SNEDDS liquid
200%-2.5-SNEDDS FCC
200%-3.0-SNEDDS FCC
200%-3.5-SNEDDS FCC
0
50
100
150
200
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
z-average (nm)
PDI
z-average (nm)
PDI
(C) 200% drug load SNEDDS
Figure 4.4: Droplet size (columns) and PdI (red dots) measured after dispersion of 100 mg formulation
in 100 mL of HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6) at 37°C.
(A) Droplet size and PDI measurement for Blank SNEDDS from left (Blank­SNEDDS liquid to right Blanks­
SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 in the respective order.
(B) Droplet size and PDI measurement for 80% drug load SNEDDS from left 80%­SNEDDS liquid to right
80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 in the respective order.
(C) Droplet size and PDI measurement for 200% drug load SNEDDS from left 200%­SNEDDS liquid to
right 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 in the respective order.
Results are represented as mean ± SD (n=9)
36
==PAGE:45==
4.4
Solid State Characterization
4.4.1
Morphological Analysis
The morphological structure of pure CRV and the carrier FCC are shown in the SEM images
in Figure 4.5. For pure CRV irregular and rectangular crystals were observed. FCC parti­
cles showed a meshwork of a porous network. Blank­SNEDDS liquid were loaded onto FCC
as a reference particle labelled Blank­SNEDDS FCC which is shown in Figure 4.5 (C). Follow­
ing the mixing of CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid with FCC, the CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid should
have been adsorbed inside the pores of FCC. Figure 4.6 shows the SEM images of the 80%­
SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 and 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations. SNEDDS
FCC formulations for both the drug load and its corresponding ratio retained the shape of the
FCC particle. The SNEDDS FCC formulations appeared no different to the pure FCC and the
Blank­SNEDDS FCC particles at CRV loads of 0.8% ­ 2.6% (w/w). No large CRV crystals were
visible which further suggests that the CRV was successfully loaded into the pores and has not
precipitated and reverted to its original crystalline form. Overall, the SEM analysis indicated
complete adsorption of the CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid onto FCC which was noticed by the
disappearance of the CRV crystalline shape and absence of oil globules.
Figure 4.5: Scanning electron microscopy images of starting materials (A­I) Pure CRV (X1200), (A­II)
Pure CRV (x3000) (B) Pure FCC (X3000) and reference material (C) Blank­SNEDDS FCC (X3000).
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 4.6: Scanning electron microscopy images of (A) 80%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC; (B) 80%­3.0­SNEDDS
FCC; (C) 80%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC; (D) 200%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC; (E) 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC; and (F) 200%­
3.5­SNEDDS FCC loaded via physical adsorption. No morphological changes were observed on the
surface of the FCC after loading with the 80%­SNEDDS liquid and 200%­SNEDDS liquid respectively. The
SEM images are captured at a magnification of X3000.
4.4.2
X­ray Powder Diffraction Studies
The X­ray powder diffraction patterns are presented in Figure 4.7 for pure CRV, pure FCC,
and the SNEDDS FCC formulations. The Figure 4.7 (A) represents the diffractograms for 80%­
SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 and the Figure 4.7 (B) for 200% ­ SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5
formulations. Pure CRV and pure FCC shows a distinctive crystalline pattern. For the SNEDDS
FCC formulations including both the drug load and its corresponding ratio, the intrinsic pattern of
the CRV disappeared in all the SNEDDS FCC formulations while the crystalline pattern of FCC
was retained.
The ratio 3.5:1 (FCC: SNEDDS liquid) has the lowest amount of the CRV. Hence, physical mix­
tures of the above ratio having Blank­SNEDDS liquid loaded onto FCC and spiked with the
amount of CRV as indicated in Table 4.1 were prepared. However, the physical mixtures did
not show the CRV crystalline patterns analyzed using the scan method initially developed for
XRPD analysis. To enable the detection of the crystalline patterns of CRV in the physical mix­
tures, the XRPD scans were modified. Three modified scans were developed. The scans
properties of the developed modified scans are represented in the Table 3.2. However, for all
the three modified scans, the crystalline patterns of CRV were not detected. The X­ray diffrac­
tograms of the physical mixtures analyzed using the modified scans are reported in Appendix
A.10.
In order to estimate the limit of detection of CRV, physical mixtures of CRV and FCC of 100 mg
at a different weight ratio (2.5%, 5%, 10%, 20%, and 30%) (w/w) of CRV were prepared. The
physical mixtures were analyzed on the modified scan run of 14 min. The X­ray diffractograms
38
==PAGE:47==
of the physical mixtures to estimate the limit of detection of CRV are reported in Appendix A.11.
From the diffractograms, it can be clearly seen that physical mixtures containing 5% (w/w) of
CRV start showing crystalline patterns of CRV. The SNEDDS FCC formulations developed for
this work have drug load between 0.8% ­ 2.6% (w/w ) of CRV as indicated in Table 4.1 . Since
the drug load in the SNEDDS FCC formulations is below 5% (w/w), no crystalline CRV patterns
could be detected from the physical mixtures. Therefore, XRPD was not utilized to analyze the
physical state of CRV in the SNEDDS FCC formulations.
0
10
20
30
40
Pure CRV
Pure FCC
80%-2.5-SNEDDS 
FCC
80%-3.0-SNEDDS 
FCC
80%-3.5-SNEDDS 
FCC
Intensity (a.u.)
Diffraction angle (
2
)
(A)
0
10
20
30
40
Pure CRV
Pure FCC
200%-2.5-SNEDDS 
FCC
200%-3.0-SNEDDS 
FCC
200%-3.5-SNEDDS 
FCC
Intensity (a.u.)
Diffraction angle (
2
)
(B)
Figure 4.7: XRPD diffractograms for pure CRV, pure FCC and SNEDDDS FCC formulations.
(A) XRPD diffractograms (bottom to top) pure CRV and pure FCC as reference and 80%­2.5­SNEDDS
FCC, 80%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC and 80%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC formulations (equivalent to 3.76 mg CRV dose)
for freshly prepared samples. XRPD diffractograms of 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 retains the
crystalline pattern of FCC.
(B) XRPD diffractograms (bottom to top) pure CRV and pure FCC as reference and 200%­2.5­SNEDDS
FCC, 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC and 200%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC formulations (equivalent to 9.4 mg CRV dose)
for freshly prepared samples. XRPD diffractograms of 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 retains the
crystalline pattern of FCC.
4.4.3
Thermal Analysis
The thermal behavior and the physical state of CRV in the SNEDDS FCC formulations and
physical mixtures were analyzed by performing the DSC analysis. Figure 4.8 represents the
DSC thermograms for the (A) individual excipients and (B) the reference materials. As seen
from the figure, CRV gave a sharp melting endotherm with an onset temperature of 115.36°C
(Kissi et al. 2018). The amorphous CRV had a Tg signal at 39.29°C (Liu et al. 2020).
39
==PAGE:48==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
Capmul MCM C8
Captex 300
Kolliphor RH40
Transcutol
Crystalline CRV
Amorphous CRV
Pure FCC
Heat Flow (mW)
Temperature (°C)
Exo up
(A)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
Blank-SNEDDS 
liquid
Blank-SNEDDS 
FCC
80%-SNEDDS 
liquid
200%-SNEDDS 
liquid
Heat Flow (mW)
Temperature (°C)
Exo up
(B)
Figure 4.8: (A) DSC thermograms for individual excipients. (B) DSC thermograms for reference mate­
rials.
The DSC thermograms of SNEDDS FCC formulations for 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5
(equivalent to 3.76 mg CRV dose) and 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 (equivalent to 9.4
mg CRV dose) for freshly prepared samples were recorded and are represented in the Figure
4.9 and Figure 4.10. Figure 4.9 represents DSC graph of a physical mixture (PM) (0.8% w/w
crystalline CRV) and Figure 4.10 represents DSC graph of a physical mixture (PM) (2% w/w
crystalline CRV). Both the physical mixtures exhibited a single sharp endothermic peak with
an onset temperature between 110­111°C. The physical mixtures DSC thermogram indicated
a shift in the onset temperature of CRV between 110­111°C when compared to the crystalline
CRV (115.36°C). To investigate the shift in the onset temperature of the PM presented in Figure
4.9 and Figure 4.10 physical blends of CRV, FCC and Blank­SNEDDS liquid were prepared.
Figure 4.11 represents the DSC thermograms for the physical blends. The DSC thermogram
for Blank­SNEDDS liquid + Spiked CRV (excess) shows a broad endothermic peak. For this
particular physical blend, the amount of CRV added in the pan was in excess. This was done
to observe a melting endotherm for CRV in presence of the Blank­SNEDDS liquid. Otherwise,
in normal amounts the CRV gets dissolved in the Blank­SNEDDS liquid during the heating pro­
cess. The physical blend for CRV + FCC showed an sharp melting endotherm with an onset
temperature of 114°C which is in close resemblance to the melting endotherm for crystalline
CRV. Hence, it can be said that presence of the lipids promotes the melting point depression of
CRV at a lower temperature (110­111°C) than the usual onset observed at 115.36°C for crys­
talline CRV. To conclude, the shift in the onset of CRV in the PM represented in Figure 4.9 and
Figure 4.10 is due to the presence of the Blank­SNEDDS liquid.
The thermogram of 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 and 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5
displayed no peaks, indicating the transformation of the physical state of the drug from crys­
talline to molecular non­crystalline form. None of the SNEDDS FCC formulations showed a Tg
signal as seen for the amorphous CRV represented in Figure 4.8. The reason could be since
the amount of CRV present in the SNEDDS FCC formulations ranges between 0.8%­2.6% (w/w)
CRV, it might be difficult to observe a Tg signal for such low amount of drug. Hence, it can be
said the physical state of CRV in the SNEDDS FCC formulations is transformed to its molecular
40
==PAGE:49==
non­crystalline form.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
PM
80%­2.5­SNEDDS 
FCC
80%­3.0­SNEDDS
 FCC
80%­3.5­SNEDDS
 FCC
Heat Flow (mW)
Temperature (°C)
Exo up
0.8% w/w crystalline CRV
Figure 4.9: DSC thermograms of 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 (equivalent to 3.76 mg CRV dose)
formulations for freshly prepared samples. The PM thermogram represents the physical mixture (0.8%
w/w crystalline CRV) showing an melting endotherm with an onset temperature at 110.70°C.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
PM
200%­2.5­SNEDDS 
FCC
200%­3.0­SNEDDS
 FCC
200%­3.5­SNEDDS
 FCC
Heat Flow (mW)
Temperature (°C)
Exo up
2% w/w crystalline CRV
Figure 4.10: DSC thermograms of 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 (equivalent to 9.4 mg CRV dose)
formulations for freshly prepared samples. The PM thermogram represents the physical mixture (2%
w/w crystalline CRV) showing an melting endotherm with an onset temperature at 111.26°C.
41
==PAGE:50==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
Heat Flow (mW)
Temperature (°C)
Exo up
a) Crystalline CRV
b)  PM (0.8% w/w crystalline CRV)
c) Blank-SNEDDS 
liquid 
+ Spiked CRV (excess) 
d) CRV + FCC
Figure 4.11: DSC thermograms of the physical blends prepared to investigate the shift in the onset
temperature of the CRV in the PM as represented in the Figure 4.9 and Figure 4.10. The solid line
indicates the melting endotherm seen from crystalline CRV. The dashed line with the arrow indicates
the melting endotherm seen from the PM (0.8% w/w crystalline CRV). The dotted line with the arrow
indicates the broad peak observed when excess CRV is added to Blank­SNEDDS liquid.
4.5
In Vitro Digestion Studies
The lipolysis was performed for ratio 3.0:1 for both the drug loads and its corresponding SNEDDS
liquid due to its good stability and drug loading.(discussed later in detail in section 4.8 )
Upon oral administration, SNEDDS are prone to digestion in the duodenum by pancreatic li­
pase. The digestion occurs at the 1st and 3rd position of the triacylglyceride leading to gen­
eration of two free fatty acids and one monoacylglyceride. In this study, the in vitro digestion
of SNEDDS liquid and SNEDDS FCC formulations was catalyzed by porcine pancreatin. Figure
4.12 shows the amount of titrated FFAs during the 45 min of in vitro lipid digestion. The cal­
culation was done based on the amount of sodium hydroxide (0.4M) consumed and assuming
each mole of sodium hydroxide neutralizes 1 mole of FFAs.
As expected, 80%­SNEDDS liquid showed higher release of FFAs compared to the 200%­
SNEDDS liquid, since the amount of 200%­SNEDDS liquid added to the vessel was less than the
80%­SNEDDS liquid in order to have the same CRV dose in the vessel. Hence, less SNEDDS
liquid was present in case of 200%­SNEDDS liquid than 80%­SNEDDS liquid.
42
==PAGE:51==
As seen from the figure, the amount of FFAs released in case for the 80%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC
and 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC was less than observed for its respective SNEDDS liquid. It could
be that complete release of SNEDDS liquid is not occurring into the media. It is also very likely
that the presence of FCC hinders the accessibility of the lipase to the SNEDDS liquid. However,
further studies on the solubilization of the CRV during the digestion step is required to validate
the results obtained from digestion profiles.
Figure 4.12: In vitro digestion profiles of Blank FaSSIF media (white circle), 80%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC
(blank triangle), 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC (white triangle), 80%­SNEDDS liquid (blank square) and 200%­
SNEDDS liquid (white square) showing the amount of FFAs (µmol) titrated by sodium hydroxide over a
period of 45 minutes. Results are represented as mean ± SD (n=3)
4.6
In Vitro Dispersion of SNEDDS FCC and SNEDDS liquid
The dispersion test of the formulations mentioned in Table 3.1 was conducted to determine the
extent of drug release from FCC. The term ‘dispersion test’ rather than the ‘dissolution test’ is
used in this report since the drug was released from FCC along with the SNEDDS liquid and
then dispersed in the aqueous media as part of fine emulsions.
Since 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations are all dosed at 3.76 mg of CRV. For all
the dispersion tests , the amount of formulations that were added to the vessel were all dosed
at 3.76 mg of CRV. The amount of formulations added to the vessel for 80%­SNEDDS FCC and
200%­SNEDDS FCC are represented in the Table 3.3 and Table 3.4, respectively. As seen from
the Table 3.3 and Table 3.4, for 200%­SNEDDDS FCC in order to have 3.76 mg of CRV in the
vessel, the amount of formulation added to the vessel is less as compared to the amount added
for 80%­SNEDDS FCC.
The media initially selected for dispersion studies of SNEDDS FCC formulations was HCl solution
(0.2M, pH 1.6). The dispersion profiles of 80%­SNEDDS FCC and 200%­SNEDDS FCC are
represented in the Figure 4.13. Dissolution profile for crystalline CRV in HCl solution (0.2M, pH
1.6) was studied to evaluate the difference between the developed SNEDDS FCC formulations
43
==PAGE:52==
and the crystalline CRV.
As seen from the figure, the 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 showed 80% drug release in
10 min of the dispersion studies. This is due to the rapid dispersion of SNEDDS liquid in the
media. The total drug release at the end of the dispersion test was 90%. The dissolution profile
for crystalline CRV is represented in Figure 4.13 (A). The crystalline CRV shows a total drug
release of more than 90% at the end of the 60 min. When compared to the dispersion profiles
of 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5, no significant difference was observed in drug release of
crystalline CRV and the 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations (p < 0.05). The reason
for 90% drug release observed for crystalline CRV and 80%­SNEDDS FCC formulations was
also due to high solubility of CRV in the acidic medium. CRV as mentioned earlier, is a weak
base and has pH dependent solubility and dissolution. Hamed et al. (2015) clearly showed that
the dissolution behavior of CRV was consistent with the solubility profile. Hamed et al. reported
complete release of CRV (95.8­98.2% released in 60 min) in acidic media (Hamed et al. 2016).
Same trend was observed for 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations in HCl solution
(0.2M, pH 1.6). However, the 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations showed complete
release in 10 min of the dispersion test. The reason for this could be firstly the rapid release of
SNEDDS FCC from FCC and second as mentioned earlier the amount of formulation added in
the vessel was less as compared to the 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations. Since
the amount of formulations added to the vessel was less a complete dissolution of FCC lead to
complete release of the CRV in the acidic media.
However, it is important to note that FCC when loaded with supersaturated state of the drug
i.e. 200%­SNEDDS liquid showed an enhanced drug release behavior as compared to 80%­
SNEDDS FCC formulations. Also, a reduction in the load of FCC for 200%­SNEDDS FCC helped
achieved complete drug release. Hence, loading of FCC with supersaturated state of the drug
did not have any effect on the in vitro drug release performance in the acidic media when
compared to the 80%­SNEDDS FCC.
However, to distinguish differences between the developed SNEDDS FCC formulations the dis­
persion studies were carried out in tap water (pH 7.5). This was accomplished since crystalline
CRV is practically insoluble in tap water (pH 7.5). Crystalline CRV showed slower dissolution
rates and the percent drug release achieved at the end of 60 min was 15%. The dissolution
profile of crystalline CRV in tap water (pH 7.5) is represented in the Figure 4.14. Dispersion
test of 80%­SNEDDS liquid and 200%­SNEDDS liquid were conducted in tap water (pH 7.5). The
results thus obtained would serve as reference for comparison with the dispersion profiles of
the respective SNEDDS FCC formulations.
As seen from the Figure 4.14 (A), the 80%­SNEDDS liquid had 90% drug release in the first min
of the dispersion test. The total drug release for 80%­SNEDDS liquid by end of 60 min was 90%.
However, for the 80%­SNEDDS FCC formulations ­ the 80%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC had a release of
80% in 10 min and by the end of 60 min the total drug release observed was more than 80%.
For 80%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC and 80%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC 70% drug release was observed in 10
min and by the end of 60 min the total drug release was more than 70%. On comparing the
drug release behavior between the three ratios, it can be seen that the ratio with the lowest
44
==PAGE:53==
amount of FCC i.e. 80%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC was able to achieve more than 80% release in 60
min. However, when compared to the other two ratios having greater amount of FCC, the drug
release achieved in 60 min is more than 70%. This suggests that the amount of FCC present
in the formulation plays a role in governing the drug release behaviour of the SNEDDS liquid.
The same trend was observed for 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations. The dis­
persion profiles for 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 and its respective liquid counterpart is
represented in Figure 4.14 (B). The 200%­SNEDDS liquid had a total drug release of 90% in 60
min. All the 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations showed a drug release of more
than 80% in 10 min and the total drug release observed was more than 80% at the end of 60
min. In regards to comparing the three ratios, it can be clearly seen that there was no differ­
ence in the drug release behavior amongst the three ratios. This results further confirm that
decrease in the amount of FCC helps achieve a comparatively higher drug release. However,
with increase in the load of FCC the drug release starts to decrease.
Based on the above observation, firstly the 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 and 200%­
SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations enhanced the extent of drug release of CRV as
compared to the crystalline CRV. A release between 70­80% for 80%­SNEDDS FCC and 80%
release for 200%­SNEDDS FCC in 10 min indicates that SNEDDS liquid are rapidly dispersed
in the media. However, when compared to the respective SNEDDS liquid the SNEDDS FCC
formulations are not able to reach the same extent of drug release. The reason for this could
be that since SNEDDS liquid emulsify spontaneously upon contact with the aqueous media, it
is very likely that SNEDDS liquid loaded onto FCC may not be able to escape the pores of the
FCC completely and enter the aqueous media prior to the start of the emulsification process.
It is noteworthy to report that even in the tap water (pH 7.5), the 200%­SNEDDS FCC is able
to show 80% drug release. The dispersion profile of the 200%­SNEDDS FCC is similar to that
observed for the 80%­SNEDDS FCC. Hence, it can be said that the FCC is able to stabilize
the supersaturated state of the drug and retain its in vitro drug release performance as the
80%­SNEDDS FCC in tap water (pH 7.5).
45
==PAGE:54==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time (min)
% Drug released
Crystalline CRV
80%- 2.5-SNEDDS FCC
80%- 3.0-SNEDDS FCC
80%- 3.5-SNEDDS FCC
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time (min)
% Drug released
Crystalline CRV
200%- 2.5-SNEDDS FCC
200%- 3.0-SNEDDS FCC
200%- 3.5-SNEDDS FCC
      (A)
      (B)
Figure 4.13: Dispersion profiles of SNEDDS FCC formulations in HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6).
(A) Dispersion profiles of 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations and dissolution profile of crys­
talline CRV, for freshly prepared samples all dosed at 3.76 mg of CRV, in 100 mL of HCl solution (0.2M,
pH 1.6) at 37°C stirred at 100 rpm.
(B) Dispersion profiles of 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations and dissolution profile crys­
talline CRV, for freshly prepared samples all dosed at 3.76 mg of CRV, in 100 mL HCl solution (0.2M,
pH 1.6) at 37°C stirred at 100 rpm.
Results are represented as mean ± SD (n=3)
46
==PAGE:55==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time (min)
% Drug released
Crystalline CRV
80%- SNEDDS liquid
80%- 2.5-SNEDDS FCC
80%- 3.0-SNEDDS FCC
80%- 3.5-SNEDDS FCC
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time (min)
% Drug released
Crystalline CRV
200%- SNEDDS liquid
200%- 2.5-SNEDDS FCC
200%- 3.0-SNEDDS FCC
200%- 3.5-SNEDDS FCC
      (A)
      (B)
Figure 4.14: Dispersion profiles of SNEDDS FCC formulations and its respective SNEDDS liquid in tap
water (pH 7.5).
(A) Dispersion profiles of 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations and 80%­SNEDDS liquid and
dissolution profile of crystalline CRV, for freshly prepared samples all dosed at 3.76 mg of CRV, in 100
mL of tap water (pH 7.5) at 37°C stirred at 100 rpm.
(B) Dispersion profiles of 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations and 200%­SNEDDS liquid and
dissolution profile crystalline CRV, for freshly prepared samples all dosed at 3.76 mg of CRV, in 100 mL
tap water (pH 7.5) at 37°C stirred at 100 rpm.
Results are represented as mean ± SD (n=3)
47
==PAGE:56==
4.7
Stability of CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid
The physical stability of CRV­loaded SNEDDS liquid was assessed during storage at 25°C. The
80%­SNEDDS liquid was stable throughout the course of the study. However, the potential
crystallization of CRV in the 200%­SNEDDS liquid during storage was of significant interest. The
onset of crystallization in the 200%­SNEDDS liquid was defined as the time point when crystals
were detected by PLM in at least one of the prepared triplicates. The 200%­SNEDDS liquid were
inspected on a regular basis visually and by PLM. The needle­shaped crystals (Figure 4.15) of
CRV were observed at 6 ± 0.5 days by PLM (n=3).
Figure 4.15: Representative PLM micrograph of needle­shaped crystal of CRV observed in 200%­
SNEDDS liquid, at the 6th day of storage at 25°C.
4.8
Physical Stability of SNEDDS FCC Formulations over Storage
Based on the thermal analysis results, CRV was found to be in the solubilized state in all the
SNEDDS FCC formulations for freshly prepared samples. However, it is important to ensure
that CRV retains its solubilized state over the storage period as well. FCC was loaded with
supersaturated state of the drug i.e. 200%­SNEDDS liquid. It was important to conduct long­
term physical stability studies to fully validate the ability of FCC to retain the supersaturated
CRV in its solubilized state during storage. Hence, physical stability studies of the SNEDDS
FCC formulations were performed over a storage period of 10 weeks under dry conditions at
25°C.
Figure 4.16 represents the DSC thermograms for 80%­SNEDDS FCC formulations over a stor­
age period of 10 weeks. Week 0 indicates the DSC thermogram for freshly prepared samples.
As seen from the figure, all the 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations were stable over
a storage period of 10 weeks. No melting endotherm of the CRV was observed over the storage
of 10 weeks by the DSC indicating that no change in the physical state of the CRV occurred
during the storage period. Hence, physical stability of CRV was retained in its solubilized state
for the 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations.
48
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.16: DSC thermograms of (A) 80%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC (B) 80%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC and (C) 80%­
3.5­SNEDDS FCC formulations (dosed at 3.76 mg CRV) stored for 10 weeks under dry conditions at
25°C. PM thermogram represents the physical mixture (0.8% w/w of CRV) indicating a melting en­
dotherm. The dashed lines guides the eye for the melting endotherm which is absent in the thermograms
for weekly recorded samples.
49
==PAGE:58==
However, it was of significant interest to assess the physical stability studies of the 200%­
SNEDDS FCC formulations. Figure 4.17 represents the DSC thermogram of 200%­2.5­SNEDDS
FCC formulation.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
PM
W eek 0
W eek 1
W eek 2
W eek 3
Heat Flow (mW)
Temperature (°C)
Exo up
(A)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
200%-2.5-T2
200%-2.5-T1
200%-2.5-T3
Heat Flow (mW)
Temperature (°C)
Exo up
After 3 w eeks of storage
(B)
Figure 4.17: (A) DSC thermograms for 200%­2.5­SNEDDSFCC formulation (dosed at 9.4 mg CRV) for
Week 0 and after 1 week, 2 week and 3 week of storage under dry conditions at 25°C. PM thermogram
represents the physical mixture (2% w/w of CRV) with an onset temperature of 111.26°C. A melting en­
dotherm was detected for all the triplicates after 3 weeks of storage.
(B) Enlarged thermogram for the triplicates of 200%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC ­ (200%­2.5­T1; 200%­2.5­T2;
and 200%­2.5­T3) formulations after 3 weeks of storage.
All the triplicates indicated a melting en­
dotherm with an onset temperature between 110­111°C. The dashed line with arrow indicates the melting
endotherm observed in all the triplicates.
As seen from the figure, the 200%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC formulations showed a melting endotherm
after 3 weeks of storage. The melting endotherm have an onset temperature ranging from the
110­111°C which coincides with the onset temperature of the PM thermogram (111.26°C). To
clearly indicate the melting endotherm, the enlarged thermogram after 3 weeks of storage are
represented in Figure 4.17 (B). Thus, it can be concluded that the onset of recrystallization
started to occur after 3 weeks of storage for 200%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC formulations.
However, the 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC and 200%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC did not show a melting en­
dotherm after 10 weeks of storage. (Figure 4.18 and Figure 4.19). The enlarged thermogram for
the respective formulation did not indicate any melting endotherm even after 10 weeks. Hence,
200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC and 200%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC were stable for the full tested time period
of 10 weeks.
To summarize, FCC was able to stabilize the supersaturated state of the drug in comparison
to 200%­SNEDDS liquid. However, 200%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC showed onset of CRV recrystal­
lization after 3 weeks of storage. 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC and 200%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC were
stable for 10 weeks. It can be concluded that the amount of FCC plays a role in stabilizing the
supersaturated state of the drug. Since, 200%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC had lower amounts of FCC
as compared to the other two formulations, the CRV present in 200%­SNEDDS liquid did not
retain its solubilized state in 250 mg of FCC.
50
==PAGE:59==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
PM
W eek 0
W eek 1
W eek 2
W eek 3
W eek 4
W eek 6
W eek 8
W eek 10
Heat Flow (mW)
Temperature (°C)
200%-3.0-SNEDDS
 FCC
Exo up
(A)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
200%-3.0-T2
200%-3.0-T3
200%-3.0-T1
Heat Flow (mW)
Temperature (°C)
Exo up
After 10 w eeks of storage
(B)
Figure 4.18: (A) DSC thermograms for 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC formulation (dosed at 9.4 mg CRV)
stored for 10 weeks under dry conditions at 25°C. PM thermogram represents the physical mixture (2%
w/w of CRV) indicating a melting endotherm. The dashed lines guides the eye for the melting endotherm
which is absent in the thermograms for weekly recorded samples.
(B) Enlarged thermogram for the triplicates of 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC ­ (200%­3.0­T1; 200%­3.0­T2;
and 200%­3.0­T3) formulations after 10 weeks of storage. No melting endotherm was indicated in the
triplicates after 10 weeks of storage. The dashed line indicates the absence of the melting endotherm
for all the three triplicates.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
PM
W eek 0
W eek 1
W eek 2
W eek 3
W eek 4
W eek 6
W eek 8
W eek 10
Heat Flow (mW)
Temperature (°C)
200%-3.5-SNEDDS
FCC
Exo up
(A)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
200%-3.5-T3
200%-3.5-T1
200%-3.5-T2
Heat Flow (mW)
Temperature (°C)
Exo up
After 10 w eeks of storage
(B)
Figure 4.19: (A) DSC thermograms for 200%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC formulation (dosed at 9.4 mg CRV)
stored for 10 weeks under dry conditions at 25°C. PM thermogram represents the physical mixture (2%
w/w of CRV) indicating a melting endotherm. The dashed lines guides the eye for the melting endotherm
which is absent in the thermograms for weekly recorded samples.
(B) Enlarged thermogram for the triplicates of 200%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC ­ (200%­3.5­T1; 200%­3.5­T2;
and 200%­3.5­T3) formulations after 10 weeks of storage. No melting endotherm was indicated in the
triplicates after 10 weeks of storage. The dashed line indicates the absence of melting endotherm for
all the three triplicates.
51
==PAGE:60==
Physical mixtures were prepared to estimate the limit of detection of CRV using DSC. The
DSC thermograms for the physical mixtures ranging from 2%­0.04% (w/w) of crystalline CRV
is reported in the Appendix A.12. A melting endotherm was detected for physical mixtures
having 2%, 0.8%, 0.5%, 0.2% and 0.08% (w/w) of CRV. A melting endotherm was not detected
for physical mixture having 0.04% (w/w) of CRV. Hence, the estimated limit of detection value
of CRV was found to be 0.08% (w/w) of CRV.
4.9
Drug Release from SNEDDS FCC Formulation over Storage
As mentioned earlier, drug release may be a major issue in the development of solidified
SNEDDS. Complete drug release may be obtained initially in freshly prepared formulations,
the drug release could decrease with time when formulations are stored under testing condi­
tions.
As seen from the dispersion results, all SNEDDS FCC formulations showed nearly complete
release for freshly prepared samples in tap water (pH 7.5). However, it was also important to
evaluate the extent of drug release from the SNEDDS FCC formulations as a function of storage
time.
Figure 4.20 and Figure 4.21 show the extent of drug release during 60 min of dispersion testing
for 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 and 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations for
freshly prepared samples (Week 0) and after storage under dry conditions at 25°C for up to 8
weeks.
As clearly seen from the results, for all the SNEDDS FCC formulations nearly same drug release
was obtained even after 8 weeks of storage. It can be observed in Figure 4.20 and Figure 4.21
that the drug release from all the formulations essentially reached plateau within 10 min of
testing irrespective of the periods of storage. This also validates that even after 8 weeks of
storage the SNEDDS liquid are rapidly released into the media as seen from the initial freshly
prepared samples.
To conclude, FCC was able to show same release mechanism even after 8 weeks of storage.
It can be clearly seen that even after 8 weeks, the SNEDDS FCC upon contact with the aqueous
media, rapidly release the SNEDDS liquid and they easily emulsify. However, the timeline for
drug release studies should be extended to fully validate the ability of FCC as solid carrier.
52
==PAGE:61==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
(A) 80%-2.5-SNEDDS FCC
Time (min)
% Drug released
Week 0
Week 3
Week 6
Week 8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
(B) 80%-3.0-SNEDDS FCC
Time (min)
% Drug released
Week 0
Week 3
Week 6
Week 8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
(C) 80%-3.5-SNEDDS FCC
Time (min)
% Drug released
Week 0
Week 3
Week 6
Week 8
Figure 4.20: Dispersion profiles of 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations for freshly prepared
samples (Week 0) and after storage under dry conditions at 25°C for Week 3, Week 6 and Week 8. The
formulations are dosed at 3.76 mg of CRV, in 100 mL of tap water (pH 7.5) at 37°C stirred at 100 rpm.
(A) Dispersion profiles of 80%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC formulations.
(B) Dispersion profiles of 80%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC formulations.
(C) Dispersion profiles of 80%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC formulations.
Results are represented as mean ± SD (n=3).
53
==PAGE:62==
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
(A) 200%-2.5-SNEDDS FCC
Time (min)
% Drug released
Week 0
Week 3
Week 6
Week 8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
(B) 200%-3.0-SNEDDS FCC
Time (min)
% Drug released
Week 0
Week 3
Week 6
Week 8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
(C) 200%-3.5-SNEDDS FCC
Time (min)
% Drug released
Week 0
Week 3
Week 6
Week 8
Figure 4.21: Dispersion profiles of 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 formulations for freshly prepared
samples (Week 0) and after storage under dry conditions at 25°C for Week 3, Week 6 and Week 8. The
formulations are dosed at 3.76 mg of CRV, in 100 mL of tap water (pH 7.5) at 37°C stirred at 100 rpm.
(A) Dispersion profiles of 200%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC formulation.
(B) Dispersion profiles of 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC formulation.
(C) Dispersion profiles of 200%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC formulation.
Results are represented as mean ± SD (n=3).
4.10
General Discussion
The section summarizes the results from physical stability and drug release studies. FCC
was investigated by loading FCC with conventional and supersaturated SNEDDS. The 80%­
SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5 were found to be physically stable for the full tested period of 10
weeks. The in vitro dispersion test showed (70­80%) drug release and the same extent of drug
release was observed after storage period of 8 weeks.
Hence, in regards to the conventional systems, FCC as a solid carrier was able to retain the
CRV in its solubilized form for at least 10 weeks which is also validated from the drug release
studies.
However, the physical stability of the supersaturated systems was of significant interest in this
work. Figure 4.22 summarizes the physical stability of the 200%­SNEDDS liquid and respective
solid counterparts.
54
==PAGE:63==
200%-SNEDDS liquid
200%-2.5-SNEDDS FCC
200%-3.0-SNEDDS FCC
200%-3.5-SNEDDS FCC
0
2
4
6
8
10
Physical stability (Weeks)
Figure 4.22: Barchart showing the physical stability of 200% drug load formulations stored at 25°C.
Loading the 200%­SNEDDS liquid onto FCC stabilized the supersaturated state of the drug.
The 200%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC showed the onset of CRV recrystallization after 3 weeks of stor­
age. However, 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC and 200%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC showed no signs of CRV
recrystallization even after 10 weeks of storage. Hence, FCC successfully stabilized the 200%­
SNEDDS liquid. The developed 200%­SNEDDS FCC formulations retained the supersaturated
state of the drug in solubilized form for at least 10 weeks.
In regards, to the drug release studies, since 200%­2.5­SNEDDS FCC showed the onset of
CRV recrystallization, it can be assumed that this onset would affect the in vitro drug release
as a function of time. However, the dispersion test clearly indicates no change in the drug
release behavior even after 8 weeks of storage. The reason could be assuming that the onset
of recrystallization occurred after 3 weeks the amount that is actually recrystallized is very
small. Based on the limit of detection of CRV it can be estimated that around 0.08% (w/w) of
CRV might have recrystallized. Since, the amount recrystallized is small it could be that it did
not have any effect on the drug release studies even after 8 weeks.
However, the drug release behavior for 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC and 200%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC
formulations also showed more than 80% drug release after 60 min of dispersion test and the
same extent of drug release was observed after storage period of 8 weeks.
To summarize, the 200%­SNEDDS FCC resulted in spontaneous dispersion of the 200%­SNEDDS
liquid on contact with the aqueous media. The supersaturated state of the drug was stabilized
in presence of FCC which was retained during in vitro drug release assessment as well.
55
==PAGE:64==
5
Conclusion
FCC was successfully loaded with 80%­SNEDDS liquid and 200%­SNEDDS liquid via physical
adsorption using a mortar and a pestle. Accordingly, 100 mg of SNEDDS liquid were adsorbed
onto 250 mg, 300 mg and 350 mg of FCC producing free­flowing powder based on visual
inspection. Based on the drug load and the corresponding ratio SNEDDS FCC formulations
having drug load ranging from 0.8% to 2.6% (w/w) were developed. The solidification method
utilized for developing SNEDDS FCC formulations ensured uniform drug distribution.
The SNEDDS FCC generated fine emulsions having a droplet size of 100­120 nm and PDI of
0.3­0.35 which was higher than its respective liquid counterpart (30­40 nm). However, based
on the droplet size measurements the SNEDDS FCC retained the nanosized nature of the pre­
pared formulations. Surface morphology analysis of the SNEDDS FCC formulations suggested
complete adsorption of the SNEDSS liquid and absence of the crystalline drug. Based on the
DSC analysis, the physical state of the drug in the developed SNEDDS FCC formulations was
found to be in non­crystalline molecular form.
The dispersion test of SNEDDS FCC formulations in tap water (pH 7.5) achieved improved
rates and extents of drug release when compared to crystalline CRV. The 200%­SNEDDS FCC
showed an enhanced dispersion profiles compared to 80%­SNEDDS FCC in tap water (pH 7.5).
No change in the drug release behavior was observed for SNEDDS FCC formulations even after
8 weeks of storage validating the ability of FCC to rapidly release the SNEDDS liquid even over
longer storage periods.
FCC showed its ability in stabilizing the supersaturated state of the drug and retaining it in
solubilized state for at least 10 weeks. The results indicate that supersaturation can be used
to extensively improve the CRV drug load by loading them onto FCC.
Overall, FCC successfully solidified the liquid SNEDDS and showed improved physical stability
in terms of supersaturated systems and nearly equal in vitro performance compared to its re­
spective liquid counterpart. FCC shows great potential as a solid carrier for solidifying SNEDDS
to enable the oral delivery of PWSDs. However, further studies are required to explore the full
potential of FCC as a carrier for solidifying SNEDDS.
56
==PAGE:65==
6
Future Perspectives
Solidification of SNEDDS are considered state­of­the­art delivery vehicles for poorly water sol­
uble drugs (Joyce et al. 2019). Improved stability and drug loading, precise dosing and ease
of handling makes solidification desirable over liquid SNEDDS (Mandić et al. 2017). However,
conflicting evidence in terms of drug release from the carriers suggest the need for further
research (Dening et al. 2016).
Firstly, it would be important to validate the ability of FCC to be able to release the SNEDDS
liquid as a function of time by extending the timeline of storage period. It would be of interest to
know if the physical stability of supersaturated system has a impact on the in vitro drug release
performance of the formulation. Further studies on in vitro lipolysis is required, to gain insights
into how the incorporation of FCC influences the solubilization of the drug during the digestion
step.
FCC has successfully also been utilized for preparation of orally dispersible tablets (ODTs)
(Stirnimann, Di Maiuta, et al. 2013; Wagner­Hattler et al. 2017). Hence, the next step would be
to compress them into tablets and conduct further studies on solid state characterization and in
vitro dissolution studies for tablets taking into account the disintegration time. Of course, before
compression it would be important to determine the flow properties including the measurement
of bulk density, tap density, compressibility index, Hausner ratio and angle of repose of these
SNEDDS FCC powders.
To gain whole perspective about FCC as a solid carrier it would be of interest to evaluate the in
vivo performance of these conventional and supersaturated solid SNEDDS and compare to its
respective liquid SNEDDS. All in all this would in help to gain further insights into in vitro and in
vivo performance and validate the potential of FCC as a solid carrier for SNEDDS.
57
==PAGE:66==
References
Alqahtani, Mohammed S et al. (2021). “Advances in Oral Drug Delivery”. In: Frontiers in Phar­
macology 12, p. 62. ISSN: 1663­9812. DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.618411. URL: https://www.
frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fphar.2021.618411.
Dening, Tahnee J. et al. (2016). “Novel Nanostructured Solid Materials for Modulating Oral
Drug Delivery from Solid­State Lipid­Based Drug Delivery Systems”. In: AAPS Journal 18.1,
pp. 23–40. ISSN: 15507416. DOI: 10.1208/s12248-015-9824-7.
Pouton, Colin W. (2000). “Lipid formulations for oral administration of drugs: Non­emulsifying,
self­emulsifying and ’self­microemulsifying’ drug delivery systems”. In: European Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences 11.SUPPL. 2, pp. 93–98. ISSN: 09280987. DOI: 10.1016/S0928-
0987(00)00167-6.
Gursoy, R. Neslihan and Simon Benita (2004). “Self­emulsifying drug delivery systems (SEDDS)
for improved oral delivery of lipophilic drugs”. In: Biomedicine and Pharmacotherapy 58.3,
pp. 173–182. ISSN: 07533322. DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2004.02.001.
Krstić, Marko et al. (2018). Self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery systems (SNEDDS) and self­
microemulsifying drug delivery systems (SMEDDS) as lipid nanocarriers for improving dis­
solution rate and bioavailability of poorly soluble drugs, pp. 473–508. ISBN: 9780128136874.
DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-813687-4.00012-8.
Thomas, N., T. Rades, and A. Müllertz (2013). “Recent developments in oral lipid­based drug
delivery”. In: Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 23.4, pp. 375–382. ISSN:
17732247. DOI: 10.1016/S1773-2247(13)50054-2. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1773-
2247(13)50054-2.
Park, Heejun, Eun Sol Ha, and Min Soo Kim (2020). “Current status of supersaturable self­
emulsifying drug delivery systems”. In: Pharmaceutics 12.4. ISSN: 19994923. DOI: 10.3390/
pharmaceutics12040365.
Thomas, Nicky et al. (2013). “Supersaturated self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery systems (Super­
SNEDDS) enhance the bioavailability of the poorly water­soluble drug simvastatin in dogs”.
In: AAPS Journal 15.1, pp. 219–227. ISSN: 15507416. DOI: 10.1208/s12248-012-9433-7.
Joyce, Paul et al. (2019). “Solidification to improve the biopharmaceutical performance of SEDDS:
Opportunities and challenges”. In: Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 142, pp. 102–117. ISSN:
18728294. DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2018.11.006.
Tan, Angel, Shasha Rao, and Clive A. Prestidge (2013). “Transforming lipid­based oral drug de­
livery systems into solid dosage forms: An overview of solid carriers, physicochemical prop­
erties, and biopharmaceutical performance”. In: Pharmaceutical Research 30.12, pp. 2993–
3017. ISSN: 07248741. DOI: 10.1007/s11095-013-1107-3.
Inugala, Spandana et al. (2015). “Solid self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery system (S­SNEDDS)
of darunavir for improved dissolution and oral bioavailability: In vitro and in vivo evaluation”.
In: European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 74, pp. 1–10. ISSN: 18790720. DOI: 10.
1016/j.ejps.2015.03.024. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejps.2015.03.024.
58
==PAGE:67==
Mandić, J. et al. (2017). “Overview of solidification techniques for self­emulsifying drug deliv­
ery systems from industrial perspective”. In: International Journal of Pharmaceutics 533.2,
pp. 335–345. ISSN: 18733476. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.05.036.
Gumaste, Suhas G et al. (2013). “Development of Solid SEDDS, IV: Effect of Adsorbed Lipid
and Surfactant on Tableting Properties and Surface Structures of Different Silicates”. In: Phar­
maceutical Research 30.12, pp. 3170–3185. ISSN: 1573­904X. DOI: 10.1007/s11095-013-
1114-4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11095-013-1114-4.
Van Speybroeck, Michiel et al. (2012). “Incomplete desorption of liquid excipients reduces the
in vitro and in vivo performance of self­emulsifying drug delivery systems solidified by ad­
sorption onto an inorganic mesoporous carrier”. In: Molecular Pharmaceutics 9.9, pp. 2750–
2760. ISSN: 15438384. DOI: 10.1021/mp300298z.
Gumaste, Suhas G., Damon M. Dalrymple, and Abu T.M. Serajuddin (2013). “Development of
solid SEDDS, V: Compaction and drug release properties of tablets prepared by adsorbing
lipid­based formulations onto neusilin® US2”. In: Pharmaceutical Research 30.12, pp. 3186–
3199. ISSN: 07248741. DOI: 10.1007/s11095-013-1106-4.
Williams, Hywel D. et al. (2014). “Lipid­based formulations solidified via adsorption onto the
mesoporous carrier neusilin® US2: Effect of drug type and formulation composition on in
vitro pharmaceutical performance”. In: Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 103.6, pp. 1734–
1746. ISSN: 15206017. DOI: 10.1002/jps.23970. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jps.23970.
Preisig, Daniel, David Haid, et al. (2014). “Drug loading into porous calcium carbonate mi­
croparticles by solvent evaporation”. In: European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biophar­
maceutics 87.3, pp. 548–558. ISSN: 18733441. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2014.02.009. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2014.02.009.
Thomas, N., R. Holm, et al. (2012). “In vitro and in vivo performance of novel supersaturated
self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery systems (super­SNEDDS)”. In: Journal of Controlled Re­
lease 160.1, pp. 25–32. ISSN: 01683659. DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.02.027.
Kuentz, Martin, René Holm, and David P. Elder (2016). “Methodology of oral formulation selec­
tion in the pharmaceutical industry”. In: European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 87,
pp. 136–163. ISSN: 18790720. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2015.12.008.
Pathak, Kamla (2021). Effective formulation strategies for poorly water soluble drugs. Elsevier
Inc., pp. 181–228. ISBN: 9780128200438. DOI: 10.1016/b978-0-12-820043-8.00004-9. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-820043-8.00004-9.
Kataoka, Makoto et al. (2006). “Effect of food intake on the oral absorption of poorly water­
soluble drugs: In vitro assessment of drug dissolution and permeation assay system”. In:
Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 95.9, pp. 2051–2061. ISSN: 15206017. DOI: 10.1002/
jps.20691.
Artursson, P. and J. Karlsson (1991). “Correlation between oral drug absorption in humans and
apparent drug permeability coefficients in human intestinal epithelial (Caco­2) cells”. In: Bio­
chemical and Biophysical Research Communications 175.3, pp. 880–885. ISSN: 10902104.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-291X(91)91647-U. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
0006291X9191647U.
59
==PAGE:68==
Kalepu, Sandeep and Vijaykumar Nekkanti (2015). “Insoluble drug delivery strategies: Review
of recent advances and business prospects”. In: Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B 5.5, pp. 442–
453. ISSN: 22113843. DOI: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.07.003.
Loftsson, Thorsteinn and Marcus E. Brewster (2010). “Pharmaceutical applications of cyclodex­
trins: Basic science and product development”. In: Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology
62.11, pp. 1607–1621. ISSN: 00223573. DOI: 10.1111/j.2042-7158.2010.01030.x.
Amidon, Gordon L. et al. (1995). A Theorotical Basis for a Biopharmaceutic Drug Classification:
The Correlation of in Vitro Drug Product Dissolution and in Vivo Bioavaliability.
Dahan, Arik, Jonathan M. Miller, and Gordon L. Amidon (2009). “Prediction of solubility and
permeability class membership: Provisional BCS classification of the world’s top oral drugs”.
In: AAPS Journal 11.4, pp. 740–746. ISSN: 15507416. DOI: 10.1208/s12248-009-9144-x.
Butler, James M. and Jennifer B. Dressman (Dec. 2010). “The developability classification sys­
tem: Application of biopharmaceutics concepts to formulation development”. In: Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences 99.12, pp. 4940–4954. ISSN: 15206017. DOI: 10.1002/jps.22217.
Pouton, Colin W. and Christopher J.H. Porter (2008). “Formulation of lipid­based delivery sys­
tems for oral administration: Materials, methods and strategies”. In: Advanced Drug Delivery
Reviews 60.6, pp. 625–637. ISSN: 0169409X. DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2007.10.010.
Buckley, Stephen Timothy et al. (2013). “Biopharmaceutical classification of poorly soluble
drugs with respect to ”enabling formulations””. In: European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sci­
ences 50.1, pp. 8–16. ISSN: 18790720. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2013.04.002. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ejps.2013.04.002.
Feeney, Orlagh M. et al. (2016). “50 years of oral lipid­based formulations: Provenance, progress
and future perspectives”. In: Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 101, pp. 167–194. ISSN:
18728294. DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2016.04.007. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.
2016.04.007.
Pouton, Colin W. (2006). “Formulation of poorly water­soluble drugs for oral administration:
Physicochemical and physiological issues and the lipid formulation classification system”.
In: European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 29.3­4 SPEC. ISS. Pp. 278–287. ISSN:
09280987. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2006.04.016.
Kalepu, Sandeep, Mohanvarma Manthina, and Veerabhadhraswamy Padavala (2013). “Oral
lipid­based drug delivery systems – an overview”. In: Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B 3.6,
pp. 361–372. ISSN: 22113835. DOI: 10.1016/j.apsb.2013.10.001. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.apsb.2013.10.001.
Charman, William N et al. (1993). “Effect of Food and a Monoglyceride Emulsion Formulation
on Danazol Bioavailability”. In: The Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 33.4, pp. 381–386. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1552-4604.1993.tb04673.x. URL: https://accp1.onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.1552-4604.1993.tb04673.x.
Cherniakov, Irina, Abraham J. Domb, and Amnon Hoffman (2015). “Self­nano­emulsifying drug
delivery systems: An update of the biopharmaceutical aspects”. In: Expert Opinion on Drug
Delivery 12.7, pp. 1121–1133. ISSN: 17447593. DOI: 10.1517/17425247.2015.999038. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1517/17425247.2015.999038.
60
==PAGE:69==
Ørskov Christensen, Janne et al. (2004). “Solubilisation of poorly water­soluble drugs during in
vitro lipolysis of medium­and long­chain triacylglycerols”. In: European Journal of Pharma­
ceutical Sciences 23, pp. 287–296. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2004.08.003.
Berthelsen, Ragna et al. (2019). “In vitro digestion models to evaluate lipid based drug deliv­
ery systems; present status and current trends”. In: Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 142,
pp. 35–49. ISSN: 18728294. DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2019.06.010.
Bannow, J. et al. (2020). “Improving the drug load and in vitro performance of supersaturated
self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery systems (super­SNEDDS) using polymeric precipitation
inhibitors”. In: International Journal of Pharmaceutics 575.October 2019, p. 118960. ISSN:
18733476. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2019.118960. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2019.
118960.
Schultz, Hayley B. et al. (2018). “Supersaturated silica­lipid hybrids (super­SLH): An improved
solid­state lipid­based oral drug delivery system with enhanced drug loading”. In: European
Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 125.December 2017, pp. 13–20. ISSN:
18733441. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2017.12.012. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2017.12.012.
Iervolino, M., S. L. Raghavan, and J. Hadgraft (2000). “Membrane penetration enhancement of
ibuprofen using supersaturation”. In: International Journal of Pharmaceutics 198.2, pp. 229–
238. ISSN: 03785173. DOI: 10.1016/S0378-5173(00)00346-X.
Savla, Ronak et al. (2017). “Review and analysis of FDA approved drugs using lipid­based
formulations”. In: Drug Development and Industrial Pharmacy 43.11, pp. 1743–1758. ISSN:
15205762. DOI: 10.1080/03639045.2017.1342654.
Hauss, David J. (2007). “Oral lipid­based formulations”. In: Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews
59.7, pp. 667–676. ISSN: 0169409X. DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2007.05.006.
Jannin, V., J. Musakhanian, and D. Marchaud (2008). “Approaches for the development of solid
and semi­solid lipid­based formulations”. In: Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews 60.6, pp. 734–
746. ISSN: 0169409X. DOI: 10.1016/j.addr.2007.09.006.
Gumaste, Suhas G., Beatryz O.S. Freire, and Abu T.M. Serajuddin (2017). “Development of
solid SEDDS, VI: Effect of precoating of Neusilin® US2 with PVP on drug release from ad­
sorbed self­emulsifying lipid­based formulations”. In: European Journal of Pharmaceutical
Sciences 110, pp. 124–133. ISSN: 18790720. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2017.02.022. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.ejps.2017.02.022.
Dixit, R. P. and M. S. Nagarsenker (Oct. 2008). “Self­nanoemulsifying granules of ezetimibe:
Design, optimization and evaluation”. In: European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 35.3,
pp. 183–192. ISSN: 09280987. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2008.06.013.
Verma, Samridhi et al. (2014). “Formulation by design of felodipine loaded liquid and solid self
nanoemulsifying drug delivery systems using Box–Behnken design”. In: Drug Development
and Industrial Pharmacy 40.10, pp. 1358–1370. DOI: 10.3109/03639045.2013.819884. URL:
https://doi.org/10.3109/03639045.2013.819884.
Dash, Rajendra Narayan et al. (Oct. 2015). “Design, optimization and evaluation of glipizide
solid self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery for enhanced solubility and dissolution”. In: Saudi
Pharmaceutical Journal 23.5, pp. 528–540. ISSN: 13190164. DOI: 10.1016/j.jsps.2015.01.024.
Yeom, Dong Woo et al. (June 2016). “Development of a solidified self­microemulsifying drug
delivery system (S­SMEDDS) for atorvastatin calcium with improved dissolution and bioavail­
61
==PAGE:70==
ability”. In: International Journal of Pharmaceutics 506.1­2, pp. 302–311. ISSN: 18733476.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2016.04.059.
Seo, Youn Gee et al. (2015). “Solid self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery system (SNEDDS) for
enhanced oral bioavailability of poorly water­soluble tacrolimus: Physicochemical character­
isation and pharmacokinetics”. eng. In: Journal of Microencapsulation 32.5, pp. 503–510.
ISSN: 14645246. DOI: 10.3109/02652048.2015.1057252.
Beg, Sarwar, O. P. Katare, et al. (June 2016). “Solid self­nanoemulsifying systems of olme­
sartan medoxomil: Formulation development, micromeritic characterization, in vitro and in
vivo evaluation”. In: Powder Technology 294, pp. 93–104. ISSN: 1873328X. DOI: 10.1016/j.
powtec.2016.02.023.
Ito, Yukako et al. (June 2005). “Oral solid gentamicin preparation using emulsifier and adsor­
bent”. In: Journal of Controlled Release 105.1­2, pp. 23–31. ISSN: 01683659. DOI: 10.1016/
j.jconrel.2005.03.017.
Kim, Dong Wuk et al. (2012). “Development of novel flurbiprofen­loaded solid self­microemulsifying
drug delivery system using gelatin as solid carrier”. In: Journal of Microencapsulation 29.4,
pp. 323–330. ISSN: 02652048. DOI: 10.3109/02652048.2011.651497. URL: https://doi.org/
10.3109/02652048.2011.651497.
Boltri, Luigi et al. (1997). “Enhancement and Modification of Etoposide Release from Crospovi­
done Particles Loaded with Oil­Surfactant Blends”. In: Pharmaceutical Development and
Technology 2.4, pp. 373–381. DOI: 10.3109/10837459709022636. URL: https://doi.org/
10.3109/10837459709022636.
Sander, Camilla and Per Holm (2009). “Porous Magnesium Aluminometasilicate Tablets as Car­
rier of a Cyclosporine Self­Emulsifying Formulation”. In: AAPS PharmSciTech 10.4, p. 1388.
ISSN: 1530­9932. DOI: 10.1208/s12249-009-9340-0. URL: https://doi.org/10.1208/s12249-
009-9340-0.
Beg, Sarwar, Suryakanta Swain, et al. (2012). “Development, Optimization, and Characteriza­
tion of Solid Self­Nanoemulsifying Drug Delivery Systems of Valsartan Using Porous Carri­
ers”. In: AAPS PharmSciTech 13.4, pp. 1416–1427. ISSN: 1530­9932. DOI: 10.1208/s12249-
012-9865-5. URL: https://doi.org/10.1208/s12249-012-9865-5.
Deshmukh, Ashish and Shirishkumar Kulkarni (2014). “Solid self­microemulsifying drug delivery
system of ritonavir”. In: Drug Development and Industrial Pharmacy 40.4, pp. 477–487. ISSN:
15205762. DOI: 10.3109/03639045.2013.768632.
Janga, Karthik Y. et al. (2013). “In situ absorption and relative bioavailability studies of zaleplon
loaded self­nanoemulsifying powders”. In: Journal of Microencapsulation 30.2, pp. 161–172.
ISSN: 02652048. DOI: 10.3109/02652048.2012.714408.
Agarwal, Vikas et al. (2009). “Dissolution and powder flow characterization of solid self­emulsified
drug delivery system (SEDDS)”. In: International Journal of Pharmaceutics 366.1­2, pp. 44–
52. ISSN: 03785173. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2008.08.046.
Kang, Jun Hyeok et al. (2012). “Effects of solid carriers on the crystalline properties, dissolution
and bioavailability of flurbiprofen in solid self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery system (solid
SNEDDS)”. In: European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 80.2, pp. 289–
297. ISSN: 09396411. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2011.11.005. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ejpb.2011.11.005.
62
==PAGE:71==
Milović, Mladen et al. (2012). “Characterization and evaluation of solid self­microemulsifying
drug delivery systems with porous carriers as systems for improved carbamazepine release”.
In: International Journal of Pharmaceutics 436.1­2, pp. 58–65. ISSN: 03785173. DOI: 10.
1016/j.ijpharm.2012.06.032.
Dening, Tahnee J. et al. (2017). “Montmorillonite­lipid hybrid carriers for ionizable and neutral
poorly water­soluble drugs: Formulation, characterization and in vitro lipolysis studies”. In:
International Journal of Pharmaceutics 526.1­2, pp. 95–105. ISSN: 18733476. DOI: 10.1016/
j.ijpharm.2017.04.063. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.04.063.
Stirnimann, Tanja, Susanna Atria, et al. (2014). “Compaction of functionalized calcium carbon­
ate, a porous and crystalline microparticulate material with a lamellar surface”. In: Interna­
tional Journal of Pharmaceutics 466.1­2, pp. 266–275. ISSN: 18733476. DOI: 10.1016/j.
ijpharm.2014.03.027. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2014.03.027.
Levy, Charlotte L. et al. (2015). “Diffusion and Tortuosity in Porous Functionalized Calcium
Carbonate”. In: Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research 54.41, pp. 9938–9947. ISSN:
15205045. DOI: 10.1021/acs.iecr.5b02362.
Stirnimann, Tanja, Nicola Di Maiuta, et al. (2013). “Functionalized calcium carbonate as a novel
pharmaceutical excipient for the preparation of orally dispersible tablets”. In: Pharmaceutical
Research 30.7, pp. 1915–1925. ISSN: 07248741. DOI: 10.1007/s11095-013-1034-3.
Wagner­Hattler, Leonie et al. (2017). “In vitro characterization and mouthfeel study of function­
alized calcium carbonate in orally disintegrating tablets”. In: International Journal of Phar­
maceutics 534.1­2, pp. 50–59. ISSN: 18733476. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.10.009. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.10.009.
Eberle, Veronika A. et al. (2014). “Floating gastroretentive drug delivery systems:Comparison of
experimental and simulated dissolution profiles and floatation behavior”. In: European Jour­
nal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 58.1, pp. 34–43. ISSN: 18790720. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2014.
03.001. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejps.2014.03.001.
Preisig, Daniel, Roger Roth, et al. (2016). “Mucoadhesive microparticles for local treatment
of gastrointestinal diseases”. In: European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics
105, pp. 156–165. ISSN: 18733441. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2016.06.009. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2016.06.009.
Roth, R. et al. (2018). “Functionalized calcium carbonate microparticles for the delivery of pro­
teins”. In: European Journal of Pharmaceutics and Biopharmaceutics 122.October 2017,
pp. 96–103. ISSN: 18733441. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2017.10.012. URL: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ejpb.2017.10.012.
Liu, Jingwen et al. (2020). “Functionalised calcium carbonate as a coformer to stabilize amor­
phous drugs by mechanochemical activation”. In: European Journal of Pharmaceutics and
Biopharmaceutics 155.July, pp. 22–28. ISSN: 18733441. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.07.029.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpb.2020.07.029.
Yue, T L et al. (Oct. 1992). “Carvedilol, a new vasodilator and beta adrenoceptor antagonist,
is an antioxidant and free radical scavenger.” eng. In: The Journal of pharmacology and
experimental therapeutics 263.1, pp. 92–98. ISSN: 0022­3565 (Print).
63
==PAGE:72==
Dunn, Christopher J, Andrew P Lea, and Antona J Wagstaff (1997). “Carvedilol”. In: Drugs
54.1, pp. 161–185. ISSN: 1179­1950. DOI: 10.2165/00003495-199754010-00015. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.2165/00003495-199754010-00015.
Beattie, Kevin, Geeta Phadke, and Jasmina Novakovic (2013). Carvedilol. Vol. 38, pp. 113–
157. ISBN: 9780124076914. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407691-4.00004-6.
Hamed, Rania et al. (2016). “pH­Dependent Solubility and Dissolution Behavior of Carvedilol—
Case Example of a Weakly Basic BCS Class II Drug”. In: AAPS PharmSciTech 17.2, pp. 418–
426. ISSN: 15309932. DOI: 10.1208/s12249-015-0365-2.
Munson, Eric J. (2009). “Analytical Techniques in Solid­state Characterization”. In: Developing
Solid Oral Dosage Forms, pp. 61–74. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53242-8.00003-5.
Qi, Sheng (2016). Analytical Techniques in the Pharmaceutical Sciences, pp. 413–437. ISBN:
978­1­4939­4027­1. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4939-4029-5.
Hitchcock, Peter B. (June 1990). “X­ray structure determination—A practical guide”. In: Journal
of Organometallic Chemistry 389.1, p. c21. ISSN: 0022328X. DOI: 10.1016/0022-328x(90)
85405-n.
Roussel, Laurent Y et al. (2009). “Extreme high resolution scanning electron microscopy (XHR
SEM) and beyond”. In: Scanning Microscopy 2009. Ed. by Michael T Postek et al. Vol. 7378.
International Society for Optics and Photonics. SPIE, pp. 151–159. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1117/12.821826.
Zangenberg, Niels Honberg et al. (Oct. 2001). “A dynamic in vitro lipolysis model. II: Evaluation
of the model”. In: European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 14.3, pp. 237–244. ISSN:
09280987. DOI: 10.1016/S0928-0987(01)00182-8.
Alghananim, Alaa et al. (2020). “A solid ultra fine self­nanoemulsifying drug delivery system
(S­snedds) of deferasirox for improved solubility: Optimization, characterization, and in vitro
cytotoxicity studies”. In: Pharmaceuticals 13.8, pp. 1–25. ISSN: 14248247. DOI: 10.3390/
ph13080162.
Kissi, Eric Ofosu et al. (2018). “The Role of Glass Transition Temperatures in Coamorphous
Drug­Amino Acid Formulations”. In: Molecular Pharmaceutics 15.9, pp. 4247–4256. ISSN:
15438392. DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.8b00650.
64
==PAGE:73==
A
Appendices
A.1
Visual Appearance of the Developed SNEDDS FCC
Formulations
Figure A.1: Visual appearance of the developed SNEDDS FCC formulations indicating the powder ap­
pearance and absence of paste or lumps like appearance.
(A) Powder appearance of 80%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5.
(B) Powder appearance of 200%­SNEDDS FCC ­ 2.5; 3.0; 3.5.
65
==PAGE:74==
A.2
Self­emulsification and Droplet Size Distribution assessment
A.2.1
Visual Assessment of Emulsions
Figure A.2: Visual appearance of the SNEDDS liquid and SNEDDS FCC formulations when dispersed in
Milli­Q­water. The pictures of the dispersion represented in the figure were captured at end of studies
i.e. after 30 min
66
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.3: Visual appearance of the SNEDDS liquid and SNEDDS FCC formulations when dispersed
in HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6). At the end of 30 min both the SNEDDS liquid and SNEDDS FCC had
translucent appearance. The pictures of the dispersion represented in the figure were captured at end
of studies i.e. after 30 min
67
==PAGE:76==
A.2.2
Droplet Size Distribution
Media: Milli­Q­water
Figure A.4: The droplet size distribution of (top to bottom) (A) Blank­SNEDDS liquid, (B) Blank­2.5­
SNEDDS FCC, (C) Blank­3.0­SNEDDS FCC, and (D) Blank­3.5­SNEDDS FCC
68
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.5: The droplet size distribution of (top to bottom) (A) 80%­SNEDDS liquid, (B) 80%­2.5­SNEDDS
FCC, (C) 80%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC, and (D) 80%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.6: The droplet size distribution of (top to bottom) (A) 200%­SNEDDS liquid, (B) 200%­2.5­
SNEDDS FCC, (C) 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC, and (D) 200%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC
70
==PAGE:79==
Media: HCl solution (0.2M, pH 1.6)
Figure A.7: The droplet size distribution of (top to bottom) (A) Blank­SNEDDS liquid, (B) Blank­2.5­
SNEDDS FCC, (C) Blank­3.0­SNEDDS FCC, and (D) Blank­3.5­SNEDDS FCC
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.8: The droplet size distribution of (top to bottom) (A) 80%­SNEDDS liquid, (B) 80%­2.5­SNEDDS
FCC, (C) 80%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC, and (D) 80%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC
72
==PAGE:81==
Figure A.9: The droplet size distribution of (top to bottom) (A) 200%­SNEDDS liquid, (B) 200%­2.5­
SNEDDS FCC, (C) 200%­3.0­SNEDDS FCC, and (D) 200%­3.5­SNEDDS FCC
73
==PAGE:82==
A.3
XRPD Studies
XRPD diffractograms of physical mixture analyzed using the modified scan methods
(A)
(B)
Figure A.10: XRPD diffractograms of physical mixture (PM) (2% w/w crystalline CRV) to detect the
crystalline patterns of CRV using the modified scans.
(A)XRPD diffractograms of PM and pure CRV for 14 min and 21 min scan.
(B)XRPD diffractograms of PM, pure CRV and pure FCC (as reference) for 33 min scan.
74
==PAGE:83==
XRPD diffractograms of CRV+FCC physical mixtures to estimate the limit of detection
of CRV
5
10
15
Pure CRV
2.5% (w /w )
5% (w /w )
10% (w /w )
20% (w /w )
30% (w /w )
Intensity (a.u.)
Diffraction angle (
2
)
Figure A.11: XRPD diffractograms of CRV+FCC physical mixtures to estimate the limit of detection of
CRV. The dashed line guides the eye through the crystalline patterns of CRV observed in the physical
mixtures. The physical mixture having 5% w/w crystalline CRV starts showing the crystalline patterns of
CRV.
75
==PAGE:84==
A.4
Thermal Analysis
DSC thermograms of physical mixtures to estimate the limit of detection of CRV
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
Heat Flow (mW)
Temperature (°C)
a) 0.04% (w /w )
b) 0.08% (w /w )
c) 0.2% (w /w )
d) 0.5% (w /w )
e) 0.8% (w /w )
f) 2% (w /w )
a) 0.04% (w/w) - Enlarged
b) 0.08% (w/w) - Enlarged
c) 0.2% (w /w )
c) 0.2% (w/w) - Enlarged
Exo up
Figure A.12: DSC thermograms of physical mixtures to estimate the limit of detection of CRV. The
physical mixtures range from 2%­0.04% (w/w) of CRV. Enlarged thermogram for 0.2% w/w (green line),
0.08% w/w (purple line), and 0.04% w/w (yellow line) of CRV is represented. The physical mixture for
0.04% w/w of CRV does not show the melting endotherm. The melting endotherm was obtained for 2%,
0.8%, 0.5%, 0.2% and 0.08% (w/w) of CRV. The arrow indicates the melting endotherm in the enlarged
thermogram for physical mixtures of 0.2% and 0.08% (w/w) of CRV
76
