==PAGE:1==
Impact of Selﬁe Filters on Face
Recognition
Cristian Botezatu
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Each individual has distinctive physiological and behavioural characteristics,
making it possible for biometric systems to use this information for recognition
purposes. Among other biometric systems, face recognition is widely accepted,
convenient and accurate, seeing signiﬁcant performance enhancement since the
appearance of deep learning. Despite the nearly perfect recognition performance
of state-of-the-art face recognition systems, there is still concern with regards
to their reliability when being exposed to occluded faces.
Inline with the aforementioned information, the goal of the thesis is to assess the
eﬀect of selﬁe ﬁlters on face recognition systems, and to provide an algorithm
for reconstructing occluded facial parts with the aim of improving face recogni-
tion performance. To be able to engage in such an investigation, an appropriate
dataset of facial images is required. To this end, popular mobile applications
are used to create selﬁe ﬁltered images. The created datasets of selﬁe ﬁltered
facial images, are used to evaluate the impact of selﬁe ﬁlters on face recogni-
tion systems, by comparing the performance of state-of-the-art face recognition
systems on unaltered and corresponding selﬁe ﬁltered facial images.
The results show that selﬁe ﬁlters aﬀect both the tested commercial and open-
source systems, especially on facial images where the eye or nose region is oc-
cluded. Furthermore, selﬁe ﬁlters of high facial coverage have shown to be the
most challenging, signiﬁcantly declining face detection, face quality assessment
and face recognition performance.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Summary (Danish)
Enhver person har karakteristiske fysiologiske og adfærdsmæssige egenskaber,
hvilket gør det muligt for biometriske systemer at bruge denne information til
genkendelsesformål. Blandt andre biometriske systemer er ansigtsgenkendelse
bredt accepteret, praktisk og nøjagtig, idet der er opnået betydelige præstations-
forbedringer siden introduktionen af dyb læring. På trods af den næsten perfek-
te genkendelsespræstation opnået af avancerede ansigtsgenkendelsessystemer, er
der stadig udfordringer med hensyn til deres pålidelighed, når de udsættes for
okkluderede ansigter.
I tråd med de ovennævnte oplysninger er afhandlingens mål at vurdere eﬀekten
af selﬁeﬁltre på ansigtsgenkendelsessystemer og udvikle en algoritme til rekon-
struktion af okkluderede ansigtsdele med det formål at forbedre ansigtsgenken-
delsesydelsen. For at kunne gøre ovenstående kræves et passende datasæt af an-
sigtsbilleder. Til dette formål bruges populære mobilapplikationer til at oprette
selﬁeﬁltrerede billeder. De oprettede datasæt af selﬁeﬁltrerede ansigtsbilleder
bruges til at evaluere påvirkningen af selﬁeﬁltre på ansigtsgenkendelsessystemer
ved at sammenligne ydeevnen for avancerede ansigtsgenkendelsessystemer på
uændrede og tilsvarende selvﬁltrerede ansigtsbilleder.
Resultaterne viser, at selﬁeﬁltre påvirker både de testede kommercielle og open-
source systemer, især på ansigtsbilleder, hvor øje- eller næseområde er dækket.
Desuden har selﬁeﬁltre med høj ansigtsdækning vist sig at være mest udfordren-
de idet de har opnået markant faldende ansigts detektion, ansigtskvalitetsvurde-
ring og ansigtsgenkendelsesydelse i forhold til de samme billeder uden selﬁeﬁltre.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This master thesis has been conducted over a ﬁve and a half months period
and has been done in collaboration with DTU Compute and the German Na-
tional Research Center for Applied Cybersecurity (ATHENE) in fulﬁlment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. It was supervised by As-
sociate Professor Christian D. Jensen, Professor Christoph Busch, Post-Doctor
Christian Rathgeb, and Mathias Ibsen.
The thesis investigates the selﬁe ﬁlter impact on state-of-the-art face recognition
systems, assessing the eﬀect across face detection, face quality assessment and
face veriﬁcation. Additionally, an algorithm for selﬁe ﬁlter removal is proposed
to identify the incremental growth in face recognition performance.
The additional ﬁles and the code used for the project have been handed in
together with this thesis document.
Kongens Lyngby, 30 June 2021
Cristian Botezatu
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my supervisors Christian D. Jensen, Christoph Busch, Christian
Rathgeb, and Mathias Ibsen, for their help and guidance throughout the master
thesis project. My special words of gratitude are addressed towards Christoph
Busch and the da-sec group at the Hochschule Darmstadt for the opportunity of
conducting the MSc thesis in Germany and for the scholarship which sponsored
my stay. Moreover, I would like to thank Mathias and Christian for the day-
to-day supervision, for helping me clarify any sort of questions and for inviting
me to interesting events within biometrics that have helped me broaden my
understanding of this ﬁeld.
All reused images, open-source libraries and scripts are cited, where appropriate,
throughout this paper and each author is acknowledged.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Summary (Danish)
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Thesis Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Fundamentals &
Related Work
5
2.1
Deﬁnition of Biometric Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Architecture of a Biometric System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
The Face as a Biometric Characteristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Face Recognition System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.1
Face Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.4.2
Image preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.3
Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Face Recognition Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.6
Facial Manipulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.7
GAN Principle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.8
Facial Inpainting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.9
Facial Occlusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.9.1
Selﬁe Filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.10 Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3
Methodology
25
3.1
Evaluation Concept
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Selﬁe Filter Mobile Applications Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.3
General Approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4
Dataset Generation
29
4.1
Bona Fide Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.1.1
FERET . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.1.2
FRGC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Mobile Phone Emulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.1
Selﬁe Filtered Datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.2
Baseline Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.3
Coverage-based Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.4
Placement-based Classiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
GAN-based Image Inpainting
37
5.1
Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.1
Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.2
Image Inpainting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2
Training & Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Quality of Selﬁe Filter Removal and Facial Inpainting
. . . . . .
48
5.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Experimental Set-up
49
6.1
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.1.1
Face Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.1.2
Face Quality Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.1.3
Face Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Reproducibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7
Experiment Results
57
7.1
Facial Coverage of Selﬁe Filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7.2
Type of Selﬁe Filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7.3
Placement of Selﬁe Filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.4
Selﬁe Filter Removal and Facial Inpainting
. . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.5
Key ﬁndings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
7.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
8
Discussion & Future Work
81
8.1
More Selﬁe Filter Mobile Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
8.2
Larger Dataset with More Selﬁe Filters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
8.3
Extension of the Proposed GAN Solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
8.4
Development of New Algorithms for Face Quality Assessment . .
83
9
Conclusion
85
A Nomenclature
89
B Popular Selﬁe Filter Mobile Applications
91
Bibliography
93
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Biometric systems are systems that perform automated recognition of individu-
als based on their distinctive physiological and behavioural characteristics. Mod-
ern biometric systems are accessible, convenient, and reliable, being extensively
used in access control software, forensic investigations, transaction authentic-
ation or even for surveillance purposes [SG18]. Biometric systems are already
used as nationwide identiﬁcation systems in a number of countries including
India, China, Argentina, Belgium, Colombia, Germany, Italy, Peru, or Spain
[Fo20].
India’s biometric identity scheme Aadhaar, introduced in 2016, has
since grown to become the world’s largest biometric dataset, with more than
1.2 billion identity records [Fo21].
According to Global Markets Insights, the global biometric market is expected
to reach USD 50 billion by 2024. The major factors driving the growth of the
biometric system market relate to the increased use of biometrics in consumer
electronic devices for authentication and identiﬁcation purposes, need for sur-
veillance and security, and the surging adoption of biometric technology in the
automotive industry [In].
One of the most popular, convenient and accurate biometric system is face
recognition, which leverages facial characteristics to automatically recognise in-
dividuals. For a reliable face recognition system, it is essential that it works
well in unconstrained environments. Given the recent advances in deep learning
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
techniques, complex facial representations can be learnt by using large image
datasets, leading to signiﬁcant growth in face recognition accuracy. Despite that
such systems are believed to have reached the human-level recognition perform-
ance (i.e. state-of-the-art), there is still concern with regards to face recognition
reliability when being exposed to occluded faces. The survey [DZ20] presents
six main occlusion challenges that the research community aims to overcome:
facial accessories (e.g. masks, eyeglasses, sunglasses), external occlusions (ran-
dom objects that cover some facial features), limited ﬁeld of view (partial faces),
self-occlusions (non-frontal pose), extreme illumination (part of the face being
highlighted), and artiﬁcial occlusions (black or white rectangles). In most cases,
occluded face recognition involves capturing an occluded image and comparing
it against one or more stored images.
In 2013, Ferrara et. al. concluded that digital alterations signiﬁcantly reduce
the face recognition performance and such images should not be allowed in e-
machine readable travel documents [MF13]. In 2018, Singh et. al. presents a
novel Disguised Faces in the Wild (DFW) dataset, rising concerns about the
intentional occlusions that hide or impersonate an identity to fool a recognition
system. A common approach is utilizing external accessories such as masks,
beard, hats, mustache, and heavy make-up to hide some facial regions.
On
the other hand, more frequently we are dealing with unintentional occlusions
such as glasses or hats, that challenge the face recognition performance in an
unintentional manner.
Based on the collected results on DFW, most of the
samples which were not correctly classiﬁed by any of the top algorithms contain
facial occlusions, being especially sensitive to the eye region. Moreover, a heavy
make-up, similar hair style or accessories, coupled with occlusion and various
illuminations, challenges the proposed face recognition systems [MS18]. In 2019,
Rathgeb et. al extended the horizon of the facial occlusion issues, uncovering
several unsolved problems related to facial plastic surgery, facial cosmetics, and
facial retouching, that have shown to negatively aﬀect the performance of state-
of-the-art face recognition systems [CR19]. Additionally, other types of facial
manipulations like self-portrait photograph (i.e selﬁe) ﬁlters are expected to
have an impact on the performance of face recognition systems.
The act of taking and sharing selﬁes has become widely popular due to digital
cameras, the internet, the appearance of social media platforms, and the human
desire to easily capture their emotions. Once selﬁes have become commonly
adopted, humans were in need for ways to enhance their look, beautifying or
animating their face for a better expressivity (Figure 1.1). Given the current
popularity of selﬁe-ﬁlter tools which produce facial occlusions, it becomes in-
creasingly more diﬃcult to recognize people even by using the state-of-the-art
face recognition systems. Nevertheless, very little research activity has been fo-
cused on assessing the impact of selﬁe ﬁlters on face recognition systems. Hence,
this project focuses on deﬁning the impact of selﬁe ﬁlters on face recognition
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Research Questions
3
Figure 1.1: Facial images with various selﬁe ﬁlters [Li]
performance, extending the work with a proposed model that is capable of re-
constructing the facial elements behind the selﬁe ﬁlter for an ultimate better
face recognition performance of state-of-the-art face recognition systems.
The popularity of selﬁe ﬁlters and the fact that modern face recognition systems
have shown to be vulnerable to other forms of face manipulations make invest-
igating the impact that selﬁe ﬁlters have on face recognition systems a relevant
research topic.
1.1
Research Questions
The thesis will address the following four research questions:
• How can a categorisation of diﬀerent types of selﬁe ﬁlters be deﬁned based
on selﬁe ﬁlters found in popular mobile applications?
• What is the impact of selﬁe ﬁlters on the biometric performance of state-
of-the-art face recognition systems?
• What is the eﬀect of reconstructing the facial elements covered by the
selﬁe ﬁlter on the face recognition performance?
• Which techniques can assist the selﬁe ﬁlter removal for an improved ac-
curacy and a better face recognition performance?
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
1.2
Thesis Contribution
The following lists the contributions made in this thesis project:
• Ranking of frequently used selﬁe ﬁlter Mobile Applications and their pop-
ular selﬁe ﬁlters.
• Collection of selﬁe ﬁltered datasets.
• Algorithm for emulating a phone to apply various selﬁe ﬁlters on reference
facial images.
• Adjustment of existing GAN-based image inpainting algorithm for recon-
structing the facial parts covered by the selﬁe ﬁlter.
• Evaluation of the performance impact of selﬁe ﬁlters on several face re-
cognition systems.
1.3
Thesis Structure
This thesis document is organized as follows:
• Chapter 2 provides an introduction to biometric systems, face recognition,
and summarizes the related work by other researchers.
• Chapter 3 presents the approach for evaluating the impact of selﬁe ﬁlters
on face recognition systems.
• Chapter 4 gives a categorisation of selﬁe ﬁlters and documents the scoring
of selﬁe ﬁlters based on the facial coverage; It describes the approach
applied to emulate selﬁe ﬁlter Mobile Applications for creating datasets of
facial images with selﬁe ﬁlters.
• Chapter 5 elaborates on the proposed GAN-based selﬁe ﬁlter removal tech-
nique, covering details about training and testing.
• Chapter 6 focuses on the experimental set-up and the software used for
evaluation purposes.
• Chapter 7 discusses the experimental results.
• Chapter 8 concludes the thesis with a discussion of the obtained results,
and future work opportunities.
• Chapter 9 concludes the thesis by answering the established research ques-
tions.
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 2
Fundamentals &
Related Work
This chapter outlines the fundamentals of biometric systems with speciﬁc focus
on face recognition systems.
Additionally, concepts such as facial manipula-
tion, facial occlusion and generative adversarial network (GAN) principle are
introduced, being later used in the project.
2.1
Deﬁnition of Biometric Systems
A biometric system is a system that uses biometric data to recognize certain be-
havioural and biological characteristics of an individual, as shown in Figure 2.1.
Biological
Fingerprint recognition
Face recognition
Retina recognition
Iris recognition
Hand geometry recognition
Vein recognition
Behavioral
Signature recognition
Voice recognition
Gait recognition
Body odor recognition
Keystroke recognition
Electrocardiograph recognition
Figure 2.1: Examples of biological and behavioral biometric systems
==PAGE:20==
6
Fundamentals &
Related Work
Based on [Ja99], several factors are weighted when deciding upon the suitability
of a biological or behavioural measurement to be used by a biometric system.
• Universality: Applicable to all individuals.
• Uniqueness: No two individuals share the same or very similar charac-
teristic.
• Performance: Low error rate and is not necessarily associated with the
throughput time.
• Permanence: The characteristic is rather stable over time.
• Collectability: The characteristic is measurable, easily acquired and the
quantitive results are reproducible.
• Acceptability: The measurement is not obtrusive for the data subject
and the use of the characteristic for automatic recognition is socially ac-
cepted.
• Circumvention: The characteristic is suﬃciently hard to replicate and
use for fooling a biometric system.
2.2
Architecture of a Biometric System
All biometric systems require subjects to enroll in the database by presenting
at least one biometric sample. The extracted biometric features are associated
with the given subject and are stored as a reference template in the biometric
database. A probe image is captured at the time of recognition, being processed
in the same way as during enrolment and being compared against a reference
template of a claimed identity (veriﬁcation) or up to all stored templates (iden-
tiﬁcation). The obtained comparison score(s) are compared to a predetermined
threshold yielding an output for an authentication or identiﬁcation query.
The conceptual components of a general biometric system are:
Data Capture Subsystem Collects a biometric sample speciﬁc to a subject
that was presented to the biometric capture device.
Signal Processing Subsystem Focuses on biometric sample enhancement,
segmentation, feature extraction, and quality control. Once identifying and
separating the face from the background, the biometric features are extracted
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Architecture of a Biometric System
7
from the segmented data (e.g. distance between eyes or length of the nose).
Further on, based on a predeﬁned threshold, the quality control is used to
automatically accept or reject the extracted features before they are stored as
a biometric template in the enrolment database or compared to one or more
pre-existing templates.
Figure 2.2: Information ﬂow within a general biometric system consisting of data
capture, signal processing, data storage, comparison and decision subsystems
from [Bi10]
Data Storage Subsystem Each reference is associated with the reference
template (i.e.
extracted features) of the enrolled subject and is stored in
the enrolment dataset, which can be within a biometric capture device, in a
central dataset, or on cloud.
Comparison and Decision Subsystem The extracted probe features are
compared against one or more references, outputting the comparison scores
that are passed to the decision subsystem.
In the veriﬁcation case, a one-to-one comparison between the reference
samples and the probe is performed. A match is found when the compar-
ison score between the probe and the reference sample exceeds a certain
predeﬁned threshold.
In the identiﬁcation case, a one-to-many comparison is done to determ-
ine the identity of the probe. The search will return the highest match
or a list of candidates that exceeds a certain threshold.
==PAGE:22==
8
Fundamentals &
Related Work
Additional subsystems that are not always present in a biometric system are:
Transmission subsystem Transmits samples, features, probes, references,
similarity or dissimilarity scores and outcomes between various subsystems.
The exchange of data may be performed following standard biometric inter-
change formats, where the authenticity, integrity, and conﬁdentiality may be
protected using cryptographic techniques.
Administration subsystem Handles the overall policy, implementation,
conﬁguration and operation of the biometric system.
Interface to external application Covers the interface to an external ap-
plication.
2.3
The Face as a Biometric Characteristic
• Universality: Facial characteristics are applicable to the vast majority of
humans, being extensively leveraged by face recognition algorithms. Des-
pite of several factors, such as quality, illumination or pose, that might
impact the suitability of a sample for recognition purposes, several meth-
ods that measure the suitability of a facial image for face recognition have
been deﬁned [MMG16] [TS21a].
• Uniqueness: As people evolve, facial characteristics become increasingly
distinct.
This makes the face recognition’s task in designing a feature
extractor and comparison for reducing the intra-class and increasing the
inter-class variations, easier. However, for twins or lookalikes the simil-
arity is high, setting up a challenging environment for an accurate face
recognition [HL11] [JRP14].
• Performance: With the development of deep learning principles in the
ﬁeld of facial recognition, the systems are believed to attain state-of-the-
art performance [YT14a] on challenging datasets [FS15] [OMP15].
• Permanence: Aging has a signiﬁcant impact on varying the facial char-
acteristics, by introducing wrinkles or other facial marks and reducing
the facial elasticity. Across big age gaps, face recognition becomes more
challenging and, thus, each person is required to update the identity card
periodically [HW19]. [ZM19] presents a survey on age-invariant face re-
cognition methods.
• Collectability: Facial samples are easily collected with the help of im-
age capturing devices that are used at the enrollment, as well as at the
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Face Recognition System
9
authentication step. The usability of face recognition systems and their
non-intrusive character has made these systems widely acceptable and
used [HB19].
• Acceptability: Face recognition systems are used in access control soft-
ware, forensic investigations, transaction authentication or even for sur-
veillance purposes [SG18]. Even though it rises some privacy concerns,
biometric systems capturing facial images for recognition purposes become
more widely deployed for convenience and security purposes [ZM21].
• Circumvention: Face recognition systems have proven their eﬃciency on
challenging datasets, demonstrating their ability to generalize well across
individuals. However, with the recent deep learning advancement, face
recognition systems are rather vulnerable to morphed [SV20] or occluded
image [DZ20] [CR19] attacks.
2.4
Face Recognition System
A Face Recognition System comprises of several steps that ensure that the
biometric sample is suitable for recognition purposes. As shown in Figure 2.3,
the common ones are:
Figure 2.3: General workﬂow of a face recognition system [CG14]
Phase 1: Face Detection Ensures that the face is accurately detected in
a given scene, being, hence, responsible for localizing the face or region of
interest, comprising of the face and the facial component detection. Some ap-
proaches that have been extensively used are edge detection, color analysis,
facial thermogram, coarse facial feature, or deep learning. The main chal-
lenges for segmentation and detection are posed by variations in illumination,
changes in the pose of the camera, motion blur, etc.
Phase 2: Image preprocessing Optional step that caters for signal en-
hancement (e.g normalization, histogram stretching) and signal shape adjust-
==PAGE:24==
10
Fundamentals &
Related Work
ment (e.g face alignment, rescaling to a standard size, remapping for pose
variations).
Phase 3: Feature Extraction Analyzes the texture of the segmented region
and collects characteristics for later recognition purposes.
Phase 4: Face Image Comparison Final recognition step where the fea-
tures collected from a probe image are compared to the ones acquired from
the reference image.
Additionally, a Face Recognition System might encompass steps like Presenta-
tion Attack Detection or Face Quality Estimation.
2.4.1
Face Detection
Face Detection is the ﬁrst and essential step in the face recognition pipeline,
being used to detect faces in images. Common areas where face detection is
used are security, biometrics, law enforcement, entertainment or personal safety.
[MHY02] classiﬁes face detection methods in four groups, where a face detection
algorithms can belong to several groups:
• Feature based These algorithms aim to ﬁnd structural features that exist
even when the pose, viewpoint, or lighting conditions vary, and using them
to locate faces. These methods are designed mainly for face localization.
• Knowledge based These rule-based methods encode human knowledge of
what constitutes a typical face. Usually, the rules capture the relationships
between facial features. These methods are designed mainly for face localiz-
ation.
• Appearance based In contrast to template comparison, the models (or tem-
plates) are learned from a set of training images which should capture the
representative variability of facial appearance. These learned models are then
used for detection.
• Template comparison Several standard patterns of a face are stored to
describe the face as a whole or the facial features separately. The correlations
between an input image and the stored patterns are computed for detection.
These methods have been used for both face localization and detection.
Table 2.1 captures some methods used for each type of face detection algorithms.
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Face Recognition System
11
Feature based
Facial Features
Grouping of edges [TL95]
Texture
Space Gray-Level Dependence matrix
(SGLD) of face pattern [YD96]
Skin Color
Mixture of Gaussian [JY96]
Multiple Features
Integration of skin color, size and
shape [RK96]
Knowledge based
Multiresolution
Multiresolution rule-based
method [GY94]
Appearance based
Eigenface
Eigenvector decomposition and
clustering [MT91]
Distribution based
Gaussian distribution and multilayer
perceptron [KKS98]
Neural Network
Ensemble of neural networks and
arbitration schemes [HR98]
Support Vector Machine (SVM)
SVM with polynomial kernel [EO97]
Naive Bayes Classiﬁer
Joint statistics of local appearance
and position [HS98]
Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
Higher order statistics with HMM [AR98]
Information Theoretical Approach
Kullback relative information [Le96]
Template based
Predeﬁned face templates
Shape template [IC92]
Deformable Templates
Active Shape Model (ASM) [AL95]
Table 2.1: Methods for Face Detection in a single image [MHY02]
2.4.2
Image preprocessing
The quality of image plays a signiﬁcant role in increasing face recognition per-
formance. Based on [Bi10], the components of image quality are:
Character: quality based on the inherent properties of the source from
which the biometric sample is derived (e.g.
a scarred face has a poor
character);
Fidelity: degree of the sample similarity to its source biometric charac-
teristic (e.g. blurred image of a face omits details and has low ﬁdelity);
Utility: the predicted positive or negative contribution of an individual
sample to the overall performance of a biometric system (e.g. false match
==PAGE:26==
12
Fundamentals &
Related Work
rate, false non-match rate, failure to enroll rate, and failure to acquire
rate).
A good quality image gives a better recognition rate than noisy images. Hence,
image preprocessing is applied prior to the actual face recognition, comprising of
signal enhancement (e.g signal normalization) and signal shape adjustment (e.g
rescaling to some standard size, alignment of the face, remapping to compensate
pose variations). Once the image preprocessing step is passed, the feature ex-
traction becomes more accurate, increasing the face recognition performance.
2.4.3
Feature Extraction
Facial feature extraction extracts highly discriminative information from face
images. In a lifetime, based on facial features each human is able to easily re-
cognize and distinguish many faces. Nevertheless, in computer programs facial
features extraction is rather challenging in unconstrained environments, due to
the close similarity of subjects and other external factors related to the envir-
onment of the reference or probe acquisition.
Extracting highly discriminative features have been a research area for dec-
ades. In 1990s, the EigenFace approach [MT91] was proposed, requiring certain
distribution assumptions (i.e. linear subspace [PB97][BM98][WD14], manifold
[XH05][SY05][WD08] or sparse representation [JW09][LZ11][WD18]) to derive
the low-dimensional representation of facial features. In 2000s, due to the lack
of control on facial changes that deviate from the chosen distribution assump-
tion, local-feature-based face recognition has appeared (i.e. Gabor [CL02] and
LBP [TA06]). Nevertheless, as the features were not necessarily distinct and
compact, in 2010s, learning-based local descriptors were introduced to the face
recognition community [ZC10][ZL14][THC15]. Despite tuning the local ﬁlters
for a better distinctiveness and compactness, the approach was lagging behind
when dealing with nonlinear facial variations. Since the development of AlexNet
[AK12], researchers realized the superior feature extraction capability oﬀered
by Convolutional Neural Neworks (CNNs), especially in the context of image
processing.
2.5
Face Recognition Approaches
The general approaches for face recognition includes the holistic, local, shallow
and deep learning approaches.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Face Recognition Approaches
13
Holistic Learning derives the low-dimensional representation through cer-
tain distribution assumptions, such as linear subspace [PB97][BM98][WD14],
manifold [XH05][SY05][WD08] or sparse representation [JW09][LZ11][WD18].
The techniques uses the raw pixel values of facial images to extract global in-
formation of faces for ultimate recognition purposes;
Local Handcraft uses the local information of the face to extract features
that could be derived on patch size level. For example, two simple features
that can be extracted from images are edges and corners, by ﬁnding areas
where the image intensity suddenly changes. Frequently used algorithms are
Local binary pattern (LBP) [MR13], SIFT [CG09], and SURF [RC15].
Shallow Learning accounts for the learning-based local descriptors, in which
the features are pre-deﬁned. Hence, the method is insuﬃcient for extract-
ing stable identity feature invariant to real-world changes.
Some popular
algorithms for learning-based facial descriptors are [ZC10] [ZL14] [THC15].
Deep Learning use a cascade of multiple layers of processing units for fea-
ture extraction and transformation, learning multiple levels of representations
that correspond to diﬀerent levels of abstraction. The levels form a hierarchy
of concepts, show strong invariance to the face pose, lighting, and expres-
sion changes. Examples of deep learning architectures are AlexNet [AK12],
Deepface [YT14b] or VGG [KS15a].
Figure 2.4: The history of face recognition from EigenFace to DeepFace [MW19].
The 1990s were dominated by holistic approaches. In the early 2000s, the pop-
ularity has shifted towards handcrafted local descriptors, while the local fea-
ture learning approaches were introduced in the late 2000s. In 2014, Deepface
[YT14b] and DeepID [YS14] achieved the state-of-the-art performance, and the
research focus has transitioned to deep learning based face recognition
==PAGE:28==
14
Fundamentals &
Related Work
2.6
Facial Manipulation
Facial manipulation is the act of modifying a genuine photo by altering the
facial attributes (e.g age), swapping or morphing two faces, adding imperceptible
perturbations (i.e. adversarial attacks) or synthetically generating faces.
Figure 2.5: The main types of facial manipulations
As shown in Figure 2.5, there are three main types of facial manipulations:
Physical can be either permanent or temporary, while aﬀecting the phys-
ical face [CR19];
Digital can generate entire or partial facial images, being possible by
using Variational AutoEncoders (VAEs) [DPK14] [DJR14] and Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [IG14].
2.7
GAN Principle
Suppose there is a electronics shop that buys certain devices from various suppli-
ers. For ﬁnancial reasons, there are cases when counterfeit devices are sold, af-
fecting the electronic shop’s reputation in front of its customers. Hence, the shop
owner continuously learns techniques that would help to distinguish between
fake and authentic electronic devices.
Initially, as the forger is not experienced in replicating authentic devices, it will
be easy for the shop owner to identify devices that are not authentic. However,
==PAGE:29==
2.7 GAN Principle
15
while trying various diﬀerent techniques, the forger gets increasingly better at
simulating authentic devices and will eventually succeed to fool the shop owner.
The goal of the forger is to deliver devices that are indistinguishable from the
authentic ones.
Similarly, the shop owner is likely going to get feedback from customers or
industry experts telling that some devices sold in the electronics shop are not
authentic. Based on this information, the shop owner would have to improve
the criteria for determining whether a device is fake or authentic. The goal of
the shop owner is to accurately tell if a device is authentic or not.
This back-and-forth competition captures the Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) idea. A GAN is an algorithmic architecture, introduced by I. Goodfellow
et. al [IG14], that uses two neural networks that are trained simultaneously - a
generative model G and a discriminative model D. G captures the data distri-
bution, while D estimates the probability that a sample came from the training
data rather than G. To optimize the generation of new, synthetic data that
can pass as real data, the adversarial process is deployed in generative models,
where G generates new data instances and D evaluates them for authenticity.
G’s task is to create synthetic images that are deemed authentic, even though
they are fake, while D’s task is to identify images coming from G as fake. The
GAN architecture is presented in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6: GAN Architecture; the solid lines represent the data ﬂows and the
dotted lines represent gradient ﬂows (adapted from [DP17])
• G takes a latent z as input and outputs a synthetic data Xgen. Usually,
the input z is sampled from zero-mean identity-covariance multivariate
Gaussian N(0, I) and the output Xgen is an image.
• D takes the real Xreal and the synthetic Xgen data as input, outputting
==PAGE:30==
16
Fundamentals &
Related Work
the probability of the input being real, rather than generated by G.
In essence, the GAN principle works according to a minimax game between the
generator and the discriminator, with the value function V (D, G):
min
G max
D V (D, G) = EX∼P real(X)[log(D(X))] + Ez∼Pz(z)[log(1 −D(G(z)))]
Given GAN’s capability to learn to mimic any distribution of data, they are
widely used in image generation.
A further extension of the original GAN is introduced by a conditional GAN
(cGAN) that embeds the class label with the noise vector input to the generator
and the image input to the discriminator. The additional information presented
by the class label allows for a better control over the ﬁnal output from the
generator.
The overall training process of the generator and the discriminator is as follows:
1. The generator generates an output image;
2. The discriminator compares the input image and the predeﬁned target, as
well as at the input and generated output image to guess on how realistic
or similar they look;
3. The discriminator weight vector adjustment is determined by the in-
put/output and the input/target pair classiﬁcation error, as in Figure 2.7;
Figure 2.7: cGAN Discriminator training [He17]
==PAGE:31==
2.7 GAN Principle
17
4. The generator’s weights are optimized based on discriminator’s output and
the diﬀerence between the output and the target image, as in Figure 2.8.
Figure 2.8: cGAN Generator training [He17]
The idea of the joint generator and discriminator architecture, as presented in
[PI17], is to train the generator on the output of the discriminator, comput-
ing the gradients through the discriminator.
Hence, while the discriminator
gets more accurate in distinguishing outputs generated by the generator, the
generator gets better at producing images that are deemed authentic by the
discriminator [He17].
A known algorithm that uses the cGAN framework is Pix2pix [PI17]. In this
context, a cGAN network is used to learn a function that maps an input image to
an output image. The generator’s role in the network is to transform the input
image to get the output image, while the discriminator measures the similarity
of the input image to an unknown image (either a target image from the dataset
or an output image from the generator), trying to guess if this was produced by
the generator.
The generator model takes an image as input, and unlike the traditional GAN
model case, the source of randomness comes from the use of dropout layers that
are used both during training and when a prediction is made. Furthermore, a U-
Net model architecture is used for the generator, instead of the common encoder-
decoder model. As presented in Figure 2.9, the U-Net model architecture is very
similar to a encoder-decoder model in the sense of downsampling the input image
to a bottleneck (i.e. low-level information shared between the input and output)
and upsampling again to an output image, but links or skip-connections are
made between layers of the same size in the encoder and the decoder, allowing
==PAGE:32==
18
Fundamentals &
Related Work
the bottleneck to be circumvented.
Figure 2.9: Encoder-Decoder and U-Net Generator Models [PI17]
The discriminator model uses the PatchGAN architecture, using deep CNN
designed to classify patches of an input image as real or fake, rather than the
entire image, as in the traditional GAN model. The discriminator model takes
an image from the source domain and an image from the target domain to
predict the likelihood of whether the image from the target domain is a real or
generated version of the source image. Pix2pix penalizes the discriminator at a
patch size of 1 x 1, 16 x 16, 70 x 70, and 286 x 286, reaching optimal results for
image-to-image translation tasks at a patch size of 70 x 70 [PI17].
2.8
Facial Inpainting
Face inpainting is a challenging task of recovering details of facial features on
high-level image semantics. It can be used in many face recognition occasions,
such as when a subject wears sunglasses, a facial mask, or even applies facial
painting. The purpose of inpainting is to reconstruct missing information in an
image, the goal being to avoid introducing noise into non-repaired regions and
to generate reliable repaired regions.
The inpainting process considers information from the whole image (i.e. low-
level texture information and high-level semantic information). Traditional in-
painting methods rely on low level information to ﬁnd best matching patches
from the unaltered regions in the same image [MB03] [CB09]. These methods
work well for background completions and repetitive texture pattern. However,
as the face image consists of many unique components, low level features are
limited for face inpainting tasks. Thus, the inpainting process needs to be car-
ried out with a high semantic level [YC19]. The traditional methods based on
ﬁnding patches with similar appearance does not always perform well.
Rapid progress in deep learning and GANs inspired lots of studies [YAC17]
==PAGE:33==
2.9 Facial Occlusions
19
[NUD20] to restore damaged images, as shown in Figure 2.10. The GAN model
is proposed to deal with both low-level textural features and high-level semantic
features, which can complete the blanks in the images, acting as a removal
approach for facial occlusions.
Figure 2.10: GAN-based image inpainting: Input image, GLCM [SI17], GCA
[JY18], EdgeConnect [KN19], MRGAN [MKJK19] and Masked Face [NUD20].
As all samples are real world images collected online, there is no ground truth
[NUD20]
2.9
Facial Occlusions
Facial occlusion relates to the presence of foreign objects on the facial region
resulting in lower face recognition performance (e.g. face covered with scarf,
glasses, beard, cap or medical mask). A tentative categorization of occlusion
challenges is presented in Table 2.2.
Figure 2.11 presents some common facial occlusions, highlighting their signiﬁc-
ance compared to the occlusion-free counterpart.
==PAGE:34==
20
Fundamentals &
Related Work
Occlusion Scenario
Examples
Facial accessories
eyeglasses, sunglasses, scarves, mask, hat, hair
External occlusions
occluded by hands and random objects
Limited ﬁeld of view
partial faces
Self-occlusions
non-frontal pose
Extreme illumination
part of face highlighted
Artiﬁcial occlusions
random black or white rectangles.
Table 2.2: Categorization of occlusion challenges [DZ20]
Figure 2.11: Various types of occlusions [DZ20]
Real occlusions realistic objects (e.g scarf, sunglasses);
Partial faces facial images that do not cover the entire face;
Synthetic occlusions digitally added occlusions that simulate real objects
(e.g selﬁe ﬁlter, synthetic tattoo);
Occluding rectangle white and black rectangles;
Occluding unrelated images superposition of multiple unrelated images.
For an enhanced face recognition performance, approaches for recognizing faces
under occlusions can be classiﬁed in three categories:
==PAGE:35==
2.9 Facial Occlusions
21
Occlusion robust feature extraction (ORFE) searches for a feature
space that is less aﬀected by facial occlusions;
Occlusion aware face recognition (OAFR) is explicitly aware where the
occlusion is. As a result, only visible face parts qualify for face recognition
(i.e. feature extraction, feature comparison);
Occlusion recovery based face recognition (ORFR) intends to recover
an occlusion-free face from the occluded face to meet the demands of con-
ventional face recognition systems.
Additionally to the occlusions listed in Figure 2.11, due to the recent COVID-
19 pandemic, the trend of wearing facial masks in public is growing all over
the world. Some people wear masks to guard themselves from certain viruses,
pollution, or to simply hide their face and emotions from the public. However,
in some case facial masks are used intentionally to trick the face recognition
systems.
Hence, many research activities focus on ORFE, OAFR or ORFR
to increase face recognition performance when dealing with mask objects that
covers almost half of an individual’s face.
Figure 2.12 presents some use cases for synthetically applied facial masks.
Figure 2.12: Sample of synthetically masked facial images [AA20]
Aside of the usual facial occlusions, the more exotic ones have increased their
popularity. E.g Facial tattoo is an extreme form of body art that has become
more appealing to the general population, as more celebrities get facial tattoos
and share pictures of themselves on social media. The study showed that facial
tattoos are especially popular among young adults, where 25% of the parti-
cipants in this age group reported that they liked face tattoos on both men and
women [St17]. Some popular facial tattoos are presented in Figure 2.13.
The research presented in [MI21] shows that tattoos signiﬁcantly aﬀect the per-
formance of the face recognition systems and that the performance of these
systems decreases as the facial tattoo coverage percentage increases.
==PAGE:36==
22
Fundamentals &
Related Work
Figure 2.13: Sample of synthetically tattooed facial images [M.20]
In 2020, Zeng et. al. has published a comprehensive survey about face recog-
nition techniques under occlusion. Dealing with occluded face detection, the
authors refer to:
• General face detection methods (i.e. applied to detect occluded face);
• Occluded face detection methods (i.e. designed speciﬁcally to tackle the
occlusion issue in face detection).
The proposed multitask training method for detecting occluded faces showed
superior performance on general as well as masked face detection benchmarks.
Additionally, Wu et al. [SW19] introduce a hierarchical attention mechanism,
applying long short-term memory (LSTM) to predict face-speciﬁc attention,
hence coping with diﬀerent poses, scales, illumination, and occlusions.
This
improvement, allows for modeling relations between facial parts and adjust their
contribution to face detection. Considering the occlusion recovery based face
recognition, Zeng et. al. mention:
• Reconstruction based techniques for face recognition [JM19];
• Inpainting techniques, which treat the occluded face as an image repairing
problem.
Referring to inpainting techniques, occlusion aware GAN [YAC17] is proposed
to identify a corrupted image region with an associated corrupted region re-
covered using a GAN pre-trained on occlusion-free faces. For example, the eye-
glasses removal generative adversarial network (ERGAN) [BH20] is proposed
for eyeglasses removal in the wild in an unsupervised manner, being capable
of rendering a competitive removal quality. The performance of occluded face
detection was assessed on the MAsked FAces (MAFA) dataset [SG17] showing
a signiﬁcantly better result on occlusion aware [SG17] and occlusion segmenta-
tion [YC18] algorithms. Zeng et. al. conclude that the unconstrained occluded
face recognition remains a major problem nowadays and suggests strategies that
would lead to a less occlusion sensitive face recognition systems [DZ20]:
==PAGE:37==
2.10 Summary
23
• Development of data augmentation techniques that could help in learning
more discriminative feature representations robust to occlusions;
• Deployment of more eﬀective occlusion recovery models and research of
new occlusion detection techniques.
On the basis of prior research work on facial occlusion, the current project
focuses on selﬁe ﬁlters.
2.9.1
Selﬁe Filter
With the world’s current fast pace in information technology development,
people tend to be more and more active online. Either for convenience or virtual
popularity reasons, especially the young segment of people become increasingly
active on social media platforms, where they want to look pretty, funny, and
unique. Hence, having as goal to connect and empower people’s creativity, most
social media platforms bundle beauty ﬁlters with augmented-reality facial ﬁlters,
occluding the original face images.
Some popular selﬁe ﬁlters used now-a-days are presented in Figure 2.14, which
are further classiﬁed in this project by the selﬁe ﬁlter facial cover (subsec-
tion 4.2.3) and the most signiﬁcantly occluded facial region (subsection 4.2.4).
Figure 2.14: Sample of selﬁe ﬁltered facial images
2.10
Summary
This chapter introduced the key concepts used along the process of assessing
the impact of selﬁe ﬁlters on face recognition, touching upon the main prin-
ciples allowing for the proposed selﬁe ﬁlter removal technique.
The related
==PAGE:38==
24
Fundamentals &
Related Work
work indicates that while face recognition systems can generalise well to many
complex scenarios, there are still unsolved challenges that need to be addressed.
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 3
Methodology
This chapter outlines the methodology for answering the research questions
established in chapter 1. A crucial step in addressing these questions is the
generation of appropriate datasets of facial images with selﬁe ﬁlters. For this
purpose, there is a need for deﬁning the popular Selﬁe Filter Mobile Applica-
tions and extracting frequently used selﬁe ﬁlters. Afterwards, an approach for
generating datasets of facial images with selﬁe ﬁlters will be described. The
overall steps to be taken for addressing the research questions are presented in
section 3.3.
3.1
Evaluation Concept
Diﬀerent datasets should be created for evaluating the impact of facial selﬁe
ﬁlters on face recognition systems:
Selﬁe Filter Facial Coverage Rank selﬁe ﬁlters based on their correspond-
ing facial coverage (i.e low, medium, and high);
Selﬁe Filter Facial Placement Choose selﬁe ﬁlters that focus on covering
various parts of the face;
==PAGE:40==
26
Methodology
Selﬁe Filter Type Focus on a subset of popular selﬁe ﬁlters;
Selﬁe Filter Facial Reconstruction Use GAN-based image inpainting
techniques to remove the selﬁe ﬁlter from the facial region.
Generating datasets with diﬀerent selﬁe ﬁlter facial coverage allows for evalu-
ating how the selﬁe ﬁlter coverage aﬀects the performance of face recognition
systems. It is expected that facial images where a large facial region is covered
by the selﬁe ﬁlter impacts face recognition systems more than facial images with
lower selﬁe ﬁlter facial coverage.
Choosing selﬁe ﬁlters by the most occluded facial region can be used to evaluate
if the placement of selﬁe ﬁlters matter, e.g. if the face recognition performance
is more signiﬁcantly aﬀected when the eyes are covered by the selﬁe ﬁlter rather
than the nose.
Datasets with diﬀerent types of selﬁe ﬁlters can be used to evaluate if a certain
selﬁe ﬁlter type has a more signiﬁcant impact on face recognition systems than
the others, e.g if a joker selﬁe ﬁlter has a more signiﬁcant role in face recognition
degradation relative to the dog selﬁe ﬁlter.
The advantages of using existing popular Selﬁe Filter Mobile Applications reside
in the ability of accurately assessing the selﬁe ﬁlter impact on face recognition
by using real tools present in the market, which are used by millions of people
on a daily basis.
3.2
Selﬁe Filter Mobile Applications Selection
The criteria used to rank the relevant Selﬁe Filter Mobile Applications are
presented in Table 3.1.
Criteria
Score
1
2
3
Gallery support
black-box
possible
supported
Ease of use
hard
medium
easy
Daily usability
no
relative
yes
Variety
no
relative
yes
Popularity
low
medium
high
Development
no
relative
yes
Complexity
easy
medium
diverse
Cost
high
medium
low
Table 3.1: Criteria used to rank the relevant Selﬁe Filter Mobile Applications
==PAGE:41==
3.3 General Approach
27
Gallery support Availability to apply Selﬁe Filters on the existing photos;
Ease of use Easy to create a dataset of faces with selﬁe ﬁlters;
Daily usability Usable on a day-to-day basis;
Variety Vast variety of selﬁe ﬁlters;
Popularity Number of downloads and daily users;
Development Continuous investment in development of selﬁe ﬁlters;
Complexity Complexity of selﬁe ﬁlters;
Cost Price per download, periodic subscription or other paid plans.
Overall, out of the chosen 21 most relevant mobile applications (Appendix B),
Table 3.2 highlights the top ﬁve that will be considered for the project:
Selﬁe Filter Mobile Application
Popularity
Sweet Snap Camera App
500M+ downloads, 4.3/5.0 score
B612
100M+ downloads, 4.5/5.0 score
Snow
100M+ downloads, 4.2/5.0 score
YouCam Fun
10M+ downloads, 4.5/5.0 score
Bloom
1M+ downloads, 4.3/5.0 score
Table 3.2: Selﬁe Filter Mobile Application used for the project
Based on the aforementioned Selﬁe Filter Mobile Applications, Figure 3.1
presents ten popular selﬁe ﬁlters.
Figure 3.1: Popular selﬁe ﬁlter dataset samples
3.3
General Approach
To answer the research questions established in chapter 1, the most relevant and
frequently used Selﬁe Filter Mobile Applications and the corresponding popu-
lar selﬁe ﬁlters have been identiﬁed. To ensure the diversity of the collected
==PAGE:42==
28
Methodology
selﬁe ﬁlters, various styles that focus on occluding diﬀerent facial regions are
considered. Once, committing to certain selﬁe ﬁlters, the FERET and FRGC
datasets are run on chosen Selﬁe Filter Mobile Applications to generate selﬁe
ﬁltered facial images. The new datasets of images are generated using an auto-
mated software that emulated the mobile phone, applying selﬁe ﬁlters on the
reference images more eﬃciently. Once, the selﬁe ﬁlter datasets are created, the
assessment of facial selﬁe ﬁlters on face recognition can be conducted, following
the concepts presented in section 3.1.
Each step will be described in the next chapters of the thesis.
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 4
Dataset Generation
4.1
Bona Fide Datasets
To generate a dataset comprising of selﬁe ﬁltered images, a set of bona ﬁde
images is needed.
The general eligibility criteria that the images have to fulﬁll are:
Size each subject needs to be represented by at least two image in the dataset,
fulﬁlling the constraint of having at least a reference and a probe image per
subject. Furthermore, the higher the number of subjects in the dataset, the
more precise the face recognition results are;
Consistency facial images should not be altered or if done so, the altering
should be consistent across the dataset. This way, the face recognition system
will not risk being biased towards certain altering of the facial images;
Posture & Environment each subject should have at least one frontal
image taken in a controlled environment, with good lightning and in which
the posture has to follow some protocol (reference image). Additionally, the
dataset should have a probe image, acquired in an uncontrolled environment,
where there are no constraints with regards to the image characteristics.
==PAGE:44==
30
Dataset Generation
Subsets of the FERET and FRGCv2 datasets which fulﬁll the above require-
ments have been selected in this thesis, being described in subsection 4.1.1 and
subsection 4.1.2, respectively.
4.1.1
FERET
Face Recognition Technology (FERET) was a research project launched in
September 1993 and was ﬁnanced by the Department of Defense Counterdrug
Technology Development Program Oﬃce [NI17]. The FERET dataset was cre-
ated from the need of having a dataset suitable for developing and testing face
recognition algorithms.
Harry Wechsler was the person in charge of the FERET dataset creation. The
rules imposed for the FERET dataset creation were related to the size of each
image (i.e 256 pixels x 384 pixels), the distance between the eyes (i.e 40 - 60
pixels), and each image should capture the head, the neck and sometimes the
shoulders of the subject that appears [PJP96].
Each subject of the FERET dataset can be identiﬁed in minimum ﬁve diﬀerent
positions (i.e two frontal images, right and left proﬁle, right and left half-proﬁle,
random) with varying facial expressions on subject’s frontal images.
Figure 4.1: Example of reference and probe images of the same subject from
the FERET database
Nowadays, the dataset contains 14,126 images of a total of 1,199 persons, where
there are 365 duplicate sets, meaning that some people appear in the dataset
more than once.
4.1.2
FRGC
Face Recognition Grand Challenge (FRGC) was launched in May 2004 and run
until March 2006, having as goal to provide facial images that would allow the
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Mobile Phone Emulation
31
researchers to develop face recognition algorithms that solve a series of proposed
techniques such as the 3D facial scans, recognition from multiple still images,
or algorithms that correct the illumination and the pose variation [PJP05].
FRGCv2 contains subjects of diﬀerent races (i.e 68% White, 22% Asian and
10% Other), age ranges (i.e 17% of the subjects had in between 18 and 22 years
old, 18% were in between 23 and 27 years old and the rest (65%) were above 28
years old) and genders (i.e 57% men and 43% women).
During the image acquisition process, each subject had to pose seven times in
various environments (i.e four image as controlled still images, two uncontrolled
still images, one 3D image), where each subject was asked to have a neutral and
a smiling face.
FRGC dataset contains 50,000 recordings of high resolution images, where the
distance between the centers of the eyes is on average 261 pixels for the controlled
still images and 144 pixels for the uncontrolled still images.
Figure 4.2: Example of reference and probe images of the same subject from
the FRGC database
4.2
Mobile Phone Emulation
This section describes the generation of selﬁe ﬁltered datasets, to be used for
the further evaluation of the selﬁe ﬁlter impact on face recognition systems. The
generation was based on the FERET and FRGC datasets, using the ﬁve chosen
Selﬁe Filter Mobile Applications (Table 3.2). Each generated dataset is divided
in a FERET and FRGCv2 subset which allows for separately evaluating the
impact of selﬁe ﬁlters on the images generated from the two face datasets.
For automation purposes, the selﬁe ﬁlters are applied by emulating a mobile
==PAGE:46==
32
Dataset Generation
phone to run the Mobile Applications. In total, ten datasets have been syn-
thetically generated, using the automation software, Automate [Ll21]. Auto-
mate is an Android Application which can be found and downloaded on Google
Play Store, being an automation application which can be used for both mo-
bile devices and tablets. Each action that is to be performed is represented in
building blocks and for each automation, a ﬂow of building blocks is required.
The process can continue for as many block as required, where repetitive actions
can be simulated using for-loops and diﬀerent scenarios can be designed when
introducing if -statements. Once the ﬂow is created, the user has to save it for
later runs.
Figure 4.3 presents an approach for setting up the ﬂow of building blocks in
Automate, such that selﬁe ﬁltered datasets could be automatically generated
while running a proposed Selﬁe Filter Mobile Application.
Figure 4.3: Flow of building blocks for emulating the Mobile Phone to run the
Bloom Selﬁe Filter Mobile Application
4.2.1
Selﬁe Filtered Datasets
In this project, the generated datasets are based on ten predeﬁned selﬁe ﬁlters
(Figure 3.1), chosen based on popularity, as well as their ability to fulﬁll the
coverage, placement, and type scenarios when evaluating the eﬀect of facial selﬁe
ﬁlters on face recognition systems:
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Mobile Phone Emulation
33
Baseline Dataset containing the unaltered reference images from the
FRGCv2 and FERET datasets;
Coverage Dataset with varying selﬁe ﬁlter coverage intensity (e.g low, me-
dium, and high coverage);
Placement Dataset with certain facial characteristics occluded at a higher
degree compared to others (e.g eye, nose, mouth or, in the extreme case, the
total face);
Type Dataset per selﬁe ﬁlter type (e.g dog, joker).
Based on the aforementioned groups, the following test scenarios are designed:
1. How is the selﬁe ﬁlter facial coverage aﬀecting the performance of face
recognition systems?
2. How is the placement of selﬁe ﬁlter aﬀecting the performance of face
recognition systems?
3. How is the type of selﬁe ﬁlter aﬀecting the performance of face recognition
systems?
4.2.2
Baseline Datasets
The baseline dataset consists of a subset of unaltered reference images from the
FRGCv2 and FERET datasets.
label
subset
number of images
baseline
FERET
FRGCv2
621
1,436
Table 4.1: Overview of the number of images in the baseline datasets
4.2.3
Coverage-based Classiﬁcation
To correlate the selﬁe ﬁlter coverage with a potential decline in face recognition
performance, a selﬁe ﬁlter coverage based grouping is deﬁned.
Figure 4.4 presents the steps for identifying the selﬁe ﬁlter facial coverage groups:
==PAGE:48==
34
Dataset Generation
1. The shape of the face is constructed on the basis of the facial landmarks.
For a clear facial region deﬁnition, the landmarks covering the eyes and
the nose are excluded, maintaining the facial region polygon;
2. A canvas with zeros is created and the polygon derived in the prior step is
used as a mask to the original image, cropping the facial part of the image
as in Figure 4.4;
Figure 4.4: The result of cropping the facial region from the image
3. Deﬁne three scoring functions and derive the most suitable one:
• Selﬁe ﬁlter’s contribution in the original photo intensity
ScoreA =
∆Facial Pixel Intensity
Original Facial Pixel Intensity
The metric is sensitive to the total color in the facial region which is
much higher for a person with light skin color than a person with a
darker skin color, even though the selﬁe ﬁlter’s eﬀect is the same.
• Average pixel diﬀerence in the face region
ScoreB = ∆Facial Pixel Intensity
Number of Facial Pixels
By looking at how each pixel has changed on average due to the selﬁe
ﬁlter has proven to be the most stable and accurate way of estimating
the signiﬁcance of the selﬁe ﬁlter. Even if some smoothing eﬀect is
applied on the selﬁe ﬁltered image, the coverage score would correlate
to the actual diﬃculty of recognizing the original face once the selﬁe
ﬁlter is applied.
• Selﬁe ﬁlter’s impact over all pixels
ScoreC = Number of Diﬀerent Facial Pixels
Number of Facial Pixels
The metric does not model well the presence of selﬁe ﬁlters of high
transparency factor.
Hence, even though all facial characteristics
would be visible, the score would indicate a very high image altera-
tion.
Table 4.2 shows the three main selﬁe ﬁlter groups by facial coverage:
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Mobile Phone Emulation
35
Selﬁe Filter
Facial Coverage
Low Coverage
less than 15% diﬀerence
Medium Coverage
between 15% and 40% diﬀerence
High Coverage
more than 40% diﬀerence
Table 4.2: Selﬁe ﬁlter groups based on the facial coverage
Figure 4.5: Low and medium facial coverage selﬁe ﬁlters
Figure 4.6: High facial coverage selﬁe ﬁlters
4.2.4
Placement-based Classiﬁcation
Each of the selﬁe ﬁlter presented in Figure 4.7 focuses on altering certain facial
characteristics.
This information will be used in concluding whether certain
regions of the face are more important for recognition purposes and if there is
any diﬀerence across the state-of-the-art face recognition systems.
==PAGE:50==
36
Dataset Generation
Figure 4.7: Selﬁe ﬁlter groups by the most aﬀected facial region
4.3
Summary
This chapter presented the selﬁe ﬁlter dataset generation process and introduces
the baseline datasets (i.e FERET and FRGC). The baseline and the generated
selﬁe ﬁltered datasets will be used in chapter 7 to evaluate the impact of selﬁe
ﬁlters on face recognition systems.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
GAN-based Image
Inpainting
The selﬁe ﬁlter facial coverage ranges from being almost non-existing to the
extreme case of full coverage (Figure 4.6). While face recognition systems gen-
eralize well on low facial coverage scenarios, they are rather challenged by selﬁe
ﬁlters that alter the facial characteristics more.
Based on the existing research work [CR19] [MI21] that shows facial occlusion’s
signiﬁcant eﬀect on face recognition systems, this chapter introduces an ap-
proach for removing the selﬁe ﬁlter from the facial image using a GAN based
image inpainting algorithm. The segmentation module and perceptual network
are inspired from [NUD20], while the generation module is adjusted based on
[JY19]. Later, in chapter 7, the incremental face recognition performance on
the reconstructed facial images will be determined.
5.1
Architecture
As proposed in [NUD20], a good way of increasing the GAN based image in-
painting accuracy is to split the occluded image segmentation from the actual
image inpainting.
==PAGE:52==
38
GAN-based Image Inpainting
5.1.1
Segmentation
The output of the module is a binary segmentation map, where one indicates
the selﬁe ﬁlter and zero covers the remaining pixels in the image. The generator
of the segmentation map is a modiﬁed version of the U-Net architecture [OR15],
consisting of a CNN-based encoder and decoder.
Encoder consists of ﬁve convolution layers followed by Lrelu activation func-
tion and a normalization layer (i.e except of the ﬁrst layer of the encoder
convolution layers);
Decoder resembles the encoder architecture except that convolution is re-
placed by deconvolution layers, where the last layer of the decoder uses tanh
activation function without normalization layer.
The local information is combined with the global one by concatenating the
result of the deconvolution layers with the feature maps from the encoder at
the same level. As a loss function, cross-entropy is used between the predicted
binary map and corresponding target map, adding a post processing step to
handle image processing operations of erosion and dilation.
Figure 5.1: Segmentation module performance on samples of selﬁe ﬁltered im-
ages for the train and test set
The overall image inpainting process is directly related to the quality of the
selﬁe ﬁlter segmentation. Hence, for enhanced accuracy and generalizability, the
training of the segmentation module should be done on a wide variety of selﬁe
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Architecture
39
ﬁlters. Given the limited number of proposed samples of popular selﬁe ﬁlters
(Figure 3.1), it becomes rather challenging to generalize well on untrained selﬁe
ﬁlters. Hence, data augmentation was implemented, but it still remains very
important to span the selﬁe ﬁlter variety as much as possible when training the
segmentation module for a better performance.
5.1.1.1
Data Augmentation
Data augmentation is a techniques used to increase the amount of available
samples by adding slight modiﬁcations on already existing data. As a result
semi-synthetic data is produced that acts as a regularizer, helps reduce over-
ﬁtting when training a machine learning model, and, hence, increases model’s
generalizability.
In this project, data augmentation is done in the form of a random placement
of shapes with transparency factor (i.e square, rectangle, ellipse) on baseline
images.
The implementation is done as follows:
• Identify the facial region based on its landmarks;
• Divide the identiﬁed region in a the desired number of subregions that do
not overlap;
• Randomly populate a subset of subregions with predeﬁned shapes, such
that only one shape is attributed to a subregion and its size is a perfect
ﬁt for the target subregion.
Figure 5.2: Sample of data augmentation using shapes as occlusions
==PAGE:54==
40
GAN-based Image Inpainting
5.1.2
Image Inpainting
The goal of this module is to remove the selﬁe ﬁlter and reconstruct the facial
characteristics that have been covered by the selﬁe ﬁlter in a way that is both
structural and appearance wise consistent with the ground truth image. Given
as input a selﬁe ﬁltered image and a binary segmented map highlighting the
occluded region, the aim is to generate a complete image without the selﬁe ﬁlter.
The main building blocks for the image inpainting module are the generator,
the discriminator and the perceptual network.
5.1.2.1
Generator
The generator has the same encoder and decoder architecture as the generator
of the segmentation map, with the addition of gated convolution for image
inpainting network, accounting for a dynamic feature selection mechanism for
each channel and spacial location.
Gatingy,x =
X X
Wg · I
Featurey,x =
X X
Wf · I
Oy,x = φ(Featurey,x)
K
σ(Gatingy,x)
where σ is the sigmoid function (i.e output gating values are between zero and
one, φ stands for the activation function (e.g ReLU, LeakyReLU), while Wg and
Wf are two diﬀerent convectional ﬁlters.
The advantage of partial convolution [GL18] over the vanilla convolutions used
in [JY18], resides in an improved quality of inpainting on irregular mask.
Vanilla convolutions: Oy,x =
k′
h
X
i=−k′
h
k′
w
X
j=−k′w
Wk′
h+i,k′w+j · Iy+i,x+j
where x, y refer to the x and y axis of the output map, kh and kw cover the
kernel size, k′
h = kh−1
2
and k′
w = kw−1
2
, while W ∈RknxkwxC′xC represents the
convolutional ﬁlters. Iy+i,x+j ∈RC and Oy,x ∈RC′ are inputs and outputs.
Partial convolutions: Oy,x =
(P P W · (I J
M
P M ), if P M > 0
0, otherwise
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Architecture
41
where M is the binary mask captured based on the selﬁe ﬁltered image. After
each partial convolution operation, the mask-update step is required to propag-
ate new M with the rule m′
y,x = 1, if P M > 0.
The vanilla convolution equation shows that for all spatial locations (y, x), the
same ﬁlters are applied to produce the output in vanilla convolutional layers.
Despite being good for object detection, the approach is not suited for image
inpainting, where the input is composed of both regions with valid features
outside holes and invalid features (in shallow layers) or synthesized features (in
deep layers) in masked regions. Based on [GL18], this causes ambiguity during
training and leads to artifacts such as color discrepancy or image blurriness.
Nevertheless, partial convolution (Figure 5.3a) is sensible from the fact that it
heuristically classiﬁes all spatial locations to be either valid or invalid, where the
mask is set to one no matter how many pixels are covered in the ﬁlter range in
the previous layer; it does not allow additional user inputs; all channels in each
layer share the same mask, which limits the ﬂexibility. Hence, as mentioned
in [JY19], instead of hard-gating mask updates with rules, gated convolutions
(Figure 5.3b) learn soft mask automatically from data and is preferred when
removing various selﬁe ﬁlters from the facial region.
Figure 5.3 highlights the main advantage of gated convolutions in terms of over-
coming the rule-based update by propagating the binary mask information ad-
aptively among feature maps with diﬀerent level.
(a) Partial convolution
(b) Gated convolution
Figure 5.3: The parallel between partial convolution and gated convolution
To guide the generator in producing realistic missing content, the combination
of the l1 and SSIM loss is used, where the l1 loss caters for the pixel diﬀer-
==PAGE:56==
42
GAN-based Image Inpainting
ence between the generated and the original image, while SSIM measures the
structural similarity between them.
Figure 5.4: Selﬁe ﬁlter removal GAN Architecture with gated convolution and
SN-PatchGAN (adapted from [JY19])
Figure 5.4 summarizes the used framework, where each convolution is distinct-
ively marked based on its type (e.g gated, dilated gated, contextual or normal
convolution).
Overall, the GAN model takes as input the original or selﬁe
ﬁltered image together with the corresponding selﬁe ﬁlter binary segmentation
and passes it to the ﬁrst generator network. Once the coarse output is derived,
it is passed through a two branch reﬁnement network with contextual attention
for a better inpainting. The reﬁned inpainting together with the selﬁe ﬁlter
binary segmentation is the input to the fully convolutional spectral normalized
Markovian discriminator and to the perceptual network. As a result, the GAN
loss is computed and the training proceeds until it has reached the target number
of iterations.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Architecture
43
5.1.2.2
Discriminator
For training free-form image inpainting networks, the spectral-normalized
Markovian PatchGAN (SN-PatchGAN) discriminator architecture is used,
where the spectral-normalization is seen as a weight normalization that stabil-
izes the training of the discriminator. As indicated by the authors, the network
is inspired by global and local GANs [SI17], MarkovianGANs [PI17], perceptual
loss [JJ16] and recent work on spectral-normalized GANs [TM18].
A six strided convolutional network with kernel size 5 and stride 2 is used as
the discriminator. Additionally, GANs are applied for each feature element in
this feature map, formulating h x w x c number of GANs focusing on diﬀerent
locations and diﬀerent semantics of the input image.
To discriminate if the
input is real or fake, the following loss function is applied:
LD(D, G) = Ex∼Pdata(x)[ReLU(1 −Dsn(x)) + Ez∼Pz(z)[ReLU(1 + Dsn(G(z)))]
LG(D, G) = −Ez∼Pz(z)[Dsn(G(z))]
where Dsn stands for the spectral-normalized discriminator and G is the image
inpainting network that takes the incomplete image z.
5.1.2.3
Perceptual network
The third block of the image inpainting module presented in Figure 5.4 is a
perceptual network, in the form of a pre-trained VGG-19 ﬁxed network [KS15b]
with a perceptual loss [JJ16] that is applied to penalize the outputs that are
perceptually not reasonable by deﬁning a feature level distance measure between
the intermediate feature maps of the reconstructed image and its original coun-
terpart. The purpose of this network is to encourage the generator’s output to
have similar feature representation to the original image.
The perceptual loss given that ai is the activation map of the ith layer is:
Lperc =
X
i
ai(Ireconstruct) −ai(Ioriginal)
As a optimization, [NUD20] suggests exploiting the intermediate convolution
layer feature maps of VGG-19 network to get rich structural information and,
thus, helps in recovering plausible structure of the face semantics.
==PAGE:58==
44
GAN-based Image Inpainting
The overall resulting loss function is:
Loss = 100 · (LD(rccoarse) + LD(rcreﬁned)) + 10 · Lperc + LG
where Lrc =
1
2 · Ll1 + 1
2 · LSSIM (calculated based on the coarse and reﬁned
outputs, as presented in Figure 5.4).
5.2
Training & Results
To assess GAN model’s generalizability, seven selﬁe ﬁlters are chosen for training
and validation, while the remaining three are used for testing, as shown in
Figure 5.5.
Figure 5.5: The selﬁe ﬁlters used for training, validation and testing
As an initial step in training the GAN based image inpainting model one selﬁe
ﬁlter was chosen. Without loss of generality the mask is preferred, such that
the two of the most challenging facial characteristics are covered (i.e the mouth
and the nose). Furthermore, the selﬁe ﬁltered image binary segmentation was
done in parallel with the selﬁe ﬁltered image inpainting.
Figure 5.6: Selﬁe ﬁlter removal by image inpainting for the test set sample image
using the mask speciﬁc model (Phase 1)
Such an approach was possible by feeding the generator with the default binary
masks, that were acquired when comparing the selﬁe ﬁltered images with their
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Training & Results
45
corresponding unaltered counterparts. For consistency, training was done on
selﬁe ﬁltered images based on the FRGC references, while for testing, the selﬁe
ﬁltered images coming from the FERET references have been used.
As presented in Figure 5.6, the model was able to fully segment and reconstruct
the facial elements covered by the mask selﬁe ﬁlter. This illustrates that the
inpainting closely resembles the original image when the segmentation mask is
accurately detected. Hence, training a model for each selﬁe ﬁlter produces res-
ults of very high accuracy, but the approach does not scale well. Hence, the
development transitioned to the second phase, when the datasets correspond-
ing to seven out of the ten chosen selﬁe ﬁlters (Figure 2.14) have been fed to
the network for training. One selﬁe ﬁlter from each facial coverage group has
been left for testing (Figure 5.5).
Figure 5.7: Selﬁe ﬁlter removal by image inpainting for the test set sample image
using the selﬁe ﬁlters presented in Figure 5.5 (Phase 2)
In order to improve the model’s generalizability, more synthetic data was gener-
ated by applying a single shape on FRGC probe images, that covers a big part
of the facial region, as presented in Figure 5.8a.
(a) Single shape of random size and solid
color
(b) Multiple shapes of random size,
color, and transparency
Figure 5.8: Data augmentation techniques used along the project
Given the relatively limited number of selﬁe ﬁlters used for training and the
limited variation in the synthetically generated new data, the model did not
generalize as well on unseen selﬁe ﬁlters, leading to the third phase. At this
step, a more robust data augmentation technique has been developed (Fig-
==PAGE:60==
46
GAN-based Image Inpainting
ure 5.8b). In the end, as it can be seen in Figure 5.9, the accuracy of the image
inpainting process has signiﬁcantly increased compared to Figure 5.7.
Figure 5.9: Test sample for the Phase 3 of the selﬁe ﬁlter removal
The training of the GAN based model for selﬁe ﬁlter removal was trained on a
Tesla M10 GPU over 18,700 training samples of size 512 x 512, where 10,080 are
selﬁe ﬁltered images (Figure 3.1) based on the FRGC references and 8,620 are
semi-synthetically created images with shapes (Figure 5.2) based on the FRGC
probes. The model is trained for 10 epochs (i.e as a good time and performance
trade-oﬀ), with a batch size of 10, using an Adam optimizer as a replacement
optimization algorithm for stochastic gradient descent. The total number of
iterations for training is derived by ﬁxing a number of epochs that is multiplied
by the length of the trainloader (i.e ⌈number of samples/batch_size⌉), resulting
in approximately 180,000 iterations in total.
Figure 5.10 presents the evolution of the GAN based selﬁe ﬁlter removal train-
ing, where samples exceeding 90,000 iterations do not diﬀer much from the
performance attained just after 90,000 iterations. Nevertheless, ﬁne-tuning the
generator and the discriminator over more iterations have proven to be very
important when testing the selﬁe ﬁlter removal on the test set.
Figure 5.11
highlight the selﬁe ﬁlter removal performance on unseen selﬁe ﬁlters over a set
of pre-trained weights.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Training & Results
47
Figure 5.10: Incremental GAN based Selﬁe Filter removal training
Figure 5.11: GAN testing on removing unseen Selﬁe Filters
==PAGE:62==
48
GAN-based Image Inpainting
5.3
Quality of Selﬁe Filter Removal and Facial
Inpainting
For perceptual facial quality benchmark purposes, the Peak Signal-to-Noise Ra-
tio (PSNR) and Structural Similarity (SSIM ) scores are considered.
In this
case, PSNR and SSIM are relevant to indicate the quality of the selﬁe ﬁlter
removal approach relative to the original image, to be discussed in Table 7.21.
PSNR captures the ratio between the maximum possible power of a signal and
the power of corrupting noise that aﬀects the ﬁdelity of its representation and
is deﬁned by:
PSNR = 20 · log10( MAXf
√
MSE
)
SSIM is a perception-based model that considers image degradation as perceived
change in structural information, while also incorporating important perceptual
phenomena, including both luminance masking and contrast masking terms.
Structural information is the idea that the pixels have strong inter-dependencies
especially when they are spatially close and is deﬁned by:
SSIM(x, y) = (2 · µx · µy + c1) · (2 · σ + c2)
(µ2x + µ2y + c1) · (σ2x + σ2y + c2)
A higher PSNR or SSIM score relate to an increased degree of similarity between
the compared images.
5.4
Summary
This chapter presents the GAN based approach for removing the selﬁe ﬁlters
from facial images. Aside of the used theory and technical details, the incre-
mental progress is presented, providing reasons for each new development phase
during the project. Overall, given the limited number of selﬁe ﬁltered images,
data augmentation has proven to be very important in reﬁning the results of the
selﬁe ﬁlter removal, as well as leading to a better generalizability of the model.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 6
Experimental Set-up
Based on the datasets of images presented in chapter 4, this chapter focuses on
the techniques and software used for assessing the impact of selﬁe ﬁlters of facial
recognition.
6.1
Software
The evaluation is done by comparing the performance of the generated datasets
on commercial and open-source face recognition systems with the performance
of the same facial images without selﬁe ﬁlters (the baseline datasets).
More speciﬁcally, the thesis investigates how selﬁe ﬁlters inﬂuence:
• Face detection accuracy
• Face quality score
• Face veriﬁcation accuracy
==PAGE:64==
50
Experimental Set-up
Given that the detection and quality scores are not normalized, for convenience,
a min-max normalization is applied:
Xnormalized
i
=
Xi −Xmax
Xmax −Xmin
· (Rmax −Rmin) + Rmin
where Rmin and Rmax cover the desired range of normalized data (i.e in this
case Rmin = 0 and Rmax = 1).
6.1.1
Face Detection
Face detection is the task of identifying human faces in physical or digital images.
Along the project, the systems that will be used for detecting faces are dlib
[Ki09], retina face [JD20], and a commercial oﬀ-the-shelf (COTS) system.
6.1.1.1
Dlib
Dlib is an algorithm that detects the facial features (i.e eyes, mouth, nose, etc.),
creating a map of points that surround each one. This map is composed of 67
landmark points as presented in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Facial landmarks detected by dlib [Sc20]
The algorithm is implemented on the basis of Histogram of Oriented Gradients
(HOG) and Linear Support Vector Machine (SVM). Face detection works by
computing HOG features (i.e focusing on the structure or the shape of an object,
while creating histograms based on the gradients and orientations of the pixel
values) and classifying them with an SVM.
==PAGE:65==
6.1 Software
51
6.1.1.2
Retina face
Retina face is a robust single-stage face detector, which performs pixel-wise
face localisation on various scales of faces by taking advantages of joint extra-
supervised and self-supervised multi-task learning. It combines the dense local-
isation and alignment of faces of arbitrary scales in images, outperforming the
other known state of the art face detection algorithms.
Based on Figure 6.2, the proposed single-stage pixel-wise face localisation
method employs extra-supervised and self-supervised multi-task learning in par-
allel with the existing box classiﬁcation and regression branches. Each positive
anchor outputs a face score, a face box, ﬁve facial landmarks (i.e. eye centres,
nose tip and mouth corners), and dense 3D face vertices projected on the image
plane.
Figure 6.2: Facial detection by retina face [JD20]
The detection accuracy of a system on a dataset will be recorded as the percent-
age of times when the system detected zero faces (denoted Dϵ). Additionally, the
detection score will be deﬁned as the average detection score, µdscore, obtained
by the system on the dataset.
6.1.2
Face Quality Assessment
Face quality estimation is used in a variety of areas to estimate the suitability
of a facial image for face recognition; this is especially useful in unconstrained
scenarios where low-quality facial images unsuitable for face recognition are
likely to be captured. In this context, the quality of a facial image refers to
==PAGE:66==
52
Experimental Set-up
the ﬁtness of the sample to fulﬁll the biometric function (e.g. face recognition
comparison) [TS21a].
The FaceQNet [JHO19] and MagFace systems [QM21] will be used for measuring
the quality score of a facial image.
6.1.2.1
FaceQNet
FaceQNet is a face recognition neural network that is used to predict the face
quality. The main ideas that have been proven by FaceQNet are that the mated
comparison score between a perfect quality picture A (i.e ICAO compliant)
and a picture B of unknown quality can be a valid and accurate reﬂection of
the quality level of picture B. Additionally, facial feature vectors containing
information about identity are likely to also contain information regarding face
quality.
Figure 6.3: FaceQNet architecture [JHO19]
FaceQNet regresses qualities by networks trained using the VGGFace2 database,
where he ground truth quality labels are obtained using FaceNet to generate
comparison scores. As visualized in Figure 6.3, FaceQnet is based on the ResNet-
50 architecture, replacing the classiﬁcation layer with two new ones designed for
regression. Using the training set containing face images and their respective
ground truth quality measures, the training is done only on the new layers
keeping the weights of the others frozen. In this context, the artiﬁcially labelled
quality values are created by investigating the relative performance of a face
recognition system (represented by comparison scores). However, the score risks
being heavily biased by low-quality samples.
==PAGE:67==
6.1 Software
53
6.1.2.2
MagFace
Figure 6.4: MagFace loss function principle [QM21]
MagFace is a face quality algorithm that exploits the fact that the magnitude of
the feature embedding monotonically increases if the subject is more likely to be
recognized. As shown in Figure 6.4, it also introduces an adaptive mechanism to
learn well structured within-class feature distributions by pulling easy samples
to class centers while pushing hard samples away, preventing the models from
overﬁtting on noisy low-quality samples and improves face recognition.
The approach has shown signiﬁcant incremental performance relative to other
state-of-the-art face quality assessment tool, such as FaceQNet. Nevertheless,
the tool does not solve the issue of determining predictive face quality scores
before running the whole face recognition pipeline on a particular sample.
The results obtained by either of the systems on a dataset will be recorded as
the average quality score, µqscore, obtained by the system on the dataset. Dϵ is
zero for MagFace, as the images are aligned before using the algorithm.
6.1.3
Face Recognition
For testing the veriﬁcation accuracy of a generated dataset, the facial images
generated from the reference images of the FERET or FRGCv2 dataset will be
compared to the unaltered probe images of the FERET or FRGCv2 dataset.
For each dataset, a list of mated and non-mated scores will be created such that
the mated scores are obtained by comparing features obtained from two images
of the same individual to each other, and the non-mated scores are obtained by
comparing features obtained from images of diﬀerent individuals. To record the
results detection error tradeoﬀ(DET) curves will be used, which plots the False
Match Rate (FMR) versus the False None Match Rate (FNMR) at diﬀerent
==PAGE:68==
54
Experimental Set-up
thresholds. Such an approach is used in standardised evaluation of biometric
systems [Bi10]. The mated comparison is done for each selﬁe ﬁlter, while the
non-mated comparisons uses the distribution obtained from unaltered images.
Furthermore, for each dataset and system the following will be recorded: The
FNMR at ﬁxed FMR, the equal error rate (EER), the number of mated and
non-mated comparisons, as well as the proportion of reference images in the
dataset where the feature extraction for veriﬁcation failed (denoted as FTE).
The FMR thresholds have been chosen such that it captures a challenging setup
at FMR 1%, the border control standard at FMR 0.1% [Un15], and the high
security standard at FMR 0.01%.
The veriﬁcation performance will be evaluated on the state-of-the-art open
source ArcFace [JD19b], equipped with a loss function that enhances the dis-
criminative power of the face recognition model and stabilises the training pro-
cess. As presented in Figure 6.5, the arc-cosine function is used to calculate
the angle between the current feature and the target weight. Afterwards, an
additive angular margin is added to the target angle, and the target logit is
obtained by the cosine function. Then, all logit function are re-scaled by a ﬁxed
feature normalization, followed by subsequent steps that resemble the softmax
loss. Arcface’s main advantages resides in its ability to directly optimise the
geodesic distance margin by leveraging the exact correspondence between the
angle and arc in the normalised hypersphere.
Figure 6.5: Training a DCNN for face recognition supervised by the ArcFace
loss [JD19a]
Additionally, a COTS face recognition system is used for evaluation purposes.
6.2
Reproducibility
This thesis has adhered to the following principles:
• Creating code which can be obtained upon request;
==PAGE:69==
6.3 Summary
55
• Storing all the obtained results and the generated datasets;
• Listing all the details needed to run the algorithms for mobile phone emu-
lation, as well as GAN training.
Moreover, the used face recognition systems and datasets are available as follows:
• FaceQNet, ArcFace, dlib, MagFace and retina face are open-source and
available on GitHub;
• The FRGCv2 and FERET datasets can be obtained by license agreement.
Additionally, the name and version number of the used COTS system can be
obtained upon request.
6.3
Summary
This chapter presented the experimented set-up in terms of the used software
and algorithms to assess the impact of selﬁe ﬁlters on facial recognition. The
detailed explanation for the dataset generation and the core questions to be
answered are presented in more details in chapter 4. Furthermore, the results
of the experiments on the generated datasets are described in chapter 7.
==PAGE:70==
56
Experimental Set-up
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 7
Experiment Results
This chapter presents the experimental results for assessing the impact of selﬁe
ﬁlters on face recognition systems. As a source of images, datasets described
in chapter 4 will be used for showing the selﬁe ﬁlter impact based on coverage,
type, and placement.
In the following, all results will be compared to the baseline dataset, original
unaltered reference images from the FERET and FRGCv2 datasets.
7.1
Facial Coverage of Selﬁe Filters
Based on the scoring function discussed in chapter 4, the sampled popular selﬁe
ﬁlters have been grouped by their facial coverage. The more challenging selﬁe
ﬁlters correlate with an increased facial coverage score.
In Figure 7.1 and 7.2, due to having normalized the data, as presented in
chapter 6, a rather consistent face detection scores are seen across all selﬁe
ﬁlter (i.e regardless of their facial coverage).
Nevertheless, when looking at
the non-normalized summary tables (Table 7.1 and 7.2), it can be noticed that
with an increased facial coverage, the selﬁe ﬁlter impacts more the detection
==PAGE:72==
58
Experiment Results
performance of the face recognition systems.
Figure 7.1: Normalized Face detection scores on FERET-based datasets by the
Selﬁe Filter Facial Coverage
Selﬁe ﬁlter (FERET)
dlib
retina face
COTS
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
Baseline
2.031
0.529
0
0.9993
0.0002
0
3.058
0.820
0
Low Coverage
0.912
0.510
1.690
0.9994
0.0003
0
1.280
0.693
2.934
Medium Coverage
0.938
0.506
10.71
0.9992
0.0004
0
0.933
0.843
38.41
High Coverage
0.722
0.412
11.96
0.9992
0.0003
4.871
0.314
0.374
18.08
Table 7.1: Summary table for the FERET-based non-normalized Face Detection
scores by the Selﬁe Filter Facial Coverage
COTS and dlib follows the same trajectory looking at the face detection scores,
while the retina face algorithm is rather invariant across the selﬁe ﬁlter coverage.
Selﬁe ﬁlter (FRGC)
dlib
retina face
COTS
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
Baseline
2.031
0.529
0
0.9993
0.0002
0
3.058
0.820
0
Low Coverage
1.331
0.498
0.609
0.9995
0.0002
0
1.952
0.762
0.313
Medium Coverage
1.378
0.500
1.079
0.9993
0.0005
0.017
1.081
0.865
30.64
High Coverage
0.874
0.388
5.658
0.9992
0.0003
2.838
0.408
0.502
21.36
Table 7.2: Summary table for the FRGC-based non-normalized Face Detection
scores by the Selﬁe Filter Facial Coverage
==PAGE:73==
7.1 Facial Coverage of Selﬁe Filters
59
Figure 7.2: Normalized Face Detection scores on FRGC-based datasets by the
Selﬁe Filter Facial Coverage
Based on the selﬁe ﬁlter coverage, Table 7.3, 7.4, and Figure 7.3, 7.4, face quality
scores for the selﬁe ﬁltered image degrade as the selﬁe ﬁlter coverage increases.
Selﬁe ﬁlter (FERET)
FaceQNet
MagFace
µqscore
σqscore
Dϵ, %
µqscore
σqscore
Dϵ, %
Baseline
0.626
0.058
0
0.921
0.070
0
Low Coverage
0.563
0.062
0.731
0.762
0.102
0
Medium Coverage
0.531
0.056
4.631
0.395
0.058
0
High Coverage
0.451
0.043
5.188
0.635
0.225
0
Table 7.3: Summary table for the FERET-based non-normalized Face Quality
scores by the Selﬁe Filter Facial Coverage
For face quality assessment, additionally to the case when the face is fully altered
by the selﬁe ﬁlter, a signiﬁcant eﬀect on face recognition performance is determ-
ined by medium coverage selﬁe ﬁlters. FaceQNet shows a consistently lower
image quality score as the selﬁe ﬁlter coverage increases its intensity. On the
other hand, MagFace is rather vulnerable to scenarios where facial characterist-
ics are highlighted by the selﬁe ﬁlter (e.g joker), as the magnitude of the facial
embedding increases while the face is still signiﬁcantly occluded. Hence, µqscore
and σqscore is higher on high selﬁe ﬁlter coverage relative to the low or medium
ones.
==PAGE:74==
60
Experiment Results
Figure 7.3: Normalized Face Quality scores on FERET-based datasets by the
Selﬁe Filter Facial Coverage
Figure 7.4: Normalized Face Quality scores on FRGC-based datasets by the
Selﬁe Filter Facial Coverage
==PAGE:75==
7.1 Facial Coverage of Selﬁe Filters
61
Selﬁe ﬁlter (FRGC)
FaceQNet
MagFace
µqscore
σqscore
Dϵ, %
µqscore
σqscore
Dϵ, %
Baseline
0.626
0.058
0
0.921
0.070
0
Low Coverage
0.561
0.061
0.609
0.604
0.052
0
Medium Coverage
0.535
0.056
1.080
0.569
0.054
0
High Coverage
0.450
0.044
5.658
0.556
0.081
0
Table 7.4: Summary table for the FRGC-based non-normalized Face Quality
scores by the Selﬁe Filter Facial Coverage
Finally, for an overview on the entire spectrum of operating points (i.e. the false
rejection rate vs. false acceptance rate), the DET curves are plotted. Ideally,
the graph presenting the FNMR relative to the FMR should not have any DET
curves or, if present, they should convey a low EER.
(a) Arcface
(b) COTS
Figure 7.5: DET curves for FERET based datasets by Selﬁe Filter Coverage
A high EER for the medium coverage selﬁe ﬁlters is mainly caused by selﬁe
ﬁlters, where the eyes and the nose are altered. Table 7.5 presents a summary
on FERET-based datasets Face Veriﬁcation scores on Arcface and COTS.
FNMR
Arcface (FERET)
Selﬁe ﬁlter
# genuine
comparisons
# impostor
comparisons
FTE %
EER %
0.01% FMR
0.1% FMR
1% FMR
Baseline
785
414,480
0
0
0
0
0
Low Coverage
3,138
1,655,808
0.081
0.010
0.050
0
0
Medium Coverage
1,558
827,904
0.805
12.70
15.70
14.10
13.20
High Coverage
3,028
1,655,808
4.409
16.80
63.60
49.60
40.40
FNMR
COTS (FERET)
Selﬁe ﬁlter
# genuine
comparisons
# impostor
comparisons
FTE %
EER %
0.01% FMR
0.1% FMR
1% FMR
Baseline
783
413,952
0.120
0
0
0
0
Low Coverage
3,022
1,655,808
3.704
0
0
0
0
Medium Coverage
975
827,904
37.84
15.10
20.10
18.70
18.10
High Coverage
2,525
1,655,808
19.52
16.00
59.00
47.60
38.10
Table 7.5: FERET-based Face Veriﬁcation by Selﬁe Filter Facial Coverage
==PAGE:76==
62
Experiment Results
(a) Arcface
(b) COTS
Figure 7.6: DET curves for FRGC based datasets by Selﬁe Filter Coverage
For the FRGC based selﬁe ﬁltered images, the selﬁe ﬁlter coverage correlates
better with the increase in EER. Due to the unconstrained environment, exposed
to a better illumination, the dog ﬁlter blends better with the facial image and
is less signiﬁcant on FRGC based images, as seen in Figure 7.7.
(a) FERET
(b) FRGC
Figure 7.7: Example of dog selﬁe ﬁlter blending on the original image
FNMR
Arcface (FRGC)
Selﬁe ﬁlter
# genuine
comparisons
# impostor
comparisons
FTE %
EER %
0.01% FMR
0.1% FMR
1% FMR
Baseline
3,290
1,692,140
0
0
0
0
0
Low Coverage
13,160
6,768,560
0.052
0.100
0.120
0.100
0.100
Medium Coverage
6,579
3,384,280
0.139
0.850
8.400
3.500
0.830
High Coverage
12,920
6,768,560
0.383
19.80
73.00
59.20
48.80
FNMR
COTS (FRGC)
Selﬁe ﬁlter
# genuine
comparisons
# impostor
comparisons
FTE %
EER %
0.01% FMR
0.1% FMR
1% FMR
Baseline
3,290
1,692,140
0
0
0
0
0
Low Coverage
13,160
6,768,560
0.331
0.200
0.200
0.184
0.125
Medium Coverage
6,381
3,384,280
30.57
1.050
8.700
4.100
1.010
High Coverage
10,275
6,768,560
21.97
18.90
66.00
50.60
38.70
Table 7.6: FRGC-based Face Veriﬁcation by Selﬁe Filter Facial Coverage
==PAGE:77==
7.2 Type of Selﬁe Filters
63
7.2
Type of Selﬁe Filters
To identify certain motif that are speciﬁcally challenging for face recognition sys-
tems, the performance is assessed across all ten chosen selﬁe ﬁlters (Figure 3.1).
Figure 7.8: Normalized Face detection scores on FERET-based datasets by the
Selﬁe Filter Type
Selﬁe ﬁlter (FERET)
dlib
retina face
COTS
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
Baseline
2.031
0.529
0
0.9993
0.0002
0
3.058
0.820
0
Kitty
1.260
0.467
0.485
0.9994
0.0002
0
1.598
0.789
0
Rabbit
0.436
0.289
3.683
0.9995
0.0002
0
1.050
0.625
1.771
Card
0.867
0.381
0.646
0.9992
0.0002
0
1.186
0.512
0.322
Mickey
0.858
0.396
1.939
0.9993
0.0002
0
0.291
0.348
9.662
Disco
0.563
0.386
21.32
0.9990
0.0005
0
0.316
0.570
76.00
Mask
0.764
0.352
6.139
0.9991
0.0003
0
0.469
0.390
3.542
Dog
1.311
0.426
0.162
0.9991
0.0003
0
1.667
0.580
0.805
Panda
0.368
0.226
19.06
0.9991
0.0002
0
0.319
0.335
1.127
Squirrel
0.519
0.235
2.746
0.9990
0.0004
19.450
0.574
0.333
64.57
Joker
1.164
0.284
20.03
0.9994
0.0002
0
0.059
0.228
3.059
Table 7.7: Summary table for the FERET-based non-normalized Face Detection
scores by the Selﬁe Filter Type
Based on Figure 7.8, for face detection, dlib performs similarly to the chosen
COTS algorithm. Nevertheless, retina face shows a signiﬁcant incremental face
==PAGE:78==
64
Experiment Results
detection performance, outputting an almost perfect detection score for the
FERET-based datasets (i.e unaltered and selﬁe ﬁltered images).
Figure 7.9: Normalized Face detection scores on FRGC-based datasets by the
Selﬁe Filter Type
Selﬁe ﬁlter (FRGC)
dlib
retina face
COTS
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
Baseline
2.478
0.439
0
0.9994
0.0002
0
3.531
0.723
0
Kitty
1.543
0.351
0.069
0.9995
0.0001
0
1.887
0.518
0.069
Rabbit
1.600
0.402
0.208
0.9995
0.0001
0
2.508
0.793
0
Card
0.842
0.322
1.944
0.9995
0.0002
0
1.458
0.536
0.347
Mickey
1.375
0.326
0.208
0.9994
0.0002
0
0.722
0.445
0.833
Disco
0.934
0.367
2.083
0.9991
0.0008
0.069
0.425
0.534
61.11
Mask
1.060
0.329
0.763
0.9993
0.0002
0.069
0.834
0.470
1.042
Dog
1.816
0.350
0.069
0.9994
0.0002
0
2.053
0.498
0.139
Panda
0.492
0.248
8.333
0.9989
0.0004
0
0.393
0.359
1.111
Squirrel
0.751
0.236
3.446
0.9995
0.0001
11.25
0.245
0.366
60.35
Joker
1.160
0.323
10.03
0.9991
0.0004
0
0.038
0.247
22.92
Table 7.8: Summary table for the FRGC-based non-normalized Face Detection
scores by the Selﬁe Filter Type
Figure 7.8 and 7.9 present the superior retina face algorithm’s face detection
score on the FERET and FRGC-based datasets (i.e unaltered and selﬁe ﬁltered
images). On the other hand, even though dlib and COTS performs very well on
unaltered images, its performance degrades fast when presenting images with
applied selﬁe ﬁlters.
==PAGE:79==
7.2 Type of Selﬁe Filters
65
From a face quality standpoint, as presented in Figure 7.10 and 7.11, the
quality of the facial images decreases with selﬁe ﬁlters of a higher facial coverage.
Figure 7.10: Normalized Face Quality scores on FERET-based datasets by the
Selﬁe Filter Type
Selﬁe ﬁlter (FERET)
FaceQNet
MagFace
µqscore
σqscore
Dϵ, %
µqscore
σqscore
Dϵ, %
Baseline
0.626
0.058
0
0.921
0.070
0
Kitty
0.548
0.065
0.482
0.798
0.100
0
Rabbit
0.615
0.055
3.666
0.689
0.058
0
Card
0.561
0.049
0.643
0.798
0.097
0
Mickey
0.545
0.052
1.929
0.358
0.048
0
Disco
0.503
0.048
21.22
0.441
0.049
0
Mask
0.472
0.055
6.109
0.797
0.079
0
Dog
0.533
0.055
0.160
0.394
0.039
0
Panda
0.434
0.038
18.97
0.469
0.046
0
Squirrel
0.461
0.032
2.733
0.586
0.058
0
Joker
0.455
0.034
20.17
0.705
0.070
0
Table 7.9: Summary table for the FERET-based non-normalized Face Quality
scores by the Selﬁe Filter Type
FaceQNet is rather consistent with assigning lower face quality scores for images
that have a high selﬁe ﬁlter coverage. However, as it results in higher facial
embedding magnitude, MagFace is vulnerable to selﬁe ﬁlters of high coverage
that highlight certain facial feature (i.e the joker face).
==PAGE:80==
66
Experiment Results
Figure 7.11: Normalized Face Quality scores on FRGC-based datasets by the
Selﬁe Filter Type
Selﬁe ﬁlter (FRGC)
FaceQNet
MagFace
µqscore
σqscore
Dϵ, %
µqscore
σqscore
Dϵ, %
Baseline
0.624
0.047
0
0.705
0.037
0
Kitty
0.533
0.058
0.069
0.644
0.036
0
Rabbit
0.596
0.055
0.208
0.614
0.031
0
Card
0.551
0.051
1.944
0.554
0.042
0
Mickey
0.536
0.047
0.208
0.555
0.048
0
Disco
0.500
0.045
2.083
0.543
0.047
0
Mask
0.476
0.057
0.763
0.644
0.036
0
Dog
0.567
0.053
0.069
0.609
0.043
0
Panda
0.419
0.036
8.333
0.481
0.034
0
Squirrel
0.449
0.014
3.446
0.484
0.027
0
Joker
0.453
0.037
10.03
0.615
0.034
0
Table 7.10: Summary table for the FRGC-based non-normalized Face Quality
scores by the Selﬁe Filter Type
With some discrepancies for MagFace, in both the FERET and FRGC-based
datasets, there is a clear tendency for having lower face quality scores when the
image has a higher selﬁe ﬁlter coverage.
The overall impact of various selﬁe ﬁlters based on their facial coverage can be
assessed by looking at the DET curves, as seen in Figure 7.12 and 7.13.
==PAGE:81==
7.2 Type of Selﬁe Filters
67
Figure 7.12: DET curves for the FERET-based selﬁe ﬁltered datasets
FNMR
Arcface (FERET)
Selﬁe ﬁlter
# genuine
comparisons
# impostor
comparisons
FTE %
EER %
0.01% FMR
0.1% FMR
1% FMR
Baseline
785
413,952
0
0
0
0
0
Kitty
785
413,952
0
0
0
0
0
Rabbit
785
413,952
0
0
0
0
0
Card
785
413,952
0
0
0
0
0
Mickey
783
413,952
0.255
0.001
0.001
0
0
Disco
778
413,952
0.892
0.700
0.700
0.700
0.700
Mask
778
413,952
0.892
0.500
4.600
1.010
0
Dog
780
413,952
0.637
18.70
26.50
22.40
21.80
Panda
775
413,952
1.274
10.90
90.90
71.50
40.60
Squirrel
703
413,952
10.53
14.70
97.20
86.00
57.00
Joker
772
413,952
1.656
21.50
99.50
96.00
78.00
Table 7.11: FERET-based Selﬁe Filtered datasets on Arcface
FNMR
COTS (FERET)
Selﬁe ﬁlter
# genuine
comparisons
# impostor
comparisons
FTE %
EER %
0.01% FMR
0.1% FMR
1% FMR
Baseline
783
413,952
0.12
0
0
0
0
Kitty
782
413,952
0.26
0
0
0
0
Rabbit
768
413,952
2.04
0
0
0
0
Card
781
413,952
0.38
0
0
0
0
Mickey
691
413,952
11.86
0.040
0.300
0
0
Disco
197
413,952
74.87
2.220
5.600
3.600
2.500
Mask
753
413,952
3.950
0.350
0.910
0.620
0.400
Dog
778
413,952
0.77
18.30
26.10
22.80
21.90
Panda
773
413,952
1.40
7.700
85.40
60.70
28.10
Squirrel
255
413,952
67.47
8.000
93.30
80.40
43.10
Joker
744
413,952
5.10
22.60
98.90
94.40
79.00
Table 7.12: FERET-based Selﬁe Filtered datasets on COTS
==PAGE:82==
68
Experiment Results
Figure 7.13: DET curves for the FRGC-based Selﬁe Filtered datasets
FNMR
Arcface (FRGC)
Selﬁe ﬁlter
# genuine
comparisons
# impostor
comparisons
FTE %
EER %
0.01% FMR
0.1% FMR
1% FMR
Baseline
3,290
1,692,140
0
0
0
0
0
Kitty
3,290
1,692,140
0
0
0
0
0
Rabbit
3,290
1,692,140
0
0.600
0.600
0.590
0.400
Card
3,290
1,692,140
0.020
0.110
0.110
0
0
Mickey
3,290
1,692,140
0
0
0
0
0
Disco
3,290
1,692,140
0
1.100
2.500
1.100
1.100
Mask
3,289
1,692,140
0.030
0.800
14.80
3.100
0.850
Dog
3,289
1,692,140
0.030
0.600
16.10
3.100
0.500
Panda
3,279
1,692,140
0.334
14.50
98.90
91.30
62.60
Squirrel
3,078
1,692,140
10.36
23.20
100
98.30
84.50
Joker
3,274
1,692,140
0.486
24.70
100
99.10
89.10
Table 7.13: FRGC-based Selﬁe Filtered datasets on Arcface
FNMR
COTS (FRGC)
Selﬁe ﬁlter
# genuine
comparisons
# impostor
comparisons
FTE %
EER %
0.01% FMR
0.1% FMR
1% FMR
Baseline
3,290
1,692,140
0
0
0
0
0
Kitty
3,290
1,692,140
0.061
0
0
0
0
Rabbit
3,290
1,692,140
0.061
0.670
0.720
0.670
0.550
Card
3,281
1,692,140
0.334
0.060
0.100
0
0
Mickey
3,265
1,692,140
0.820
0.450
1.100
0.700
0.100
Disco
3,091
1,692,140
61.06
1.300
3.500
2.700
1.300
Mask
3,260
1,692,140
0.972
0.600
3.600
1.100
0.400
Dog
3,290
1,692,140
0.030
1.000
14.80
5.900
0.900
Panda
3,242
1,692,140
1.519
12.40
93.00
76.30
45.50
Squirrel
1,348
1,692,140
59.05
19.10
97.80
89.50
70.00
Joker
2,425
1,692,140
26.33
28.60
99.80
97.20
86.60
Table 7.14: FRGC-based Selﬁe Filtered datasets on COTS
==PAGE:83==
7.3 Placement of Selﬁe Filters
69
The FERET and FRGC-based selﬁe ﬁltered datasets performance is similar
based on the DET curves. Overall, as indicated in Table 7.12 and 7.14, FTE,
EER, and FNMR at certain FMR are grown as the selﬁe ﬁlter intensity
increases.
7.3
Placement of Selﬁe Filters
Based on Figure 4.7, the sampled popular selﬁe ﬁlters have been grouped by the
facial region that is mostly occluded.
Figure 7.14: Normalized Face detection scores on FERET-based datasets by the
Facial Region that is mostly altered by the Selﬁe Filter
Figure 7.14 and Table 7.15 indicates that as more facial features are altered
by the selﬁe ﬁlter, the worse the face detection gets. Additionally, based on
the FERET and FRGC-based datasets, the mouth and the eyes are the two
most signiﬁcant facial elements that aﬀect the face detection algorithms. Ad-
ditionally, if the nose together with some other facial elements is occluded, the
detection score degrades signiﬁcantly, as shown in Figure 7.8 and 7.9 for the
dog or mask selﬁe ﬁlter. On the other hand, for selﬁe ﬁlters where mostly the
nose is covered, the face detection is aﬀected the least (e.g the rabbit selﬁe ﬁlter
shown in section 7.2).
==PAGE:84==
70
Experiment Results
Even if one of the three facial elements are altered, the most robust face detection
algorithm out of the proposed ones is retina face.
Selﬁe ﬁlter (FERET)
dlib
retina face
COTS
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
Baseline
2.031
0.529
0
0.9993
0.0002
0
3.058
0.820
0
Mouth
0.817
0.371
3.382
0.9992
0.0003
0
0.833
0.580
1.932
Eyes
0.919
0.506
7.890
0.9992
0.0004
0
0.903
0.894
28.50
Nose
0.972
0.571
1.932
0.9993
0.0003
0
1.360
0.677
1.288
Total face
0.707
0.428
13.90
0.9992
0.0004
6.495
0.249
0.346
22.92
Table 7.15: Summary table for the FERET-based non-normalized Face Detec-
tion scores by the Facial Region that is mostly altered by the Selﬁe Filter
Figure 7.15: Normalized Face detection scores on FRGC-based datasets by the
Facial Region that is mostly altered by the Selﬁe Filter
Selﬁe ﬁlter (FRGC)
dlib
retina face
COTS
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
µdscore
σdscore
Dϵ, %
Baseline
2.478
0.439
0
0.9994
0.0002
0
3.531
0.723
0
Mouth
0.952
0.343
1.358
0.9994
0.0002
0.035
1.147
0.593
0.696
Eyes
1.286
0.432
0.789
0.9993
0.0004
0.023
1.025
0.806
20.68
Nose
1.708
0.392
0.139
0.9995
0.0002
0
2.281
0.701
0.069
Total face
0.810
0.386
7.289
0.9992
0.0004
3.760
0.212
0.379
28.13
Table 7.16: Summary table for the FRGC-based Face Detection non-normalized
scores by the Facial Region that is mostly altered by the Selﬁe Filter
For face quality assessment, additionally to the case when the face is entirely
==PAGE:85==
7.3 Placement of Selﬁe Filters
71
altered by the selﬁe ﬁlter, another highly signiﬁcant region of the face for the
face quality score remains the eye region.
Figure 7.16: Normalized Face Quality scores on FERET-based datasets by Fa-
cial Region that is mostly altered by the Selﬁe Filter
Selﬁe ﬁlter (FERET)
FaceQNet
MagFace
µqscore
σqscore
Dϵ, %
µqscore
σqscore
Dϵ, %
Baseline
0.626
0.058
0
0.921
0.070
0
Mouth
0.514
0.065
3.382
0.846
0.101
0
Eyes
0.523
0.054
7.890
0.532
0.204
0
Nose
0.579
0.060
1.932
0.537
0.160
0
Total face
0.443
0.035
13.96
0.548
0.188
0
Table 7.17: Summary table for the FERET-based non-normalized Face Quality
scores by the Facial Region that is mostly altered by the Selﬁe Filter
Selﬁe ﬁlter (FRGC)
FaceQNet
MagFace
µqscore
σqscore
Dϵ, %
µqscore
σqscore
Dϵ, %
Baseline
0.624
0.047
0
0.705
0.037
0
Mouth
0.533
0.058
1.358
0.644
0.036
0
Eyes
0.596
0.055
0.789
0.614
0.031
0
Nose
0.551
0.051
0.139
0.554
0.042
0
Total face
0.536
0.047
7.289
0.555
0.048
0
Table 7.18: Summary table for the FRGC-based non-normalized Face Quality
scores by the Facial Region that is mostly altered by the Selﬁe Filter
==PAGE:86==
72
Experiment Results
Figure 7.17: Normalized Face Quality scores on FRGC-based datasets by Facial
Region that is mostly altered by the Selﬁe Filter
The facial regions that have a higher impact on the face quality scores are
consistent across the FERET and FRGC-based datasets. Nevertheless, despite
of still showing a relatively high face quality score for the images with altered
facial region, MagFace reconﬁrms the importance of the eye region.
Figure 7.18 presents the DET curves by selﬁe ﬁlter placement for the FERET
based selﬁe ﬁltered dataset (Table 7.19), while Figure 7.19 focuses on the FRGC
based selﬁe ﬁltered dataset (Table 7.20). Based on the results, the occluded nose
shows a high EER %, as the selﬁe ﬁlter alters partially the eyes and the mouth.
FNMR
Arcface (FERET)
Selﬁe ﬁlter
# genuine
comparisons
# impostor
comparisons
FTE %
EER %
0.01% FMR
0.1% FMR
1% FMR
Baseline
785
413,952
0
0
0
0
0
Mouth
1,563
828,960
0.483
0.200
2.400
0.700
0
Eyes
2,346
1,243,440
0.069
0.200
0.270
0.200
0.200
Nose
1,565
828,960
0.322
12.40
16.70
13.903
12.05
Total face
2,250
1,243,440
4.557
17.80
78.80
62.30
50.10
Selﬁe ﬁlters that cover the face entirely are the most challenging for face recogni-
tion systems. Also, as COTS face recognition systems rely on the eye localisation
for the face enrollment and recognition, the eye region is very important.
==PAGE:87==
7.3 Placement of Selﬁe Filters
73
FNMR
COTS (FERET)
Selﬁe ﬁlter
# genuine
comparisons
# impostor
comparisons
FTE %
EER %
0.01% FMR
0.1% FMR
1% FMR
Baseline
783
413,952
0.120
0
0
0
0
Mouth
1,534
828,960
2.254
0.200
0.600
0.300
0.150
Eyes
1,670
1,243,440
29.04
0.500
1.000
0.910
0.420
Nose
1,546
828,960
1.449
12.82
14.40
12.90
12.50
Total face
1,772
1,243,440
24.69
17.80
70.50
55.60
46.40
Table 7.19: FERET-based Face Veriﬁcation by the Facial Region that is mostly
altered by the Selﬁe Filter
(a) Arcface
(b) COTS
Figure 7.18: DET curves for FERET based datasets by Selﬁe Filter Placement
(a) Arcface
(b) COTS
Figure 7.19: DET curves for FRGC based datasets by Selﬁe Filter Placement
FNMR
Arcface (FRGC)
Selﬁe ﬁlter
# genuine
comparisons
# impostor
comparisons
FTE %
EER %
0.01% FMR
0.1% FMR
1% FMR
Baseline
3,290
1,692,140
0
0
0
0
0
Mouth
6,579
3,384,280
0.244
0.550
1.500
0.700
0.250
Eyes
9,870
5,076,420
0
0.750
1.200
0.800
0.700
Nose
6,579
3,384,280
0.139
0.950
7.800
3.780
0.720
Total face
9,631
5,076,420
0.418
18.90
94.80
78.60
56.80
==PAGE:88==
74
Experiment Results
FNMR
COTS (FRGC)
Selﬁe ﬁlter
# genuine
comparisons
# impostor
comparisons
FTE %
EER %
0.01% FMR
0.1% FMR
1% FMR
Baseline
3,290
1,692,140
0
0
0
0
0
Mouth
6,541
3,384,280
0.662
0.700
5.200
2.100
0.610
Eyes
9,815
5,076,420
20.66
0.500
0.900
0.700
0.610
Nose
6,580
3,384,280
0.069
0.800
5.700
2.350
0.650
Total face
7,015
5,076,420
28.97
21.20
82.90
69.70
58.30
Table 7.20: FRGC-based Face Veriﬁcation by the Facial Region that is mostly
altered by the Selﬁe Filter
7.4
Selﬁe Filter Removal and Facial Inpainting
Having trained the GAN based selﬁe ﬁlter removal model for at least 90,000
iterations, a comparison with the original unaltered counterparts is performed.
Following the scoring strategy presented in section 5.3, Table 7.21 indicates an
overall higher similarity between the FERET reference and the image where the
selﬁe ﬁlter has been removed relative to the selﬁe ﬁltered counterpart.
Selﬁe Filtered
Reconstructed Image
(Selﬁe ﬁlter removal)
Coverage
Placement
Size
PSNR
SSIM
PSNR
SSIM
Card
low
mouth
621
29.93
0.958
30.87
0.983
Kitty
low
eyes
621
31.00
0.973
33.66
0.973
Bunny
low
nose
621
31.54
0.982
42.02
0.988
Mickey
low
eyes
621
29.26
0.970
26.69
0.955
Glasses
medium
eyes
621
22.33
0.948
30.17
0.972
Dog
medium
nose
621
22.64
0.959
33.70
0.975
Mask
high
mouth
621
14.90
0.922
31.69
0.971
Panda
high
total
621
19.90
0.925
23.21
0.933
Squirrel
high
total
621
18.61
0.914
30.00
0.960
Joker
high
total
621
19.60
0.902
26.82
0.945
Table 7.21: The PSNR and SSIM scores for the selﬁe ﬁltered image (Figure 7.20)
and its reconstructed counterpart, averaged over 621 images
Figure 7.20: Sample of Selﬁe Filtered facial images
To quantify the incremental face recognition performance impact after removing
the selﬁe ﬁlters, the DET curves are plotted for selﬁe ﬁlters of various facial
coverage (subsection 4.2.3) and aﬀected facial regions (subsection 4.2.4).
==PAGE:89==
7.4 Selﬁe Filter Removal and Facial Inpainting
75
(a) Arcface
(b) COTS
Figure 7.21: DET curves for FERET based selﬁe ﬁlter test dataset by Selﬁe
Filter Coverage
Arcface
COTS
Facial Coverage
FERET
Selﬁe Filtered
EER %
Selﬁe Filter Removal
EER %
∆
Selﬁe Filtered
EER %
Selﬁe Filter Removal
EER %
∆
Low
0
0.030
0.030
0
0.090
0.090
Medium
12.70
6.110
-6.590
15.10
6.050
-9.050
High
16.80
15.30
-1.500
16.00
17.10
1.100
Table 7.22: EER comparison between the image where the selﬁe ﬁlter has been
removed relative to the selﬁe ﬁltered counterpart by Selﬁe Facial Coverage
Comparing the results in Figure 7.21 and Table 7.22 with their selﬁe ﬁltered
counterparts, the EER has mostly decreased, improving the face recognition
performance across facial coverage and placement.
(a) Selﬁe ﬁltered image
(b) Selﬁe ﬁlter removal
(c) Original image
Figure 7.22: Examples of medium facial coverage selﬁe ﬁlters
The medium coverage selﬁe ﬁlters have beneﬁted the most from the proposed
selﬁe ﬁlter removal approach, reaching 6.50% percentage point lower EER on
Arcface (Figure 7.21a) and 9.05% percentage point lower EER on COTS (Fig-
ure 7.21b) compared to the selﬁe ﬁltered variant (Figure 7.22).
In the case of low coverage selﬁe ﬁlters, facial images before and after selﬁe ﬁlter
removal maintain the high visibility of the original facial characteristics, leading
==PAGE:90==
76
Experiment Results
to a superior face recognition performance (Figure 7.23).
(a) Selﬁe ﬁltered image
(b) Selﬁe ﬁlter removal
(c) Original image
Figure 7.23: Examples of low facial coverage selﬁe ﬁlters
For total facial coverage selﬁe ﬁlters, despite of a realistic reconstruction of the
face, it is challenging to capture most of the subject’s facial characteristics,
resulting in the least growth in face recognition performance (Figure 7.24).
(a) Selﬁe ﬁltered image
(b) Selﬁe ﬁlter removal
(c) Original image
Figure 7.24: Examples of total facial coverage selﬁe ﬁlters
Based on Figure 7.25 and Table 7.23, the removal of selﬁe ﬁlters mainly covering
the eyes and the nose have been the most signiﬁcant on Arcface and COTS.
(a) Arcface
(b) COTS
Figure 7.25: DET curves for FERET based selﬁe ﬁlter test dataset by Selﬁe
Filter Placement
For the eye region, the selﬁe ﬁlter removal resulted in 0.11% percentage point
lower EER on Arcface and 0.45% percentage point lower EER on COTS. Re-
==PAGE:91==
7.5 Key ﬁndings
77
moving the selﬁe ﬁlters covering mostly the nose region, resulted in at least
7.20% percentage point lower EER on both Arcface and COTS.
Arcface
COTS
Facial Placement
FERET
Selﬁe Filtered
EER %
Selﬁe Filter Removal
EER %
∆
Selﬁe Filtered
EER %
Selﬁe Filter Removal
EER %
∆
Mouth
0.200
0.290
0.090
0.200
0.450
0.250
Eyes
0.200
0.090
-0.110
0.650
0.200
-0.450
Nose
12.40
5.200
-7.200
12.82
5.390
-7.430
Total face
17.80
16.70
-1.100
17.80
18.30
0.500
Table 7.23: EER comparison between the image where the selﬁe ﬁlter has been
removed relative to the selﬁe ﬁltered counterpart by Selﬁe Facial Placement
Additionally to reducing the EER, the selﬁe ﬁlter removal beneﬁts the FTE
metric as well. Given that COTS has shown to vulnerable to selﬁe ﬁlter covering
the eye region, the selﬁe removal has reduce the corresponding FTE by 25.29%
points. Furthermore, the selﬁe ﬁlter removal has reduced the FTE on COTS
for the total coverage selﬁe ﬁlters by 24.15% points.
The FTE metric on Arcface is stable prior and post selﬁe ﬁlter removal.
Table 7.24 and 7.25 present the selﬁe ﬁlter removal contribution in the FTE
decline across facial coverage and placement, where the FERET test dataset is
considered.
Arcface
COTS
Facial Coverage
FERET
Selﬁe Filtered
FTE %
Selﬁe Filter Removal
FTE %
∆
Selﬁe Filtered
FTE %
Selﬁe Filter Removal
FTE %
∆
Low
0.081
0.070
-0.011
3.704
2.743
-0.961
Medium
0.805
0.690
-0.115
37.84
6.439
-31.40
High
4.409
1.390
-3.019
19.52
0.447
-19.07
Table 7.24: FTE comparison between the image where the selﬁe ﬁlter has been
removed relative to the selﬁe ﬁltered counterpart by Selﬁe Facial Coverage
Arcface
COTS
Facial Placement
FERET
Selﬁe Filtered
FTE %
Selﬁe Filter Removal
FTE %
∆
Selﬁe Filtered
FTE %
Selﬁe Filter Removal
FTE %
∆
Mouth
0.483
0.450
-0.033
2.254
1.721
-0.533
Eyes
0.069
0.069
0
29.04
3.753
-25.29
Nose
0.322
0.340
0.018
1.449
1.558
0.109
Total face
4.557
1.500
-3.057
24.69
0.537
-24.15
Table 7.25: FTE comparison between the image where the selﬁe ﬁlter has been
removed relative to the selﬁe ﬁltered counterpart by Selﬁe Facial Placement
7.5
Key ﬁndings
This section summarizes the key ﬁndings that can be observed from the results:
==PAGE:92==
78
Experiment Results
• EER, FTE increases when the facial coverage of the selﬁe ﬁlter increases;
• Based on the used face detection algorithms, retina face has proven to be
the most stable;
• The overall lowest face detection performance is seen on the COTS al-
gorithm. However, such recognition systems are designed based on con-
straint environments, where the subject is required to follow some rules
for an increased face recognition pipeline accuracy. E.g At the border con-
trol, every person looks straight at the camera and no unnecessary object
is allowed to occlude the face;
• The FaceQNet quality score decreases as the selﬁe ﬁlter coverage increases;
• The MagFace quality score has a nearly perfect face detection, but the
score is vulnerable to selﬁe ﬁlters of high facial coverage intensity that high-
light certain facial characteristics, making them more visible, and hence,
increasing the magnitude of the facial embedding;
• The performance of the tested commercial and open-source systems have
shown to be signiﬁcantly impacted by selﬁe ﬁlters occluding the eye region,
nose region, and the total face;
• The tested commercial system has proven to be particularly vulnerable to
selﬁe ﬁlters where the eyes are covered, leading to a high FTE; The FTE
is signiﬁcantly reduced by applying the selﬁe ﬁlter removal algorithm;
• Having removed the selﬁe ﬁlter, an incremental growth in face recognition
performance was found, where the medium coverage selﬁe ﬁlters and the
selﬁe ﬁltered images covering the eyes and the nose regions are beneﬁting
the most.
Figure 7.26a highlights some typical cases when dlib does not detect any faces.
On the other hand, Figure 7.26b is prone to detecting multiple faces.
(a) Dlib
(b) Retina face
Figure 7.26: Detection challenges on dlib and retina face
Figure 7.27a and Figure 7.27b aims to put in perspective the low and high
quality selﬁe ﬁltered facial images. Aside of the overall blending of the selﬁe
==PAGE:93==
7.6 Summary
79
ﬁlter with the original image, the low or high quality score can be partially
impacted by the original image itself (e.g illumination, pose, etc).
(a) Low quality score
(b) High quality score
Figure 7.27: Examples of facial images in the selﬁe ﬁltered databases that re-
ceived a low quality score (a) and a high quality score (b) for FaceQNet
Facial images with bad veriﬁcation performance on Arcface and COTS are shown
in Figure 7.28. Arcface veriﬁcation performance is signiﬁcantly impacted by high
coverage selﬁe ﬁlters, while COTS is particularly vulnerable to selﬁe ﬁlters with
occluded eyes.
(a) Arcface
(b) COTS
Figure 7.28: Examples of bad veriﬁcation performance on Arcface and COTS
7.6
Summary
This chapter presents the results of the project.
The obtained results show
that selﬁe ﬁlters aﬀect both the tested commercial and open-source systems,
==PAGE:94==
80
Experiment Results
especially for facial images with high intensities of selﬁe ﬁlters and when facial
images with selﬁe ﬁlters are compared to more unconstrained probe images
without selﬁe ﬁlters. In terms of the selﬁe ﬁltered facial region that aﬀects the
face recognition systems the most, the results show that the eyes and nose plays
a signiﬁcant role. Moreover, the commercial system that has been used has been
particularly vulnerable to selﬁe ﬁltered images where the eye region is covered
or highly altered.
The selﬁe ﬁlter removal algorithm reduces the EER and FTE relative to the
selﬁe ﬁltered counterparts, hence, increasing the face recognition performance.
==PAGE:95==
Chapter 8
Discussion & Future Work
In this chapter, a general overview of the project is presented, together with
some future-work discussion.
In chapter 4, a categorisation of selﬁe ﬁlters based on the facial coverage, facial
placement, and type has been completed. Overall, based on the criteria stated
in section 3.2 a shortlist of ﬁve popular selﬁe ﬁlter mobile applications have been
deﬁned, with thousands of available selﬁe ﬁlters. Hence, further media research
on mobile application speciﬁc popular selﬁe ﬁlters was done, reaching a list of
ten selﬁe ﬁlters that are used along the project. However, it might very well be
the case that over time the trend in selﬁe ﬁlters might shift, thus, leading to
diﬀerent results. Additionally, the generated facial images with selﬁe ﬁlters are
solely generate by existing popular selﬁe ﬁlter mobile applications. Based on
the acquired results, it can be said with high conﬁdence that selﬁe ﬁlters have
an impact on face recognition systems by degrading their performance.
Hence, by combining two recent GAN-based occlusion removal algorithm ideas,
a variant that is speciﬁcally tailored to the selﬁe ﬁlter case has been created.
Due to the relatively limited amount of selﬁe ﬁltered images, data augmentation
has been applied, signiﬁcantly increasing the model’s performance. Further on,
in section 7.4, the quality of the selﬁe ﬁlter removal is assessed in terms of
the proposed scoring functions.
Overall, the resulting images show a better
score relative to their selﬁe ﬁltered counterparts. Nevertheless, to quantify the
==PAGE:96==
82
Discussion & Future Work
incremental growth in the performance of face recognition systems, chapter 7
measures the impact of the facial reconstruction on face detection, face quality,
and overall face recognition.
The impact of selﬁe ﬁlters was evaluated on six diﬀerent commercial and open-
source systems. Most, of these systems, are considered state-of-the-art and are
widely used, being good representatives for showing the selﬁe ﬁlter eﬀect on
modern face recognition systems. However, there might be some other systems
proven to be more robust for selﬁe ﬁltered images than the tested systems.
8.1
More Selﬁe Filter Mobile Application
To increase the GAN-based approach selﬁe ﬁlter removal accuracy, a larger
gallery of selﬁe ﬁlters, that is diversiﬁed across various selﬁe ﬁlter mobile ap-
plications, is needed.
Furthermore, a possible API integration with popular
selﬁe ﬁlter mobile application, such as Snapchat, would allow the model to be
constantly up-to-date with the daily trends. Furthermore, by covering more
selﬁe ﬁlter mobile applications, a large user segment could be approached.
8.2
Larger Dataset with More Selﬁe Filters
More data would act as a catalyst for the GAN-based selﬁe ﬁlter removal per-
formance. Despite of the current well-deﬁned data augmentation techniques,
more selﬁe ﬁlter datasets would ensure that the training covers more scenarios,
hence, leading to a better genralizability. Furthermore, more selﬁe ﬁlters would
minimize the risk of potentially missing some popular selﬁe ﬁlters that might
aﬀect the face recognition systems.
8.3
Extension of the Proposed GAN Solution
Further enhancements and ﬁne-tuning of the GAN-based selﬁe ﬁlter removal
solution would lead to a better facial reconstruction performance. A possible
approach could be adding one more discriminator that would focus on the selﬁe
ﬁltered image, ensuring that both global and local facial features are consistent
with the source unaltered image during the training phase. The training could
be done such that the generator and the discriminator covering the whole facial
==PAGE:97==
8.4 Development of New Algorithms for Face Quality Assessment
83
image are trained for half of the training iterations, while for the other half, the
generator and the discriminator covering the selﬁe ﬁltered region of the image
would be considered. As possible inspiration, [NUD20] can be used.
Additionally, for better selﬁe ﬁlter removal results, model parallelism could be
leveraged, allowing for multi-GPU training. This way, the current limitation
presented by the long training time could be addressed and, ultimately, better
inpainting results can be attained.
8.4
Development of New Algorithms for Face
Quality Assessment
Face quality assessment aims to estimate the suitability of a face image for
recognition. Based on the components listed in subsection 2.4.2, extensive re-
search has been conducted on the character and ﬁdelity level. However, to be
able to identify images that would not be suitable for a face recognition system
without running it through the entire face recognition pipeline, the recent focus
has shifted towards utility.
Figure 8.1: A face image is preprocessed and a face quality assessment algorithm
is applied, outputting a scalar quality score [TS21b]
As a result an image quality score should be deﬁned similarly to the NFIQv2
[NI11] for ﬁngerprint recognition. The major innovation of NFIQv2 was linking
image quality to operational recognition performance. By allowed for quality
values to be tightly deﬁned and then numerically calibrated, this in turn, con-
tributed to the standardization needed to support a worldwide deployment of
ﬁngerprint sensors with universally interpretable image qualities.
==PAGE:98==
84
Discussion & Future Work
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
One of the most popular, convenient and accurate biometric system is face
recognition. Despite of the nearly perfect recognition performance of state-of-
the-art face recognition systems since the appearance of deep learning, there is
still concern with regards to face recognition reliability when being exposed to
occluded or manipulated faces. Therefore, selﬁe ﬁlters are expected to have an
impact on the performance of face recognition systems, that was investigated
along the project.
To investigate the impact of selﬁe ﬁlters on face recognition systems, four re-
search questions were formulated in chapter 1, which now will be separately
answered.
Research question 1 How can a categorisation of diﬀerent types of selﬁe ﬁlters
be deﬁned based on selﬁe ﬁlters found in popular mobile applications?
A possible approach is to deﬁned the categorisation of selﬁe ﬁlters based on the
facial coverage, facial placement, and selﬁe ﬁlter type. For applicability reasons,
the generated facial images with selﬁe ﬁlters should be solely based on existing
popular tool to ensure that all details in a target selﬁe ﬁltered are captured as
for a usual day-to-day user of the mobile application. It is important to research
the most popular selﬁe ﬁlter mobile applications that comply to a list of criteria
(see section 3.2) for this project. Furthermore, out of the thousands of available
==PAGE:100==
86
Conclusion
selﬁe ﬁlters, the most relevant, diverse and used ones should be considered, such
that the above mentioned categories of selﬁe ﬁlters could be fulﬁlled.
Research question 2 What is the impact of selﬁe ﬁlters on the biometric
performance of state-of-the-art face recognition systems?
The results obtained during the project show that selﬁe ﬁlters have an impact
on both the tested commercial and open-source systems, especially for facial
images with high selﬁe ﬁlter facial coverage and when facial images with selﬁe
ﬁlters are compared to more unconstrained probe images without selﬁe ﬁlters.
For biometric veriﬁcation using ArcFace, the growth in EER is highly correlated
with selﬁe ﬁlter facial coverage. Moreover, high FTE for the COTS system was
observed on the generated datasets with high selﬁe ﬁlter facial coverage that is
centered on the eye region (i.e the selﬁe ﬁlter with solid colored glasses).
FaceQNet and MagFace are systems that measure the suitability of a facial image
for face recognition. The results show that the quality score for FaceQNet drops
as the intensities of the selﬁe ﬁlter in a facial image increases.
Considering
MagFace, more robust face quality scores are recorded, but the algorithm is
rather vulnerable to selﬁe ﬁlters that highlight facial features (e.g.
the red
color around the joker mouth). Hence, for extreme selﬁe ﬁlters that are highly
likely to increase the face embedding magnitude, MagFace is outperformed by
FaceQNet.
Additionally, the results show that the tested system’s abilities to detect faces
reliably are signiﬁcantly aﬀected by selﬁe ﬁlters. Along the testing phase, the
most reliable algorithm for face detection has proven to be retina face. On the
other hand, for the COTS system a signiﬁcant increase in the detection error
relative to the baseline experiment was shown on selﬁe ﬁltered datasets with
increased facial coverage. The COTS system’s detection error is related to the
system’s ability to enroll the images, which is highly challenged by selﬁe ﬁlters
that cover the entire face or mostly the eye region of the face.
Based on the ﬁndings, it can be concluded that a high selﬁe ﬁlter facial coverage
signiﬁcantly impacts the performance of the tested face recognition systems.
Hence, more research should be conducted towards making face recognition
systems more robust to the facial changes caused by selﬁe ﬁlters.
Research question 3 What is the eﬀect of reconstructing the facial elements
covered by the selﬁe ﬁlter on the face recognition performance?
Along the project, it has been proven that selﬁe ﬁlters have a signiﬁcant eﬀect
on the performance of face recognition systems. Hence, to solve the issue, a
novel GAN-based approach is proposed by combining the idea of selﬁe ﬁlter
==PAGE:101==
87
segmentation from [NUD20] with the GAN architecture described in [TM18].
Additionally, a perceptual network is added to ensure that the reconstruction
of the face is consistent with its global structure.
Having assessed the results, selﬁe ﬁlter removal using GAN-based facial image
inpainting increases the similarity between the resulting and original images
(Table 7.21), growing the face recognition performance across the face recogni-
tion system pipeline (section 7.4).
Research question 4 Which techniques can assist selﬁe ﬁlter removal for an
improved accuracy and a better face recognition performance?
During the work on the GAN model, it has been noticed that the selﬁe ﬁlter
segmentation is very important for an overall accurate selﬁe ﬁlter removal. The
network is trained following the structure presented in section 5.2, where bet-
ter results have been obtained by adding data augmentation techniques that
resemble the selﬁe ﬁlter structures.
At the same time, given the yet limited number of chosen selﬁe ﬁlters, an accur-
ate selﬁe ﬁlter segmentation has been proven to be one of the most challenging
part of the overall selﬁe ﬁlter removal.
Thus, initially the generator of the
GAN-based selﬁe ﬁlter removal architecture was fed with the original binary
segmentation of the selﬁe ﬁlter, showing promising results on reconstructing the
mask ﬁlter. Later, when adding more selﬁe ﬁlters for training, validation and
testing (supplemented by data augmentation techniques), the automatic binary
segmentation was applied, achieving good results.
==PAGE:102==
88
Conclusion
==PAGE:103==
Appendix A
Nomenclature
µdscore Average face detection score obtained by a system on a database.
σdscore Standard deviation for the face detection score obtained by a system
on a database.
µqscore Average face quality score obtained by a system on a database.
σqscore Standard deviation for the face quality score obtained by a system on
a database.
Dϵ Percentage of time when the system detected zero faces.
EER The equal error rate obtained by a system on genuine and imposter
scores produced by a system during biometric veriﬁcation.
FMR The proportion of comparisons where a system falsely classiﬁes two
samples of diﬀerent subject as belonging to same subjects. This thesis con-
siders 1% FMR, 0.1% FMR, and 0.01% FMR.
FNMR The proportion of comparisons where a system falsely classiﬁes two
samples of the same subject as belonging to diﬀerent subjects. In this thesis
it is reported at 0.1% FMR.
FTE The percentage of population which fails to complete enrollment for a
biometric system.
==PAGE:104==
90
Nomenclature
==PAGE:105==
Appendix B
Popular Selﬁe Filter Mobile
Applications
==PAGE:106==
92
Popular Selﬁe Filter Mobile Applications
Selﬁe Filter
Mobile
Application
Gallery support
Ease of use
Daily usability
Variety
Popularity
Development
Complexity
Cost
Score
Sweet Snap
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3.00
SNOW
3
3
3
2
3
3
3
3
2.88
YouCam Fun
3
3
2
3
2
3
3
3
2.75
B612
3
3
2
2
3
3
3
3
2.75
Bloom
3
3
2
2
2
3
3
3
2.63
Snapchat
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
2.50
TikTok
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
3
2.50
Banuba
1
1
2
2
3
3
2
3
2.13
Instagram
1
1
3
2
3
2
2
3
2.13
Remini
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
2.13
FaceApp
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
3
2.00
Facetune2
by Lightricks
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
3
2.00
Wickr Me
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
3
2.00
Selﬁsh
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
3
1.88
Marco Polo
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
3
1.88
Camera+2
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
3
1.88
Camera360
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
3
1.88
Slingshot
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
3
1.88
BeautyPlus
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
1.75
Bigo Live
1
1
2
2
1
2
2
3
1.75
Line Camera
1
1
2
2
1
2
2
3
1.75
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[AA20]
A. Anwar, A. Raychowdhury: Masked Face Recognition for Secure
Authentication. 2020.
[AK12]
A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G. E. Hinton: ImageNet classiﬁcation
with deep convolutional neural networks. NIPS, S. 1097–1105, 2012.
[AL95]
A. Lanitis, C.J. Taylor, T.F. Cootes: An Automatic FaceIdentiﬁc-
ation System Using Flexible Appearance Model. Imageand Vision
Computing, S. vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 393–401, 1995.
[AR98]
A. Rajagopalan, K. Kumar, J. Karlekar R. Manivasakan M. Patil
U. Desai P. Poonacha S. Chaudhuri: Finding Faces in Photographs.
Proc. Sixth IEEE Int’l Conf. Computer Vision, S. pp. 640–645, 1998.
[BH20]
B. Hu, W. Yang, M. Ren: Unsupervised eyeglasses removal in the
wild. 2020.
[Bi10]
Biometrics, ISO/IEC 29794-1: Text of Standing Document 11. In-
ternational Organization for Standardization, 2010.
[BM98]
B. Moghaddam, W. Wahid, A. Pentland: Beyond eigenfaces: prob-
abilistic matching for face recognition. IEEE Int. Conf., S. 30–35,
1998.
[CB09]
C. Barnes, E. Shechtman, A. Finkelstein D. Goldman: PatchMatch:
A randomized correspondence algorithm for structural image edit-
ing. ACM Trans. Graph., S. pages 24, 2009.
[CG09]
C. Geng, X. Jiang: Sift features for face recognition. IEEE, S. pages
598–602, 2009.
==PAGE:108==
94
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[CG14]
C. Gopalan, S Suchitra: A robust face recognition using automatic-
ally detected facial attributes. International Conference on Science,
Engineering Management Research, 2014.
[CL02]
C. Liu, H. Wechsler: Gabor feature based classiﬁcation using the
enhanced ﬁsher linear discriminant model for face recognition. Image
processing, IEEE Transactions, S. 467–476, 2002.
[CR19]
C. Rathgeb, A. Dantcheva, C. Busch: Impact and detection of facial
beautiﬁcation in face recognition: An overview. IEEE Access, 2019.
[DJR14]
D. J. Rezende, S. Mohamed, D. Wierstra: Stochastic backpropaga-
tion and approximate inference in deep generative models. ICML,
2014.
[DP17]
D. Pfau, O. Vinyals: Connecting Generative Adversarial Networks
and Actor-Critic Methods. 2017.
[DPK14]
D. P. Kingma, M. Welling: Auto-encoding variational bayes. ICLR,
2014.
[DZ20]
D. Zeng, R. Veldhuis, L. Spreeuwers: A survey of face recognition
techniques under occlusion. 2020.
[EO97]
E. Osuna, R. Freund, F. Girosi: Training Support Vector Machines:
An Application to Face Detection. Proc. IEEE Conf.Computer Vis-
ion and Pattern Recognition, S. pp. 130–136, 1997.
[Fo20]
Foundation, Electronic Frontier: Mandatory National IDs and Bio-
metric Databases. https://www.eff.org/issues/national-ids,
2020.
[Fo21]
Foundation, Electronic Frontier: India’s biometric identity scheme
Aadhaar. https://uidai.gov.in/aadhaar_dashboard/index.p
hp, 2021.
[FS15]
F. Schroﬀ, D. Kalenichenko, J. Philbin: Facenet: A uniﬁed embed-
ding for face recognition and clustering. Proceedings of the IEEE
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Re-
cognition, 2015.
[GL18]
G. Liu, F. A. Reda, K. J. Shih T. C. Wang A. Tao B. Catanzaro:
Image inpainting for irregular holes using partial convolutions. Pro-
ceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
2018.
[GY94]
G. Yang, T. S. Huang: Human Face Detection in Complex Back-
ground. Pattern Recognition, S. vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 53–63, 1994.
==PAGE:109==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
95
[HB19]
H. Baqeel, S. Saeed: Face detection authentication on Smartphones:
End Users Usability Assessment Experiences. IEEE, 2019.
[He17]
Hesse, C.: Image-to-Image Translation in Tensorﬂow. https://af
finelayer.com/pix2pix/, 2017.
[HL11]
H. Lamba, A. Noore: Face Recognition for Look-Alikes: A Prelim-
inary Study. IEEE, 2011.
[HR98]
H. Rowley, S. Baluja, T. Kanade: Neural Network-Based FaceDe-
tection. IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, S.
vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 23–38, 1998.
[HS98]
H. Schneiderman, T. Kanade: Probabilistic Modeling of Local Ap-
pearance and Spatial Relationships for Object Recognition. Proc.
IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, S. pp. 45–51,
1998.
[HW19]
H. Wang, D. Gong, Z. Li W. Liu: Decorrelated adversarial learning
for age-invariant face recognition. IEEE / CVPR, 2019.
[IC92]
I. Craw, D. Tock, A. Bennett: Finding Face Features. Proc. Second
European Conf. Computer Vision, S. pp. 92–96, 1992.
[IG14]
I. Goodfellow, J. P. Abadie, M. Mirza B. Xu D. W. Farley S. Ozair
A. Courville Y. Bengio: Generative adversarial nets. NeurIPS, 2014.
[In]
Insights, Global Market: Biometric System Market. https://www.
gminsights.com/industry-analysis/biometrics-market.
[Ja99]
Jain, Anil K.: Biometrics: personal identiﬁcation in networked so-
ciety. Kluwer Academic Publications, 1999.
[JD19a]
J. Deng, J. Guo, N. Xue S. Zafeiriou: ArcFace: Additive Angular
Margin Loss for Deep Face Recognition. 2019.
[JD19b]
J. Deng, J. Guo, Z. Yuxiang J. Yu I. Kotsia S. Zafeiriou: Retinaface:
Single-stage dense face localisation in the wild. 2019.
[JD20]
J. Deng, J. Guo, Y. Zhou: RetinaFace: Single-stage Dense Face
Localisation in the Wild. 2020.
[JHO19]
J. H. Ortega, J. Galbally, J. Fierrez R. Haraksim L. Beslay:
Faceqnet: Quality assessment for face recognition based on deep
learning. 2019.
[JJ16]
J. Johnson, A. Alahi, L. Fei-Fei: Perceptual losses for real-time
style transfer and super-resolution. Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis.
(ECCV), S. pages 694–711, 2016.
==PAGE:110==
96
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[JM19]
J. Mathai, I. Masi, W. AbdAlmageed: Does Generative Face Com-
pletion Help Face Recognition? In: 2019 International Conference
on Biometrics (ICB). S. 1–8, 2019.
[JRP14]
J. R. Paone, P. J. Flynn, P. J. Philips K. W. Bowyer R. W. V.
Bruegge P. J. Grother G. W. Quinn M. T. Pruitt J. M. Grant:
Double trouble: Diﬀerentiating identical twins by face recognition.
IEEE, 2014.
[JW09]
J. Wright, A. Yang, A. Ganesh S. Sastry Y. Ma: Robust Face Recog-
nition via Sparse Representation. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell, S. 210–227, 2009.
[JY96]
J. Yang, A. Waibel: A Real-Time Face Tracker. Proc. Third Work-
shop Applications of Computer Vision, S. pp. 142–147, 1996.
[JY18]
J. Yu, Z. Lin, J. Yang X. Shen X. Lu T. S. Huang: Generative
image inpainting with contextual attention. Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., S. pages 5505–5514, 2018.
[JY19]
J. Yu, Z. Lin, J. Yang X. Shen X. Lu T. Huang: Free-Form Image
Inpainting with Gated Convolution. IEEE, 2019.
[Ki09]
King, Davis E.: Dlib-ml: A machine learning toolkit. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 2009.
[KKS98]
K. K. Sung, T. Poggio: Example-Based Learning for View-Based
Human Face Detection. IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis andMachine
Intelligence, S. vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 39–51, 1998.
[KN19]
K. Nazeri, E. Ng, T. Joseph F. Z. Qureshi M. Ebrahimi: EdgeCon-
nect: Generative image inpainting with adversarial edge learning.
2019.
[KS15a]
K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman: Very Deep Convolutional Networks For
Large-scale Image Recognition. IEEE, 2015.
[KS15b]
K. Simonyan, A. Zisserman: Very deep convolutional networks for
large-scale image recognition. Proc. ICLR, S. pages 1–14, 2015.
[Le96]
Lew, M. S.: Information Theoretic View-Based and Modular Face
Detection. Proc. Second Int’l Conf. Automatic Face and Gesture
Recognition, S. pp. 198–203, 1996.
[Li]
Line: Selﬁe Filter Samples. https://official-blog-en.line.me
/archives/1057908066.html.
[Ll21]
LlamaLab: Automate. 2021.
==PAGE:111==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
97
[LZ11]
L. Zhang, M. Yang, X. Feng: Sparse representation or collaborative
representation: Which helps face recognition? ICCV, 2011.
[M.20]
M.Ibsen: Impact of Facial Tattoos on Face Recognition Systems.
2020.
[MB03]
M. Bertalmio, L. Vese, G. Sapiro S. Osher: Simultaneous structure
and texture image inpainting. IEEE, S. pages 882–889, 2003.
[MF13]
M. Ferrara, A. Franco, D. Maltoni Y. Sun: On the Impact of Alter-
ations on Face Photo Recognition Accuracy. Springer, 2013.
[MHY02]
M. H. Yang, D. J. Kriegman, N. Ahuja: Detecting Faces in Images:
A Survey. IEEE, 2002.
[MI21]
M. Ibsen, C. Rathgeb, T. Fink P. Drozdowski C. Busch: Impact of
Facial Tattoos and Paintings on Face Recognition Systems. 2021.
[MKJK19] M. K. J. Khan, N. Ud Din, S. Bae J. Yi: Interactive removal of
microphone object in facial images. Electronics, S. page 1115, 2019.
[MMG16]
M. M. Ghazi, H. K. Ekenel: A comprehensive analysis of deep learn-
ing based representation for face recognition. S. 34–41, 2016.
[MR13]
M. Rahim, M. Hossain, T. Wahid M. Azam: Face recognition using
local binary patterns (LBP). 2013.
[MS18]
M. Singh, R. Singh, M.Vatsa N. Ratha R. Chellappa: Recognizing
Disguised Faces in the Wild. IEEE, 2018.
[MT91]
M. Turk, A. Pentland: Eigenfaces for Recognition.
J. Cognitive
Neuroscience, S. vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 71–86, 1991.
[MW19]
M. Wang, W. Deng: Deep Face Recognition: A Survey. 2019.
[NI11]
NIST: Fingerprint Image Quality. 2011.
[NI17]
NIST: Face Recognition Technology (FERET). 2017.
[NUD20]
N. U. Din, K. Javed, S. Bae J. Yi: A Novel GAN-Based Network for
Unmasking of Masked Face. 2020.
[OMP15]
O. M. Parkhi, A. Vedaldi, A. Zisserman: Deep face recognition.
British Machine Vision Conference, 2015.
[OR15]
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, T. Brox: U-Net: Convolutional net-
works for biomedical image segmentation.
Proc. Int. Conf. Med.
Image Comput. Comput. Assist. Intervent. Munich, Germany:
Springer, S. pages 234–241, 2015.
==PAGE:112==
98
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[PB97]
P. Belhumeur, J. P. Hespanha, D. J. Kriegman: Eigenfaces vs. ﬁsher-
faces: Recognition using class speciﬁc linear projection. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell, S. 711–720, 1997.
[PI17]
P. Isola, J. Y. Zhu, T. Zhou A. A. Efros: Image-to-Image translation
with conditional adversarial networks. Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), S. pages 5967–5976, 2017.
[PJP96]
P. J. Phillips, P. J. Rauss, S. Z. Der: FERET (Face Recognition
Technology) Recognition Algorithm Development and Test Results.
1996.
[PJP05]
P. J. Phillips, P.J. Flynn, T. Scruggs K.W. Bowyer J. Chang K. Hoﬀ-
man J. Marques J. Min W. Worek: Overview of the face recognition
grand challenge. IEEE, 2005.
[QM21]
Q. Meng, S. Zhao, Z. Huang F. Zhou: MagFace: A Universal Rep-
resentation for Face Recognition and Quality Assessment. 2021.
[RC15]
R. Carro, J. M. A. Larios, E. Huerta R. M. Caporal F. Ramirez:
Face recognition using SURF. Springer, 2015.
[RK96]
R. Kjeldsen, J. Kender: Finding Skin in Color Images. Proc.Second
Int’l Conf. Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition, S. pp. 312–317,
1996.
[Sc20]
Schlett, T.: Facial landmarks detected by dlib. https://dasec.h-
da.de/staff/torsten-schlett/, 2020.
[SG17]
S. Ge, J. Li, Q. Ye Z. Luo: Detecting masked faces in the wild with
LLE-CNNs. CVPR, 2017.
[SG18]
S. Guennouni, A. Mansouri, A. Ahaitouf: Biometric Systems and
Their Applications. S. 711–720, 2018.
[SI17]
S. Iizuka, E. Simo-Serra, H. Ishikawa: Globally and locally consistent
image completion. ACM Trans. Graph., 2017.
[St17]
Statista: Popularity of face tattoos. https://www.statista.com/s
tatistics/722094/face-tattoos-popularity-among-america
ns-by-age/, 2017.
[SV20]
S. Venkatesh, R. Ramachandra, K. Raja C. Busch: Face Morphing
Attack Generation Detection: A Comprehensive Survey. 2020.
[SW19]
S. Wu, M. Kan, S. Shan X. Chen: Hierarchical attention for part-
aware face detection. Springer, S. 2037–2041, 2019.
==PAGE:113==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
99
[SY05]
S. Yan, D. Xu, B. Zhang H. J. Zhang: Graph embedding: A general
framework for dimensionality reduction. IEEE Computer Society
Conference, S. 830–837, 2005.
[TA06]
T. Ahonen, A. Hadid, M. Pietikainen: Face description with local
binary patterns: Application to face recognition. IEEE Trans. Pat-
tern Anal. Mach. Intell, S. 2037–2041, 2006.
[THC15]
T. H. Chan, K. Jia, S. Gao J. Lu Z. Zeng Y. Ma. Pcanet: A simple
deep learning baseline for image classiﬁcation? IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing, S. 5017–5032, 2015.
[TL95]
T.K. Leung, M.C. Burl, P. Perona:
Finding Faces in Cluttered
Scenes Using Random Labeled Graph Matching. Proc. Fifth IEEE-
Int’l Conf. Computer Vision, S. pp. 637–644, 1995.
[TM18]
T. Miyato, T. Kataoka, M. Koyama Y. Yoshida: Spectral normaliz-
ation for generative adversarial networks. 2018.
[TS21a]
T. Schlett, C. Rathgeb, O. Henniger J. Galbally J. Fierrez C. Busch:
Face Image Quality Assessment: A Literature Survey. 2021.
[TS21b]
T. Schlett, C. Rathgeb, O. Henniger J. Galbally J. Fierrez C. Busch:
Face Image Quality Assessment: A Literature Survey. 2021.
[Un15]
Unit, Research Development: Best Practice Technical Guidelines for
Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems. Bericht, FRONTEX,
2015.
[WD08]
W. Deng, J. Hu, J. Guo H. Zhang C. Zhang: Comments on “globally
maximizing, locally minimizing: Unsupervised discriminant projec-
tion with applications to face and palm biometrics”. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell, S. 1503–1504, 2008.
[WD14]
W. Deng, J. Hu, J. Lu J. Guo: Transform-invariant PCA: A uni-
ﬁed approach to fully automatic facealignment, representation and
recognition. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell, S. 1275–1284,
2014.
[WD18]
W. Deng, J. Hu, J. Guo: Face recognition via collaborative rep-
resentation: Its discriminant nature and superposed representation.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell, S. 1, 2018.
[XH05]
X. He, S. Yan, Y. Hu P. Niyogi H. J. Zhang: Face recognition using
laplacianfaces. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell, S. 328–340,
2005.
==PAGE:114==
100
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[YAC17]
Y. A. Chen, W. C. Chen, C. P. Wei Y. C. Wang: Occlusion-aware
face inpainting via generative adversarial networks. IEEE, 2017.
[YC18]
Y. Chen, L. Song, R. He: Adversarial occlusion-aware face detection.
2018.
[YC19]
Y. Chen, H. Hu: An improved method for semantic image inpainting
with GANs: Progressive inpainting. Neural Process. Lett., S. pages
1355–1367, 2019.
[YD96]
Y. Dai, Y. Nakano: Face-Texture Model Based on SGLD and Its
Application in Face Detection in a Color Scene. Pattern Recognition,
S. vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1007–1017, 1996.
[YS14]
Y. Sun, Y. Chen, X. Wang X. Tang: Deep learning face representa-
tion by joint identiﬁcation-veriﬁcation. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, S. pp. 1988–1996, 2014.
[YT14a]
Y. Taigman, M. Yang, M. A. Ranzato L. Wolf: Deepface: Closing
the gap to human-level performance in face veriﬁcation. Proceedings
of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2014.
[YT14b]
Y. Taigman, M. Yang, M. Ranzato L. Wolf: Deepface: Closing the
gap to human-level performance in face veriﬁcation. IEEE, S. pp.
1701–170, 2014.
[ZC10]
Z. Cao, Q. Yin, X. Tang J. Sun: Face recognition with learning-
based descriptor. IEEE, S. 2707–2714, 2010.
[ZL14]
Z. Lei, M. Pietikainen, S. Z. Li:
Learning discriminant face
descriptor. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intell, S. 289–302,
2014.
[ZM19]
Z. Mortezaie, H. Hassanpour: A survey on age-invariant face recog-
nition methods. Jordanian Journal of Computers and Information
Technology, 2019.
[ZM21]
Z. Mortezaie, H. Hassanpour: Surveillance camera statistics: which
cities have the most CCTV cameras? Comparitech, 2021.
