==PAGE:1==
Smart control for load balancing of an energy
grid
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
Master Thesis
July, 2021
By
Sebastian Ameland Maltesen
Frederik Sonberg
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The efforts towards reducing the Co2 emission has gradually been receiving more atten­
tion throughout the years. One aspect that may help in such a reduction, is looking at
how energy is produced and consumed. Controlling how energy is consumed can be a
helping factor in balancing the production of energy as well. Therefore, there has been
an increasing interest in the ability to load balance energy grids, to avoid peaks in power
consumption throughout different time slots. Load balancing has the potential to avoid
the need for additional power providers as it can provide peak shaving on the overall
consumption.
This thesis proposes a model to support the control of energy consumption within an en­
ergy grid. The model is developed such that load balancing can be achieved through
configuration of an energy grid, by providing PID Controlling to regulate the consuming
components within the grid. Moreover, it will prioritise the various consumers and con­
trollers within the grid by utilizing a SOAP priority scheduling, to be able to distribute
energy in a grid base different prioritisation policies. The model is developed through
thorough experimentation of various techniques such as priority scheduling, and each ex­
periment builds on top of the previous. This is done in an attempt to investigate as broadly
as possible and consider a large variety of approaches that may benefit the model.
In conclusion, it was possible to develop a model that is able to schedule resources based
on a prioritisation policy. The model make use of PID controlling of the different consumers
such that they are able to keep a satisfying control value. Further work on the model
includes testing on more scenarios, implementation of providing and storing component.
Moreover investigating the ability to predict patterns in energy consumption to further
improve the ability to load balance.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
3
2.1
Gantt
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Agile/Iterative . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Design Pattern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Programming Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Domain Description
5
3.1
Component Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Current state of the domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
System Design
13
4.1
Component Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.3
Consumers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.5
Providers & Storages
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.6
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5
Base Model Implementation
23
5.1
IConsumer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5.2
Consumers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.3
Controller . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.4
Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Implementation & Experimentation
33
6.1
Priority List
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
6.2
Critical Level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6.3
Regulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.4
Regulating Controllers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7
Model Testing and Analysis
69
7.1
The importance of configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
7.2
Model Functionalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
7.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
8
Discussion
83
8.1
Component Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
8.2
Load Forecasting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
8.3
Model relevance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
v
==PAGE:8==
8.4
The generalisation issue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
9
Conclusion
87
Bibliography
89
A Title
91
A.1 Configuration Table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.2 Gantt Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
A.3 Complete version of Group 2, Changing setpoint experiment
. . . . . . . . 94
A.4 Add Device Failure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
A.5 Add Device Success . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
A.6 Scalability Hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
vi
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In today’s society, there is an increased focus on sustainability especially when it comes
to energy production and consumption. Even from the United Nations (UN) there has
been an increased interest on creating sustainable energy, as it is one of the 17 goals [1],
resulting in a larger focus on energy production, distribution and consumption in general.
In general, the different energy production companies will produce energy based on statis­
tics, showing what the usual requirements are during different times of the day, weeks and
months. However, they can not completely predict how the energy grid behaves, which
is why they keep a buffer to ensure enough capacity if unknown events occurs[2]. As
one might expect, this may lead towards overproduction, as the production companies
have to ensure sufficient amounts of power to meet the demands of the market. That
is why there is an increased focus on the field, specifically on how to produce and use
energy intelligently rather than overproducing and then being forced to sell or transport
the excessive energy to somewhere else. For a more sustainable energy production, the
consumption must also be considered, it is imperative that for the production of energy
to become more sustainable and intelligent, so must the consumption. This is where
concepts like load balancing are being introduced. Load balancing concerns itself with
balancing the load in an energy grid at any given time, thus, controlling when devices in
a grid are allowed to consume energy.
The technological development has made it possible to research in how efficient and
effective both energy consumption and production can become. Compared to 30 or 20
years ago, the technological advancements, like the increasing possibilities of IOT, cloud
based solutions etc., enables the possibilities of data transmission, device collaborations
and reaction times in a much larger scale, and at much higher speed. There has also been
great development in the utilization of batteries. As it was described above, the excessive
energy that has been produced will be transported elsewhere, but with the increasing
capacities, effectiveness and efficiency of batteries, allowing for storage in much larger
scale than previously. This will allow for lesser energy production, as the storages of
energy layered within these batteries can be utilized instead.
The above mentioned topic is also what this project focus on. It looks to research and
experiment with methodologies that can improve or apply load balancing on an energy
grid. This interest in load balancing of energy grids were initially sparked through the
course Model based system engineering, that allowed for the opportunity to research
into load balancing combined with user behavior. The results were that even though it
was possible to load balance the energy consumption, the unforeseeable behavior of the
simulated users had great impact on the ability to load balance. It did however spark an
interest in how to load balance energy grids in a larger scale, when more variables take
part and can effect the ability to load balance the system.
1.1
Objectives
This project aims on researching the advantages of different scheduling and distribution
algorithms through experimentation, to obtain the best possible level of load balancing in
an energy grid. This will be done by developing a model of an energy grid. The simulation
will focus on capturing the key features of the components functionality in an energy grid to
such extend, that conclusions can be made based on the findings. Therefore, this thesis
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
1
==PAGE:10==
won’t be focused on making a simulation as close to the real world as possible, and several
assumptions will be made to simplify the model. This also means that it is not the goal, to
have a finished commercial product at the end of project, that could be implemented in an
existing energy grid. It will rather focus on the possibilities and advantages the proposed
solution could have in a modern smart energy grid.
1.2
Thesis structure
This section is meant to be a reader guide towards what can be expected in the nine
different chapters of this report.
1. The Introduction focuses on providing a general understanding of the field and the
objectives of the project.
2. The Methodology addresses the methodology of the thesis, how work is structured,
the general design pattern used for the model implementation and the programming
language used.
3. Domain Description, concerns itself with providing a proper definition of the entirety
and the components that makes the domain of the thesis.
4. System Model, focuses on further definition of the components within the domain
with a focus on the implementation of a model. Thereby expanding on the definitions
made in the domain description, such that the project goals can be achieved.
5. Base build, focuses on the implementation of what was described in the System
model to provide a model implementation that simulates a simplified reality.
6. The Implementation & Experimentation chapter, focuses on the various experi­
ments that were conducted, focusing on various aspects that will improve the models
functionality and precision.
7. Analysis, will bring all of the experiments together, building a large simulation and
then provide an analysis, providing an understanding of the finished model and its
functionalities.
8. Discussion, will discuss the results of the project, moreover it will reflect on further
development possibilities. Lastly, the chapter will discuss some of the choices that
were made for this project and the effects a different choice could have had.
9. The Conclusion concludes the thesis, highlighting the various findings of the report
along with further work on the model.
In chapter 3 & 4, a summary is provided at the end. This is done to ensure a common
understanding of the main points that has been addressed throughout the chapter.
2
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:11==
2
Methodology
This section will focus on the methodology chosen for this project. When defining a set of
goals for a project it is also of great importance, to find a suitable approach to achieve the
set goals. It was decided to start by making an overall plan, including various milestones
that would have to be achieved.
2.1
Gantt
To define and establish an overall plan for the project, it was decided to use the Gantt
tool. The Gantt enables an easy way to define milestones of a project, while also estab­
lishing a deadline for a part of the system. One may discuss the use of a Gantt chart
and argue that this mostly enables the use of a somewhat strict waterfall methodology,
which is a sound argument. For this project however, it is used as a tool to establish,
define and keep track of milestones and goals, and thus not as a strict tool that has to
be followed. With this specific usage of the Gantt tool, it will enable the use of either an
agile[3] methodology or the more classical waterfall[4] approach, as both approaches will
require certain milestones and deadlines to be met in order for a project to be successful.
Figure 2.1: Project Gantt Chart
Figure 2.1 showcases the Gantt chart that were made for this project, the full version of
the Gantt chart can be found in appendix A.2. As the figure shows, the milestones, tasks
and subtasks in the chart, are rather broadly defined. The broad definition of the tasks
are made on purpose, as it would not sway us towards either of the approaches defined
above. If the Waterfall approach were chosen, a Gantt chart of each task could be made,
while if the Agile approach were chosen, it would allow for the freedom of the iterative
exploration.
2.2
Agile/Iterative
After thorough discussion along with the definition and creation of the Gantt chart, it was
apparent that we were not entirely sure how the model should be build. We had some
general ideas about technologies and approaches to the overall design of the model, but
at the same time, no idea if they would work. As we did not have a bulletproof plan or
design of the model from the beginning, the waterfall approach appeared unfeasible for the
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
3
==PAGE:12==
project. We decided on using the agile methodology, that allows for continuous exploration
and iteration of the product. The agile methodology also made the structure of this report
easier to define, as the development experience and process could be described in a
more linear way, while allowing for exploration of design and implementation decisions.
2.3
Design Pattern
This section will focus on the various design patterns that were considered at the begin­
ning of the project. There will not be a focus on all the different design patterns, but rather
the ones that has been considered. In general, it makes sense to use a pattern of some
sort, as it allows for an easy separation of components within the application, it being
business logic or presentational logic.
Throughout this project, mainly two different design patterns considered, the Model­View­
Control (MVC)[5] and the Model­View­ViewModel (MVVM)[6]. The MVC pattern, imple­
ments an architecture, where the business logic of the application is handled within the
Model, while the user interacts with the Controller, such that the Model can be updated
along with the View. The MVVM architecture works differently from the MVC. The user
will in MVVM, interact directly with the View, the difference is that the data being displayed
in the view is binded with the ViewModel. This means that the view sends commands to­
wards the ViewModel, the ViewModel will in turn update the Model depending on the rules
of the business logic. The Model will then notify the ViewModel of the changes, which in
turn will update the state variables, that will update the view that the user sees.
With the above high level description of the two different architectural patterns some un­
derstanding of their functionalities and purpose is acquired. Both of the patterns could
potentially have been applicable to this project, as they would both be able to accommo­
date the needs of the project in some way or another. However, as one of the goals of
the project, is to present live data to the user it would be appropriate if the data could be
binded. This will result in the data being updated in the view as it is being updated in
the model. It is also the goal to implement some sort of user interaction with the system,
like disabling different parts of the system or the like. However, the view and interactions
is not the main focus of this project. Therefore the MVVM structure was chosen as this
allows for a decoupling between the business logic and UI.
2.4
Programming Language
To build the model that is the product of this project, an appropriate programming lan­
guage had to be chosen. Throughout the design phase of the project, several different
programming languages were discussed, such as Python or MatLab. As the discussion
came along, it became clear that the amount of data was to be processed and the rate in
which the computations, and therefore also the general performance of the model, was
not of great importance. Therefore, it was chosen to work with a programming language
the project group had the most experience with, such that the focus could be on explor­
ing the possibilities within the model, rather than learning a new programming language.
Therefore, this model will be programmed in C#.
4
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:13==
3
Domain Description
This chapter will focus on clarifying the domain of this project, as to properly understand
the purpose, goals and conclusions of this thesis, it is believed that one must first under­
stand the field it touches upon. Thus, this chapter will start by describing the two main
topics of the field, that is the energy grid and load balancing. Moreover, the chapter will
also include a definition of the various components that will be considered. For each com­
ponent type there will be an informal discussion of how the component works. Followed
by a precise mathematical definition of the parameters and internal dependencies of the
component to get a common understanding of how the respective component types are
understood.
An energy grid can be seen as an amount of distribution channels for energy, going from
some energy provider towards the different systems, households or devices which con­
sumes the energy. These distribution channels are linked through transport wires and
possibly transformer stations which are in charge of distributing the energy to the correct
places. This thesis will not consider transformer stations as they are in charge of up and
down scaling the energy, such that the transport can be as efficient as possible, although
it is relevant when looking at a sustainability perspective. This is because the transport of
energy and therefore also the loss of energy due to the transport, do have an impact on the
amount of energy required overall. This thesis will address energy grids in a lower scale,
being from the main switch of a compound and the distribution throughout its system.
The concept of performing Load balancing on an energy grid, does not necessarily mean
that its an attempt on reducing the amount of energy consumed in the grid. It is rather
an attempt on balancing energy consumption over a period of time, such that large peaks
can be removed and result in a more even consumption over time. This will make it easier
for energy providers to predict the demand, and will help removing some of the necessary
buffer that energy providers are producing today.
3.1
Component Types
To understand the sometimes complex energy grids, it is important to understand the
different components that it is build of. It was decided to split the various components
of said energy grids into four different types, the Consumer, Provider, Storage and the
Switch. Defining a set of different types will reduce the complexity of the grid and clearly
define the roles of the different component types. With such a definition established, it
should also provide a tool to properly design and implement such components.
3.1.1
Consumer
A consumer is the type of component within the model, that will consume a resource
when fulfilling a set of conditions. They can consume this resource in many different
ways, based on many different parameters. It was identified that there are two main
categories of how a consumer can consume a resource, which can be used to describe
most electrical devices.
First of all there is a consumer that can simply be turned on or off, henceforth we will refer
to this as an On/Off consumer. This could be a light bulb that can be manually turned on by
some external actor. However, a fridge will most often also work as an On/Off consumer.
A fridge is turned off while the control value is within an accepted span, but turned on as
soon as the temperature is above a certain threshold. With this type of device there may
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
5
==PAGE:14==
also exist some standby power as for example a fridge will never be completely turned off
unless unplugged from the power outlet.
The other type of consumer identified is one that continuously consumes power. The
important difference compared to the On/Off consumer is that, where an On/Off consumer
can only use either maximum power or minimum power, the continuous consumer can
adjust its power level between a maximum or minimum. An example of a device that
continuously consumes a resource is a ventilation system. The Ventilation system will
continuously measure a number of control values that has to be within set thresholds
such that proper air quality can be ensured. If some of its control values fall out of a
threshold, the ventilation system will consume more power to ensure the control value
is kept within the threshold. Once the control value is within the threshold again, the
ventilation system will consume less of a resource, since it is not needed anymore. These
two types of consumption patterns can be used to describe a large amount of different
energy consuming devices. However it is also important to define what affects, when a
device have to use more or less power, or have to turn on or off.
As with the examples with the fridge and ventilation system, we found that many devices
work by trying to keep some control value at a certain level or in between a minimum
and maximum threshold value. This means that the control value is the deciding factor
towards when the consumer will consume a resource. While the consumer’s control value
is within the set thresholds, the consumer might use less or none of the resource, while
having to turn on or increase its effective level, and thereby it’s energy consumption, once
the control value falls below the minimum value.
The energy consumption can also be affected by user behavior, either directly or indirectly.
If a user is directly affecting the energy consumption, it is meant that the user is manually
setting its effective level. For example if a user turns on the lights in a room or adjusts
it from 50% to a 100%, the user will directly have told a device how much power to use.
A user can also affect the power consumption indirectly, by changing the wanted value
for the control value on a consumer. For example if a user changes the temperature
setting for a room the user will not directly have changed the energy consumption for
the responsible device. Another factor to consider is the patterns and intensity in user
behavior. Some devices might be used more often in certain time slots during a day or a
week. For example a coffee machine might be used more during the early hours of the
day, and a ventilation system will need more power during the weekdays when the office
is used compared to the weekends.
There is also a large set of external factors that can affect the energy consumption of a
consumer. These can be difficult to generalize as they will be very specific to the exact
type of device. For example, automated light control is most likely not affected by the
outside temperature. However the outside temperature might have a great impact on a
room heater. These external factors can be difficult to foresee, and might have complex
patterns in how they affect the energy consumption.
Based on the reflections above, it was decided to define an On/Off consumer and a con­
tinuous consumer formally for the further works of this project. The two definitions have
some similarities as they are both based on a control value and a set point, however
there are also some important differences. Looking at definition 3.1.1, the definition for
the On/Off consumer, it can be seen that is includes a set of two different states that
the consumer can be in. As it can only either used it’s maximum energy consumption,
or standby energy consumption, the on off consumer will need two threshold values to
determine when to turn on or off. For this purpose the set point and hysteresis value is
6
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:15==
introduces and the current state of the consumer can be updated based on point nine in
the definition. Furthermore, the consumers includes a control value which is defined by
the sum of two functions. The first one is f(s), representing the positive change that the
consumer itself can have on the control value. In the case of an On/Off consumer this
most likely means that if the current state is soff, it will have little to no impact on the
control value, and the result of f(s) will be close to zero. However if the state is son the
result will depend on the effectiveness of the consumer. When it is mentioned that this
represents the positive change in the control value, this does not necessarily mean that
the result of f(s) is a positive number. For example if you look at a ventilation system, the
effect of having it on will most likely mean that the CO2 level will fall and the result of f will
be negative. As mentioned there will also be a set of external factors affecting the change
in the control value. This is represented by the function G(CV ) which is the negative
change in the control value. In the example with a ventilation system this function might
return an increase in the control value based on outside levels, how many people are in
the room or other factors affecting the change in CO2 levels. It takes the CV as an input
as the change can often be connected to the current level. For example when looking at
a room heater and it is 11 degrees outside. The closer the control value gets to 11, the
lesser effect the outside temperature will have. Furthermore, it will not be possible for the
control value to fall below 11 degrees, unless some other external factors have an effect
on the change.
Definition 3.1.1. On/Off Consumer
1. S = {son, soff} is the set of states that the consumer can be in.
2. son ∈S is the on state, and
3. soff ∈S is the off state
4. SP ∈R is the set point of the consumer indicating the consumers desired control
value
5. H ∈R represents the hysteresis of the consumer
6. ME ∈R, ME > 0 is the max energy consumption that the consumer can consume
from the energy grid,
7. SE ∈R, SE ≤0 < ME is the standby energy consumption.
8. CE is the current energy consumption, where for s ∈S
CE = f(s) =
{
ME
for s = son
SE
for s = soff
}
9. s ∈S is the current state of the consumer, where the updated state s′ ∈S is defined
as
s′ = f(s, CE) =





son
for s = soff ∧CV ≥H
soff
for s = son ∧CV ≤SP
s
for CV > H ∧CV < SP





10. CV ∈R, defines the current control value through, CV ′ = f(s) + G(CV ) where the
function f(s) is representing the positive change in the control value based on the
state of the consumer and G(CV ) representing the negative change in the control
value from external factors
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
7
==PAGE:16==
In definition 3.1.2 we se the formal definition of a continuous consumer. As seen some
of the definitions for the continuous consumer are the same as for the On/off consumer.
However as the continuous consumer is able is able to adjust it’s energy consumption
between the maximum and standby energy consumption, it wil not have a hysteresis as
the On/Off, as it will try to adjust its energy consumption such that the control value will be
as close to the set point as possible. This can be seen in point 4 in the definition where
the current energy consumption of the consumer is caluculated by a fucntion based on
the current control value and set point. Furthermore the continuous consumer defines
an effective level. Instead of having a set of states as the On/Off consumer, the effective
level can be interpreted as the state of a continuous consumer. The value of the effective
level is the percentage of the current energy consumption from the maximum energy
consumption. The effective level is used in the function f(EL), to represent the positive
change in the control value. And as with the On/Off consumer we have the function G(CV )
to represent the negative change from external factors.
Definition 3.1.2. Continuous Consumer
1. SP ∈R is the set point of the consumer indicating the consumers desired control
value
2. ME ∈R, ME > 0 is the max energy consumption that the consumer can consume
from the energy grid,
3. SE ∈R, SE ≤0 < ME is the standby energy consumption.
4. CE = SE + f(SP, CV ) is the current energy consumption of the consumer defined
as the standby power plus a function taking the current control value and the set
point to calculate the current energy consumption of the consumer.
5. EL ∈R, 0 ≤EL ≥1 is a percentage level indicating the effective level of the
consumer and is calculated by EL = ME/CE
6. CV ∈R, defines the current control value through, CV ′ = f(EL) + G(CV ) where
the function f(EL) representing the positive change in the control value based on
the effective level of the consumer plus the G(CV ) representing the negative change
in the control value from external factors
3.1.2
Provider
The provider component, is any component within a system that by one mean or another
can supply power to the system. This can be either from an external producer of power,
which could be energy production companies like Ørsted, or it could be from more local
sources like a small windmill or private solar plant. The external power provider, are in
most cases the main provider of energy within a system, but there are some uncertain­
ties. There is the potential that the external provider won’t be able to deliver the required
amount of the resource, or as it is the case with energy providers, there is the risk of a
power outage happening, which will result in a complete breakdown of a system unless
some counter measures are in place. These countermeasures can be storages, which
will be addressed in the next section, or it can be the local providers that was mentioned
earlier. The local sources in question, could be local windmills, solar panels or the like
that can supply the system with an additional amount of resources that can be spend.
There are some factors one have to be aware of, when discussing such local providers. It
may not always be the case, that the local provider can deliver the demanded amount of
power, to clarify this notion an example will be made. Take a windmill, if there is no wind
present, the windmill will not be able to produce power and therefore unable to provide
8
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:17==
the required power to the system. Moreover, it may not be the case that the windmill itself
can provide the required amount of power, depending on the specifications of the windmill
itself, e.g., if the system requires 200 watts, but the windmill can only produce 100 watts
at full effectiveness. The same is the case for solar panels, where the lack of sun will
heavily affect the effectiveness of the resource production. From the reflection above the
provider was defined formally as can be seen in definition 3.1.3.
Definition 3.1.3. Provider
1. MO ∈R is the max energy output that the provider can produce
2. D ∈R, D ≥0 is the demand from the energy grid
3. O ∈R, O ≤MO, O = f(D) is the actual output from the provider calculated by a
function f(D) based on the demand for the provider
3.1.3
Storage
A component of the storage type, is a component used for storing powerfor later use. This
component can be any type of storage unit like a battery. These storages can be used
when there is an excess of power within the system, such that it can be stored for later
use, when there may no longer be enough to supply the needs of the system. However,
there is a limit to how much a storage component can store at any given time, which can
be solved by having several storage components. Another factor that has to be taken into
account, is the fact that the storage unit may not be able to disperse all of its containing
power at once. This means that a system cannot expect to receive the entire content of
the storage component at once, but rather over time. The time factor will be specified by
the storage component itself, indicating how much power it can deliver at once. To clarify
this with an example, we will consider a battery. The battery may only be able to store
200 kWh, this means that no matter how much a system attempts to supply the battery
with, no more than 200 kWh will be stored. Secondly, it may be specified that the battery
can only deliver 50 kW at any given time, this means that the 200 kWh will be delivered
over time, in this example approximately over 4 hours, and not at once.
When addressing storages and specifically batteries, the battery degradation has to be
acknowledged. This means, that the battery will degrade over time in terms of its max­
imum capacity, which will result in a future need for replacement. The factor that the
battery degrades over time, also means that one would have to expect less efficiency
from the battery over time, which is something that has to be accounted for. Then comes
the external factors such as the temperature, depending on the type of battery used within
the system, outside factors may have an impact on the charging times and the maximum
capacity of the battery, which again will have to be taken into account when storage com­
ponents are implemented. However, unlike the case with the Consumers, a user should
not have any meaningful impact on the efficiency of the battery.
Definition 3.1.4. Storage
1. MC ∈R, MC ≥0 is the max capacity of the storage unit
2. L ∈R, 0 ≤L ≥MC is the current level of the storage unit
3. MCR ∈R, MCR ≥0 is the maximum charging rate
4. CCR ∈R, 0 ≥CCR ≤MCR is the current charging rate
5. MDR ∈R, MDR ≥0 is the maximum discharging rate
6. CDR ∈R, 0 ≥CDR ≤MDR is the current charging rate
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
9
==PAGE:18==
7. LCR ∈R, LR = CCR −CDR is the current change rate battery level based upon
the difference between the current charging rate and current discharge rate
3.1.4
Switch
The consumer, provider and storage will all have to be connected to form an energy grid.
The switch component works as a link between the aforementioned component types, by
distributing the resources that are being send from the provider, towards the consumers
that the switch is linked to. This is also the case with the battery that was mentioned earlier,
here the switch distributes resources either towards the battery or from the battery.
For the switch component, it has to be mentioned that is not an intelligent component, but
rather a mechanical one. This means that the ”distribution” happens through the use of
fuses, which can be interpreted as power limiters rather than controllers. These fuses has
a set amount of power that can run through them before they break or melt, if the fuse is
forced to deliver more power than it can hold, it will break and not be able to deliver power
to the consumers in its chain.
Definition 3.1.5 (Consumer). Switch
1. P is a set where p ∈P is of the type provider
2. C is a set where c ∈C is of the type On/Off consumer or Continuous consumer
3. S is a set where s ∈S is of the type storage
4. SW is a set where sw ∈SW is of the type switch
5. MEI, ∈R, is the maximum energy input in the switch and is defined for a switch
sw′, where MOsw′−>sw is the maximum output from sw′ towards sw, by
MEIsw′ =
∑
p∈Psw′
MOp+
∑
s∈Ssw′
{
MDRs
for Ls > 0
0
}
+
∑
sw∈SWsw′
MEIsw−MOsw′−>sw
6. MEO, ∈R, is the maximum energy output in the switch and is defined for a switch
sw′, where MIsw′−>sw is the maximum output from sw′ towards sw, by
MEOsw′ =
∑
p∈Psw′
MEp+
∑
s∈Ss′
{
MCRs
for Ls < MC
0
}
+
∑
sw∈SWsw′
MEOsw−MIsw−>sw′
7. CI, ∈R, is the current energy input in the controller and is defined for a switch sw′,
where Isw−>sw′ is the input from sw towards sw′, by
CIsw′ =
∑
p∈Psw′
Op +
∑
s∈Ss′
CDRs +
∑
sw∈SWsw′
Isw′−>sw
8. CO, ∈R, is the current energy output in the controller and is defined for a switch
sw′, where Osw−>sw′ is the output from sw towards sw′, by
COsw′ =
∑
p∈Psw′
CEp +
∑
s∈Ss′
CCRs +
∑
sw∈SWsw′
Osw−>sw′
10
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:19==
3.2
Current state of the domain
In the modern energy grid, there are several issues that will have to be addressed over
the upcoming years. Some of these issues are regarding how energy is being produced,
with a focus on moving from the use of fossil fuels to renewable energy sources. This
directly addresses the UN goal of becoming more sustainable in the future and limit the
CO2 emission in general. However moving to renewable and sustainable energy source
also creates some new issues. As the demand in an energy grid changes constantly there
is a high demand for flexibility. Energy production companies are trying to predict the de­
mand of energy based on previous data. This is necessary, because it may take hours
or even days, to ramp up the energy production of a large power plant to accommodate
the increasing requirements. However, they should also be able to respond to demand
changes in a matter of seconds which require smaller but more expensive generators in
the network. Even though these can react fast, it may still not be enough if there is a sud­
den peak in demand. For this reason energy providers keep a certain backup capacity
usually around 5­15%[2] more than the actual amount needed to ensure that the energy
grid doesn’t fail when unforeseen events such as sudden peaks, or the failure of a gen­
erator or plant happens. If there is an unpredictable decrease the energy consumption, it
results in an excessive amount of energy before the energy providers have time to ramp
down production, which the companies will have to get rid of in one way or another.
The introduction of renewable energy sources such as wind and solar power will also in­
troduce new variability and uncertainties to the energy grid. In modern renewable energy
plants, it is possible ramp up production, however as with large coal or nuclear plants
this might take several minutes or hours[2]. Furthermore, wind and sunlight is not always
reliable and the energy company will have to ensure access to enough flexible energy
sources that can quickly ramp up or down, to create a reliable network that can respond
to unknown events. Several proposals have been made on having a more dynamic and
reactive methodology of producing, providing and consuming energy, some are through
storing excessive power while others focus on a more dynamic production. With the
technological advancement over the years, the different proposals have become real­
istic. Batteries has become more capable in terms of capacity, but also in terms of charge
and discharge times. At the same time, the increasing effectiveness and efficiency within
technology, especially IOT and cloud computing, enables faster response time based on
real time data that can be procured at any time, at any place.
This thesis looks towards improving the way that energy is scheduled based on the re­
quirements of the consumers within the grid. The topic of this thesis will then be to address
some of the flexibility issues that are described above. The focus will be to mitigate the
short term adjustments in the grid due to unforeseen events, such that the use of the
expensive and polluting generators can be minimized. Thus, this project will have a high
focus on experimentation of different approaches to scheduling and distribution of shared
resources in a network. However, in order to conduct such experimentation, there would
have to exist some basis from where the experimentation can take place. This basis,
will be defined in the next chapters explaining and discussing the design and implemen­
tation of the various component types and their functionalities in the grid as it has been
described in this chapter. On that base build, the experimentation will be conducted, both
in terms of scheduling algorithms, but also gradually increasing the realism of the model
in general.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
11
==PAGE:20==
3.3
Summary
In this chapter the general domain has been described. Working with an energy grid
and attempting to develop a model that can load balance the consumption of energy, it
was deemed necessary to define an understanding of the components taking part in the
grid, while also defining the scope of the project. Two different types of consumers were
discussed in this chapter, being the on off consumer that is able to turn on and off and
the continuous consumer that can adjust its consumption dynamically. The provider is
defined as some component, that can deliver energy to a macro or microgrid, and the
storage as being a component where energy can be stored temporarily. The last compo­
nent that was defined in this chapter were the Switch, which works as a link between the
various component defined previously. Thereby, it will distribute power from the provider
towards the other components that it is linked to. Lastly in the section Current State of
the domain, some of the issues with the current technologies and the ongoing concerns
on consumption especially in regards to energy, are touched upon. Here there is a fo­
cus on the reduction of Co2 emission, and some of the challenges the new technological
enhancement brings, e.g., Solar and wind energy.
12
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:21==
4
System Design
To ensure that a proper model can be developed, a preliminary plan and design will be
made to ensure the basic functionalities of the model are covered properly. Therefore, this
chapter will focus on describing and discussing the various design decisions that has been
carried out, in order to establish a good foundation for the model. There will be focused
on ensuring an appropriate architecture for the model, discussing the various types with
their pros and cons, along with the specific design of the component types mentioned in
the previous chapter.
The project will consider the system in such a way, that there are awareness that a macro­
grid may have several main providers delivering power. However, the project will not fo­
cus on these providers but rather the individual microgrid that distributes and consumes
energy.
4.1
Component Structure
In order to properly introduce the design of the model, it would be appropriate to present
the design decisions to the overall structure of the model. When deciding on a model
or system structure, one must debate the functionalities it will implement. The model
will simulate a grid of different components that will be communicating with each other.
It was earlier defined that there exists switches in an energy grid, that in some way or
another distributes energy towards consumers or other switches. To control the amount
of energy that is used at any given time, the information flow will have to be rather fast,
and so must the decision making. It is therefore imperative that the most appropriate
structure is chosen for the model. When discussing architectures one will usually see
that it is split into three different categories of systems, the Peer to peer henceforth
P2P, the Centralized and the Decentralized system. Following sections will focus on
the argumentation towards which of the categories suits the purpose of the model, as it
will have great impact on the implementation of the various components in the system.
Defining a component structure/architecture will also provide a common understanding of
component’s relation to each other.
4.1.1
Centralized System
The Centralized[7] system, is a systems where a central unit is in charge of the deci­
sion making. This means that every component in a system must be connected to this
centralized unit in order for the system to work. A more common terminology would be
to reference it as having a client/server architecture, meaning that a server is in charge
of providing its clients with the resources it needs to work. An example of a centralized
system, are when customers attempt to access an online shop through their computers.
This would be a classical example where the customers ­ the clients, attempts to access
the company’s server, to receive some information about products or the like. However,
having a centralized system where every client is connected to a centralized unit does
have its drawbacks. By having a centralized unit as the only component in the system
capable of making decisions for the entire system, requires that its processing power can
accommodate the requirements of the system. This means that there might arise issues
with an increasing amount of clients trying to access resources from the centralized unit,
a so called scalability[7] issue. Another issue with having just one centralized unit, is in
case of a faulty unit. If the centralized unit breaks for some reason, the entire system will
break with it. However, as there is just one unit that processes data it will also be easier
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
13
==PAGE:22==
to repair, as there will only be one point of failure. This example assumes that the fault in
the system is software based, where mechanical errors such as cables breaking are not
limited to the centralized unit. Figure 4.1 is an illustration showing a simplified model of
what a centralized system would look like.
4.1.2
P2P
A P2P system, can be defined as a network of entities communicating with each other.
Unlike the centralized system presented above, each unit within the system will be able to
process information. The various entities will have to collaborate in order to complete the
task successfully. As an example, if an energy grid was implemented as a P2P system,
and the energy was a limited shared resource, each of the entities within the system
would have to agree on the entity or entities to receive the power. This means that every
entity within this system have to be connected in some way or another, and are directing
messages to each other in order to collaborate. There are different topologies within the
P2P systems category[7] which all have their pros and cons, this project will not focus
on an in depth description of them. Figure 4.1 shows an abstract illustration of what the
model could look like, if it was implemented as a P2P system.
One of the major issues at hand with a P2P system in this context, is who would be
the decision maker, and how should a proper decision be carried out. A P2P system
that contains a large amount of components who are continuously communicating, can
make it difficult to decide which component holds the best claim. Especially if all the
components within the system will have to agree upon it. Furthermore, if multiple nodes
in the network is trying to claim the resources at the same time, this could lead to an
overload in communication, when trying to distribute power.
4.1.3
Decentralized System
The Decentralized system, can be interpreted as a hybrid of the two structures that were
discussed above. In the decentralized version, several components can decide how to
distribute resources and there exists clients like you would see in a centralized system[8].
There would not exists a single point of failure as there are several components that can
make decisions based on the resources in the network. Basically, the decentralized sys­
tem can be seen as a network containing small centralized networks, who are linked to
each other through a controlling unit. This provides the benefit, that each centralized sys­
tem will only have to process the resources that are concerned with their own microgrid.
For clarification, figure 4.1 shows a simplified model of how a decentralized system could
look like. This shows how several smaller groups are linked together. Each group having
a controlling unit and some components within, that receives the resource distributed by
their respective controller.
4.1.4
Choice of Structure
Through research of P2P systems, we were able to discover several approaches that
potentially could be able to complement the system in different ways. One of the appealing
aspects of a P2P structure is the conceptual idea of delegating logic handling and actions
out to the various peers, such that there won’t be one centralized unit but collaboration
towards the completion of a task. It would also ensure, that there would be no single
point of failure. However, it turned out that there would be some challenges using a P2P
solution. One of the challenges with a P2P system, is defining how the distribution of
power should be coordinated in the system between the peers. Furthermore, the psychical
structure in a power net may limit how power can be distributed between peers, which
presents the problem of determining what units can physically coordinate the distribution
of resources between them. The project group came to the conclusion, that as it is the
14
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.1: An illustration of the three main system structures considered for this project
goal to simulate a basic version of the reality, the system structure should match that
reality.
The choice of structure ended up being the decentralized system. Through a decentral­
ized approach, it is possible to build a system, where a set of controllers can be used to
distribute energy to different components. This means that decisions towards who can
use power and when, can be made locally by a controller within a small group of devices.
It will also allow for a controllable amount of messages being passed around between the
controllers, opposed to every component in the entire system sending messages to one
another.
There is a caveat to the model that is going to be build, which is the entry of energy.
This is where the main energy supply from a provider enters the system, therefore, the
argument could be made that this is the root. For this project the root will be considered as
the first switch after the main provider. However, the choice of a decentralized structure
supports physical structure of the current energy grid layout as it was described in the
domain description. With a decentralized structure, it allows for a distribution of energy
and information in a hierarchical manner. Hence the root node in our structure would be
the controller were the main supply of energy is connected. This is illustrated in figure
4.2, showing how the system structure will be for this model. As the figure shows, each
controller have a set of child nodes, henceforth referenced as a microgrid, which can
contain an arbitrary amount of consumers, storages, providers and switches. It has to be
mentioned that this hierarchy can be of an arbitrary size as well, and figure 4.2 is therefore
just an illustration made to visualise the structure concept.
To get a more precise definition of how the model is intended to work, an example of
a small energy grid has been made, which shows the power and communication flow
between the different components. As can be seen from the figure 4.3, there are some
external components in charge of delivering the main energy supply. This energy supply
arrives at the first Controller in the hierarchy. The transport component that is shown on
the figure, is a representation describing that the transportation of power may also be
a factor. We might have to consider in the transportation length at some point during
the project, to account for the potential power loss on transport. The power loss through
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.2: An illustration of the chosen hierarchy structure showing how controllers, con­
sumers, providers and storage can be arranged in different level
transportation will however not be implemented in the model, but it is important to be aware
of its existence. The figure also describes the components and the communication that
happens between them. It consists of two Controllers, a windmill (provider), a storage of
some type, and three consumers of unknown type. Thus, the figure provided is somewhat
abstract, as the three consumers may be Controllers themselves having their own children
components.
4.2
Controller
In the domain description efforts were made to define a switch. In this section an extension
to that definition will be made in order to suit the purpose of the project. Therefore, the
switch will be redefined as a controller, whose purpose is to control both the information
flow and the distribution of energy within its specific microgrid. However, as a controller
can also be a child node in another microgrid, it will also have to behave like a consumer
in its parent’s microgrid. The main purpose of the Controller is therefore to schedule the
available resources within its own microgrid.
4.2.1
Scheduling
The controller’s job is to make appropriate decisions in regards to which of its children
should be receiving a certain amount of a resource at any given time. We wanted a flexible
solution where the order and handling of which consumer should receive power could
easily be changed. As this problem have many similarities with scheduling of resources
in computer science, this field was researched in order find an approach for resource
distribution.
In computer science there exists a vast amount of different scheduling algorithms focusing
on achieving different goals. To be able to decide if an algorithm is appropriate for the
resource scheduling of this project, it is important to look at the goals to be achieved with
16
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.3: A closer look on what is referred to as a subgroup or microgrid in the hierarchy
the algorithm. An example is that it may not focus as much on maximizing the number
of jobs per time unit, as some batch systems do. It is important that the algorithm is able
to enforce some sort of policy. When trying to distribute energy in a system where the
available amount might not be large enough to accommodate the requirements of all the
consumers at the same time, it will require a policy defining which should run and which
should not. For example, if there is not enough power it is important that the freezer
with Covid­19 vaccines gets power before the fridge with cold beer for the Friday bar.
Furthermore, it is important that the algorithm is able to enforce a degree of fairness and
balance. If two consumers have an equal claim to a resource it is important that they
at some point get their fair share. However, if a consumer is defined to have a better
claim to the resource in the policy than another, the algorithm should also make sure that
a certain balance in the distribution is present, such that the lower priority consumers
receives some power at some point. The last goal of the algorithm is what will be called
power utilization, meaning that it uses all the resources available to it at all times. This
is important to achieve load balancing in an energy grid. If energy is not utilized in a
controller this means that all requests send to this controller is being granted.
After the above goals were defined, different algorithms were investigated. Some were
easily disregarded as they did not meet the established criteria. For example, a ”First­
come, First­served algorithm”, where the distribution, as the name suggests, is solely
based on whichever job comes first is the first to be handled. One of the main issues
with this algorithm in the context of this project, is that the ”jobs” inside the scheduler may
not finish at all, and therefore it will not be able to provide fairness nor balance. This
algorithm will also make it difficult to implement any kind of policy, as the algorithm will
always handle the first index in the queue.
Another algorithm that was investigated, was the Round­Robin algorithm. Here a job is
assigned an amount of resources in a time period which can vary based on the policy.
When the time period has expired, the job will be moved to the end of the queue and will
not get any resources before all other jobs in front of it, has gotten a share of the resources.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
17
==PAGE:26==
This would create some sort of fairness and balance in the distribution of resources, and
it would also be able to implement some sort of policy. However, this algorithm was not
deemed appropriate for distribution in an energy grid. In the example with a Covid­19
vaccine freezer, when the time period where it has access to power expires, it will be
moved to the back of the queue and wait for its turn again. However, vaccines may need
to be kept at a very precise temperature, which may be impossible if the waiting time
before it is granted power again is to long. Thus, it is evident that there is a need to
prioritize and distribute the power based on several parameters.
This lead to the investigation of Priority Scheduling[9] where each job is assigned a pri­
ority, and the job with the highest priority is the one allowed access to the resources. As
the priority can be assigned either statically, dynamically or both, it allows for an imple­
mentation of a very flexible resource scheduling policy. For example, if there is some high
priority consumer, like the Covid­19 vaccine freezer, it can assure that this high priority
consumers will always be first to receive the power available by assigning a static priority.
It also implements some fairness and balance by changing the priority dynamically. For
example, it can lower the priority of a consumer over time such that its priority eventually
won’t be the highest, and a rotation in active jobs can happen. Priority scheduling can also
have some issues, as there is a chance of starvation. If there are to many jobs with high
priority consuming all the available resources, it might lead to a situation where low priority
jobs never gets access to power, or will have to wait for a very long time. However, this
could be the intended policy when looking at the example with a Covid­19 vaccine freezer
and the beer fridge. Therefore, choosing priority scheduling with dynamically changing
priorities allows for a design of different scheduling policies based on several static and
dynamically changing parameters. Therefore, it was chosen that the scheduling algorithm
should be based on a priority scheduling.
To provide a better understanding, there has been made a figure showing how a prioriti­
sation system will work. Figure 4.4 shows a scheduler with processes of various sizes,
where the numbers inside the processes are their priority. In the example a new process
will arrive with the priority of 4, the list will then be sorted such that the new process can
be put in its right place.
Figure 4.4: An example of how the prioritized scheduling will insert a new element in the
sorted list
4.3
Consumers
One of the main challenges when designing the different types of consumers, is to make
them general enough for them to suit many different purposes, and thereby simulate many
different types of devices. Generally, a consumer’s goal is to uphold some control value
18
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:27==
within some specified threshold e.g., a setpoint and hysteresis. This project will mainly
concern itself with two different types of consumers, the OnOffConsumer and the Continu­
ous consumer whose general definition was addressed in the domain description, chapter
3. The decision on defining the control value, and the setpoint and hysteresis value, are
based on the experience that many types of devices work in such manner. Where some
control value will have to adjust itself to be within some set boundaries, unless it’s a de­
vice that is strictly on or off like light bulbs. As it was defined in the domain description,
consumers will usually attempt to keep some setpoint value. For an On/Off consumer this
is done using a hysteresis which is the amount that the control value is allowed to be away
from the setpoint. For a continuous consumer this is usually just done using a setpoint.
However, the main goal of the project is to provide some degree of load balancing, and
it is therefore imperative that the system can be controlled. Therefore it was decided to
also add a hysteresis to a continuous consumer to define an accepted span for the control
value, allowing the system to control the consumer’s energy consumption.
The OnOffConsumer, should consume energy when its control value falls below a certain
allowed hysteresis, this shall result in an increasing control value. The control value of
the OnOffConsumer should then keep rising until it reaches its setpoint which in turn will
result in the consumer turning off, and therefore no longer consume energy.
The ContinuousConsumer, should work in a more dynamic way, it will react based on how
close its control value is to it’s setpoint and hysteresis. This means that when the control
value gets close to hysteresis, it will try to adjust by consuming more energy such that
the control value may increase. The opposite should then be the case when the control
value gets close to its setpoint resulting in the consumer consuming a smaller amounts
of energy. This should result in a more dynamic consumer where the control value will
oscillate up and down.
The consumer does not control the energy flow within the system, meaning that if the
consumer requires more power than what is currently available to it, it will have to be
granted by its parent controller. However, if the consumer reaches its control value it may
decide to turn itself off or consume less energy. With this design the mechanisms have
been decoupled into adjusting the control value in a consumer, and the mechanism that
is the scheduling of energy. This makes it very flexible in terms of implementing different
sorts of consumers with different behaviour, without affecting the scheduling algorithm.
Finally, there are some device types that cannot be simulated using these two generalised
component types. An example could be a computer, the computer is a very complex
system that contains several devices that has their own control values and other factors
that may or may not impact the behavior of the computer as a whole. Therefore, even
though it may be possible to define a computer as one of the two consumer types, it would
appear unfeasible to do so. Another type of device that we won’t be able to simulate
properly with the consumer types, are time based devices. This type of device is defined
as a device that are powered up within a certain time period, and is turned off otherwise,
this can be light bulbs that are scheduled by a timer.
4.4
Communication
The structure of the model has now been defined, with the different consumers and con­
trollers and how they should work internally. It should also be defined how to simulate the
communication between components in the model. In computer science there are two
main ways for devices to communicate, request­response and publish­subscribe. Look­
ing at a request­response model, this would mean that the controller should send a request
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
19
==PAGE:28==
to all its child nodes in the microgrid for some information that would indicate how much
power the device needs, or the child node would have to send a request for power and im­
mediatly receive a response of wether or not it could consume more power. However if it
cannot initially be granted in the response the child node would continuously have to send
a request to check if it could consumer more power. In both cases this communication
method raises the question of how often should a component send a request? If a rela­
tively small interval was chosen, it means there would be a large amount of unnecessary
communication happening on the network, as the state of a the system doesn’t necessar­
ily change from one request to the next. This could be mitigated by increasing the interval
between requests. However, this may result in slow reaction times to accommodate the
needs of the system.
Instead, it was decided to use a publish subscribe methodology. Here subscribers express
an interest in receiving certain messages, and publishers are publishing their messages
without any direct recipient. The way that it is going to function in this model, is that the
consumers will publish their need for additional energy when their energy requirement
state changes. The Controllers will in turn be subscribed to their children consumers and
therefore be able to act in accordance to their design. When a consumer is allowed to use
more power, the controller will needs to communicate that to the child node. This means
that a child in a microgrid should also be subscribed to messages from its parent.
4.5
Providers & Storages
The providers could be of several different types, as long as they would provide power
to the grid in one way or another. The storage, is a component that can be used to
store energy for a limited amount of time, such as a battery, this would enable the saving
of energy for later use rather than getting rid of it. Both of these component types are
important for an energy grid, however, for this project they will not be implemented even
though there are benefits in using them. Having additional providers in a system, allows
for quite a bit of flexibility in terms of power management, and supportive providers are
usable if the main provider cannot provide sufficient power by itself. The storage type is
a component that also provides some positive effects towards the energy grid’s flexibility.
Being able to store energy for a limited amount of time for later usage, when the energy
requirement is higher than what can be provided by the main provider.
Thus, it is easy to see the positive effects that both component types has, and they should
be implemented in an iteration that is past the scope of this thesis. It could be interesting
to see, the effects that local providers within an energy grid, meaning providers that are
linked directly to a microgrid, could have on the overall consumption of energy within the
entire grid. The same goes for storages, having storages within some microgrids could
benefit the overall consumption of the macrogrid.
4.6
Simulation
In order to understand the output of the model, and make an overview of the results
that is provided, it was decided to make a simulation view. The goal of the simulation is to
provide sufficient information about the relevant data being processed by the model. It was
chosen that a graphical visualisation would be an appropriate way to represent the user,
to how the different components are behaving at any given time during the simulation.
Moreover, it was decided to show the relevant data of every consumer that takes part in
the simulation, as it would give the user the ability to track how different variables would
affect each other. The components should be represented in a list view, such that it would
be possible to see which consumers belongs to what controller.
20
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:29==
4.6.1
Time Management
To build a proper simulation, the handling of time would have to be addressed. Within
the subject of Time Management, two different approaches will be discussed, being con­
tinuous time management and discrete time management. In a continuous simulation
the system state values would have to change continuously in respect to time, using a
set of continuous functions. This could provide a very realistic view on how the different
components work in real life as it would have an infinite set of system states. However,
the focus of this project is to research different approaches to load balancing rather than
creating a completely realistic simulation[10]. Thus, it was decided to build a discrete
simulation, where the system states changes over time by triggering events in the sys­
tem at particular points in time. In a discrete simulation there are two approaches to time
advancements, next­event time advance and fixed­increment time advance. It was cho­
sen to use the fixed­increment time advances, as this would provide the opportunity to
simulate a continuous development by using a sufficiently small time unit.
4.7
Summary
In this chapter the design of the basic build has been introduced. The system will be build
with a decentralized based structure, that will allow for the implementation of a compo­
nent hierarchy, much like what is shown in figure 4.2. It was necessary to expand on the
switch component that was defined in the previous chapter, and it is now called the Con­
troller component. The Controller will be in charge of updating the list of components and
their requests such that scheduling can be done. However, the scheduling part will not
be implemented in the base build, but it was deemed necessary to address, such that the
general direction of the implementation could be understood. The two consumer types
that were previously defined is designed and their intended implemented behavior is de­
fined in accordance to their description in chapter 3. Providers and storages were also
discussed in this chapter, as the project concerns itself with the topic of load balancing, it
is the distribution and consumption of power that is the main issue. It was therefore nec­
essary to define the Providers and Storages as being out of scope for this specific project,
but not as unimportant, as it could potentially have a great impact on the simulations and
experiments. Lastly, the simulation itself was discussed, both in terms of the view setup
and how time is managed, thus how it works with discrete time.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:31==
5
Base Model Implementation
This section will introduce the implementation of the base build as was designed in the pre­
vious chapter. The main purpose of the base build is to establish the core functionalities
of the system and thereby the foundation for the experiments that aims towards applying
load balancing. However, some definitions has been made in the previous chapter that
will not be part of the base build, for example the priority scheduling algorithm. It was
chosen to present the designs of those specific functionalities/parts in the design phase,
as it is believed to be core functionalities required for load balancing, but does not have
any effect on the systems core functionalities.
The base build concerns itself with a basic implementation of the component types and
the simulation that was defined in the domain description and the system model, in an
attempt to simulate reality in its most basic form.
Figure 5.1: The class diagram of the model implementation for the base build
5.1
IConsumer
For the model in general, it was decided to implement an interface, consumers would have
to implement to take part in the system. By developing an interface, it can be ensured
that all consumers no matter their type implements some basic functionalities and holds
some specific variables. The interface will work as contract that each consumer must
sign in order to be a part of the system. It was decided to use an interface rather than an
abstract class, as the different consumers should implement some functionality, but the
functionality may vary depending on the consumer. The usage of an interface allows for
some freedom as well, as a Class can inherit several interfaces but can only extend one
abstract class. The IConsumer interface implements the variables Id and Name, which
represents their id which is used as an identifier, that can be referenced within the system.
The name is used to make it easier to differentiate the components, it is our assumption
that remembering specific Ids is harder than component names.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
23
==PAGE:32==
The IConsumer has two different methods its inheritors has to implement.
The Tick
method is used to simulate the passing of time, as a discrete simulation this method
should be called for every component in the system for each time unit that has passed.
The method’s functionality should be implemented by each component type to update
the components state. GetEnergyConsumption, will be used as a method to monitor the
consumer’s current energy consumption. The entire class and its relation to the different
consumers can be found on figure 5.1
5.2
Consumers
Following will be the implementation of the two consumer types used in the model. These
two consumer types were defined in the previous chapters. Thus, this section will not fo­
cus much on describing the high level functionalities of the consumers, nor their purpose,
but rather the implementation.
5.2.1
OnOffConsumer
To implement the On/Off consumer as described in the system design, we first need to im­
plement some variables to keep track of the consumers state and configuration. First of all
the two variables SetPoint and Hysteresis, was implemented to represent the upper and
lower boundaries of the threshold for the ControlValue. Furthermore, we need a variable
to keep track of the consumers energy consumption, hence another variable was added
called CurrentEnergyConsumption. The last two variables needed, is for the configura­
tion of the device, to know how much power is consumed when the consumer is turned
on or off, thus the two variables MaxEnergyConsumption and MinEnergyConsumption was
implemented. These two should be set upon creation and configuration of the model, and
will not change when running the simulation. Lastly the On/Off consumer should also
implement the IConsumer interface and have a name and id variable.
To implement the functionality of the On/Off consumer we would also need to implement
the Tick method from the IConsumer interface, which is invoked every time a time unit
in the simulation have passed. This Tick method should implement an algorithm that
will update the consumer’s states, meaning it should update the energy consumption if
needed, and update the control value based on the state of the consumer. Updating
the energy consumption for the On/Off consumer, means that we need to check if the
consumer should be turned on or off. As the On/Off consumer can only be in two states, it
means the CurrentEnergyConsumption is either equal to the MaxEnergyConsumption or
the MinEnergyConsumption. This also means that the CurrentEnergyConsumption can
be used to check if the consumer is on or off. The Tick method was therefore implemented
as can be seen in algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 OnOffConsumer.Tick()
if ControlV alue < Minvalue
AND CurrentEnergyConsumption < MaxEnergyConsumption then
CurrentEnergyConsumption = MaxEnergyConsumption
else if ControlV alue > MaxV alue
AND CurrentEnergyConsumption > MinEnergyConsumption then
CurrentEnergyConsumption = MinEnergyConsumption
AdjustControlV alue()
The first if statement is to see if the consumer should be turned on. First we check if
the control value is getting below the minimum threshold allowed. If this is true it means
24
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:33==
we should try to turn on the consumer if it is not already turned on. This is why we also
check if the CurrentEnergyConsumption is lower than the MaximumEnergyConsumption
as this would be true only if the consumer is turned off. If the complete boolean state­
ment is true it means we should turn on the consumer, which means we simply set the
CurrentEnergyConsumption to the MaxEnergyConsumption. The opposite check is made
to see if the consumer should be turned off. First we check if the ControlValue have reach
it’s upper bound, and if true we check if the CurrentEnergyConsumption is higher than the
minimum energy consumption. If the expression is true the CurrentEnergyConsumption
is set to the minimum value, meaning that the consumer is turned off.
After the update of the consumer’s energy consumption the Tick method will call the
AdjustControlValue method. As the name suggests it will update the control value based
on whether the consumer is on or off. In algorithm 1 we see the implementation of this
method. To check if the consumer is on we simply test if the CurrentEnergyConsumption
is larger than the configured MinimumEnergyConsumption. If this is true we increment the
control value by the AdjustPerSecond configuration parameter. Otherwise it means that
the consumer is turned off, and we instead subtract the AdjustPerSecond. As discussed
in the system design, the base build does not focus on implementing a realistic way to
regulate consumers but rather on the distribution of energy, therefore it was chosen to let
the regulation increase or decrease with a static value.
Algorithm 2 OnOffConsumer.AdjustControlValue()
if CurrentEnergyConsumption > MinEnergyConsumption then
ControlV alue = ControlV alue + AdjustmentPerSecond
else
ControlV alue = ControlV alue −AdjustmentPerSecond
5.2.2
ContinousConsumer
The goal of the continuous consumer is to implement a consumer that will adjust its Con­
trolValue to stay as close to a set point as possible. This will allow the Conusmer’s energy
consumption curve to look a lot cleaner as it will adjust itself with a certain amount of en­
ergy, rather than either using 100 % of its MaximumEnergyConsumption or a minimum
standby power.
The Continuous consumer does, as the OnOffConsumer described above, implement
the values ControlValue, SetPoint, MinValue, CurrentEnergyConsumption and MaxEner­
gyConsumption, and the Id and Name from the IConsumer interface. These variables
will have the same purpose in the continuous consumer, however some will be used dif­
ferently and some other calculations will be made. Two new variables have also been
introduced on the continuous consumer. The first is called TimeOut and is an integer
value. The TimeOut ensures that a ContinuousConsumer will have to wait for a certain
amount of time between adjustsments. It would otherwise be re­evaulating its current
energy consumption and its control value to fast and turn itself up to 100 % of its Max­
EnergyConsumption to often. This would defeat the purpose of a continuous consumer
as it would then behave like an On/Off consumer. The last variable implemented was the
EffectiveLevel. This is an indicator of the current energy consumption in percentages
and is used for internal calculations. Hence the effective level can be used to calculate
the CurrentEnergyConsumption as seen in equation 5.1.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
25
==PAGE:34==
CurrentEnergyConsumption = MaxEnergyConsumption ∗EffectiveLevel
(5.1)
To implement the functionality of the consumer we start by implementing the Tick method
from the interface, which as with the On/Off consumer is responsible for updating the
consumers state in terms of energy consumption and control value. The implementation
of the function can be seen in algorithm 3. The Tick method utilizes the aforementioned
TimeOut variable, which works like a countdown from when the consumer send their latest
request. If the TimeOut variable is larger than 0, it means that the consumer recently
adjusted its value and will therefore have to wait before another adjustment can be made.
As the invocation of the Tick indicates that a time unit have passed, we need to decrease
the TimeOut if it is in fact larger than zero.
However, if the TimeOut is not larger than zero we will have to check if we should adjust
the effective level, and thereby the energy consumption of the consumer, which is done
with the invokation of AdjustPower. Lastly, the consumer will have to update the control
value based on the current state for each time unit, which is why the AdjustControlValue
is invoked outside the if statement.
Algorithm 3 ContinuousConsumer.Tick
if TimeOut > 0 then
TimeOut = TimeOut −1
else
AdjustPower()
AdjustControlV alue()
The AdjustPower method is responsible for the evaluation of whether or not the consumer
is in need of more or less power. The implementation can be seen in algorithm 4. The
method starts by checking if the ControlValue is higher than the defined MaxValue, and
if the EffectiveLevel is larger than 0. As with the On/Off consumer, if the ControlValue is
larger than the MaxValue, it means that the consumer shall consume less power. The
check of whether or not the EffectiveLevel is larger than 0, is to ensure that a consumer
cannot turn their energy consumption into a negative figure if the consumer is currently
turned off completely. Thus, if this expression is true, it means that the consumer should
lower its effective level, and thereby its energy consumption. The TimeOut variable will
be set to 50 which ensures that another AdjustPower invocation cannot happen before
the TimeOut is not greater than 0 again. Next, it will adjust the EffectiveLevel by reduc­
ing it by 0.1 or 10 %. Lastly the CalculateEnergyConsumption method will be invoked to
recalculate the CurrentEnergyConsumption, as it may have changed. The same goes in
the opposite case, where it is checked if the ControlValue is smaller than the MinValue
and if the EffectiveLevel is larger than one. The check of EffectiveLevel is again a logical
check that the consumer cannot receive more energy if it is already receiving 100 % of its
MaxEnergyConsumption. The effects of this check being true are very similar to the case
above, where the TimeOut variable is set to 50. However, since the consumer should
now consume more energy the EffectiveLevel will be increased by 0.1 instead. Lastly,
the CalculateEnergyConsumption method will be invoked to ensure that the CurrentEn­
ergyConsumption reflects the changes to the EffectiveLevel.
26
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:35==
Algorithm 4 ContinuousConsumer.AdjustPower
if ControlV alue > MaxV alue AND EffectiveLevel > 0 then
Timeout = 50
EffectiveLevel = EffectiveLevel −0.1
CalculateEnergyConsumption()
else if ControlV alue < MinV alue AND EffectiveLevel < 1 then
Timeout = 50
EffectiveLevel = EffectiveLevel + 0.1
CalculateEnergyConsumption()
The AdjustControlValue method is in charge of adjusting the ControlValue based on
the current EffectiveLevel of the Continuous consumer. The method will check if the
EffectiveLevel is either higher than 0.5 or lower or equal to 0.5, as can be seen in
algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 ContinuousConsumer.AdjustControlValue
if EffectiveLevel > 0.50 then
ControlV alue = ControlV alue + (0.1 ∗EffectiveLevel)
else if EffectiveLevel ≤0.50 then
ControlV alue = ControlV alue −0.1 ∗(1 −EffectiveLevel)
If it is higher than 0.5 the ControlValue will be adjusted according to equation 5.2. And
likewise, if the EffectiveLevel is lower than or equal to 0.5 the ControlValue will be adjusted
by equation 5.3.
ControlV alue = ControlV alue + 0.1 ∗EffectiveLevel
(5.2)
ControlV alue = ControlV alue −0.1 ∗(1 −EffectiveLevel)
(5.3)
Note that it is necessary to subtract the EffectiveLevel from one when decreasing the
control value. This is to simulate the intended behavior for the control value to increasingly
adjust the itself the lower the effective level gets.
To provide an example, lets look at a consumer where the AdjustmentPerSecond is +0.1.
Then we will get a curve for the the actual adjustment value based on the effective level
as seen in figure 5.2. The project group is aware that the calculation method is by no
means accurate and does not simulate the reality. However, the calculation and adjust­
ment of the ControlValue was not the priority for this base build, but rather to develop the
general behavior. It is therefore assumed that if the EffectiveLevel is above 0.5 (50%) it
will result in an increasing control value, while if it is below 0.5 it will decrease. However,
regulation methods will be extended and experimented upon in the Implementation and
Experimentation chapter.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.2: Adjustment Control value graph, showing the scale of how adjustments are
made towards the control value
5.3
Controller
The Controller component is in the base build implemented as a Switch, as it was de­
fined in the domain description, chapter 3. The controller does not include any func­
tionality other than being a link between other components in the energy grid. For the
base build it is allowed for the consumers to consume the amount of energy that they
require in order to stay functional. This means, that at any given time throughout the
simulation, every consumer can consume the entirety of their MaxEnergyConsumption.
This allowes for a hierarchy to be build early in the process, which is also a reason­
able implementation of how an energy grid is structured in the real world. However as
the controller will have to be able to act as a consumer in the system, it will need to
implement the IConsumer interface. Thus, it will have to implement the Id and Name vari­
able, as well as the two methods Tick and GetEnergyConsumption. Furthermore, the
controller implements the CurrentEnergyConsumption variable to keep track of the en­
ergy consumed in its microgrid. This should represent that there is an electricity me­
ter placed at the switch in the real world, capable of measuring how much energy is
flowing through the switch. The only thing to implement in the Tick method is there­
fore to update the CurrentEnergyConsumption. This is implemented through the method
CalculateEnergyConsumtion, which will calculate the sum of the energy consumption for
all the child nodes in its microgrid. The last method in the Controller is the GetEnergyConsumption
method, which simply returns the value of CurrentEnergyConsumption.
5.4
Simulation
This section will address the approach to create the simulation view, displaying all the rel­
evant information. Here, there will be a focus on the visual aspects of the implementation,
what is the user actually seeing in the view, along with the relevant methods that are used
to setup the view and to run the simulation in the desired configuration.
Figure 5.3 shows a simple simulation running in an unoptimized configuration. This view
shows a graph to the left representing the total energy consumption which is plotted over
time. As load balancing techniques are implemented this graph should show less oscil­
28
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.3: An example of the simulation view, showing relevant information and graphs
for the configured components
lation, and thereby a more successful balance of energy consumption within the system.
This will be used as a basis to compare different experiments to analyse the advantages
and disadvantages of the experiments to achieve the over all goal of load balancing in an
energy grid.
A note towards figure 5.3, this shows the entirety of the simulation view. Most of the
experiments includes a large amount of components, thus it has been decided to split
them into a figure showing the graph, and one or more figures showing the components
that is included in the simulation. This is done such that the reader can get a clear overview
of the model behavior.
The right hand side of the figure shows the current system structure. The system structure
consists of n amount of controllers, that can have n amount of children, which can be either
of the consumer type of the controller type. By implementing this structure, it allows for
the hierarchy to be build as defined in chapter 3. Each controller in the hierarchy on the
right hand side of the view, will present their Energy Consumption variable which is how
much energy the controller is distributing at the given point of the simulation. The second
variable is called Available Power, this variable represents the amount of energy available
to the controller, this is not a used variable for the base build as it allows the consumers to
consume as much energy as they require. However, load balancing presumes that there
exists a limited resource that has to be shared and the variable will therefore become
relevant when further experimentation is being conducted.
Every Consumer on the right hand side of the view, is presented with their type, being
either an on/off or a continuous consumer, followed by their name. For this example it
was chosen to name them Test Consumer 1 and Test Consumer 2, but it would make
sense to provide proper naming schemes when scalability is implemented into the model,
and thus allow for a large amount of consumers and controllers. The next variable on
the consumer called ”Energy Consumption”, does as it is the case with the controller,
present the CurrentEnergyConsumption of the consumer. Lastly, the Control Value of
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
29
==PAGE:38==
the individual consumer is presented, it is the most important variable to have, as it can
be used to analyse if the model is behaving as expected. It was decided to include a
graph, such that a pattern can be seen and to visualise the control value compared to the
hysteresis and setpoint value of the individual consumers.
The simulation is primarily build by two different classes, the SimulationModel and the
ModelConfiguration. As the names may suggest, the SimulationModel class is in charge
of running and updating the view and its content, while the ModelConfiguration is in charge
of configuring what components should be included in the simulation.
Specifically, the SimulationModel builds the hierarchy with the help of a ModelConfigura­
tor. This ModelConfiguration class consists of an enum that represents the various builds
that will be used in this project. In the Base Build, the ModelConfiguration will only contain
the Unoptimized build, but will be expanded through the various experiments. Moreover,
the ModelConfiguration class holds a method called GetModelConfiguration which returns
the root controller with the configured mode, it uses the mode variable to decide which
kind of build it should run. The model will build a hierarchy with every mode that has been
configured. Lastly, to build this hierarchy there’s a need for a reference from each child
node to their parent. Therefore, it is implemented such that all components that are build
will have a parent variable, however, if the Controller is the root controller the variable will
be set to null.
To run the actual simulation there’s been implemented a method called RunSimulation.
This method is designed to run as long as the application is running, therefore there’s been
created a boolean value that is always true. This boolean value is used as the condition of
a while loop within the method, to ensure that it will run continuously while the application
is active. Inside the while loop, there’s a foreach function that runs through every root
controller in the system. For each of these root controllers there’s a recursive method in­
vocation called CallTickRecursively. This method expands the component hierarchy, and
ensures that the tick method is called on every component within the hierarchy. Once the
foreach loop has finished, there’s a simulation specific functionality invoked, to ensures
that the view is not redrawn every time a minor change has happened within the mode.
Rather it will redraw every time the Time variable modulo some other variable is equal to
zero. For this example, equation 5.4, the other variable has been set to 5000, however
it is highly depending on the computers processing capabilities. If this check returns true
the view will get updated. No matter if it returns true or false the Time variable will be
increased by one.
Time%5000 == 0
(5.4)
5.5
Summary
This concludes the implementation of the base build. The base build focused on imple­
menting the basic functionalities that were deemed necessary for the further experimen­
tation that will be carried out in this project. There was a focus on implementing a build
that could distribute energy based on the a control value within the two consumer types.
Thereby it is shown that the consumers manages to adjust their own energy consumption
based on a control value. Following are a screenshot of the simulation, showing the con­
trol value and their individual energy consumption, however this will only be a snapshot
of the simulation at this given point in time and thus a need for elaboration.
30
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:39==
Figure 5.4: An example of the unoptimized build during run­time, showing the components
Figure 5.5: An example of the unoptimized build during run­time, showing the graph part
As figure 5.4 shows, both types of consumers consumes energy depending on their con­
trol value. The graph showing how the increasing and decreasing control values of the
individual consumers, and above one can see their current energy consumption state.
When the simulation is running it can be seen that as soon as the control value reaches
its lower threshold the consumer will consume energy. If it’s a continuous consumer it will
dynamically consume more energy, while if it is an On/Off consumer it will consume 100
% of its MaxEnergyConsumption. On the other hand, if the control value reaches its max­
imum thresholds, the On/Off consumer will turn off completely or go on standby, while the
continuous consumer will consume an decreased amount of energy. Furthermore, fig­
ure 5.5 shows the microgrid’s energy consumption, recall that the controller was defined
earlier, but without any real functionality other than measuring the energy consumed by
the microgrid. There is a table in appendix A.1, showing the different configurations files
used to create the configuration for each test case, including the one used to provide
these results.
Although the implementation of the base build was succesful in providing consumers that
can consume energy on demand of the control value, it does not provide any load bal­
ancing. To simulate the effects of load balancing, we would have restrict the amount of
energy that is available to a microgrid, which in turn requires a policy in regards to how
the distribution should be done. Therefore, the next experiment will have the topic of ad­
dressing and finding a solution to this issue. Thus given a restricted amount of energy
within a microgrid, how should a policy be made such that a successful distribution of said
power can happen.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:41==
6
Implementation & Experimentation
This chapter will describe the different experiments conducted in this project. The re­
sults are then used as the basis for the next experiment, which is why it’s been chosen
to call them experiments rather than iterations. The experiments that are conducted in
this chapter are mainly of two different natures. One being towards load balancing and
thereby improving the distribution and consumption of energy. The second being how
reality is simulated, which can be, but is not limited to, experimentation on how to adjust
a control value of a consumer in the most appropriate way. It has to be mentioned, that
the implementation & experimentation chapter will focus on the idea and thought process
of the implementation, and will therefore not be a description going through the code of
each class in the system line by line.
A note that has to be made about these experiments, it was decided to merge some of
the experiments, both for the sake of the reader, but also in regards to the content of
the experiment itself. If the content of an experiment was deemed as being limited and
therefore the results of the experiment as well, and it will therefore be a part of a larger
experiment.
Each experiment will contain a general introduction, formulating the purpose and issues
it will address, both in terms of the general goals of the project, but also in terms of issues
that may arise in a previous experiment. Next will be the design and implementation,
which generally will have the same format as the previous section, where the design and
implementation of the base build has been presented. Lastly, the results will be presented
and addressed. Focusing on the findings of the current experiment, will help targeting the
next experiment or experiments, depending on the results that was found.
6.1
Priority List
This first experiment will extend on the base build. Since the energy in the system is
defined as a limited shared resource, it will have to be treated as such. Therefore, this
iteration will take into account, a limit to the energy that can run within the system and a
prioritization system is proposed. The prioritization will be created set by the user of the
model, having to define a priority on each consumer added to the system, using a scale
where 1 is the highest priority and the higher the value of the priority variable, the lower
priority, e.g. priority 5 is more important than priority 10. The prioritised system can be
used to sort the consumers by their importance, and thereby ensure that the consumers
with the highest priority have their needs fulfilled.
The goal of this experiment is to implement a proof­of­concept version of a priority list, as
described in the System Design, using a static priority on consumers. The expectation is
to show that the model is able to deliver some degree of load balancing. This experiment
should also be used to expose possible downfalls in simply using a static priority for further
experiments.
6.1.1
Design & Implementation
As mentioned, this experiment will extend upon the base build implemented in the pre­
vious section. There will be introduced several new classes along with extensions and
changes to existing classes and interfaces. The IConsumer interface should be able to
support the distribution of power and therefore, a method to simulate the distribution of
energy to the consumers will have to be created. Furthermore, there has to be made a
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
33
==PAGE:42==
standardized format for consumers to request energy from their parent controller, such
that the system can expect the same format from every component requesting energy.
The various consumer types will have to be edited, such that they no longer can decide
to consume energy whenever they need it, but will have to request it from their controller.
Thus, the controller will need methods to both handle the incoming requests and a place
to store them, such that the energy can be distributed to the correct consumers at the
right times. The current experiment will focus on the distribution of energy, therefore no
further efforts will be put into the regulation of control values for this experiment.
The next part of this section, will focus on the design and implementation of the experi­
ment, to further ensure a common understanding of the experiment and its functionalities
a Class Diagram has been made that can be seen in figure 6.1. Throughout this section
several pseudo code algorithms will be presented. It was decided to present the more
complex algorithms for the reader to improve the understanding of the systems function­
ality.
Figure 6.1: The updated class diagram showing the changes made to implement priori­
tized scheduling
6.1.2
IConsumer
The IConsumer interface will be undergoing a few changes to suit this experiment. Since
all consumers in the model will have to implement the IConsumer interface, it was decided
to implement a GrantPower method, as there will be a need to simulate the distribution
of power from parent to child. An example is a Controller granting energy to its child
consumer, the GrantPower will then work as the simulating factor delivering energy from
the Controller to the Consumer. The GrantPower method takes one parameter called
power, which reflects the amount of energy that is granted to the requesting consumer.
Currently the Controller will not be implementing this method fully, as the experiment will
34
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:43==
not include a scenario where a Controller can behave as a Consumer and request power
further up in the hierarchy. This will be implemented in a later experiment, where the
focus will be on building a hierarchy where the subgroups, hence the controllers can also
request energy from their parent.
6.1.3
Requests
As decided in the system design, there is a need for a generalized way for a consumer to
send a request to its parent controller for more energy, or to tell the parent that it uses less
than what was last granted. Therefore, the PowerRequest class is introduced, this class
will ensure that all requests are of the same format and can be compare on the same
parameters independent on the implementation of a consumer. This will increase the
flexibility of how energy is requested, as some consumer might be implemented such that
the parameters in the request are dynamically changed based on several other internal
parameters rather than the static configuration parameters.
The implementation is done with two components, an interface called ICompareable which
allows for an simple way to compare objects and object attributes in C# through the Com­
pareTo method. Through the experiments we will need different methods to compare
requests. For this reason the CompareTo method is simply choosing the method of how
to compare PowerRequest based on the current mode of the simulation, which will then
be implemented in seperate methods. This experiment will make use of the CompareTo­
Priority method which will return different values depending on the priority of the current
request and the one that it is being compared to. Algorithm 6 shows the functionalities of
the method in pseudo code, and can be used to help understanding the following expla­
nation of the method. If the current PowerRequest’s priority is greater than the one it is
that is being compared to, it will return 1, likewise, if the current PowerRequest’s priority
is lower than the one it is being compared to, it will return ­1. If neither are the case it
means that the two request being compared have the same priority and it will return 0.
This method definition will be useful when the approach to storing the PowerRequests is
presented.
Algorithm 6 PowerRequest.CompareToPriority
if Priority1 > Priority2 then
return 1
else if Priority1 < Priority2 then
return ­1
else
return 0
The PowerRequest class has four variables, the ConsumerId which is a reference to the
Consumer that made the request, a Power variable representing the total amount of en­
ergy requested by the consumer, a Priority variable, representing the consumer’s own
priority in their request. Lastly, the double variable Granted reflects both if the request is
being handled and by how much. If the Granted Variable is larger than 0, it means that the
consumer is receiving power, and it also describes by how much, as the Granted variable
reflects the amount of energy that is being granted. As the definition from the domain
model states, the on/off consumer can only consume either a standby power, or it’s max­
imum. Therefore a boolean variable was added to the request called RequiresAll, such
that the consumer can tell through the request that it requires all the power requested. This
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
35
==PAGE:44==
is to ensure that power is not distributed to the On/Off consumer unless the consumer can
actually turn on.
6.1.4
Consumers
To support the changes for the PriorityList functionalities, some adjustments and additions
to the consumers were required. The adjustments made to the different consumers, are
rather than adjusting the EffectiveLevel of the consumer directly in the consumer itself, it
will now have to create the aforementioned PowerRequest. The created PowerRequest is
then forwarded to the parent Controller of the requestee, through a RequestPower method
that takes the PowerRequest as its only parameter. This method will be described in detail
when going through the implementation of the consumer. However, the check of whether
it needs more or less energy remains the same, being dependant on its ControlValue
compared to the hysteresis and setpoint.
The TimeOut variable persists, as there is still an interest in not updating the values in
an uncontrollable manner. This also counts for the creation and forwarding of requests,
setting a timer on how often a consumer can request will limit the amount of PowerRe­
quests flowing around in the system. However, once the timer has ended, the consumer
may create and forward a new PowerRequest to the parent Controller if needed. Both of
the changes are reflected for the ContinuousConsumer in algorithm 7 and the OnOffCon­
sumer in algorithm 8.
Algorithm 7 ContinuousConsumer.AdjustPower
if ControlV alue > MaxV alue AND EffectiveLevel > 0 then
EffectiveLevel = EffectiveLevel −0.1
CalculateEnergyConsumption()
power = MaxEnergyConsumption ∗EffectiveLevel Request = newPowerRequest
TimeOut = 50
ParentController.RequestPower(Request)
else if ControlV alue < MinV alue AND EffectiveLevel < 1 then
power = MaxEnergyConsumption ∗(EffectiveLevel + 0.1)
Request = newPowerRequest(power)
TimeOut = 50
ParentController.RequestPower(Request)
In the AdjustPower method for the continuous consumer it is important to note that when
lowering the power, the effective level is set directly on the consumer before the power
for the request is calculated. When requesting more power, the power is only calculated
by using the EffectiveLevel plus a 10 percent increase. This is based on the design de­
cision that a consumer should be able to lower it’s own power consumption when needed
and simply inform the parent controller of the lowered amount of energy such that it can
be distributed elsewhere. When requesting power we have to calculate the increased
amount of power the controller want to request and wait for a response before adjusting
the EffectiveLevel. The same reasoning is used for the On/Off consumer in the Tick
method where CurrentEnergyConsumption is only set directly when the power is lowered
36
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:45==
to the Minimum consumption of the consumer.
Algorithm 8 OnOffConsumer.Tick
if ControlV alue
<
MinV alue AND CurrentEnergyConsumption
==
0 AND
LatestRequest.Power != MaxEnergyConsumption then
Request = newPowerRequest()
ParentConsumer.RequestPower(Request)
LatestRequest = Request
else if ControlV alue > MaxV alue AND CurrentEnergyConsumption > 0 AND
LatestRequest?.Power != 0 then
CurrentEnergyConsumption = MinEnergyConsumption
Request = newPowerRequest()
ParentConsumer.RequestPower(Request)
LatestRequest = Request
AdjustControlV alue()
Lastly, the new addition to the IConsumer interface will have to be implemented. The
GrantPower is implemented in the ContinuousConsumer ensuring the EffectiveLevel of
the individual consumer can be set based on the granted power and the MaxEnergyCon­
sumption. Whereas, the CurrentEnergyConsumption is set based on the power that was
granted in the OnOffConsumer. This will result in an EffectiveLevel variable representing
the percentage amount of its MaxEnergyConsumption it has received, lastly the Calcu­
lateEnergyConsumption method will be invoked, to set its CurrentEnergyConsumption.
The method is slightly different depending on the type of consumer, the ContinousCon­
sumer calculates its EffectiveLevel as seen in equation 6.1, while the OnOffConsumer
calculates its CurrentEnergyConsumption as seen in equation 6.2.
EffectiveLevel = power/EnergyConsumption
(6.1)
CurrentEnergyConsumption = power
(6.2)
6.1.5
Priority List
It was earlier mentioned that there would be a need to store the PowerRequest. To do so,
it was decided to implement a PriorityList class that should contain the PowerRequests,
and implement the functionalities of the proposed priority scheduling from the system
model design. The PriorityList will hold an internal C# List, to store the request. The
reason that we implement our own priority list, and does not simply use a C# list directly
on the controller, is that the priority list have certain features that is not implemented in the
standard list. An example is the Insert method which does not just Add a PowerRequest
to the list end of the list, but it makes sure that when inserting an element, the list is still
correctly sorted based on the priority of the elements.
The first method of this class is the Insert method, which adds a PowerRequest to the
list and sorts the list. The idea behind using the sort method is that the PowerRequests
should be sorted based on their priorities, such that the requests with the highest priorities
are first in the List. The sorting algorithm that is used depends on the mode the model
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
37
==PAGE:46==
is configured to use. Currently, the model allows for either a Priority Mode which will be
the one used for this experiment, or an Unoptimized Mode which was used in the base
build. Modes allows for the usage of a switch case to choose between what algorithm
to use depending on the selected mode, which enables the flexibility of having different
parts of the system running different modes depending on the configuration. This exper­
iment will utilise the CompareToPriority method, algorithm 6, that was presented in the
PowerRequest section. As it was described, the CompareToPriority method would return
either 0, 1 or ­1 depending on the priorities of the PowerRequests being compared. If the
method returns 0 it means that the current request and the next request in the list has the
same priority, therefore the current request’s should not be moved ahead. However, if
the method returns ­1 it means that the current requests priority is lower than the one it’s
being compared to and it should be behind it in the List. Lastly, if the method returns 1 it
means the current request has a higher priority than the one it is comparing to and the two
PowerRequests shall swap spots in the List. Thus, as soon as a request is added to the
end of the list, the system will loop through the list of requests comparing each existing
request’s priority making sure that the list is sorted. The new request will then move up
the list until it meets another request with either the same or higher priority. This allows
for great flexibility in terms of how to handle the list and how to sort it, as it will simply be
a matter of changing how the CompareTo method works.
The next method is the IsLowerPriorityReceivingPower method (Algorithm 9) which takes
a PowerRequest as its only parameter. The method assumes that the list is sorted, and
checks if any PowerRequest with a lower priority than the one given as the parameter
is receiving energy. As seen in algorithm 9 it will find the elements of the lower priority
request by taking the subarray of the elements after the request index, and simply check
if any of these lower priotity request are receiving power. If that is the case, it will return
true and false otherwise.
Algorithm 9 PriorityList.IsLowerPriorityReceivingPower
index = data.IndexOf(Request)
result = false
if index != (data.Count −1) then
SubList = data.GetRange(index + 1, data.Count −(index + 1))
result = SubList.Any(Granted > 0)
return result
Even though it was decided that PowerRequests should generally not be removed from
the list, but rather updated, it would make sense to remove PowerRequests that requests
0 energy. The main reason for doing this is to keep the list as controlled as possible and
therefore only contain PowerRequests that are actually requesting energy, which has the
positive side effect that incidents where PowerRequests not requesting energy will have
to be evaluated or compared will be avoided. This will be done through a Remove method,
that takes an Id of a PowerRequest as its only parameter, it will find the PowerRequest
with a matching Id and remove it.
In order for the controller to distribute energy correctly, it will need a method to find the next
request in the list that does not receive energy and a method to find the last request in the
list that is receiving energy. Especially the last method is interesting, as it may be needed
to regulate the energy distributed to the consumer with the lowest priority, if the system
38
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:47==
otherwise fails to meet the energy requirements of higher priority requests. Likewise, a
Controller should evaluate the list and grant more energy to a request if leftover energy
exists. Therefore, the Controller should be able to find the request with the highest priority
that is not receiving its requested amount. Thus, the GetNextNotActive method was made
to find and return the next element in the list that is not receiving it’s required amount of
energy, and as the list is sorted this means the request with the highest priority that is
not being granted. And a GetLastActive that finds last element in the list who’s receiving
more than 0 energy, meaning the lowest priority. Lastly, there has been made two helper
methods, one called Count that returns the size of the List, and a PowerSum method
which returns the amount of energy being requested within the list.
6.1.6
Controller
The Controller will be undergoing quite the amount of changes for this experiment. It will
work as the link between most of the new features that has been implemented in the dif­
ferent existing classes and the new ones. The Controller will be the component that holds
the Priority List that is described above, which contains the PowerRequests. The Re­
questPower method, algorithm 10, is used to simulate when the consumers is requesting
power at their controller. It is therefore a method that a consumer may call on their parent
controller. Once this method is called by a consumer, the controller will check if the con­
sumer already has a request in the PriorityList. It was a wanted functionality that rather
than adding new requests to the PriorityList throughout the simulation, the request should
be updated instead. Thus, as mentioned each request has a reference to the consumer
that has send the request, such that it can be updated or removed if zero, when the energy
requirements of the consumer changes over time. However, if the consumer haven’t re­
quested energy before, it should be added to the list. The method is described in pseudo
code in algorithm 10. The RequestPower method should then check the PriorityList to
ensure that the controller is still distributing energy to the correct consumers based on
their priority. Since the list gets updated often when the requirements of the consumers
change, it is important to check the PriorityList every time its state changes. This happens
every time a new PowerRequest is received, ensuring that it is the prioritized consumers
that gets the energy first.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
39
==PAGE:48==
Algorithm 10 Controller.RequestPower
powerRequest = RequestList.Peek(Request.ConsumerId)
if powerRequest == null then
RequestList.Insert(Request)
else
if Request.Power > 0 then
if Request.Power < powerRequest.Granted then
powerRequest.Granted = Request.Power
powerRequest.Power = Request.Power
powerRequest.Priority = Request.Priority
else
RequestList.Remove(Request)
RequestList.Sort()
CalculateEnergyConsumption()
CheckRequestList()
The CheckRequestList method, algorithm 11, is the last method invoked in the Request­
Power method, algorithm 10, it is used to ensure that the consumers with the highest
priority in the list, are the ones getting the energy they require.
Algorithm 11 Controller.CheckRequestList
Request = RequestList.GetNextInactive()
if Request! = null && Request! = PreviousRequest then
consumer = Consumers.Get(Request.ConsumerId)
if Consumer != null then
neededPower = req.Power −consumer.CurrentEnergyConsumption
if neededPower > 0 then
FreePower(neededPower, req)
GrantPowerToConsumer(Request)
CalculateEnergyConsumption()
CheckRequestList(req)
This method starts by finding the next request in the list which is not receiving its required
amount of energy. If no request is found it means that the controller at this point is able to
deliver power to all current request and no further action is required. However if a request
is found we will need to check if we are able to distribute power to the consumer, either
because we already have enough available, or if someone with lower priority is receiving
power. First we calculate how much extra power the consumer have requested com­
pared to what it is currently using. If this value is larger then zero we call the FreePower
method with the needed amount and the request as a parameter. This method is re­
40
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:49==
sponsible for ensuring that the controller have the maximum amount of energy available
for the consumer. After this the algorithm will grant power to the consumer by calling
GrantPowerToConsumer before updating the controllers current energy consumption and
finally calling the CheckRequestList method again with the found request as a parameter.
This recursive call is made to ensure that we activate as many consumers as possible.
Therefore, when we find a the next inactive request in the first line of the method, we
check that this is not equal to the previous request that is passed in as a parameter to
the method. If the found request is the same as the previous, it means that we have al­
ready tried to free power for the request but were not able to, thus the controller is now
distributing power to the consumers with highest priority.
The GrantPowerToConsumer method, algorithm 12, is responsible for granting as much
power to a consumer as the controller has available. This method takes both the con­
sumer and the request as parameters as they will both need to be updated such that the
consumer can be granted power, and the controller can update the request. First it will
update the CurrentEnergyConsumption to make sure that it is not distributing to much
power in the system. Then in an if statement it will check to see if the requested power
amount can be met. If this is true the Granted variable on the request will be updated.
However, if it is not true it will check if the request requires the entire amount. If it is true
it will grant the maximum amount available in the controller to the consumer. The check
to see if it requires all of the amount in the request is to ensure that we do not distribute
power to a component that will not be able to use it, e.g., an On/Off consumer.
Algorithm 12 Controller.GrantPowerToConsumer
Input Request
CalculateEnergyConsumption()
Request = RequestList.GetNextInactive()
if
Request.Power −Consumer.GetEnergyConsumption
<=
AvailablePower −
CurrentEnergyConsumption then
Request.Granted = Request.Power
else if !Request.RequiresAll then
Request.Granted = AvailablePower−CurrentEnergyConsumption0Consumer.GetEnergyConsum
Consumer.GrantPower(Request.Granted)
As mentioned, when checking if the distribution of power is correct based on the priority
list, a call to the FreePower method is made, algorithm 13. The method is rather sim­
ple itself as it call another method GetRequestToLower. Which will return a copy of the
requests to be lowered with the granted value set to the amount. The method then runs
through this list to lower the energy of the consumer, and update the original request in the
RequestList on the controller. The reason that we start by getting a copy of the request is
that if we are not able to lower the CurrentEnergyConsumption of the consumer enough to
grant power to a request the requires the entire amount, we would have to back track the
change if the amount was changed in the original list. Hence, the GetRequestsToLower
will return an empty list if it is not able to meet the needed power.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
41
==PAGE:50==
Algorithm 13 Controller.FreePower
Input NeededPower, Request
RequestsToLower = GetRequestToLower(NeededPower, Request)
foreach Requesti ∈RequestsToLower do
LowerEnergyForConsumer(Requesti.ConsumerId, Requesti.Granted)
Requestoriginal
=
RequestList.Peek(Requesti)
Requestoriginal.Granted
=
Requesti.Granted
To go a little more into detail on how we figure out which consumers to lower the power
of, we look at algorithm 14. As mentioned before, we make a copy of the current re­
quest list to figure out if we can lower enough consumers power supply, to free up the
needed amount of power before actually updating the original requests. Furthermore, we
initiate an empty list called RequestToLower, where we add all the found requests that
we need to lower to free up power. In a while loop we make two boolean checks to de­
termine if we are able to and need to lower additional power. The first one is a call to
the IsLowerPriorityReceivingPower on the copy of the request list to determine if the
input request is of higher priority than any other receiving power at the moment. Fur­
thermore, we check to see if the NeededPower is higher than what is currently available
for distribution in the controller, by subtracting the current energy consumption from the
available power. If both these booleans are true it means we are able to lower power for
one or more lower priority consumers. We there for find the lowest priority consumer with
a call to the method GetLastActive on the request list and calculate the amount that it
has to be lowered with. If this amount is below zero we have to set the LoweredPower
to zero, as a consumer cannot be granted a negative amount of power. If the consumer
requires the entire amount of its request we will also have to set the LoweredPower to
zero. Then we update the NeededPower amount to reflect the change that we lowered
the LastGranted amount by, such that the second boolean condition in the while loop will
still be true if there is still a need for more power, or false if the needed amount is met.
Finally the Request’s granted value is updated to the lowered amount and it is added to
the list RequestToBeLowered. Note that it is still a copy of the original request that remains
unchanged. When the while loop ends it means that we have either freed enough power
to meet the needed amount, or there is no longer any requests with lower priority where
it is possible to lower the granted amount. The last thing to check is to see if the Request
that we are trying to free power requires the entire amount. If it does and the needed
amount of power is still larger than what we were able to free in the controller, there is no
reason to lower the power of the consumer and the list RequestToLower is cleared.
42
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:51==
Algorithm 14 Controller.FreePower
Input NeededPower, Request
RequestListcopy = RequestList
RequestToLower =
while
RequestListcopy.IsLowerPriorityReceivingPower(Request.ConsumerId
&&
NeededPower > AvailablePower −CurrentEnergyConsumption do
LastGranted = RequestListcopy.GetLastActive()
LoweredPower = LastGranted.Granted −NeededPower
if LoweredPower < 0 ∥LastGranted.RequiresAll then
LoweredPower = 0
NeededPower = NeededPower −LastGranted.Granted −LoweredPower
LastGranted = LoweredPower RequestToLower.Add(LastGranted)
if Request.RequiresAll NeedePower > AvailablePower−CurrentEnergyConsumption
then
RequestToLower.Clear()
return RequestToLower
6.1.7
Results
This experiment was an attempt on balancing the distribution of energy within a microgrid.
To do so a prioritisation system was introduced, by giving every consumer a static priority
the experiment would be about analysing how it would influence the system. Note that the
following results that will be presented has, as it was the case with the base build, a focus
on the distribution of energy rather than the regulation of control values. Therefore, the
control values may seem to change in a rather unrealistic manner, but what is interesting
is how the individual consumer reacts to hitting their hysteresis and setpoint thresholds.
In conclusion, implementing a prioritisation system while restricting the energy of the mi­
crogrid would appear to work at first eyesight. The prioritised consumers do in fact get
energy when they request it from their controller, which in turn will increase the control
value of the consumer. While when they let go of energy it does result in the energy
becoming available in the grid and the consumers control value will start to decline.
The following examples show some snapshots of how the energy is distributed using the
prioritization build, and there will be a table of the configurations used in appendix A.1.
The examples will also implement the unoptimized build to show the difference in energy
consumption. The two examples shown, demonstrates a successful distribution of energy
and an unsuccessful distribution of energy. Mind that the ladder example does in fact
distribute energy, but it does not provide the energy all the consumers need. Another
aspect that one has to be aware of, is the configuration of the consumer group. If a
consumer group is configured to receive more or exactly the amount of energy required
for all of its consumers, it will result in little to no load balancing. The load balancing
becomes interesting when a controller will have to make an intelligent decision about
which and when consumers should receive energy. Therefore, limiting the amount of
energy correctly is important for the functionality of the system.
The first example that is being shown, is a successful distribution of energy, see figure 6.2
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
43
==PAGE:52==
& 6.3. In the middle graph, the difference in overall energy consumption of a microgrid can
be seen, between the unoptimized build that was defined in section 5 and the prioritisation
system that is the topic of this experiment. As the graph shows, we have successfully
balanced the energy consumption by quite the margin, however there are some small
peaks. These peaks happens during transitions between consumers that are receiving
power, this can be fixed by fine tuning variables, but we would rather like to see this as a
proof of concept and therefore not apply further effort into the matter. The configuration of
the consumers for both the unoptimized and the priority configuration are the same such
that a proper comparison can be done. The tree view shows that the model/system is
capable of keeping the the consumers’ control value within the allowed thresholds. The
next experiment will attempt to expand on the amount of consumers that will have to share
the limited resource, which can be seen as a way to stress test the controller and thus the
system as a whole.
Figure 6.2: Successful distribution of energy using the prioritisation system, showing the
graph of the total power consumtion in an unoptimized configuration (Green) versus the
optimized configuration (Orange)
Figure 6.3: Successful distribution of energy using the prioritisation system, showing the
component information for the optiomized configuration
The second example shows the shortcomings of the prioritisation system. Since the pri­
ority of every consumer in the system are statically set on configuration of the model it will
distribute energy based on those. Thus, as it can be seen in figure 6.4 & 6.5, consumer 4
has the lowest priority and will therefore never receive energy from its controller. This is
because the limited amount of energy within the microgrid is distributed to the consumers
with high priority. As all the consumers are defined to only have an increasing control
value if their individual consumption is above 50, while the energy regulation algorithm at
the moment only allows for either an increase or decrease, of an amount of 10 energy.
This will result in all the important consumers always receive either 50 or 60 energy, and
let the remaining amount go to the remaining consumers with lesser priority. This will
44
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:53==
result in Test Consumer 4’s control value to be forever declining. There haven’t been
set any lower boundaries to the control value as of yet and therefore you will notice that
consumer’s control value is ­1191.
Figure 6.4: Unsuccessful distribution of energy using the prioritisation system, showing
the total energy consumption of the unoptimized (green) versus optimized (Orange)
Figure 6.5: Unsuccessful distribution of energy using the prioritisation system, showing
the component information of the optimized configuration
As it is apparent from the above example, the implementation is in fact somewhat success­
ful in handling the restriction of energy through having prioritised consumers. However,
as it is also apparent from the example there is an issue when a consumer of high prior­
ity continuously claims all the energy that is available within a microgrid. This results in
the consumer of lower priority to newer receive energy. Therefore, there will be a need
to ensure that all consumers do in fact receive some amount of energy over time, and
therefore should have a higher probability of being above their setpoint threshold even if
their priority is low. Thus the next experiment will focus on implementing a build that at
some point will deliver energy to the all consumers of the microgrid.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
45
==PAGE:54==
6.2
Critical Level
This chapter will focus on the implementation of what we have decided to call the Critical
Level experiment. As the results of the PriorityList experiment show there were some
scenarios that would lead to an unwanted behavior, and therefore an undesirable result.
Since some consumers had higher priority than others, the system would always priori­
tise them, resulting in a scenario where some consumers with high priority would always
be very close to their max value, while those of low priority would fall below their min
value. That scenario is unwanted, it is the goal that all consumer’s Control Value should
be somewhere between the hysteresis and setpoint value. This experiment will introduce
the concept of fairness within scheduling. Fairness means that all processes will be han­
dled to some extend over time, in our context this means that all consumers should be
receiving some amount of energy over time. However, to introduce and implement such
a concept in the system would require some research within scheduling and different
scheduling policies. Through this research we came along the concept of SOAP schedul­
ing algorithms, SOAP means Scheduling Ordered by Age­Based Priority[11], which are all
scheduling policies that are expressible through a ranking function. This means that the
SOAP policy requires that all the consumers in the system are ranked, which is already
the case through the use of prioritization. We are aware that many SOAP policies are
based on the utilisation of time, however that is not of much interest in this project as time
isn’t the important factor, but rather a focus on a consumer’s control value.
Since we would like to introduce fairness in the system and the current system distributes
energy based on the priority of the consumers, we would have to find a way to change
the priority of the consumers based on their Control Values. This shall ensure that the
closer a consumer comes to its min value the higher its priority will get. Therefore, we
will introduce the concept of the Critical Level which is also the topic of this experiment,
it focuses around a new variable that will by set dynamically depending on the Control
Value and the hysteresis and setpoint of the consumer. The hypothesis and the results
we are hoping to achieve, is that by dynamically changing the critical level on a consumer
while keeping its priority, will result in a more even distribution of energy.
This experiment will focus on the implementation of the critical level that was described
above which will requires changes and additions to some of the classes that were defined
in the previous experiment and in the base build.
6.2.1
Design & Implementation
This experiment will build upon the the results that were achieved through the PriorityList
experiment. To properly implement the functionalities of the critical level that was de­
scribed above, the way Requests are compared will have to be changed to take the crit­
ical level into account. Moreover, the consumers Will now have to calculate their critical
level such that they can add it to the PowerRequests that they send when their energy
requirement changes. Lastly the controller will now have to update the Critical level when
the RequestPower method is called.
Requests
For the PowerRequest the first change is the implementation of the criticalLevel variable,
when the various PowerRequests will be compared this variable will work like the Priority
variable. If the criticalLevel is 1 it means its control value has reached a critical level and
the higher value the criticalLevel variable has, the less critical the control value is. How the
criticalLevel is set originally will be described when the changes to the consumers will be
addressed. This experiment requires the implementation of a method that can compare
not just the priority of a consumer but also its critical level. Therefore, the CompareTo­
46
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:55==
Critical method has been implemented, which can be seen in algorithm 15, this method is
called on a request and takes the request it shall compare itself to as its only parameter.
We will in this experiment use a weighted value, this means that it is made possible to
weight either the critical level or the priority as being more important. To elaborate on
the weightedPriority variable, algorithm 15 can be used as an example, here the weight
of the priority and the criticalLevel variable is set to 0.5, and therefore defined as being
equally important. However, a scenario could exist where the critical level, and therefore
the dynamic priority, is more important than the static priority, which is set at the start of
the simulation and will never change. The first weightedPriority represents the priority
of the current PowerRequest, while the weightedPriority2 variable represents the Power­
Request it is being compared to. Other than that, it works the same as was seen in the
CompareToPriority, algorithm 6, where if the current request has higher priority than the
one being compared two, it will return 1, if the opposite is the case it will return ­1 and if
they have the same priority it will return 0.
Algorithm 15 PowerRequest.CompareToCritical
weightedPriority = 0.5 ∗Priority/0.5 ∗CriticalLevel
weightedPriority2 = 0.5 ∗compare.Priority/0.5 ∗compare.CriticalLevel
if weightedPriority > weightedPriority2 then
return 1
else if weightedPriority < weightedPriority2 then
return ­1
else
return 0
Consumers
For the consumer there has been 2 new methods added, while also introducing a new
variable. This variable is called CriticalLevel and describes the critical level of an individual
consumer. It was defined that the Critical level shall be a dynamic variable, and then be
set a new depending on its control value compared to its min and max value. This is the
purpose of the UpdateCriticalLevel method that exists in both the OnOffConsumer and
the ContinuousConsumer, but as they are the same only one of them will be presented
as pseudo code, which can be found in algorithm 16. This method starts by calculating
what we call the criticalPercentage, which represents the percentage amount the Control
Value is from its hysteresis, this is then divided by the span to return it in percentage.
Thus, the lower the criticalPercentage gets, so the closer to 0, the higher its critical level,
remember that the closer the CriticalLevel is to 0, the more critical it is. That is also the
purpose of the checks within the method, checking the criticalPercentage and then setting
the CriticalLevel of the consumer accordingly.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
47
==PAGE:56==
Algorithm 16 ContinuousConsumer.UpdateCriticalLevel
criticalPercentage = (ControlV alue −MinV alue)/(MaxV alue −MinV alue)
if criticalPercentage < 0.5 then
CriticalLevel = 1
else if criticalPercentage < 0.1 then
CriticalLevel = 2
else if criticalPercentage < 0.15 then
CriticalLevel = 3
else if criticalPercentage < 0.2 then
CriticalLevel = 4
else if criticalPercentage < 0.25 then
CriticalLevel = 5
The UpdateCriticalLevel method is called every time the consumer has to adjust its energy,
and thereby request more or less energy, or do nothing if ControlValue is doing fine within
its threshold. The AdjustPower method, that can be seen in algorithm 7, will therefore also
have to support the addition of the critical level. It does so by ensuring that the CriticalLevel
of the consumer is correct through invoking the UpdateCriticalLevel method that was just
described. The next two checks does the same as they did in the previous experiment
and will therefore not be described. The last check in this method was created to support
the CriticalLevel addition, it will compare the current CriticalLevel of the consumer with
what was in its last energy request if any exists. The method will then recalculate the
weightedPriority and ensure that the latestrequest has its criticalLevel updated with the
current criticalLevel, lastly the request will be forwarded to the parent to update the request
that is within the PriorityList.
Algorithm 17 ContinuousConsumer.AdjustPower
UpdateCriticalLevel()
if ControlV alue > MaxV alue && EffectiveLevel > 0 then
WeightedPriority = 0.5 ∗criticalLevel/0.5 ∗Priority
EffectiveLevel = EffectiveLevel −0.1
CalculateEnergyConsumption()
Request = newPowerRequest()
TimeOut = 50 ParentController.RequestPower(Request)
else if ControlV alue < MinV alue && EffectiveLevel < 1 then
WeightedPriority = 0.5 ∗criticalLevel + 0.5 ∗Priority
Request = newPowerRequest()
TimeOut = 50 ParentController.RequestPower(Request)
else if CriticalLevel != LatestRequest.CriticalLevel && LatestRequest != null then
WeightedPriority = 0.5 ∗CriticalLevel + 0.5 ∗Priority
LatestRequest.CriticalLevel = CriticalLevel
ParentController.RequestPower(LatestRequest)
48
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:57==
Controller
Towards this experiment the changes to the controller are limited, but the changes are
important to the functionality of how requests are updated within our system and therefore
important to address. As the system has to take the critical level of a consumer into
account as well, it is important that the requests are being updated with that critical level
as well, therefore the critical level is taken from the request the consumer sends which is
then used to update the critical level of the request that is stored in the list. It was decided
not write out the pseudo code for the entire method again, but just write the bit where the
change has happened, it can be seen in algorithm 18, and the entire method can be seen
in algorithm 10.
Algorithm 18 Controller.RequestPower
if req.Power < powReq.Granted then
powReq.Granted = req.Power
powReq.Power = req.Power
powReq.Priority = req.Priority
powReq.CriticalLevel = req.CriticalLevel
RequestList.Sort()
CalculateEnergyConsumption()
6.2.2
Results
This experiment had a focus on introducing and implementing fairness in our build. This
was successful in that regards that it does not necessarily ensure that all consumers has a
control value that is kept above their hysteresis, but it was possible to let all consumers get
some energy over time. By introducing a dynamically changing variable that will increase
the weighted priority of a component the closer it gets to its hysteresis and thereby letting
the controller know that its control value has now reached a critical level.
The example that has been made to showcase the results that were acquired, can be
seen in figure 6.6, 6.7 and 6.8.To properly show the results of the experiment and thereby
compare the critical level build with the previous priority build, it has been necessary to
split it into several figures. Thus the time series aren’t identical but it is sufficient to provide
an understanding of the results that were acquired. As it can be seen the priority build and
therefore results are identical to the ones that can be found in the experiment, in section
6.1. The fourth in figure 6.6 does have the issue where it will never receive energy from its
controller as its priority is to low, and there is a need for the energy from consumers with
higher priority. In figure 6.7 one will notice that there persists an issue where the fourth
controller cannot receive enough energy to keep its control value within the set thresholds.
The explanation for this behavior is found in the way that consumers are prioritised both
dynamically and statically. Since the 4 consumers has been set with different priorities
and their weighted priority changes throughout the simulation depending on their control
value. The way the weighted priority works and as it is explained above, is based on how
close the control value is to its hysteresis. Therefore, the fourth consumer will receive
energy when its control value comes sufficiently close to the hysteresis, which in turn will
result in an increase of the control value. However, as the control value increases it will
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.6: The consumption and control values of the priority build with the current con­
figuration
also decrease the weighted priority, resulting in another consumer now has higher priority
than the other, which will change the distribution of energy. This is the case while the fourth
consumer is above its hysteresis. The reason why it still ends up decreasing to a value
below its hysteresis is still a priority issue. Since the other consumers has a higher static
priority that is set in the configuration of the simulation and their weighted will increase as
their control value comes sufficiently close to the hysteresis, just as it is the case with the
fourth consumer, they will eventually have a higher claim on the energy than the fourth
consumer. This will result in the Controller swapping the distribution to once again provide
the high priority consumers with the energy they need. As one may understand from the
above explanation, this behavior works as intended as we would always want the highest
prioritised consumer to receive energy.
From the example above, we’re able to conclude that the implementation of a critical
level do in fact ensure that every consumer in the microgrid will receive some energy over
time, no matter their static priority. However, it is also apparent from the example, there
are consumers that will never receive enough energy to have a control value within its
allowed limits. There are several possible reasons for this behavior, the first is the fact
that the we cannot produce additional energy within the microgrid, and therefore if there
is not enough energy to satisfy the entirety of the demand within the microgrid this result
is to be expected. The controller will behave according to the logic that was implemented,
where it will always focus on the most important consumers, and even with the weighted
priority that is dynamically changed throughout the simulation, it will still result in the same
consumers receiving the majority of energy. However, the positive result is that it does
greatly increase the low priority consumer’s ability to adjust its control value, which is
now declining at a far slower pace. Another hypothesis for this behavior is about the way
regulation is implemented in the current model. As it was explained the base build, chapter
5, a very simple regulation methodology was implemented as the main focus at that point
was to ensure correct distribution of energy. This could mean that as the regulation is
very unrealistic, where the control values changes rapidly depending on the energy that
is distributed to the consumer, it does most likely have a great impact on how often the
50
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.7: The consumption and control values of the critical level build with the current
configuration
controller will have to adjust the distribution of energy. Therefore, the next experiment will
focus on implementing a more realistic regulation methodology, such that the increase and
decrease of control values can become satisfiable and hopefully support the hypothesis
that it will also greatly impact the distribution of energy. Thus, the next experiment will
focus on exploring various regulation methods such as a proportional–integral–derivative
controller (PID controller/regulator).
6.3
Regulation
In the beginning of the experimentation phase of this project we had stated that regulating
the control value of a consumer was of very low priority. This would mean that the ad­
justment of the control value wouldn’t be regulated in a realistic way, which in turn results
in a consumer being able to both increase and decrease their control value quickly and
in a linear manner. Thus, through the learning process of the experimentations that has
been conducted, we would have to come to the conclusion, that not acknowledging the
neccessity and importance of realist regulation of control values was wrong. Therefore,
regulation of control values will be of focus in this experiment. Through proper regulation
methodology, it is the expectation that it is possible to find the exact amount of energy or
threshold of energy that is required to maintain a SetPoint. This should free up energy as
the consumer will only ever request what is required to maintain the SetPoint. This should
affect the curve of the control values to be much cleaner and with out large peaks. For
this experiment we have focused on exploring the methodology of implementing PID Con­
troller, not to be confused with the Controller component that was already defined in this
project. Therefore, this experiment will explain the general theory of the PID controller and
how it is tuned. A PID controller will have to be tuned for every individual consumer within
the system to prevent the consumers energy consumption and control value to oscillate
out of control. This experiment will also include a small part about our use of exponential
functions to simulate the increase and decrease of control values.
Exponential Regulation To simulate the increasing and decreasing control values, it was
decided that we would have to simulate the increasing factor as an exponential function.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 6.8: Illustrates the energy consumption graph for both the critical level and the
priority build
This would allow the control value to either increase or decrease by a declining amount
depending on how close it would come to either the hysteresis or setpoint. In order to
construct this exponential function there was a need to use exponential regression, this
was done through defining a set of stages and their corresponding either decreasing or
increasing values. This was dependant on it either being of exponential growth or decay.
This should illustrate the effect that outside factors may have on the system. An example
can be made with room temperatures compared to the outside temperature, if the outside
temperature is 10 degrees celcius and the room temperature is 22 degrees celcius. This
will result in the temperature of the room to decrease exponentially towards the outside
temperature, thus decreasing fast and then less as it approaches the outside temperature.
PID
The Proportional,Integral,Derivative controller or PID controller, is a methodology/tech­
nique to control the effective output of a system. To clarify this we will look at an example,
there is a picture of the example in figure 6.9, this example is simplified to ensure a basic
understanding of how the PID Controller works before getting into the specifics. This ex­
ample is inspired by the article PID without a PhD written by Tim Wescott. Starting from
the left hand side of the example figure, there’s an input value called the SetPoint, this
describes the desired control value. Together with the measured value of the control value
the PID controller will then do some calculations and determine how much the amplifier
should amplify the output for the plant. The plant is the job or process that can affect the
measured value, in our example the control value. The current control value is then mea­
sured by some measurement equipment and delivered back to the PID Controller, which
then recalculates how much amplification is required for the Plant to reach its SetPoint
value.
The calculations made inside the PID controller are done through a three step phase, the
Proportional, the Integral and the Derivative phase. These are then added together to
52
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.9: PID Controller example
figure out how much the system should regulate in order to reach the desired SetPoint.
To do so, one must first decide the error within the system, the error is defined as the
difference between the SetPoint value and the measured control value, thus if the SetPoint
is 22 and the control value is 15, the error will be 7. This error is used for all three phases.
The proportional phase is fairly straight forward, as it multiplies the error with a constant
called Kp. This constant dertermines how aggressive the regulation should be. The equa­
tion can be seen in equation 6.3, where Kp is the constant and E(t) is the measured error.
However, as one might expect this will not result in a very good regulation methodology,
as the closer one get to the SetPoint the lower the error will get. When the error becomes
zero the proportional function will also return zero which will make the control value drop
once again. Thus, one will experience a control value curve that is fluctuating as the reg­
ulation is not focusing on keeping the control value at the SetPoint value, but rather on
decreasing the error. This means that when the error becomes sufficiently small so will
the proportional output, meaning that the control value will start decreasing once more,
until the error becomes high enough for the proportional output to be large enough for the
control value to increase.
Kp ∗E(t)
(6.3)
The Integral part is used to look at previous behavior of the regulation and thus the pre­
vious error. As long as the error is a non zero value, the integration of it will produce an
increasing number. This multiplied by the constant Ki, will increase the speed in which
the control value will increase. However, there persists an issue with the integration, if
there for some reason exists a situation where the Control Value isn’t increasing, this in­
tegral value may continuously increase. This will result in the integration value being far
to large and once the control value can increase again, it will increase above the setPoint.
This results in the error to become negative, but as the integral value has increased to a
very large value which means that the PID calculation sum is still forcing the amplifier to
increase the control value, this is what is called integral wind up. Thus, when the error now
becomes a negative number as the control value is way above the setpoint, the integral
is calculating on a negative number and will slowly decrease, but as the integral value is
already very high, it will take time for it to allow the control value to once again hit its set­
point, meaning that the integral that has been running through several calculations is now
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
53
==PAGE:62==
a very large negative number which will force the control value below the setPoint. This
is what is referred to as integral windup, where Tim Wescott suggest to clamp the integral
calculation by a maximum and minimum, such that it can not grow out of proportion. The
formula for the integral function can be found in equation 6.4.
Ki ∗
∫
E(t)
(6.4)
The derivative value is an attempt on calculating the future. This means that by looking
at the previous error and the current error, it is possible to calculate the speed of which
it will reach its setpoint through a derivative calculation. This value is used to prevent
the Integral value and the effects of the integral calculation to overshoot the setpoint and
thereby avoid saturation of the PID control in general. This means that the bigger the
change in the error is, the larger the derivative value will get to counteract the control
value increase. The derivitive function can be seen in equation 6.5, and as it can be seen
the Kd factor is multiplied into the derivative function.
Kp ∗dE(t)
dt
(6.5)
The final function of a PID controller will look like equation 6.6 which is the Proportion­
ate part, the Integral part and the Derivative part which produces the output of the PID
controller. If tuned correctly this formula can ensure a control value of a component that
reaches fairly close to the setpoint and is able to regulate itself to keep that value to some
extend. To sum up this part about the PID controller and the math behind it, it can be
simplified as the Output being equal to the sum of the present error (Proportional), plus
the past errors (Integral), plus the future error (Derivative).
u(t) = Kp ∗E(t) + Ki ∗
∫
E(t) + Kp ∗dE(t)
dt
(6.6)
PID Tuning
In order to decide the size of the Kp, Ki&Kd values, some tuning is needed. In order to
hit the sweet spot it requires extensive testing on every consumer that partakes in the
system. To avoid guessing on the tuning ratios we decided to look for methodologies
for tuning a PID controller. This lead to a guide written by Tim Wescott who is also the
person that delivered the earlier example. From the article PID without a PhD, he provides
a methodology for the tuning that is to increase or decrease the proportional gain until
the controller does not ocsillate. Then add a derivative gain by a factor of 100 of the
proportional gain and increase it by a factor of two until you find the limit that the system
begins to oscillate, after which you will lower the derivative by a factor of 2 again. The
same then done for the proportional gain where you increase it to the limit of oscillation
and then half it. Lastly for the integral gain you start by setting the integral to 1/100 of the
proportional gain, how ever this time you half it to stop oscillation and when you find the
point where it is just about to ocsillate you half the integral gain again.
6.3.1
Design & Implementation
In this section we will explain how the regulation of the system will be handled. The section
will be split in two parts. The first part will explain the design and implementation of the
Exponential, and the second part will focus on the PID Controller that will be regulating
the control values of the system.
54
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:63==
Exponential control value
The ExponentialFunction class represents the exponential function, which is found through
the use of exponential regression. The class contains two double variables that represents
the two coefficient values found through the regression, and a CalculateValue method that
takes the current ControlValue as its only parameter. To utilize the exponential function,
the AdjustControlValue of the ContinuousConsumer class has been changed to calculate
a negative adjustment value by using the exponential function, and a positive adjustment
that is calculated based on the current EffectiveLevel multiplied with AdjusmentPerSec­
ond, which is a value that is set in the configuration. The positive is then added and the
negative value is subtracted from the Control Value. The implementation of the Exponen­
tialFunction’s CalculateValue method can be found in algorithm 19, where A & B are the
found coefficients and the x is the current Control Value.
Algorithm 19 ExponentialFunction.CalculateValue
Exp(A + B ∗x)
The OnOffConsumer class will implement a DecayFunction.CalculateValue inside its Ad­
justControlValue. In the AdjustControlValue method there is a check whether the con­
sumer is turned on or not. If the consumer is turned on, the adjustment variable is set to
the value of the AdjusmentPerSecond variable. If the consumer is turned off the adjust­
ment variable will be set equal to the negative value of the DecayFunction.CalculateValue.
Lastly the adjustment value is added to the current ControlValue. The changes made to
the OnOffConsumer haven’t made any substantial changes to the behavior of the con­
sumer itself, other than ensuring that the consumer cannot have a control value that will
decrease in a limitless fashion as has been the case with previous examples. This will al­
low for experimentation and observation of whether the system is capable of self recovery
depending on the energy requirements of the system.
PID Controller
For the implementation of the PID Controller it was decided to create it in its own class,
this class takes the three gain parameters, a minimum value and a maximum value. The
minimum and maximum value represents the minimum and maximum value that the out­
put of the PID controller chain can provide, this is called clamping. Clamping is a way to
limit the the performance of our consumer, this is necessary as the PID controller does
not know anything about the consumer and it is therefore important to define a maximum
and a minimum energy consumption. As mentioned Tim Wescott suggested a method to
prevent integral windup by clamping the integral itself to a maximum and minimum value.
The for these threshold value is done inside the class’ constructor. The integral calculation
made in the implementation is as represented in algorithm 20, for the real mathematical
equation refer to 6.4.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
55
==PAGE:64==
Algorithm 20 PidRegulator.PidRegulator calculating the integralMin and IntegralMax
if GainIntegral != 0 then
IntegralMax = OutputMax / GainIntegral
else
IntegralMax = 0
if GainIntegral != 0 then
IntegralMin = OutputMin / GainIntegral
else
IntegralMin = 0
In order to provide proper results and conclusions to this experiment it was decided to
expand on both the unoptimized version and the critical version, thus implementing a
PID controller inside both of them. It will allow for the comparison of the usage of a
PID controller within a normal scenario where no distribution scheduling is made, with an
optimized build that implements the previously defined Critical Level build, now with a PID
controller. This should allow us to conclude on, if the PID controller provides any beneficial
functionality to the model that is being build. It has been necessary to implement a variable
that holds a PID controller, since every consumer type will have different proportional,
integral and derivative gains depending on their AdjusmentPerSecond value and their
decay function. By tuning the different consumer types differently it should allow for control
value curves that oscillates as little as possible.
The PidRegulator class contains a method that calculates the output of the controller as
it is described in the beginning of this experiment. This method is called CalculateOutPut
and can be seen in algorithm 21. The method calculates the output of the PID controller by
adding the Proportional, the Integral and the Derivative together into one variable which
is then returned, the formula can be found in equation 6.6. Before returning the output
however, we make sure to save the current error as the previous error such that it can be
used next time the method is called for that consumer. Moreover, the Clamp method is
called to clamp the output and thereby ensuring that it cannot be adjusted higher or lower
than its energy consumption thresholds, this algorithm can be seen in algorithm 22.
Algorithm 21 PidRegulator.CalculateOutput
error = setPoint −measurement
proportional = GainProportional ∗error
Integral = Integral + error
if Integral > IntegralMax then
Integral = IntegralMax
else if InteGral < IntegralMin then
Integral = IntegralMin
derivative = GainDerivative ∗(error −previousError)
output = Clamp(proportional + GainIntegral ∗Integral + derivative)
PreviousError = error
return output
56
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:65==
Algorithm 22 PidRegulator.Clamp
if variableToClamp <= OutputMin then
return OutputMin
if variableToClamp >= OutputMax then
return OutputMax
return variableToClamp
The Unoptimized version inherits from the base build, but since the behavior of how we
regulate the control value has changed, it is necessary to override the tick method within
the class. This means that there has been made changes to the AdjustPower and Adjust­
ControlValue methods as well. The tick method starts by calling the AdjustPower method,
which now updates the CurrentEnergyConsumption based on the aforementioned Pid­
Controller.CalculateOutput method (algorithm 21), and the EffectiveLevel which is now
equal to the CurrentEnergyConsumption divided by the MaxEnergyConsumption. The
AdjustControlValue method will now calculate the negative adjustment and the positive
adjustment and update the control value based on the subtraction of those two values.
The algorithm can be seen in algorithm 23. The calculation of the CurrentEnergyCon­
sumption can be calculated within the class as it works like the base build case, where
there are no restrictions to the amount of energy they can receive, and therefore no need
for the controller to calculate this value, as it is not really used. This also means that
it can update the EffectiveLevel on the basis of the CurrentEnergyConsumption and the
MaxEnergyConsumption, for reference see algorithm 5. Lastly, the UpdatePlotModels
method is called which ensures that the view is updated to reflect the changed values.
Algorithm 23 ContinuousConsumerP ID.AdjustControlV alue
negativeAdjustment = DecayFunction.CalculateV alue(ControlV alue)
positiveAdjustment = EffectiveLevel ∗AdjustmentPerSecond
ControlV alue = ControlV alue + (positiveAdjustment −negativeAdjustment)
To build the optimized version we are going to inherit from the Critical level version that was
described in 6.2. This is done as we are interested in using the scheduling policy that was
implemented such that we can restrict the amount of energy flowing around the system
and balance the overall load. As it is not possible to inherit from two different classes, the
unoptimized implements the new regulation methods and the Critical level implements the
distribution methods, we had to copy the AdjustControlValue method from the unoptimized
to the optimized version. Therefore, the major difference between the optimized and the
unoptimized build is that there is a restriction on the energy flowing around in the system,
and the fact that the individual consumer will have to create energy requests and update
them as was the case in the CriticalLevel experiment. It was earlier stated that there is a
restriction to how often a consumer is allowed to send a request, such that we can avoid
an information overflow within the system. This will also have to be the case for the PID
controller, thus, the sampling rate is set to happen every tenth second. This is done by
utilizing the current timeunit modulo sampling frequency, if this modulo function is equal to
zero or if the Critical level is the same as the one provided in the last request, we can call
the AdjustPower method. The ladder check can be done as the critical level should not
change on a secondly basis, if that is the case the model would either have been wrongly
configured or the model is unable to handle the current case.
To update the energy consumption we will have to invoke the AdjustPower method, which
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
57
==PAGE:66==
calculates the output from our PID controller based on its current setpoint and the control
value. With a PID controller the changes in the output can be quite small, it is therefore
necessary to calculate the percentage change of the output compared to the current en­
ergy consumption, this calculation can be seen in algorithm 24. Hereafter, it is checked
whether or not the change is larger than 1 %, if the change is less than 1 % it is deemed
that the change is to small and no update is needed. However, if the change is in fact
larger than 1 % we will have to update the PowerRequest, but first we need to check if
the output is smaller than the current energy consumption, if that is the case we should
update the CurrentEnergyConsumption variable and the EffectiveLevel because the con­
sumer now requires less energy than before, then the updated request can be send.
Algorithm 24 ContinuousConsumerP ID.AdjustPower
output = PidController.CalculateOutPut(SetPoint, ControlV alue)
changePercentage
=
Numerical((CurrentEnergyConsumption
−
output))/CurrentEnergyConsumption
if ChangePercentage > 0.01 then
if output < CurrentEnergyConsumption then
CurrentEnergyConsumption = output
EffectiveLevel = CurrentEnergyConsumption/MaxEnergyConsumption
SendPowerRequest(output)
Finally, there are no changes to the controller compare to the critical level, but it is nec­
essary to make a new class that inherits from the critical controller as the configuration
strategy that is implemented requires a controller with the PID_Critical mode, otherwise
the configuration for the PID regulation experiment will break the application.
6.3.2
Results
This concludes the design and implementaiton phase of the regulation experiment. We
have successfully implemented a PID controller to adjust the control values and an ex­
ponential function to control how the control values are adjusted. In this section various
experiments will be provided, both as a way of proving the implementation and to further
experiment on the behavior of the implementation in different scenarios. Thus, we will
attempt to showcase scenarios using the different types of consumers used in the model
and different kinds of configuration.
58
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:67==
Figure 6.10: Shows the behavior of a singular continuous consumer showing the behavior
of both its energy consumption and control value when the setpoint changes.
The first experiment that will be shown is one where it was possible to simulate the behav­
ior of a PID controller. As it can be seen in figure 6.10, the simulation shows that there is
in fact some initial adjustment time and therefore offset where the control value is not the
same as the setpoint value that the consumer was provided with and since the consumer
is not receiving energy from the get go, the control value will start dropping. This will result
in the consumer requesting for more energy which will result in an increase of the energy
consumption and the control value. The PID Controller will then adjust the amount of out­
put required to keep the setpoint value as was stated when the general theory behind the
PID controller was discussed. To show the reaction of a setpoint change, it was decided
to change it from 20 to 22 at around the 20000 timeunit mark. As the figure shows, this
results in a great spark in the consumer’s energy consumption as there is now a demand
such that the control value can reach its new setpoint value. Looking at the figure, one
can see that there is a small saturation where the control value goes beyond its setpoint.
This is a matter of fine tuning the PID controller, which could be done but isn’t a focus
for the regulation experiment, here there is rather a focus on proving the concept and
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
59
==PAGE:68==
showing the potential of using the PID controller methodology.
Figure 6.11: An example showing the behavior of the OnOffConsumer in the PID experi­
ment
Looking at the OnOffConsumers, they are behaving as could be expected and therefore
still act within their setpoint and hysteresis. The effect of the exponential function is no­
ticeable however, looking at figure 6.11 it can be seen that the exponential function has
an effect on the curve, rather than being linear it now behaves exponentially.
The next experiment that has been made is implementing two ContinuousConsumers
comparing the unoptimized version with the optimized. This experiment is made such
that it is possible to compare the behavior of the two and thereby see the effects of the
PID Controller in conjunction with the Critical Level, compared to the PID Controller alone.
Figure 6.12 & 6.13 shows the two simulations that were just mentioned, as it is apparent
from the experiment the Unoptimized version successfully keeps the control value at its
setpoint using the PID controller. However one have to be aware of the fact that in the
unoptimized build there are no restrictions to how much energy a consumer can consume,
as the controller doesn’t control the available energy within the microgrid in this build. In
the Optimized build where the available energy is limited by controller and the distribution
is therefore dependant on the critical level scheduling policy. With the limited amount
of energy within the microgrid it will therefore prioritise the consumer with the highest
priority it will then ensure that there’s enough energy to keep the control value at the
setpoint value, which is 20 in this experiment. The consumers start at different initial
control values, 22 and 20 respectively, but as the consumers does not receive any energy
in the beginning as they haven’t requested any yet and thus none is being provided by
the controller, the control value drops rapidly. Since there is not enough energy for both
consumers to reach their setpoint values, it prioritises the one with the highest priority. As
the second consumer doesn’t receive the required energy it will start dropping towards
its hysteresis, as it drops however, its Critical Level will rise and thus force the controller
to provide it with energy, as its weighted priority is now larger than the other consumer,
ensuring that it is kept at its hysteresis.
60
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:69==
Figure 6.12: Optimized: Experiment with two ContinuousConsumers that using the Criti­
cal Level distribution policy and the PID controller
Figure 6.13: Unoptimized: Experiment with two ContinuousConsumers that using just the
PID controller
To finish of this experiment a conclusion can be made, that PID controller that has been
implemented does in fact work and allows for the simulation of PID controller behavior,
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
61
==PAGE:70==
and also an improvement of the control value behavior of the ContinuousConsumers.
However, there persists some issues when using a group that consists of only OnOffCon­
sumers, which have a heavy impact on the load balancing results. Moreover, there is an
issue when a controller cannot ask for more power at their parent controller, and therefore
results in the prioritisation of consumers which results in some bad ControlValue adjust­
ments as can be seen in figure 6.14. Therefore, the next experiment will focus controllers
being able to request for more energy from their parent. With a controller being able to in­
crease and decrease their available power it should allow for a more flexible system both
in terms of scalability, as the energy that is not used by the controller itself will then be
made available at the parent node such that it can be distributed elsewhere. This should
also have the result that there will be used less power in the system altogether, as with
”self adjusting” controllers, there will no longer be a need of having a buffer of energy at
each controller to accommodate peak cases.
Figure 6.14: A PID experiment, showing that the controller cannot provide enough energy
to its consumers
6.4
Regulating Controllers
The previous experiments has focused on the distribution of energy and the regulation of
control values within consumers. This experiment will build on the foundations presneted
in the previous experiments and attempt to implement scalability. To do so, the focus
will be to build a hierarchy of consumers and controllers as it was described in chapter
4 in the component structure, section 4.1, where the controller can also interact via the
IConsumer interface with its parent. Since it is already possible for a controller to distribute
energy to the consumers within its group, there shall now be a focus on the distribution
of energy between different controllers. Therefore, there has to be found an approach
where a controller can request for more energy from its parent controller and thereby act
as if it was a consumer itself. This should allow us to build a hierarchy of controllers
that can have both consumers but also other controllers as a node in their microgrid. It
was mentioned in the previous experiment how the controller cannot distribute its energy
if it has no consumers in need of it. Therefore this experiment will also investigate the
62
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:71==
possibilities of a controller releasing the leftover energy back to its parent such that it can
be distributed to a controller or consumer which is in need of it. It is the hypothesis that
by not reserving energy on a controller that it does not need, will both make the overall
energy consumption of the system look more balanced and therefore implement some sort
of load balancing, but it will also decrease the overall energy requirement of the system.
According to section 4.1 there will be a root controller that will work as the entrance of
energy and therefore the first node that is in charge of distributing energy to the rest of the
system. As an example, the root controller as the entry of energy will distribute energy
to an arbitrary amount of controllers, that distributes energy to its child nodes, which may
be either consumers or other controllers that distributes the energy even further. The
point is that whenever a controller registers that it cannot supply enough energy to feed
the demand of the nodes it distributes to, it should request for more at its nearest parent
controller. This should be the case for all controllers until the ”root” controller has been
reached in which case will not have a parent controller, this is in accordance to figure 4.2
in chapter 4 that was made to show how the hierarchy would be build in the system model.
However, as it was also mentioned, there will also be a focus on ensuring that controllers
will not reserve energy that they are not in need of. To do so there has to be done some
calculation that can tell exactly how much energy is needed on average.
6.4.1
Design & Implementation
The version of the model that are build through this experiment, extends on the PID con­
troller experiment in the optimized version. To implement the above described hierarchy
and methodology for controllers to distribute energy in between eachother, no changes
needs to be made to the consumers in the system. However, as it was the case with previ­
ous experiments they will have to be implemented, such that the simulation can target the
correct classes depending on the chosen modes. This means that the only changes that
will be made for this experiment, is done inside the controller class. It has to be changed
such that a controller can exist as a child node of another controller and thereby have
its available power controlled by the parent. However, a controller cannot be allowed to
just request for more energy as soon as it cannot fulfill the needs of one of its consumers.
Therefore it is necessary to estimate how much energy the controller will need, this is done
by calculating the moving average of the total amount of energy being requested within
the controller. We have provided an example in figure 6.15, this is however a somewhat
abstract and not necessarily precise understanding, but the figure and the following expla­
nation should provide an understanding of how the moving average is intended to work.
If the green curve is the total amount of requested energy over time, then the moving
average will react on the decreasing and increasing amount. This will result in the mov­
ing average increasing and decreasing along with the total request amount. The idea of
calculating the moving average is such that the controller will only request enough power,
such that can fulfill the requests over time. This means that the jobs that results in the
energy requests are completed over a longer period of time, but requires the controller
to reserve less energy. To summarize, the moving average is basically a way to analyze
the trend of energy requests based on a set of previous data. This will result in a curve
that goes up and down depending on this trend, which the controller may use to update
its own power request.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.15: An example of how the MovingAverage curve (Black) could look compared
to the total amount of power requested for a controller (Green)
SMAk,next = 1
k ∗
n+1
∑
i=n−k+1
Pi
(6.7)
A moving average is generally calculated as it is seen in equation 6.7. This formula can
be quite demanding depending on how large a dataset is considered for every calculation
of the moving average, and the frequency of which the moving average is updated. Thus,
it was decided to implement the moving average in an optimized algorithm using a FIFO
buffer of values that has the size of the amount of datapoints to be considered for the
moving average. This allows for a simplification of the calculation using three arithmetic
steps that makes the calculation reserve less resources on the computer. Therefore, the
formula that we’re using for our calculation of the moving average is as seen in equation
6.8. The new moving average value will be equal to the previous value plus the difference
between the newest measurement and the oldest value available in the buffer times 1
k.
Where k is the amount of of data points used in the calculation. The implementation in
our model can be found in algorithm 25. The newValue is being set to the sum of the
total requested power from the RequestList. Then the moving average is calculated as
it is explained in equation 6.8. The new total requested amount is then added to the list
of moving average values. Lastly, since the calculation only considers a certain amount
of datapoints, if the size of the MovingAverageValues list is larger than the amount of
datapoints we want to consider, we remove the oldest element in the list.
SMAk,prev + 1
k(Pn+1 −Pn−k+1)
(6.8)
Algorithm 25 ControllerRegulating.UpdateTotalRequestMovingAverage
newV alue = RequestList.PowerSum()
MovingAverage
=
MovingAverage + (1.0/numberOfElements) ∗(newV alue −
MovingAverage[0])
MovingAverageV alues.add(newV alue)
if MovingAverageV alues.Count > numberOfElements then
MovingAverageV alues.remove(0)
Until now the Tick method of the controller haven’t been used for anything but to update
the measurement of the total energy consumed by its group. It is still the case that it
should calculate the total energy consumption of the group, but there’s now also a need
64
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:73==
to calculate the aforementioned Moving average. Therefore, we have to override the the
Tick method to also call the UpdateTotalRequestMovingAverage method while checking
if it satisfies the energy requirements of its child consumers or controllers. To assure that
we avoid an information overflow we have added an interval that together with a modulo
check ensures a timeout before a new request can be made. Inside the same check,
we also have to check if the controller has a parent, if this is not the case it would mean
that the controller is the root controller and therefore cannot request energy from anyone.
To check if the power request is necessary, we have to calculate the numeric difference
between our available power and the moving average. This value will indicate if we have
to much or to little available power within the system compared to the requirements of the
consumers in the microgrid. If the value is large it will mean that there is far to much energy
available at the consumer. In an optimized simulation it would most likely mean that the
consumption will be unstable and will result in no load balancing. However, if the value
is small, it will most likely result in an almost perfect load balancing, but as a side effect
the consumers will have trouble keeping their control values at the setpoint. Since we are
not interested in changes that are very small, we calculate the percentage change, and
ensure that a request is only send if the change is larger than 1 %. As the controller like
every other component in the system, is in charge of releasing excessive energy, we have
to check if the change in the moving average is smaller than the energy that is available.
We would then have to adjust the amount of power the consumer has. Next, we will have
to check if we are using more energy than what is now currently available and thereby
are in need to adjust the energy consumption of some of the child consumers. First,
we would have to calculate the amount of excessive energy by substituting the available
energy from the current energy consumption. This amount of energy is then send through
the FreePower method, this method lowers the energy that is distributed to lower priority
consumers until the necessary amount has been reached, this was addressed in section
6.1. Normally this method would take a PowerRequest as its parameter as it would have
to compare different requests to check if there exists requests with lower priority that is
receiving energy, but as there is no request to compare in this case, we had to make this
parameter optional. Lastly, a request will have to be sent to the controller’s parent such
that the parent can update the distribution of energy accordingly. The implementation of
how the available power is updated can be found in algorithm 26
Algorithm 26 ControllerRegulating.UpdateAvailableEnergy
if ParentController != null && time%60 == 0 then
change = Numeric(AvailablePower −MovingAverage)
changePercentage = change/CurrentEnergyConsumption
if changePercentage > 0.01 then
if MovingAverage < AvailablePower then
AvailablePower = MovingAverage
if AvailablePower < CurrentEnergyConsumption then
neededPower = CurrentEnergyConsumption −AvailablePower
FreePower(neededPower)
req = newPowerRequest()
ParentController.RequestPower(req)
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
65
==PAGE:74==
The last thing that has to be implemented within the controller is how it should act when it
is receiving energy, which is done through the GrantPower method from the IConsumer
interface. If the consumer is receiving more energy than it currently has available it will
set the AvailablePower variable equal to how much it is receiving. Recall that the Avail­
ablePower variable represents the amount of energy made available to its child nodes.
Thus, it is necessary to check if the distribution is done correctly in regards to the updated
AvailablePower, as we now can distribute either more or less energy to the children. If
the controller receives less power than what was already available, it will have reduced
the distribution to the children nodes as was described in section 6.1
6.4.2
Results
This experiment has concerned itself with how the controllers within the system should
adjust themselves. As it became apparent in the previous experiment in regards to the
PID controlling, it did provide an approach to adjust how much energy is being consumed
compared to the individual control values of a consumer. However, there persisted an is­
sue where even though the overall power consumption of a microgrid was now controlled,
the controller would still reserve to much energy. Therefore, it was necessary to build a
proper hierarchy where controllers could request for more energy if needed and deliver
power back to their parent if it is no longer needed. For the controller to know how much
energy it either needed or had in excess, and to still provide the load balancing features,
the moving average was calculated. This would allow for a dynamic adjustment of the
Available Power within the individual controllers. The following examples shows the fea­
tures of this experiment and can be found in figure 6.16, 6.17, 6.18 & 6.19, calculating
the moving average and requesting energy based on it. As the example also shows, the
model still implements the functionalities of the PID controller. This example provides a
root controller with two child controllers, Group 1 and Group 2. Group 1 has two child con­
sumers being of the ContinuousConsumer type and Group 2 has one child consumer of
the ContinuousConsumer type. Both groups are provided with zero energy at the begin­
ning of the simulation, which is also why it takes a small amount of time before the energy
consumption and the various control values within the consumers starts to increase.
Figure 6.16: The Root Controller infomation
66
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:75==
Figure 6.17: Group 1 Controller with children Consumers
Figure 6.18: Group 2 Controller with children Consumers
This happens because before any controller can be provided with energy they will have
to request for it. In order for that to happen, they will first and foremost have to calculate
their moving average and then request for the energy they need. This is also the reason
that there is a large peak in the beginning of the simulation, because all the controllers
in the grid will lack a large amount of energy to accommodate with the needs of their
consumers. In figure 6.19, the two different algorithms used for this example can be seen.
It was decided to include the unoptimized PID controller algortihm such that a comparison
can be made.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure 6.19: The overall energy consumption graph comparing the unoptimized version
(Green) and optimized version (Orange)
As it is noticeable from the graph, the energy consumption looks similar for both algo­
rithms. This happens because there is limited variables that can affect the consumption
of the systems, thus the PID regulation will slowly find its setpoint and keep the regulation
at a minimum. If various variables were included and thus have an impact on the regula­
tion, such as external factors or if a controller or a consumer were suddenly shut off and
on. This will be addressed in the next chapter, where the focus is on testing the entirety
of the system that has been implemented.
68
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:77==
7
Model Testing and Analysis
This chapter will focus on analysing the final implementation, here a variety of different
test cases will be made that will show the benefits and the shortcomings of the model.
This will be done by providing a variety of configurations that all have the purpose of
showing different scenarios. These scenarios will clarify how and when the model is able
to provide load balancing. The idea of this chapter is to prove the functionalities of the
model, but also point out the requirements to ensure proper load balancing. The model
cannot create power that can be distributed within the macrogrids, so if a user of the model
fails to provide enough power to the system, it will not be able to accommodate the needs
of some consumers or maybe even entire groups. It will however, load balance the system
in accordance to the prioritisation system as defined in chapter 6. The start of this chapter
will focus first on the importance of configuration, then it will show some scenarios where
dependencies may change over time, such as setpoints, available power, and consumers
being shut down. To ensure that the behavior of the model in said scenarios is easy to
understand, it was decided to reduce the complexity of the grid. Therefore, the results may
appear as being close to perfect, but this is purposely done to enhance the understanding
of the behavior. Since the scenarios have been rather simplified, it is decided to end this
chapter by providing a large example where several layers of controllers and consumers
co­exists. Note that the screenshots that are provided in this chapter are snapshots of
the simulation and does not necessarily describe every activity that happens throughout
the simulation. However, a thorough description of the behavior will be made such that
the reader may understand the behavior. The various scenarios that are made within
this chapter and the configurations made for the experiments can be found in appendix
A.1. The configurations are provided as classes within the model’s solution, and should
therefore be easy to implement and replicate the behavior that is described.
7.1
The importance of configuration
This section will provide both an understanding and an analysis of the importance of cor­
rect configuration. Here it will become clear how important it is that the configuration of
the model is done correctly. With a wrong configuration one may never be able to achieve
the expected results. Following will be an example showing the results of a wrongly con­
figured grid/hierarchy, and afterwards a correctly configured example will be made. This
is done such that a comparison and arguments towards the functionalities of the system
can be made.
This example shows the importance of correct model configuration, as it can be seen on
figure 7.1, 7.2 & 7.3, the model is unsuccessful in providing load balancing to the system.
Especially figure 7.3 provides a clear picture of the model being unable to balance the
energy consumption, although it does decrease the size of the peaks by a fair margin. To
understand why the simulation is unable to provide proper load balancing, the configura­
tion will have to be defined, the configuration for this example can be found in appendix
A.1. The controller in this case, figure 7.1, has two child nodes all being of the on/off con­
sumer type. This means that all the consumers within the microgrid can only turn on and
off. In this case it was decided to ensure that the controller only has an available power of
50 and as the two consumers require 50 to be turned on, it will only be possible to have
one consumer turned on at a time. Figure 7.2 shows the result, a consumer will be turned
on as soon its control value reaches its hysteresis, which in turn will increase their control
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
69
==PAGE:78==
value and decrease their dynamic priority (critical level). The consumer will then be turned
off as soon as another consumer reaches their hysteresis and so on. But as it is apparent
from figure 7.3, there are times within the simulation, where no consumer is necessarily
in need of energy, which results in no power being consumed within the entire macrogrid.
The consumer to the right in the figure, is an unoptimized version only provided to do a
comparison and does not impact the load balancing of the regulating controller. There­
fore this example provides very little load balancing although it does manage to keep the
consumers’ control value within their setpoint and hysteresis.
Figure 7.1: A screenshot showing the relevant information about the root controller
The argument to explain this behavior, is that there is a requirement towards the amount
of consumers within the macrogrid. If there are too few consumers within the network,
situations like the one described above may occur, where the controller will have no place
to distribute left over power to, and thereby the power will not be consumed.
Figure 7.2: The control value and energy consumption graphs for each of the two opti­
mized On/Off consumers and one of the unoptimized to the right
70
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:79==
Figure 7.3: A graph showing the energy total energy consumption of the unoptimized
configuration (green) versus the optimized version (oragne)
The next example that is being provided, has the purpose of showing how a correct con­
figuration will provide much better results in terms of load balancing. Figure 7.4, 7.5 & 7.6
provides the visual result of the example.
Figure 7.4: The information about the root controller with three On/Off consumers con­
nected
Since the conclusion from the previous example was, that with just two on/off consumers
it would not be possible to provide any satisfying level of load balancing. It was concluded
that this was due to the controller not having anywhere to put the remaining power in the
system, as it cannot currently return the energy to the provider. This is an important fact
about the system that one has to be aware of when configuring the model. Excess energy
that cannot be used anywhere else in the macrogrid will impact the load balancing results.
To provide an example of this, the previous example will be extended with another on/off
consumer, note that the unoptimized consumer is not part of figure 7.5. The configuration
of the controller is the same for this example such that a comparison can be done. Figure
7.5 now shows that control values of the three consumers are fairly controlled, being kept
somewhere close their hysteresis.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure 7.5: The three optimized On/Off consumer showing a graph of the control value
and their ocsillating energy consumption
However, the energy consumption of each consumer has changed drastically, this is be­
cause the available power is kept at 50, and there is now three consumers who will have to
share this energy. This means that the individual consumer will now be receiving power
for a much shorter span of time, before another consumer reaches a critical level and
therefore have a better claim on the available power. But as it becomes apparent from
figure 7.6, the system is now much more capable in terms of load balancing and does it
almost perfectly. None of the consumers’ control values seen in this example will ever
reach their setpoint, because of the limited amount of power within the system.
Figure 7.6: The total energy consumption in the root controller for the unoptimized version
(green) and the optimized version (oragne), both with three On/Off consumers as child
nodes
7.2
Model Functionalities
This section will focus on the functionalities of the model, specifically how the model reacts
when exposed to different factors that has an impact on how it should schedule the power
within the macrogrid. This section will therefore include an example where, the available
power is altered while the simulation is running. Another example where the setpoints
of two consumers changes after the initial regulation has been completed. Lastly, an
example showing the effects and the model’s reaction to consumers being shut off during
run time. There will be a smaller hierarchy showing the specific reactions for each of these
cases, and in the end a large scale example illustrating how this would work in a large
72
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:81==
energy grid.
7.2.1
Additional AvailablePower
The following will show how the model reacts when the available power is changed during
simulation runtime. In order to do so it was decided to use the configuration that was
used in the regulating controllers experiment. The idea behind providing this scenario is
to prove the functionalities of the model in a more dynamic environment. The results that
this scenario provides can be seen in figure 7.7, 7.8, 7.9 & 7.10.
The configuration is initially set, such that the macrogrid has an available power of 150.
After the initial regulation by the PID controllers the control values are as seen in the Reg­
ulating Controllers experiment, section 6.4. Once the Control values are regulated, the
regulation peaks becomes smaller and as the overall energy consumption is somewhat
steady, the available power from the root will be adjusted.
Figure 7.7: Information about the root controller for the optimized version
When changing the Available Power to 140, Test Consumer 2 on figure 7.8, will start to
receive less power from its controller. This is due to the prioritisation system prioritizing the
more important consumers ­ those with the highest weighted priority. Therefore, Group1
will have to prioritise the power that it receives and as Test Consumer 1 has the highest
priority, it will receive enough power to stay at its set point. Decreasing the Available
Power even more will result in the second drop in control value on Test Consumer 2.
However, as the critical level is implemented and thereby the weighted priority, the control
value of Test Consumer 1 will decrease by a small amount, allowing Test Consumer 2 to
have a control value that does not decrease further than the hysteresis.
Figure 7.8: Information about group 1 in the optimized version showing the change in
control value and energy consumption as the available energy in their parent controller is
lowered
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure 7.9: Information about group 2 in the optimized version showing the change in
control value and energy consumption as the available energy in their parent controller is
lowered
If the Available Power is decreased another step, one will notice the control value of
Test Consumer 3 of Group 2 in figure 7.9 will start to drop. This happens because Test
Consumer 1 is the consumer with the highest priority, and the model will therefore attempt
to keep it as ”healthy” as possible. Meanwhile, Test Consumer 2’s control value cannot
be allowed to drop any further as it would hit a critical level and thereby gain a higher
weighted priority. This means that the model will have to ”steal” energy from somewhere
else such that it can be delivered to Test Consumer 1, resulting in the drop in control value
on Test Consumer 3. Continuously stepping down the amount of power that is available in
the grid, will result in the model trying to keep Test Consumer 1 as ”healthy” as possible,
but if the control value of all lower prioritised consumers are at their hysteresis, it will no
longer be possible to provide enough power to Test Consumer 1.
Figure 7.10: The total energy conumption of the unoptimized version (green) and the
optimized version (orange), showing how the available power was stepwise lowered
7.2.2
Changing setpoints
The next scenario that will be presented evolves around the model behavior upon change
of the setpoint value. As the changes to the behavior may be fairly small if the setpoint
74
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:83==
of just one consumer is changed, it was decided to include an additional amount of con­
sumers such that the model would have to distribute energy to a larger grid. The new
hierarchy that is being build as a result of this, consists of a root, figure 7.11, and two
controllers which will be called ”Group1” and ”Group2”.
Figure 7.11: Information about the root controller in the example when changing setpoint
for the consumers
Both controllers will be provided with the same static priority, this will result in the distribu­
tion being dependant on their individual critical level. Group1 will consist of two continuous
consumers, where the first called Test Consumer 1, will have the highest possible priority
(1), and the second consumer called Test Consumer 2 will be provided with a priority of 2.
Group2 will have 4 children consumers, being one continuous consumer, Test Consumer
3, with a priority of 1 and 3 on/off consumers, Test Consumer 4, Test Consumer 5 and
Test Consumer 6, which all have the priority of 2. The two consumers with their children
consumers can be found in figure 7.12 & 7.13.
Figure 7.12: Showing information about Group 1 in this experiment and how the system
reacts when changing the setpoint for one or more of the consumers
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure 7.13: Showing information about Group 2 in this experiment and how the system
reacts when changing the setpoint for one or more of the consumers
When the simulation starts, there is an immediate oscillation within the energy consump­
tion, figure 7.14, this is due to the PID controller trying to regulate the various control
values within the grid to reach their set point value. After some progression time of the
simulation, the graph shows how the energy consumption is becoming more and more
balanced, and in the end it is able to provide a certain level of load balancing. Since the
model has now had time to regulate and distribute energy, the setpoint value of Test Con­
sumer 1 is changed from 20 to 22, which means that the control value of the consumer
should increase accordingly as it has a high priority.
76
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:85==
Figure 7.14: The total energy consumption of the unoptimized version and the optimized
version showing the reaction of changing the setpoints in one or more consumers
As figure 7.12 shows, Test Consumer 1 does in fact increase its control value, and as it is
also apparent both from Test Consumer 2, and the consumers in figure 7.13 the various
controllers and the root do in fact react to the changing requirements of the grid. One note
will have to be made about figure 7.13, it was decided to only show some of the group,
as the figure would otherwise become quite large. Therefore, the complete version of the
figure can be found in appendix A.3. The oscillation that can be seen at Test Consumer
1 happens because the PID controller have not been perfectly tuned. Figure 7.12 shows
how the two different consumers are both trying to receive as much power as possible.
Since Test Consumer 1 has been set with a static priority that is higher than the one of
Test Consumer 2, it will result in Test Consumer 2 only receiving the leftover power that is
within the microgrid of Group1, but will lose all of it as soon as Test Consumer 1 requires
the additional power supply.
The next test will be to change the setpoint of Test Consumer 2, changing the setpoint
from 20 to 22 does not impact Test Consumer 1 as it has a higher priority. The consumer
will only be able to increase its control value to accommodate the new setpoint if there
is additional power available. It does however have an effect on Group 2, where the
On/Off consumers’ control value does start to oscillate because they are now receiving
less power than before. Their control value will start to normalize as soon as the PID
controller of Test Consumer 2 has finished regulating. It could however be discussed if
the model would behave nicer if the various consumers were allowed to consume power
for a longer period of time whenever it is ”their turn” to receive power.
Looking at the root controller in figure 7.11, it does not use all the energy available to it
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
77
==PAGE:86==
at all times. This happens because the various groups will not provide energy to On/Off
controllers if they cannot deliver 100% of their requirement. This happens because it
was defined that an On/Off consumer is only effective whenever it receives the entirety
of its maximum energy consumption. If that cannot be delivered the controller will in­
stead decide to not use that energy, which in turn will result in a decrease in their energy
consumption. In a further iteration it could however be interesting to investigate the pos­
sibilities of providing this ”excess” power to continuous consumers that have not reached
their setpoint yet. Once the continuous consumer reaches its setpoint it will then be able
to receive 0 power for a while, which may then be provided to an On/Off consumer in need
of it.
7.2.3
Adding additional consumers
The following scenario will be split in two parts as the results are quite interesting. This
scenario will include two separate experiments, and it was therefore decided that the
figures used will be provided as an appendix, in appendix A.4 A.5. This scenario will
focus on the model’s behavior if additional devices are added within a group.
The general configuration for this scenario is a root including two groups, Group1 and
Group2, both having priority 1. Group1 has two continuous consumers, Test Consumer 1
with a priority of 1, and Test Consumer 2 with a priority of 2. Group2 has 4 consumers as
its children, a Continuous Consumer Test Consumer 3 with a priority of 1, and 2 On/Off
consumers named Test Consumer 4 and Test Consumer 5 respectively, both having a
priority of 2.
The first experiment that was made to test the behavior of the model was, to start a sim­
ulation with the above configuration and an available power of 200. Once the regulation
and startup phase has ended and the various curves both in terms of energy consumption
and control value has started to stabilize and load balancing is applied, it was attempted
to add an On/Off Consumer. As it can be seen on the figures in appendix A.4, the addition
of a consumer has great impact on the behavior of the model, and after letting the model
”work” for a while it could be concluded that it was never going to be able to stabilize itself.
It was therefore decided that an addition of power should be tested, however providing
an extra 50 units, such that the total was now 250 rather than 200, would not make the
model able to stabilize itself. This happens because a large amount of the consumers
in the system are in a critical state, thus every time a consumer receives power it will
have to let go it in an instant as some other consumer are at a critical level and there­
fore has a higher claim on the power. This behavior will continue resulting in none of the
consumers every really hitting a satisfying control level. This results of this behavior can
also be seen through the TotalConsumption graph, where the energy consumption curve
oscillates uncontrollably.
To investigate if this behavior was caused by the PID controller and thus how control
values are regulated, it was decided to attempt the same experiment again, but this time
provide the model with an available power of 250. Once again there is some waiting time
for the PID regulation and the load balancing to take proper effect on the system. The
results of adding a new consumer to the grid would appear to be very different from the
previous experiment. As the figures in appendix A.5 shows, this does impact the various
consumers that already exist in the grid, but not as drastically as was the case previously.
The figures clearly shows that all the consumers within the grid are able to regulate back to
an acceptable control value staying somewhere in between their setpoint and hysteresis.
The resulting overall energy consumption is also impacted by the addition of the new
consumer, where some peaks appear but it is also able to adjust itself to an acceptable
78
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:87==
level that still manages to load balance better than what the unoptimized version is able
to. This suggests that the PID controller had great impact on the failure of the previous
experiment, and therefore the conclusion will be that efforts should be made towards
tuning every PID controller. The challenges with the PID controller is then enhanced by
the delay in regulations in terms of how often the model is allowed to adjust the power
distributed to the controllers and consumers. Thus, it will have to be concluded that in
the current state of the model, one would have to regulate the available power within the
model before additional consumers can be added during run time.
7.2.4
Model Scalability
The last experiment within this chapter will concern itself with, has the topic of scalabil­
ity. The model has now gone through various experiments both in this and the previous
chapter, and it does now seem feasible to test its scalability. The following experiement
is quite large, and it is therefore unfeasible to provide screenshots of all the entirety of
the models behavior. It was decided to bring some screenshots of some examples, and
a thorough explanation, which provides enough information to give an understanding of
what is going on. The configuration used in this model will be addressed and the name
of the configuration file can be found in appendix A.1. The idea behind this experiment
is to allow the system to regulate itself to reach a satisfying level of load balancing and
regulated control values. Then the system should perform several steps, decreasing the
amount of power that is available within the grid. As was the case in previous scenario,
having to much energy within the grid can lead to complications depending on the amount
and type of consumers used. The hypothesis is that the decreasing available power will
provide more load balancing at the cost of control value versus setpoint precision. The
ladder means that less available power will have a direct consequence of the consumers
being unable to keep their control values at, or close to their setpoints.
The experiment that will test the scalability capabilities of the model will have the fol­
lowing components, 7 Controllers including the Root Controller, 5 levels in the hierarki
and 22 consumers where 12 of them are Continuous consumers and the rest are On/Off
consumers. Appendix A.6, shows a diagram of the hierarchy to provide a visual under­
standing of the setup. Even though some of the groups has the same amount of children
of the same types, many of them are quite different from each other. For the configuration
we have made ”group configuration types” that are used to configure an entire group at
a time. As an example Group2 and Group5 has the same amount of consumers and of
same types. However, the individual configuration of the consumers are different, which
is also apparent when looking at the simulation behavior of the consumers.
At the beginning of the simulation, it is ensured that there is enough power within the
system to satisfy the various consumers. This is done to ensure that the regulation and
the load balancing have the time and capacity to adjust themselves to a satisfying level.
Once the system has stabilized it is time to start decreasing the available power of the
macrogrid and let it adjust itself.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure 7.15: The total power consumtion of the unoptimized version versus the optimized
configuration when running a large scale example
As figure 7.15 shows, the regulating/optimized build was initially receiving a larger amount
of energy than what the unoptimized build is using to keep the same consumers at a
satisfying control value. The optimized build is successful in adjusting the control values
of the consumers based on the new available power. It was therefore decided to speed
up the pace of the steps such that the optimized build would at least use the same level of
power as the unoptimized build, although still allowing the model to adjust after each step.
As figure 7.16 illustrates, the lower available power has great impact on the consumers.
Where it becomes very apparent on Test Consumer 6, that the available power makes it
reach a point where it is getting harder and harder to keep a satisfying control value. At
some point the level of available power will become sufficiently small which will result in
no consumers receiving enough power to keep a satisfying control value.
Figure 7.16: Three examples of how the consumer react when lowering the available
energy in the grid to the point where consumers have trouble keeping an acceptable state
7.3
Summary
Through this chapter several topics has been addressed that are of great importance to
the relevance of the model. Here there were provided argumentation towards why the
80
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:89==
configuration is paramount for the model to provide load balancing of an energy grid. As
the cases show a wrongly configured simulation will most likely provide quite meaning­
less results. Moreover, various experiments were conducted, in order to both prove and
analyse the behavior of the model given different scenarios like changing dependencies
during run time. The experiments were mostly a success after the model have had time to
adjust the various consumers and controllers. However, it did raise awareness about an
issue in the model. When a large set of consumers or maybe even groups are in a critical
level, it may not be able to recover from this state, even when more power is provided.
Therefore, if a consumer is to be added to the grid, the power will have to be adjusted ac­
cordingly before the addition. Finally, to further prove the use of the model, it would have
to support a certain degree of scalability. This resulted in a large grid and thus hierarchy
of consumers and groups to be developed. The scalability experiment was a success,
the controller when provided with enough power was able to adjust the control values of
all the consumers within the macro grid, and as the amount of power available inside the
grid were continuously decreased, it was able to provide a certain level of load balancing
on the cost of control value precision.
Overall it can be concluded that the model behaves as is to be expected. However, some
issue do still persist and it is an ongoing theory that the PID controlling of the control
values greatly impacts the models capabilities of load balancing. As it was already shown
in several of the previous examples that a focus on load balancing has great impact on
the models capabilities of keeping the control values at a satisfying level and vice versa.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
81
==PAGE:90==
82
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:91==
8
Discussion
This chapter will focus on discussing the project, and the process of developing it. A
discussion of the design decisions that were made will allow for a reflection and discussion
of other approaches that could have been used for this model. By doing so it should shed
a light on the potential of Load balancing using technologies like Artificial Intelligence to
predict the energy load pattern. This chapter will also reflect on further development of the
model and its applications as is. Moreover, what it would have meant for the results of the
model if various aspects such as providers and storages would have been implemented.
8.1
Component Types
The first part of this discussion will focus on some of the topics that were mentioned in
chapter 3 which described the domain that this project is concerned with. In that chap­
ter several types of components were addressed, some of which were not implemented
throughout the course of this project. Therefore, it appears obvious to discuss these com­
ponent types and their potential influence on the model.
The provider component type, was meant to simulate an entity that could provide energy to
the system. If this component was to be implemented it would allow for an expansion of the
model also including the energy providing part. This would allow for the model to simulate
a provider adjusting its delivery amount to be adjusted depending on the requirements of
the controllers it was connected to. Moreover, it would allow for the implementation of
providers within the macrogrid, to keep them separated from the main provider lets call
them local providers in this discussion, even though their functionality is the same as they
deliver some amount of energy to the system. It has to be mentioned that these local
providers can be of a large variety of types from diesel generators to windmills and solar
panels, and therefore have each their condition for energy to be produced and delivered.
These local providers can be used to support the macrogrid, or even microgrids within, if
it is deemed important that these will always have the energy they require. An example
of this could be lifesaving material at a hospital, here it could make sense to have a local
provider supporting the lifesaving material in case of power outages, or in the case of
a system breakdown. Thereby the local provider may be able to produce on demand
energy, or produce energy over time that can be stored in energy storages.
Storages are components used for storing energy that can be used at a later time. This
type of component would allow for even more flexibility within the system, as the con­
trollers would have the opportunity to draw energy from the storages when needed, rather
than their only option being to send a request to their parent controller, to maybe receive
more energy. The storages could then be recharged (assuming its some kind of battery),
when some excessive amount of energy exists in the microgrid. However, there would
have to be some logic controlling when the various batteries are allowed to charge, as
the excessive energy in one microgrid may be needed in another. But looking at it in a
simple manner, it would allow for some microgrids, that keeps a storage component, to
have some additional energy that can be drawn when need be.
The next topic would be, are there some device behaviors and consumer types that are
not accounted for in the two consumer types that were defined in the domain description.
After some discussion the project group came to the realisation that the model does not
handle user controlled devices. This model does only consider consumer types that are
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
83
==PAGE:92==
measurable and can be controlled through the analysis of that measured value. But what
about coffee machines or other types of user controlled devices, how would they have to
interact with the system, and should they ignore the way components are prioritised alto­
gether. One could easily think of a scenario where a user would like to brew some coffee,
but would have to wait for 30 minutes before the brewing process would start, because
the coffee machines weighted priority is not high enough to justify it receiving energy. This
type of component would have to be implemented in a later experiment that is beyond this
project, but it is an interesting thought. Would this type of consumer have to ignore the
the whole prioritisation system set in place, such that the energy it requires to complete
its process is directly stolen out of the microgrid it belongs to. This would also set the
discussion of which microgrids this type of consumers could belong to. To use the exam­
ple with vital medical equipment from above, it would appear troublesome if the coffee
machine would steal energy from that specific microgrid. Therefore, a larger discussion
would have to be made about how the user controlled component type should be priori­
tised, and then in which microgrids they can be placed in to not disturb the functionality
of vital business equipment.
Lastly, there exists components that are not necessarily user controlled and does not have
a direct measurable value that the energy provision can be based on. This could be de­
vices like servers in a data center, how should the model react to this kind of consumer.
Should this consumer type just receive a static amount of energy, but what about prioriti­
sation should they be prioritised in some way and how much. The how much depends on
the company implementing the model, how important are the servers compared to other
equipment in the macrogrid.
8.2
Load Forecasting
This project and the model in general has mostly been concerned with a rather reactive
approach to load balancing, although it does implement a usage of moving average which
attempts to analyse a trend in a dataset. However, the topic of Load forecasting has
been greatly expanded upon over the past years and the usage of Artificial Intelligence
in this context could benefit the model, thinking about its capabilities in analysing large
data sets. This discussion will not make great efforts to describe the theory of Artificial
Intelligence, as that would be an entire project on its own, but its capabilities would have to
be acknowledged and the usage of such technologies in this project should be discussed.
For further reading on the topic we would like to refer the reader to this review: Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, by Muhammad Qamar Raza & Abbas Khosravi[12].
This article provides a good overview of the topic, while providing several references that
can be used for further reading.
Being able to forecast the future requirements of the macrogrid could be a methodol­
ogy to prepare the various providers within a system on upcoming requirements from the
macrogrid. However, it is our strong belief that forecasting alone cannot stand alone in
the subject of load balancing. This reasoning exists as the forecasting would be based on
patterns being recognised, but what if there is no pattern but rather a need for a reaction
to a new type of situation. The corona lockdown could be used as an example, which
has most likely changed the pattern of how energy is consumed, which may be hard if
not impossible to predict. This is when one would see positive feedback in a reactive
methodology, that would change the system state based on the current requirements of
the system. To conclude the topic of load forecasting, it is proposed that in a future ex­
periment beyond this project, the potential of Artificial Intelligence should be investigated
as a possible addition to the current model.
84
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:93==
8.3
Model relevance
The topic of model relevance is also something that would have to be addressed in this
discussion. Is it even likely that the model that is proposed in this project will be used
in a real world scenario. Thus, far it has been attempted to simulate a scenario close
to a real world scenario. However, some reflections will have to be made in regards to
the applicability in the real world. Is it even possible to communicate as often as the
model is currently doing. At the moment the consumers can update their requests every
50th second and the controllers can update their requests every 50th second or 10th to
60th minute. Extensive experimentation and research would have to be made to ensure
that the real world system could even communicate this often without overflowing the
system with information transfers. Or is the opposite the case, should the aforementioned
components communicate more often than what is being simulated, and how would that
affect a real world scenario.
Not only the requests will have to be discussed, but also the response times. Say that a
rather complex hierarchy exists, and as it is defined, a controller will have to request and
then be provided energy from its closest parent controller. This could lead to a scenario
where a request in some microgrid would trigger a chain of requests climbing several
levels up in the component hierarchy. Therefore, the response times would have to be
discussed, considering that a controller would have to first evaluate the request, compar­
ing it with the existing requests, and then potentially have to request additional energy
from its closest parent. How would this affect the response time of the system when quite
the extensive amount of logical operations may potentially happen when a single request
is send, and how would this affect the distribution of energy within the system.
As it was mentioned in the analysis in chapter 7, the configuration is of great effect to­
wards the success of the simulation and its behavior in general. If the model is ”wrongly”
configured it may lead to very unsatisfiable results that does not necessarily represent
the real world. Therefore, it is of great importance that sufficient efforts are made towards
correct configuration of the model such that a proper simulation can be made that shows
the effects that the model may have on the system. Lastly, the PID regulation would have
to be addressed as well. As it is apparent from the regulation experiment in section 6.3,
the tuning of the PID controller is of great importance towards its effectiveness in adjusting
the control value of a consumer. This project has used the PID controller and its regulation
as a proof of concept, that shows the effectiveness of the tool. The argument is therefore,
that in a real world implementation, further effort should be put into the tuning of the PID
controller.
8.4
The generalisation issue
This project has focused on defining the model as generally as possibly, thereby not defin­
ing any values as being of any specific type. This means that it is never defined that a
Control Value will have to a temperature as an example. Rather, the various component
types has been defined based on how they are expected to behave. This may result in
being an issue in a real world implementation, and it may therefore be necessary to spec­
ify a consumer or controller such that proper modelling can be made. To exemplify this,
lets look at a temperature control system, if the external factors that may affect the system
were to be found, one would have to specify the system in such a way that the external
factors specific to temperature measuring and regulation can be assessed. Therefore,
the argument is that the general model that is being proposed in this project, can be used
as a proof of concept, but it would most likely have to be specified to some extend when
implemented in a real scenario. However, this does not make the model useless, it can
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
85
==PAGE:94==
be used as a way to experiment on real scenarios to generate a reasoning if the proposed
structure is realistic in terms of the energy distribution, or something additional is needed
to support it. This means that it can be used to prove if some scenario makes sense to
work with.
86
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:95==
9
Conclusion
For this thesis an approach to distributing energy within an energy grid is proposed.
Through a model using a variety of technologies such as SOAP based scheduling al­
gorithms, PID regulating and moving average calculation, provides an approach to load
balance within an energy grid. The model is meant to show the potential for load balancing
in an energy grid and can therefore be seen as a proof of concept.
The results show that it is possible to provide load balancing of the system by imple­
menting the proposed model. The model’s distribution algorithm is able to prioritise the
distribution of energy to the various consumers within its grid, based on a variety of param­
eters. First and foremost, the consumers are prioritised based on their current condition
and their importance which may be based on business logic. The prioritisation works dy­
namically such that a consumer becomes more important in the prioritisation algorithm as
their condition gets worse.
A PID controller is also implemented and tuned based on the various consumers and how
they are intended to work within the system. This helps in regulating their individual control
values making them more stable and more realistic, as one has to keep in mind that this
is a simulation, and thus the realism will have to be simulated as well. In conclusion, the
model provides some load balancing when introduced to certain scenarios as it was the
case in chapter 7, but there are some challenges within the model.
First and foremost, the configuration of the model is of great importance for its ability to
provide load balancing. Through the configuration of the model it also has to be decided
if the focus is on keeping precise control values or provide a satisfying level of load bal­
ancing. Specifically, it was analyzed that the increasing level of load balancing that the
model provides, has great impact on the precision of the PID controller’s ability to keep the
individual consumers at their setpoint values. Secondly, the model has issues adjusting
the consumers if the model has reached a critical state where to many consumers have
a high priority at the same time. Thus it will switch the distribution towards consumers far
to often, which results in none of the consumers having their needs satisfied.
In the future the model can be improved and expanded even further. It should be inves­
tigated how the simulation can provide even more realism, such that it becomes even
closer to a real world implementation. The PID controllers should be improved by tuning
them even more than what has been the case in this project. The concept of auto­tuning
PID controllers may even be presented as a topic worth investigating. Furthermore, the
distribution algorithm could be improved upon through further experimentation. Specifi­
cally, the prioritisation algorithm can be improved to make even smarter decisions based
on consumers’ current state. To support such improvements, an implementation of Artifi­
cial Intelligence could be investigated and experimented upon, as this will provide a level
of pattern recognition which should provide a better and more precise model.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
87
==PAGE:96==
88
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:97==
Bibliography
[1]
United Nations. Goal 7 | Department of Economic and Social Affairs. 2015. URL:
https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal7.
[2]
National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy.
2011. URL: https://www1.eere.energy.gov/solar/pdfs/50060.pdf.
[3]
Roger S. Pressman. “Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach”. In: Euro­
pean. Adapted by Darrel Ince. McGraw­Hill, 2015. Chap. 5.
[4]
Dr Govardhan. “A Comparison Between Five Models Of Software Engineering”. In:
IJCSI International Journal of Computer Science Issues 1694­0814 7 (Sept. 2010),
pp. 94–101. URL: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.403.
3201&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
[5]
Roger S. Pressman. “Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach”. In: Euro­
pean. Adapted by Darrel Ince. McGraw­Hill, 2015. Chap. 17.7.2.
[6]
Microsoft. The Model­View­ViewModel Pattern. 2017. URL: https://docs.microsoft.
com/en-us/xamarin/xamarin-forms/enterprise-application-patterns/mvvm.
[7]
George Coulouris, Jean Dollimore, and Tim Kindberg. Distributed Systems: Con­
cepts and Design (International Computer Science). 5th rev. ed. Addison­Wesley
Longman, Amsterdam, 2005.
[8]
Javad Zarrin, Rui Aguiar, and João Barraca. “Resource discovery for distributed
computing systems: A comprehensive survey”. In: Journal of Parallel and Distributed
Computing 113 (Nov. 2017). DOI: 10.1016/j.jpdc.2017.11.010.
[9]
Andrew S. Tanenbaum and Herbert Bos. Modern Operating Systems. 4th ed. Boston,
MA: Pearson, 2014.
[10]
Peter Marwedel. Embedded Systems Foundations of Cyber­Physical Systems, and
the Internet of Things. 4th ed. Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland: Springer
Nature Switzerland, 2014.
[11]
Ziv Scully, Mor Harchol­Balter, and Alan Scheller­Wolf. “SOAP: One Clean Analysis
of All Age­Based Scheduling Policies”. In: Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst.
2.1 (Apr. 2018). DOI: 10.1145/3179419. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3179419.
[12]
Muhammad Qamar Raza and Abbas Khosravi. “A review on artificial intelligence
based load demand forecasting techniques for smart grid and buildings”. In: Renew­
able and Sustainable Energy Reviews 50 (2015), pp. 1352–1372. ISSN: 1364­0321.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.04.065. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1364032115003354.
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
89
==PAGE:98==
90
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:99==
A
Title
A.1
Configuration Table
This Appendix includes two different tables, one showing the configurations that were
used throughout each experiment and another with simulation modes that were used.
With this thesis a zipped folder containing all the code and a compiled version with the
Changing SetPoints configuration is delivered. The compiled version will run a simulation
of the PID_Unoptimized configuration and the RegulatingController configuration. The
executable for the simulation can be found in ./binbin/Debug/netcoreapp3.1 folder and
can be run on a windows machine by executing the SmartControlApp2.exe file.
If the reader wants to change the configuration and simulation modes, the program will
have to be compiled again using .Net core. The configuration of the hierarchy can be
changed in the file ./Configurations/ModelConfiguration.cs in line 70, by choosing which
instance to initiate. In the same file the simulation modes to be executed can also be
changed by uncommenting the different simulation modes in line 30­35.
Experiment Configurations
Experiment
Config 1
Config 2
Config 3
Config 4
Base Build
Unoptimized ­
Config.cs
Priority List
PrioritySuccess
­ Config.cs
PriorityError ­
Config.cs
Critical Level
PrioritySuccess
­ Config.cs
PriorityError ­
Config.cs
Regulation
(PID)
PidRegulation
­
Continuous.cs
PidRegulation
­ OnOff.cs
PidRegulation
­ Success.cs
PidRegulation
­ Error.cs
Regulating
Controllers
RegulatingCon
­ trollerSuc­
cess.cs
RegulatingCon
­ trollerError.cs
Importance of
Configuration
OnOffError ­
Configura­
tion.cs
OnOffSuccess
­ Configura­
tion.cs
Additional
Avaliable­
Power
LowerTotal ­
Available­
Power.cs
Changing
setpoints
ChangeSet ­
Points ­ Con­
figuration.cs
Adding
consumers
AddConsumer
­ Configura­
tion.cs
Scalability
BigScale ­
Configura­
tion.cs
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
91
==PAGE:100==
Simulation Modes
Experiment
Mode 1
Mode 2
Base Build
Unoptimized
Priority List
Unoptimized
Priority
Critical Level
Priority
CriticalLevel
Regulation (PID)
PID_Unoptimized
PID_CriticalLevel
Regulating Controllers
PID_Unoptimized
RegulatingController
Importance of
Configuration
PID_Unoptimized
RegulatingController
Additional Available Power
PID_Unoptimized
RegulatingController
Changing setpoints
PID_Unoptimized
RegulatingController
Adding Consumers
PID_Unoptimized
RegulatingController
Scalability
PID_Unoptimized
RegulatingController
92
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:101==
A.2
Gantt Chart
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
93
==PAGE:102==
A.3
Complete version of Group 2, Changing setpoint
experiment
94
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:103==
A.4
Add Device Failure
Figure A.1: Caption
Figure A.2: Caption
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
95
==PAGE:104==
Figure A.3: Caption
Figure A.4: Caption
96
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:105==
A.5
Add Device Success
Figure A.5: Caption
Figure A.6: Caption
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
97
==PAGE:106==
Figure A.7: Caption
Figure A.8: Caption
98
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
==PAGE:107==
A.6
Scalability Hierarchy
Smart control for load balancing of an energy grid
99
==PAGE:108==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
