==PAGE:1==
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived
from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
Master Thesis
July, 2021
By
Anshul Chauhan
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months under the supervision of Line Katerine
Harder Clemmensen, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Techni­
cal University of Denmark and Mai Winstrup, at DTU Space in fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of glaciography, statistics,
probability and machine learning concepts.
Anshul Chauhan ­ s192164
Signature
Date
ii
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Due to the climatic changes in weather patterns across the globe, ice sheets are melting
rapidly, resulting in melt ponds occurring in the ablation zones of Greenland and Antarc­
tica. These melt ponds are known as supraglacial lakes which are the critical components
of the hydrological system of ice sheets. Changes in temporal dynamics and physical
factors like depth and volume of supraglacial lakes are crucial to understand glacier dy­
namics. This study is focused on estimating the depth of supraglacial lakes using data
from NASA’s ICESat­2 laser altimeter. The data is generated using photons that can pen­
etrate water and are reflected from both the water surface and lake bed. This research uses
fifteen datasets recorded from five different lakes in Greenland, where the datasets are
generated from six different beams of ICESat­2 laser altimeter.
Several methods have been used to estimate the depth of the supraglacial lakes, where re­
searchers provide remarkable results using satellite imagery datasets and ICESat­2 datasets.
However, data used for calculations were limited, and most of the approaches could not
give satisfactory results for deep lakes. This problem is solved by the proposed model in
this study, where multiple approaches have been used to clean the data by formulating a
method of separating lake surfaces and beds. This separation is followed by independent
removal of background noise and irrelevant data points from lake datasets using kernel
density estimation and making it optimal for the implementation of depth detection algo­
rithms. Regularized shortest path extraction(RSPE) is one such algorithm that is incorpo­
rated with machine learning approaches like hold­out and cross­validation to increase the
search space and prediction accuracy.
In total, 14 out of 15 lakes have shown exceptional results with an average accuracy of
93.706% and average uncertainty of 0.2411m. Eight lakes are predicted to be deeper than
digital depth, six lakes with shallower predicted depth and only one lake displayed an
uncertainty of over 1m. The whole analysis is an amalgamation of multiple mathematical
and conventional approaches to differentiate the surface and bottom part of the lake and
understand the right choice for different data trends.
This research can be further used to calculate the volume of the lake, from where study
can be extended to analyze the effect of depth and volume of the lake on water flow from
hydro fractures to the bottom of the ice sheets. Furthermore, these results can act as the
supporting factor in understanding the change in sea level through glacier melting.
Keywords— Supraglacial lakes, Regularized shortest path extraction, kernel density estimation,
cross­validation, hold­out
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my utmost gratitude for the tremendous support that I have received from
a significant number of people.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisors, Line Katrine Harder Clemmensen, As­
sociate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science and Mai Winstrup,
Postdoc, DTU Space for taking up my thesis project during my last semester in DTU, helping me
with planning the study and experiment, guiding me the with clear direction on the project, and all
the experiments. Meanwhile, they also gave me space and opportunity to explore.
Prof. Line helped me in directing towards the correct implementation of algorithms, brainstorming
about various approaches and provided multiple ideas to explore the data. It was always effortless
to discuss things with her as she is very considerate, which also gave me immense confidence to
carry forward this research efficiently. Besides that, She also helped me get a PhD position in DTU
Aqua, for which I will always be thankful to her. I am looking forward to taking this research ahead
with her and hope to collaborate on other projects.
My co­supervisor, Mai Winstrup, helped me a great deal in understanding the background in
glaciology, about which I was completely unaware. Her suggestions always helped me a great
deal will implementing various methods. She made sure that we don’t get diverted from our path
and was always there to provide all the help regarding the dataset.
I would also like to thank Louise Sandberg Sørensen, Senior Researcher, DTU Space, who allowed
me to interact with other students working on the same projects. Moreover, she also participated
in some my thesis supervisor meetings and enlightened us about more data and how we can shape
the results for potential publications.
Last but not least, I want to thank all of my friends and my brother, Arvind Chauhan, who is
enrolled in Environmental Engineering in DTU, for their interactive discussions about my project,
which helped me a lot in generating new ideas. Finally, I owe my deepest thanks to my parents for
supporting me to study and live in Denmark.
iv
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
2
Literature Review
4
3
Data Sources and Description
7
3.1
Lake analysis (Raw data representation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Lake analysis (Digitally drawn lake cross section representation) . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Theory
10
4.1
Data Cleaning Concepts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.2
Algorithmic Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
5
Implementation
19
5.1
Data Cleaning Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Outlier Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Algorithmic implementation on ICESAT­2 Dataset
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6
Results
36
6.1
Analysis using Holdout method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Analysis using Cross­validation method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Result Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
7
Conclusion and Discussion
42
7.1
Result Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.2
RSPE Algorithm for calculating elevation of ice sheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.3
Limitations of this project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
8
Summary
45
9
Future Work
47
Bibliography
49
A Appendix
51
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
1
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The ice sheet’s mass in Greenland has been declined rapidly in the last several years because of
iceberg calving and sheet surface melting. These ice sheets are estimated to contain enough water
to raise the average sea level by more than 7 metres (23 feet). Based on the various research and
satellite data in the last 20 years, Greenland shed an average of 279 billion metric tons of ice per
year, which resulted in global sea­level rise. The normal streamlines of Greenland’s ice merge into
the areas of big outlet glacial masses and harmonize with areas of highest ice sheet mass loss. This
phenomenon is also supporting the different perceptions that warming sea waters around Greenland
play an essential role in heavy ice mass loss [1]. According to the various studies, climatic changes
in the weather patterns over Greenland are among the most prominent reasons for large island’s
increasing ice loss rate. Greenland has set a new record for ice loss in the last two years, shedding
532 billion tons of ice. As a result, this record melting is likely to raise the global sea level by 1.5
millimetres [2].
Based on multiple ice sheet models (used to make predictions regarding future changes in Green­
land ice sheets), results will be consistent for Greenland if the greenhouse gas emission level re­
mains the same. The island will eventually lose a significant amount of ice resulting in 9 centime­
tres to global sea­level rise by 2100. Based on the complex structure of ocean dynamics and the
number of interdependent atmospheric factors, there is a considerable amount of uncertainty in
predictions and some models also predicted up to 30 centimetres of sea­level rise [3]. Hence, the
situation is drastic, and understanding these phenomena is very important to take optimal steps to
avoid natural calamities.
Due to the melting of ice sheets for a longer duration, local topographic low elevation points collect
the melted water runoff. As the water is denser and can absorb more heat than ice, the melted region
starts spreading over the wide range of ice sheets, resulting in large lakes known as supraglacial
lakes. These lakes are now becoming a standard feature on the significant parts of the ice sheets
and have become more extensive and have advanced inland toward higher elevations in the past
decades [4]. These meltwater lakes have become a vital component of the hydrological system of
ice sheets.
The hydrological system includes both surface flow of water into the lakes and water drainage
flow to the lake bed. Many glacial lakes atop the Greenland Ice Sheet are disappearing day by day
because of the formation of the large cracks (hydro fractures) below them, draining the lakes and
sending torrents of water to the base of the ice sheet thousands of feet below. The accumulating
water reduces the basal friction, which floats the entire ice sheet and the melting of these ice sheets
increases the water levels in the sea. It can cause devastating effects on coastal habitats farther
in the land, destructive erosion, wetland flooding, aquifer and agricultural soil contamination with
salt, and lost habitat for fish, birds, and plants. These hydro fractures in ice sheets are also widening
because of lake water pressure and tension from the volume of water that accumulates at the ice
sheet base [5].
Based on the results from [6], supraglacial lakes are far more widespread than in previous years, and
cross­section is changing rapidly with time. Ice surface slopes also influence the development of
supraglacial lakes, and that the majority of lakes form at low elevations. Subsequently, they are and
will be playing an essential role in controlling the contribution of Greenland to the rise in sea level in
the upcoming decades to few centuries as the marine­terminating outlet glaciers are also retreating
from their deep troughs. Furthermore, according to various researches [7], significant and spatially
2
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:8==
extensive speedups concurrent with times of lake drainage, showing that lakes play a crucial role
in modulating regional ice flow. The glacial hydrological processes and the contribution of glacial
water to rising sea levels are heavily dependent on in­situ measurements of the supraglacial lakes.
Besides that, supraglacial liquid water at the margins of ice sheets has an essential impact on the
surface energy balance and affects the marine life close to the glacial icecaps.
In order to understand the geography of supraglacial lakes, multiple approaches have been used in
the last several years over different types of data like satellite imagery data, IceBridge altimetry
data and ICESat­2 data. Based on these datasets, researchers have drawn various conclusions and
provided astonishing results in predicting the depth and volume of the lakes. The recent availability
of the ICESat­2 laser altimeter since 2018 has now introduced the potential to replace the in­situ
measurements used in empirical bathymetric methods with satellite laser bathymetric depths at
a high vertical resolution, consequently extracting lake volumes from imagery [8]. It carries the
Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter System, a photon­counting, 532 nm (green light) lidar
operating at 10 kHz.
This research is proposing a new algorithm (Regularized Shortest Path Extraction) to calculate
the depth of the supraglacial lakes. The idea behind this algorithm is to find the smooth­curved
shortest path between the image top and bottom using intuitive and straightforward smoothness
constraint. In pictorial representation of supraglacial lakes, the topmost layer of photons in the
bottom part should be used for calculating depth. To achieve this condition, we can state an argu­
ment that traversing photons on the lake bed must be the shortest path between both ends of the
lake. Hence, it makes sense to implement the regularized shortest path extraction algorithm to find
a fitting line through lake bed data points and calculate the depth for the deepest point in the lake.
Following current section, Several research papers have been introduced where authors used mul­
tiple approaches to identify and calculate the depth and volume for supraglacial lakes across the
globe. All these researches are complementary, and most of them have used ICESat­2 and satellite
imagery datasets. After that, data sources have been mentioned, along with the dataset description
used in this research. Successively, multiple data cleaning approaches have been introduced in the
data cleaning section. Each following cleaning method complements the problems of the previous
approach and ultimately leads to the best approach for data cleaning.
Furthermore, theoretical analysis is done over various methods for calculating the depth of the
lakes, which eventually leads to the selection of dynamic programming based on the ”Regular­
ized Shortest Path Extraction algorithm”. The Cross­validation method is used to select the best
combination of hyperparameters for the final model after evaluating and exploring the hyper para­
metric search space. Finally, the result assessment has been done where state­of­the­art results are
displayed, and in due course, research has been concluded in the conclusion section.
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
3
==PAGE:9==
2
Literature Review
Data like altimetry data, satellite imagery data and ICESat­2 data supported the research signifi­
cantly in Greenland and Antarctica. Many researchers started to divert their focus towards climate
change which is affecting the global dynamics. These datasets cover various factors like land
and vegetation heights, inland water elevations, sea surface heights, cloud layering and optical
thickness Etc., which is also helping in understanding the inter­dependency of several factors. Re­
searchers have created various models to detect and analyse the lakes in Greenland and Antarctica
concerning supraglacial lakes, resulting in predicting the depth and volume of lakes. As NASA’s
ICESat­2 laser altimeter brings a new capability where photons can penetrate water and reflect from
both the water and the underlying ice, most researchers have used the ICESat­2 data to analyse and
predict lakes with high accuracy.
The formation and rapid drainage of supraglacial lakes influence the mass balance and dynamics
of the Greenland Ice Sheet in several ways. As the global atmospheric temperature increases,
the water stays in the lakes for a longer duration, which helps in increasing the lake dimensions
with time. Moreover, the rapid drainage through hydrofracture is also increasing water pressure in
the subglacial hydrological system, which reduces the basal friction and causes transient ice­flow
speedups [9].
These inland expansions of supraglacial lakes (SGLs) during the 21st century have been explained
in [10] where they have shown that at the end of the 21st century (2070–2099), approximately 9.8
± 3.9 km3 (+113% compared to 1980­2009) and 12.6 ± 5 km3 (+174%) of meltwater could be
stored in supraglacial lakes under moderate and high representative concentration pathways (RCP
4.5 and 8.5), respectively. According to the research, The most significant increase is predicted
to be in the northeastern sector of the Greenland ice sheets (191% in RCP 4.5 and 320% in RCP
8.5), whereas in west Greenland, which is home to most supraglacial lakes are going to see the
future increase of 55% in RCP 4.5 and 68% in RCP 8.5 which is relatively moderate. In order to
get these results, they compared the surface depressions and contemporary lakes, analysed their
distributions and supraglacial projections. Besides the future predictions, they also determined the
percentage of lakes in parts of Greenland, which is about 18% of the total SGL volume, lies in the
northeast and 23% in the southwest catchment. However, it is also expected to see 30–35% and
14–17% increase respectively, by the end of the century.
Another similar research has been conducted on East Antarctic Ice Sheet in [11] according to which
lakes often cluster a few kilometres down­ice from grounding lines and 60% (>80% by area) de­
velop on ice shelves, including some potentially vulnerable to collapse driven by lake­induced
hydro­fracturing which signifies that the parts of the ice sheet may be susceptible to increasing
atmospheric temperature. This research has been done widely over 65,459 SGLs formed on the
East Antarctic Ice Sheet in January 2017. The primary source of imagery was Sentinel 2A, which
represents the highest spatial resolution satellite imagery. They used image processing and auto­
mated supraglacial lake identification and mapping to classify each image into water or no­water
regions using a threshold value that was selected intuitively and visual understanding. Further­
more, they quantified errors and uncertainties in supraglacial lake mapping, which estimated the
uncertainty of around 1% (13.8km2) over a total lake area of around (1383km2). Finally, estima­
tion of volume for SGLs has been calculated, which revealed a significant and robust relationship
(r2 = 0.86) between area (A) and volume (V).
Concerning bathymetry of the supraglacial lakes, a paper by Zachary Fair and Mark Flanner [12]
4
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:10==
presented case studies for 12 SGLs with Airborne Topographic Mapper (ATM) lidar and 12 lakes
with ICESat­2 lidar sensors. Both approaches reliably detected the bottom returned photons from
lake beds for a max depth of 7 m. The lake bed’s uncertainty for these retrievals is 0.05–0.20 m
for ATM and 0.12– 0.80 m for ICESat­2. However, it gave higher uncertainties for lakes deeper
than 4 m. Based on observations, high confidence photons are primarily insufficient to represent
the complete profile of the lakes. Hence, it is essential also to consider lower confidence pho­
tons and sometimes even background noise density. They started with lake detection using lake
surface flatness tests, where they observed low topographical variance over lake surfaces relative
to surrounding ice. Following this, they continued with data refinement because of heavy noise.
Furthermore, the authors estimated the lake depth using curve fitting approaches like polynomial
fits and splines on both datasets. After refining the algorithm, they managed to get reasonably well
results mentioned in appendix A.3 with a mean uncertainty of 0.38 m for bed photons for the lake,
which are shallower than 4m.
As ICESat­2 photon data gained popularity, Researchers carry forward on Amery Ice Shelf in
East Antarctica [13] where they developed several algorithms to estimate water depth estimates.
The authors compared depth estimates from six different ICESat­2 algorithms in various stages
of development and two image­based algorithms for four melt lakes. In order to create a baseline
for the algorithm, a manual picking technique was used on ICESat­2 data. In terms of reliabil­
ity, there was no difference between algorithms. However, when it comes to accuracy, estimates
from the adapted ATL08 algorithm were the closest to the manual baseline, whereas image­based
algorithms were underestimating lake depths by more than 30%. The six algorithms used sequen­
tially on ICESat­2 were: Adapted ATL08 algorithm, ATL13­melt.V1, Lake surface­bed separation,
Watta, Surface Removal and Robust Fit and Manual picking. More information about all the ap­
proaches can be found in appendix A.1. Finally, they compared the results from these algorithms
with image­based water depth estimates. They found that image­based techniques produced lakes
depth estimate too shallow with the mean difference of +0.71m and very low consistency between
multiple lakes. However, the case of algorithms based on the ICESatthe ­2 dataset has shown
promising results, mentioned in appendix A.2.
Another algorithm (Watta) has been introduced by Rajashree Tri Datta and Bert Wouters in [14]
which automatically calculates the SGLs bathymetry and detect the ice layers along tracks of the
ICESat­2 laser altimeter. As a whole, this algorithm extracts the lake surface, bottom, corrected
depth and sub­surface ice cover. It has been tested over 46 lakes in Western Greenland and used
multiple imagery sources to extrapolate depths along a profile to get the volume of the water in
the lake. They started with data cleaning, which comprised a method for selecting photons in the
window followed by kernel density estimate on the selected window. Subsequently, they removed
outliers based on top and bottom values within the horizontal window, interpolating the missing
values and smoothing the dataset. This preprocessed dataset is further used in the watta algorithm
in order to detect the lake bottom and depth estimates for the lakes A.4.
Furthermore, the authors used imagery processing to calculate the volume of the lake. Additionally,
they also extended this research towards capturing lake drainage over the melt season and designed
a drainage mechanism over Lake Julian from airborne and satellite­based imagery and the watta
algorithm. In this research, they have shown results with satisfactory r­squared values mentioned
in A.5. However, the results were a bit inconsistent between the multiple lakes. Based on the other
results, identifying narrow stream features on sloping surfaces still needs visual verification due to
many false positives.
All the existing approaches performed considerably well on the lake datasets, but it has been seen
that the performance starts degrading with the increase in depth of the lake. There are minimal
approaches that provide good results where lake depth is more than 7m. Besides that, the num­
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
5
==PAGE:11==
ber of datasets used for that purpose was also pretty less. Therefore, In this report, we present a
”time­delayed” dynamic programming (Regularised shortest­path extraction [15]) algorithm for
contour extraction that can be adapted to produce a very effective and straightforward algorithm for
finding smooth shortest­paths across a lake. This algorithm looks for the closest defined number
of neighbours and incorporates a penalty for roughness to each cell/pixel in the matrix. Following
this way, for every pixel in the row from top to bottom, paper [15] successfully presented smooth
paths for detecting fractures and roads in borehole and satellite images, respectively.
6
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:12==
3
Data Sources and Description
The proposed system in this research relies on the depths of individual photons measured by
ICESat­2’s ATLAS instrument (Ice, Cloud, and Land Elevation Satellite – 2). The ICESat­2 was
launched to quantify the ice sheet and glacier elevation change, sea ice freeboard, and empower
the assurance of the heights of Earth’s forest. However, it can also provide information on land
and vegetation heights, inland water elevations, sea surface heights, and cloud layering and opti­
cal thickness. In the wake of this research, ICESat­2’s laser altimeter, the Advanced Topographic
Laser Altimeter System (ATLAS), has been utilized to accumulate information about the stature of
supraglacial lake surfaces and lake beds. This framework utilizes single­photon sensitive identifi­
cation to quantify time of flight and consequently surface height along each of its multiple beams
among other data [16].
The Observational mechanism is divided into two components:
• ATLAS instrument: Lidar system used to transmit photons, record the time of departure
and arrival, and determine the laser pointing direction.
• Spacecraft Bus: Contains Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers and antennas as well
as is used to provide energy.
ALTAS instrument is a photon­counting 532nm laser altimeter aboard ICESat­2 split into six
beams partitioned into three sets (isolated by 3.3km), where radiates inside each pair are iso­
lated by 90m. Each beam pair consists of a strong and weak beam, with the strong beam using
0.6 −3.9 signal photons per shot vs 0.6 −1.0 signal photons per shot for the weak beam [14].
ATL03 produces a photon cloud where every photon is geolocated to within a 6.5m accuracy with
an associated height as well as a confidence level and is produced at an along­track horizontal
resolution of 0.7m [17]. ICESat­2 can produce returns from both surface and the bottom of the
lake.
The individual photon times of flight from the ATL02 data product are combined with the laser
pointing vectors and the position of the ICESat­2 observatory in orbit to determine the Latitude,
Longitude and height of individual received photon events concerning the WGS­84 ellipsoid.
The study in this research is focused on all types of beams as the initial idea was to design a dynamic
algorithm that can handle all types of data. The six different beams are named GT1L/R, GT2L/R,
and GT3L/R, and the data provided for the research is from 5 different lakes over different times­
tamps. Note that L and R mean left and right­sided beams, respectively and also these Greenland
based lakes are named Lake 257, Lake 5289, Lake 1116, Lake 4788 and Lake 963. This research
uses 15 datasets from the mentioned lakes recorded in 2019 and 2020. For every supraglacial lake,
there are six parameters mentioned in the dataset. These are:
• Longitude is the measurement east or west of the prime meridian. It is measured by imag­
inary lines that run around the Earth vertically (up and down) and meet at the North, and
South Poles [18].
• Latitude is the measurement of distance north or south of the Equator. It is measured with
180 imaginary lines that form circles around the Earth east­west, parallel to the Equator
[19].
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
7
==PAGE:13==
(a) Lake 4788 (comprehensible dataset)
(b) Lake 1116 (comprehensible dataset)
(c) Lake 1116 (ambiguous dataset)
(d) Lake 257 (ambiguous dataset)
Figure 3.1: Lake data representation (raw data)
• Elevation above the ellipsoid is the Elevation above a mathematical model that approxi­
mates the shape of the Earth. The current most common one and used here is WGS84.
• Signal Confidence gives the confidence parameter for each of the beams in the data.
• x_atc is along­track coordinate for each data point.
• t_year is the timestamp for the recorded data.
3.1
Lake analysis (Raw data representation)
Conducive to this project, the parameters used for the analysis are Latitude, Elevation above the
ellipsoid, and signal confidence. Data has been represented in 2 dimensions using latitude and
Elevation above the ellipsoid as x­axis and y­axis, respectively. Signal confidence is mainly used
to represent the surface and bottom part of the lake, where the surface part mainly contains points
with high and medium confidence. In contrast, the bottom part consists of low confidence points
and background noise.
Of all the lakes with different datasets in figure 3.1, some of them are easy to visualize, and there­
fore, analytical complexity is not very high. However, for some lakes, it is even challenging to
visualize the actual bottom line of the lake. Therefore, these lakes are difficult to analyze, and it is
also challenging to predict the accurate fitting line for lake beds.
8
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:14==
(a) Lake 4788 (comprehensible dataset)
(b) Lake 1116 (comprehensible dataset)
(c) Lake 1116 (ambiguous dataset)
(d) Lake 257 (ambiguous dataset)
Figure 3.2: Lake data representation (digitally drawn lake cross section)
3.2
Lake analysis (Digitally drawn lake cross section
representation)
After forecasting the fitting line for the surface and bottom part of the lake, digital data points have
been drawn using WebPlotDigitizer software. This software was developed to facilitate easy and
accurate data extraction from a variety of plot types. This program is designed using HTML5,
which allows it to run within the most popular web browsers and does not require installing it. It
helps in recovering the exact numerical values of the data, which is available only in the form of
plots and images [20].
In order to create the digital fitting line for lake cross­sections, all the lakes have been uploaded in
the form of images in WebPlotDigitizer, where latitude and elevation above the ellipsoid parameters
were aligned data points were created based on the visual understanding. As shown in figure 3.2,
data points have been created for all the lake datasets, which gives an expected fitting line for the
surface and bottom part of the lake.
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
9
==PAGE:15==
4
Theory
4.1
Data Cleaning Concepts
Data cleaning is defined as the process of understanding, detecting and removing inaccurate data
points in order to inject high­quality data in the assessment and prediction models. Real­time data
can be very noisy, and there is always a high possibility of irregular intervals and outliers. It can
be of various types: Event data (Discrete events occurring at point locations and times), trajectory
data (Trajectories denote the paths traced by bodies moving in space over time), Point reference
data (Measurements of a continuous Spatio­temporal field), Raster data (Continuous or discrete
Spatio­temporal field that is recorded at fixed locations in space and at fixed time points), video
data and so on [21]. Therefore, data cleaning techniques also vary with the kind of data provided
for assessment. For instance, if the given data is spatial, then it can be understood and rectified
using distance­based or density­based outlier detection algorithms. Data is considered perfectly
cleaned when it is noise­free, complete, no duplicates, no outliers and highly consistent.
4.1.1
Why Data Cleaning is important?
Data cleaning improves data quality and consequently helps in increasing overall productivity.
When data is cleaned, all irrelevant or incorrect information is gone, leaving the highest quality
information. Incorrect or inconsistent data leads to false conclusions. Cleaned and understandable
data has a high impact on the quality of the results. A simple algorithm can outweigh a complex
one just because it was given enough and high­quality data [22].
4.1.2
Data Quality Criteria
Several criteria need to be passed in order to achieve high­quality data:[23]
1. Validity: The degree to which the data follow some set of rules and constraints. Below
mentioned are some commonly used constraints:
• Data­Type Constraints: Values with the particular data type (Boolean, Numeric Etc.)
• Range Constraints: Values fall within a certain range
• Mandatory Constraints: Non­empty columns
• Unique Constraints: A field or a combination of fields must be unique
2. Accuracy: The degree of conformity of a measure to a standard or a true value. it gives the
information of how much data is distorted
3. Completeness: The degree to which all the necessary measures are investigated
4. Consistency: The degree to which the bunch of measures are identical across multiple
frameworks.
5. Uniformity: The degree to which a set of information measures are indicated using similar
units of measure in all frameworks
4.1.3
Data Cleaning Work Flow
It is a sequence of steps that helps produce high­quality data by keeping all the criteria into account.
[22]
10
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:16==
1. Inspection: This helps in the detection of incorrect and inconsistent data and spotting out­
liers and can be further divided into two methods
• Data Profiling: It helps generating summary statistics of all the parameters(mean, std
Etc.)
• Visualizations: It helps to spot outliers and periodic trends in the data
2. Cleaning: Rectify the data and remove the detected anomalies in the inspection phase. This
phase is data­dependent and contains various methods to handle the data. Some of those
methods are:
• Removal of Irrelevant data, duplicates and outliers
• Handling of type conversions and syntax errors(whitespaces, pad strings, typos)
• Standardization of dataset
• Scaling/Transformation
• Normalization
• Imputing missing values
3. verifying: It involves re­inspection of data and cross­checking whether constraints do hold.
It can also involve some manual corrections.
4. Reporting: It deals with the formatting of a dataset based on the model requirements.
4.1.4
Concepts used for Data Cleaning
In this project, Three parameters have been considered ­ Height (Elevation above WGS84 Ellipsoid
[m]), Latitude and Signal confidence. Height and latitude define the 2D position of the data points,
and signal confidence determines how confident we can state the existence of data points in situ
measurements. Typically, 15 datasets have been taken into account, further divided into training
and test set.
The key concepts that have been used here for data cleaning are kernel density estimation(KDE),
data split function, clustering algorithms(DBSCAN and GMM) and sliding window function.
1. Kernel Density Estimation : It is a non­parametric way to estimate the probability density
function of a random variable. It is a powerful way to estimate the probability density of
data points corresponding to variables. It helps in creating a smooth curve given a set of
random data [24]. This density­based approach is useful to clean the data with the help
of a distribution curve created by weighing the distance of all the points in each specific
location. Following this, a cutoff can be set to extract low­density points and remove them
from the data. The function used for calculating KDE in this research is gaussian_kde from
Scipy.stats library of python. The bandwidth of the distribution can also be manipulated
using set_bandwidth function, which provides a great deal of flexibility to adjust curves
accordingly. Mathematically, Kernel density estimator is defined as:
fh(x) = 1
nh
n
∑
i=1
K x −xi
h
(4.1)
where K is the kernel and h is a smoothing parameter called the bandwidth.
2. Density­based spatial clustering of applications with noise (DBSCAN) Clustering Al­
gorithm:
It is a distance­based unsupervised learning method which groups data points
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
11
==PAGE:17==
into several clusters, which are closely packed together while marking others as outliers that
lie alone in low­density regions. It is mainly focused on two key parameters: min_samples
which defines the minimum number of points required to form a dense region, and eps
which specify the distance to define a neighbourhood. This algorithm starts with a ran­
dom data point and searches for the neighbouring points based on eps. After considering
min_samples parameter, it classifies the point as Core point (around which cluster can be
formed), Border point (points are on the fringes of a cluster) and outliers (points outside the
cluster). Tuning of these parameters is significant to create valid clusters [25]. The function
used for calculating clusters using this approach is DBSCAN from sklearn.cluster library
of python.
3. Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) Clustering Algorithm:
It is also a distance­based
probabilistic model which is designed to consider all the data points generated from a linear
combination of multivariate Gaussian distributions with unknown parameters. This algo­
rithm executes the expectation­maximization (EM) algorithm iteratively to find the best
distribution of data points by maximizing the log likelihood function. This method is bound
to define k gaussian distributions and iteratively distribute the points into clusters using
each point’s probabilities associated with the distributions. Covariance type also plays a
very important role in distributing points and can be set as full, tied, diag and spherical [25].
The function used for calculating clusters using this approach is GaussianMixture from
sklearn.mixture library of python. Mathematically, Expectation Step is defined as:
ric =
πcN(xi|µc, ∑
c)
∑K
c=1 N(xi|µc, ∑
c)
(4.2)
and Expectation Step is defined as:
mc =
N
∑
i=1
ric
(4.3)
πc = mc
N
(4.4)
µc = 1
mc
N
∑
i=1
ricxi
(4.5)
∑
c
= 1
mc
N
∑
i=1
ric(xi −µc)T (xi −µc)
(4.6)
4. Data Split Function: This function has been designed to split the data into several chunks
so that KDE can be implemented on those chunks rather than the whole data. Function is
defined as:
Nsplits = L
1
4 −1
(4.7)
Where L in the length of the dataset.
5. Sliding Window Function: This function is designed to extract the surface part of the lake
by sliding a fixed­sized window over the data vertically. A window with the highest number
of data points is considered the surface part of the lake because the surface part of the lake
is primarily flat and comprised of points with higher density than the points on the bottom
part of the lake.
Above mentioned algorithms and functions have been used together to formulate the multiple ap­
proaches for data cleaning.
12
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:18==
4.2
Algorithmic Concepts
4.2.1
Understanding Algorithmic Requirements
The main focus of this section is to understand the algorithmic concepts used to design an algorithm
that can analyze the lakes and predict the depth of the lake over the ICESat­2 dataset. Based on
the ICESat­2 dataset of the lakes, certain assertions were made to understand the data clearly.
• Following the visualization of lake datasets, it can be deduced that several points are the part
of the lake but do not represent the lake surface or the bottom. Those points were largely
created by photons striking many ice chunks in the lake, and some of them with extremely
low density are photon­generated noise
• Using ICESat­2 confidence classifications of detected photons, it has been observed that
high­confidence photons are often insufficient to profile lakes, so lower confidence and
buffer photons are recommended for improved retrievals [26]
• Moreover, Uncertainty for ICESat­2 photon data retrievals is 0.12−0.80m with the highest
uncertainties observed for lakes deeper than 4 m which means that the original bottom of
the lake should be slightly lower than the observed one using data [26]
Considering the above assertions, certain requirements and expectations have been set up for the
algorithm.
• Algorithm should follow the high­density data points to predict the surface and bottom part
of the lake accurately
• It should also be able to handle uncertainties and manage irregularities in data because of
ice chunks
• It should be flexible and able to understand small and large datasets without any intolerance.
• To counter the last assertion, it should be able to interpret the dynamics of observed data
and give results by keeping height uncertainties in check
Other than technical requirements, there are some general requirements as well, which are also
important to design the optimal algorithmic schema. [27]
• Required functionality: It is a good practice to develop functionalities to address complex
operations and simple tasks. It is also essential to develop functions that might be of need
down the line
• Data Size and Performance: One should also have a good definition of the performance
expectations from the algorithm, depending on the application, whether real­time or batch
mode
• Processing speed: A system will smooth interface that permits fast execution, greatly re­
duces the effort and time taken to handle large datasets
• Storage efficient: The algorithm should be designed to be storage efficient for data objects.
There might be some cases when the system cannot allocate more than the designated space
for variables at the run time
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
13
==PAGE:19==
4.2.2
Possible Approaches and Theoretical Analysis
In order to get the lake cross sections, multiple curve fitting algorithms have been inspected. For
the surface part of the lake, linear regression is considered the best approach because the surface
data for most of the lakes have been perceived as linear, Homoscedastic (The variance of residual
is the same for any value of X), independent and normalized. As for the bottom part of the lake, the
dynamics are a bit complex, and linear regression does not fulfil all the requirements. Therefore,
in order to understand the bottom part, two algorithms have been taken into consideration: Cubic
Splines and Shortest Path Extraction Algorithm (SPE).
Cubic Splines
Spline interpolation is a type of interpolation where the interpolant is a particular case of piece­
wise polynomial called a spline. The term ”spline” indicates a comprehensive class of functions
used in applications requiring data interpolation and smoothing. The idea is, Instead of fitting a
single and high­degree polynomial to all of the values at once, spline interpolation gives leverage
in fitting multiple low­degree polynomials to small subsets of the values.
Spline interpolation is preferred over polynomial interpolation because the interpolation error can
be made small even when using low degree polynomials for the spline. Spline interpolation avoids
the problem of Runge’s phenomenon, which occurs when the interpolating uses high degree poly­
nomials. [28]
Function for cubic spline is defined as:
fi(x) = ai + bix + cix2 + dix3; i = 1, 2, 3, 4, ...., n
(4.8)
where ai, bi, ci, di is the 4n coefficient for i = 1, 2...n and ith interval is defined as [xi−1, xi].
To determine this cubic spline fi(x), ai, bi, ci and di can be determined for each i using following
conditions:
fi(xi) = fi
(4.9)
fi(xi+1) = fi+1(xi+1)
(4.10)
f′
i(xi+1) = f′
i+1(xi+1)
(4.11)
f′′
i (xi+1) = f′′
i+1(xi+1)
(4.12)
Theoretical Analysis
Based on the understanding of the cubic spline algorithm, it tries to extrapolate the line over the
provided dataset by an average of data points in a given range. Data is 2­dimensional, and the
width of the bottom part of the lake is considerably large. So, suppose we try to fit the line over the
bottom part corresponding to the horizontal axis. In that case, it will try to take the average of all
data points corresponding to a vertical axis, which may result in extrapolating the line below the
expected bottom part of the lake. Therefore, it can be even worse for the datasets where the width
of the bottom part of the lake is even more prominent. However, to counter this problem, bias can
be induced in the splines, but it can be very complex because it will also have to be different based
on different split functions.
In figure 4.1(a), the interpolated line has been drawn based on the mathematical analysis of the
algorithm, which shows that the predicted bottom part of the lake is slightly shifted downwards.
14
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:20==
(a) Spline analysis on lake 257
(b) Shortest path extraction analysis on lake 257
Figure 4.1: Theoretical comparison based on mathematical understanding between cubic
splines and Shortest path extraction algorithm
Shortest Path Extraction Algorithm
In imagery data, shortest path extraction is implemented using dynamic programming methods to
find the shortest paths between two pixels. It has been proven to be very successful in finding long
paths and understand linear features in images. These methods can be implemented using both
recursive and iterative approaches and are computationally inexpensive. This algorithm assures
finding a globally optimal path in the images because it has been widely used for finding roads in
satellite images.
In ICESat­2 lake datasets, the main objective is to determine the bottom part of the lake, which
can be fulfilled using the shortest path extraction algorithm. This algorithm can find the shortest
path by traversing from left to right on the dataset. The shortest path will be equivalent to the top
layer of the bottom part of the lake. The data should be converted into an equidistant set of pixels
where a space in the datasets corresponding to latitude and height can be considered white values.
Any data points can be considered grey values. This process is called pixel subdivision. Under
those circumstances, the goal will be to find the minimum sum of pixels having a grey value while
traversing from left to right. [15]
Mathematical Foundation
for 1 ≤i ≤m and 1 ≤j ≤n, Let X(i, j) be the all the grey values in m ∗n dataset where m
represents the latitude values and n represents the height in the dataset. Therefore, a pthorderpath
drawn from any (i, j) in X to left most part of the lake will be defined as:
P = (1, j1), (2, j2), (3, j3)...(i, ji)
(4.13)
with 1 ≤jr ≤n for r = 1, 2, ....i
That is, P is the set of pixels that contains one point from each column in X and ends at the leftmost
point of X. Such path always proceeds in one direction and therefore, the length of the path is simply
the sum of grey values of the dataset in the path:
i
∑
r=1
X(r, jr)
(4.14)
As we are aiming to find the shortest path from left to right, path P should minimize
m
∑
r=1
X(r, jr)
(4.15)
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
15
==PAGE:21==
First step to design the algorithm is define the distance matrix Y (i, j) from each point (i, j) to the
leftmost column of the dataset. For the base case of i = 1, there is only path ending at (1, j) which
is a single pixel path P = (1, j). So, for all j = 1, ..., n,
Y (1, j) = X(1, j)
(4.16)
The above equation is the base property for the recursion implementation in this algorithm. Using
this property for i ≥2, any path to left most column from point X(i, j) must include one of its
p neighbours from the adjacent column. Therefore, the minimum distance for any point (i, j) to
left most part will be the sum of the minimum distances for each neighbour p in a column. This
generates the basic recursion equation:
Y (i, j) = X(i, j) + mink∈pY (i −1, j + k)
(4.17)
Where p is the set of neighbours in the adjacent columns on both sides of the row, for instance, for
p=2, the total number of neighbours will be (2p + 1), i.e., 5. Hence, k ∈[−p, p].
Using equation 4.16 and 4.17 together creates a recursive calculation of Y (i, j) for all i and j.
In order to achieve the minimum in 4.17, algorithm needs a back­tracking phase which can be
evaluated as:
k(i, j) = argmink∈pY (i −1, j + k)
(4.18)
Finally, the minimum length from left­to­right can be calculated as
min1≤j≤nY (m, j)
(4.19)
One important constraint that has to be taken in consideration is Y (i, j) values does not exist for
j < 1 and j > n.
Based on the syntactical analysis, the space complexity of this algorithm is O(2mn) for both Y
and K arrays. However, for the time complexity, If the total number of neighbours is kn then
complexity will be O(Knmn)
The shortest path extraction algorithm can be defined as:
Algorithm 1: Shortest Path Extraction Algorithm
Input: Data points corresponding to height and latitude
Output: Shortest path position array, length of the shortest path
Data: Data matrix
/* Forward Pass
*/
1 for j in 1,2, ... ,n do
2
Y(1,j) ←X(1, j)
3 for i in 2,3, ... ,m do
4
for j in 1,2, ... ,n do
5
Y (i, j) ←X(i,j) + mink∈pY (i −1, j + k)
6
k(i, j) ←(the value of k which achieves this minimum)
/* Back-tracking
*/
7 Jm ←argmin1≤j≤nY (m, j)
8 for i in m,m­1, ... ,1 do
9
Ji ←Ji+1 + k(i + 1, Ji+1)
16
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:22==
Figure 4.2: Shortest path extraction algorithm on bottom part of Lake 257
Despite having abilities to find the shortest path from the left to the right part of the lake, it does
not have any smoothness constraint on the path. For instance, as shown in fig 4.2 which is an
implementation of shortest path extraction algorithm on bottom part of Lake 257, algorithm is
trying to take all the top points from the bottom part of the lake and therefore, has many irregular
edges.
Regularized Shortest Path Extraction Algorithm
In order to solve issues in ordinary shortest­path extraction algorithm, several researchers have
attempted to regularise the path extraction to increase smoothness and shift extrapolated lines by
including a penalty for roughness (mentioned in previous research). In our research, the concept
of a ”time­delayed” dynamic programming algorithm is used to find a smooth shortest path from
left to right across the dataset matrix. Same as the ordinary shortest­path extraction algorithm, this
improved version also needs pixel subdivision. [15]
Mathematical Foundation
In regularized shortest path extraction, regularization parameter should be added as a penalty to
each path in between columns which will help in measuring its roughness. Therefore, roughness
for the path P = (1, j1), (2, j2), (3, j3)...(i, ji) will be defined as [29], [30]:
i−1
∑
r=2
(jr−1 −2jr + jr+1)2
(4.20)
and therefore, the length of the path will be defined as:
i
∑
r=1
X(r, jr) + λ
i−1
∑
r=2
(jr−1 −2jr + jr+1)2
(4.21)
Where λ is the regularization parameter.
In order to extract the shortest path, the optimal λ value must be selected by the user, which can
maintain a balance between roughness and correctness.
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
17
==PAGE:23==
Similar to ordinary shortest path extract algorithm, we need to define Y (i, j, k) as the distance
from each point (i, j) to left most part of the lake via (i −1, j + k) for k ∈[­p,p]. Conclusively,
Y represents a 3D matrix with dimensions m × n × P.
Hence, base condition for recursive algorithm changes to:
Y (2, j, k) = X(2, j) + X(1, j + k)
(4.22)
where j = 1.....n and k = −p.....p and holds on some constraints: j + k < 1 and j + k > n.
In order to perform recursion for Y (i, j, k), path from (i, j) via (i −1, j + k) must pass through
(i −2, j + k + l) for some |l| ≤p. From equation 4.20 and taking both l and k in consideration,
regularization factor is defined as λ(l −k)2 which generates the equation
Y (i, j, k) = X(i, j) + minl∈pY (i −1, j + k, l) + λ(l −k)2
(4.23)
Following to the recursion, To achieve the minimum in 4.23, algorithm needs a back­tracking phase
which can be evaluated as:
l(i, j, k) = argminl∈pY (i −1, j + k, l) + λ(l −k)2
(4.24)
The space complexity will be the same as the ordinary shortest path extract algorithm for both
Y and l arrays, i.e., O(2mn). However, the time complexity is O(k2
nmn) (kn is used for both l
and k) for forward pass and O(m) for the backward pass. Hence, the overall time complexity is
O(k2
nmn).
Finally, the regularized shortest path extraction algorithm can be defined as:
Algorithm 2: Regularized Shortest Path Extraction Algorithm
Input: Data points corresponding to height and latitude
Output: Shortest path position array, length of the shortest path
Data: Data matrix
/* Forward Pass
*/
1 for j in 1,2, ... ,n do
2
for k in ­p, ... ,p do
3
Y(2,j,k) ←X(2, j) + X(1, j + k)
4 for i in 3, ... ,m do
5
for j in 1, ... ,n do
6
for k in ­p, .... ,p do
7
Y (i, j, k) ←X(i,j) + minl∈pY (i −1, j + k, l) + λ(l −k)2
8
L(i, j, k) ←(the value of L which achieves this minimum)
/* Back-tracking
*/
9 (Jm, Km) ←argmin(j,k)Y (m, j, k)
10 for i in m­1, ... ,2 do
11
Ki ←L(i+1,Ji+1, Ki+1)
12
Ji−1 ←Ji + Ki
18
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:24==
5
Implementation
5.1
Data Cleaning Approaches
The following subsections contain different approaches which are taken into consideration to clean
the data efficiently. The main objective is to remove the background noise from the dataset and
maintain consistency in the data. In total, five approaches have been taken into account, out of
which two of them are distance­based approaches and the remaining ones are density­based ap­
proaches.
5.1.1
Kernel Density estimation on whole dataset
The data Cleaning process is established using the direct use of kernel density estimation approach
on the whole dataset. This approach is applied for the height dimension (vertically) and extracted
the noise from the dataset. Judging by the results, This direct approach seemed ineffective because
out of 15 datasets, only two datasets responded positively by removing some noise from the dataset.
Even for those datasets, it could not provide acceptable results.
As shown in figure 5.1, This approach could only remove some background noise from the top and
bottom part of the lake. It can also be inferred that the bottom part of the lake is also losing some
valuable data points. Therefore, this approach was considered to be inefficient and incomplete.
(a) Lake representation before data cleaning
(b) Lake representation after cleaning
Figure 5.1: ATL03_20200706005932_01630805_003_01_shape1116_gt1r
5.1.2
Kernel Density estimation on splits of dataset
One of the main reasons KDE did not work on the whole dataset is that data varies a lot spatially
concerning both dimensions (height and latitude). Therefore, data chunks have been created of a
specific size, which depends on the size of the dataset. Hence, Data split function (mentioned in
the fundamental concepts) is used to create the chunks of data along the latitude axis so that KDE
can be applied on each chunk to the height axis, and noise can be segregated.
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
19
==PAGE:25==
(a) Lake dataset divided into bins
(b) Lake dataset after cleaning
Figure 5.2: Lake 257
(a) KDE on 1st bin of dataset
(b) KDE on 2nd bin of dataset
(c) KDE on 3rd bin of dataset
(d) KDE on 4th bin of dataset
(e) KDE on 5th bin of dataset
(f) KDE on 6th bin of dataset
Figure 5.3: Density graph for each bin
As shown in figure 5.2, dataset has been divided into six bins using the data split function, and after
applying KDE on each bin (shown in figure 5.3), the background noise is completely removed.
In figure 5.3, the cut­off line is used to remove low­density points because lake cross­section data
points are in high density across the region. However, this is not sufficient to handle all the datasets
because all the datasets did not respond positively. As mentioned in figure 5.4, there are some
datasets where valuable points have also been removed, whereas some could not handle the noise
properly.
20
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:26==
(a) Missing points in the dataset
(b) Ambiguity in background noise reduction
Figure 5.4: Lake 257
5.1.3
Kernel Density estimation after splitting data into surface and
bottom part of the lake
It has been observed that there is a high­density variation in the data points, due to which it is
getting challenging to clear the noise efficiently. Therefore, an approach for separately evaluating
both surface and the bottom part has been taken into account, leading to the splitting of data between
surface and bottom data. As surface data has high density, KDE is used along the height dimension
(vertically) to separate the high­density segment using the cutoff line.
Some tests were made to select the optimal cut­off line:
Test 1: Used mean + constant for cutoff
• Missing a lot of data points.
Test 2: Used (mean ­ std) + constant for cutoff
• Recover some missing points but also increasing noise in some datasets.
Test 3: Used median + constant for cutoff
• Recovered some missing points and keeping the noise in check.
Final Cutoff is defined as:
Cuttoff = Median(density(data)) + constant
(5.1)
After dividing the dataset into the surface and bottom parts, the data cleaning process has been
applied on both parts by taking one at a time, split the data and finally apply KDE on each split.
Moreover, the data split function has been tested numerous times with different parameters to get
the best possible function.
Test 1: Number_of_splits = 15 (Same for all the datasets)
• Couldn’t remove outliers from some datasets.
Test 2: Number_of_splits = length(dataset)0.333
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
21
==PAGE:27==
• No significant change from the previous test.
Test 3: Number_of_splits = length(dataset)0.5
• Add extra noise in the dataset.
Test 4: Number_of_splits = length(dataset)0.25
• Removes most of the noise properly but missing some data points.
After analyzing tests, it can be inferred that Number_of_splits = length(dataset)0.25 is the
best option to use as a data split function.
(a) Lake 257_2019
(b) Lake 257_2020
Figure 5.5: Data cleaning after separating data into surface and bottom parts
It can be seen in figure 5.5 that the noise has appropriately removed, but at the same time, there
are a lot of missing points at the edges which are supposed to connect the top and bottom part of
the lake.
5.1.4
DBSCAN and GMM analysis on the dataset
In order to solve the missing data problem, distance­based clustering methods have taken into
consideration which clusters the data based on the distance between the data points. Because the
surface points are densely packed, the idea was to use a distance­based approach to separate the
surface and bottom part. Based on the figure 5.6, clustering algorithms are working fine with
separating surface and bottom parts, but there are still some overlapping points. Besides, these
approaches could not handle the noise properly and clustering it with surface data.
5.1.5
Sliding window approach to split data into surface data and
bed data
After iterating through multiple approaches, it can be inferred that splitting the lake into the surface
and bottom part without any loss of data is a necessity to remove noise efficiently. So, instead of
using any defined algorithm for partitioning, a self­designed sliding window approach has been
used. The main idea of the algorithm is to slide the window vertically over the lake so that the
index at which the window contains the highest number of data points will be used to extract the
22
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.6: DBSCAN Analysis
surface part. It has been designed in algorithm 14 as follows:
Algorithm 3: Sliding Window Algorithm
Result: surface_data_points, bottom_data_points
1 initialization;
2 size_window ←1.4
3 data ←sorted data by height
4 start_point ←min(data[’height’])
5 end_point ←max(data[’height’])
6 window_range ←array(start_point, end_point+1, size_window/4)
7 count_max ←0
8 for i in length(window_range)/4 do
9
count_values ←number of points in the selected window
10
if count_values > count_max then
11
count_max ←count_values
12
surface_data ←data in the selected window
13
end
14 end
15
After splitting the data into the surface and bottom part of the lake, the data cleaning process has
been applied on the bottom part, split the data horizontally into chunks and finally apply KDE on
each chunk. Best parameters for data split function and KDE have been selected from the tests
mentioned in section 5.1.3.
As shown in figure 5.7, noise has been remove from the data efficiently without any loss of data
points on the edges of the lake. Hence, This method is considered optimal for data cleaning,
and further calculations and algorithmic implementation have been done after this data cleaning
approach.
Furthermore, the algorithm for cleaning the bottom part of the lake using kernel density estimation
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
23
==PAGE:29==
(a) Lake 257
(b) Lake 5289
Figure 5.7: Cleaned data after separating data into surface and bottom part
is mentioned in algorithm 4 as follows:
Algorithm 4: Data cleaning using kernel density estimation
Result: Cleaned data(bottom part of the lake)
1 initialization;
2 for data in bottom_data_points do
3
split_data_array ←data_split_function(data)
4
for split_data in split_data_array do
5
density ←gaussian_kde(split_data)
6
cutt­off ←median(density) + constant
7
filtered_data ←split_data[where(density>cut­off)]
8
end
9 end
24
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:30==
5.2
Outlier Detection
As it can be seen in the lake cross­sections that there are a bunch of outlying data points present
in the dataset. These outliers can be detected by applying the kernel density estimation algorithm
horizontally over the whole dataset. The idea was to find the first minima in the dataset and remove
all the points behind the minima point.
(a) Lake Cross Section
(b) Density graph
Figure 5.8: Outlier detection for lake 257_2019
(a) Lake Cross Section
(b) Density graph
Figure 5.9: Outlier detection for lake 257_2020
For instance, in figure 5.8 and 5.9, density has been calculated for both the lakes on the horizontal
axis in which the initial peak is representing the outlying data. This information can be used to
eliminate the outliers by using the first minima after the first peak as a cut­off point.
However, in this research, removing outliers has not been taken into consideration to check the
robustness of the mathematical model and make it more efficient to work appropriately on an
unseen dataset that can have these kinds of problems.
5.3
Algorithmic implementation on ICESAT­2 Dataset
Regularized Shortest Path Extraction can be implemented only on equidistant pixels, represented in
the matrix form. More precisely, data should be fitted into rows and columns where each cell con­
tains some value corresponding to the availability of data points at that particular position. Hence,
data preprocessing function has been designed to fulfil the requirements of the RSPE algorithm.
5.3.1
Data Pre­processing
The main idea of preprocessing is to convert the ICESat­2 dataset for each lake into an equally
spaced cell matrix that contains a value of 1 in the cell where latitude and height values of the lake
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
25
==PAGE:31==
satisfy the condition. The remaining cells should be filled with any significant value, e.g. 100. The
first step towards this matrix is to find rows and columns of the data matrix containing equidistant
values of latitude and height of the lake mentioned in algorithm 5.
If the number of lake data points in the cell range [lat, height] to [lat + lat_cell_size, height +
height_cell_size] are zero then impute the value 100 and if they are greater than 0 then impute
value 1 in the matrix cell.
After finishing the preprocessing part, the lake will be represented in the matrix form in which data
is encapsulated in the equidistant matrix cells. However, it is imperative to choose the parameters
for cell size optimally using brute force not to affect the lake’s physical properties. For instance, in
algorithm 5, values like 0.005 for latitude and 0.08 for height have been chosen using brute force
after multiple iterations. In figure 5.10, it can be seen that both representations of lake 257 have
almost the same structure with minimum loss of data properties.
Algorithm 5: Matrix Construction Function
Input: Dataframe containing height and latitude values for lake points
Output: rows and columns for data matrix
Data: ICESAT­2 lake dataset
1 value ←1500/len(data)
2 latitude_cell_size ←0.005*value
3 height_cell_size ←0.08*value
// all equidistant latitude values for columns in matrix
4 column_matrix ←array(min(data[’lat’]), max(data[’lat’]),latitude_cell_size)
// all equidistant height values for rows in matrix
5 row_matrix ←array(min(data[’height’]), max(data[’height’]),height_cell_size)
(a) Before Pre­processing
(b) After Pre­processing
Figure 5.10: lake 257 without surface
5.3.2
Regularized Shortest Path Extraction (RSPE) on the bottom
part of the lake
After preprocessing data into an equally spaced cell­matrix, regularized shortest path extraction
algorithm 2 has been used to find the bottom part of the lake. This recursion based dynamic pro­
gramming algorithm extracts all the paths from the left to the right part of the lake by iterating
through existing photon points in the cells and then optimizing the process to find the shortest
path using the backtracking process. This Algorithm relies on two hyperparameters (number of
neighbours, lambda value) which are vital components to find the optimal path. The number of
neighbours (p) is a search parameter that is a deciding factor for the lookup of the following se­
lected cells. In contrast, lambda value (λ) helps insert the bias to increase the smoothness of the
26
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:32==
Algorithm 6: Linear Curve Fitting Algorithm
Input: data_matrix for surface points
Output: predicted surface points
// Curve_fit and predict functions are used from sklearn python library
1 a,b ←curve_fit(a ∗x + b, data_matrix)
2 for data in data_matrix do
3
predicted_surface_points = predict(data, a, b)
path. The best possible values for both these parameters have been selected using another machine
learning approach (cross­validation) described in section 5.3.7.
Algorithm explained:
The Algorithm starts with initializing two new matrices; Y and L. Y matrix contain the distance
for each point from the left­most part of the lake, whereas the L matrix contains boolean values for
the point in each column, which achieves the minimum. Furthermore, algorithm is divided into
two parts: forward pass and backward pass, where forward pass calculates Y and L matrix and
backward pass finds the shortest path.
• Forward Pass: First step towards creating the recursive loop for the forward pass is to
initialize the second row of the Y matrix by filling the distances for points in the X matrix.
Then set a recursive loop from the third row where each row stores the distance from previ­
ous Y matrix row points. Simultaneously, it also adds the regularization parameter in each
calculated distance, followed by selecting the minimum value. L matrix keeps track of all
points and stores the index for values that achieves minimum in Y.
• Back Tracking: This process is used in selecting the shortest path by iteratively moving
backwards in Y and L matrix. The last point of the shortest path is the point (m, Jm) which
achieves the minimum and second last point (m −1, Jm−1) is should satisfy the condition
(Jm−1 = Jm + Km). Similarly, the third last point can now be calculated as Jm−2 =
Jm−1 + Km−1 with Km−1 = L(m, Jm, Km). This process can now be repeated to find all
points(r, Jr) on the regularised shortest path.
5.3.3
Linear Regression on the surface part of the lake
After preprocessing the data into an equal space cell­matrix, a Linear regression algorithm has
been implemented to fit a straight line over surface data of the lake. Furthermore, surface data
shows a linear trend that makes it sufficient to fit data with linear curve fit algorithms. In the wake
of this research, the curve_fit function has been used from scipy.optimize python library. The
objective function, defined as ax + b, is used to predict the curve points and the pseudocode for
linear regression is mentioned in algorithm 6.
5.3.4
Lake height prediction
As stated in algorithm 7, both linear regression and regularized shortest path extraction algorithms
have been used together for the surface and bottom part of the lake. This algorithm takes data
for all the lakes and fits the prediction line, which results in surface fitting line points and bottom
fitting line points. These points can be further used for depth prediction of the lake using algorithm
8. Consequently, algorithm 8 inputs the output from algorithm 7, iterate over predicted fitting line
data from all the lakes and results in­depth prediction individually for all lakes.
Algorithm 9 is designed in the same way as algorithm 8 used for the digitized height values where
test data has been created digitally from images of the lakes.
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
27
==PAGE:33==
Algorithm 7: Prediction of surface and bottom points
/* p is number of neighbours
*/
Input: Lake_surface_data, lake_bottom_data , p, lambda_value
Output: predicted_surface_points, predicted_bottom_points
1 for data_surface, data_bottom in (Lake_surface_data, lake_bottom_data) do
/* Bottom part prediction
*/
// Algorithm 5
2
row_bottom, column_bottom ←matrix_construction(data_bottom)
3
data_matrix_bottom ←Matrix(row_bottom, column_bottom)
// Algorithm 2
4
predicted_bottom_points ←RPSE(data_matrix_bottom)
/* Surface part prediction
*/
// Algorithm 5
5
row_surface, column_surface ←matrix_construction(data_surface)
6
data_matrix_surface ←Matrix(row_surface, column_surface)
// Algorithm 6
7
predicted_surface_points
←linear_curve_fit(a ∗x + b, data_matrix_surface)
Algorithm 8: Calculate predicted depth
Input: predicted_surface_points, predicted_bottom_points
Output: predicted_depth
1 for data_name in predicted_bottom_points do
2
bottom_point_h ←predicted_bottom_points[data_name]
3
surface_point_h ←predicted_surface_points[data_name]
4
predicted_depth[data_name] ←surface_point_h −bottom_point_h
Algorithm 9: Calculate test depth
Input: test_surface_points, test_bottom_points
Output: test_depth
1 for data_name in test_bottom_points do
2
bottom_point_h ←test_bottom_points[data_name]
3
surface_point_h ←test_surface_points[data_name]
4
test_depth[data_name] ←surface_point_h −bottom_point_h
28
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:34==
5.3.5
Quality estimation parameters
In order to assess the results, some quality parameters are used, which explains the variance from
test data and assists in improving the algorithm while using cross­validation. Three algorithms are
used for a better understanding of predictions from the data. These are:
• Mean Squared Error: It is a measure of the quality of a predictor, which measures the
average of the squares of residuals, i.e., the average squared difference between the predicted
values and the actual value. It is also called a risk function and is always greater than or
equal to zero because it is derived from the square of Euclidean distance. It comprises both
the variance and bias of a predictor. It can be defined as:
MSE = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
(Yi −Y p
i )2
(5.2)
Y is the vector of observed values, Y p have predicted values over the observed vector, and
n is the total number of observed values.
In this research, MSE has been calculated over predicted depth and test depth values for all
the lake datasets as shown in algorithm 10. It has also been used as the deciding factor for es­
timating the best combination of hyperparameters (p, lambda) and parametric combination
having minimum MSE being selected as the best one for predictions.
• R­squared Error: It is a statistical measure that represents the proportion of the variance
for a dependent variable that’s explained by an independent variable or variables in a re­
gression model [31]. An R­squared of 100% means all the test data is completely explained
by the predicted data points or fitting lines. It may also be known as the coefficient of
determination, and the formula can be defined as
R2 = 1 −unexplained variation
Total variation
(5.3)
where unexplained variation is ∑
i(yi −fi)2 and explained variance can be written as
∑
i(yi −ym)2. Note that, y is the vector of observed values where as f is the predicted set
of values.
This parameter has been used in [14] as a quality measure for prediction of lakes which is
why, for the sake of comparison in section ??, r­squared error is being calculated in this
research as well. Algorithm for r­squared is mentioned in 11.
• Prediction Accuracy: In order to calculate how accurate is the predicted fitting line to the
test fitting line, a forecast accuracy formula has been used, which is formulated as:
Accuracy = 1 −Actual −forecast
Actual
∗100
(5.4)
where test height is used as an actual value and prediction height is used as the forecast
value. The algorithm for prediction accuracy is mentioned in 12.
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
29
==PAGE:35==
Algorithm 10: Mean Squared Error (mse)
Input: test_depth, predicted_depth
Output: error_rate
1 sum ←0
2 counter ←number of lakes
/* mean squared error formula
*/
3 for data_name in predicted_depth do
4
sum ←sum + (test_depth[data_name] −predicted_depth[data_name])2
5 error_rate ←sum/counter
Algorithm 11: R­squared Error
Input: test_depth, predicted_depth
Output: r_squared_error
1 sum1 ←0
2 sum2 ←0
3 sum3 ←0
4 counter ←number of lakes
/* R-squared error formula
*/
5 for data_name in test_depth do
6
sum1 = sum1 + test_depth[data_name]
7 mean_observed = sum1/counter
8 for data_name in test_depth do
9
sum2 ←sum2 + (test_depth[data_name] −predicted_depth[data_name])2
10
sum3 ←sum3 + (test_depth[data_name] −mean_observed)2
11 r_squared_error ←(1 −sum2/sum3)
Algorithm 12: Prediction accuracy
Input: test_depth, predicted_depth
Output: prediction_accuracy
1 sum ←0
2 sum_prediction ←0
/* percentage accuracy
*/
3 for data_name in predicted_depth do
4
sum ←sum + abs(test_depth[data_name] −predicted_depth[data_name])
5
sum_prediction ←sum_prediction + predicted_depth[data_name]
6 prediction_accuracy ←(1 −sum/sum_prediction)∗100
5.3.6
Hold out method implementation
Multiple approaches have been used to search for the best combination of hyperparameters and
select and evaluate models based on their performance. One such approach is holdout method
which is the most straightforward sort of method to evaluate a model. In this method, the dataset is
divided into two sets, the Training set and the Test set, where the training set is what the model is
trained on, and the test set is used to see how well that model performs on unseen data. Generally,
80% of data accounts for training and the remaining 20% of the data for testing. However, it also
depends on the size of the dataset and user expectations from the model. The holdout method is
suitable for large datasets and often taken as an initial model for selection because it takes less
computational power and time to run than other cross­validation approaches.
30
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.11: Hold­out Method
In figure 5.11, it is shown that one split is set aside for training whereas the other for evaluation.
This technique is quite efficient when comparing the models based on the model accuracy on the
test set and selecting the best model.
The process can be stated as follows [32]:
• Split the dataset into training and test set (preferably 80­20% split)
• Train the model on training set for multiple combinations of hyperparameters and select the
best one
• Test the model on the test set with the best combination of hyperparameters
• Trains the final model on all the datasets to get a generalized model for unseen datasets
At first, a randomization approach has been used in the algorithm 13 which is taking 3 out of 15
lakes at random for the test set and the remaining lakes for the training set. Subsequently, the
training dataset is used to select the best combination of parameters, and the selected combination
is used for the prediction over the test dataset. As a result, predicted depths, the best combination
of parameters and minimum error have been extracted for the test data.
Based on the mentioned process, algorithm 13 has been designed as follows:
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
31
==PAGE:37==
Algorithm 13: Hold out Method
Input: Lake_surface_data, lake_bottom_data, test_surface_points, test_bottom_points
Output: best_combination, best_predicted_depths, minimum_error
1 neighbours ←[2, 5]
2 lambda_values ←[50, 80, 100]
// any maximum value in min_error
3 min_error ←100
4 size_train ←length(Lake_surface_data)∗0.8
5 size_test ←length(Lake_surface_data)∗0.2
/* map all neighbours with all lambda_values
*/
6 combinations ←cross_map(neighbours, lambda_values)
/* note that in test data should contains datasets which are not in training
data
*/
7 train_data_surface ←random(Lake_surface_data, size_train)
8 test_data_surface ←random(Lake_surface_data, size_test)
9 train_data_bottom ←random(Lake_bottom_data, size_train)
10 test_data_bottom ←random(Lake_bottom_data, size_test)
11 for combination in combinations do
/* Algorithm 7
*/
12
predicted_surface_bottom(train_data_surface, train_data_bottom, combination)
/* Algorithm 8
*/
13
predicted_depth(predicted_surface_points, predicted_bottom_points)
/* Algorithm 9
*/
14
test_depth(test_surface_points, test_bottom_points)
/* Algorithm 10
*/
15
error ←MSE(test_depth, predicted_depth)
16
if error < min_error then
17
min_error ←error
18
best_combination ←combination
/* Algorithm 7
*/
19 predicted_surface_bottom(test_data_surface, test_data_bottom, best_combination)
/* Algorithm 8
*/
20 best_predicted_depths
←predicted_depth(predicted_surface_points, predicted_bottom_points)
/* Algorithm 9
*/
21 test_depths ←test_depth(test_surface_points, test_bottom_points)
/* Algorithm 10
*/
22 minimum_error ←MSE(test_depths, best_predicted_depths)
32
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:38==
Despite its accuracy, there lies a possibility that the current technique may result in overfitting of
the model to the test dataset. For instance, the models are prepared to improve model precision on
the test dataset, considering that the test dataset represents the unseen datasets. However, the test
error occasionally turns into the one­sided assessment of generalization error. Hence, The final
model fails to predict well on the future dataset as it is prepared to fit well concerning the test data.
5.3.7
Cross validation method implementation
In order to counter the overfitting problem in the hold out method, a cross­validation approach
has been used to test the effectiveness of a machine learning model [33]. This method takes a
sample of data to keep aside for later use of testing the model, and the remaining part of the data
is used to train the model. The most common techniques used for cross­validation are Train_Test
Split approach (randomly split the complete data into training and test sets) and K­Folds Cross
Validation.
In this research, we have used the K­Fold cross­validation approach to evaluate the results because
of several reasons [34]:
• It generally results in a less biased model compare to other methods
• It ensures that every observation from the original dataset has the chance of appearing in
the training and test set
• It is considered to be one of the best approaches for limited input data
K­Fold cross­validation method follows the steps mentioned below:
• Split the entire dataset into K folds (Note that the value of k depends on the size of the
dataset) The higher value of K leads to a less biased model, but because of large variance,
it might also lead to overfitting), whereas the lower value of K can end up becoming a
train­test split approach
• Fit the model using the K­1 folds and validate the model using the remaining Kth fold
• Repeat this process until every K­fold serve as the test set and then take the average of
quality estimation parameters (model accuracy or validation error). These parameters can
act as a performance metric for the model
The only drawback of this approach is that it can be computationally costly for large datasets. In
that case, it becomes crucial to choose the k value wisely.
Given below is the algorithm for implementation over lake datasets using the K­fold cross­validation
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
33
==PAGE:39==
method.
Algorithm 14: K­fold cross validation Method
Input: Lake_surface_data, Lake_bottom_data, test_surface_points, test_bottom_points
Output: best_combination, final_predicted_depths, test_error, r2_error, pred_accuracy
1 neighbours ←[2, 5]
2 lambda_values ←[50, 80, 100]
// any maximum value in min_error
3 size_train, size_test ←len(Lake_surface_data)∗0.8, len(Lake_surface_data)∗0.2
/* map all neighbours with all lambda_values
*/
4 combinations ←cross_map(neighbours, lambda_values)
5 sum_error ←0
6 for train_data_surface, test_data_surface, train_data_bottom, test_data_bottom in
cross_validation_split(Lake_surface_data, Lake_bottom_data, size_test) do
7
min_error ←100
8
for combination in combinations do
/* Algorithm 7
*/
9
predicted_surface_bottom(train_data_surface, train_data_bottom, combination)
/* Algorithm 8
*/
10
predicted_depth(predicted_surface_points, predicted_bottom_points)
/* Algorithm 9
*/
11
test_depth(test_surface_points, test_bottom_points)
/* Algorithm 10
*/
12
error ←MSE(test_depth, predicted_depth)
13
if error < min_error then
14
min_error ←error
15
best_combination ←combination
/* Algorithm 7
*/
16
predicted_surface_bottom(test_data_surface, test_data_bottom, best_combination)
/* Algorithm 8
*/
17
best_predicted_depths
←predicted_depth(predicted_surface_points, predicted_bottom_points)
/* Algorithm 9
*/
18
test_depths ←test_depth(test_surface_points, test_bottom_points)
/* Algorithm 10
*/
19
minimum_error ←MSE(test_depths, best_predicted_depths)
/* Algorithm 12
*/
20
prediction_accuracy(test_depths, best_predicted_depths)
21
sum_error ←sum_error + minimum_error
22 average_test_error ←sum_error/n_CV fold
/* testing on all the lakes
*/
/* using algorithm 7, 8, 9, 10 in line 22, 23, 24, 25 respectively
*/
23 predicted_surface_bottom(Lake_surface_data, Lake_bottom_data, best_combination)
24 final_predicted_depths
←predicted_depth(predicted_surface_points, predicted_bottom_points)
25 test_depths ←test_depth(test_surface_points, test_bottom_points)
26 test_error ←MSE(test_depths, final_predicted_depths)
/* Algorithm 11
*/
27 r2_error ←r_squared_error(test_depths, final_predicted_depths)
/* Algorithm 12
*/
28 pred_accuracy ←prediction_accuracy(test_depths, final_predicted_depths)
34
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:40==
Figure 5.12: 2­level Cross Validation Method
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
35
==PAGE:41==
6
Results
In this research, 15 datasets over five different lakes have been investigated, recorded in 2019
and 2020. There is high variability between the depth of the lakes, where the shallowest lake is
around 3m deep, and the deepest lake is around 11m deep. In order to remove background noise and
irrelevant data points from the dataset, multiple data cleaning approaches have been used revolving
around the kernel density estimation approach and some distance­based approaches. Furthermore,
regularized shortest path extraction (RSPE) algorithm and linear curve fitting algorithm have been
used according to the holdout and cross­validation approach to predict the fitting line for the surface
and bottom part of the lake.
6.1
Analysis using Holdout method
Twelve lakes are used for training both RSPE and linear curve fitting algorithms, and the remaining
three lakes are used as testing data. The algorithm is training RSPE and linear curve fitting models
for all possible pairs of hyperparameters (neighbours, lambda values) and looking for the best
combination of hyperparameters. Based on the results, the number of neighbours and best lambda
value is estimated to be 5 and 80, respectively. The average test error in the prediction of the
bottom part of the lake is estimated to be 0.336. Note that this error is calculated over test data,
and average training errors for all the combinations of hyperparameters is mentioned in the table
6.1.
Table 6.1: Quality estimation parameters for Training data (12 randomly selected lakes)
Combinations
Training error
Training accuracy
R2 value
(n_neigh & λ)
(Average(meters))
(Average(%))
2 & 50
0.512
90.665
0.922
2 & 80
0.512
90.665
0.922
2 & 100
0.535
90.771
0.918
5 & 50
0.265
93.780
0.959
5 & 80
0.265
93.780
0.959
5 & 100
0.326
91.3304
0.950
Based on the results mentioned in table 6.1, it can interpret that algorithm has shown the best results
for two parametric combinations (5 & 50 and 5 & 80) in terms of all quality parameters. There can
be two reasons for getting the two best combinations:
1. Difference between lambda values 50 and 80 for implementing the RSPE algorithm is mea­
gre.
2. Random selection of datasets for training the model is not considering complex datasets,
resulting in limited search space.
36
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:42==
Nevertheless, the algorithm considered (5 & 80) as the best combination for hyperparameters which
is used for testing and displayed acceptable results mentioned in table 6.2.
Table 6.2: Quality estimation parameters for Test data (3 randomly selected lakes)
Combinations
Test error
Test accuracy
R2 value
(n_neigh & λ)
(Average(meters))
(Average(%))
5 & 80
0.085
92.989
0.8350
6.2
Analysis using Cross­validation method
Lakes are divided into 12:3 for training and testing using both RSPE and linear curve fitting al­
gorithms. However, the cross­validation approach makes sure to give every lake dataset a chance
to be in the test set by dividing all the lakes into five­folds and test one fold in each iteration, as
shown in figure 5.12. Therefore, there are five iterations where the algorithm is training RSPE and
linear curve fitting models in each iteration for all possible pairs of hyperparameters (neighbours,
lambda values) and looking for the best combination of hyperparameters. Based on the results,
4 out of 5 times, the number of neighbours and best lambda value is estimated to be 5 and 80,
respectively. Note that the average test error, prediction accuracy and R2 value is calculated over
the test data for each iteration as shown in 6.3 whereas quality estimation parametric values for
each combination in every iteration in mentioned in appendix A.1.
Table 6.3: Quality estimation parameters on Training data for all iterations in cross vali­
dation approach
Iterations
Combinations
Training error
Training accuracy
R2 value
(n_neigh & λ)
(Average(meters))
(Average(%))
Iteration 1
5 & 80
0.3077
91.2586
0.8651
Iteration 2
5 & 80
0.0495
98.1583
0.9955
Iteration 3
5 & 80
0.5645
90.0559
0.8140
Iteration 4
5 & 50
0.4564
87.4715
0.8317
Iteration 5
5 & 80
0.3797
88.6234
0.8582
After training the data for five iterations, it can be inferred that the best combination of the num­
ber of neighbours and lambda values should be (5 & 80) respectively as the only iteration four
chose (5 & 50) with an error rate of 0.45m in the depth calculation. It can be noted from table 6.3
that model is performing exceptionally well in iteration 2 where cross­validation is taking lakes:
(2020_shape1116_gt1l, 2020_shape4788_gt2r and 2020_shape4788_gt2l) in the test set. The rea­
son for this behaviour is less background noise and well­defined curves in these datasets. With
an average accuracy of 91.1135%, the average test error is calculated as 0.3515. It appears to be
lower than the holdout method, which makes sense given that the holdout method only tested lakes
once, making it one of the best cases possible. Whereas in the cross­validation, every lake is going
in test set sequentially, and the final test error is the average of all the iterations.
As the test set only contains three lakes and is very small to generalize the results, the algorithm
has been tested over all the datasets together using the best combination of parameters. Based on
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
37
==PAGE:43==
Table 6.4: Quality estimation parameters for Test data (all lakes)
Combinations
Test error
Test accuracy
R2 value
(n_neigh & λ)
(Average(meters))
(Average(%))
5 & 80
0.2411
93.706
0.9610
the results, both holdout and cross­validation have selected (5 & 80) as the best combination of
parameters, therefore using this combination, quality parameters have been calculated and results
are mentioned in table 6.4. The predicted depth for all lakes is mentioned in 6.5 where the predicted
results are having an accuracy of 93.706%.
6.3
Result Analysis
Table 6.5: Comparison between predicted depth and digital depths for 15 lakes
Lakes
Predicted depth
Digital depths
Difference
(in meters)
(in meters)
(in meters)
2020_shape1116_gt2l
4.1963
3.7819
0.4143
2020_shape1116_gt1r
4.6195
4.4770
0.1424
2020_shape257_gt3l
7.3372
6.4821
0.8551
2020_shape1116_gt1l
4.2625
4.2963
­0.0338
2020_shape4788_gt2r
11.8126
11.9034
­0.0908
2020_shape4788_gt2l
10.9601
10.5869
0.3732
2020_shape257_gt2l
7.4951
8.7147
­1.2196
2019_shape5289_gt1l
6.0708
5.7445
0.3262
2020_shape963_gt2r
5.1543
4.8386
0.3156
2020_shape257_gt3r
4.9896
5.0355
­0.0459
2019_shape257_gt3r
3.1375
3.4023
­0.2648
2020_shape1116_gt2r
4.3561
4.5278
­0.1716
2019_shape257_gt3l
4.3568
5.0898
­0.7335
2020_shape963_gt2l
4.6205
4.1617
0.4587
2019_shape5289_gt1r
3.9552
3.9051
0.0500
In table 6.5, results are divided into three colour codes. black colour represents lakes for which
predicted depths are deeper than the digital depths, and the blue colour represents lakes for which
predicted depths are shallower than the digital depths. The red colour represents lakes for which the
difference between predicted depths and digital depths is more than 1m. There are eight lakes with
deeper predicted depth, six lakes with shallower predicted depth and one lake with inaccurately
predicted depth. Note that, the digital depths are denoted by green colored data points in figure
6.1, 6.2 and 6.3.
38
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:44==
Figure 6.1: Lake with inaccurate results (Lake 257_gt2l)
Based on figure 6.1, Algorithm seems to be inaccurate over lake 257_gt2l as the prediction of the
fitting line is a bit disturbed and does not seem to follow the data trend accurately. The reason
for this behaviour is the inconsistency in the data cleaning phase. This lake has high number of
low density data points because of which KDE algorithm filtered out some critical points having a
density less than the cutoff line. As a result, when the RSPE algorithm attempted to determine the
shortest path, it was unable to find many neighbour points, and hence, used some noisy points in
the fitting line.
As shown in figure 6.2, There are in total six lakes for which Algorithm is tending to predict
shallower depths than the digital ones. However, the predictions are pretty accurate and do not
show much difference in the depths (less than 0.3m) except lake 2019_shape257_gt3l, which has a
difference of 0.7335. Following these images, it can also be inferred that the predicted fitting line
is accurately following the bottom part of the lake.
Furthermore, the remaining eight figures in 6.3 have also shown astonishing results when it comes
to the prediction of fitting lines. However, the predicted depths are more profound than the digital
depths. Also, one lake (2020_shape257_gt3l) has a prediction depth error of 0.85m and seems to
be comparatively less accurate than the other ones.
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
39
==PAGE:45==
(a) Lake 1116_gt1l
(b) Lake 1116_gt2r
(c) Lake 4788_gt2r
(d) Lake 257_gt3r
(e) Lake 257_gt3r_2019
(f) Lake 257_gt3l_2019
Figure 6.2: Lakes with predicted depths less than digital depths
40
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:46==
(a) Lake 1116_gt2l
(b) Lake 1116_gt1r
(c) Lake 257_gt3l
(d) Lake 4788_gt2l
(e) Lake 5289_gt1l
(f) Lake 5289_gt1r
(g) Lake 963_gt2l
(h) Lake 963_gt2r
Figure 6.3: Lakes with predicted depths more than digital depths
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
41
==PAGE:47==
7
Conclusion and Discussion
Based on the results assessment, it can be inferred that algorithm has successfully calculated the
depth of the lake with exceptionally high accuracy of 93.706% and mean uncertainty of 0.2411.
In order to understand the potential of algorithms used in this research, several results comparisons
have been made with the previous research work using ICESat­2 datasets. Furthermore, this chap­
ter also deals with the discussion over operability of current algorithm to check the elevation of ice
sheet surface.
7.1
Result Comparison
Some previous research papers have mentioned their techniques to calculate the depth of supraglacial
lakes using the ICESat­2 dataset.
A paper by Zachary Fair and Mark Flanner [12] on the bathymetry of the supraglacial lakes have
shown research on 12 lakes with ICESat­2 lidar sensors. They managed to predict the depth of
the supraglacial lakes with a mean uncertainty of 0.38m using polynomial fits and splines. These
results are also for the lakes which are shallower than 4m, and for deeper lakes, it gave higher
uncertainties up to 0.80m (results can be seen in appendix A.3). Based on the results (0.24m), it
can be stated that the algorithm employed in this study is superior to the one used in [12].
In a research paper [13], the authors have used several algorithms using the ICESat­2 dataset and
satellite imagery dataset, based on which they established some promising results. Using image­
based techniques, their results were too shallow with a mean difference of 0.71m. Besides that,
using the ATL08 algorithm, they managed to generate the estimates with a mean difference of
0.17m which are mostly deeper than the manual baseline. However, there are some points which
should be taken into consideration:
• This research paper uses four lakes, whereas, in our research, we are considering five lakes
with 15 different datasets on different timestamps
• It can be seen in figure A.2 (Appendix) that density distribution of the points in the datasets
is very straightforward because of which lake bottom is distinguishable. However, in current
research, all the lakes have very less difference between the density of the lake’s background
noise and bottom points except lakes 5289 and 4788
Based on this comparison, the research paper [13] has shown better results. However, it could be
interesting to implement algorithm on some uncomplicated datasets as well, and there is a high
possibility that it might show even better results than [13].
Another algorithm watta had been introduced in [14], where researchers tested their algorithm
over a set of 46 lakes. This paper has considered two types of depths based on the results: green
band depth (mainly for shallow lakes) and red band depth(for deeper lakes). However, when the
maximum depth exceeds 7.2m, both red and green­band­based profiles cannot resolve the deepest
points in the lake. They managed to achieve highest R2 value of 0.91 and average R2 value of
around 0.87 (details mentioned in appendix A.5) which is less than compared to what this research
has shown 0.961. Moreover, the RSPE algorithm seemed to have good results on lakes deeper than
7.2m as well.
42
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:48==
7.2
RSPE Algorithm for calculating elevation of ice
sheet
As discussed before, the supraglacial lakes tend to form in the regions where exists some depres­
sions on the ice sheets. This depression also decides the possibility of crack formations on the lake
beds. Lakes having more steeper slopes, less width, and high depths are more susceptible to form
cracks resulting in high­pressure water flow through them, which results in widening the cracks
and breaking of icecaps.
This problem demands developing indicators for ice sheets having high elevated surfaces and can
be used to detect which places are more inclined to form high depression lakes in the future. Using
the RSPE algorithm, fitting lines can be predicted over the ice sheets, which will help understand
the cross­section of the ice sheet. This cross­section can be further used to calculate the volume,
and the amount of pressure water can apply at the bottom of the depression using the concepts of
hydrostatics. Besides that, the slope of these elevated surfaces also changes with time, making them
deeper and shallower. In order to understand this process and predict the change in the slopes of
elevated ice surfaces, the RSPE algorithm can be embedded with temporal algorithms like LSTM.
This amalgamation will help understand the change in the physical schema of ice sheets and provide
a great edge in predicting the future formation of supraglacial lakes. For instance, in figure 7.1,
the RSPE algorithm is used to predict the fitting line over the ice sheet (blue line behind the grey
data points). This fitting line can calculate the slope and depth of the lake by taking lake edges as
the surface baseline.
Figure 7.1: RSPE algorithm on ice sheet surface
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
43
==PAGE:49==
7.3
Limitations of this project
Despite having exceptional results, this research also faced several setbacks and limited scope up
to some extent:
• Effective separation of surface and bottom part of the lake: Currently, the approach
used in the data cleaning to extract the surface seemed to work fine, but it might fail in the
cases where the density of photons is higher on the bottom part of the lake as well. In those
scenarios, the algorithm is likely to select the higher density region of the bottom part as the
lake’s surface.
• Outlier Detection and Removal: In this research, outliers removal methods are not used
to check the algorithm’s robustness. However, the state­of­the­art implementation needs to
deal with the outliers efficiently.
• Effective removal of noisy data points in­between lakes: There is always some scope for
improving the data cleaning approaches. Therefore, Besides KDE, there is an opportunity
to look for other methods which can perform better than KDE.
• Inability to calculate the volume of the lake from current results: The priority of the
research was depth calculation of the lakes. Therefore, we ignored the fact that the fitting
lines should start and end at the same points to calculate the volume. Currently, starting
and ending points for the surface and bottom fitting lines are different, making it difficult to
operate for volume calculations.
• Exploration of matrix cell dimensions (during preprocessing for algorithmic imple­
mentation): At present, the cell dimensions for the calculation matrix are defined by having
multiple manual tests. Ideally, this parameter should be completely dynamic based on the
lakes.
44
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:50==
8
Summary
This report introduces how ice sheet’s mass is changing rapidly and the scenarios in the next 50
to 100 years. Based on the studies, Climatic changes in the weather patterns over Greenland are
among the most prominent reasons for the increasing loss rate. Consequently, it explains the water
drainage through hydrofracture and its effect on sea­level rise. Because of this issue, it is becoming
imperative to analyse the lakes formation and its depths in the glaciers.
In chapter 2, this report presented a literature review of several approaches used to estimate the
depth of supraglacial lakes in Greenland and Antarctica. The data used in most of the research pa­
pers is ICESat­2 because of its high capability of penetrating photons deep into the lakes and ability
to record the reflected photons from both the water and the underlying ice with high confidence.
The review mainly deals with research about inland lake expansions, temporal change in depths
across various regions, increasing uncertainties based on the depth and volume estimation of water
in supraglacial lakes where research papers [12], [13] and [14] have shown amazing results.
The following chapter gives the data description from the ICESat­2 satellite, where this report has
provided a brief description of satellite, observational mechanism and working of laser altimeter.
Furthermore, it discusses the dataset generated over supraglacial lakes and selects the important
parameters for analysis. This chapter also contains information about how to create test data on
these lakes for predicting depths. The data can be visualized in 3.1 and 3.2.
The first section of chapter 4 explains the data cleaning concepts, its importance and some clean­
ing criteria. Moreover, it illustrates the data cleaning workflow followed by the concepts used to
understand and refactor data for further implementation. Meanwhile, multiple machine learning
techniques like Kernel density estimation, DBSCAN clustering algorithm and Gaussian mixture
model(GMM) clustering Algorithm have also been investigated. Besides that, this research has
also witnessed some newly created functions specifically for density­based datasets. The second
section deals with concepts used to design an algorithm for depth detection of lakes. Based on
certain assertions, specific algorithmic requirements have been created for lake datasets. Based
on those requirements, three possible approaches (cubic splines, Shortest path extraction(SPE) (al­
gorithm 1) and Regularized SPE (algorithm 2)) were analysed on theoretical and mathematical
basis.
Chapter 5 deals with the implementation of data cleaning and algorithmic approaches on raw lake
data. Data cleaning process went through 5 different approaches out of which a method mentioned
in section 5.1.5 has been considered, which can remove the background noise most optimally. This
selection was based on multiple tests involved during the data cleaning process. Following this,
Regularized shortest path algorithm (RSPE) has been selected from three mentioned approaches
because of its ability to provide a smooth curve and handle some data uncertainties effectively. For
implementing the algorithm, data preprocessing is necessary to convert the ICESat­2 dataset for
each lake into an equally spaced cell­matrix 5.10. After the preprocessing part, the RSPE algorithm
has been implemented on the bottom part of the lake, followed by a Linear curve fit algorithm
(algorithm 6) on the surface part of the lake. In order to estimate the error between predict depth
and digital depth, quality estimation parameters like Mean Squared Error (algorithm 10), R­squared
Error (algorithm 11) and Prediction Accuracy (algorithm 12) has been used. Furthermore, multiple
approaches like the hold out method (algorithm 13) and the Cross­validation method (algorithm
14) have been used to search for the best combination of hyperparameters and evaluate models
based on their performance.
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
45
==PAGE:51==
In Chapter 6, both the holdout and cross­validation approaches were analysed, which helped under­
stand the differences between usability of both approaches. Subsequently, final results are shown
in figure 6.1, 6.2 and 6.3 which are complementing the analysis in table 6.5. Finally, results have
been concluded in chapter 7, followed by a detailed comparison of results from this research with
previous research papers. Furthermore, Another use case of the RSPE algorithm for calculating
elevation of the ice sheet has also been discussed in which algorithm is implemented for detecting
the slopes in the ice sheets 7.1. Finally, all the limitations have been mentioned, which will be
taken care of as future work for potential publications.
46
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:52==
9
Future Work
To further extend the research and improve the existing methods, there is much scope in this project.
This section will discuss this project’s limitations in detail and mention the possible approaches
that can be taken into account. Furthermore, it will also discuss the possible implementation of
other methods for handling potential time series data, which will be available in the upcoming
years.
1. Improvement in data cleaning methods: Effective data cleaning is vital for having better
implementation and handle uncertainties in the data. Concerning this project, there are
many loose ends related to outlier removal and background noise that need refurbishment.
Based on the first limitation, effective separation of the surface and bottom part of the lake is
fundamental. It can be carried forward considering the linear regression method in the data
cleaning method. First, the idea is to extract the surface region and apply linear regression
with some bias to shift the axis. Based on the predicted surface fitting line, kernel density
estimation can be used to calculate the densities of data points that are above and below
the surface region. Hence, it will be possible to understand the data distribution on the
different sectors of the lake and clean them accordingly. This approach will be used to
remove background noise and irrelevant data points on the lake edges. Furthermore, it
can be seen in the visual representation of the lakes that between outliers and relevant data
points, there is a certain gap along the horizontal axis. This gap can be used to design an
algorithm that can detect the gap and remove the outliers. If it does not find any gap, then
it should be considered as data without outliers.
2. Volume estimation: Without calculating the lake cross­section, it is not possible to estimate
the volume of the lake. Thereby, it is necessary to have the same starting and ending points
of the fitting lines for the surface and bottom part of the lake. This implementation depends
on the data cleaning part, where we have to make sure that there is no data before and
after the start and end of the lake surface. On this note, it is possible to force both surface
and bottom fitting lines to meet at similar start and endpoint. Finally, lake volume can be
calculated as average Depth times the lake area. Note that, to calculate the lake area, we
will need extra information from satellite view about the lake’s size.
3. Combining crack geometry with predicted results: Based on the research from [35],
lake depth and volume of water affects the water flow from hydrofractures all the way to
the bottom of the ice sheets. In order to understand that, we have a concept of crack geom­
etry that helps assess whether a supraglacial lake contains a sufficient volume of water to
keep a crack water­filled until it reaches the bed. The essential parameters for applying the
crack geometry are depth of water in supraglacial lakes, the cross­sectional area of lakes,
increasing cross­sectional area of water­filled cracks and thickness of the ice sheet. Using
these parameters, water flow through hydro fractures can be analyzed. This information can
help explain glacier melting in sea level rise around Greenland and Antarctica.
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
47
==PAGE:53==
4. Futuristic time series lake data: Currently, the available data from ICESat­2 is only from
the last 2 years after the launch. However, this data will increase with time, and soon,
enough data will be available to analyze the changes with respect to time. As a result, it will
be possible to extend the research towards understanding the Spatio­temporal dynamics of
supraglacial lakes and their effect on sea level. Furthermore, it will be feasible to predict
depths in glacial lakes and water drainage rates for the upcoming years. Conclusively, it
will also help in predicting the change in sea level rise because of glacier melting.
48
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
“Why and how to Cross Validate a Model?” In: (April 1, 2021). URL: https://
climate.nasa.gov/climate_resources/264/video-greenland-ice-mass-loss-2002-
2020/.
[2]
“Study: 2019 Sees Record Loss of Greenland Ice”. In: (August 20, 2020). URL:
https://climate.nasa.gov/news/3010/study-2019-sees-record-loss-of-greenland-
ice/.
[3]
“Experts Calculate Future Ice Loss and Sea­Level Increases From Greenland and
Antarctica”. In: (September 17, 2020). URL: https://scitechdaily.com/experts-
calculate-future-ice-loss-and-sea-level-increases-from-greenland-and-antarctica/.
[4]
Gledhill Williamson. “Inland advance of supraglacial lakes in north­west Greenland
under recent climatic warming, Annals of Glaciology”. In: 2018.
[5]
“New Study Explains What Triggers Sudden Drainages of Greenland Supraglacial
Lakes”. In: (Jun 4, 2015). URL: http : / / www . sci - news . com / othersciences /
geophysics/science-greenland-supraglacial-lakes-02876.html.
[6]
Bertie W. J. Miles Chris R. Stokes Jack E. Sanderson. “Widespread distribution
of supraglacial lakes around the margin of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet”. In: IEEE
springer, 25 september 2019.
[7]
G. E. Flowers I. Joughin S. B. Das. “Influence of supraglacial lakes and ice­sheet
geometry on seasonal ice­flow variability”. In: The Cryosphere Discuss, 13 March
2013.
[8]
Neuenschwander Parrish Magruder. “Validation of ICESat­2 ATLAS Bathymetry
and Analysis of ATLAS’s Bathymetric Mapping Performance, Remote Sensing”.
In: 2019.
[9]
T. Herring Zwally W. Abdalati. “Surface melt­induced acceleration of Greenland
Ice­Sheet flow”. In: 2002.
[10]
Stephen J Livingstone Ádám Ignéczi1 Andrew J. Sole1. “Northeast sector of the
Greenland Ice Sheet to undergo the greatest inland expansion of supraglacial lakes
during the 21st century”. In: Geophysical Research Letters, 23 SEP 2016.
[11]
Bertie W. J. Miles Chris R. Stokes Jack E. Sanderson. “Widespread distribution of
supraglacial lakes around the margin of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet”. In: nature,
31 January 2020.
[12]
Kelly M. Brunt Zachary Fair Mark Flanner. “Using ICESat­2 and Operation Ice­
Bridge altimetry for supraglacial lake depth retrievals”. In: The Cryosphere, 2020.
[13]
Kelly M. Brunt Helen Amanda Fricker Philipp Arndt. “ICESat­2 melt depth re­
trievals: application to surface melt on Amery Ice Shelf, East Antarctica ”. In:
[14]
Bert Wouters Rajashree Tri Datta. “Supraglacial lake bathymetry automatically de­
rived from ICESat­2 constraining lake depth estimates from multi­source satellite
imagery”. In: 29 January, 2021.
[15]
Jean Yang Michael Buckley. “Regularised shortest­path extraction”. In: 17 June
1997.
[16]
Thorsten Markusa Thomas A. Neumanna Anthony J. Martinoa. “The Ice, Cloud,
and Land Elevation Satellite – 2 mission: A global geolocated photon product de­
rived from the Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter System”. In: 2019.
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
49
==PAGE:55==
[17]
Michael Alonzo Lori A. Magruder Kelly M. Brunt. “Early ICESat­2 on­orbit Ge­
olocation Validation Using Ground­Based Corner Cube Retro­Reflectors”. In: 7
November 2020.
[18]
“Longitude”. In: (). URL: https://www.nationalgeographic.org/encyclopedia/
longitude/.
[19]
“Latitude”. In: (). URL: https : / / www . nationalgeographic . org / encyclopedia /
latitude/.
[20]
“WebPlotDigitizer User Manual”. In: (July 6, 2020). URL: https://automeris.io/
WebPlotDigitizer/userManual.pdf.
[21]
Martino Markus Neumann. “The Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite­2 (ICESat­
2): Science requirements, concept, and implementation”. In: 31 December 2016.
[22]
“The Ultimate Guide to Data Cleaning”. In: (Feb 28 2019). URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/the-ultimate-guide-to-data-cleaning-3969843991d4.
[23]
“Data Quality”. In: (). URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_cleansing#
Data_quality.
[24]
“Kernel Density Estimation”. In: (). URL: https://deepai.org/machine-learning-
glossary-and-terms/kernel-density-estimation.
[25]
“K­means, DBSCAN, GMM, Agglomerative clustering — Mastering the popular
models in a segmentation problem”. In: (Nov 8, 2020). URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/k-means-dbscan-gmm-agglomerative-clustering-mastering-the-popular-
models-in-a-segmentation-c891a3818e29.
[26]
Kelly Brunt Zachary Fair Mark Flanner. “Using ICESat­2 and Operation IceBridge
altimetry for supraglacial lake depth retrievals”. In: 25 May 2020.
[27]
“6 factors to consider while selecting any Algorithm Library”. In: (). URL: https:
//www.pre-scient.com/blogs/cad-software-development/6-factors-to-consider-
while-selecting-any-algorithm-library.html.
[28]
KHAN FARAH DEEBA NAJMUDDIN AHMAD1. “THE STUDY OF NEW AP­
PROACHES IN CUBIC SPLINE INTERPOLATION FOR AUTO MOBILE DATA”.
In: 30.09.2017.
[29]
Zerubia Merlet. “New prospects for line detection by dynamic programming”. In:
1996.
[30]
Jain Amini Weymouth. “Using dynamic programming for solving variational prob­
lems in vision”. In: 1990.
[31]
“R­Squared Definition”. In: (Nov 18, 2020). URL: https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/r/r-squared.asp.
[32]
“Hold­out Method for Training Machine Learning Models”. In: (Dec 22, 2020).
URL: https://vitalflux.com/hold-out-method-for-training-machine-learning-
model/.
[33]
“Cross­validation: evaluating estimator performance”. In: (). URL: https://scikit-
learn.org/stable/modules/cross_validation.html.
[34]
“Why and how to Cross Validate a Model?” In: (Nov 13, 2018). URL: https://
towardsdatascience.com/why-and-how-to-cross-validate-a-model-d6424b45261f.
[35]
S. B.Das M.J.Krawczynski M. D.Behn. “Constraints on the lake volume required
for hydro­fracture through ice sheets”. In: GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH LET­
TERS, 16 May 2009.
50
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:56==
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
51
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix
Table A.1: Quality estimation parameters for all the iterations (using all combinations)
Combinations
Training error
Training accuracy
R2 value
(Itr & n_neigh & λ)
(Average in meters)
(Average in %)
1 & 2 & 50
0.5130
90.177
0.932
1 & 2 & 80
0.5071
90.369
0.933
1 & 2 & 100
0.4908
91.102
0.935
1 & 5 & 50
0.3625
92.420
0.952
1 & 5 & 80
0.3625
92.421
0.952
1 & 5 & 100
0.3652
92.524
0.756
2 & 2 & 50
0.5438
87.942
0.759
2 & 2 & 80
0.5379
88.168
0.738
2 & 2 & 100
0.5848
87.749
0.808
2 & 5 & 50
0.4271
89.535
0.808
2 & 5 & 80
0.4270
89.537
0.782
2 & 5 & 100
0.4865
89.297
0.922
3 & 2 & 50
0.5657
89.081
0.922
3 & 2 & 80
0.5657
89.082
0.920
3 & 2 & 100
0.5838
89.169
0.959
3 & 5 & 50
0.2983
92.791
0.959
3 & 5 & 80
0.2983
92.792
0.951
3 & 5 & 100
0.3574
92.197
0.920
4 & 2 & 50
0.5927
89.632
0.921
4 & 2 & 80
0.5868
89.820
0.917
4 & 2 & 100
0.6148
89.686
0.956
4 & 5 & 50
0.3254
92.994
0.956
4 & 5 & 80
0.3254
92.994
0.948
4 & 5 & 100
0.3860
92.673
0.911
5 & 2 & 50
0.6120
89.429
0.912
5 & 2 & 80
0.6061
89.429
0.909
5 & 2 & 100
0.6315
89.738
0.950
5 & 5 & 50
0.3445
92.8280
0.950
5 & 5 & 80
0.3445
92.8280
0.950
5 & 5 & 100
0.4051
92.5280
0.941
52
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.1: Main characteristics of the six ICESat­2 melt depth algorithms used in [13]
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
53
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.2: Results from all eight algorithms on four lakes from [13]
54
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.3: Supraglacial lakes and melt ponds detected by ICESat­2 over the Amery Ice
Shelf from [12]
Figure A.4: Watta algorithm from [14]
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
55
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.5: Results using Watta algorithm from [14]
56
Depth estimation of supraglacial lakes derived from ICESat­2 satellite dataset
==PAGE:62==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Building 324
2800 Kongens Lyngby
https://www.compute.dtu.dk
