==PAGE:1==
Real-Time Anomaly Detection
on the SeaCat AUV
Jeremy Coffelt (s191731)
Master of Science in Electrical Engineering
2021
==PAGE:2==
Real-Time Target Detection on the SeaCat AUV
Report written by:
Jeremy Coffelt (s191731)
Advisor(s):
Jesper Haahr Christensen, AI and CV Systems Engineer at ATLAS MARIDAN
Dr. Ole Ravn, Head of Studies in the Electrical Engineering Department at DTU
Dr. Nils Andersen, Associate Professor in the Electrical Engineering Department of DTU
DTU Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
Project period:
25 January 2021 - 16 July 2021
ECTS:
30
Education:
M.Sc.
Field:
Automation and Robot Technology
Class:
Public
Edition:
1st
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for gradu-
ation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
Copyrights:
©Jeremy Coffelt, 2021
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) are ideally suited for seafloor surveys, pipeline
inspections, and various military applications. While submerged on a mission, an AUV is
continuously collecting enormous amounts of data, with only a small amount of it imme-
diately shareable with operators of the AUV. Then, when the AUV surfaces, offloading
the hours and gigabytes of data that was collected is a slow process. A complete analysis
of the data may even take days or weeks to complete and generally requires expensive
and proprietary software, as well as someone specifically trained to use the software and
interpret the data.
ATLAS MARIDAN is hoping to change this. Specifically, they are seeking a way
to analyze sonar data in real time, while the AUV is operating. Then, instantly upon
surfacing, anything anomalous detected in the sonar data could be presented to the
AUV operator.
This would allow a follow-up mission to be started immediately to
inspect anything detected that warrants a closer look.
The solution developed in this project relies on a type of deep learning model called
an autoencoder. The models will be applied to side scan sonar imagery like that col-
lected on the ATLAS SeaCAT AUV. The underlying idea is that autoencoders can be
trained to produce good reconstructions for “normal” images, while struggling with im-
ages containing anomalies. By quantifying the quality of these reconstructions, an image
can then be classified as either normal or anomalous. Anything anomalous can then be
flagged for closer inspection by the operator.
To demonstrate that these models can perform as needed in real time, a simulator
is developed that takes data logs collected from past missions and essentially converts
them back into a continuous stream of raw data. To visualize this data, and the state of
the AUV as the mission progresses, a basic graphical user interface (GUI) is developed.
With the simulator and GUI in place, real-time performance is tested on two embedded
Linux boards – the Nvidia Jetson and the Raspberry Pi.
The thesis then concludes with some suggestions for future work, including a proposal
for a basic implementation of a real-time anomaly detector on the SeaCat AUV.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared for the department of Electrical Engineering at the Technical
University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for a master’s degree (MSc
Eng) in Electrical Engineering.
The contents of this thesis represent a total of 30 ECTS, with the work performed
between 25 January 2021 and 16 July 2021.
There are several people who have helped me throughout this project and I would
like to offer them my thanks.
Above all, I am most deeply indebted to my industry supervisor, Jesper Christensen,
for his patience, encouragement, humor, and friendship over the last few months. With-
out failure, he always generously offered his time and wisdom to help me, and for that
I will be forever grateful.
I would also like to express my sincere gratitude to my academic supervisors, Dr.
Ole Ravn and Dr. Nils Andersen. Their guidance throughout this project is greatly
appreciated.
To the team at ATLAS MARIDAN, thank you for welcoming me (and for the deli-
cious lunches). Special thanks go to Lars Mogensen for working behind the scenes to
make all of this happen.
I would also like to express my gratitude to the faculty of the Electrical Engineering
and Autonomous Systems departments at DTU. Their engaging lectures and challenging
projects made my time at DTU a truly wonderful experience.
Finally, to my wife, thank you for your unwavering faith and support over the last
few years. You always knew exactly what to say to keep me smiling and moving along.
Without you, I could not have done any of this!
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark, 16 July 2021
Jeremy Coffelt
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Project Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Thesis Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Analysis of Related Work
9
2.1
Current State of Anomaly Detection in Side-Scan Sonar . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
State-of-the-Art for Anomaly Detection in Traditional Images
. . . . . .
10
3
Data Collection and Processing
15
3.1
Source of Sonar Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Conversion from Raw Data to Image Form . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Quantity and Variability of Images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Preprocessing the Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Model Types and Architectures
25
4.1
Introduction to Deep Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
CNNs as Classifiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.5
Hyperparameters and Tuning Options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5
Model Implementation and Evaluation
35
5.1
Software Ecosystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Reconstruction Loss
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.3
Autoencoders with Simple Topographies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.4
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.5
Autoencoders on Varied Topographies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.6
Testing and Applying the Autoencoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
5.7
Binary Classifiers and Ensemble Approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6
Real-Time Implementation
53
6.1
Extracting Time Dependencies From Existing Mission Data
. . . . . . .
53
6.2
Graphical User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3
Implementation on Embeddable Devices
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.4
Proposed Hardware Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
63
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter introduces the project of developing a real-time target detector for the
SeaCat autonomous underwater vehicle. First, the project is motivated with some back-
ground material. Then, the problem statement, associated tasks, and personal contribu-
tions are discussed in greater detail. Finally, the chapter concludes with an outline of
the remainder of the thesis.
1.1
Background and Motivation
The thyssenkrupp is an international conglomerate of technology and industrial compa-
nies, headquartered in Duisburg and Essen, Germany, with more than 100,000 employees
collectively. ATLAS ELEKTRONIK is a naval and maritime technology company within
thyssenkrupp that is headquartered in Bremen, Germany, and specializes in underwater
acoustics [1]. Their Danish subsidiary, ATLAS MARIDAN, is located in Rungsted and
is focused on integrating and developing solutions involving autonomous underwater ve-
hicles [2]. Such vehicles are ideally suited for numerous applications, including: seafloor
mapping, pipeline surveys, inspection of underwater structures, oceanographic research,
and numerous military applications ranging from mine removal to covert surveillance.
In general, unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs) fall into two main classes – au-
tonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) and remotely operated vehicles (ROVs). ROVs,
like the one shown in Figure 1.1, are tethered to a surface vessel for power and commu-
nication. For this reason, ROVs have essentially continuous control from their operators
and have endurance limited only by the ship to which they are connected. This comes
at the cost of severely restricted autonomy, as the ROVs range is limited by the length
of the tether cable.
AUVs, on the other hand, are unattached to any other vessels and vary dramatically
in size, cost, and capabilities. For example, on the small end is the ATLAS SeaShark
AUV, which measures about 1 m in length and 10 kg in mass [4]. Towards the opposite
end is the thyssenkrupp modifiable underwater mothership (MUM) unmanned undersea
vehicle (UUV), which is intended to transport and deploy large payloads for the offshore
energy sectors [5]. Both of these AUVs are picture in Figure 1.2.
Regardless of the size or purpose, AUVs have autonomy and range limited only
by their battery capacity and control algorithms. Typically, however, AUVs are pro-
grammed to follow predefined paths, such as out-and-back lines, “lawnmower” patterns
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: As pictured here, ROVs remain tethered to a surface vessel, which limits
their range and autonomy. Image from [3].
Figure 1.2: AUV Size Comparisons. On the left, the ATLAS SeaShark is intended to
be deployable and operable by a single-person, which is made possible by
its small size, light weight, and built-in carry handle [4]. On the right,
the thyssenkrupp “mothership” is designed to transport large payloads for
offshore wind, oil, and gas industries, especially in remote locations such
as the Arctic [5].
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Background and Motivation
3
(Figure 1.3), or spiraling circles. Importantly, AUVs are rarely allowed to intentionally
deviate from these paths, except for safety reasons like avoiding obstacles.
To help detect obstacles, but primarily for surveying purposes, most AUVs are
equipped with some sort of sonar sensor. Forward-facing sonar works well for obsta-
cle avoidance. For hydrographic surveys to create 3D maps of the seabed, multibeam
echo sounders (MBES) are most appropriate. And, for a general solution for creating
image-like representations of the seabed, side-scan sonar (SSS) is ideal. Regardless of
the sonar sensor chosen, the underlying principle is the same. A pulse of sound is emit-
ted from a transmitter on the sensor, while a receiver on the sensor measures the time
it takes for the acoustic signal to return. Then, using the speed of sound underwater
(which is dependent on temperature, salinity, and pressure), the distance to the reflect-
ing object/surface can be determined [7]. As illustrated in Figure 1.4, side-scan sonar
extends this idea by using a transducer array to emit a fan-shaped pulse perpendicular
to the vehicle’s trajectory, typically one on each of the port and starboard sides of the
vehicle. The measured return times and intensities of these cross-track pulses can then
be stacked to form an “image” of the seabed.
By using the intensity of the reflected signal, hard surfaces like rocks or metallic
objects generate highlights that distinguish them from the surrounding seabed. The
true size of the object is often best determined by measuring the length of the shadow
caused by a blocked return signal from the seabed hidden behind the object. Together
the highlights and shadows give a visual representation of the shape and size of objects
between the sensor and the seabed. These ideas are shown in Figure 1.5.
While submerged, AUVs are often capable of using low-bandwidth acoustic modems
to transmit mission-critical data such as depth, speed, and battery status. Most other
sensor data, such as images or sonar readings, requires transfer rates that are possible
only after the AUV is returned to ship or even harbor. Although recent advances in real-
Figure 1.3: The “lawnmower” pattern commonly used for surveys and search-and-
recovery missions. Although not pictured, AUVs will occasionally surface
(for instance, at the ends of each sweep) to obtain a GNSS/GPS position
fix. Image modified from [6].
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
Figure 1.4: SSS works by using a transducer array to emit a fan-shaped pulse. The
return signal then creates slices that can be stitched together to form an
“image” of the seabed. Image modified from [8].
Figure 1.5: By using the intensity of the reflected signal (highlights) or the lack thereof
(shadows), the relative shape and size of objects lying on the seafloor can
be determined. Figure from [9]..
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Problem Statement
5
time acoustic streaming have made it possible to transmit such data with near negligible
losses [10], transmitting the original, full-resolution data is currently not feasible. For
this reason, any surprises in the sonar data are typically not discovered until well after
the mission had ended, the AUV has returned to the ship, and the ship has returned to
the harbor.
By definition, these surprises or anomalies are unexpected because they are either
rare (unlikely to occur again) or salient (unlike their surroundings) or both. In sonar
imagery, such objects include ship or plane wrecks; scarring from anchors, trawling
nets or other man-made artifacts; and even boulders in an otherwise barren seabed. A
related term is targets, which are well-defined objects that are specifically sought out.
For instance, in military applications they often involve submarines or mines. In this
project, all anomalies will be targeted and finding these surprises in sonar data in a
timely manner (while the AUV is still in the water) is the focus of this thesis.
1.2
Problem Statement
With few exceptions, the data collected while an AUV is under mission is unavailable for
immediate analysis. Such data typically consists of hours and gigabytes of navigational
data, such as GNSS and IMU readings, and perceptional data from one or more sonar or
visual sensors. Because of the amount of raw data and the computational power required
to process it, weeks are often needed to analyze the collected data to determine if the
mission was a success or if follow-up missions are justified.
For instance, anomalies
in sonar data could reveal a seabed feature or man-made object that warrants either
more thorough sonar coverage or a closer pass for photography. Either option could
provide higher resolution data and alternative viewpoints of the anomaly than originally
collected.
Unfortunately, relocating these targets weeks later, even if theoretically possible, is
logistically diﬀicult and expensive. AUVs often rely on chartered ships for transport
from harbor to sea and require several crew members for launch and recovery (LnR).
The ultimate goal in this project is to reduce or eliminate these time and monetary
costs for follow-up missions by providing crew with a mission summary, complete with
a listing of any anomalies, that is ready upon surfacing. This would allow operators to
immediately begin a follow-up survey to closer inspect any anomalies of interest, rather
than returning to dock, analyzing the data, and returning weeks later to perform the
same task. In essence, achieving this goal would allow AUV operators to make missions
iterable as possible in the sense shown in Figure 1.6.
1.3
Project Description
Elaborating on the goal presented in the previous section, this project focuses on devel-
oping an anomaly detection procedure on real-time sonar data. The emphasis of this
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
Figure 1.6: The goal of this project is to actively seek anomalies while the AUV is
submerged, so that any detected anomalies can be presented and acted
upon immediately after surfacing..
project is on side-scan sonar (SSS) imaging, but similar solutions could also be applied
to multibeam echosounders (MBES). Since the anomalies must ultimately be presented
in human-readable form, they are processed and delivered as images. Because of the
computational demands of such processing, a new ”compute tube” will be proposed for
the ATLAS SeaCat AUV, shown in Figure 1.7, that will have an embedded single-board
computer with on-board graphical processing unit (GPU) and an attached storage drive.
When the survey is completed and the AUV surfaces, a prioritized list of anomalies is
compiled and presented to the operator via a graphical user interface (GUI) suitable for
a laptop or tablet.
The project outlined above can be split into the following sub-tasks:
• Collect sonar data covering a large variety of anomalies and seabed topographies
• Process the sonar data in a consistent image form optimized for further analysis
• Research state-of-the-art deep learning models for anomaly detection in images
• Implement, train, and test various configurations of each model
• Isolate and optimize the model that performs most consistently
• Develop a real-time simulator for playing back previously-collected mission data
• Develop a graphical interface to present the anomalous findings of a mission
• Propose a “compute” tube implementation suitable for the SeaCat AUV
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Thesis Outline
7
Figure 1.7: The ATLAS SeaCat AUV is a mid-sized, general purpose AUV and is the
intended destination for the solution presented in this project.
Collectively, these tasks will demonstrate the real-time anomaly detection capabilities
desired of the SeaCat AUV, which should prove useful in both time and monetary savings
for ATLAS MARIDAN and other companies that develop or depend on AUVs.
1.4
Thesis Outline
In Chapter 2, state-of-the-art techniques for anomaly detection in both traditional
images and sonar images are presented and analyzed.
Although some conventional
solutions are included, the focus is on deep learning approaches because they offer the
most modern, popular, and promising solutions.
In Chapter 3, the steps involved in creating, organizing, and preprocessing the data
are described. This includes a brief walk-through of how raw sonar data is converted
first into images and then manipulated into a format that can be fed into the anomaly
detection models.
In Chapter 4, the various neural network architectures and relevant hyperparam-
eters used in this project are introduced. This includes a brief review of deep learning
followed by detailed discussions on convolutional neural networks, classifiers, and au-
toencoders.
In Chapter 5, the software used to train and test the models is presented, along
with tools for visualizing the evolution of the models. Next, a few metrics are defined
so that the quality of the models can be evaluated and compared. Then, the results of
numerous architecture configurations and combinations is discussed.
In Chapter 6, the development of a real-time simulator is discussed, along with its
benefits, assumptions, and limitations. To demonstrate the capabilities of the simulator
and to visualize the state of a simulated mission, a GUI is presented that would be
==PAGE:16==
8
1 Introduction
suitable for a tablet or laptop that an AUV operator could reasonably use while on a
mission. Finally, options are proposed for implementing the solutions of Chapter 5 on
an embedded Linux device that could be added to the SeaCat AUV to perform real-time
anomaly detection.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Analysis of Related Work
This chapter includes a survey of the current state of anomaly detection in side-scan
sonar, as well as state-of-the-art anomaly detection in traditional images.
2.1
Current State of Anomaly Detection in
Side-Scan Sonar
The existing literature on anomaly detection in sonar imagery is rather limited. That
said, a few different approaches have been suggested.
The approach presented in [11] relies on first analyzing the background clutter of a
sonar image in the wavelet domain [12] using an autoregressive conditional heteroskedas-
ticity (ARCH) model [13] and then following that with a matched subspace detector [14]
for anomaly detection. In simpler terms, the idea is to look at the historical variability
in the seafloor backgrounds and compare new images to see if they appear to share the
same statistical properties. As shown in Figure 2.1, the method appears to work as
claimed in rather limited scenarios.
A more recent approach given in [15] identifies salient regions in sonar imagery using
methods analagous to keypoint detection [16] in conventional imagery. Then, models
learned to describe these salient regions are used to determine the rarity of new images.
Together, the saliency and rarity are described in a Bayesian framework so that the
difference between posterior and prior distributions resulting from a new image can
be used as a measure of how “surprising” the new image is and, therefore, how likely
it is to contain an anomaly. The details are quite vague, but the general framework
implementation of this approach is only given in vague terms, but the general anomaly
detection framework and implementation is given in Figure 2.2
A more recent work [17] applies several different salient/anomalous object detection
methods commonly used on traditional images to sonar images. The methods included
contrast-based saliency [18], graph-based visual saliency [19], and Itti-Koch saliency [20].
Each of these methods was trained on 1500 simulated sonar images and then tested on
350 real images. The results on a simulated image are shown in Figure 2.3 and a real
sonar image in Figure 2.4
Notice that the anomalies in Figures 2.1 and 2.2 contain are rather round in shape,
==PAGE:18==
10
2 Analysis of Related Work
Figure 2.1: A pair of side-scan sonar images with hand marked targets on the left with
the corresponding output of the proposed anomaly detector on the right.
Image modified from [11].
which suggests the corresponding models would work well for boulders and perhaps
underwater targets such as mines.
However, there is little evidence that any of the
methods above will extend to anomalies such as pipes, scars, and ship or plane wrecks.
A search for more capable methods naturally leads back to similar methods in traditional
images.
2.2
State-of-the-Art for Anomaly Detection in
Traditional Images
One traditional machine learning technique for anomaly detection in images is demon-
strated in [21]. The method used here involves isolation forests, which are an ensemble
method combining multiple decision trees with branches based on randomly selected
features and value splits. An outlier or anomaly is then determined by how isolated it
is, which is measured by its depth from the base of the tree. [22]. The data set used
in [21] consisted of 16 images containing actual forests and three test images shown in
Figure 2.5 containing another forest, a highway, and a beach.
Although the solution in [21] was successfully applied to images, it relied on the
distribution of the green color channel in the RGB images. However, as shown in Fig-
ures 3.3 and 3.4, sonar images are grayscale and the distribution of values on their only
channel is unlikely to have any relationship to the presence or absence of anomalies.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 State-of-the-Art for Anomaly Detection in Traditional Images
11
Figure 2.2: Anomaly detection framework (on the left) and implementation (on the
right) proposed in [15]. Figures from [15].
Despite the exceptions above, most of the current literature on anomaly detection in
images does not involve traditional computer vision or machine learning. Instead, deep
learning approaches appear more successful and, therefore, more popular. A comprehen-
sive survey of some modern solution for images (and video) is given in [23]. Perhaps the
most well-established deep anomaly detection solution for convention images involves
autoencoders [24], which seem to be suspiciously missing from the literature for sonar
images. For this reason, they are the focus of this project and are discussed in great
detail in Section 4.4.
An interesting approach in [25] uses convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which
were also used in this project and are described in depth in Section 4.3. In [25], CNNs
were used to train a model on one particular object class and dozens of transformations
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Analysis of Related Work
Figure 2.3: From left to right: a simulated sonar image, objects detected by contrast
saliency, graph-based visual saliency and Itti-Koch saliency. Figure modi-
fied from [17].
Figure 2.4: Results of the models [17] applied to a real sonar image, with anomalous
regions boxed in green on the left and detected on the right in red. Figure
modified from [17].
==PAGE:21==
2.2 State-of-the-Art for Anomaly Detection in Traditional Images
13
Figure 2.5: The test images used in [21] for detecting anomalies relative to the images
of forests used in the training data.
that could be applied to images such objects. The idea is that the model will be able
to clearly determine a transformation, if any, applied to new images belonging to the
same class. At the same time, the model will be unable to determine with any certainty
which transformation is applied to images not belonging to this class. The confidence
in the transformation is then used as a proxy for determining how likely the image is to
contain an anomaly. The solution presented in this theory combines similar ideas, since
input images are randomly rotated and reflected during training.
One final family of solutions is generative adversarial networks (GANs), which in-
volve two competing neural networks: a generator and a discriminator. The generator
is trained to generate examples in some high-dimensional space based on a given lower-
dimensional representation. The goal is to create new data indistinguishable from that
in the training dataset. The discriminator then acts as a binary classifier that learns
to distinguish between the real and generated data. [26] A common analogy is that the
generator acts like an art forger, while the discriminator behaves like an art appraiser
who must determine whether or not a piece of art is authentic or fake. The generator is
then trained to trick the discriminator, while the discriminator is simultaneously trained
not to be fooled. Because GANs involve two neural networks, they are capable of excep-
tional performance, but are also notoriously diﬀicult to train as they are computationally
expensive and often unstable. [27] For this reason, these were not used in this project,
but they may offer a good next step towards improving upon the solution presented in
this thesis.
==PAGE:22==
14
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3
Data Collection and
Processing
This chapter details the steps involved in creating, organizing, and preprocessing the
data used in this project. This includes a brief walk-through of how raw sonar data is
converted first into “images” and then manipulated into a format that can be fed into
the anomaly detection models discussed in Chapter 4.
3.1
Source of Sonar Data
The bulk of the data used in this project originated from an EdgeTech 2205 side-scan
sonar (SSS), like the one shown in Figure 3.1, installed on a ATLAS SeaCat AUV.
The electronics for the unit can be mounted in their own pressurized vessel (as shown)
or within the pressurized chassis of an AUV or ROV. The transducer arrays are then
mounted externally on the AUV, angled with the desired view of the seafloor. The SSS
system can be used simply as a collection and storage device, operating independently
of the rest of the vehicle, or can be configured to interface with the vehicle while under
mission. These particular units are capable of depth ratings up to 6000 m and can
be equipped to collect auxiliary data such as roll, pitch, yaw, heading, pressure, and
temperature. The raw sonar data can be collected from a low-frequency (LF) channel, a
high-frequency (HF) channel, or both. LF data has lower resolution, but greater range.
For the 2205, frequencies as low as 120 kHz are possible with ranges up to 500 m. HF
data, on the other hand, offers more detail but limited range. For the 2205, frequencies
as high as 1.6 MHz are possible with an effective range of at most 35 m [28].
In addition to the sonar data, navigational data is used to periodically estimate
the global position of the AUV. This information could come from a global navigation
satellite system (GNSS) receiver mounted directly to the AUV that receives updates
whenever the AUV surfaces. An alternative approach involves combining GNSS on the
surface ship as a ‘ground truth” absolute position with additional sensors on the AUV
that provide its relative position to the surface ship. These sensors commonly include
either an inertial navigational system (INS) or a Doppler velocity log (DVL) or both.
The INS performs dead reckoning relative to some known initial state by combining
data from accelerometers and gyroscopes [29].
The DVL works quite differently.
It
==PAGE:24==
16
3 Data Collection and Processing
Figure 3.1: An EdgeTech 2205 SSS unit, like those used on the ATLAS SeaCat AUV.
Image from [28].
tracks position relative to the seabed by using the Doppler shift of the return signals of
pulses emitted towards and reflected from the seabed [30]. Using either of these tools in
combination with the absolute position of the surface vessel, the AUV can also determine
its own absolute position.
All of the sonar and positioning data for this project is stored on and offloaded from
the ATLAS AUVs as JSF files, the format used for EdgeTech devices. Before this raw
data can be used for anomaly detection, it must first be converted to image form.
3.2
Conversion from Raw Data to Image Form
The JSF files are saved at regular intervals while the AUV is under mission.
Each
file contains numerous messages of various types, each beginning with a 16-byte header
providing the type and size of the data that follows. The entire message is stored in a
little-endian, binary format, which must be unpacked during processing. The types of
messages and the organization of each is described in detail in [31].
Message type 80, which corresponds to sonar data messages, was the only type
needed for this project.
Each of these messages contains a single ping for a single
channel, where separate channels were devoted to each frequency-side combination (for
instance, LF-portside or HF-starboard). Each message not only contained sonar trace
data, but also numerous other quantities required for image construction or real-time
simulation, or were chosen for display in the GUI. In order of appearance in the JSF
file, they include: position of last navigation fix, sampling interval, pulse frequencies,
sweep duration, depth, altitude, system time and date, weighting factor to convert trace
data from unsigned integers to floating-point values, compass heading, pitch, roll, and
speed [31].
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Conversion from Raw Data to Image Form
17
Also available are pressure and water temperature, which could be used to refine the
speed-of-sound computations discussed below. However, these calculations were omitted
from the final implementation in this project as their effects proved negligible for the
depths and speeds experienced by the AUVs [31].
Denoting the weighting factor above by N, the unsigned integer trace data is first
converted to float values according to the formula:
scaled float data = raw unsigned int data
2N
These intensities can be assembled mathematically into a vector or visually as a hor-
izontal (by convention) line of pixels. The slant range along this line is found via a
time-of-flight calculation involving the underwater speed of sound:
slant range = speed of sound × sweep duration
2
≈1500 m/s × sample time
2
Optionally, the range above can be corrected to convert slant ranges into horizontal
ranges. The effects of this correction are shown in Figure 3.2, with the calculations
following from the Pythagorean Theorem:
cross-track range =
√
(slant range)2 −(AUV altitude)2
The cross-track resolution (perpendicular to the AUV path) is then the range divided
by the number of values/pixels in the vector/line, which gives units of horizontal meters
per pixel.
In the time between consecutive sonar readings, the AUV has travelled some distance
determined by the formula:
displacement = speed of AUV × sampling interval
If two successive sonar scans were now stacked on top of each other, the pixel height
would be determined by this displacement, giving an along-track (parallel to the AUV
path) resolution of vertical meters per pixel. In order to view the sonar data as an
image, the horizontal/cross-track and vertical/along-track resolutions must agree so that
the pixels are square. To achieve this, the horizontal dimensions are generally adjusted
to align with the vertical dimensions, which are determined by the number of samples
required for the AUV to travel some fixed distance, such as 200 m.
It should be noted that there are many assumptions that go into the calculations
above, such as:
• the AUV has constant speed and orientation
• the AUV is not rolling or pitching
• any variation in the speed of sound underwater (due to changes in temperature or
pressure) is negligible
==PAGE:26==
18
3 Data Collection and Processing
Figure 3.2: Before (top) and after (bottom) slant-range correction. Note that the black
region in the top is the nadir gap, which aligns with the AUV’s navigational
direction and is caused by the lack of return signal between the vessel and
the seafloor directly beneath it. Image modified from [32].
For the purposes of this project, any violation of these assumptions resulted in images
that were somewhat distorted, but not unusable.
3.3
Quantity and Variability of Images
In total, ATLAS MARIDAN provided access to approximately 8000 images distributed
across 25 missions. Many of these missions spanned multiple days and the majority were
concentrated near ATLAS MARIDAN headquarters and the seas surrounding Denmark.
The seafloor topographies present in these images varied dramatically depending on
the location, as shown in Figure 3.3.
Most of the images contain flat and relatively barren seabed with gradual changes
in slope and occasional boulders.
Still, a significant number were completely rocky
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Quantity and Variability of Images
19
Figure 3.3: Examples of the types of seafloor topographies present in the data.
==PAGE:28==
20
3 Data Collection and Processing
or contained wavy texturing. And, a few even showed underwater mountains or coral
reefs. Despite this huge variation, all of these different scenarios could fairly be called
“normal”, since they contain no man-made objects or markings. That said, it would also
be fair to say some of the missions were anomalous to the dataset as a whole, since they
were so different from anything present in the other missions. This distinction between
man-made and natural anomalies will be revisited in Chapter 5.
Some missions contained nothing but normal images, but most contained a few nat-
ural or man-made anomalies. For missions that involved pipeline surveys, there were
naturally anomalies in almost every image. Even in missions involving ship or plane
wreck surveys, the wrecks were only present in a very small percentage of the images
generated from the JSF files collected during the mission. So, overall, anomalies were
very rare in the dataset, even though the dataset was quite large and involved several
missions specifically seeking out anomalies. Some of the anomalies present in the dataset
are shown in Figure 3.4.
Before these images could be used as input into the anomaly detection models, a few
issues had to be addressed first.
3.4
Preprocessing the Images
One issue with sonar images that is perhaps not obvious is salt-and-pepper noise. As
shown in Figure 3.5, this issue only becomes clear upon very close inspection. Fortu-
nately, the severity of the problem is easy to reduce using a median filter, which replaces
each pixel value with the median value is some neighborhood of that pixel.
Perhaps one issue with the images in Figures 3.3 and 3.4 may be their apparent lack
of consistency in brightness and contrast. However, this is actually misleading as the
conversion from JSF file to image format includes histogram equalization, which aims to
uniformly distribute pixel values for the entire image across the whole range of possible
values.
Still, several additional approaches were made to increase the brightness on the left
and right edges of the images, where sonar returns are weak. These included contrast-
limited adaptive histogram equalization (CLAHE), which subdivides the image into
multiple neighborhoods and then locally equalizes each [33].
Unfortunately, this ap-
proach tended to produce images that appeared overexposed, while also exaggerating
the salt-and-pepper noise.
Another promising approach was based on Retinex theory, which is related to the
way humans perceive color with varying illumination. The underlying formula is:
S′(x, y) =
A · S(x, y)
S(x, y) ⊗F(x, y) + α,
where S(x, y) represents the original pixel values, S′(x, y) represents the corrected pixel
values, F(x, y) represents a smoothing/blurring kernel, ⊗represents a convolutional
==PAGE:29==
3.4 Preprocessing the Images
21
Figure 3.4: Examples of the types of anomalies present in the data. (a) plane wreck, (b)
ship wreck, (c) scarring, (d) sandbags covering pipes/cables, (e) unknown
man-made structures, (f) exposed pipes/cables.
==PAGE:30==
22
3 Data Collection and Processing
Figure 3.5: Salt-and-pepper noise common to sonar images before (on the left) and
after (on the right) median blurring.
operator, α is an offset term, and A is a gain adjustment factor. The first operation is
smoothing/blurring, which replaces single pixel values with their neighborhood average.
The next operation adds a small positive term to avoid division by zero in the next
step. After these operations, the pixel values in the original image are divided by the
corresponding pixel values in the smoothed and offset image, which results in a so-called
illumination map. Finally, these values are adjusted by rescaling by a gain constant [34].
As shown in Figure 3.6, this method is capable of producing excellent results since
the corrected image is much clearer than the original image, especially on the sides.
Unfortunately, the whole procedure relies on proper choices for α and A, which varied
dramatically from mission to mission, with no apparent way to automate their selection.
One last issue with the original images was their dimensions, which averaged 808 ×
1448 pixels. However, most models like those used in this project are optimized for square
inputs with sides that are powers of two. For this reason, model inputs were chosen to
be 256 × 256 pixels. Rescaling the original images to fit this size would compromise the
aspect ratio and seriously distort any objects found in the image. So each image needed
to be rescaled and split in such a way that the aspect ratio was preserved and the pieces
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Preprocessing the Images
23
Figure 3.6: The steps involved in the Retinex method include smoothing, shifting,
relative scaling, and gain adjustment. Image modified from [34].
were 256×256 squares. This was accomplished with the following procedure. (1) Resize
the original image so that its new width is 512 pixels, but its original aspect ratio is
preserved. (2) Split this rescaled image vertically down the middle. (3) Starting at the
top of each half, cut out 256 × 256 slices. Note that this last step requires either leaving
off the excess after the last slice is removed or overlapping consecutive slices so that all
data is used. The latter approach was chosen in this project, and is shown in Figure 3.7.
With the data processed and ready, the models can now be introduced.
==PAGE:32==
24
3 Data Collection and Processing
Figure 3.7: An illustration of the slicing procedure from the original image to model-
ready slices.
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Model Types and
Architectures
This chapter begins with a quick introduction to deep learning, which may be skimmed
or omitted by readers already familiar with neural networks. Afterwards, the neural
network architectures and hyperparameters used in this project are described.
4.1
Introduction to Deep Learning
As shown in Figure 4.1, deep learning (DL) is a branch of machine learning (ML), which
itself is a branch of artificial intelligence (AI).
At the core of deep learning is the artificial neural network (ANN), which is inspired
by the way brains process information to learn. Neural networks are built from a collec-
tion of units interchangeably called nodes, neurons, or perceptrons, which are typically
Figure 4.1: AI is concerned with making machines mimic the natural intelligence of
animals, especially humans. ML is a branch of AI that mimics intelligence
by learning from data. DL is a branch of AI that learns through the use
of artificial neural networks. Image modified from [35].
==PAGE:34==
26
4 Model Types and Architectures
represented as in Figure 4.2.
Each such node essentially represent a logistic model of the form:
y = f(z) = f (b + w1x1 + w2x2 + · · · wnxn) ,
where the xi are inputs, the wi are weighting coeﬀicients, b is a bias term, z is a weighted
sum of the inputs, f is an activation function, and y is the output. Common choices for
the activation function include the logistic/sigmoid function, the hyperboic tangent, the
unit step function, and the rectified linear unit (ReLU). The ReLU, which is defined as
f(z) = max(0, z), was again motivated by the neurons of the brain that only fire once
inputs exceed some threshold and then afterwards produce a response proportional to
the input.
A shallow neural network is an extension of the perceptron model that contains
multiple parallel nodes within a hidden layer sandwiched between the input and output
layers. The outputs of the hidden layer are then further combined to produce the final
model output(s). If every node in one layer is connected to every node in the next
layer, the network is said to be fully connected. If node values are only passed in one
direction though the network, from input to output, the network is said to be feedforward.
Combining these ideas gives the fully-connected, feedforward shallow network shown in
Figure 4.3.
A deep neural network (DNN) then continues this idea even further by adding mul-
tiple hidden layers in series between the input and output layers.
Models such as DNNs are trained by exposure to data. When the model learns, the
weights and biases evolve to produce more desirable outputs. For a single input or a
batch of inputs, the difference between the actual and desired outputs determines the
loss of the model for that data. Generally speaking, the lower the loss, the better the
model is performing.
Figure 4.2: Standard representation of a perceptron with weighted inputs that are
summed and passed through an activation function to yield an output.
==PAGE:35==
4.2 Convolutional Neural Networks
27
Figure 4.3: A fully-connected, feedforward shallow neural network consists of an input
layer, an output layer, and a hidden layer in-between containing several
parallel nodes. Each node in one level is fed into every node in the following
level.
In order to systematically lower the loss for DNNs, some variant of the gradient
descent algorithm is typically used as an optimizer. At its core, the algorithm relies on a
fundamental property of the gradient. Namely, since the gradient points in the direction
of maximum increase, its negative must point in the direction of maximum decrease. So,
in theory, if θ represents all weight and bias parameters in the entire model and L(θ)
represent the loss, then the loss can be decreased by modifying the parameters according
to the relationship:
θnew = θold −η∇L(θold),
where η is a learning rate that controls how fast the model parameters change in each
iteration.
Unfortunately, like most such numerical optimization algorithms, gradient descent is
not guaranteed to converge at all, much less to a global minimum. For instance, consider
Figure 4.4. At a local minimum, the gradient is zero, which causes:
θnew = θold −η∇L(θold) = θold −η · 0 = θold,
and the model to converge sub-optimally. A significantly worse failure occurs when the
parameter estimates oscillate about or even diverge from an optimal value. Methods to
reduce or eliminate the risks of such failures are discussed later in this chapter.
4.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) use the idea of convolutional kernels to extract
and manipulate the spatial relationships found in images. Essentially, the kernels are
==PAGE:36==
28
4 Model Types and Architectures
Figure 4.4: The plot on the left shows convergence to a local minimum, instead of a
global minimum. The plot on the right shows poor convergence because
of oscillation.
used to replace a single pixel value with a weighted average of all pixels within some
neighborhood of that pixel. These kernels can be visualized as windows that are slid
over every single pixel in an image or rectangular array to produce a new 2D array. An
impressive interactive animation of these concepts is available at [36], which was used
to produce the screenshot in Figure 4.5.
By setting all kernel coeﬀicients to the same value, standard computer vision oper-
ations can be performed, such as blurring and sharpening. Or, by selecting the kernel
coeﬀicients to mimic 2D gradient operators, basic features in the original image, such as
boundary lines, can be extracted.
In tandem with feature extraction, CNNs use max pooling to reduce the spatial
resolution of consecutive layers of the network. The result is a downsampled version of
Figure 4.5: A screenshot from the interactive animation in [36] showing the effects of
the kernel coeﬀicients as the kernel window is slid over an image.
==PAGE:37==
4.3 CNNs as Classifiers
29
the previous layer that highlights dominant features. For example, using a 2×2 window
with a stride length (distance between adjacent windows) of 2 results in halving the
length and width of the original image, as shown in Figure 4.6.
Finally, by combining and layering more and more of these kernels, the complexity
of the extracted features can be increased from lines and arcs to basic shapes like circle
and rectangles to entire objects and complicated textures. This idea is demonstrated in
Figure 4.7.
Because of their ability to extract and condense information contained in images,
CNNs have found many applications, including the two that used in this project: au-
toencoders and classifiers.
4.3
CNNs as Classifiers
In simplest terms, a classifier predicts the class or category to which an input belongs.
The general architecture of classifier CNN is shown in Figure 4.8.
A classifier CNN consists of multiple alternating convolution layers and pooling op-
erations used for feature extraction. Except for the first layer of a grayscale classifier,
every layer is represented by a 3D-array. Each 3D array is, in turn, built from a stack of
2D feature channels, with each of these feature channels corresponding to the location
and intensity, if any, of some particular feature in the previous layer. The final layer is
then flattened into a 1D vector. This 1D vector is then used as an input into a classifier
network consisting of one or more fully-connected layers. The last layer in this classifier
contains N outputs, where N is the number of classes to which the input image may
belong. For computational reasons, these N inputs, say y1, y2, . . . , yN, are then typically
Figure 4.6: A 2 × 2 window paired with a stride length of 2 results in a quarter of the
pixels in the original image while preserving and even emphasizing many
of its dominant features.
==PAGE:38==
30
4 Model Types and Architectures
Figure 4.7: A representation of the increase in feature complexity in successive layers
of a CNN. Figure from [37].
Figure 4.8: The architecture of a classifier CNN consisting of alternating convolution
and pooling operations, followed by flattening, and one or more fully-
connected layers. Figure from [38].
==PAGE:39==
4.4 Autoencoders
31
used as inputs to the softmax function:
pi = softmax (yi) =
eyi
∑eyi .
Note that, if the classes are assumed to be mutually exclusive, the softmax results in a
probability distribution across the N different classes. The input image is then predicted
to belong to whichever class has highest probability. That is, the image is predicted to
be of class n, where
n = argmax
i
{pi | i = 1, 2, . . . , N} = argmax
i
{softmax (yi) | i = 1, 2, . . . , N}
The general architecture described above has been successfully applied to many disci-
plines, from facial recognition [39] to COVID-19 detection in chest x-rays [40].
For sonar imagery, a classifier could be used to classify an image as pipe, shipwreck,
mine, . . . , or normal seabed. However, the focus of this project is on anomaly detection
and there are no restrictions made as to what type of anomaly may be found or even
that the type could be determined. So, for the purposes of this project, there are only
two classes of interest – normal and anomalous – warranting only a binary classifier.
Unfortunately, anomalies are, by definition, rare and classifiers typically require data
to be equally split across the various classes. To see why, suppose even 1% of data is
anomalous, which is significantly higher than in the sonar data used in this project. If a
binary classifier predicted every single input image was normal, then it would have 99%
accuracy while remaining totally useless. There are ways to minimize this issue, such as
undersampling the majority (abatement) or oversampling the minority (augmentation),
but they are unlikely to succeed for datasets as unbalanced as the one used in this
project [41]. Still, a binary classifier would be trained to recognize anomalous images,
and would be likely to fail on anomalies unlike any other previously encountered. So,
although binary classifiers are investigated in this project, they are only used in a limited
capacity. Instead, the focus is on autoencoders, which take a fundamentally different
approach.
4.4
Autoencoders
While classifiers require training on all classes, autoencoders (AEs) are trained on only
one class. The idea is that they are optimized to learn and extract the underlying and
defining features of a particular class, while removing all other superfluous information.
Then, knowing only the locations and intensities of these features, a reconstruction of the
original input can be made that is nearly indistinguishable. So, for an input belonging to
the target class, the AE should output a near-identical reconstruction. But, for an input
belonging to any other class, the AE should produce a much poorer reconstruction. For
this project, the AE is trained on normal data only for which there is an abundance. The
key idea is then that the AE will be able to produce high-quality reconstructions of any
==PAGE:40==
32
4 Model Types and Architectures
new normal images, while producing very poor reconstructions of anything anomalous.
The reconstruction loss between the inputs and outputs will then be used as an indicator
of how likely the original image was to be anomalous. This dependency on the underlying
statistical distribution of the dataset will be more precisely defined in Chapter 5.
Another important property of AEs is that they are capable of producing excellent
results from noisy images [42]. This comes almost as a side effect of the reconstructive
process of compressing through the latent space, where only the most crucial features of
the input are maintained. This provides another compelling reason to believe AEs could
produce an effective anomaly detectors for sonar images, which, as shown in Figure 3.5,
commonly display significant salt-and-pepper noise.
To achieve the behaviours described above, AEs use an architecture consisting of an
encoder followed by a decoder. When applied to images, the structure of the encoder
is the same as that of a CNN, except there is no softmax at its end and there may or
may not be any fully connected layers. The decoder that follows essentially attempts
to undo the encoder. For this reason, it is also built from convolutions, but uses some
form of upscaling in place of pooling. The overall architecture of these convolutional
autoencoders (CAEs) can be visualized as in Figure 4.9.
The underlying idea with the encoder is that it reduces spatial dimensions while
increasing feature channels, which essentially compresses the original data into a more
compact form while trying to maintain as much descriptive information as possible. For
this project, inputs are grayscale images that are 256 × 256 pixels in size, containing
2562 bytes of information. For many of the models considered in this report, the encoder
compresses this data into a spatial size of 16 × 16 pixels with 64 features channels,
Figure 4.9: Typical convolutional autoencoder architecture, beginning with an en-
coder, ending with a decoder, and containing a bottleneck in-between.
==PAGE:41==
4.5 Hyperparameters and Tuning Options
33
requiring only 25% of the data while still retaining most of the original information and
significantly more than classical downsizing methods would preserve. This bottleneck
or latent-space representation replaces pixel values with indicators of the location and
intensity of important features of the underlying data.
Recovering the original image from the latent-space representation is the job of the
decoder. As mentioned above, the decoder is essentially the inverse of the encoder –
using convolutions to recover pixel values from feature values and some sort of upscaling
procedure in place of pooling to increase the spatial dimensions back to their original size.
For upscaling, there are two fundamentally different approaches. The first is upsampling,
which generally involves some form of spatial interpolation, such as nearest neighbor,
bicubic, or trilinear, with each serving as different compromise between quality and
computational eﬀiciency. (See [43] for numerical examples of each.) The other approach
involves so called transposed convolutions, which involve convolutional kernels that can,
in theory, be learned from the data to provide optimal upscaling.
The final output of the autoencoder, also called a reconstruction, is usually of the
same dimension as the original encoder input. The difference between each pixel value
in the input image and the corresponding pixel in the output image is used to compute
loss. These pixel-level losses can be totalled or averaged to produce an image-level loss.
Repeating these calculations for all images under consideration gives a measure of how
well-suited the model is for the given data. In order to optimize a given model, we train
the model by adjusting its weights and biases to give minimal loss. To find the most
appropriate model, we seek out the optimal values for architecture-level design choices
involving so-called hyperparameters.
4.5
Hyperparameters and Tuning Options
As hinted at earlier in this chapter, one of the most important design choices when
training a neural network is the choice of learning rate. If this value is too small, the
model will take too long to converge and will be unlikely to escape from a local minimum.
If the value is too large, the model may fluctuate about or diverge from a local minimum.
Finding the sweet spot that gives quick convergence to a global minimum, if even possible,
involves some related experience, a bit of luck, or a lot of trial and error.
To remedy this problem, the gradient descent algorithm can be extended to include
momentum, which allows the learning rate to effectively adapt to its current state of
convergence. Two of the more well-known solutions are RMSProp [44] and Adam [45].
For more information on these and other recent extensions of gradient descent, see the
excellent survey in [46]. Even with momentum, optimizing a model can be tricky. If the
momentum coeﬀicient is set too low, it has negligible effect. If it is too high, the model
could overcorrect and overshoot any nearby minima.
Another key design choice for convolutional neural networks is the kernel size. In
general, it should be similar in scale to the smaller features in the data that are believed
==PAGE:42==
34
4 Model Types and Architectures
to be of importance. Although unnecessary, kernel sizes are often chosen to be the same
size across layers of the model. As an example, for 256 × 256 pixel sonar images, a 3 × 3
kernel would likely be a good choice for a boulder detector. For ship and plane wrecks, a
5×5 kernel is likely to give better results. And, for larger objects or image-level textures,
even a 7×7 kernel might be appropriate. Whatever the choice, the kernel size, k should
be an odd integer. That way, by framing or padding all images or feature channels with
p = (k −1)/2 pixels, the convolution operations will preserve spatial dimensions. An
excellent animation of this and other related concepts can be found at [47].
Another choice is whether or not to rescale or normalize the input data. In some
software packages, this operation is required. In virtually all cases, it is encouraged.
Doing so allows the model to remain unit-agnostic while usually dramatically improving
convergence [48]. For standard images, this would require either rescaling pixel values
from unsigned, 8-bit integers to floats in the interval [0, 1] (rescaling) or normalizing
pixel values to have zero mean and unit variance.
A related choice to rescaling and normalizing is the choice of activation function.
Since the range of the sigmoid is (0, 1) it is often used in combination with outputs
that are probabilities or are required to remain in the interval (0, 1). Likewise, the
hyperbolic tangent has range (−1, 1) and pairs well with normalized data.
Another
important activation function, is the ReLU function, which is a nonlinear function that
only activates once the input has exceed some threshold. These functions are summarized
in Figure 4.10.
For a detailed survey of these and many other activation functions,
see [49].
There are too many other hyperparameter and design choices to be discussed in
detail here. However, the most important ones for this project have been introduced
above and will be specified in the following chapter.
Figure 4.10: The equations and graphs of three of the most common activation func-
tions: logistic/sigmoid, hyperbolic tangent, and ReLU.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 5
Model Implementation and
Evaluation
This chapter begins with a discussion of the programming tools used to implement and
apply the models detailed in the previous chapter. Then, the various model configura-
tions and combinations will be presented, as well as the results produced by each. Along
the way, overviews will be given for the datasets and metrics used to train, test, and
evaluate each approach.
5.1
Software Ecosystem
Python was chosen as the primary programming language for this project because it
is free, open-source, and has already proven effective and suﬀicient in previous ATLAS
projects. In addition, Python has an extensive selection of well-documented libraries
and frameworks for the types of work required in this project, including:
• NumPy for numerical analysis [50]
• Pandas for data analysis [51]
• MatPlotLib for visualization [52]
• OpenCV for computer vision [53]
• PyTorch, TensorFlow, and Keras for deep learning [54], [55], [56]
PyTorch was selected as the primary deep learning framework because its pythonic
syntax made it easier to learn and its low-level API offered more control for customization
and debugging. One component of TensorFlow that was used was TensorBoard, which
offered an eﬀicient way to monitor progress during training and validation [57].
For initial prototyping, Jupyter Notebook was used because it provided a simple
way to interact and experiment with live code [58]. Most prototyping was done locally,
relying primarily on the CPU. Afterwards, Sublime Text was used to refactor these
notebooks into scripts for implementation on a GPU server [59].
Before specifying the models and presenting their results, a key metric used to eval-
uate them must first be properly defined.
==PAGE:44==
36
5 Model Implementation and Evaluation
5.2
Reconstruction Loss
Autoencoders ideally output a perfect reconstruction of the original input. Any differ-
ence between the two is used to compute a loss, where the lower the loss, the better the
reconstruction. This idea can be visualized as in Figure 5.1, where the intensity of each
pixel in the loss map corresponds to the magnitude of the difference between correspond-
ing pixels in the input and output images. That is, if a pixel is perfectly reconstructed,
its corresponding pixel in the loss map has no brightness and is, therefore, black. At the
other extreme, if a reconstructed pixel is inverted, then the corresponding pixel in the
loss map has full brightness. In summary, good reconstructions, which are expected for
normal inputs, should have mostly low pixel losses and loss maps that are dark overall.
On the other hand, anomalous inputs should produce poor reconstructions with high
loss and bright loss maps.
In order to make the observations above more quantifiable, pixel values in the input
and output images are first scaled to lie in the interval [0, 1]. As a result, the pixel losses
must fall within the same interval. Then, in order to measure the quality of a single
reconstruction (and, therefore, classify the whole image as normal or anomalous), the
pixel losses are averaged across the entire image. Finally, this same procedure is extended
to all images in the entire dataset to give an overall measure of the reconstructive ability
of the model.
To formalize these computations, denote the dimensions of the image as w × h, the
pixel coordinates as (x, y), the pixel values in input image I as I(x, y), the reconstruction
of image I as RI, and the dataset as D. Then the loss for image I, L(I), and dataset
D, L(D), can be computed using any of the following:
• mean absolute error (MAE) or L1 loss:
LMAE(I) = 1
wh
∑
x,y
|I(x, y) −RI(x, y)|
LMAE(D) = E
I∈D∥I −RI∥
• mean-square error (MSE) or L2 loss:
LMSE(I) = 1
wh
∑
x,y
[I(x, y) −RI(x, y)]2
LMSE(D) = E
I∈D∥I −RI∥2
• binary cross entropy (BCE):
LBCE(I) = −1
wh
∑
x,y
{I(x, y) log RI(x, y) + [1 −I(x, y)] log [1 −RI(x, y)]}
LBCE(D) = −E
I∈D [I log RI + (1 −I) log(1 −RI)]
With these definitions in place, some preliminary results can now be discussed.
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Autoencoders with Simple Topographies
37
Figure 5.1: Comparison of original inputs, reconstruction outputs, and loss maps for
normal and anomalous images. Notice that the loss map is much brighter
for the anomalous image.
5.3
Autoencoders with Simple Topographies
As an initial proof of concept at implementing an autoencoder-based anomaly detector,
the dataset consisted of only hand-picked images from various missions.
In the normal group, there were 8116 slices, all 256 × 256 pixels in size, consisting of
rather flat and barren seafloor with occasional boulders and gentle changes in elevation.
In the anomalous group, there were 192 slices (of the same size), split equally across
wrecks, pipes, and scars. Training used 80% of the normal images (and none of the
anomalies), while testing used all of the anomalous images and the remaining 20% of
the normal images.
Each model was trained on a GeForce RTX 2080 Ti GPU with 11 GB of GDDR6
memory and 4352 CUDA cores for parallel processing.
As this was the first attempt at training such models, numerous combinations of
AE architectures, hyperparameter values, and training configurations were tried.
A
TensorBoard screenshot of 20 of these runs is shown in Figure 5.2.
==PAGE:46==
38
5 Model Implementation and Evaluation
Figure 5.2: A TensorBoard screenshot (modified for clarity) comparing the training
and test losses for 20 runs with various models architectures and training
configurations. Note that the top curves were based on L1 losses, while
those on the bottom used L2 losses.
The plots in Figure 5.2 suggest the models are properly learning, with performance
on the training data being carried over to the test data. Furthermore, there was no sign
of overfitting as the validation losses never began to increase.
The next step was to see if there was an obvious difference in the losses between the
normal and anomalous groups, which was to be expected. A TensorBoard screenshot
comparing these test losses is shown in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: A TensorBoard screenshot (modified for clarity) comparing the losses for
the normal and anomalous images in the test data.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Autoencoders with Simple Topographies
39
The plots in Figure 5.3 suggest minimal separation between the two groups, which
was certainly not the outcome expected.
In fact, the hope was that, as the models
became more trained on reconstructing normal images, they would become specialized
for that purpose and would, therefore, begin to get worse at reconstructing anomalous
images. So far, this did not appear to be the case.
To check if the models were perhaps performing well on some subset of the anomalies,
the losses were tracked based on anomaly type. As shown in Figure 5.4, the model
performance does indeed vary according to anomaly type. Unfortunately, wrecks, which
are arguably the most interesting type of anomaly, have the lowest average loss. Even
scars, which show the highest losses, have no significant separation from normal images.
To clarify these relationships, the plots in Figure 5.5 were created by using the mean
and variance of the losses in each category along with Gaussian approximations of their
distributions.
As Figure 5.5 shows, using any loss value as a cutoff for inferring whether an image
is normal or anomalous would fail for one of two reasons. First, if the cutoff is set low
enough to correctly predict the majority of the anomalous images, then it would also
result in a high proportion of normal images being incorrectly flagged as anomalous.
And since normal images are much more abundant than anomalous images, a huge
number of mislabeled normal images would have to be sorted through to find the true
anomalies. The second type of failure would be setting the cutoff score so high that few
normal images would be misclassified as anomalous, which results in perhaps half of the
anomalous images being missed.
All of the observations above suggested a different approach was required. A closer
inspection of Figure 5.1 reveals a common trend in the loss maps of anomalous images.
Specifically, the pixels of high loss in anomalous images are not distributed across the
entire image, but are instead concentrated in “hotspots” around the location of the
anomaly (like the plane wreckage in Figure 5.1). This idea is illustrated in Figure 5.6,
where the loss maps were colored and overlaid onto the original images.
This idea of “hotspots” motivated a natural extension of the standard, loss calcu-
lations given above. Rather than relying on the image-level loss to classify anomalies,
instead use the maximum concentration of loss within the image. More specifically, look
for hotspots within the image where the mean relative loss is significantly higher than
the mean loss across the entire image. If a hotspot exists, it is likely to contain something
anomalous. The higher the relative loss, the higher the likelihood of an anomaly.
To make this idea more concrete, rectangles of various sizes were used to bound the
hotspots. Those that most consistently yielded good results were of sizes 64 × 64 pixels
for larger anomalies and 16×16 pixels for smaller anomalies. To search for a hotspot, the
bounding rectangles or “windows” were slid across the entire image, while computing the
mean relative loss within the window at each new location. The result of this procedure
on the anomalous image from Figure 5.1 is shown in Figure 5.7.
After inspecting the hotspots in many other images in the preliminary dataset, it
==PAGE:48==
40
5 Model Implementation and Evaluation
Figure 5.4: A TensorBoard screenshot (modified for clarity) comparing the losses in
the test data according to anomaly type.
became clear that using maximum loss in sliding windows could offer a promising means
of separating anomalous images from the normal ones. In order to objectively evaluate
the models, a few more metrics must be defined.
5.4
Evaluation Metrics
All of the metrics discussed so far provide a means of evaluating the quality of the re-
construction (and, therefore, the underlying model) on an individual image. To evaluate
the appropriateness of the model on the dataset as a whole, a different set of statistics
must be used.
Since anomalous images contain an object or feature of interest, they are referred
to as the positive group. That leaves normal images as the negative group. If a model
correctly identifies an anomalous image, the result is a true positive (TP). If the model
instead classifies the anomaly as normal, the result is a false negative (FN). The terms
true negative (TN) and false positive (FP) are defined analogously for normal images.
==PAGE:49==
5.4 Evaluation Metrics
41
Figure 5.5: Gaussian approximations of the loss distributions of each type of test image.
Note the significant overlap of the Normal curve and all other curves.
Figure 5.6: Loss maps colored and overlaid onto original images. Notice that regions
with high loss align with the anomalous object, while the low loss regions
coincide with normal seabed.
==PAGE:50==
42
5 Model Implementation and Evaluation
Figure 5.7: Windows of maximum loss are computed using the loss map, but, as shown,
align as expected on the anomalous regions in the original image. Here,
windows of size 16 × 16 pixels (in red), 32 × 32 (in orange), 64 × 64 (in
green), and 128 × 128 (in blue) are used.
Using this terminology, the following metrics can be defined:
• recall is the fraction of all anomalies that were labeled as anomalies by the model:
recall =
TP
TP + FN
• precision is the fraction of images labeled as anomalous by the model that were
actually anomalous:
precision =
TP
TP + FP
• F-score measures accuracy using the harmonic mean of the recall and precision:
F-score =
(recall−1 + precision−1
2
)−1
With evidence that AEs could successfully serve as anomaly detectors, and with the
metrics above to compare competing models, the dataset was then significantly expanded
and diversified.
5.5
Autoencoders on Varied Topographies
With feasibility confirmed, the dataset was expanded from hand-picked images from a
couple missions to all images in twelve complete missions.
==PAGE:51==
5.5 Autoencoders on Varied Topographies
43
In the normal group, there were 14,391 slices consisting of seafloors with varying
complexity. Many were similar to those in the preliminary dataset, while others were
rocky or wavy or had sudden changes in elevation, as shown in Figure 5.8.
In the anomalous group, there were 712 slices (of the same size) containing anomalies
of various types, as shown in Figure 5.9.
Just as before, training used 80% of the normal images (and none of the anomalies),
while validation used all of the anomalous images and the remaining 20% of the normal
images. After all of the trial and error involved with earlier attempts on the preliminary
dataset, the following emerged as most promising:
• Convolutional layers in the encoder following the pattern:
– Layer 1: (256 pixels)2 × N1 feature channels
– Layer 2: (128 pixels)2 × N2 feature channels
– Layer 3: (64 pixels)2 × N3 feature channels
– Layer 4: (32 pixels)2 × N4 feature channels
– Layer 5: (16 pixels)2 × N5 feature channels,
where the hyperparameters N = [N1, N2, . . . , N5] varied from model to model
• Layers in the decoder reversing the pattern in the encoder
• Nearest neighbor for the upsampling method in the decoder [43]
• Convolutional kernels of size 5 × 5 pixels
• Bias terms used in convolutional layers, rather than batch normalization between
them [60]
• No dropouts [61]
• No fully-connected layers between encoder and decoder
• ReLU as activation for interior layers
• Sigmoid as activation in the output layer if inputs are rescaled to the interval [0,
1]. Hyperbolic tangent instead if inputs are normalized
• Mean-square error (the L2-norm) for the loss metric
• Adam for the optimizer [45]
• Learning rates of 1e-2, 1e-3, or 1e-4, depending on the complexity of the model
• 100 or 1000 training epochs, depending on the complexity of the model
• batch sizes of 8, 32, or 128, depending on the complexity of the model
==PAGE:52==
44
5 Model Implementation and Evaluation
Figure 5.8: Samples of the diversity in seabeds in the normal images.
With these architectures, hyperparameters, and training configurations settled, one
key issue remains.
That is, how to choose the thresholds for the window losses to
distinguish between normal and anomalous images. As mentioned earlier, determining
this cutoff requires a compromise to be made between allowing a few anomalies to be
missed or possibly many normal images being mistakenly flagged for further attention.
Since 100% recall could be achieved trivially by setting the minimum threshold for
anomaly classification at 0, F-score was initially chosen for the evaluation metric. As
it equally prioritizes recall and precision, maximizing F-score was assumed to result in
a good balance between true positives and false negatives. However, since the F-score
weights recall and precision equally, and does not account for the extremely unbalanced
nature of the data, it tended to result in very high recalls (∼99%) and disappointingly
low precisions (∼25%). So the final choice was to rely solely on precision, as it tended to
produce significantly higher precisions (∼40%) without greatly decreasing recall (∼95%).
For each validation input, the total loss for the entire image along with the maximum
losses over sliding windows of sizes 16 × 16 and 64 × 64 pixels were computed. Separate
cutoff scores were computed for the image, 16 × 16, and 64 × 64 windows that gave
maximum precision. This approach gave the results in Table 5.1.
==PAGE:53==
5.5 Autoencoders on Varied Topographies
45
Figure 5.9: Samples of the diversity in the anomalous images. Note that many objects
are easily distinguishable, such as the boat, pipes, and cables. However, the
bottom-right image may contain only natural features but would fairly be
classified as anomalous simply because it so different than the surrounding
seabed.
With precisions averaging about 95%, this means the models miss about one out
of every 20 anomalies. And, with precisions around 40%, two out of every five images
labeled as anomalies are true anomalies. As mentioned before, the precision could be
increased significantly by lowering the cutoff scores. In fact, it could likely be made
to be 100% as some anomalous image would likely have the highest loss in the dataset.
However, any increase in precision comes with the trade-off of a much lower recall and
many more missed anomalies. Since detecting anomalies is the priority in this project,
the values in Table 1 are likely very acceptable.
To understand where the models are struggling, consider the false positives and
negatives shown in Figures 5.10 and 5.11, respectively.
As can be seen in the Figure 5.10, false positives generally fell into one of two groups:
• elaborate and wavy textures
• unusually large or irregularly shaped boulders
==PAGE:54==
46
5 Model Implementation and Evaluation
Feature Channels: N = [8, 48, 288, 48, 8]
recall
precision
F-score
cutoff
whole image
0.972
0.305
0.464
0.0005
64 × 64 window
0.938
0.416
0.577
2.0136
16 × 16 window
0.992
0.329
0.494
5.2558
Feature Channels: N = [16, 16, 16, 16, 16]
recall
precision
F-score
cutoff
whole image
0.997
0.230
0.373
0.0004
64 × 64 window
0.930
0.474
0.627
1.9334
16 × 16 window
0.945
0.489
0.644
4.2535
Feature Channels: N = [32, 96, 288, 96, 32]
recall
precision
F-score
cutoff
whole image
0.979
0.289
0.446
0.0003
64 × 64 window
0.985
0.340
0.505
1.0585
16 × 16 window
0.951
0.428
0.591
4.9594
Table 5.1: A comparison of the recalls, precisions, and F-scores based on total image
loss, max 64×64 loss, and max 16×16 loss for three different hyperparameter
configurations.
Figure 5.10: Examples of false positives, which typically involve either wavy textures
or large/irregularly-shaped boulders.
==PAGE:55==
5.5 Autoencoders on Varied Topographies
47
Figure 5.11: Examples of false negatives, which usually contain either wavy scars (high-
lighted in teal) or subtle anomalies, like the pipes highlighted in magenta.
In both cases, such images do not contain man-made anomalies, but could be fairly
claimed to be anonymous since their features are atypical of the normal images in the
training set as a whole. In fact, deciding whether to classify these images an normal
or anomalous was a subjective issue that was revisited several times throughout the
project. But, for consistency, anomalies were eventually defined to include only man-
made features or unexplainable natural features. In any case, most of the images deemed
to be false positives had losses only slightly above the chosen cutoff. So, the number of
false positives could be significantly lowered by raising the thresholds a bit.
The false negatives, like those in Figure 5.11, also generally fell into one of two
groups:
• groups of scars that resembled naturally wavy seabed
• subtle pipes/cables with intensities very close to the surrounding seabed
This is especially clear in the first two images in Figure 5.10 as one must look very closely
to even notice the pipes/cables. Again, these “mistakes” are easily understood as they
could just as well be made by a human inspecting the same images. In fact, numerous
times during validation and testing, the model would correctly identify similar images
as anomalies that were misclassified earlier during manual sorting. In any case, most of
these false negatives had losses only slightly below the chosen cutoff. So, the number of
false negatives could be significantly decreased by lowering the thresholds.
These competing goals, and the high dependence of loss on the nature of the seabed,
greatly impact the inference capabilities of the the cutoff scores on new missions, which
is where they are of greatest interest. This observation naturally leads to a solution
involving showing the operator batches of slices at a time, sorted by loss, and beginning
with the highest losses (and mostly probable anomalies) first. Then, if the the slices
in the current batch with the lowest losses still tend to correspond to true anomalies,
==PAGE:56==
48
5 Model Implementation and Evaluation
the operator could then review another batch. This could then be repeated until the
images start regularly corresponding to normal seabed or, for whatever reasons, begin
to consistently involve slices that are no longer of interest. This idea is used in the next
section to produce Figure 5.12.
With the models successfully demonstrated on the larger dataset, and a more solid
understanding of how best to use the models, the next step was to stretch the dataset
even further.
5.6
Testing and Applying the Autoencoders
As a true test of the performance of the models, they were applied to data from com-
pletely new missions, rather than some subset of images from the same missions they
were trained on. More specifically, the models were trained on two new missions con-
sisting of 3150 new slices. These missions had seabeds that were not especially flat or
roughly textured, but with moderate complexity, which seemed to offer a fair test of
their performance.
With the idea of continually growing the dataset by adding more and more mis-
sions as they became available, testing the models on these new missions offered the
opportunity to test the effectiveness of the models at active learning, which is a form
of semi-supervised learning where the data the model is trained on is iteratively and
interactively updated during training [62].
Since the model with N = [32, 96, 288, 96, 32] feature channels and a cutoff score
based on 64 × 64 pixel windows performed best on the validation data, its inferences
were chosen for manual resorting. Of the 3150 slices tested, 2341 were classified correctly
including 96% of the anomalous slices. In total, there were 528 anomalies and 2622
normal images, distributed as shown in the confusion matrix in Table 5.2. Note that the
higher anomaly rate (17%) is due to that fact that the longer mission involved a survey
of a site largerly scattered with man-made debris.
A screenshot of a directory containing the processed slices is shown in Figure 5.12,
where the images are presented from highest loss to lowest, showing the images deemed
most anomalous images first.
Predicted Class
Anomaly
Normal
Anomaly
507
21
True Class
Normal
788
1834
Table 5.2: Confusion matrix showing the number of images in each true and predicted
class.
==PAGE:57==
5.6 Testing and Applying the Autoencoders
49
Figure 5.12: A screenshot of a directory produced by the models, listing the images from highest loss (most anomalous) to
lowest (most normal).
==PAGE:58==
50
5 Model Implementation and Evaluation
5.7
Binary Classifiers and Ensemble
Approaches
Since the autoencoders do an excellent job catching anomalies, an ensemble approach was
implemented in the hopes of reducing the number of normal images that were incorrectly
labeled as anomalous. The particular configuration chosen adds a binary classifier to
the inference pipeline, as shown in Figure 5.13.
Rather than building and training a classifier from scratch, transfer learning was
used to take advantage of an existing fully-trained model. The idea is that many of the
features used to classify objects in traditional images could also be applicable to objects
found in sonar images.
The model that seemed most appropriate and readily available was ResNet-18, which
is an 18-layer version of the ResNet architecture [63]. The particular implementation
chosen was coded with PyTorch and pretrained on ImageNet, which uses RGB inputs
of size 224 × 224 pixels and outputs one of ten possible classes [64].
In order, to retrofit the ResNet model for dataset in this project, a new convolutional
layer was added to the front of the existing model to act as an interface between the
grayscale inputs of size 256 × 256 pixels to the 224 × 224 × 3 inputs expected by ResNet.
The final layer of ResNet also had to be modified to produce a scalar output between 0
and 1. This was accomplished by adding a fully-connected layer followed by a sigmoid
function at the end of the existing ResNet model to interface the 10 provided outputs
to the one needed for this project. This one scalar was then rounded to the either 0
or 1, with 0 corresponding to a normal image and 1 corresponding to an anomaly. All
Figure 5.13: Inference pipeline after adding a binary classifier to check the autoencoder
inferences labeled as anomalous.
==PAGE:59==
5.7 Binary Classifiers and Ensemble Approaches
51
original layers in the pre-trained model were then fixed before the newly added layers
were trained.
In addition to to the straightforward implementation described above, several exten-
sions were implemented, including:
• using the loss map produced by the autoencoder as input into the modified ResNet
model, rather than the original sonar image
• stacking the original image and its corresponding loss map to give a 256 × 256 × 2
input to the modified ResNet
• stacking the original image and the corresponding loss maps from all three autoen-
coders to give a 256 × 256 × 4 input to the modified ResNet
Each of these models was trained on all images previously classified as anomalous
by at least one of the encoders. This resulted in (and required) training data consisting
of both normal and anomalous images, unlike the autoencoders that were trained solely
on normal images. Because the split between true normal and anomalous images in this
subset of data was still highly imbalanced, PyTorch’s WeightedRandomSampler was
used to ensure both classes were sampled with equal probability [65].
Unfortunately, all of these scenarios yielded the same result. Each version of the
modified ResNet had near perfect performance during training, but did very poorly
during testing, demonstrating the tell-tale signs of overfitting.
To test whether this problem was caused by the particular choice of classifier, a new
binary classifier was built from scratch in PyTorch using many of the same components
used in the autoencoders. More specifically, this new classifier began with three convo-
lutional layers, each with spatial dimensions half that of the previous layer, and with 16,
32, and 64 feature channels, respectively. The output of the last layer was then reshaped
from (16 pixels)2 × 64 feature channels to a vector of dimension 16 × 16 × 64 = 16, 384.
Next followed three fully-connected layers with outputs of dimensions 2048, 128, and
1, respectively. Finally, a sigmoid was added at the very end to remap outputs to the
interval [0, 1] . Unfortunately this version of a binary classifier suffered the same fate as
the modified ResNets.
These troubles with every classifier tested appear to confirm the original assumption
that there are just too few anomalous images to properly train a classifier, even a severely
restricted one like the modified ResNets. Despite reducing the scope of the the classifiers
to discriminators between true and false positives, they were still unable to produce any
meaningful results. Because of the variety and complexity of the sonar images, it seems
orders of magnitude more anomalous images would be needed to train a binary classifier
suﬀiciently enough to improve upon the proven autoencoder-only solution.
==PAGE:60==
52
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6
Real-Time Implementation
This chapter discusses the steps involved to implement an autoencoder-based anomaly
detector in a real-time setting. This includes an existing implementation using a simu-
lated playback of data collected from past missions. Afterwards, a general suggestion for
implementation on the ATLAS SeaCat AUV is proposed. But, first, the JSF processing
procedures detailed in Chapter 3 must be modified to better consider time dependency.
6.1
Extracting Time Dependencies From
Existing Mission Data
So far, extracting images from previously-collected JSF files required only minimal con-
sideration of any sort of time dependencies. Each JSF file was processed as a one large
image that was then split into pieces with equal along-track lengths (typically 200 me-
ters). Since all data for the entire mission was available before any of this processing
was performed, positions and distances could be accurately determined by interpolation.
This discretized approach to converting JSF files into images is a natural choice, and
performs very well, for the purposes for which it has been used so far.
To prove that the autoencoders proposed in the previous chapter are capable of
performing inferences on real-time data, the models needed to be tested either while on
mission using actual hardware or with some sort of simulation, as shown in Figure 6.1.
Since the the development of such simulation capabilities could be useful to ATLAS
for other projects, it was the prioritized solution. That said, the idea was not to develop
a full-featured simulator, but rather a simulation of the data stream created as the side-
scan sonar measures and records data. This involved taking the batch of JSF files for
a given mission and converting them from individual files into a continuous stream of
data. To do this, the differentials in timestamps stored in each sonar message that were
originally based on mission time were aligned with time differentials on the computer
being used to now play back the data.
Also, the assumption was that the only data currently available corresponds to mes-
sages with earlier timestamps than the one found in the current message. Other mission
data with future timestamps was ignored. This shifted the emphasis to extrapolation
rather than interpolation for determining the speed, depth, and coordinates of the AUV.
==PAGE:62==
54
6 Real-Time Implementation
Figure 6.1: Proposed real-time pipeline for processing or simulating either real-time
sonar data. Note that the waterfall acts much like a video playback of
the seabed currently below the AUV (at the top) and recently passed over
(towards the bottom).
Lastly, all quantities of interest were now being converted to a human-readable form
and saved as a mission summary in CSV format that was built up as the mission pro-
gressed, as shown in the screenshot of Figure 6.2.
Because new sonar messages had sizes on the order of 10 kB and were being processed
at a rate of 40 Hz, appending new data to the mission summary as soon as it was received
compromised the ability of the simulation to remain in sync with the timeline of the
original mission. To account for this, a minimal displacement (currently set to 10 m)
was required before new data was appended to the mission summary file. Also, to create
images like those used for model training and testing, a new image is saved to a mission
directory whenever the AUV has travelled some predefined distance from the position
when the last image was saved (currently set to 200 m).
All of the JSF processing, time synchronization, and data logging was achieved with a
Jupyter Notebook that allows the simulation to be reconfigured as desired, the playback
speed to be adjusted (slower or faster than real time), the progress to be monitored, and
all produced images to be saved to a mission directory.
Initiated at the same time as the Juptyer Notebook is a Python script that periodi-
cally scans the mission directory for new images. When a new one is detected, it slices
it into 256 × 256 pixel slices, and inputs each into one of the autoencoders for anomaly
detection. The outputs are then saved to a sub-directory with a filename prefixed with
==PAGE:63==
6.1 Extracting Time Dependencies From Existing Mission Data
55
Figure 6.2: An excerpt of a CSV mission summary that was saved while playing back a mission. Note that the coordinates
of the AUV have been recentered about (0, 0) for confidentiality reasons.
==PAGE:64==
56
6 Real-Time Implementation
the computed loss.
To confirm the simulation and anomaly detection processes were performing as ex-
pected, a basic graphical user interface (GUI) was developed to monitor the playback
state.
6.2
Graphical User Interface
Since Python and Juptyer Notebook were the primary development tools for this project
and are the preferred development tools at ATLAS MARIDAN for machine learning
applications, they were also used to prototype a GUI to complement the simulation.
Ultimately, the GUI was based on a grid of images and MatPlotLib plots that are all
dynamically updated.
For the data displayed in the GUI, the mission summary CSV file is opened in a
read-only mode. Then, the GUI is refreshed to match the most recent data. This check-
and-update procedure is performed at a user-specified interval (currently set to 1 Hz).
With the AUV travelling at typical speeds of around 2 knots, the GUI will be refreshed
roughly every 1 meter in displacement. Each time the plots in the GUI are updated, the
slices with highest loss are identified and added to the display. A screenshot of the GUI
during the middle of a run in shown in Figure 6.3.
With the real-time simulation, anomaly detection, and GUI working as desired, the
natural next step is to confirm the computations needed for anomaly detection inferences
could be performed in real time on the sort of devices likely to be embedded on the
SeaCat.
6.3
Implementation on Embeddable Devices
The sort of intelligent devices most likely to be implemented on the SeaCat for anomaly
detection are Linux-based, single-board computers (SBCs).
Perhaps the most popular is the Raspberry Pi, which is currently on version 4B and
comes in 2, 4, and 8-GB versions. The 8-GB version costs around 65 e and is shown in
Figure 6.4. Some of its key features (and lack thereof) include: [66]
• Quad-core Cortex-A72 CPU @ 1.5GHz
• 2, 4 or 8 GB LPDDR4-3200 SDRAM
• No GPU
Perhaps the most popular SBC for AI projects are NVIDIA’s line of GPU-equipped
devices, which currently include the Nano, TX2, Xavier, and AGX, each more powerful
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Implementation on Embeddable Devices
57
Figure 6.3: A screenshot of the GUI during mission playback. Note the include of trajectory, speed, and altitude plots, as
well as a waterfall display, and grid containing the most anomalous images detected. Note that the coordinates
of the AUV have been recentered about (0, 0) for confidentiality reasons.
==PAGE:66==
58
6 Real-Time Implementation
Figure 6.4: The Raspberry Pi 4B with its various power and interfacing ports, microSD
card slot, and GPIO expansion header. Image from [66].
than the one before [67]. These devices can be purchased as stand-alone, production-
ready modules or as developer kits with carrier boards for rapid prototyping.
The
entry-level Jetson Nano Developer Kit costs around 85 e and is shown in Figure 6.5.
Some of its key features include: [68]
• 28-core NVIDIA Maxwell GPU
• Quad-core ARM A57 CPU @ 1.43 GHz
• 4GB 64-bit LPDDR4 Memory @ 25.6GB/s
• 472 gigaflops for AI Performance
6.4
Proposed Hardware Implementation
In order to deploy a real-time anomaly detector on the SeaCat AUV, any NVIDIA mod-
ule should prove suﬀicient. If the device will be doing work besides anomaly detection,
such as additional machine learning tasks or video processing, then the entry-level Nano
may need to be upgraded to a TX2 or even a Xavier. Carrier boards are available for
==PAGE:67==
6.4 Proposed Hardware Implementation
59
Figure 6.5: The Jetson Nano Developer Kit with its various power and interfacing
ports, microSD card slot, GPIO expansion header, and prominent heat
sink. Image from [68].
all of these modules and would be required to supply power, network, and input/output
connections.
For debugging purposes, the solutions implemented in this project generated a corre-
sponding reconstruction, loss map, hotspot, and sliding window image for each slice that
was processed. At this point, these auxiliary outputs are no longer required. But, if they
are to be saved and stored for whatever reason, or if large amounts of data are generated
by other tasks being performed by the NVIDIA, then the on-board micro-SD card that
is used as a boot device for the operating system may be insuﬀicient for additional file
storage. In this case, an external solid-state drive (SSD) may be needed.
Besides the GPU module, a carrier board, and a data storage device, the only other
requirements might be a mount or water-proof enclosure for the electronics, some sort of
heat dissipation (a fan or heat sink), along with a few cables and connectors to interface
with the existing AUV network and power system.
==PAGE:68==
60
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The primary goal of this project was to develop a procedure for performing real-time
anomaly detection on side-scan sonar imagery. Deep learning solutions were the focus as
they can provide superior flexibility and performance over traditional machine learning
techniques, especially when large amounts of data are available.
Two fundamentally different models were used. The first, autoencoders, were trained
only on normal data, which was abundant in this project. The key idea is that the mod-
els learn the underlying descriptive features and statistical distributions that define the
normal group. The models use this knowledge to produce high-quality reconstructions
of any normal image that is given as an input. The models also produce inferior recon-
structions for anomalous images, since they were never exposed to such images during
training. Then during inference, the quality of the reconstruction is then used to deter-
mine whether or not a new image is normal or anomalous. In this project, such models
proved excellent at detecting anomalies in side-scan sonar. But, as is typically the case,
they came with a trade-off. Detecting more true anomalies comes at the cost of having
to sort through more falsely-labeled normal images. A solution for striking a balance
between these competing goals was proposed in the form of cutoff scores for competing
windows. However, perhaps a less ideal but more appropriate solution is to provide the
AUV operator with a list of images, sorted by highest loss.
In the hopes of lowering the false positives rate, a second type of model was used – a
classifier. Like the autoencoders, these models are also built up from convolutional layers
for feature extraction. But, unlike autoencoders, they end with fully-connected layers for
classification. In this project, only two classes were of interest, so only a binary classifier
was needed. Unfortunately, but not unexpectedly, these models performed poorly as the
dataset was too imbalanced. Even on such a large dataset, there were too few anomalies
to properly train the classifier to properly recognize one. Ultimately, all attempts failed
for adding a binary classifier to the anomaly detection pipeline.
Still, the performance of the autoencoders showed that anomaly detection could be
performed successfully on sonar data, even if there was room for improvement.
To
demonstrated that these models could be applied in a real-time, they needed to be
implemented on either an ATLAS AUV or in some sort of simulator. The latter approach
was selected because it could be useful to ATLAS for other projects and required no
access to hardware. To accomplish this, the data collected from past missions and stored
in JSF files was extracted and converted back into a continuous stream of raw data that
was time synchronized with the original mission. To confirm this data playback was
==PAGE:70==
62
7 Conclusion
working as expected, a graphical user interface (GUI) was developed to visualize the
speed, depth, and position of the AUV during these mission playbacks. Included in this
GUI, was the sonar waterfall, providing an image representation of the seafloor recently
passed over by the AUV. Also included in the GUI was a display of the image slices
that gave the highest reconstruction losses and, therefore, corresponded to the locations
most likely to contain an anomaly.
With the mission playback functioning as expected and confirmed with the GUI,
the models were tested on devices that could be considered for implementation on the
ATLAS SeaCat AUV. These included the Raspberry Pi 4B and the GPU-equipped
NVIDIA Jetson Nano. The experiments conducted on these devices confirmed the Jetson
to be an appropriate choice and the better choice. With that verified, some general
guidelines were proposed for the hardware requirements of embedding a similar solution
on the AUV.
Although the solution developed in this project perhaps leaves room for improvement,
it serves as a proof of concept and demonstrates that real-time anomaly detection using
side-scan sonar is achievable.
These capabilities should prove immediately useful to
ATLAS and other companies that rely on AUVs.
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Atlas Elektronik. ATLAS ELEKTRONIK - Who We Are. url: https://www.
atlas-elektronik.com/who-we-are (visited on July 16, 2021).
[2]
Atlas Maridan. ATLAS MARIDAN - Who We Are. url: https://www.maridan.
atlas-elektronik.com (visited on July 16, 2021).
[3]
DeepOcean. Mohawk ROV. url: https://deepoceangroup.com/asset/mohawk-
searov (visited on July 16, 2021).
[4]
J.H. Christensen et al. “SeaShark: Towards a Modular Multi-Purpose Man-Portable
AUV.” In: 2020 IEEE/OES Autonomous Underwater Vehicles Symposium (AUV).
2020, pages 1–6. doi: 10.1109/AUV50043.2020.9267896.
[5]
thyssenkrupp Marine Systems. Modular Underwater Vehicle (MUM) Project. url:
https://www.thyssenkrupp-marinesystems.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/
press-detail-page/thyssenkrupp-marine-systems-presents-new-modular-
underwater-vehicle--mum-project-to-set-new-standard-for-unmanned-
underwater-operations-85194 (visited on July 16, 2021).
[6]
Jawaad Ullah Khan and Ho-Shin Cho. “A Distributed Data-Gathering Protocol
Using AUV in Underwater Sensor Networks.” In: 15 (2015), pages 19331–19350.
doi: 10.3390/s150819331.
[7]
Philippe Blondel. The Handbook of Side-Scan Sonar. Springer, 2009.
[8]
United States Geological Survey. Sea Floor Mapping Group. url: https://www.
usgs.gov/centers/whcmsc/science/sea-floor-mapping-group?qt-science_
center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects (visited on July 16, 2021).
[9]
A. Sinai, A. Amar, and G. Gilboa. “Mine-Like Objects detection in Side-Scan Sonar
images using a shadows-highlights geometrical features space.” In: 2016 OCEANS
MTS/IEEE Monterey. 2016. doi: 10.1109/OCEANS.2016.7760991.
[10]
Jesper Haahr Christensen, L.V. Mogensen, and O. Ravn. “Side-Scan Sonar Imag-
ing: Real-Time Acoustic Streaming.” In: IFAC (2021).
[11]
Saman Mousazadeh and Israel Cohen. “Anomaly detection in sonar images based
on wavelet domain noncausal AR-ARCH random field modeling.” In: 2010 IEEE
26-th Convention of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in Israel. 2010, pages 000306–
000309. doi: 10.1109/EEEI.2010.5662219.
==PAGE:72==
64
Bibliography
[12]
Richard Ree Brooks, Lynne L. Grewe, and S. Sitharama Iyengar. “Recognition
in the wavelet domain: a survey.” In: Journal of Electronic Imaging 10.3 (2001),
pages 757–784. doi: 10.1117/1.1381560. url: https://doi.org/10.1117/1.
1381560.
[13]
James D Hamilton and Raul Susmel. “Autoregressive conditional heteroskedastic-
ity and changes in regime.” In: Journal of Econometrics 64.1 (1994), pages 307–333.
issn: 0304-4076. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4076(94)90067-1. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0304407694900671.
[14]
L.L. Scharf and B. Friedlander. “Matched subspace detectors.” In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Signal Processing 42.8 (1994), pages 2146–2157. doi: 10.1109/78.
301849.
[15]
Jeffrey Kaeli. “Real-time anomaly detection in side-scan sonar imagery for adap-
tive AUV missions.” In: November 2016, pages 85–89. doi: 10.1109/AUV.2016.
7778653.
[16]
Xingyi Zhou, Dequan Wang, and Philipp Krähenbühl. Objects as Points. 2019.
arXiv: 1904.07850 [cs.CV].
[17]
N. Kapetanovic, N. Miskovic, and A. Tahirovic. “Saliency and Anomaly: Transition
of Concepts from Natural Images to Side-Scan Sonar Images.” In: Proceedings of
the 21st IFAC World Congress, Berlin, Germany. 2020.
[18]
Y. Zhai and M. Shah. “Visual attention detection in video sequences using spa-
tiotemporal cues.” In: MM ’06. 2006.
[19]
Jonathan Harel, C. Koch, and P. Perona. “Graph-Based Visual Saliency.” In: NIPS.
2006.
[20]
L. Itti, C. Koch, and E.Niebur. “A model of saliency-based visual attention for
rapid scene analysis.” In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 20.11 (1998), pages 1254–1259. doi: 10.1109/34.730558.
[21]
Adrian Rosebrock. Intro to anomaly detection with OpenCV, Computer Vision,
and scikit-learn. url: https://www.pyimagesearch.com/2020/01/20/intro-
to-anomaly-detection-with-opencv-computer-vision-and-scikit-learn/
(visited on July 16, 2021).
[22]
Tony Fei Liu, Kai Ting, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. “Isolation-Based Anomaly Detection.”
In: ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery From Data - TKDD 6 (March
2012), pages 1–39. doi: 10.1145/2133360.2133363.
[23]
Bahram Mohammadi, Mahmood Fathy, and Mohammad Sabokrou. Image/Video
Deep Anomaly Detection: A Survey. 2021. arXiv: 2103.01739 [cs.CV].
[24]
Mark A. Kramer. “Nonlinear principal component analysis using autoassociative
neural networks.” In: Aiche Journal 37.2 (1991), pages 233–243.
[25]
Izhak Golan and Ran El-Yaniv. Deep Anomaly Detection Using Geometric Trans-
formations. 2018. arXiv: 1805.10917 [cs.LG].
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
65
[26]
Lucas Deecke et al. “Image Anomaly Detection with Generative Adversarial Net-
works.” In: September 2018.
[27]
Samuel A. Barnett. Convergence Problems with Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs). 2018. arXiv: 1806.11382 [cs.LG].
[28]
EdgeTech. 2205 Product Brochure. url: https : / / www . edgetech . com / wp -
content/uploads/2019/07/2205- auv- and- rov- based- sonar- brochure-
020817.pdf (visited on July 16, 2021).
[29]
Billur Barshan and Hugh F Durrant-Whyte. “An inertial navigation system for a
mobile robot.” In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes 26.1 (1993), pages 54–59.
[30]
Jeff Snyder. “Doppler Velocity Log (DVL) navigation for observation-class ROVs.”
In: OCEANS 2010 MTS/IEEE SEATTLE. 2010, pages 1–9. doi: 10.1109/OCEANS.
2010.5664561.
[31]
EdgeTech. Description of EdgeTech’s JSF File Format. url: https : / / www .
edgetech.com/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/0023492_Rev_C.pdf (visited
on July 16, 2021).
[32]
G.E. Jones et al. “Acoustic Seabed Survey Methods, Analysis and Applications.”
In: Estuarine and Coastal Hydrography and Sediment Transport. Edited by R. J.
Uncles and S. B.Editors Mitchell. Cambridge University Press, 2017, pages 54–91.
doi: 10.1017/9781139644426.004.
[33]
Stephen M. Pizer et al. “Adaptive histogram equalization and its variations.”
In: Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing 39.3 (1987), pages 355–
368. issn: 0734-189X. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0734 - 189X(87 )
80186- X. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0734189X8780186X.
[34]
Xiufen Ye et al. “A Gray Scale Correction Method for Side-Scan Sonar Images
Based on Retinex.” In: Remote Sensing 11.11 (2019). issn: 2072-4292. doi: 10.
3390/rs11111281. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/11/11/1281.
[35]
The Global Tech Council. Clearing the Confusion: AI vs Machine Learning vs
Deep Learning. url: https : / / www . globaltechcouncil . org / artificial -
intelligence/clearing-the-confusion-ai-vs-machine-learning-vs-deep-
learning/ (visited on July 16, 2021).
[36]
Victor Powell. Image Kernels. url: https://setosa.io/ev/image-kernels/
(visited on July 16, 2021).
[37]
Jared Doe. A Road Map for Data Science. url: https://towardsdatascience.
com/a-road-map-for-deep-learning-b9aee0b2919f (visited on July 16, 2021).
[38]
Rezaul Karim and Ahmed Menshawy. Deep Learning By Example. Packt Publish-
ing, 2018.
==PAGE:74==
66
Bibliography
[39]
S. Khan et al. “Facial Recognition using Convolutional Neural Networks and Im-
plementation on Smart Glasses.” In: 2019 International Conference on Informa-
tion Science and Communication Technology (ICISCT). 2019, pages 1–6. doi:
10.1109/CISCT.2019.8777442.
[40]
L. Wang, Z. Lin, and A. Wong. “COVID-Net: a tailored deep convolutional neural
network design for detection of COVID-19 cases from chest X-ray images.” In:
Scientific Reports. Volume 10. 2020, pages 1–6. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-76550-
z.
[41]
J.J. Chen et al. “Classification ensembles for unbalanced class sizes in predictive
toxicology.” In: SAR and QSAR in Environmental Research 16.6 (2005). PMID:
16428129, pages 517–529. doi: 10.1080/10659360500468468. eprint: https://
doi.org/10.1080/10659360500468468. url: https://doi.org/10.1080/
10659360500468468.
[42]
Lovedeep Gondara. “Medical Image Denoising Using Convolutional Denoising Au-
toencoders.” In: December 2016, pages 241–246. doi: 10.1109/ICDMW.2016.0041.
[43]
PyTorch. Upsample. url: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/
torch.nn.Upsample.html (visited on July 16, 2021).
[44]
Alex Graves. Generating Sequences With Recurrent Neural Networks. 2014. arXiv:
1308.0850 [cs.NE].
[45]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization.
2017. arXiv: 1412.6980 [cs.LG].
[46]
John Chen. An updated overview of recent gradient descent algorithms. url: https:
//johnchenresearch.github.io/demon/ (visited on July 16, 2021).
[47]
Edward Z. Yang. Convolution Visualizer. url: https://ezyang.github.io/
convolution-visualizer/index.html (visited on July 16, 2021).
[48]
L. Huang et al. Normalization Techniques in Training DNNs: Methodology, Anal-
ysis and Application. 2020. arXiv: 2009.12836 [cs.LG].
[49]
Siddharth Sharma, Simone Sharma, and Anidhya Athaiya. “Activation Functions
in Neural Networks.” In: International Journal of Engineering Applied Sciences
and Technology. Volume 4. 21. 2021, pages 310–316. doi: 10.1109/CISCT.2019.
8777442.
[50]
NumPy. NumPy quickstart. url: https://numpy.org/devdocs/user/quickstart.
html (visited on July 16, 2021).
[51]
Pandas. 10 minutes to pandas. url: https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-
docs/stable/user_guide/10min.html (visited on July 16, 2021).
[52]
MatPlotLib. MatPlotLib Usage Guide. url: https://matplotlib.org/stable/
tutorials/introductory/usage.html#sphx-glr-tutorials-introductory-
usage-py (visited on July 16, 2021).
[53]
OpenCV. Introduction to OpenCV-Python. url: https://docs.opencv.org/4.
5.2/d0/de3/tutorial_py_intro.html (visited on July 16, 2021).
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
67
[54]
PyTorch. Learn the PyTorch Basics. url: https://pytorch.org/tutorials/
beginner/basics/intro.html (visited on July 16, 2021).
[55]
TensorFlow. TensorFlow 2 quickstart. url: https : / / www . tensorflow . org /
tutorials/quickstart/beginner (visited on July 16, 2021).
[56]
Keras. Introduction to Keras for Researchers. url: https://keras.io/getting_
started/intro_to_keras_for_researchers/ (visited on July 16, 2021).
[57]
Tensorboard. Get started with TensorBoard. url: https://www.tensorflow.org/
tensorboard/get_started (visited on July 16, 2021).
[58]
Jupyter Notebook. Introduction to the Jupyter Notebook. url: https://jupyter-
notebook.readthedocs.io/en/stable/notebook.html (visited on July 16,
2021).
[59]
Sublime Text. Sublime Text Basic Concepts. url: https://docs.sublimetext.
io/guide/getting- started/basic- concepts.html#general- conventions
(visited on July 16, 2021).
[60]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Net-
work Training by Reducing Internal Covariate Shift. 2015. arXiv: 1502.03167
[cs.LG].
[61]
Geoffrey E. Hinton et al. Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation
of feature detectors. 2012. arXiv: 1207.0580 [cs.NE].
[62]
Burr Settles. Active learning literature survey. Technical report. 2010.
[63]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv:
1512.03385 [cs.CV].
[64]
Jia Deng et al. “Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database.” In: 2009
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. Ieee. 2009, pages 248–
255.
[65]
PyTorch. WeightedRandomSampler. url: https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/
_modules/torch/utils/data/sampler.html#WeightedRandomSampler (visited
on July 16, 2021).
[66]
Raspberry Pi Foundation. Raspberry Pi 4. url: https://www.raspberrypi.org/
products/raspberry-pi-4-model-b/?variant=raspberry-pi-4-model-b-
8gb (visited on July 16, 2021).
[67]
Jetson. Embedded Systems. url: https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/autonomous-
machines/embedded-systems/ (visited on July 16, 2021).
[68]
Jetson. Getting Started with Jetson Nano Developer Kit. url: https://developer.
nvidia . com / embedded / learn / get - started - jetson - nano - devkit # intro
(visited on July 16, 2021).
==PAGE:76==
DTU Electrical Engineering
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Denmark
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00
www.elektro.dtu.dk
