==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Attacking virtualization-based obfuscation
Recovering lost instructions from embedded
emulators of virtual machine architectures
Valdemar Carøe (s153859)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract (English)
Increasing advancements in software protection products and their protection techniques
are causing severe problems for modern anti-virus products that are now struggling to
distinguish between ”clean” software and ”malicious” software for software that has been
protected by means of packing, obfuscation and/or virtualization. This study aims to de-
termine if it is possible to revert software virtualization and restore a protected procedure
to its original machine code state. Specifically, it investigates the possibility of restoring
protected procedures both manually (by means of dynamic analysis) and automatically
(by means of static analysis). In this context, dynamic analysis refers to executing and
monitoring the protected software while static analysis refers to reading and parsing the
protected software.
To test whether it is possible to restore a protected procedure to its original machine
code state, analyses were conducted for two distinct virtual machine architectures sup-
ported by a market leader in the software protection industry known as Themida. These
analyses included in-depth dissections of the virtual machine architectures as well as man-
ual attempts at restoring protected procedures and later automating that same process.
The results of these analyses were working methodologies for manually and automatically
restoring protected procedures to their original machine code states.
The resulting methodologies explicitly confirm that it is indeed possible to restore pro-
tected procedures to their original machine code states and furthermore shows that it
is possible to do so without any loss of information. However, as the thesis work was
carried out on the basis of Themida, all the herein documented results are not necessarily
applicable to other software virtualization products.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract (Danish)
Stigende fremskridt inden for softwarebeskyttelsesprodukter og deres beskyttelsesteknikker
forårsager alvorlige problemer for moderne anti-virus produkter, der nu møder store ud-
fordringer i at skelne mellem ”clean” software og ”malicious” software, for software der
er blevet beskyttet ved hjælp af pakning, obfuskering og/eller virtualisering. Denne tese
forsøger at afgøre hvorvidt det er muligt at gendanne en beskyttet procedure til dens
oprindelige maskinkode tilstand. Specifikt undersøger den muligheden for at gendanne
beskyttede procedurer både manuelt (ved hjælp af dynamisk analyse) og automatisk (ved
hjælp af statisk analyse). I denne sammenhæng henviser dynamisk analyse til kørsel og
overvågning af den beskyttede software, hvorimod statisk analyse henviser til læsning og
bearbejdelse af den beskyttede software.
For at teste, om det er muligt at gendanne en beskyttet procedure til dens oprindelige
maskinkode tilstand, blev der udført analyser for to forskellige virtuelle maskine arkitek-
turer som er understøttet af en markedsleder inden for softwarebeskyttelsesindustrien
kendt som Themida. Disse analyser omfattede dybdegående dissektioner af de virtuelle
maskine arkitekturer samt manuelle forsøg på at gendanne beskyttede procedurer og
senere automatisere den selvsamme proces. Resultaterne af disse analyser var metoder
til manuel og automatisk gendannelse af beskyttede procedurer.
De resulterende metoder bekræfter eksplicit, at det faktisk er muligt at gendanne beskyt-
tede procedurer til deres oprindelige maskinkode tilstande og viser desuden, at det er
muligt at gøre det uden tab af information. Da afhandlingens arbejde blev udført på ba-
sis af Themida, er alle de heri-dokumenterede resultater dog ikke nødvendigvis gældende
for andre softwarevirtualiseringsprodukter.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for
acquiring a master’s degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, June 20, 2021
Valdemar Carøe (s153859)
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Aim of the study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Report structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Software protection
4
2.1
Software packing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Software obfuscation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Software virtualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Themida
19
3.1
Defining the target of analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
How to setup an unpacking environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
How to unpack Themida 2.1.8.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
How to unpack Themida 2.2.5.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
The CISC architecture
29
4.1
Analysis of the virtual machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2
Recovering virtual opcodes manually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3
Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
The FISH architecture
45
5.1
Analysis of the virtual machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.2
Recovering virtual opcodes manually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Results and evaluation
62
7
Conclusion
65
A Themida CISC handlers
67
B Themida FISH handlers
81
C Themida FISH subhandlers
99
Bibliography
101
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
There are many legitimate reasons for wanting to protect a proprietary software product
from reverse-engineering and analysis efforts, as the success of a business is often tightly
correlated to the confidentiality of the inner workings of its software product(s).
For instance, licensed software requires a proprietary license validation algorithm, which,
if successfully recovered by an analyst, can potentially be reverted and used to generate
valid licenses for the software in question. This can prove fatal to the business model for
the software product.
In the gaming industry, cheaters have invaded first-person shooter games, where they
abuse in-game mechanics to see through walls or perform automatically-aimed fatal head-
shots on any opponent player in visible range. A number of legitimate players are being
coerced into quitting these games out of spite for abusive players, which can lead to mas-
sive revenue losses for game product vendors. In order to reduce the amount of abusive
players, most vendors deploy an anti-cheat solution, whose sole purpose is to detect mod-
ifications made to the game client. However, the effectiveness of an anti-cheat solution is
directly correlated to the confidentiality of the detection routines, which, if successfully
recovered by an analyst, can be bypassed to allow abusive players to continue their cheat-
ing efforts while remaining undetected by the game platform.
There are a multitude of alternative legitimate reasons for desiring to limit external access
to the internal workings of a proprietary software product. For this particular reason, a
variety of software protection techniques have been developed over the years including
software packing, software obfuscation, and last but not least, software virtualization.
These technologies have all been researched en masse, resulting in the development and
public distribution of various methods of reversal for all except the software virtualization
technique. Software virtualization therefore remains the de facto standard for present day
protection of software products.
Although initially conceived in good faith, these software protection techniques are also be-
ing used for illegitimate purposes. Due to the proven resilience against reverse-engineering,
that software virtualization provides, this technique has found its way into the malware
development community. While this might not seem alarming at a glance, the ability to
protect malware with strong software protection is proving to be a vast problem for the
anti-virus industry.
==PAGE:8==
1.1 Aim of the study
2
In a presentation[9] from 2010 by Microsoft Malware Protection Center employee, Zhenxi-
ang Jim Wang, whose primary work at Microsoft involves analysis and research of virtual
machine technology, he addresses a number of issues relating to the pervasive usage of
software protection technologies in modern malware. The main points raised throughout
the presentation, is that emulation-based analysis of binaries that have been protected
by software virtualization often leads to exhaustion of resources and execution times far
too long to tolerate, especially for on-access scans. Anti-virus products are therefore in
need of static unpacking and devirtualization templates for individual software protection
products, for which the development cycle requires a massive investment of time.
In another paper[13] from 2014 by Dr. Mafaz Mohsin Khalil Al-Anezi from Mosul Univer-
sity in Iraq, it is estimated that over 80% of modern malware samples are packed using an
arbitrary software protection product. However, given that this is presented as a growing
trend, it can be rightfully assumed that this percentage has further increased since then.
It is therefore of paramount importance that research be made in this field, such that anti-
virus products can once again protect its end-users from the clutch of malware attacks.
1.1
Aim of the study
As will be explained later in section 2.3, software virtualization makes permanent mod-
ifications to an executable binary in an effort to hide the implementation details of a
protected procedure. This thesis shall determine if it is possible to revert software virtu-
alization and restore a protected procedure to its original machine code state.
Because the area of research is vast and unexplored, this thesis will focus solely on
Themida, one of two market leaders in the software protection industry. Furthermore, to
simplify the analyses and their generated results, only 32-bit architectures will be consid-
ered throughout this thesis. However, the findings presented in this thesis will also apply
to equivalent architectures in the 64-bit domain.
Throughout the thesis, separate analyses will be presented for two distinct software vir-
tualization architectures supported by Themida. These analyses will be carried out inde-
pendently and will each attempt to answer the following research questions.
R1. How can a virtualized procedure be recovered manually using dynamic methods?
R2. How can a virtualized procedure be recovered automatically using static methods?
Both of these analyses will be carried out and documented in an indentical manner, such
that similarities and differences can be trivially identified.
Finally, it shall be discussed if the discovered results are capable of bringing much needed
value to the anti-virus industry or if further research and adjustments are necessary.
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Report structure
3
1.2
Report structure
This section presents a chapter-by-chapter summary of what to expect from this thesis.
Chapter 2, Software protection, iterates the foundational knowledge necessary to under-
stand the contents of this thesis, including various techniques within the area of research
such as packing, obfuscation and virtualization.
Chapter 3, Themida, introduces the virtual machine architectures supported by Themida
and a variety of configurations applicable to these. The chapter also introduces the target
of the analyses and details how to prepare for an analysis by unpacking an executable
binary that has been protected by Themida.
Chapter 4, The CISC architecture, details an analysis of the CISC virtual machine archi-
tecture supported by Themida. This includes dissecting the virtual machine architecture,
documenting how the interpreter works, and deriving answers to the research questions
for the given virtual machine architecture.
Chapter 5, The FISH architecture, details an analysis of the FISH virtual machine archi-
tecture supported by Themida. This includes dissecting the virtual machine architecture,
documenting how the interpreter works, and deriving answers to the research questions
for the given virtual machine architecture.
Chapter 6, Results and evaluation, gathers the results from the previous chapters, 4 and
5 respectively, and evaluates these results according to various metrics such as efficiency,
effectiveness and coverage.
Chapter 7, Conclusion, assesses the overall success of the thesis by detailing the strengths
and weaknesses of the developed solutions. Finally, the chapter concludes the thesis by
identifying subjects for future research and development.
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2
Software protection
This chapter contains an introduction to various techniques that are commonly found
in commercial software protection products. This includes how software packers protect
binaries from static analysis as well as from being debugged, modified and/or executed
in virtualized environments. The chapter further introduces commonly used mechanisms
for obfuscating native machine code to make reverse engineering efforts more tedious
and more time consuming. Finally, the chapter is concluded with an introduction to the
cutting-edge software protection technique known as code virtualization.
In order to understand how software protection helps protect binaries and how any such
type of protection can be bypassed to recover an unprotected binary, it is important to
understand how binaries work in the first place.
C
.obj
.exe
Source Code
(C, C++, etc.)
Object Files
(Machine Code)
Executable
Figure 2.1: The native compilation process.
As depicted in figure 2.1 above, when compiling a binary in a low-level unmanaged lan-
guage such as C or C++, all source code files (.c or .cpp respectively) are compiled into
separate object (.obj) files. These object files contains the machine code generated as a
result of the individual compilations. Once all object files have been generated from the
source code, these are linked together to form the final executable binary.
It is not important to understand exactly how these concepts work in greater detail, but it
is important to understand that the generated binary now contains the source code of the
application in a machine code format formally known as assembly. Any application built
for the Windows platform will have its source code transformed into Intel x86 assembly
for 32-bit applications or into Intel x86-64 assembly for 64-bit applications respectively.
Due to the fact that the source code is still present in the compiled binary albeit in a
machine code format rather than that of the original programming language, the internal
workings of the binary is inherently deductible by analysing the machine code residing in
the binary and reconstructing the original code flow. This is known as reverse engineering.
==PAGE:11==
2 Software protection
5
A compiled Windows executable follows the PE file format shown in figure 2.2 below.
MS-DOS Header
PE Header
Section Headers
Header
Sections
Section 1
Section n
IMAGE_SECTION_HEADER
IMAGE_NT_HEADERS
IMAGE_DOS_HEADER
Components
Relevant structure
...
Figure 2.2: The PE file format.
The PE file format contains a header with multiple subcomponents and a variable amount
of subsequent sections.
The first subcomponent of the header is the legacy MS-DOS header. The MS-DOS header
is followed by an MS-DOS executable stub that will only ever be reached if attempts are
made to execute the binary in DOS mode. Most Windows compilers, if not all, will write
the same universally accepted MS-DOS executable stub that prints ”This program cannot
be run in DOS mode” to the terminal. At the end of the MS-DOS header is a field that
contains the offset of the PE header.
The PE header contains two subcomponents, the file header and the optional header. The
file header contains various information about the executable file, but most importantly
it contains the intended file architecture (32-bit or 64-bit), the amount of sections in the
file and the size of the optional header in bytes. The optional header contains a plethora
of information, but most notably it contains the image base and size of the executable
(i.e. where in memory the executable has been mapped), the address of the entry point of
the executable (i.e. which procedure in the executable is the first to be run), and finally
a list of data directories. These data directories points to various clusters of information
such as which procedures the executable imports from other binaries or which procedures
the executable exports to other binaries.
The PE header is followed by a linear array of section headers. These section headers
contains information about individual sections in the executable such as the name of the
section, the physical offset and size of the section data in the executable file on disk,
the virtual address and size of the section when mapped into memory and various charac-
teristics about the section such as section type, section alignment and section permissions.
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Software packing
6
Subsequent to all the header subcomponents, the executable file contains the data chunks
for the various file sections. By convention, the primary code section that contains the
executable code of the binary is the .text section which is usually listed as the first
section in an executable file. Following the code section is an arbitrary number of data
sections such as the .bss section which contains uninitialized global or static data, the
.data section which contains initialized global or static data or the .rsrc section which
contains resource data such as images or icons used throughout the executable.
Executable code sections in a compiled binary contain raw machine code in which each en-
coded instruction has a one-to-one correlation to a relevant assembly language mnemonic.
This essentially makes raw machine code interpretable in a humanly readable format. By
parsing through the code sections of a compiled executable binary, most notably the
.text section, it is possible to read the machine code stored in the binary.
This is
usually done using a disassembler as shown in figure 2.3 below.
.exe
Executable
x86
Source Code
(Assembly)
Disassembler
Figure 2.3: The native decompilation process.
A disassembler is a primitive file parser that is able to locate executable code sections in a
binary file and translate the encoded raw machine code instructions to their correspond-
ing assembly language mnemonic. This is essentially the enabler of reverse engineering of
executable binaries, as it allows an analyst to read the underlying code stored in a given
binary.
However, a disassembler is not to be confused with a decompiler, which is a similar file
parser with a far more sophisticated capability of further translating the assembly code
resulting from the disassembling of the executable binary to a higher-level language such
as C or C++. In the majority of cases, this allows for much faster analysis of binaries as
higher-level languages are more concise and easier to read.
2.1
Software packing
Due to the structure of the PE file format as discussed above and the fact that executable
binaries contains raw machine code in their respective code sections that can be parsed
and read using a disassembler, these binaries are neither efficient in terms of size nor
resistant towards code analysis efforts. In an attempt to combat these known weaknesses,
a series of software protection techniques have been developed over the years. The first
such technique to be conceived was software packing which can be seen as the first line
of defense against reverse engineering efforts.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Software packing
7
Back when software packing was initially introduced, the capacity of storage devices were
incomparable to current standards and transmission speeds were even worse. To this end,
software vendors would begin to compress their executable binaries and turn them into
archives that would self-extract during runtime. This greatly reduced the storage costs
necessary to transfer these components and allowed installation medias such as CD-ROMs
to carry packages that would normally exceed the maximum capacity of the storage media.
Interestingly, creating self-extracting compressed executable binaries also proved useful
for less benevolent actors such as malware developers. Compressing all the code sections
of an executable binary would make reverse engineering infeasible as the original raw ma-
chine code stored in these code sections would no longer be stored in its original format.
Furthermore, this type of compression also masked literal strings stored in data sections
as well as modify signatures of the raw machine code stored in code sections, allowing
potentially malicious executable binaries to bypass detection from signature-based scan-
ning performed by antivirus softwares in order to detect known malicious patterns.
A number of alternatives to this type of software packing exists, in which the executable
binary is packed using encryption rather than compression or using both encryption and
compression in combination. The packing process is the exact same for either variant of
the technique and is depicted in figure 2.4 below.
Original Header
Code Sections
(.text, etc.)
Data Sections
(.data, .rdata, .rsrc, etc.)
Packed Sections
Packed Sections
Unpacking Stub
Original file components
Packed file components
Modified Header
Packer
Figure 2.4: The general software packing process.
The software packing technique works by compressing and/or encrypting all sections of the
executable binary and inserting an unpacking stub responsible for decompressing and/or
decrypting the other sections of the executable binary during runtime. The entry point
of the application is changed from the original entry point (OEP) located in the .text
section to the unpacking stub located at an arbitrary location in the file. Once the file is
executed, the new entry point of the executable binary will point to the unpacking stub
which will restore the packed sections to their original states and transfer execution to
the original entry point and thereby continue execution of the executable binary without
any noticable difference to the end-user.
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Software packing
8
However, this software packing solution suffers a major vulnerability that makes it insuf-
ficient as a stand-alone protection technique. Due to the fact that the unpacking stub of
a protected executable binary will restore all other sections to their original states during
runtime, it is possible to simply dump the binary from memory after the self-extraction
process and thereby procure an unprotected version of the executable binary. For this
very reason, a range of protection techniques have been conceived to complement this
generic software packing technique.
Anti-debugging techniques are implemented to detect or deter the use of debuggers during
execution of a binary. For example, it is possible to detect a live debugger by invoking the
IsDebuggerPresent Windows API or checking the NtGlobalFlag member of the Process
Environment Block (PEB), both of which can be used to indicate if the current process is
being controlled by a debugger. An alternative way of detecting that the current process
is being debugged is by fetching timestamps at two distinct points in the execution flow
of the application and comparing these to see if the difference between the timestamps
exceeds the expected default execution time. This should only happen when an analyst
is manually stepping through the binary code using a debugger as the process is then
paused on each instruction until the analyst instructs the debugger to continue execution.
There is a plethora of other methods for detecting or even breaking debugging efforts,
but it would require a sizable amount of effort and space to describe them all in greater
detail while adding little to no additional value towards the goal of this thesis and they
have therefore been omitted.
Anti-virtualization techniques are implemented to detect the use of virtualized environ-
ments such as VMWare or VirtualBox and to change the runtime behaviour of the ex-
ecutable binary when running in any such sandboxed environment. It is no secret that
malware analysts or reverse engineers in general use virtualized environments to run, un-
pack or analyse executable binaries. This is both due to the fact that the repercussions of
running these potentially malicious binaries does not have an impact on the host system
as well as the fact that these guest systems can be rolled back to a previous point in
time once the analysis of a binary has been concluded. By forcing the flow of binaries
in virtualized environments to either terminate the process prematurely or to execute
an alternative branch of the application that is only reached from within guest systems,
it is possible to deter reverse engineers of low to mediocre skill from analysing a given
executable binary or to trick them into misinterpreting what the binary actually does.
There are many different ways to determine if the current process is running in a virtu-
alized environment such as checking for known services, processes, files, registry keys or
even MAC addresses since hypervisors such as VMWare uses static MAC address prefixes.
Anti-tampering techniques are implemented to prevent an end-user from making modifi-
cations to either the raw file on disk or to the runtime process once mapped into memory.
This type of software protection serves a variety of different purposes such as to stop an
advanced analyst from patching out other software protection features present in the ex-
ecutable binary or to stop cracking groups from removing proprietary integrity checks in
licensed software. This is achieved by computing a checksum for each code section in the
binary during runtime and comparing the results to precomputed unmodified checksums.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Software packing
9
Anti-dumping techniques are implemented to prevent the inherent flaw in software pack-
ers as described above, in which an analyst can dump a compressed and/or encrypted
binary from memory after the self-extraction process has been carried out. A naive ap-
proach to achieving this type of protection is to clear the entire file header in memory by
overwriting it with null-bytes, as the file header has already lived out its purpose once the
file has been mapped into memory. However, while the file header may no longer exist
in memory and while dumping this memory mapped file may no longer create runnable
executable binaries, it is possible to repair these dumps by copying the header from the
protected executable binary on disk and modifying the entry point field so that it points
to the original entry point found in the unpacked .text code section.
However, an effective approach that most modern software packers appear to use is the
Import Address Table (IAT) hijacking technique in which a proxy call stub is inserted
into the protected executable binary. This proxy call stub is responsible for dynamically
resolving and transfering execution to requested imported procedure calls. In unprotected
executable binaries, imported procedures are invoked as shown in figure 2.5 below.
Header
Code Section (.text)
Data Section (.rdata)
Original file components
hFile = CreateFile(...);
WriteFile(hFile, ...);
CloseFile(hFile);
CreateFile
Kernel32.dll
WriteFile
CloseFile
Figure 2.5: Imported procedures in an unprotected file.
Inside any executable binary that follows the PE file format there is an Import Name
Table (INT) which contains the names of libraries referenced throughout the executable
binary as well as all external procedures referenced from these libraries. These are known
as imports. When an executable binary is being loaded into memory, the loader attempts
to resolve all imports found in the INT by ensuring that the referenced libraries are also
loaded into memory and by writing the location of all imported procedures from these
loaded libraries into the Import Address Table (IAT).
For example, in figure 2.5 above, the executable binary references three distinct proce-
dures from the kernel32.dll library. Effectively, this means that the INT will contain the
name of the library, kernel32.dll, as well as the names of the three imported procedures
CreateFile, WriteFile and CloseFile. Once the loader attempts to map this executable
binary into memory, the kernel32.dll library will be loaded aswell and the location of
these three imported procedures will be written into the IAT. Now in order to invoke
e.g. CreateFile, the executable binary will invoke an entry from the IAT corresponding
to where the executable binary expects the imported CreateFile location to be stored.
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Software packing
10
In protected executable binaries, for which the IAT hijacking technique has been applied,
imported procedures are invoked as shown in figure 2.6 below.
Header
Code Section (.text)
Data Section (.rdata)
Packed file components
Import Resolving Stub
hFile = Function1(...);
Function2(hFile, ...);
Function3(hFile);
Function1
?
Function2
Function3
Dynamically resolve imports
Figure 2.6: Imported procedures in a protected file.
Basically, IAT hijacking works by stripping the INT of the executable binary so that the
loader is not made aware of any imports that needs to be resolved. As a result, the IAT is
never populated by the loader, and the location of imported procedures used throughout
the executable binary are therefore not known. Since the INT is no longer populated and
since the IAT still needs resolving in order to make the executable binary functional, the
software packer performs dynamic resolving of the imports during the unpacking process.
Any attempts at dumping the unpacked executable binary from memory will now gener-
ate faulty binaries as the imported procedures are never resolved by the loader. However,
manual reconstruction of the INT is possible so long as the analyst is able to figure out
which imported procedures the entries of the IAT refers to. For this reason, most modern
software packers apply an additional layer of security to this technique by pointing the
IAT to convoluted obfuscated code chunks that eventually flow into an imported proce-
dure rather than storing the raw location of the imported procedure in the IAT.
It should be noted that for each of the software packing techniques discussed throughout
this section thus far, there exists a direct counter technique. In other words, none of these
software packing techniques are irreversible. With the correct approach and methodology
it is possible to bypass every single one of these software packing techniques or to revert
the modifications they may have imposed on the executable binary entirely. Realistically,
this means that while software packing can make reverse engineering an executable binary
very hard and tedious for the mediocre analyst, it should always be assumed that someone
will eventually manage to successfully create a functional dump of the executable binary
in its unpacked (and therefore unprotected) state.
Because of this, advanced modern software packers also use obfuscation and virtualization
to make permanent modifications to the binary that does not self-revert during runtime.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Software obfuscation
11
2.2
Software obfuscation
When building an executable binary in C or C++, the compiler performs a series of op-
timizations on the source code before assembling it into machine code instructions. The
product of this optimization is usually more concise and easier to read than the original
version of the code. Software obfuscation makes use of this observation by intentionally
reducing the optimization of the machine code stored in an executable binary. While the
executable binary might suffer a loss of performance, the additional noise in the machine
code instructions makes analysis efforts less productive and far more time consuming.
Due to the fact that these obfuscation techniques are applied to the raw machine code
stored in an executable binary, this section will focus solely on the obfuscation of Intel
x86 assembly language constructs in 32-bit execution mode.
Obfuscation practically aims to turn an arbitrary group of instructions into a larger group
of instructions that accomplishes the exact same functional goal. This can be done in a
variety of ways. One such method is by emulating one or more instructions using different
instructions as depicted in figure 2.7 below.
pop eax
inc esp
add esp,03
pop eax
push [esp]
add esp,04
mov eax,[esp]
not esp
neg esp
Figure 2.7: Instruction expansion obfuscation.
The pop instruction is responsible for moving the top element of the stack into a desig-
nated destination and removing it from the top of the stack. In this case, that destination
is eax. There are many ways to emulate this behaviour such as by moving the top element
of the stack ([esp]) into eax and then, since the stack grows backwards, incrementing the
stack pointer (esp) by the size of one stack element which is 4 bytes in 32-bit mode. The
pop eax instruction has now been split into two instructions that performs the same task.
This approach can then be further applied to the newly generated construct. For example,
moving the top element of the stack into eax can be accomplished by using the push
instruction to move it onto the top of the stack and then using the pop instruction to
move it from the top of the stack into eax. Interestingly, the construct has now arrived
at another pop instruction, which is also the core of this whole construct expansion. This
is indicative of the fact that this expansion approach can potentially be performed an
unlimited amount of times.
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Software obfuscation
12
It should be mentioned that there are multiple different ways to emulate most constructs
and that almost every single instruction in the Intel x86 instruction set can be emulated
using other instructions from the same instruction set. The most effective way to counter-
act this type of obfuscation is to do it in reverse by collapsing instructions in larger
instruction groups to form smaller instruction groups. This technique is known as peephole
optimization and requires a large series of precompiled optimization patterns, as it is only
possible to collapse patterns that are known beforehand. However, it is also possible to
increase the size of instruction groups based on constant expansion rather than instruction
expansion. One such method is depicted in figure 2.8 below.
mov eax,deadbeef
mov eax,1fcbd0f9
xor eax,baadf00d
shl eax,00000001
add eax,12345678
Figure 2.8: Constant expansion obfuscation.
Instead of assigning a desired constant value directly to a designated destination, the
constant value is dynamically constructed through the usage of arithmetic and/or similar
instructions. Since constant values can be constructed in an infinite amount of ways,
there are no limitations to how substantially this obfuscation technique can be applied
to expand an arbitrary instruction group. The most effective way to counteract this type
of obfuscation is to compute the result of these operations and to replace the instruction
sequence with the resulting constant value. This technique is known as constant folding.
Another similar method of constant obfuscation is depicted in figure 2.9 below.
add eax,deadbeef
push ecx
pop ecx
add eax,ecx
mov ecx,deadbeef
Figure 2.9: Constant duplication obfuscation.
Instead of using a desired constant value directly in an arithmetic operation, the constant
value is proxied through a temporary carrier. The push and pop instructions are used to
backup the original contents of the temporary carrier and to restore the contents after it
has served its purpose. This example could be simplified in the C programming language
as expanding [int x = 0xdeadbeef;] into [int tmp = 0xdeadbeef; int x = tmp;].
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Software obfuscation
13
In most cases this technique is used in conjunction with the constant expansion obfusca-
tion technique, as any combination of arithmetic, bitwise or similar instructions could be
used to form the constant value that goes into the temporary carrier. The most effective
way to counteract this type of obfuscation is to perform elimination of the temporary car-
rier by writing the resulting constant value directly into the arithmetic operation. This
technique is known as constant propagation.
Next to expanding existing instruction groups, modern obfuscation engines also insert
seemingly random code that does not have any effect on the state of the application and
thus does not impact the overall task carried out by the instruction group. This type of
obfuscation is known as deadcode insertion and is depicted in figure 2.10 below.
sub eax,deadbeef
sub eax,deadbeef
push baadf00d
add esp,08
pop ebx
push ebx
push deadbeef
mov ebx,61db8a95
xor ebx,20ec4d32
Figure 2.10: Deadcode insertion obfuscation.
In this regard, deadcode refers to code that does not attribute any meaningful changes
to the instruction group. In other words, deadcode instructions are inserted for the sole
purpose of adding mass to the instruction group and does not make lasting changes to
the state of the application throughout its execution. When this type of obfuscation has
been carried out, it can be difficult to locate the ”real” instructions that make stateful
changes to the application.
In the above figure, there are two subgroups of deadcode constructs each of which have
been given a different color. In the orange group, the add esp,08 instruction removes
two 32-bit objects from the top of the stack, effectively making the previous two push
instructions obsolete. In the red group, the pop ebx instruction removes a 32-bit object
from the top of the stack and stores it in ebx, effectively overwriting any prior changes
made to ebx. Furthermore, since the preceding push instruction operates on the same
register as the pop instruction, the two instructions ends up cancelling eachother.
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Software obfuscation
14
The most effective way to counteract this type of obfuscation is to perform elimination
of any instruction in the instruction group that does not propagate any meaningful in-
formation to the state of the application. This technique is known as deadcode elimination.
However, not all code obfuscation techniques increases obscurity by increasing mass. In-
stead, some obfuscation techniques aims at making it harder to navigate the instruction
group for analysis purposes or to visualize the entity as a whole. These techniques usually
pertain to modifying or otherwise controlling the flow of the application. The most basic
of these techniques is control flow obfuscation as depicted in figure 2.11 below.
mov ebx,deadbeef
add ebx,baadf00d
xor ebx,cafebabe
...
...
mov ebx,deadbeef
add ebx,baadf00d
xor ebx,cafebabe
...
...
Obfuscated code flow
Normal code flow
Figure 2.11: Control flow obfuscation.
In a compiler-generated version of an instruction group, the code flow is linear. In other
words, the execution of the code flows in a single direction. The obvious exceptions to this
claim are loops or similar constructs. When applying basic control flow obfuscation, the
execution order of non-looping constructs is shuffled so that this basis no longer holds true.
This is usually done by splitting an instruction group into smaller subgroups and placing
each subgroup in a random location in the executable binary. These subgroups are then
connected by appending a jmp instruction that transfers program control to the next sub-
group in the original order of execution. This makes no logical changes to the executed
instruction group, but it does make manual analysis of the executable binary infeasible
as the analyst can only hover over a single subgroup in a disassembler at a time and
therefore has to remember or write down every single subgroup he or she passes through.
In terms of automatic analysis, however, this is very straight-forward to implement. The
most effective way to counteract this type of obfuscation is to collect the original instruc-
tion group by tracing through each individual subgroup. This is done using the appended
jmp instruction to locate the next entry in the subgroup chain. When the entire instruc-
tion group has been collected, the intermediate jmp instructions are then eliminated. This
technique is known as control flow optimization.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Software obfuscation
15
There are also other variants of this type of obfuscation, one of which is branch obfuscation
as depicted in figure 2.12 below.
mov eax,deadbeef
...
...
mov eax,deadbeef
jnz ...
xor ecx,ecx
...
...
Obfuscated code flow
Normal code flow
Figure 2.12: Branch obfuscation.
The idea behind this obfuscation technique is the same as for control flow obfuscation, but
instead of using unconditional jmp instructions, this technique makes use of conditional
jcc instructions. Due to the fact that each inserted jcc instruction has two potential
destinations, one for true and one for false, it is less trivial to analyse, as it is no longer
possible to simply follow the instruction destination.
Usually, when implementing this type of obfuscation, the conditional jcc instruction is
used to emulate an unconditional jmp instruction by forcing a specific condition to hold
true prior to reaching the jcc instruction. In this case, a xor ecx,ecx instruction resets
the value of ecx to zero and thereby sets the ZF (zero-flag) field of the EFLAGS register to
true. This results in the jnz (jump if not zero) instruction never transfering execution
to its true-branch destination.
The most effective way to counteract this type of obfuscation is to verify if the conditional
jcc instruction depends on a known or an unknown state. If the instruction depends on
an unknown state, i.e. a state that is not specified by the instruction group itself, it can
be assumed that the conditional jcc instruction originates from the original instruction
group and is not a part of this obfuscation technique. However, if the instruction depends
on a known state, the state can be predicted by computing the outcome of the instruc-
tions leading to the known state and it is thereby possible to decide whether or not to
follow the conditional branch. This technique is known as branch prediction.
Conclusively, the obfuscation techniques shown in this section all suffer the same level of
weakness against generic compiler theory constructs and optimization algorithms. This
makes them less than ideal as primary drivers for modern software protection. Modern
software protection thus require more specialized obfuscation techniques that are not
defeated by generic optimization techniques.
==PAGE:22==
2.3 Software virtualization
16
2.3
Software virtualization
Software virtualization, also known as code virtualization or VM-based code obfuscation, is
a sophisticated obfuscation technique based on instruction emulation rather than instruc-
tion group expansion. This technique in its many forms is the flagship product of leading
solutions in the software protection market, including Themida by Oreans Technologies
and VMProtect by VMProtect Software.
This obfuscation technique can be summarized as translating the native machine code of
an executable binary into instructions from an arbitrary, potentially custom, architecture
and emulating these instructions by embedding a virtual machine capable of interpreting
these into the executable binary. An example follows in figure 2.13 below.
01 10    ld 0x10
03 01    sd r1
01 01    ld 0x01
02 01    ld r1
04       add
03 02    sd r2
mov eax,0x10
lea ebx,[eax+1]
Virtualizer
Original Code
(Intel-x86 Platform)
Transformed Code
(VM-RISC Platform)
Figure 2.13: Example of code transformation for a stack-based RISC VM.
The original x86 code depicted in figure 2.13 above mimics a simple assignment in C,
which could have also been written as [int x = 0x10; int y = x+1;]. When protect-
ing the executable binary with a software virtualization product, this native machine
code is translated into an arbitrary custom architecture. In this particular case, that
architecture is a made-up stack-based RISC architecture which draws heavy mnemonic
insiration from the RISC-V instruction set architecture.
Once the original machine code has been translated into the custom architecture, a small
virtual machine capable of interpreting and executing these custom instructions is em-
bedded into the executable binary. Furthermore, the original machine code is removed
from the binary and replaced with a trampoline gadget that loads the byte-code for the
custom instructions to be executed and jumps into the embedded virtual machine. An
example of this can be seen in figure 2.14 below.
push [opcodes]
jmp vm_entrypoint
VM Entrypoint
VM Dispatcher
lodsb
movzx eax,al
jmp [edi+eax*4]
pop esi
lea ebp,[context]
lea edi,[handlers]
jmp vm_dispatch
VM Trampoline
Figure 2.14: Example of main stages in a stack-based RISC VM.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Software virtualization
17
In the above figure, there are three undefined symbols, opcodes, context and handlers.
The opcodes symbol refers to a buffer that contains the byte-code of the custom instruc-
tions to be executed by the virtual machine. The context symbol refers to a structure
that contains all the variables necessary for the virtual machine to operate. This includes
the general-purpose registers supported by the architecture as well as the base address of
the executable binary in memory, which is used to align addresses for invoking procedures
that are external to the virtual machine. In other implementations that are structured
differently, the context may also contain other vital constructs such as an internal in-
struction pointer or a pointer to an emulated stack. The handlers symbol refers to a
function table containing all the procedures responsible for emulating single instructions
in the custom architecture. In other words, there is a designated single procedure for all
instructions in the custom architecture instruction set, which is responsible for carrying
out the expected behaviour of that single instruction.
As shown in figure 2.14 above, there are three main stages aside from the handler proce-
dures. These are the VM Trampoline, the VM Entrypoint and the VM Dispatcher. Each
protected function in the executable binary has its own VM Trampoline responsible for
loading its particular byte-code buffer and flowing into the VM Entrypoint. However, all
the individual VM Trampoline areas of protected functions flow into the same unique VM
Entrypoint, which is responsible for loading all necessary constructs such as the context
structure and the handlers table. Finally, the VM Dispatcher is responsible for invoking
the individual instruction handlers as depicted in figure 2.15 below.
Handler 01
Load 8-bit constant
VM Dispatcher
Handler 02
Load 32-bit register
Handler 03
Store 32-bit register
Handler 04
Add 32-bit values
lodsb
movzx eax,al
pop [ebp+eax*4]
lodsb
movzx eax,al
push [ebp+eax*4]
lodsb
movzx eax,al
push eax
pop eax
add [esp],eax
Figure 2.15: Example of VM handlers for a stack-based RISC VM.
As seen in the above figure, each instruction handler is implemented as a micro procedure
that performs a single trivial task, such as loading a 32-bit context register onto the stack
or removing an element from the stack by storing it back into a 32-bit context register.
After each handler procedure has been invoked, the execution flow returns to the VM
Dispatcher for redirection into the next handler procedure in the byte-code sequence.
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Software virtualization
18
The above example showcases a simplified generic model for embedded virtual machines
in software virtualization products. However, the model varies between different virtual
machine architectures as will be discovered later in this thesis. This is especially true
when accounting for virtual machine architectures supported by different software pro-
tection vendors. Some custom architectures mimics the Intel-x86 architecture closely by
using a similar instruction set or by using similar general-purpose registers, while other
architectures might have a completely different instruction set or support anything from
1 to 20 general-purpose registers. Some implementations even remove the single unique
VM Dispatcher routine by appending a similar scheme to each of the handler procedures.
Whereas the obfuscation methods showcased in the previous section had simple counter
techniques inspired by compiler-theory designs and algorithms, software virtualization is
much more sophisticated and requires a far more tailored approach. Due to the varying
nature of custom architectures, it is extremely infeasible, if not impossible, to create a
catch-all algorithm for counteracting this type of obfuscation. Analysts must hence focus
on a single specific architecture when devising a counter-agent.
However, the methodology of recovering instructions that have been protected by software
virtualization can be generalized into the following high-level steps.
1. Deduce the functional responsibility of each individual handler procedure.
2. Map the byte-code sequence to handler procedures (recreate the code-flow).
3. Translate the custom architecture code-flow back to its original architecture.
Since most virtual machines operate with instruction handlers implemented as micro pro-
cedures, the first step is generally the easiest. These handlers are usually obfuscated, but
using counter-techniques elaborated on in section 2.2 above, it is possible to reduce these
handlers to nothing but their core instructions. Once reduced to its core, it is usually
trivial to deduce the purpose of each individual handler procedure.
Mapping the byte-code sequence to its respective handler procedures in order to recre-
ate the code-flow can range from extremely trivial to very tricky depending on how the
virtual machine is implemented. Some embedded architectures operate on encrypted byte-
code sequences that are decrypted during runtime, as will be shown later on in this thesis.
Lastly, translating the recreated code-flow of a custom architecture back to its original
architecture, in this case Intel-x86, can prove extremely problematic. This is usually the
hardest step in the process, depending on how closely the custom architecture mimics
the original architecture. For example, it can prove very difficult to translate a custom
architecture code snippet that concurrently utilizes 20 general-purpose registers into a
code-snippet that carries out the same machine logic in the Intel-x86 architecture which
has only 8 general-purpose registers, of which one is reserved for the stack.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Themida
This chapter aims to introduce Themida by Oreans Technologies. The vendor of Themida,
Oreans Technologies, offer two additional products, Code Virtualizer and WinLicense.
Code Virtualizer is a stand-alone software virtualization product and the core of the rest
of the product catalogue. Themida is an extension of Code Virtualizer that additionally
features software packing, software obfuscation and more. Similarly, WinLicense is an
extension of Themida that additionally features advanced licensing control.
At present, Oreans Technologies with their flagship product, Themida, is one of the lead-
ers in the software protection market challenged only by VMProtect. Software protection
products such as Enigma, ASProtect and Obsidium support software virtualization tech-
nologies aswell, albeit at an extremely immature level in comparison to that of Themida
and VMProtect.
The software virtualization technology supported by Themida has been in constant evolu-
tion since the initial release of Themida in December 2004, with its most notable changes
listed below.
• Themida [1.8.0.0] (05-Sep-2006)
[+] Added new mutable RISC-128 processor (virtual machine)
[+] Added new mutable CISC processor (virtual machine)
• Themida [1.8.2.0] (06-Oct-2006)
[+] Added new processor (CISC-2) in virtual machine
• Themida [2.2.5.0] (03-Oct-2013)
[+] New Virtual Machine added (TIGER architecture)
[+] New Virtual Machine added (FISH architecture)
• Themida [2.2.8.0] (18-Mar-2014)
[+] Added PUMA VM (White, Red, Black)
[+] Added SHARK VM (White, Red, Black)
• Themida [2.3.5.0] (22-Jun-2015)
[+] Added DOLPHIN virtual machine
[+] Added EAGLE virtual machine
• Themida [2.3.9.0] (13-Nov-2015)
[!] Removed support for old CISC/RISC VMs
==PAGE:26==
3 Themida
20
In the above changelog list, adding a new virtual machine actually means adding support
for a new type of custom architecture. In terms of Themida, a distinction can be made
between the old architectures and the new architectures as shown in table 3.1 below.
The old architectures
The new architectures
CISC, CISC-2,
FISH, TIGER, DOLPHIN,
RISC-64, RISC-128
PUMA, SHARK, EAGLE
Table 3.1: All virtual machines supported by Themida.
Interestingly, all virtual machines supported by Themida are mutable in the sense that
parts of the virtual machines are randomly generated so that each instance of a virtual
machine is unique. Furthermore, Themida allows the client to choose between different
settings for each of the virtual machine architectures. The old architectures supports a
range of settings as shown in table 3.2 below.
Setting
Options
Multiprocessor (CISC and CISC-2 only)
1 CPU
2 CPUs
4 CPUs
8 CPUs
Opcode Type
Static opcodes
Metamorphic - Level 1
Metamorphic - Level 2
Metamorphic - Level 3
Dynamic Opcode
Disabled
20% Dynamic
40% Dynamic
60% Dynamic
80% Dynamic
Table 3.2: The settings supported by the old architectures.
The names assigned to these settings are not very descriptive of their functional purpose,
so a minor description is in order.
• The Multiprocessor setting allows multiple mutable instances of the same virtual
machine architecture to be generated for a single binary. This adds greatly to the
overall complexity of the executable binary.
• The Opcode Type setting determines the complexity of the virtual machine by de-
ciding the level of obfuscation applied throughout the main areas as well as the
handler procedures in the virtual machine.
• The Dynamic Opcode setting determines the amount of deadcode instructions (in
the custom architecture) to be added to the byte-code buffer right before the original
translated instructions.
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Defining the target of analysis
21
The new architectures no longer support the same level of fine-grained settings as the old
architectures, but instead support a three-level color setting, WHITE, RED and BLACK.
In reality, the color settings are symbolic names for roughly the same functionality as
the Opcode Type setting from the old architectures in that they determine the level of
obfuscation applied throughout the main areas as well as the handler procedures in the
virtual machine.
• The WHITE setting is the lowest level of obfuscation, and feature minor application
of instruction expansion and deadcode insertion.
• The RED setting is the medium level of obfuscation, and feature moderate applica-
tion of instruction expansion, constant expansion, deadcode insertion, and control
flow obfuscation.
• The BLACK setting is the highest level of obfuscation, and feature excessive ap-
plication of instruction expansion, constant expansion, deadcode insertion, control
flow obfuscation and branch obfuscation.
In the new architectures, a further distinction can be made between core architectures and
layered architectures. Core architectures are basic stand-alone architectures and includes
FISH, TIGER and DOLPHIN. Layered architectures are architectures that consists of
nested core architectures and includes PUMA, SHARK and EAGLE. An overview of the
layers involved in these architectures can be found in table 3.3 below, where each row
reads ”[Name] is actually [Layer 1] virtualized by [Layer 2]”.
Name
Layer 1
Layer 2
PUMA
TIGER
FISH
SHARK
FISH
TIGER
EAGLE
FISH
DOLPHIN
Table 3.3: All layered virtual machines supported by Themida.
Despite the amount of information being illustrated in this thesis, the internal workings
of Themida are largely undocumented in the public domain. This especially holds true
for the new architectures. The only published works about the internal workings of the
software virtualization technology by Themida, is found to be “Inside Code Virtualizer”
from 2007 [3], which focuses on an early version of the CISC virtual machine architecture.
Unfortunately, most section of the paper appears rushed and does not adequately explain
the vital parts of the virtual machine architecture. However, the paper did inspire parts
of the naming conventions and syntax used throughout this thesis for constructs in the
custom architecture instruction sets.
3.1
Defining the target of analysis
The subsequent chapters, 4 and 5, aims to dissect and understand the old CISC architec-
tures and the new FISH architecture. The chosen primary target for analysis throughout
these chapters is a simple application written in C as shown in listing 3.1 below.
==PAGE:28==
3.1 Defining the target of analysis
22
1 #include <stdio.h>
2 #include "ThemidaSDK.h"
3
4 __declspec(naked) int test()
5 {
6
VM_START
7
__asm
8
{
9
push ecx
10
xor ecx, ecx
11
mov ecx, 0x05
12
add ecx, 0xbe
13
sub ecx, 0x34
14
shl ecx, 0x08
15
mov eax, ecx
16
pop ecx
17
ret
18
}
19
VM_END
20 }
21
22 int main()
23 {
24
int n = test();
25
printf("%x", n);
26
return 0;
27 }
Listing 3.1: The program to be analysed.
The preprocessor macros, VM_START and VM_END are obtained from the Themida SDK,
and marks the area to be protected by software virtualization. These macros work for all
32-bit versions of Themida. The test function was written in native x86 assembly for
precise control over the instructions that must be recovered later in this thesis. Once the
application has been compiled, it is a good idea to open the resulting executable binary
in a disassembler such that the general layout of the binary can be assessed. For example,
the main function of the executable binary is found to be as shown in listing 3.2 below.
.text:00401040 ; int main(int argc, const char **argv, const char **envp)
.text:00401040 _main
proc near
.text:00401040
.text:00401040 argc
= dword ptr
0x04
.text:00401040 argv
= dword ptr
0x08
.text:00401040 envp
= dword ptr
0x0C
.text:00401040
.text:00401040
call
sub_401000
.text:00401045
push
eax
.text:00401046
push
offset Format
; "%x"
.text:0040104B
call
ds:printf
.text:00401051
add
esp, 0x08
.text:00401054
xor
eax, eax
.text:00401056
retn
.text:00401056
.text:00401056 _main
endp
Listing 3.2: The main function in the program after being compiled.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Defining the target of analysis
23
Here, the main function invokes another function located at address 401000, which we
can assume to be the test function, and uses the value returned from this function in a
subsequent invocation of the printf function. The function that is assumed to be the
test function is found to be as shown in listing 3.3 below.
.text:00401000 sub_401000
proc near
.text:00401000
.text:00401000 ; ---------------------------------------------------------------
.text:00401000
db EB, 10, 57, 4C, 20, 20, 0C, 00, 00
.text:00401009
db 00, 00, 00, 00, 00, 57, 4C, 20, 20
.text:00401012 ; ---------------------------------------------------------------
.text:00401012
.text:00401012
push
ecx
.text:00401013
xor
ecx, ecx
.text:00401015
mov
ecx, 0x05
.text:0040101A
add
ecx, 0xBE
.text:00401020
sub
ecx, 0x34
.text:00401023
shl
ecx, 0x08
.text:00401026
mov
eax, ecx
.text:00401028
pop
ecx
.text:00401029
retn
.text:00401029
.text:00401029 ; ---------------------------------------------------------------
.text:0040102A
db EB, 10, 57, 4C, 20, 20, 0D, 00, 00
.text:00401033
db 00, 00, 00, 00, 00, 57, 4C, 20, 20
.text:00401033 ; ---------------------------------------------------------------
.text:00401033
.text:00401033 sub_401000
endp
Listing 3.3: The test function in the program after being compiled.
Notice how the VM_START and VM_END preprocessor macros have expanded into these ir-
regular binary chunks that can be easily identified by Themida. Interestingly, they are
both initiated by EB 10 which is the binary representation for a jump instruction that
skips over the rest of the bytes in the binary chunk.
Essentially, this means that the binary chunks allows the execution flow to run through
them without causing disruption in the application. Obviously, this only occurs when a
tagged binary is executed prior to being protected by Themida. This is a very important
feature, as had the function not been declared naked (i.e. compiled without a prologue
or epilogue), the VM_START macro would have appeared after the function prologue and
the VM_END macro would have appeared before the function epilogue. Effectively, this
means that the execution flow of the application would have run through both of them
everytime the test function was invoked.
The binary is ready to have software virtualization applied to it by Themida. Due to
the preprocessor macros being supported by all 32-bit versions of Themida, the binary
need not be recompiled between the two subsequent chapters and can furthermore be
protected over and over by the same protection template to determine variabilities in the
analysed virtual machine architectures.
==PAGE:30==
3.2 How to setup an unpacking environment
24
3.2
How to setup an unpacking environment
When Themida applies software virtualization to an executable binary, a range of other
protections are also applied, including the software packing techniques previously de-
tailed in section 2.1. Before the software virtualization technology can be analysed, the
protected executable binary must therefore undergo a procedure known as unpacking, in
which it is stripped of software packing protection.
When unpacking protected software, the goal is to reach the Original Entry Point (OEP),
which is the address that was originally assigned as the entry point of the executable bi-
nary prior to having software packing applied to it.
Since this implies performing a
partial execution of the executable binary and since packed software is often malicious,
this procedure should always be carried out in a guest virtual machine rather than on
the host system. Throughout the remaining sections of this chapter, it shall be assumed
that all actions are carried out in a VMWare guest system running a 32-bit version of
Windows XP with Service Pack 3.
The most accomplished publicly available unpacking scripts for Themida are written for
OllyDbg v1.101, which is therefore the chosen debugger throughout the upcoming sections.
Unfortunately, Themida inserts a number of anti-debugging templates into protected ex-
ecutable binaries, so in order to run unpacking scripts under the OllyDbg debugger, all
anti-debugging routines must be bypassed using a selection of anti-anti-debugging plugins.
For a guest machine running 32-bit Windows XP with Service Pack 3, it is advised to
use both the PhantOm2 and the StrongOD3 plugins.
These plugins are installed by placing their dynamic link library (.dll) files in the plugin
folder for OllyDbg, which can be configured in the Directories tab of the appearance
configuration window (Options Menu →Appearance) in OllyDbg. By default, this is
configured as the root directory of the OllyDbg installation. Once installed, the following
options must be enabled in the configuration (Plugins Menu →plugin-name →Options).
• PhantOm v1.85
– Protect DRx
• StrongOD v0.4.8.892
– Hide PEB
– Kernel Mode
– Break on TLS
– Kill BadPE Bug
– Skip Some Exceptions
– Remove EP One-Shot
The correctly configured UIs are depicted in table 3.4 below.
1https://www.ollydbg.de/odbg110.zip
2https://forum.tuts4you.com/topic/13402-phantom
3https://forum.tuts4you.com/topic/19480-strongod
==PAGE:31==
3.2 How to setup an unpacking environment
25
Table 3.4: The plugin configurations for PhantOm and StrongOD.
With these configured, almost every anti-debugging technique inserted by Themida is
bypassed. However, the StrongOD options dialog does not support modification of all
configurable settings, including the DriverName setting which is configured as ”fengyue0”
by default. The OllyDbg configuration file (ollydbg.ini) located in the root directory of
the OllyDbg installation, depicts the active setting in the StrongOD plugin group as
shown in listing 3.4 below.
1 [Plugin StrongOD]
2 ...
3 DriverName=fengyue0
4 ...
Listing 3.4: The DriverName default configuration for StrongOD.
This value must undergo manual modification to represent a non-default value. For every
unpacking procedures carried out in the subsequent chapters of this thesis, the setting
was configured as ”something_unique”. With the plugins configured to bypass all anti-
debugging techniques currently introduced by Themida, unpacking a protected executable
binary is finally possible. Lastly, in order to run the scripts presented in the subsequent
sections of this chapter, the ODbgScript4 plugin must also be installed.
4https://sourceforge.net/projects/odbgscript/
==PAGE:32==
3.3 How to unpack Themida 2.1.8.0
26
3.3
How to unpack Themida 2.1.8.0
A serial contributor of the tuts4you reverse-engineering community, named LCF-AT, has
published an unpacking script5 for Themida 2.1.8.0 and earlier versions. This script can
be downloaded as a text file (.txt) and executed using the Run Script functionality of the
ODbgScript plugin (Plugins Menu →ODbgScript →Run Script).
Throughout the execution of the script, the user is prompted to make a series of choices
regarding actions to be carried out by the unpacking script. The majority of prompts
suggests a default option to be attempted first and an alternative option to be attempted
if the default option causes a malfunction. However, there are a few prompts that does
not suggest a default choice and which must be answered as depicted in table 3.5 below.
Prompt
Answer
Find VM Ware pointer? » quosego «
Yes
Do you want to use the magic jumps as eax is an API place?
Yes
Fixing IAT with the » Fast IAT Patch Method way by LCF-AT «
Yes
Table 3.5: Answers to prompts that does not include suggestions.
A final message will signal the termination of the unpacking script, at which point the
running process has reached the original entry point of the unpacked executable binary
which can therefore be dumped from memory using the all-in-one tool named Scylla6.
However, when dumped from memory, the unpacked executable binary suffers a broken
import name table as a result of the anti-dump technique known as IAT hijacking which
was previously described in section 2.1. In order to correct for this, the import name
table must be restored, which, given the correct parameters, is also possible using Scylla.
In order to restore the import name table, the neccessary IAT parameters must be iden-
tified. Towards the end of the unpacking script, these are printed to the OllyDbg log
window (View Menu →Log) as shown in listing 3.5 below.
1 IAT RESULTS IN VA
2 ------------------------------
3 oep: 004012CF
4
5 IAT_START: 00402000
6 IAT_END: 00402094
Listing 3.5: The import address table parameters output by the unpacking script.
By inserting these parameters and clicking ”Get Imports” after attaching to the running
process, Scylla is able to reconstruct the list of imports as shown in figure 3.1 below.
5https://forum.tuts4you.com/topic/25554-themida-winlicense-1x-2x-multi-pro-edition-12
6https://github.com/NtQuery/Scylla
==PAGE:33==
3.3 How to unpack Themida 2.1.8.0
27
Figure 3.1: The Scylla window after import retrieval.
The ”Dump” button dumps the unpacked executable binary from memory to disk but
with a broken import name table. The ”Fix Dump” button uses the reconstructed list of
imports shown in the UI to restore the import name table of a previously generated dump.
Following all of the above steps restores an executable binary to its original state prior
to have software packing applied to it by Themida. However, the software virtualization
protection is still intact in the executable binary and therefore possible to analyse.
==PAGE:34==
3.4 How to unpack Themida 2.2.5.0
28
3.4
How to unpack Themida 2.2.5.0
A serial contributor of the tuts4you reverse-engineering community, named LCF-AT, has
published an unpacking script7 for Themida 2.2.5.0 and later versions. This script can
be downloaded as a text file (.txt) and executed using the Run Script functionality of the
ODbgScript plugin (Plugins Menu →ODbgScript →Run Script).
Throughout the execution of the script, the user is prompted to make a series of choices
regarding actions to be carried out by the unpacking script. The prompts suggests a
default option to be attempted first and an alternative option to be attempted if the
default option causes a malfunction. A final message will signal the termination of the
unpacking script, at which point the running process has been dumped to disk with its
import name table fully restored. The dump is placed in the same location as the packed
executable binary although with a ”_DP” suffix.
Following all of the above steps restores an executable binary to its original state prior
to have software packing applied to it by Themida. However, the software virtualization
protection is still intact in the executable binary and therefore possible to analyse.
7https://forum.tuts4you.com/topic/34085-themida-winlicense-ultra-unpacker-14
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
The CISC architecture
This chapter will focus on Themida version 2.1.8.0 and the supported CISC and CISC-2
virtual machine architectures. The herein analysed binary is protected by Themida with
the lowest levels of virtual machine protection settings as shown in figure 4.1 below.
Figure 4.1: The virtual machine options chosen for protecting the program.
Before the protected binary and its virtualization protection can be analysed, it must first
be unpacked. An unpacking environment setup guide and an unpacking walkthrough for
Themida 2.1.8.0 can be found in sections 3.2 and 3.3 respectively.
==PAGE:36==
4.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
30
4.1
Analysis of the virtual machine
The binary has now been protected by Themida 2.1.8.0, and a reanalysis of the protected
test function depicted in listing 4.1 below should be carried out.
.text:00401000 sub_401000
proc near
.text:00401000
.text:00401000
jmp
sub_4B9157
.text:00401000
.text:00401000 ; ---------------------------------------------------------------
.text:00401005
db 18, C1, 17, 65, E8, 7E, B4, 8B, 66, B1, B5
.text:00401010
db B2, 1B, 30, E8, E0, 49, 13, 8D, 00, C8, FF
.text:0040101B
db 62, 21, 3F, 70, A0, E5, 0B, E0, 71, B0, D0
.text:00401026
db B2, B0, BF, E8, EB, 10, 57, 4C, 20, 89, FF
.text:00401031
db 89, C0, 89, C9, 89, D2, 89, DB, 89, C0, 90
.text:00401031 ; ---------------------------------------------------------------
.text:00401031
.text:00401031 sub_401000
endp
Listing 4.1: The test function in the program after being protected.
Here, it can be seen that the machine code of the test function has been replaced with a
jump to the virtual machine segment, specifically to the VM Trampoline area referenced
in section 2.3, and that the rest of the function has been overwritten by a random sequence
of bytes. The contents of the VM Trampoline area is shown in listing 4.2 below.
.themida:004B9157 sub_4B9157
proc near
.themida:004B9157
.themida:004B9157
push
0872300C ; opcode key
.themida:004B915C
jmp
loc_40DA3E
.themida:004B915C
.themida:004B915C sub_4B9157
endp
Listing 4.2: The VM Trampoline area for the test function.
The VM Trampoline area stores the opcode key for the test function on the stack and then
jumps to the VM Entrypoint area of the virtual machine. However, the VM Entrypoint
area is obfuscated as briefly shown in listing 4.3 below.
.themida:0040DA3E loc_40DA3E:
.themida:0040DA3E
.themida:0040DA3E
pushf
.themida:0040DA3F
push
00007616
.themida:0040DA44
mov
[esp], eax
.themida:0040DA47
push
000040E5
.themida:0040DA4C
mov
[esp], ecx
.themida:0040DA4F
push
0000065C
.themida:0040DA54
mov
[esp], edx
.themida:0040DA57
push
000035BE
.themida:0040DA5C
mov
[esp], ebx
.themida:0040DA69
...
Listing 4.3: The obfuscated entry point for the virtual machine.
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
31
The obfuscation produced by Themida follows a monotone and predictable pattern, al-
lowing for rather trivial elimination using the counter-techniques described in section 2.2.
For example, the above listing contains a pushfd instruction followed by the obfuscated
first half of a pushad instruction. Upon reduction, the VM Entrypoint area should reveal
its core instructions as shown in listing 4.4 below.
1 0040da3e
pushfd
2 0040da3f
pushad
3 0040db14
cld
4
5 ; Initialize context (edi)
6 0040db7c
call $+5
7 0040db81
pop edi
8 0040dbeb
sub edi,0x08677a39
9 0040dc54
and edi,0xfffff000
10 0040dc9a
add edi,0x14
11 0040dcf5
mov eax,edi
; delta
12 0040dd44
add edi,0x086776ee
; context
13
14 ; Initialize handlers
15 0040ddbd
cmp eax,[edi+0x64]
16 0040ddc3
jz 0x0040dfa8
17 0040ddce
mov [edi+0x64],eax
18 0040de18
mov ecx,0xaa
; handler count = 0xaa (170)
19 0040dea2
jmp 0x0040dfa0
20 0040dea7
add [edi+ecx*4+0x90],eax
; handler table
21 0040df2d
add ecx,0xffffffff
22 0040dfa0
or ecx,ecx
23 0040dfa2
jnz 0x0040dea7
24
25 ; Initialize opcode buffer (esi) and opcode key (ebx)
26 0040dfa8
mov esi,[esp+0x24]
27 0040dff0
mov ebx,esi
; opcode key
28 0040e02b
add esi,eax
; opcode buffer
29
30 ; Spinlock (only one instance permitted at a time)
31 0040e0a4
mov ecx,0x1
32 0040e10d
xor eax,eax
33 0040e10f
lock cmpxchg [edi+0x88],ecx
34 0040e117
jnz 0x0040e10d
35 0040e11d
...
; VM Dispatcher
Listing 4.4: The deobfuscated entry point for the virtual machine.
The VM Entrypoint area consists of five minor sub-areas, each of which hold the following
responsibilities.
• The first sub-area pushes the EFLAGS register and all general-purpose registers to the
stack, so that the virtual machine can pop them into its own proprietary registers
as will be showcased later in section 4.2.
• The second sub-area uses the return address from a relative call to calculate the
address of the virtual machine context structure as well as a delta value that is used
for initialization of certain data in the virtual machine.
==PAGE:38==
4.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
32
• The third sub-area uses the delta value from the second sub-area to perform a
one-time initialization of the handler procedure table.
• The fourth sub-area assigns the value from the VM Trampoline area to the opcode
key and initializes the byte-code buffer by adding the delta value from the second
sub-area to the opcode key. The opcode key is used throughout the virtual machine
for decryption of opcodes from the byte-code buffer.
• The fifth sub-area performs a mutual exclusion spinlock procedure, in order to
ensure that only a single byte-code buffer is being processed at a time. This is
important because the virtual machine uses a shared global context structure across
executions.
Once all sub-areas have been executed, the virtual machine is ready for processing and the
execution flow is transferred to the VM Dispatcher area illustrated in listing 4.5 below.
1 0040e11d
lodsb
2 0040fdde
sub al,bl
3 00419fd5
xor al,0x4d
4 00417e3c
sub al,0x40
5 00414848
sub bl,al
6 004196f9
movzx eax,al
7 004196fc
jmp dword ptr [edi+eax*4]
Listing 4.5: The main dispatch handler procedure.
The VM Dispatcher is responsible for deducing which handler procedure to invoke next
based on data from the byte-code buffer. It is important to note that since the byte-code
buffer is located in ESI, the lods instruction can be used to read data from the byte-code
buffer into EAX without having to manage buffer increments manually.
Furthermore, it can be seen that the data stored in the byte-code buffer is decrypted
using a series of arithmetic operations involving the opcode key and two constant values.
The opcode key is also updated after each decryption operation, indicating that opcodes
stored in the byte-code buffer has been encrypted using different opcode keys.
Once the data from the byte-code buffer has been decrypted, execution flow is transferred
to a handler procedure using the decrypted data from the byte-code buffer as an offset
into the context structure which contains the handler procedure table as shown in listing
4.4 above. For example, the execution flow could transfer into the load imm32 handler
procedure shown in listing 4.6 below.
1 lodsd
2 xor eax,ebx
3 add eax,0x674cca9f
4 xor eax,0x070ef2f5
5 sub ebx,eax
6 push eax
7 jmp 0040e11d ; vm_dispatch
Listing 4.6: The virtual handler procedure for load imm32.
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
33
Interestingly, the sequence of registers in the decryption operations are identical to those
previously seen in the VM Dispatcher area depicted in listing 4.5 above. However, the
operation mnemonics as well as the constant values appear to be randomized between
different handler procedures. This observation will prove useful for automated opcode
recovery as shown in section 4.3.
After thorough analysis of all handler procedures in the virtual machine, it becomes ev-
ident that the virtual machine architecture follows a stack-based model, and that the
majority of supported operations can be separated into three distinct groups. These are
load operations, store operations and basic operations. Load operations are equivalent to
the x86 push instruction and are responsible for loading source operands onto the stack.
Store operations are equivalent to the x86 pop instruction and are responsible for storing
data from the stack into destination operands. Basic operations are responsible for con-
suming loaded source operands to produce results for one or more destination operand(s).
The comprehensive list of supported load operations can be found in table 4.1 below.
Operation
8-bit
16-bit
32-bit
Description
load imm
x
x
x
Push integer to the stack
load [imm]
x
x
x
Push dereferenced offset to the stack
load reg
x
Push vm register to the stack
load [reg]
x
x
Push dereferenced vm register to the stack
load offset reg
x
Push address of vm register to the stack
load addr
x
Push EDX to the stack
load [addr]
x
x
x
Push [EDX] to the stack
load fs:[addr]
x
x
x
Push fs:[EDX] to the stack
load stack
x
x
Push the stack pointer to the stack
load param
x
Push vm param to the stack
load delta
x
Push vm delta to the stack
load delta align
x
Push data aligned by vm delta to the stack
Table 4.1: Load operations supported by the virtual machine.
The comprehensive list of supported store operations can be found in table 4.2 below.
Operation
8-bit
16-bit
32-bit
Description
store [imm]
x
x
x
Pop the top stack element into dereferenced offset
store reg
x
x
x
Pop the top stack element into register
store reg high
x
Pop the top stack element into register high byte
store addr
x
Pop the top stack element into EDX
store [addr]
x
x
x
Pop the top stack element into [EDX]
store fs:[addr]
x
x
x
Pop the top stack element into fs:[EDX]
store stack
x
x
Pop the top stack element into the stack pointer
store param
x
Pop the top stack element into vm param
store eflags
x
Pop the top stack element into vm eflags
Table 4.2: Store operations supported by the virtual machine.
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
34
The comprehensive list of supported basic operations can be found in table 4.3 below.
Operation
I
O
Flags
8-bit
16-bit
32-bit
Description
inc
1
1
x
x
x
x
Increment an integer
dec
1
1
x
x
x
x
Decrement an integer
neg
1
1
x
x
x
x
Negate an integer
not
1
1
x
x
x
Bitwise NOT an integer
add
2
1
x
x
x
x
Add two integers
addx
2
1
x
Add two integers (no flags)
adc
2
1
x
x
x
x
Add two integers with carry
sub
2
1
x
x
x
x
Subtract two integers
subx
2
1
x
Subtract two integers (no flags)
sbb
2
1
x
x
x
x
Subtract two integers with borrow
mul
2
2
x
x
x
x
Mulitply two unsigned integers
imul
2
2
x
x
x
x
Mulitply two signed integers
imulc
2
1
x
x
x
x
Mulitply two signed integers
div
2
2
x
x
x
x
Divide two unsigned integers
idiv
2
2
x
x
x
x
Divide two signed integers
and
2
1
x
x
x
x
Bitwise AND two integers
or
2
1
x
x
x
x
Bitwise OR two integers
xor
2
1
x
x
x
x
Bitwise XOR two integers
xorx
2
1
x
Bitwise XOR two integers (no flags)
shr
2
1
x
x
x
x
Bitwise shift an unsigned integer right
sar
2
1
x
x
x
x
Bitwise shift a signed integer right
shl/sal
2
1
x
x
x
x
Bitwise shift an integer left
shlx/salx
2
1
x
Bitwise shift an integer left (no flags)
ror
2
1
x
x
x
x
Bitwise rotate an integer right
rcr
2
1
x
x
x
x
Bitwise rotate an integer right through carry
rol
2
1
x
x
x
x
Bitwise rotate an integer left
rcl
2
1
x
x
x
x
Bitwise rotate an integer left through carry
cmp
2
0
x
x
x
x
Compare two integers (using subtraction)
test
2
0
x
x
x
x
Compare two integers (using bitwise AND)
bt
2
1
x
x
x
Bit-test string
btc
2
1
x
x
Bit-test and complement string
btr
2
1
x
x
x
Bit-test and reset string
bts
2
1
x
x
x
Bit-test and set string
bswap
1
1
x
Invert the byte-order of an integer
movsxb
2
1
x
x
Move byte with sign-extension
movsxw
2
1
x
Move word with sign-extension
movzxb
2
1
x
x
Move byte with zero-extension
movzxw
2
1
x
Move word with zero-extension
readptr
1
1
x
Read the value of a 32-bit pointer
writeptr
2
0
x
Assign a value to a 32-bit pointer
Table 4.3: Basic operations supported by the virtual machine.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
35
For clarification, the I and O columns depict the amount of consumed parameters (inputs)
and generated results (outputs) respectively. The Flags column depicts if the EFLAGS
register is loaded onto the stack subsequent to the core operation being carried out.
Apart from the stack-based operations shown above, the virtual machine architecture also
support a variety of miscellaneous operations pertaining to manipulation of the EFLAGS
register, execution flow control, and edge-case necessities as shown in table 4.4 below.
Operation
Description
nop
No operation
clc
Clear carry flag
cmc
Complement carry flag
cld
Clear direction flag
stc
Set carry flag
std
Set direction flag
sti
Set interrupt flag
mov addr, imm32
Move an integer into EDX
mov addr, stack32
Move the stack pointer into EDX
add addr, imm32
Add an integer to EDX
add addr, reg32
Add a register to EDX
add addr, reloc
Add vm reloc to EDX
add [stack32], reloc
Add vm reloc to the top stack element
sub addr, imm32
Subtract an integer from EDX
xor addr, imm32
Bitwise XOR EDX with an integer
xchg [stack32], addr
Exchange the top stack element with EDX
set param
Move the second topmost stack element into vm param
set counter offset
Reset the ecx context offset for use in ecx-based jcc evaluation
set stack offset
Reset the esp offset for stack re-alignment in subsequent ret instruction
reset key
Reset opcode key
jcc evaluate
Evaluate condition for subsequent jcc imm32 instruction
jcc imm32
Increment opcode pointer and reset opcode key if condition evaluated to true
jmp imm32
Increment opcode pointer and reset opcode key
ret
Reset the stack, registers, eflags and spinlock and return from the virtual machine
Table 4.4: Remaining operations supported by the virtual machine.
Using sequences of supported instructions from all of the above tables combined, it is pos-
sible to emulate almost any x86 usermode instruction in the virtual machine architecture.
However, the above tables depict only high-level descriptions of the supported operations
and does not adequately outline their implementation details. For a exhaustive list of
handler procedures and their core instructions respectively, please refer to appendix A.
Now that the design of the virtual machine has been mapped and analysed, it is possible
to iterate the byte-code buffer in order to determine the sequence of invoked handler
procedures and thereby reconstruct the custom architecture code flow.
==PAGE:42==
4.2 Recovering virtual opcodes manually
36
4.2
Recovering virtual opcodes manually
By placing a software breakpoint in the VM Dispatcher area and stepping into every
invoked handler procedure to recover the decrypted byte-code data, it is possible to
reconstruct the custom architecture code flow as shown in listing 4.7 below.
1 load offset reg32(3)
2 store addr
3 store [addr]
4 load offset reg32(4)
5 store addr
6 store [addr]
7 load offset reg32(1)
8 store addr
9 store [addr]
10 load offset reg32(5)
11 store addr
12 store [addr]
13 set counter offset
14 load offset reg32(5)
15 store addr
16 store [addr]
17 load offset reg32(6)
18 store addr
19 store [addr]
20 load offset reg32(0)
21 store addr
22 store [addr]
23 load offset reg32(2)
24 store addr
25 store [addr]
26 load offset reg32(7)
27 store addr
28 store [addr]
29 mov addr, stack32
30 load addr
31 load dword(00000004)
32 add dword (no flags)
33 store stack32
34 load offset reg32(0)
35 store addr
36 load [addr]
37 load offset reg32(0)
38 store addr
39 load [addr]
40 load offset reg32(0)
41 store addr
42 load [addr]
43 xor dword
44 load addr
45 load addr
46 load dword(00000004)
47 add dword (no flags)
48 store addr
49 store addr
50 store reg32(7)
51 load offset reg32(0)
52 store addr
53 store [addr]
54 load dword(00000005)
55 load offset reg32(0)
56 store addr
57 store [addr]
58 load offset reg32(0)
59 store addr
60 load addr
61 load addr
62 load word(765A)
63 load word(90DB)
64 store addr
65 load dword(00000004)
66 add dword (no flags)
67 store addr
68 store addr
69 load [addr]
70 load dword(000000BE)
71 add dword
72 store reg32(7)
73 load offset reg32(0)
74 store addr
75 store [addr]
76 load addr
77 load addr
78 load dword(00000004)
79 add dword (no flags)
80 store addr
81 store addr
82 load offset reg32(0)
83 load offset reg32(6)
84 load offset reg32(0)
85 store addr
86 store addr
87 load offset reg32(5)
88 store addr
89 store addr
90 load [addr]
91 load dword(00000034)
92 sub dword
93 load addr
94 load word(8F74)
95 load word(E76B)
96 store addr
97 load offset reg32(1)
98 store addr
99 load [addr]
100 store addr
101 store addr
102 store reg32(7)
103 load addr
104 load word(09D8)
105 load word(D427)
106 store addr
107 store addr
108 load offset reg32(0)
109 store addr
110 store [addr]
111 load offset reg32(0)
112 store addr
113 load addr
114 load offset reg32(3)
115 load offset reg32(5)
116 store addr
117 store addr
118 load [addr]
119 store addr
120 store addr
121 load [addr]
122 load byte(08)
123 shl dword
124 load addr
125 load addr
126 load dword(00000004)
127 load addr
128 load dword(00000004)
129 add dword (no flags)
130 store addr
131 add dword (no flags)
132 store addr
133 store addr
134 store reg32(7)
135 load addr
136 load offset reg32(1)
137 store addr
138 store addr
139 load offset reg32(0)
140 store addr
141 store [addr]
142 load offset reg32(0)
143 load offset reg32(4)
144 store addr
145 load offset reg32(2)
146 store addr
147 load [addr]
148 store addr
149 store addr
150 load [addr]
151 load offset reg32(2)
152 load word(07BA)
153 load word(6E5D)
154 load offset reg32(6)
155 store addr
156 load [addr]
157 store addr
158 store addr
159 store addr
160 store [addr]
161 load offset reg32(0)
162 store addr
163 store [addr]
164 jmp imm32(0000000E)
165 load offset reg32(7)
166 store addr
167 load [addr]
168 load offset reg32(2)
169 store addr
170 load [addr]
171 load offset reg32(0)
172 store addr
173 load [addr]
174 load offset reg32(6)
175 store addr
176 load [addr]
177 load offset reg32(5)
178 store addr
179 load [addr]
180 load offset reg32(5)
181 store addr
182 load [addr]
183 load offset reg32(1)
184 store addr
185 load [addr]
186 load offset reg32(4)
187 store addr
188 load [addr]
189 load offset reg32(3)
190 store addr
191 load [addr]
192 ret
Listing 4.7: The raw extracted virtual opcodes for the test function.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Recovering virtual opcodes manually
37
Please note that the above process is extremely time consuming and very prone to errors.
The recovered custom architecture code flow contains minor obfuscation patterns that
must be dealt with in order to reveal the core instructions of the code snippet. First of
all, it is possible to remove instructions whose purpose is entirely bound to the internals
of the virtual machine, such as the set counter offset instruction. Additionally, it can
be noticed that there are a lot of deadcode instructions in the snippet, such as overlapping
store instructions that repeatedly overwrites the same destination operand. Removing
all of these instructions yields a cleaner result as shown in listing 4.8 below.
1 load offset reg32(3)
2 store addr
3 store [addr]
4 load offset reg32(4)
5 store addr
6 store [addr]
7 load offset reg32(1)
8 store addr
9 store [addr]
10 load offset reg32(5)
11 store addr
12 store [addr]
13 load offset reg32(5)
14 store addr
15 store [addr]
16 load offset reg32(6)
17 store addr
18 store [addr]
19 load offset reg32(0)
20 store addr
21 store [addr]
22 load offset reg32(2)
23 store addr
24 store [addr]
25 load offset reg32(7)
26 store addr
27 store [addr]
28 mov addr, stack32
29 load addr
30 load dword(00000004)
31 add dword (no flags)
32 store stack32
33 load offset reg32(0)
34 store addr
35 load [addr]
36 load offset reg32(0)
37 store addr
38 load [addr]
39 load offset reg32(0)
40 store addr
41 load [addr]
42 xor dword
43 store reg32(7)
44 load offset reg32(0)
45 store addr
46 store [addr]
47 load dword(00000005)
48 load offset reg32(0)
49 store addr
50 store [addr]
51 load offset reg32(0)
52 store addr
53 load [addr]
54 load dword(000000BE)
55 add dword
56 store reg32(7)
57 load offset reg32(0)
58 store addr
59 store [addr]
60 load offset reg32(0)
61 store addr
62 load [addr]
63 load dword(00000034)
64 sub dword
65 store reg32(7)
66 load offset reg32(0)
67 store addr
68 store [addr]
69 load offset reg32(0)
70 store addr
71 load [addr]
72 load byte(08)
73 shl dword
74 store reg32(7)
75 load offset reg32(0)
76 store addr
77 store [addr]
78 load offset reg32(0)
79 store addr
80 load [addr]
81 load offset reg32(2)
82 store addr
83 store [addr]
84 load offset reg32(0)
85 store addr
86 store [addr]
87 load offset reg32(7)
88 store addr
89 load [addr]
90 load offset reg32(2)
91 store addr
92 load [addr]
93 load offset reg32(0)
94 store addr
95 load [addr]
96 load offset reg32(6)
97 store addr
98 load [addr]
99 load offset reg32(5)
100 store addr
101 load [addr]
102 load offset reg32(5)
103 store addr
104 load [addr]
105 load offset reg32(1)
106 store addr
107 load [addr]
108 load offset reg32(4)
109 store addr
110 load [addr]
111 load offset reg32(3)
112 store addr
113 load [addr]
114 ret
Listing 4.8: The virtual opcodes after removal of redundant opcodes.
Despite having removed deadcode instructions from the custom architecture code flow,
there are still instances of instruction expansion obfuscation patterns present in the code.
In particular, there are two distinct expansion patterns that can be observed excessively,
as detailed in table 4.5 below.
load reg32(x)
store reg32(x)
1 load offset reg32(x)
2 store addr
3 load [addr]
1 load offset reg32(x)
2 store addr
3 store [addr]
Table 4.5: Reoccurring patterns in the virtual machine opcodes.
==PAGE:44==
4.2 Recovering virtual opcodes manually
38
By loading the effective address of an internal virtual machine context register, storing
it in the temporary addr container and then loading the value pointed to by the addr
container, the virtual machine is loading the value stored in the internal context register
albeit in a convoluted manner. The same logic applies to the equivalent convoluted store
instruction. By reduction of these redundant patterns, it is possible to clean the code
even further as shown in listing 4.9 below.
1 store reg32(3)
2 store reg32(4)
3 store reg32(1)
4 store reg32(5)
5 store reg32(5)
6 store reg32(6)
7 store reg32(0)
8 store reg32(2)
9 store reg32(7)
10 mov addr, stack32
11 load addr
12 load dword(00000004)
13 add dword (no flags)
14 store stack32
15 load reg32(0)
16 load reg32(0)
17 load reg32(0)
18 xor dword
19 store reg32(7)
20 store reg32(0)
21 load dword(00000005)
22 store reg32(0)
23 load reg32(0)
24 load dword(000000BE)
25 add dword
26 store reg32(7)
27 store reg32(0)
28 load reg32(0)
29 load dword(00000034)
30 sub dword
31 store reg32(7)
32 store reg32(0)
33 load reg32(0)
34 load byte(08)
35 shl dword
36 store reg32(7)
37 store reg32(0)
38 load reg32(0)
39 store reg32(2)
40 store reg32(0)
41 load reg32(7)
42 load reg32(2)
43 load reg32(0)
44 load reg32(6)
45 load reg32(5)
46 load reg32(5)
47 load reg32(1)
48 load reg32(4)
49 load reg32(3)
50 ret
Listing 4.9: The virtual opcodes after opcode optimization.
Once the obfuscation has been removed, the stack-based architecture operation constructs
can be translated to equivalent x86 architecture operation constructs.
For example,
an integer addition operation in the custom stack-based architecture is performed by
loading two source operands onto the stack, performing a stack-based addition, and
storing the result of the operation from the stack into a destination operand. However, in
the x86 architecture, an addition operation is performed using a single instruction, [add
operand1,operand2], that leverages the first operand as both source and destination.
Similarly, a move operation in the custom stack-based architecture is performed by
loading a source operand onto the stack and storing it from the stack into a destination
operand. However, in the x86 architecture, a move instruction is performed using a single
instruction [mov operand1,operand], that stores the second operand in the first operand.
Considering these transformations, it is possible to translate the stack-based architecture
constructs to x86 architecture constructs as shown in listing 4.10 below.
1 store reg32(3)
2 store reg32(4)
3 store reg32(1)
4 store reg32(5)
5 store reg32(5)
6 store reg32(6)
7 store reg32(0)
8 store reg32(2)
9 store reg32(7)
10 add stack32 ,00000004
11 load reg32(0)
12 xor reg32(0),reg32(0)
13 mov reg32(0) ,00000005
14 add reg32(0) ,000000BE
15 sub reg32(0) ,00000034
16 shl reg32(0),08
17 mov reg32(2),reg32(0)
18 store reg32(0)
19 load reg32(7)
20 load reg32(2)
21 load reg32(0)
22 load reg32(6)
23 load reg32(5)
24 load reg32(5)
25 load reg32(1)
26 load reg32(4)
27 load reg32(3)
28 ret
Listing 4.10: The virtual opcodes after opcode transformation.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Recovering virtual opcodes manually
39
The custom stack-based architecture code is almost fully restored to its original x86 ar-
chitecture state. The last step is to convert remaining custom architecture constructs to
x86 architecture equivalents. This includes translating custom architecture instructions,
load and store, to their x86 architecture equivalents, push and pop, as well as translat-
ing the virtual machine context registers to their equivalent x86 general-purpose registers.
Interestingly, the VM Entrypoint procedure and the ret handler procedure makes this
process trivial, as they indirectly define which virtual machine context registers corre-
sponds to which x86 general-purpose registers as depicted in table 4.6 below.
VM Entrypoint
VM Return
0040da3e
pushfd
0040da3f
pushad
0040db14
cld
0040db7c
...
00417ea0
...
00418d09
popad
00418d0a
popfd
00418d0b
retn
Table 4.6: Exhibits of the VM Entrypoint and the ret handler procedures.
At the start of the VM Entrypoint procedure, a pushfd instruction and a pushad
instruction loads the following registers onto the stack in the specified order: EFLAGS,
EAX, ECX, EDX, EBX, ESP, EBP, ESI, EDI. Subsequent to this, the prologue of the custom
architecture code stores them in virtual machine context registers in the reverse order.
Similar behaviour can be spotted in the epilogue of the custom architecture code flow,
where all virtual machine context registers are pushed onto the stack in an order
identical to that of the VM Entrypoint procedure. This time, however, they are retrieved
by the ret handler procedure, that uses a popad instruction and a popfd instruction
to propagate these internal register states to the equivalent x86 general-purpose registers.
Accounting for these observations, and the fact that the stack register in the custom
stack-based architecture corresponds to the esp register in the x86 architecture, the code
can be transformed and segregated as shown in table 4.7 below.
Prologue
Core
Epilogue
1 pop edi
2 pop esi
3 pop ebp
4 pop ebx
5 pop ebx
6 pop edx
7 pop ecx
8 pop eax
9 popfd
10 add esp, 0x04
1 push ecx
2 xor ecx,ecx
3 mov ecx,0x05
4 add ecx,0xbe
5 sub ecx,0x34
6 shl ecx,0x08
7 mov eax,ecx
8 pop ecx
1 pushfd
2 push eax
3 push ecx
4 push edx
5 push ebx
6 push ebx
7 push ebp
8 push esi
9 push edi
10 ret
Table 4.7: The virtual opcodes after register substitution and segregation.
As mentioned previously for the set counter offset instruction, it is possible to remove
instructions whose purpose is entirely bound to the internal state of the virtual machine.
==PAGE:46==
4.3 Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
40
The prologue is solely responsible for populating the internal context registers with the
states of the native x86 registers at the time of entering the virtual machine, as well
as removing the opcode key from the stack, which was loaded by the VM Trampoline area.
The epilogue is solely responsible for loading the internal context registers to the stack
and returning from the virtual machine, so that the ret handler procedure can populate
the native x86 registers with the states of the internal context registers at the time of
exiting the virtual machine.
It is thus conclusible that the prologue and epilogue can both be removed from the custom
architecture code snippet as they are entirely responsible for mutation of the internal state
of the virtual machine, thus serving no purpose for understanding what actions are being
emulated by the virtual machine. By removing both the prologue and the epilogue, only
the core instructions of the protected function remain as shown in listing 4.11 below.
1 push ecx
2 xor ecx,ecx
3 mov ecx,0x05
4 add ecx,0xbe
5 sub ecx,0x34
6 shl ecx,0x08
7 mov eax,ecx
8 pop ecx
9 ret
Listing 4.11: The virtual opcodes after removing the prologue and epilogue.
In comparison to the original program source code shown in section 3.1, the recovered
procedure code is an exact match. In other words, it has proven possible to fully recover
the original machine code of a protected procedure, albeit just for a single instance of the
mutable virtual machine architecture.
4.3
Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
In order to fully automate the process of recovering the original machine code of a pro-
tected procedure, all previously documented steps must be automated and the mutability
of the virtual machine architecture must be accounted for. However, the methodology
still follows the general approach outlined in section 2.3 as shown below.
1. Deduce the functional responsibility of each individual handler procedure.
2. Map the byte-code sequence to handler procedures (recreate the code-flow).
3. Translate the custom architecture code-flow back to its original architecture.
The first step was done in the previous section. However, the mutability of the virtual
machine architecture results in new obfuscation being applied to every single area of
the virtual machine every time a new instance of the virtual machine is generated.
==PAGE:47==
4.3 Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
41
Furthermore, the handler procedure table is shuffled before inserting it into the virtual
machine context structure at a randomly chosen offset. In fact, all virtual machine con-
text offsets are randomized for every new instance of the virtual machine being generated.
Before any of the above steps are even approachable, a reliable deobfuscation engine must
be developed. Ideally, this is done by implementing all of the counter-techniques described
in section 2.2. However, the obfuscation patterns used by Themida are very monotone
and predictable, and can be targeted specifically without the need for generic approaches.
Once the deobfuscation engine has been developed to a reliable extent, it must be applied
to the VM Entrypoint area so that certain data can be carved from there. Specifically,
as marked in listing 4.12 below, this includes the delta value, the address of the virtual
machine context structure, the amount of handler procedures in the virtual machine and
the handler procedure table offset into the virtual machine context structure.
1 0040db14
...
2 ; Initialize context (edi)
3 0040db7c
call $+5
4 0040db81
pop edi
5 0040dbeb
sub edi,0x08677a39
6 0040dc54
and edi,0xfffff000
7 0040dc9a
add edi,0x14
8 0040dcf5
mov eax,edi
; delta
9 0040dd44
add edi,0x086776ee
; context
10 ; Initialize handlers
11 0040ddbd
cmp eax,[edi+0x64]
12 0040ddc3
jz 0x0040dfa8
13 0040ddce
mov [edi+0x64],eax
14 0040de18
mov ecx,0xaa
; handler count
15 0040dea2
jmp 0x0040dfa0
16 0040dea7
add [edi+ecx*4+0x90],eax
; handler table
17 0040df2d
add ecx,0xffffffff
18 0040dfa0
or ecx,ecx
19 0040dfa2
jnz 0x0040dea7
20 0040dfa8
...
Listing 4.12: Exhibit of the deobfuscated entry point for the virtual machine.
Once the handler procedure table has been carved from the VM Entrypoint area, the
table can be iterated and the delta value can be added to each of the stored handler
procedures in order to initialize the actual address of the individual procedures.
It is now possible to deobfuscate each of the individual handlers and deduce their
functional responsibilities as required by the first step of the general methodology. Since
all operations supported by the virtual machine architecture have already been identified
in section 4.1 above, with their handler procedures available in appendix A, this is simply
a matter of identifying the core instructions of each individual handler procedure and us-
ing these to map the handler procedures to the predetermined set of supported operations.
When all handler procedures have been mapped to their respective virtual machine op-
erations, the code-flow can be reconstructed from the byte-code sequence in accordance
==PAGE:48==
4.3 Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
42
with step two of the general methodology. However, in order to parse the byte-code and
perform this step, the opcode key must first be retrieved from the VM Trampoline area,
and the byte-code buffer be initialized by addition of the delta value. Furthermore, as
previously shown in section 4.1, all handler procedures that reads data from the byte-code
buffer also contain a decryption routine as shown in listings 4.13, 4.14 and 4.15 below.
1 lodsb
2 add/sub/xor al,bl
3 add/sub/xor al,0xff
; random constant
4 add/sub/xor al,0xff
; random constant
5 add/sub/xor bl,al
Listing 4.13: Loading 8-bit data from the byte-code buffer.
1 lodsw
2 add/sub/xor ax,bx
3 add/sub/xor ax,0xffff
; random constant
4 add/sub/xor ax,0xffff
; random constant
5 add/sub/xor bx,ax
Listing 4.14: Loading 16-bit data from the byte-code buffer.
1 lodsd
2 add/sub/xor eax,ebx
3 add/sub/xor eax,0xffffffff
; random constant
4 add/sub/xor eax,0xffffffff
; random constant
5 add/sub/xor ebx,eax
Listing 4.15: Loading 32-bit data from the byte-code buffer.
For each of these handler procedures, including the VM Dispatcher area, the decryption
routine must be identified and emulated using the relevant instructions and constants in
order to decrypt the custom architecture data stored in the byte-code buffer. It should be
noted that the decryption routines support only a small subset of possible instructions,
consisting of the add, the sub and the xor instructions. The custom architecture code can
now be recovered by parsing all the opcode data stored in the encrypted byte-code buffer.
Once the custom architecture code-flow has been recovered from the byte-code buffer, it
need only be translated back into its original x86 architecture equivalent. Most constructs
follows an easily translatable [load data →perform operation →store data] pattern.
However, complex instructions require complex constructs which may prove less trivial
to identify and translate, as they do not follow streamlined patterns. One such construct
is the emulation of the lodsb instruction depicted in table 4.8 below.
_forwards:
_backwards:
load byte [reg32(esi)]
store reg8(eax)
jcc evaluate (df=1)
jcc _backwards
jmp _forwards
load reg32(esi)
load dword(1)
addx dword
store reg32(esi)
jmp _exit
load reg32(esi)
load dword(1)
subx dword
store reg32(esi)
jmp _exit
Table 4.8: Custom architecture construct of the lodsb instruction.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
43
There are approximately 1000-1500 unique operation constructs covering a variety of
implementations of distinct x86 architecture instructions. An approximation of 200-300
of these constructs are identified as complex instruction constructs, as they do not follow
the easily translatable pattern described above. Thus, in order to reliably and success-
fully translate any protected function back to its original x86 architecture equivalent, all
of these distinct constructs must be identified and accounted for in the translation process.
However, prior to removal of deadcode instructions in the custom architecture code-flow,
as was demonstrated during the manual opcode recovery performed in section 4.2, a lot
of constructs are ill-formed and therefore not translatable to equivalent x86 architecture
constructs. It is thus of great importance that all deadcode instructions be stripped from
the custom architecture code-flow before attempting to translate the custom architecture
constructs to their x86 architecture equivalent.
While the chapters in this thesis focus primarily on the disection and analysis of
Themida virtual machine architectures, the study further aims to verify that the
solutions proposed in this thesis can be applied to Themida protected binaries in order
to perform automated recovery of protected procedures. To this end, a devirtualization
tool for Themida was developed in parallel to the writing of this thesis.
For demonstration purposes, a protected binary that has been virtualized with the CISC
virtual machine architecture was downloaded from the internet1 and unpacked using the
guide available in section 3.4. The recovered procedure is shown in figure 4.2 below.
Figure 4.2: Example of code recovery for public UnpackMe binary.
1https://forum.tuts4you.com/topic/31743-unpackme-themida-2240/
==PAGE:50==
4.3 Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
44
For clarification, the downloaded protected binary contains a virtualization-protected
procedure which starts at address 00401895 with a jmp instruction leading into the VM
Trampoline area. The code shown in the bottom of the figure is the custom architecture
procedure after it has been recovered and retranslated to its x86 architecture equivalent.
Notice that the procedure has been protected with the Dynamic Opcode setting config-
ured at 20% Dynamic, leading to deadcode instructions being inserted into the custom
architecture code-flow prior to the original procedure instructions. These instructions are
usually easy to distinguish from the original procedure code, as the original procedure
instructions are always located at the end of the custom architecture code flow and since
the inserted deadcode instructions usually resolves to unsensible operations involving the
stack. The highlighted instruction thus marks the start of the original procedure code in
the custom architecture code-snippet.
For validation of the correctness and precision of the developed devirtualization tool for
the CISC virtual machine architecture, the recovered code from the protected procedure
is compared to the same code region in another restored binary that has been posted as a
challenge solution by a known user in the community from which the binary was procured.
The same code region in the alternate binary, which has been accepted as a valid solution
by the challenge author, can be seen in figure 4.3 below.
Figure 4.3: Solution of code recovery for public UnpackMe binary.
The two solutions are an exact match. It has thus proven possible to automate recovery
of procedures that have been protected using the CISC virtual machine architecture and
has furthermore been achieved with the herein developed devirtualization tool.
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 5
The FISH architecture
This chapter will focus on Themida version 2.2.5.0 and the supported FISH virtual ma-
chine architecture. The herein analysed binary is protected by Themida with the lowest
virtual machine protection setting, WHITE, as shown in figure 5.1 below.
Figure 5.1: The virtual machine options chosen for protecting the program.
Before the protected binary and its virtualization protection can be analysed, it must first
be unpacked. An unpacking environment setup guide and an unpacking walkthrough for
Themida 2.2.5.0 can be found in sections 3.2 and 3.4 respectively.
==PAGE:52==
5.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
46
5.1
Analysis of the virtual machine
The binary has now been protected by Themida 2.2.5.0, and a reanalysis of the protected
test function depicted in listing 5.1 below should be carried out.
.text:00401000 sub_401000
proc near
.text:00401000
.text:00401000
jmp
sub_4D4CC5
.text:00401000
.text:00401000 ; ---------------------------------------------------------------
.text:00401005
db 9E, C0, 96, 55, A4, A6, 5F, 8B, 8B, F7, B4
.text:00401010
db C6, 9A, 81, 4C, 17, B1, 17, 42, 07, 84, 02
.text:0040101B
db BF, 23, 85, 48, 9E, 60, ED, 26, 90, A8, 27
.text:00401026
db 48, 81, AC, 7A, EB, 10, 57, 4C, 20, 89, FF
.text:00401031
db 89, C0, 89, C9, 89, D2, 89, DB, 89, C0, 90
.text:00401031 ; ---------------------------------------------------------------
.text:00401031
.text:00401031 sub_401000
endp
Listing 5.1: The test function in the program after being protected.
Here, it can be seen that the machine code of the test function has been replaced with a
jump to the virtual machine segment, specifically to the VM Trampoline area referenced
in section 2.3, and that the rest of the function has been overwritten by a random sequence
of bytes. The contents of the VM Trampoline area is shown in listing 5.2 below.
.themida:004D4CC5 sub_4D4CC5
proc near
.themida:004D4CC5
.themida:004D4CC5
push
000D388B ; opcode key
.themida:004D4CCA
push
3C ; first handler offset
.themida:004D4CCF
jmp
loc_4348B9
.themida:004D4CCF
.themida:004D4CCF sub_4D4CC5
endp
Listing 5.2: The VM Trampoline area for the test function.
The VM Trampoline area stores the opcode key for the test function on the stack followed
by the handler procedure table offset of the first handler procedure to be executed and
then jumps to the VM Entrypoint area of the virtual machine. However, despite using
the lowest obfuscation level, WHITE, the VM Entrypoint area remains obfuscated as
briefly shown in listing 5.3 below.
.themida:004348EA
...
.themida:004348EB
mov
ebx,75
.themida:004348F0
mov
[ebp+ebx],ecx
.themida:004348F4
mov
ebx,3F
.themida:004348F9
mov
[ebp+ebx],400000
.themida:00434901
...
Listing 5.3: The unoptimized entry point for the virtual machine.
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
47
Using the counter-techniques described in section 2.2 on the VM Entrypoint area should
reveal its core instructions as shown in listing 5.4 below.
1 004348b9
pushfd
2 004348ba
pushad
3
4 ; Initialize context (ebp)
5 004348bb
call $+5
6 004348c0
pop ecx
7 004348c1
sub ecx,0x07
8 004348c4
sub ecx,0x000348b9
; delta
9 004348ca
mov ebp,0x00016d4e
10 004348cf
add ebp,ecx
; context
11
12 ; Spinlock (only one instance permitted at a time)
13 004348d1
push ecx
14 004348d2
mov ecx,0x00000001
15 004348dc
xor eax,eax
16 004348de
lock cmpxchg [ebp+0x36],ecx
17 004348e4
jz 0x004348ea
18 004348e6
pause
19 004348e8
jmp 0x004348dc
20 004348ea
pop ecx
21
22 ; Initialize image base (delta) and opcode buffer
23 004348f0
mov [ebp+0x75],ecx
; actual image base
24 004348f9
mov [ebp+0x3f],0x00400000
; preferred image base
25 00434906
mov eax,[esp+0x28]
26 0043490a
add eax,ecx
27 0043490c
mov [ebp+0x08],eax
; opcode buffer
28
29 ; Initialize handlers
30 00434910
mov eax,0x000346a1
31 00434915
add eax,ecx
32 00434920
cmp [ebp+0x4f],eax
; handler table
33 00434922
jz 0x00434940
34 00434925
mov ebx,0x00000218
35 0043492a
shr ebx,0x02
; handler count = 0x86 (134)
36 0043492d
push eax
37 0043492e
test ebx,ebx
38 00434930
jz 0x0043493a
39 00434932
add [eax],ecx
40 00434934
add eax,0x04
41 00434937
dec ebx
42 00434938
jmp 0x0043492e
43 0043493a
pop eax
44 0043493c
mov [ebp+0x4f],eax
45
46 ; Initial handler dispatch
47 00434940
mov ebx,[esp+0x24]
48 00434944
shl ebx,0x02
49 00434947
add eax,ebx
50 00434949
jmp dword ptr [eax]
Listing 5.4: The optimized entry point for the virtual machine.
==PAGE:54==
5.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
48
The VM Entrypoint area consists of six minor sub-areas, each of which hold the following
responsibilities.
• The first sub-area pushes the EFLAGS register and all general-purpose registers to the
stack, so that the virtual machine can pop them into its own proprietary registers
as will be showcased later in section 5.2.
• The second sub-area uses the return address from a relative call to calculate the
address of the virtual machine context structure as well as a delta value that is used
for initialization of certain data in the virtual machine. In this instance, the delta
value is the image base of the protected application.
• The third sub-area performs a mutual exclusion spinlock procedure, in order to
ensure that only a single byte-code buffer is being processed at a time. This is
important because the virtual machine uses a shared global context structure across
executions.
• The fourth sub-area populates members of the virtual machine context structure,
specifically the current image base, the preferred image base and the byte-code
buffer which is initialized by adding the delta value from the second sub-area to the
opcode key from the VM Trampoline area.
• The fifth sub-area uses the delta value from the second sub-area to perform a one-
time initialization of the handler procedure table.
• The sixth sub-area uses the initial handler procedure offset from the VM Trampoline
area to transfer execution flow to the handler procedure in question and start the
virtual machine byte-code processing.
However, the last sub-area does not act as a central VM Dispatcher area, since it only
transfers execution flow to a single fixed handler procedure. Instead, every handler in the
custom architecture, that does not unconditionally exit the virtual machine, contains a
proprietary dispatcher at the end of its procedure as depicted in listing 5.5 below.
1 mov [ebp+0x53],0x00000000
2 mov [ebp+0xa7],0x00000000
3 mov [ebp+0x89],0x00000000
4 mov [ebp+0x14],0x00000000
5 mov [ebp+0x8f],0x00000000
6 mov [ebp+0xa0],0x0000
7 mov [ebp+0x57],0x00
8 mov [ebp+0x68],0x00000000
9 ; dispatcher area
10 mov eax,[ebp+0x4f] ; handler table
11 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08] ; byte-code buffer
12 movzx ebx,word ptr [ebx+0x00] ; byte-code buffer offset for next handler
13 sub ebx,0x2277293e ; random decrypt constant
14 and ebx,0xffff
15 add dword ptr [ebp+0x08],0x02 ; advance byte-code buffer
16 jmp dword ptr [eax+ebx*4]
Listing 5.5: The virtual handler procedure for reset.
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
49
As depicted in the above listing, opcode data in the custom virtual machine architecture
is read using direct offsets into the byte-code buffer. Consequently, the byte-code buffer
must be incremented by the amount of bytes consumed by the handler procedure, before
transferring execution flow to the next handler procedure in the code-flow sequence. The
dispatcher area itself consumes two bytes from the byte-code buffer, since it has to read
the handler procedure table offset of the next handler procedure in the sequence. This
results in the byte-code buffer being incremented by a minimum of two bytes for all
handler procedures that contains a dispatcher area. Notice that the dispatcher area of
individual handlers at random contains one or more decryption operations, such as the
[sub ebx,0x2277293e] and the [and ebx,0xffff] instructions found in the listing above.
After thorough analysis of all handler procedures in the virtual machine, it is found that
the supported operations can be separated into two distinct groups, basic operations
and complex operations. An operation type is considered basic, if an explicit dedicated
handler procedure exists for every single form of the operation in question, i.e. with one
combination of operand types (register, memory, constant) and one operand size (8-bit,
16-bit, 32-bit). In contrast, an operation type is considered complex, if a single handler
procedure covers every single form of the operation in question, i.e. with varying operand
types (register, memory, constant) and varying operand sizes (8-bit, 16-bit, 32-bit).
The reset handler procedure depicted in the above listing is responsible for clearing a
range of virtual machine context entries, henceforth referred to as the context keys, which
are used to decrypt the mnemonic key in multi-complex handler procedures as shown in
listing 5.6 below.
1 ... ; Pre-mutate context keys
2 and [ebp+0xa7],0x198dd351
3 or
[ebp+0x89],0x4ad0b120
4 ... ; Load mnemonic (subhandler)
5 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08] ; byte-code buffer
6 movzx ecx,byte ptr [ebx+0x00] ; encrypted mnemonic identifier
7 xor ecx,[ebp+0x53]
8 xor ecx,[ebp+0xa7]
9 add ecx,[ebp+0x68]
10 and [ebp+0xa7],0x6a381f86
11 sub ecx,[ebp+0x89]
12 xor [ebp+0x57],cl ; mnemonic key
13 ... ; Post-mutate context keys
14 sub [ebp+0xa7],0x6d3caedd
15 or
[ebp+0x89],0x665b765e
16 xor [ebp+0x53],0x1446b272
17 or
[ebp+0x14],0x4ed21ba6
18 add [ebp+0x68],0x1981bd60
19 ... ; Evaluate mnemonic identifier
20 mov bl,[ebp+0x57] ; mnemonic key
21 add bl,0x35
22 cmp bl,0xff ; mnemonic identifier
23 jnz _skip_mnemonic
24 ...
Listing 5.6: Excerpts from the binary operation handler procedure
==PAGE:56==
5.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
50
Multi-type handler procedures are operations that contains execution logic for multiple
distinct mnemonics. In other words, multi-type handler procedures includes any handler
procedure capable of emulating more than one instruction.
In multi-complex handler procedures, the virtual machine context keys are leveraged in a
sequence of operations, which results in the mnemonic key for the handler procedure being
decrypted and stored in the byte-sized context key. Notice that the context keys are being
mutated before, during and after the decryption of the mnemonic key in the listing above.
After decryption, the mnemonic key is compared against a range of mnemonic identifiers
to figure out which execution logic should be carried out by the handler procedure.
The list of operations supported by the multi-complex unary operation handler proce-
dure can be found in table 5.1 below.
Operation
Description
inc
Increment an operand
dec
Decrement an operand
neg
Negate an operand
not
Bitwise NOT an operand
Table 5.1: Multi-complex unary operations supported by the virtual machine.
Similarly, the list of operations supported by the multi-complex binary operation han-
dler procedure can be found in table 5.2 below.
Operation
Description
add
Add two operand
sub
Subtract two operand
imul
Mulitply two operand
and
Bitwise AND two operand
or
Bitwise OR two operand
xor
Bitwise XOR two operand
shr
Bitwise shift an operand right
shl
Bitwise shift an operand left
ror
Bitwise rotate an operand right
rcr
Bitwise rotate an operand right through carry
rol
Bitwise rotate an operand left
rcl
Bitwise rotate an operand left through carry
cmp
Compare two operand (using subtraction)
test
Compare two operand (using bitwise AND)
mov
Copy an operand into another operand
movsx
Copy an operand into another operand with sign-extension
movzx
Copy an operand into another operand with zero-extension
Table 5.2: Multi-complex binary operations supported by the virtual machine.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
51
Lastly, the list of operations supported by the multi-complex stack operation handler
procedure can be found in table 5.3 below.
Operation
Description
push
Push an operand to the stack
pop
Pop the top stack element into an operand
Table 5.3: Multi-complex stack operations supported by the virtual machine.
The three tables above details all the individual operations supported by each of the three
multi-complex handler procedures that exist in the custom virtual machine architecture.
Note that each of the above-mentioned multi-complex handler procedures are capable
of carrying out each of the supported operations depicted in their respective tables,
including in any form supported by the operation in question.
The virtual machine also support a range of complex operations shown in table 5.4 below.
Operation
Description
call
Return to an operand address and assign a relative constant return address
xchg
Exchange the contents of two operands
Table 5.4: Remaining complex operations supported by the virtual machine.
In contrast to the multi-complex operations listed above, these two complex operations
are not implemented by the same handler procedure. Instead, they are each implemented
by their own individual handler procedure. However, they are still considered complex
operations, as their single individual handler procedure implements every supported
form of their individual operations.
The virtual machine supports a single multi-basic operation. The list of operations sup-
ported by the multi-basic EFLAGS handler procedure can be found in table 5.5 below.
Operation
Description
clc
Clear the carry flag (CF = 0)
cld
Clear the direction flag (DF = 0)
cli
Clear the interrupt flag (IF = 0)
cmc
Complement the carry flag (CF = NOT(CF))
stc
Set the carry flag (CF = 1)
std
Set the direction flag (DF = 1)
sti
Set the interrupt flag (IF = 1)
Table 5.5: Multi-basic EFLAGS operations supported by the virtual machine.
Similar to the multi-complex handler procedures, this is a single handler procedure that
implements multiple distinct operations. However, the operations are considered basic
as they do not support any type of operands at all.
==PAGE:58==
5.1 Analysis of the virtual machine
52
The list of supported basic string operations can be found in table 5.6 below.
Operation
8-bit
16-bit
32-bit
Description
lods
x
x
x
Immitates the lods instruction albeit on arbitrary registers
stos
x
x
x
Immitates the stos instruction albeit on arbitrary registers
cmps
x
x
x
Immitates the cmps instruction albeit on arbitrary registers
subs
x
x
x
Same as cmps, but uses the sub instruction instead of cmp
movs
x
x
x
Immitates the movs instruction albeit on arbitrary registers
Table 5.6: Basic string operations supported by the virtual machine.
The basic string operations depicted in the above table differs from multi-type handler
procedures in that they have a single individual handler procedure for each individual
operation type. Moreover, they differ from complex handler procedures in that they have
an individual handler procedure for each supported form of their individual operations.
In other words, there are distinct handler procedures for every form of every operation
depicted in the above table.
Lastly, the virtual machine support a variety of miscellaneous basic operations pertaining
to execution flow control and edge-case necessities as shown in table 5.7 below.
Operation
Description
reset
Reset all internal context keys to zero
crypt
Populates a context register with the crypt seed value
load stack
Read the stack pointer into the context stack register
store stack
Write the context stack register to the stack pointer
add stack,imm8
Add an 8-bit constant to the stack pointer and context stack register
pushfd
Push the context EFLAGS register to the stack
popfd
Pop the top stack element into the context EFLAGS register
load align imm32
Read a constant value aligned by the image base into a context register
jcc internal imm32
Increment the byte-code buffer by a constant value if condition evaluates to true
jcc external imm32
Return to a relative constant address if condition evaluates to true
jmp internal imm32
Increment the byte-code buffer by a constant value
jmp external imm32
Return to a relative constant address
jmp external imm32 dll
Return to a relative constant address and realign up to two offsets
jmp external reg
Return to an address stored in a context register
jmp external [reg]
Return to an address stored in a dereferenced context register
ret
Reset the stack and return from the virtual machine
Table 5.7: Remaining operations supported by the virtual machine.
Using sequences of supported instructions from all of the above tables combined, it is pos-
sible to emulate almost any x86 usermode instruction in the virtual machine architecture.
However, the above tables depict only high-level descriptions of the supported operations
and does not adequately outline their implementation details. For a exhaustive list of
==PAGE:59==
5.2 Recovering virtual opcodes manually
53
handler procedures and their core instructions respectively, please refer to appendix B.
Notice however, that the proprietary dispatcher areas and all references to mutation of
the context keys have been omitted in these handler procedure listings for readability
reasons, as they do not convery any information about the core responsibility of the
individual handler procedures.
Furthermore, the majority of the complex handler procedures detailed in appendix B
reuse identical subhandler procedure code to manage support for multi-type mnemonic
handling and arbitrary operands.
For this reason, these complex handler procedures
have been shortened to include a prologue list of included subhandler procedures
followed by the unique code of the particular complex handler procedure. For a list of
subhandler procedures and their core instructions respectively, please refer to appendix C.
Now that the entire virtual machine has been mapped and analysed, it is possible to iterate
the byte-code buffer in order to determine the sequence of invoked handler procedures
and thereby reconstruct the custom architecture code flow.
5.2
Recovering virtual opcodes manually
By placing a software breakpoint in the initial handler dispatch of the VM Entrypoint area
and stepping through each of the invoked handler procedures in the code-flow execution
chain to recover the decrypted byte-code data, it is possible to reconstruct the custom
architecture code flow as shown in listing 5.7 below.
1 reset
2 load stack
3 stack(0xb5) (1, 3, 0x85)
4 stack(0xb5) (1, 3, 0x3b)
5 stack(0xb5) (1, 3, 0x1a)
6 stack(0xb5) (1, 3, 0x6c)
7 stack(0xb5) (1, 3, 0x6c)
8 stack(0xb5) (1, 3, 0x2e)
9 stack(0xb5) (1, 3, 0x9c)
10 stack(0xb5) (1, 3, 0x22)
11 popfd
12 add stack,0x08
13 ... ; deadcode instructions
14 stack(0x42) (1, 3, 0x9c)
15 binary(0x08) (1, 3, 0x9c),(1, 3, 0x9c)
16 binary(0xd7) (1, 3, 0x9c),(3, 3, 0x05)
17 binary(0xa2) (1, 3, 0x9c),(3, 3, 0xbe)
18 binary(0x10) (1, 3, 0x9c),(3, 3, 0x34)
19 binary(0x8d) (1, 3, 0x9c),(3, 3, 0x08)
20 binary(0xd7) (1, 3, 0x22),(1, 3, 0x9c)
21 stack(0xb5) (1, 3, 0x9c)
22 stack(0x42) (1, 3, 0x22)
23 pushfd
24 stack(0x42) (1, 3, 0x22)
25 stack(0x42) (1, 3, 0x9c)
26 stack(0x42) (1, 3, 0x2e)
27 stack(0x42) (1, 3, 0x6c)
28 stack(0x42) (1, 3, 0x93)
29 stack(0x42) (1, 3, 0x1a)
30 stack(0x42) (1, 3, 0x3b)
31 stack(0x42) (1, 3, 0x85)
32 ret
Listing 5.7: The raw extracted virtual opcodes for the test function.
Please note that the above process is extremely time consuming and very prone to errors.
The recovered custom architecture code flow contains minor obfuscation patterns that
must be dealt with in order to reveal the core instructions of the code snippet. First of
all, it is possible to remove instructions whose purpose is entirely bound to the internals
==PAGE:60==
5.2 Recovering virtual opcodes manually
54
of the virtual machine, such as the reset instruction and the load stack instruction.
Additionally, it is possible to remove deadcode instructions, of which the recovered code
snippet above contained approximately 300 instances.
However, for readability pur-
poses, these are represented by an ellipsis and related comment in the above code snippet.
Furthermore, the instruction operands are represented by a tuple structure of the format,
(type, size, data), of which the representative values can be found in table 5.8 below.
ID
Type
Size
1
Register
8-bit
2
Memory
16-bit
3
Immediate
32-bit
Table 5.8: Operand values for types and sizes.
The code snippet is thus reducible as shown in listing 5.8 below.
1 stack(0xb5) reg32(0x85)
2 stack(0xb5) reg32(0x3b)
3 stack(0xb5) reg32(0x1a)
4 stack(0xb5) reg32(0x6c)
5 stack(0xb5) reg32(0x6c)
6 stack(0xb5) reg32(0x2e)
7 stack(0xb5) reg32(0x9c)
8 stack(0xb5) reg32(0x22)
9 popfd
10 add stack,0x08
11 stack(0x42) reg32(0x9c)
12 binary(0x08) reg32(0x9c),reg32(0x9c)
13 binary(0xd7) reg32(0x9c),imm32(0x05)
14 binary(0xa2) reg32(0x9c),imm32(0xbe)
15 binary(0x10) reg32(0x9c),imm32(0x34)
16 binary(0x8d) reg32(0x9c),imm32(0x08)
17 binary(0xd7) reg32(0x22),reg32(0x9c)
18 stack(0xb5) reg32(0x9c)
19 stack(0x42) reg32(0x22)
20 pushfd
21 stack(0x42) reg32(0x22)
22 stack(0x42) reg32(0x9c)
23 stack(0x42) reg32(0x2e)
24 stack(0x42) reg32(0x6c)
25 stack(0x42) reg32(0x93)
26 stack(0x42) reg32(0x1a)
27 stack(0x42) reg32(0x3b)
28 stack(0x42) reg32(0x85)
29 ret
Listing 5.8: The virtual opcodes after optimization.
The reduced custom virtual machine architecture code flow contains a range of unresolve
mnemonics. These are represented by the name of their respective multi-complex handler
procedure as well as the mnemonic key that was decrypted during audit of the handler
procedure. In order to resolve these mnemonic keys and map them to their corresponding
mnemonic identifiers, each of the responsible handler procedures must be analysed. Two
excerpts from the stack operation handler procedure can be seen in table 5.9 below.
push
pop
...
cmp cl,0x42 ; push
jnz _skip_push
...
...
cmp cl,0xb5 ; pop
jnz _skip_pop
...
Table 5.9: Excerpts from the stack operation handler procedure.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Recovering virtual opcodes manually
55
Inside the stack operation handler procedure, the mnemonic identifier is compared
to 0x42 before carrying out the push instruction and similarly compared to 0xb5 before
carrying out the pop instruction. It can thus be concluded that these mnemonic identifiers
map to their respective instruction mnemonics. Performing a similar analysis for the
unary operations handler procedure or the binary operations handler procedure reveals
another set of identifier-to-mnemonic mappings as depicted in tables 5.10 and 5.11 below.
Mnemonic
ID
Mnemonic
ID
inc
0x41
neg
0x96
dec
0x72
not
0x39
Table 5.10: Mnemonic identifier mappings for unary operations.
Mnemonic
ID
Mnemonic
ID
Mnemonic
ID
add
0xa2
shr
0x1f
cmp
0xc1
sub
0x10
shl
0x8d
test
0x06
imul
0xc4
ror
0x15
mov
0xd7
and
0x49
rcr
0x4d
movsx
0xca
or
0x40
rol
0xe3
movzx
0x9c
xor
0x08
rcl
0x05
Table 5.11: Mnemonic identifier mappings for binary operations.
By consideration of these identifier-to-mnemonic mappings, it is possible to reconstruct
the mnemonics in the custom architecture code flow as shown in listing 5.9 below.
1 pop reg32(0x85)
2 pop reg32(0x3b)
3 pop reg32(0x1a)
4 pop reg32(0x6c)
5 pop reg32(0x6c)
6 pop reg32(0x2e)
7 pop reg32(0x9c)
8 pop reg32(0x22)
9 popfd
10 add stack,0x08
11 push reg32(0x9c)
12 xor reg32(0x9c),reg32(0x9c)
13 mov reg32(0x9c),imm32(0x05)
14 add reg32(0x9c),imm32(0xbe)
15 sub reg32(0x9c),imm32(0x34)
16 shl reg32(0x9c),imm32(0x08)
17 mov reg32(0x22),reg32(0x9c)
18 pop reg32(0x9c)
19 push reg32(0x22)
20 pushfd
21 push reg32(0x22)
22 push reg32(0x9c)
23 push reg32(0x2e)
24 push reg32(0x6c)
25 push reg32(0x93)
26 push reg32(0x1a)
27 push reg32(0x3b)
28 push reg32(0x85)
29 ret
Listing 5.9: The virtual opcodes after restoration of mnemonics.
The custom virtual machine architecture code flow has now almost been restored to its
original x86 architecture construct, with the sole exception of the operation operands.
The last step is therefore to resolve the final operands by translating the virtual machine
context registers to their equivalent x86 general-purpose registers.
==PAGE:62==
5.2 Recovering virtual opcodes manually
56
Interestingly, the VM Entrypoint procedure and the ret handler procedure makes this
process trivial, as they indirectly define which virtual machine context registers corre-
sponds to which x86 general-purpose registers as depicted in table 5.12 below.
VM Entrypoint
VM Return
004348b9
pushfd
004348ba
pushad
004348bb
...
004348c0
...
004348c1
...
00428cc4
...
00428cca popad
00428cd1 popfd
00428cd2 add esp,0x04
00428cd8 ret
Table 5.12: Excerpts from the VM Entrypoint and the ret handler procedures.
At the start of the VM Entrypoint procedure, a pushfd instruction and a pushad
instruction loads the following registers onto the stack in the specified order: EFLAGS,
EAX, ECX, EDX, EBX, ESP, EBP, ESI, EDI. Subsequent to this, the prologue of the custom
architecture code stores them in virtual machine context registers in the reverse order.
Similar behaviour can be spotted in the epilogue of the custom architecture code flow,
where all virtual machine context registers are pushed onto the stack in an order
identical to that of the VM Entrypoint procedure. This time, however, they are retrieved
by the ret handler procedure, that uses a popad instruction and a popfd instruction
to propagate these internal register states to the equivalent x86 general-purpose registers.
Accounting for these observations, and the fact that the stack register in the custom
architecture corresponds to the esp register in the x86 architecture, the code can be
transformed and segregated as shown in table 5.13 below.
Prologue
Core
Epilogue
1 pop edi
2 pop esi
3 pop ebp
4 pop ebx
5 pop ebx
6 pop edx
7 pop ecx
8 pop eax
9 popfd
10 add esp,0x08
1 ...
2 push ecx
3 xor ecx,ecx
4 mov ecx,0x05
5 add ecx,0xbe
6 sub ecx,0x34
7 shl ecx,0x08
8 mov eax,ecx
9 pop ecx
1 push eax
2 pushfd
3 push eax
4 push ecx
5 push edx
6 push ebx
7 push esp
8 push ebp
9 push esi
10 push edi
11 ret
Table 5.13: The virtual opcodes after register substitution and segregation.
As mentioned previously for the reset instruction and the load stack instruction, it is
possible to remove instructions whose purpose is entirely bound to the internal state of
the virtual machine.
The prologue is solely responsible for populating the internal context registers with the
states of the native x86 registers at the time of entering the virtual machine, as well
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
57
as removing the opcode key from the stack, which was loaded by the VM Trampoline area.
The epilogue is solely responsible for loading the internal context registers to the stack
and returning from the virtual machine, so that the ret handler procedure can populate
the native x86 registers with the states of the internal context registers at the time of
exiting the virtual machine.
It is thus conclusible that the prologue and epilogue can both be removed from the custom
architecture code snippet as they are entirely responsible for mutation of the internal state
of the virtual machine, thus serving no purpose for understanding what actions are being
emulated by the virtual machine. By removing both the prologue and the epilogue, only
the core instructions of the protected function remain as shown in listing 5.10 below.
1 ...
2 push ecx
3 xor ecx,ecx
4 mov ecx,0x05
5 add ecx,0xbe
6 sub ecx,0x34
7 shl ecx,0x08
8 mov eax,ecx
9 pop ecx
10 ret
Listing 5.10: The virtual opcodes after removing the prologue and epilogue.
In comparison to the original program source code shown in section 3.1, the recovered
procedure code is an exact match. In other words, it has proven possible to fully recover
the original machine code of a protected procedure, albeit just for a single instance of the
mutable virtual machine architecture.
5.3
Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
In order to fully automate the process of recovering the original machine code of a pro-
tected procedure, all previously documented steps must be automated and the mutability
of the virtual machine architecture must be accounted for. However, the methodology
still follows the general approach outlined in section 2.3 as shown below.
1. Deduce the functional responsibility of each individual handler procedure.
2. Map the byte-code sequence to handler procedures (recreate the code-flow).
3. Translate the custom architecture code-flow back to its original architecture.
The first step was done in the previous section. However, the mutability of the virtual
machine architecture results in new obfuscation being applied to every single area of
the virtual machine every time a new instance of the virtual machine is generated.
Furthermore, the handler procedure table is shuffled before inserting it into the virtual
==PAGE:64==
5.3 Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
58
machine context structure at a randomly chosen offset. In fact, all virtual machine con-
text offsets are randomized for every new instance of the virtual machine being generated.
Before any of the above steps are even approachable, a reliable deobfuscation engine must
be developed. Ideally, this is done by implementing all of the counter-techniques described
in section 2.2. However, the obfuscation patterns used by Themida are very monotone
and predictable, and can be targeted specifically without the need for generic approaches.
Once the deobfuscation engine has been developed to a reliable extend, it must be applied
to the VM Entrypoint area so that certain data can be carved from there. Specifically, as
marked in listing 5.11 below, this includes the delta value, the virtual machine context
structure, the image base offsets, the amount of handler procedures in the virtual machine
and the handler procedure table offset into the virtual machine context structure.
1 004348ba
...
2 ; Initialize context (ebp)
3 004348bb
call $+5
4 004348c0
pop ecx
5 004348c1
sub ecx,0x07
6 004348c4
sub ecx,0x000348b9
; delta
7 004348ca
mov ebp,0x00016d4e
8 004348cf
add ebp,ecx
; context
9 ; Initialize image base (delta) and opcode buffer
10 004348f0
mov [ebp+0x75],ecx
; actual image base
11 004348f9
mov [ebp+0x3f],0x00400000
; preferred image base
12 00434906
mov eax,[esp+0x28]
13 0043490a
add eax,ecx
14 0043490c
mov [ebp+0x08],eax
; opcode buffer
15 ; Initialize handlers
16 00434910
mov eax,0x000346a1
17 00434915
add eax,ecx
18 00434920
cmp [ebp+0x4f],eax
; handler table
19 00434922
jz 0x00434940
20 00434925
mov ebx,0x00000218
21 0043492a
shr ebx,0x02
; handler count = 0x86 (134)
22 0043492d
push eax
23 0043492e
test ebx,ebx
24 00434930
jz 0x0043493a
25 00434932
add [eax],ecx
26 00434934
add eax,0x04
27 00434937
dec ebx
28 00434938
jmp 0x0043492e
29 0043493a
pop eax
30 0043493c
mov [ebp+0x4f],eax
31 00434940
...
Listing 5.11: Exhibit of the deobfuscated entry point for the virtual machine.
Once the handler procedure table has been carved from the VM Entrypoint area, the
table can be iterated and the delta value can be added to each of the stored handler
procedures in order to initialize the actual address of the individual procedures.
==PAGE:65==
5.3 Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
59
It is now possible to deobfuscate each of the individual handlers and deduce their
functional responsibilities as required by the first step of the general methodology.
Since all operations supported by the virtual machine architecture have already been
identified in section 5.1 above, with their handler procedures available in appendix B,
this is simply a matter of identifying the core instructions of each individual handler
procedure and using these to map the handler procedures to the predetermined set of
supported operations. It should however be noted, that the core instructions are prone
to rearrangement and that the same holds true for the placement of subhandlers in the
complex handler procedures.
When all handler procedures have been mapped to their respective virtual machine op-
erations, the code-flow can be reconstructed from the byte-code sequence in accordance
with step two of the general methodology. However, in order to parse the byte-code and
perform this step, the opcode key and the initial handler procedure offset must first be
retrieved from the VM Trampoline area, and the byte-code buffer be initialized by addi-
tion of the delta value. Furthermore, as previously shown in section 5.1, all operations
that does not unconditionally exit the virtual machine, contains a proprietary dispatcher
at the end of the handler procedure as shown in listing 5.12 below.
1 mov eax,[ebp+0x4f] ; handler table
2 movzx ebx,word ptr [ebx+0x02] ; byte-code buffer offset for next handler
3 add/sub/xor ebx,0xffffffff ; random constant
4 and ebx,0xffff
5 add dword ptr [ebp+0x08],0x04 ; advance byte-code buffer
6 jmp dword ptr [eax+ebx*4]
Listing 5.12: The general handler procedure dispatcher layout.
Note that the dispatcher area may contain one or more decryption operations as depicted
by [add/sub/xor ebx,0xffffffff] and [and ebx,0xffff] in the above listing. For each
of these handler procedures, including the dispatcher area of the VM Entrypoint area,
the decryption routine must be identified and emulated using the relevant instructions
and constants in order to locate the next handler procedure in the execution sequence.
It should furthermore be noted that the first decryption operation support only a small
subset of possible instructions, consisting of the add, the sub and the xor instructions.
The custom architecture code flow can now be recovered by parsing and emulating the
dispatcher area of every handler procedure encountered in the byte-code buffer.
Once the custom architecture code flow has been recovered from the byte-code buffer, it
must be translated back into its original x86 architecture equivalent. Most constructs
are identical in both the custom architecture and the x86 architecture, and therefore
does not require additional processing to translate between architectures. However, the
exception to this observation are the multi-type handler procedures supported by the
custom virtual machine architecture. Because these individual handler procedures are
responsible for multiple corresponding operations in the x86 architecture, an additional
step must be carried out to resolve the particular instruction being carried out by each
particular invocation of a multi-complex handler procedure.
==PAGE:66==
5.3 Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
60
As previously explained in section 5.1, the context keys are responsible for resolving
the mnemonic key for multi-complex handler procedures. For each handler procedure
in the virtual machine architecture, context key operations must thus be identified and
emulated using the relevant instructions and constants in order to decrypt the intended
mnemonic identifiers for multi-complex handler procedures and translate them to their
equivalent x86 architecture instruction. The context offsets to be identified as context
keys can be parsed from the reset handler procedure.
The final aspect in which the custom virtual machine architecture deviates from the
Intel x86 architecture, is that it contains two intermediary registers, herein referred to
as addr1 and addr2, which are meant for computing dynamic constants and relative
addresses. Any construct that makes use of these intermediary registers can be translated
to the x86 architecture by replacing the addr register with dynamically resolved value.
While the chapters in this thesis focus primarily on the disection and analysis of
Themida virtual machine architectures, the study further aims to verify that the
solutions proposed in this thesis can be applied to Themida protected binaries in order
to perform automated recovery of protected procedures. To this end, a devirtualization
tool for Themida was developed in parallel to the writing of this thesis.
For demonstration purposes, a protected binary that has been virtualized with the FISH
virtual machine architecture was downloaded from the internet1 and unpacked using the
guide available in section 3.4. The recovered procedure is shown in figure 5.2 below.
Figure 5.2: Example of code recovery for public UnpackMe binary.
For clarification, the downloaded protected binary contains a virtualization-protected
procedure which starts at address 0040103a with a jmp instruction leading into the VM
Trampoline area. The code shown in the bottom of the figure is the custom architecture
1https://forum.tuts4you.com/topic/33562-unpackme-themida-2260/
==PAGE:67==
5.3 Recovering virtual opcodes automatically
61
procedure after it has been recovered and retranslated to its x86 architecture equivalent.
Notice that the procedure being protected leads to deadcode instructions being inserted
into the custom architecture code-flow prior to the original procedure instructions. These
instructions are usually easy to distinguish from the original procedure code, as the
original procedure instructions are always located at the end of the custom architecture
code flow and since the inserted deadcode instructions usually resolves to unsensible
operations involving the stack. The highlighted instruction thus marks the start of the
original procedure code in the custom architecture code-snippet.
For validation of the correctness and precision of the developed devirtualization tool for
the FISH virtual machine architecture, the recovered code from the protected procedure
is compared to the same code region in another restored binary that has been posted as a
challenge solution by a known user in the community from which the binary was procured.
The same code region in the alternate binary, which has been accepted as a valid solution
by the challenge author, can be seen in figure 5.3 below.
Figure 5.3: Solution of code recovery for public UnpackMe binary.
The resolved address for the imported MessageBoxA function is referenced from address
004060e4, and the addresses, 00407820 and 00407828, contains the same string references
as depicted in the alternate binary shown in the figure above. The two solutions are
therefore an extremely close match, with the only difference being the general-purpose
register used to carry the hWnd parameter for the invocation of the imported MessageBoxA
function. It has thus proven possible to automate recovery of procedures that have been
protected using the FISH virtual machine architecture and has furthermore been achieved
with the herein developed devirtualization tool.
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 6
Results and evaluation
This chapter aims to gather the results collected throughout this thesis up until this
point and evaluate them according to industry needs. Thus far, two indepedent virtual
machine architectures supported by the leading software protection product, Themida,
have been dissected and analysed in great detail in chapters 4 and 5 respectively. For each
of these virtual machine architectures, the control flow mechanisms have been identified
and all supported operations have been mapped and thoroughly documented.
It has
also been documented how the virtual machine architectures parse and interpret virtual
opcodes from the byte-code buffers and how the embedded virtual machine architecture
delivers generated results to the respective procedures in the executable binary. Lastly, a
manual and dynamic approach for restoring virtual machine opcodes to their original x86
machine code states have been presented for each of the virtual machine architectures
and have furthermore been developed into an automated and static process capable
of restoring procedures that have been protected by software virtualization from Themida.
In order to evaluate if the derived solutions are suitable for industrial needs, there are
a range of parameters that must be considered. For example, as explained in the intro-
duction of this thesis, anti-virus products are very concerned about efficiency because it
interferes with the usability of their on-access scan feature. The approach used through-
out this thesis, in which an entire virtual machine architecture must be analysed deeply
and have a specific routine developed for that particular architecture, involves extremely
long development processes albeit at the benefit of splendid runtime performance. How-
ever, in order to validate if a given runtime performance is qualified for a particular
use-case, a tolerance threshold must be defined. For an on-access scan feature supplied
by an anti-virus product, in which a noticeable delay in execution times should not be
experienced by an end-user, a tolerable time-frame should not exceed 5 seconds.
To
compare the herein developed solutions against the established tolerance threshold, the
execution times of the solutions have been captured over five consecutive runs against the
UnpackMe binaries previously presented in sections 4.3 and 5.3 respectively. The results
of these captures can be found in table 6.1 below.
VM
Decode VM (seconds)
Decode Opcodes (seconds)
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
CISC
0.229
0.205
0.196
0.213
0.226
0.277
0.294
0.301
0.397
0.418
FISH
0.495
0.479
0.489
0.479
0.483
0.279
0.250
0.251
0.247
0.246
Table 6.1: Performance tests for automated devirtualization of UnpackMe binaries.
==PAGE:69==
6 Results and evaluation
63
The ”Decode VM” column depicts the time it takes for the developed solutions to
parse and decode the VM Entrypoint area of the respective virtual machine architecture
as well as to identify all of the individual handler procedures and map them to their
corresponding virtual machine architecture operations. Note that this process need only
be carried out once for a given instance of a virtual machine architecture.
The ”Decode Opcodes” column depicts the time it takes for the developed solutions to
parse and decode virtual machine opcodes from a byte-code buffer and translate these
operations from the virtual machine architecture back to its original x86 architecture
equivalents. Note that this process must be carried out for all protected procedures that
are to be restored to their original machine code state.
The average execution times are found as shown in table 6.2 below.
VM
Decode VM (seconds)
Decode Opcodes (seconds)
CISC
0.2138
0.3374
FISH
0.4850
0.2546
Table 6.2: Average performance for automated devirtualization of UnpackMe binaries.
The execution times in relation to eachother matches initial expectations. The CISC
virtual machine architecture is much simpler than the FISH virtual machine architecture,
and with significantly smaller handler procedures, leading to the vast difference in the
”Decode VM” execution time column. However, the CISC virtual machine architecture
is also fundamentally different from the original x86 architecture and requires additional
processing to convert stack-operations into flat x86 architecture operations. In constrast
to that, the FISH virtual machine architecture is almost identical to the original x86
architecture and most operations can be translated directly between the two.
Granted that the virtual machine architecture need only be decoded once in order to allow
the decoding of arbitrary protected procedures, the amount of protected procedures that
can be recovered from the CISC virtual machine architecture before passing the tolerance
threshold of 5 seconds can be calculated as follows.
(5 −0.2138) ÷ 0.3374 = 14.1855
Similarly, the amount of protected procedures that can be recovered from the FISH virtual
machine architecture before passing the tolerance threshold can be calculated as follows.
(5 −0.4850) ÷ 0.2546 = 17.7337
However, the above calculations assume that an executable binary is not protected
by software packing and that its protected procedures have been located in advance.
Since this is usually not the case, the above numbers depict optimistic scenarios at
best. Furthermore, the obfuscation levels used in the tested UnpackMe binaries varies
a lot, as the executable binary protected by the CISC virtual machine architecture has
medium-level obfuscation settings enabled, whereas the executable binary protected by
==PAGE:70==
6 Results and evaluation
64
the FISH virtual machine architecture is using the lowest obfuscation level, WHITE,
yielding an overall unbalanced comparison. In a realistic scenario where the user might
opt-in for the highest obfuscation level, BLACK, execution time captures for decoding
the virtual machine would be much higher and the size of the opcode buffers would be
vastly different. It should further be noted that no efforts have been made to optimize
the routines implemented in the automated devirtualization process, so the execution
times could be improved significantly given the necessary time investment.
In section 5.3, the automatically recovered code from the FISH virtual machine architec-
ture matched the accepted solution very closely, albeit with the slight deviation of using
a different general-purpose register when translated back into its original x86 machine
code. By manual re-inspection of the binary, and by numerous tests and validations of
other protected binaries, it has been derived that there are no errors in the way that the
automated devirtualization software restores the FISH virtual machine opcodes to their
original x86 equivalents. The slight mismatch in restored general-purpose register for
the accepted solution is therefore accredited to the author of the solution.
While the efficiency and effectiveness parameters have turned out great, the same cannot
be said for the coverage of the solutions. Currently, the solutions support only 32-bit
architectures and the CISC virtual machine family reached end of life in 2015. While
the herein performed analysis for the CISC virtual machine architecture is relevant for
all existing versions of the architecture family, and can be used for older executable
binaries that have been protected by Themida, the solution is not applicable for modern
content. Furthermore, the performed analysis for the FISH virtual machine architecture
covers only the inital version released in 2013, for which a great number of updates and
security templates have since been introduced.
Despite the limited coverage of the derived solutions, the knowledge presented throughout
this thesis is believed to bring insight and value to the reverse-engineering community,
as the first academic work to document the inner workings of various virtual machine
architectures supported by Themida.
The methodologies presented in the previous chapters are furthermore applicable to other
virtual machine architectures than those supported by leading software protection prod-
ucts such as Themida or VMProtect.
For example, a paper[15] from 2018 by ESET
employee, Filip Kafka, documents a custom virtual machine architecture used by the in-
famous FinFisher malware, also known as FinSpy, which has been the center of attention
for large human rights organizations in recent times as it has supposedly been used by
government agencies to spy on their citizens1. While extremely simple in comparison to
the virtual machine architectures supported by Themida, there is a clear resemblance be-
tween the CISC virtual machine architecture and the custom FinFisher virtual machine
architecture documented in the paper. In fact, they are so similar that the methodologies
outlined in this paper are directly applicable to the FinFisher virtual machine architecture
in order to recover protected procedures to their original machine code state.
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FinFisher
==PAGE:71==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The purpose of this thesis was to determine if it is possible to revert software virtualization
technologies and restore protected procedures to their original machine code states. For
this reason, two distinct analyses were carried out with the intention of answering the
following research questions.
R1. How can a virtualized procedure be recovered manually using dynamic methods?
R2. How can a virtualized procedure be recovered automatically using static methods?
The underlying idea is that the existence of adequate answers to these questions is also
an implicit answer to the overall problem definition that the thesis attempts to solve. In
other words, if any one of the research questions listed above can be answered in full for
any one of the analyses carried out throughout this thesis, then it can be concluded that
it is possible to revert software virtualization technology.
Based on the herein documented analyses, the research indicates that it is very much pos-
sible to revert software virtualization technology and restore protected procedures to their
original machine code states, as it has proven possible to create answers to both of the
research questions listed above for both of the analyses carried out throughout this thesis.
The two analyses were carried out in an identical manner and the methodologies resulting
from these analyses were devised on the basis of the following pre-emptively conjured
methodology, which is assumed to be applicable for all similar analysis attempts.
1. Deduce the functional responsibility of each individual handler procedure.
2. Map the byte-code sequence to handler procedures (recreate the code-flow).
3. Translate the custom architecture code-flow back to its original architecture.
The developed methodologies are both efficient and effective, as they both operate at low
execution times despites having made no efforts to optimize the involved routines and
restore protected procedures to a machine code state that is identical to that of the same
procedure prior to having software virtualization applied to it. However, the particularity
of the virtual machine architectures targeted by the developed methodologies constitutes
a high restriction on coverage.
Fortunately, all modern virtual machine architectures
supported by Themida are built on the same core engine, allowing for feasible extension
of the developed methodologies to target everything currently supported by Themida.
==PAGE:72==
7 Conclusion
66
Future work and research should therefore be focused on the expansion of coverage for
the developed methodologies. In particular, the following issues should be addressed.
• Optimizations
– Optimizations should be considered where applicable; there are a multitude of
places to create optimizations that can speed up the entire process significantly.
• Deobfuscation
– The deobfuscation engine used throughout these developed methodologies re-
lies on monotone and predictable patterns used by Themida, and should in-
stead be implemented as a generalized construct based on compiler-theory
algorithms as depicted in section 2.2.
• Bitness
– Themida offers both 32-bit and 64-bit variants of all supported virtual machine
architectures. However, the developed methodologies are built solely around
32-bit architectures, and efforts should therefore be made to include support
for 64-bit variants of all supported virtual machine architectures.
• Version
– The developed methodologies currently support only the initial version of the
FISH virtual machine architecture. Themida versions since 2013 should there-
fore be analysed incrementally and have their changes supported by the devel-
oped methodologies until coverage includes the newest versions of the virtual
machine architectures.
• Core architectures
– The developed methodologies should be expanded to include support for the
TIGER and DOLPHIN virtual machine architectures in order to cover all core
virtual machine architectures currently supported by Themida.
• Layered architectures
– The developed methodologies should be expanded to include support for the
layered PUMA, SHARK and EAGLE virtual machine architectures which are
based on nested compositions of the core virtual machine architectures.
The list comprises all of the modifications that must be implemented to fully support the
restoration of any procedure that has been protected by Themida using modern virtual
machine architectures. However, the list would be far longer if the aim of the study was
to support additional software virtualization products, such as VMProtect or Obsidium.
==PAGE:73==
APPENDIX A
Themida CISC handlers
dispatcher
1 lodsb
2 sub al,bl
3 xor al,0x4d
4 sub al,0x40
5 sub bl,al
6 movzx eax,al
7 jmp dword ptr [edi+eax*4]
load imm8
1 lodsb
2 sub al,bl
3 xor al,0x36
4 xor al,0xd9
5 add bl,al
6 movzx eax,al
7 push ax
load imm16
1 lodsw
2 xor ax,bx
3 sub ax,0xc487
4 xor ax,0x5c00
5 add bx,ax
6 movzx eax,ax
7 push ax
load imm32
1 lodsd
2 xor eax,ebx
3 add eax,0x674cca9f
4 xor eax,0x70ef2f5
5 sub ebx,eax
6 push eax
load byte [imm32]
1 lodsd
2 sub eax,ebx
3 add eax,0x5f5e9239
4 sub eax,0x33324026
5 add ebx,eax
6 movzx ax,byte ptr [eax]
7 push ax
load word [imm32]
1 lodsd
2 xor eax,ebx
3 sub eax,0x29493e59
4 xor eax,0x513cf2fd
5 add ebx,eax
6 push word ptr [eax]
load dword [imm32]
1 lodsd
2 add eax,ebx
3 add eax,0x3b673ccb
4 add eax,0x5bfee4ee
5 xor ebx,eax
6 push dword ptr [eax]
load reg32
1 lodsb
2 sub al,bl
3 sub al,0x2f
4 xor al,0x4e
5 xor bl,al
6 movzx eax,al
7 push dword ptr [edi+eax*4]
==PAGE:74==
A Themida CISC handlers
68
load byte [reg32]
1 lodsb
2 xor al,bl
3 sub al,0xf7
4 add al,0x84
5 xor bl,al
6 movzx eax,al
7 mov eax,dword ptr [edi+eax*4]
8 movzx ax,byte ptr [eax]
9 push ax
load word [reg32]
1 lodsb
2 xor al,bl
3 sub al,0xc4
4 xor al,0xa7
5 add bl,al
6 movzx eax,al
7 mov eax,dword ptr [edi+eax*4]
8 push word ptr [eax]
load offset reg32
1 lodsb
2 add al,bl
3 xor al,0x59
4 sub al,0x28
5 sub bl,al
6 movzx eax,al
7 lea eax,dword ptr [edi+eax*4]
8 push eax
load addr
1 push edx
load byte [addr]
1 movzx ax,byte ptr [edx]
2 push ax
load word [addr]
1 push word ptr [edx]
load dword [addr]
1 push dword ptr [edx]
load byte fs:[addr]
1 movzx ax,byte ptr fs:[edx]
2 push ax
load word fs:[addr]
1 mov ax,word ptr fs:[edx]
2 push ax
load dword fs:[addr]
1 push dword ptr fs:[edx]
load stack16
1 push sp
load stack32
1 push esp
load param
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x60]
load delta
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x64]
load align
1 lodsd
2 sub eax,ebx
3 xor eax,0x7ba62371
4 sub eax,0x1ca98778
5 add ebx,eax
6 add eax,dword ptr [edi+0x64]
7 push eax
==PAGE:75==
A Themida CISC handlers
69
store byte [imm32]
1 lodsd
2 add eax,ebx
3 sub eax,0x7be0d78f
4 add eax,0x44a0917e
5 sub ebx,eax
6 pop dx
7 mov byte ptr [eax],dl
store word [imm32]
1 lodsd
2 xor eax,ebx
3 add eax,0x3b1c7265
4 add eax,0x3972e026
5 sub ebx,eax
6 pop word ptr [eax]
store dword [imm32]
1 lodsd
2 sub eax,ebx
3 sub eax,0x5a66f329
4 xor eax,0x4e547aaf
5 add ebx,eax
6 pop dword ptr [eax]
store reg8
1 lodsb
2 add al,bl
3 sub al,0xf7
4 xor al,0x0
5 sub bl,al
6 movzx eax,al
7 pop dx
8 mov byte ptr [edi+eax*4],dl
store reg8 high
1 lodsb
2 xor al,bl
3 add al,0x89
4 sub al,0x9d
5 xor bl,al
6 movzx eax,al
7 pop dx
8 mov byte ptr [edi+eax*4+0x1],dl
store reg16
1 lodsb
2 sub al,bl
3 sub al,0x41
4 xor al,0x18
5 sub bl,al
6 movzx eax,al
7 pop word ptr [edi+eax*4]
store reg32
1 lodsb
2 add al,bl
3 xor al,0x66
4 xor al,0xaa
5 xor bl,al
6 movzx eax,al
7 pop dword ptr [edi+eax*4]
store addr
1 pop edx
store byte [addr]
1 pop ax
2 mov byte ptr [edx],al
store word [addr]
1 pop word ptr [edx]
store dword [addr]
1 pop dword ptr [edx]
store byte fs:[addr]
1 pop ax
2 mov byte ptr fs:[edx],al
store word fs:[addr]
1 pop ax
2 mov word ptr fs:[edx],ax
==PAGE:76==
A Themida CISC handlers
70
store dword fs:[addr]
1 pop dword ptr fs:[edx]
store stack16
1 pop sp
store stack32
1 pop esp
store param
1 pop dword ptr [edi+0x60]
store eflags
1 pop dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
inc byte
1 pop ax
2 inc byte ptr [esp]
3 pushfd
inc word
1 pop ax
2 inc word ptr [esp]
3 pushfd
inc dword
1 pop eax
2 inc dword ptr [esp]
3 pushfd
dec byte
1 pop ax
2 dec byte ptr [esp]
3 pushfd
dec word
1 pop ax
2 dec word ptr [esp]
3 pushfd
dec dword
1 pop eax
2 dec dword ptr [esp]
3 pushfd
neg byte
1 neg byte ptr [esp]
2 pushfd
neg word
1 neg word ptr [esp]
2 pushfd
neg dword
1 neg dword ptr [esp]
2 pushfd
not byte
1 not byte ptr [esp]
not word
1 not word ptr [esp]
not dword
1 not dword ptr [esp]
==PAGE:77==
A Themida CISC handlers
71
add byte
1 pop ax
2 add byte ptr [esp],al
3 pushfd
add word
1 pop ax
2 add word ptr [esp],ax
3 pushfd
add dword
1 pop eax
2 add dword ptr [esp],eax
3 pushfd
addx dword
1 pop eax
2 add dword ptr [esp],eax
adc byte
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 popfd
3 pop ax
4 adc byte ptr [esp],al
5 pushfd
adc word
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 popfd
3 pop ax
4 adc word ptr [esp],ax
5 pushfd
adc dword
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 popfd
3 pop eax
4 adc dword ptr [esp],eax
5 pushfd
sub byte
1 pop ax
2 sub byte ptr [esp],al
3 pushfd
sub word
1 pop ax
2 sub word ptr [esp],ax
3 pushfd
sub dword
1 pop eax
2 sub dword ptr [esp],eax
3 pushfd
subx dword
1 pop eax
2 sub dword ptr [esp],eax
sbb byte
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 popfd
3 pop ax
4 sbb byte ptr [esp],al
5 pushfd
sbb word
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 popfd
3 pop ax
4 sbb word ptr [esp],ax
5 pushfd
sbb dword
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 popfd
3 pop eax
4 sbb dword ptr [esp],eax
5 pushfd
==PAGE:78==
A Themida CISC handlers
72
mul byte
1 pop cx
2 pop ax
3 mul cl
4 movzx cx,ah
5 push cx
6 movzx cx,al
7 push cx
8 pushfd
mul word
1 pop cx
2 pop ax
3 mul cx
4 push dx
5 push ax
6 pushfd
mul dword
1 pop ecx
2 pop eax
3 mul ecx
4 push edx
5 push eax
6 pushfd
imul byte
1 pop cx
2 pop ax
3 imul cl
4 movzx cx,ah
5 push cx
6 movzx cx,al
7 push cx
8 pushfd
imul word
1 pop cx
2 pop ax
3 imul cx
4 push dx
5 push ax
6 pushfd
imul dword
1 pop ecx
2 pop eax
3 imul ecx
4 push edx
5 push eax
6 pushfd
imulc word
1 pop ax
2 pop cx
3 imul cx,ax
4 push cx
5 pushfd
imulc dword
1 pop eax
2 pop ecx
3 imul ecx,eax
4 push ecx
5 pushfd
div byte
1 pop cx
2 pop ax
3 div cl
4 movzx cx,ah
5 push cx
6 movzx cx,al
7 push cx
8 pushfd
div word
1 pop cx
2 pop ax
3 pop ax
4 div cx
5 push dx
6 push ax
7 pushfd
==PAGE:79==
A Themida CISC handlers
73
div dword
1 pop ecx
2 pop eax
3 pop edx
4 div ecx
5 push edx
6 push eax
7 pushfd
idiv byte
1 pop cx
2 pop ax
3 idiv cl
4 movzx cx,ah
5 push cx
6 movzx cx,al
7 push cx
8 pushfd
idiv word
1 pop cx
2 pop ax
3 pop dx
4 idiv cx
5 push dx
6 push ax
7 pushfd
idiv dword
1 pop ecx
2 pop eax
3 pop edx
4 idiv ecx
5 push edx
6 push eax
7 pushfd
and byte
1 pop ax
2 and byte ptr [esp],al
3 pushfd
and word
1 pop ax
2 and word ptr [esp],ax
3 pushfd
and dword
1 pop eax
2 and dword ptr [esp],eax
3 pushfd
or byte
1 pop ax
2 or byte ptr [esp],al
3 pushfd
or word
1 pop ax
2 or word ptr [esp],ax
3 pushfd
or dword
1 pop eax
2 or dword ptr [esp],eax
3 pushfd
xor byte
1 pop ax
2 xor byte ptr [esp],al
3 pushfd
xor word
1 pop ax
2 xor word ptr [esp],ax
3 pushfd
==PAGE:80==
A Themida CISC handlers
74
xor dword
1 pop eax
2 xor dword ptr [esp],eax
3 pushfd
xorx dword
1 pop eax
2 xor dword ptr [esp],eax
shr byte
1 pop cx
2 shr byte ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
shr word
1 pop cx
2 shr word ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
shr dword
1 pop cx
2 shr dword ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
sar byte
1 pop cx
2 sar byte ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
sar word
1 pop cx
2 sar word ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
sar dword
1 pop cx
2 sar dword ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
shl/sal byte
1 pop cx
2 shl byte ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
shl/sal word
1 pop cx
2 shl word ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
shl/sal dword
1 pop cx
2 shl dword ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
shlx dword
1 pop ecx
2 shl dword ptr [esp],cl
ror byte
1 pop cx
2 ror byte ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
ror word
1 pop cx
2 ror word ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
ror dword
1 pop cx
2 ror dword ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
==PAGE:81==
A Themida CISC handlers
75
rcr byte
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 popfd
3 pop cx
4 rcr byte ptr [esp],cl
5 pushfd
rcr word
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 popfd
3 pop cx
4 rcr word ptr [esp],cl
5 pushfd
rcr dword
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 popfd
3 pop cx
4 rcr dword ptr [esp],cl
5 pushfd
rol byte
1 pop cx
2 rol byte ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
rol word
1 pop cx
2 rol word ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
rol dword
1 pop cx
2 rol dword ptr [esp],cl
3 pushfd
rcl byte
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 popfd
3 pop cx
4 rcl byte ptr [esp],cl
5 pushfd
rcl word
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 popfd
3 pop cx
4 rcl word ptr [esp],cl
5 pushfd
rcl dword
1 push dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 popfd
3 pop cx
4 rcl dword ptr [esp],cl
5 pushfd
cmp byte
1 pop ax
2 pop cx
3 cmp cl,al
4 pushfd
cmp word
1 pop ax
2 pop cx
3 cmp cx,ax
4 pushfd
cmp dword
1 pop eax
2 pop ecx
3 cmp ecx,eax
4 pushfd
test byte
1 pop ax
2 pop cx
3 test al,cl
4 pushfd
==PAGE:82==
A Themida CISC handlers
76
test word
1 pop ax
2 pop cx
3 test ax,cx
4 pushfd
test dword
1 pop eax
2 pop ecx
3 test eax,ecx
4 pushfd
bt word
1 pop ax
2 bt word ptr [esp],ax
3 pushfd
bt dword
1 pop eax
2 bt dword ptr [esp],eax
3 pushfd
btc word
1 pop ax
2 btc word ptr [esp],ax
3 pushfd
btr word
1 pop ax
2 btr word ptr [esp],ax
3 pushfd
btr dword
1 pop eax
2 btr dword ptr [esp],eax
3 pushfd
bts word
1 pop ax
2 bts word ptr [esp],ax
3 pushfd
bts dword
1 pop eax
2 bts dword ptr [esp],eax
3 pushfd
bswap dword
1 pop eax
2 bswap eax
3 push eax
movsxb word
1 pop cx
2 pop ax
3 movsx cx,al
4 push cx
movsxb dword
1 pop ecx
2 pop eax
3 movsx ecx,al
4 push ecx
movsxw dword
1 pop ecx
2 pop eax
3 movsx ecx,ax
4 push ecx
movzxb word
1 pop cx
2 pop ax
3 movzx cx,al
4 push cx
movzxb dword
1 pop ecx
2 pop eax
3 movzx ecx,al
4 push ecx
==PAGE:83==
A Themida CISC handlers
77
movzxw dword
1 pop ecx
2 pop eax
3 movzx ecx,ax
4 push ecx
readptr dword
1 pop eax
2 push dword ptr [eax]
writeptr dword
1 pop eax
2 pop ecx
3 mov dword ptr [eax],ecx
clc
1 and dword ptr [edi+0x1c],0xfffffffe
cmc
1 mov eax,dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
2 and eax,0x1
3 or eax,eax
4 jz _skip
5 and dword ptr [edi+0x1c],0xfffffffe
6 ; _skip:
7 mov ebx,ebx
cld
1 mov dword ptr [edi+0x74],0x0
2 and dword ptr [edi+0x1c],0xfffffbff
stc
1 or dword ptr [edi+0x1c],0x1
std
1 mov dword ptr [edi+0x74],0x1
2 or dword ptr [edi+0x1c],0x400
sti
1 or dword ptr [edi+0x1c],0x200
move addr, imm32
1 lodsd
2 sub eax,ebx
3 xor eax,0x6c2c03b6
4 xor eax,0x25ab2676
5 add ebx,eax
6 mov edx,eax
move addr, stack32
1 mov edx,esp
add addr, imm32
1 lodsd
2 xor eax,ebx
3 xor eax,0x10e18bd7
4 sub eax,0x651e460e
5 add ebx,eax
6 add edx,eax
add addr, reg32
1 lodsb
2 sub al,bl
3 xor al,0xaf
4 xor al,0x7a
5 sub bl,al
6 movzx eax,al
7 cmp eax,0x7
8 jz _stack
9 mov eax,dword ptr [edi+eax*4]
10 jmp _continue
11 ; _stack:
12 mov eax,esp
13 ; _continue:
14 add edx,eax
add addr, reloc
1 mov eax,dword ptr [edi+0x7c]
2 add edx,eax
==PAGE:84==
A Themida CISC handlers
78
add [stack32], reloc
1 mov eax,dword ptr [edi+0x7c]
2 add dword ptr [esp],eax
sub addr, imm32
1 lodsd
2 add eax,ebx
3 sub eax,0x711a9801
4 add eax,0x596ec402
5 sub ebx,eax
6 sub edx,eax
xor addr, imm32
1 lodsd
2 add eax,ebx
3 add eax,0xc13d6ff
4 xor eax,0x4873a200
5 xor ebx,eax
6 xor edx,eax
xchg [stack32], addr
1 pop eax
2 push edx
3 mov edx,eax
set param
1 mov eax,dword ptr [esp+0x4]
2 mov dword ptr [edi+0x60],eax
3 pop eax
4 add esp,0x4
5 push eax
set counter offset
1 lodsb
2 sub al,bl
3 xor al,0x37
4 add al,0xf6
5 xor bl,al
6 mov byte ptr [edi+0x68],al
set stack offset
1 lodsb
2 sub al,bl
3 xor al,0xdd
4 add al,0xb1
5 xor bl,al
6 mov byte ptr [edi+0x70],al
reset key
1 mov ebx,0x0
ret
1 mov ecx,dword ptr [edi+0x70]
2 mov edx,edi
3 or ecx,ecx
4 jz _skip_stack
5 lea esi,[esp+0x24]
6 lea edi,[esi+ecx]
7 std
8 mov ecx,0xa
9 rep movsd
10 add esp,dword ptr [edx+0x70]
11 mov dword ptr [edx+0x70],0x0
12 ; _skip_stack:
13 cmp dword ptr [edx+0x74],0x0
14 jz _skip_df
15 or dword ptr [esp+0x20],0x400
16 mov dword ptr [edx+0x74],0x0
17 ; _skip_df:
18 mov dword ptr [edx+0x88],0x0
19 popad
20 popfd
21 retn
jmp imm32
1 lodsd
2 add esi,eax
3 mov ebx,0x0
jcc imm32
1 lodsd
2 cmp dword ptr [edi+0x8c],0x0
3 jz _skip
4 add esi,eax
5 mov ebx,0x0
6 ; _skip:
7 mov eax,eax
==PAGE:85==
A Themida CISC handlers
79
jcc evaluate
1 lodsb
2 add eax,ebx
3 sub eax,0x67db6747
4 xor eax,0x74136396
5 add ebx,eax
6 and al,0x7f
7 push ebx
8 mov ebx,eax
9 mov dword ptr [edi+0x8c],0x1
10 mov dword ptr [edi+0x78],0x0
11 xor edx,edx
12 mov eax,ebx
13 and eax,0x200
14 mov ecx,dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
15 and ecx,0x1 ; cf
16 shr ecx,0x0
17 or eax,eax
18 jz _skip_cf
19 mov eax,ebx
20 and eax,0x100
21 shr eax,0x8
22 xor eax,ecx
23 not eax
24 and eax,0x1
25 or edx,eax
26 shl edx,0x1
27 add dword ptr [edi+0x78],0x1
28 ; _skip_cf:
29 mov eax,ebx
30 and eax,0x800
31 or eax,eax
32 jz _skip_zf
33 mov ecx,dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
34 and ecx,0x40 ; zf
35 shr ecx,0x6
36 mov eax,ebx
37 and eax,0x400
38 shr eax,0xa
39 xor eax,ecx
40 not eax
41 and eax,0x1
42 or edx,eax
43 shl edx,0x1
44 add dword ptr [edi+0x78],0x1
45 ; _skip_zf:
46 mov eax,ebx
47 and eax,0x2000000
48 or eax,eax
49 jz _skip_df
50 mov ecx,dword ptr [edi+0x74]
51 mov eax,ebx
52 and eax,0x1000000
53 shr eax,0x18
54 xor eax,ecx
55 not eax
56 and eax,0x1
57 or edx,eax
58 shl edx,0x1
59 add dword ptr [edi+0x78],0x1
60 ; _skip_df:
61 mov eax,ebx
62 and eax,0x2000
63 or eax,eax
64 jz _skip_sf
65 mov ecx,dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
66 and ecx,0x80 ; sf
67 shr ecx,0x7
68 mov eax,ebx
69 and eax,0x1000
70 shr eax,0xc
71 xor eax,ecx
72 not eax
73 and eax,0x1
74 or edx,eax
75 shl edx,0x1
76 add dword ptr [edi+0x78],0x1
77 ; _skip_sf:
78 mov eax,ebx
79 and eax,0x8000
80 or eax,eax
81 jz _skip_of
82 mov ecx,dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
83 and ecx,0x800 ; of
84 shr ecx,0xb
85 mov eax,ebx
86 and eax,0x4000
87 shr eax,0xe
88 xor eax,ecx
89 not eax
90 and eax,0x1
91 or edx,eax
92 shl edx,0x1
93 add dword ptr [edi+0x78],0x1
94 ; _skip_of:
95 mov eax,ebx
96 and eax,0x20000
97 or eax,eax
98 jz _skip_pf
99 mov ecx,dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
100 and ecx,0x4 ; pf
101 shr ecx,0x2
102 mov eax,ebx
103 and eax,0x10000
104 shr eax,0x10
105 xor eax,ecx
106 not eax
107 and eax,0x1
108 or edx,eax
109 shl edx,0x1
110 add dword ptr [edi+0x78],0x1
==PAGE:86==
A Themida CISC handlers
80
111 ; _skip_pf:
112 mov eax,ebx
113 and eax,0x80000
114 or eax,eax
115 jz _skip_sf_of
116 mov ecx,dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
117 and ecx,0x80 ; sf
118 shr ecx,0x7
119 mov eax,dword ptr [edi+0x1c]
120 and eax,0x800 ; of
121 shr eax,0xb
122 xor ecx,eax
123 mov eax,ebx
124 and eax,0x40000
125 shr eax,0x12
126 xor eax,ecx
127 not eax
128 and eax,0x1
129 or edx,eax
130 shl edx,0x1
131 add dword ptr [edi+0x78],0x1
132 ; _skip_sf_of:
133 mov eax,ebx
134 and eax,0x200000
135 or eax,eax
136 jz _skip_cx
137 mov eax,dword ptr [edi+0x68]
138 mov eax,dword ptr [edi+eax*4]
139 and eax,0xffff
140 or eax,eax
141 jnz _skip_cx
142 mov edx,0x1
143 ; _skip_cx:
144 mov eax,ebx
145 and eax,0x800000
146 or eax,eax
147 jz _skip_ecx
148 mov eax,dword ptr [edi+0x68]
149 mov eax,dword ptr [edi+eax*4]
150 or eax,eax
151 jnz _skip_ecx
152 mov edx,0x1
153 ; _skip_ecx:
154 mov ecx,dword ptr [edi+0x78]
155 mov eax,0x1
156 shl eax,cl
157 add eax,0xffffffff
158 and ebx,0x10
159 or ebx,ebx
160 jnz _evaluate
161 mov dword ptr [edi+0x8c],edx
162 jmp _continue
163 ; _evaluate:
164 shr edx,0x1
165 cmp eax,edx
166 jz _continue
167 mov dword ptr [edi+0x8c],0x0
168 ; _continue:
169 pop ebx
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX B
Themida FISH handlers
reset
1 mov [ebp+0x53],0x00000000
2 mov [ebp+0xa7],0x00000000
3 mov [ebp+0x89],0x00000000
4 mov [ebp+0x14],0x00000000
5 mov [ebp+0x8f],0x00000000
6 mov [ebp+0xa0],0x0000
7 mov [ebp+0x57],0x00
8 mov [ebp+0x68],0x00000000
load stack
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 mov [ebp+eax],esp
store stack
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 mov esp,[ebp+eax]
add stack,imm8
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,byte ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 add esp,eax
4 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x01]
5 add [ebp+edx],eax
pushfd
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 sub dword ptr [ebp+eax],0x04
4 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
5 push dword ptr [ebp+eax]
popfd
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 add dword ptr [ebp+eax],0x04
4 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
5 pop dword ptr [ebp+eax]
crypt
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 mov edx,[ebp+0x2a]
4 mov [ebp+eax],edx
eflags operation
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx esi,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 mov dl,[ebx+0x02]
4 cmp dl,0xbb ; clc
5 jnz _skip_clc
6 and [ebp+esi],0xfffffffe ; NOT(0x01)
7 ; _skip_clc:
8 cmp dl,0xc8 ; cld
9 jnz _skip_cld
10 and [ebp+esi],0xfffffbff ; NOT(0x400)
11 ; _skip_cld:
12 cmp dl,0x33 ; cli
13 jnz _skip_cli
14 and [ebp+esi],0xfffffdff ; NOT(0x200)
15 ; _skip_cli:
16 cmp dl,0x95 ; cmc
17 jnz _skip_cmc
18 test [ebp+esi],0x01
19 jz _set_cmc
20 and [ebp+esi],0xfffffffe ; NOT(0x01)
21 jmp _skip_cmc
22 ; _set_cmc:
23 or [ebp+esi],0x01
24 ; _skip_cmc:
25 cmp dl,0x11 ; stc
26 jnz _skip_stc
27 or [ebp+esi],0x01
28 ; _skip_stc:
29 cmp dl,0x7b ; std
30 jnz _skip_std
31 or [ebp+esi],0x400
32 ; _skip_std:
33 cmp dl,0x1c ; sti
34 jnz _skip_sti
35 or [ebp+esi],0x200
36 ; _skip_sti:
==PAGE:88==
B Themida FISH handlers
82
lods byte
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov esi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov al,[esi]
6 mov [ebp+edx],al
7 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
8 test [ebp+eax],0x400
9 jz _forwards
10 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x01
11 jmp _finish
12 ; _forwards:
13 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x01
14 ; _finish:
lods word
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov esi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov ax,[esi]
6 mov [ebp+edx],ax
7 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
8 test [ebp+eax],0x400
9 jz _forwards
10 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x02
11 jmp _finish
12 ; _forwards:
13 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x02
14 ; _finish:
lods dword
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov esi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov eax,[esi]
6 mov [ebp+edx],eax
7 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
8 test [ebp+eax],0x400
9 jz _forwards
10 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x04
11 jmp _finish
12 ; _forwards:
13 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x04
14 ; _finish:
stos byte
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov edi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov eax,[ebp+edx]
6 mov [edi],al
7 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
8 test [ebp+eax],0x400
9 jz _forwards
10 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x01
11 jmp _finish
12 ; _forwards:
13 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x01
14 ; _finish:
stos word
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov edi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov eax,[ebp+edx]
6 mov [edi],ax
7 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
8 test [ebp+eax],0x400
9 jz _forwards
10 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x02
11 jmp _finish
12 ; _forwards:
13 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x02
14 ; _finish:
stos dword
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov edi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov eax,[ebp+edx]
6 mov [edi],eax
7 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
8 test [ebp+eax],0x400
9 jz _forwards
10 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x04
11 jmp _finish
12 ; _forwards:
13 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x04
14 ; _finish:
==PAGE:89==
B Themida FISH handlers
83
cmps byte
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov esi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov edi,[ebp+edx]
6 mov al,[esi]
7 cmp [edi],al
8 pushfd
9 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
10 test [ebp+eax],0x400
11 jz _forwards
12 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x01
13 sub dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x01
14 jmp _finish
15 ; _forwards:
16 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x01
17 add dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x01
18 ; _finish:
19 pop esi
20 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x06],0x00
21 jz _skip_flags
22 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x07]
23 mov [ebp+eax],esi
24 ; _skip_flags:
cmps word
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov esi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov edi,[ebp+edx]
6 mov ax,[esi]
7 cmp [edi],ax
8 pushfd
9 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
10 test [ebp+eax],0x400
11 jz _forwards
12 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x02
13 sub dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x02
14 jmp _finish
15 ; _forwards:
16 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x02
17 add dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x02
18 ; _finish:
19 pop esi
20 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x06],0x00
21 jz _skip_flags
22 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x07]
23 mov [ebp+eax],esi
24 ; _skip_flags:
cmps dword
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov esi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov edi,[ebp+edx]
6 mov eax,[esi]
7 cmp [edi],eax
8 pushfd
9 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
10 test [ebp+eax],0x400
11 jz _forwards
12 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x04
13 sub dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x04
14 jmp _finish
15 ; _forwards:
16 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x04
17 add dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x04
18 ; _finish:
19 pop esi
20 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x06],0x00
21 jz _skip_flags
22 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x07]
23 mov [ebp+eax],esi
24 ; _skip_flags:
subs byte
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov esi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov edi,[ebp+edx]
6 mov al,[esi]
7 sub [edi],al
8 pushfd
9 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
10 test [ebp+eax],0x400
11 jz _forwards
12 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x01
13 sub dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x01
14 jmp _finish
15 ; _forwards:
16 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x01
17 add dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x01
18 ; _finish:
19 pop esi
20 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x06],0x00
21 jz _skip_flags
22 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x07]
23 mov [ebp+eax],esi
24 ; _skip_flags:
==PAGE:90==
B Themida FISH handlers
84
subs word
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov esi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov edi,[ebp+edx]
6 mov ax,[esi]
7 sub [edi],ax
8 pushfd
9 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
10 test [ebp+eax],0x400
11 jz _forwards
12 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x02
13 sub dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x02
14 jmp _finish
15 ; _forwards:
16 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x02
17 add dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x02
18 ; _finish:
19 pop esi
20 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x06],0x00
21 jz _skip_flags
22 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x07]
23 mov [ebp+eax],esi
24 ; _skip_flags:
subs dword
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov esi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov edi,[ebp+edx]
6 mov eax,[esi]
7 sub [edi],eax
8 pushfd
9 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
10 test [ebp+eax],0x400
11 jz _forwards
12 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x04
13 sub dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x04
14 jmp _finish
15 ; _forwards:
16 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x04
17 add dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x04
18 ; _finish:
19 pop esi
20 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x06],0x00
21 jz _skip_flags
22 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x07]
23 mov [ebp+eax],esi
24 ; _skip_flags:
movs byte
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov esi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov edi,[ebp+edx]
6 mov al,[esi]
7 mov [edi],al
8 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
9 test [ebp+eax],0x400
10 jz _forwards
11 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x01
12 sub dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x01
13 jmp _finish
14 ; _forwards:
15 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x01
16 add dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x01
17 ; _finish:
movs word
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
4 mov esi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov edi,[ebp+edx]
6 mov ax,[esi]
7 mov [edi],ax
8 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
9 test [ebp+eax],0x400
10 jz _forwards
11 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x02
12 sub dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x02
13 jmp _finish
14 ; _forwards:
15 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x02
16 add dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x02
17 ; _finish:
movs dword
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx ecx,[ebx+0x00]
3 movzx edx,[ebx+0x02]
4 mov esi,[ebp+ecx]
5 mov edi,[ebp+edx]
6 mov eax,[esi]
7 mov [edi],eax
8 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
9 test [ebp+eax],0x400
10 jz _forwards
11 sub dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x04
12 sub dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x04
13 jmp _finish
14 ; _forwards:
15 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x04
16 add dword ptr [ebp+edx],0x04
17 ; _finish:
==PAGE:91==
B Themida FISH handlers
85
jmp internal imm32
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 mov eax,[ebx+0x00]
3 test eax,0x80000000
4 jz _forwards
5 and eax,0x7fffffff
6 sub [ebp+0x08],eax
7 jmp _finish
8 ; _forwards:
9 add [ebp+0x08],eax
10 ; _finish:
jmp external imm32
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 mov ecx,[ebx+0x00]
3 add ecx,[ebp+0x75] ; image base
4 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
5 mov [esp+eax],ecx
6 mov [ebp+0x36],0x00000000
7 popad
8 popfd
9 ret
jmp external reg
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 mov ecx,[ebp+eax]
4 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
5 mov [esp+eax],ecx
6 mov [ebp+0x36],0x00000000
7 popad
8 popfd
9 ret
jmp external [reg]
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 mov ecx,[ebp+eax]
4 mov ecx,[ecx]
5 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x02]
6 mov [esp+eax],ecx
7 mov [ebp+0x36],0x00000000
8 popad
9 popfd
10 ret
call
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x00],0x11 ; imm32
3 jnz _skip_immediate
4 mov edx,[ebx+0x01]
5 add edx,[ebp+0x75] ; image base
6 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x05]
7 mov [esp+ecx],edx
8 ; _skip_immediate:
9 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x00],0x22 ; reg
10 jz _resolve_register
11 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x00],0x33 ; mem
12 jnz _skip_register
13 ; _resolve_register:
14 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x01]
15 mov edx,[ebp+edx]
16 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x00],0x33 ; mem
17 jnz _skip_memory
18 mov edx,[edx]
19 ; _skip_memory:
20 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x03]
21 mov [esp+ecx],edx
22 ; _skip_register
23 mov edx,[ebx+0x07]
24 add edx,[ebp+0x75] ; image base
25 mov [esp+ecx+0x04],edx
26 mov [ebp+0x36],0x00000000
27 popad
28 popfd
29 ret
ret
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 mov edx,[ebx+0x00]
3 lea esi,[esp+0x28]
4 lea edi,[esi+edx]
5 std
6 mov ecx,edx
7 test ecx,ecx
8 jz _skip_default
9 mov ecx,0x0a
10 ; _skip_default:
11 rep movsd
12 add esp,edx
13 mov [ebp+0x36],0x00000000
14 popad
15 popfd
16 add esp,0x04
17 ret
==PAGE:92==
B Themida FISH handlers
86
jmp external imm32 dll
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 mov eax,[ebx+0x00]
3 add eax,[ebp+0x75] ; image base
4 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x04],0x01
5 jz _realign
6 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x04],0x02
7 jz _realign
8 jmp _skip
9 ; _realign:
10 mov ecx,[ebx+0x05]
11 add ecx,[ebp+0x75]
12 movzx edx,byte ptr [ebx+0x09]
13 cmp [eax+edx],ecx
14 jz _skip
15 mov esi,[ebp+0x3f]
16 sub [eax+edx],esi
17 mov esi,[ebp+0x75]
18 add [eax+edx],esi
19 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x04],0x02
20 jnz _skip
21 movzx edx,byte ptr [ebx+0x0a]
22 mov esi,[ebp+0x3f]
23 sub [eax+edx],esi
24 mov esi,[ebp+0x75]
25 add [eax+edx],esi
26 ; _skip:
27 movzx edx,word ptr [ebx+0x0b]
28 mov [esp+edx],eax
29 mov [ebp+0x36],0x00000000
30 popad
31 popfd
32 ret
==PAGE:93==
B Themida FISH handlers
87
jcc internal imm32
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x08]
3 mov eax,[ebp+eax]
4 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x00
5 mov ecx,eax
6 and ecx,0x80 ; sf
7 shr ecx,0x07
8 mov edx,eax
9 and edx,0x800 ; of
10 shr edx,0x0b
11 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0x00 ; jz
12 jnz _skip_jz
13 test eax,0x40 ; zf = 1
14 jz _skip_jz
15 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
16 ; _skip_jz:
17 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0x11 ; jnz
18 jnz _skip_jnz
19 test eax,0x40 ; zf = 0
20 jnz _skip_jnz
21 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
22 ; _skip_jnz:
23 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0x22 ; ja
24 jnz _skip_ja
25 test eax,0x40 ; zf = 0
26 jnz _skip_ja
27 test eax,0x01 ; cf = 0
28 jnz _skip_ja
29 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
30 ; _skip_ja:
31 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0x33 ; jae
32 jnz _skip_jae
33 test eax,0x01 ; cf = 0
34 jnz _skip_jae
35 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
36 ; _skip_jae:
37 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0x44 ; jb
38 jnz _skip_jb
39 test eax,0x01 ; cf = 1
40 jz _skip_jb
41 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
42 ; _skip_jb:
43 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0x55 ; jbe
44 jnz _skip_jbe
45 test eax,0x40 ; zf = 1
46 jz _skip_jbe_zf
47 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
48 ; _skip_jbe_zf:
49 test eax,0x01 ; cf = 1
50 jz _skip_jbe
51 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
52 ; _skip_jbe:
53 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0x66 ; jg
54 jnz _skip_jg
55 test eax,0x40 ; zf = 0
56 jnz _skip_jg
57 cmp ecx,edx ; sf == of
58 jnz _skip_jg
59 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
60 ; _skip_jg:
61 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0x77 ; jge
62 jnz _skip_jge
63 cmp ecx,edx ; sf == of
64 jnz _skip_jge
65 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
66 ; _skip_jge:
67 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0x88 ; jl
68 jnz _skip_jl
69 cmp ecx,edx ; sf != of
70 jz _skip_jl
71 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
72 ; _skip_jl:
73 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0x99 ; jle
74 jnz _skip_jle
75 test eax,0x40 ; zf = 1
76 jz _skip_jle_zf
77 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
78 ; _skip_jle_zf:
79 cmp ecx,edx ; sf != of
80 jz _skip_jle
81 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
82 ; _skip_jle:
83 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0xaa ; jno
84 jnz _skip_jno
85 test eax,0x800 ; of = 0
86 jnz _skip_jno
87 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
88 ; _skip_jno:
89 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0xbb ; jnp
90 jnz _skip_jnp
91 test eax,0x04 ; pf = 0
92 jnz _skip_jnp
93 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
94 ; _skip_jnp:
95 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0xcc ; jns
96 jnz _skip_jns
97 test eax,0x80 ; sf = 0
98 jnz _skip_jns
99 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
100 ; _skip_jns:
101 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0xdd ; jo
102 jnz _skip_jo
103 test eax,0x800 ; of = 1
104 jz _skip_jo
105 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
106 ; _skip_jo:
107 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0xee ; jp
108 jnz _skip_jp
109 test eax,0x04 ; pf = 1
110 jz _skip_jp
==PAGE:94==
B Themida FISH handlers
88
111 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
112 ; _skip_jp:
113 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x0a],0xff ; js
114 jnz _skip_js
115 test eax,0x80 ; sf = 1
116 jz _skip_js
117 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
118 ; _skip_js:
119 cmp byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x00
120 jz _false_branch
121 ; _true_branch:
122 mov eax,[ebx+0x04]
123 test eax,0x80000000
124 jz _forwards
125 and eax,0x7fffffff
126 sub [ebp+0x08],eax
127 jmp _finish
128 ; _forwards:
129 add [ebp+0x08],eax
130 ; _finish:
131 mov edi,[ebp+0x4f]
132 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x00]
133 jmp dword ptr [edi+eax*4]
134 ; _false_branch:
==PAGE:95==
B Themida FISH handlers
89
jcc external imm32
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,word ptr [ebx+0x06]
3 mov eax,[ebp+eax]
4 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x00
5 mov ecx,eax
6 and ecx,0x80 ; sf
7 shr ecx,0x07
8 mov edx,eax
9 and edx,0x800 ; of
10 shr edx,0x0b
11 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0x00 ; jz
12 jnz _skip_jz
13 test eax,0x40 ; zf = 1
14 jz _skip_jz
15 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
16 ; _skip_jz:
17 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0x11 ; jnz
18 jnz _skip_jnz
19 test eax,0x40 ; zf = 0
20 jnz _skip_jnz
21 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
22 ; _skip_jnz:
23 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0x22 ; ja
24 jnz _skip_ja
25 test eax,0x40 ; zf = 0
26 jnz _skip_ja
27 test eax,0x01 ; cf = 0
28 jnz _skip_ja
29 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
30 ; _skip_ja:
31 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0x33 ; jae
32 jnz _skip_jae
33 test eax,0x01 ; cf = 0
34 jnz _skip_jae
35 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
36 ; _skip_jae:
37 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0x44 ; jb
38 jnz _skip_jb
39 test eax,0x01 ; cf = 1
40 jz _skip_jb
41 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
42 ; _skip_jb:
43 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0x55 ; jbe
44 jnz _skip_jbe
45 test eax,0x40 ; zf = 1
46 jz _skip_jbe_zf
47 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
48 ; _skip_jbe_zf:
49 test eax,0x01 ; cf = 1
50 jz _skip_jbe
51 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
52 ; _skip_jbe:
53 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0x66 ; jg
54 jnz _skip_jg
55 test eax,0x40 ; zf = 0
56 jnz _skip_jg
57 cmp ecx,edx ; sf == of
58 jnz _skip_jg
59 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
60 ; _skip_jg:
61 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0x77 ; jge
62 jnz _skip_jge
63 cmp ecx,edx ; sf == of
64 jnz _skip_jge
65 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
66 ; _skip_jge:
67 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0x88 ; jl
68 jnz _skip_jl
69 cmp ecx,edx ; sf != of
70 jz _skip_jl
71 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
72 ; _skip_jl:
73 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0x99 ; jle
74 jnz _skip_jle
75 test eax,0x40 ; zf = 1
76 jz _skip_jle_zf
77 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
78 ; _skip_jle_zf:
79 cmp ecx,edx ; sf != of
80 jz _skip_jle
81 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
82 ; _skip_jle:
83 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0xaa ; jno
84 jnz _skip_jno
85 test eax,0x800 ; of = 0
86 jnz _skip_jno
87 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
88 ; _skip_jno:
89 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0xbb ; jnp
90 jnz _skip_jnp
91 test eax,0x04 ; pf = 0
92 jnz _skip_jnp
93 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
94 ; _skip_jnp:
95 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0xcc ; jns
96 jnz _skip_jns
97 test eax,0x80 ; sf = 0
98 jnz _skip_jns
99 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
100 ; _skip_jns:
101 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0xdd ; jo
102 jnz _skip_jo
103 test eax,0x800 ; of = 1
104 jz _skip_jo
105 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
106 ; _skip_jo:
107 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0xee ; jp
108 jnz _skip_jp
109 test eax,0x04 ; pf = 1
110 jz _skip_jp
==PAGE:96==
B Themida FISH handlers
90
111 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
112 ; _skip_jp:
113 cmp byte ptr [ebx+0x08],0xff ; js
114 jnz _skip_js
115 test eax,0x80 ; sf = 1
116 jz _skip_js
117 mov byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x01
118 ; _skip_js:
119 cmp byte ptr [ebp+0x97],0x00
120 jz _false_branch
121 ; _true_branch:
122 mov edx,[ebx+0x00]
123 add edx,[ebp+0x75] ; image base
124 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x04]
125 mov [esp+ecx],edx
126 mov [ebp+0x36],0x00000000
127 popad
128 popfd
129 ret
130 ; _false_branch:
131 add esp,0x24
132 movzx ecx,word ptr [ebx+0x09]
133 add dword ptr [ebp+ecx],0x24
==PAGE:97==
B Themida FISH handlers
91
align
1 [load operand data (operand 1)]
1 mov edi,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
2 sub edi,[ebp+0x60]
3 sub edi,0x1f7e5efd
4 and edi,0xffff
5 mov esi,[ebp+0x75] ; image base
6 add [ebp+edi],esi
xchg
1 [load operand info (operand 1)]
2 [load operand data (operand 1)]
3 [resolve register (operand 1)]
4 [resolve memory (operand 1)]
5 [load operand info (operand 2)]
6 [load operand data (operand 2)]
7 [resolve register (operand 2)]
8 [resolve memory (operand 2)]
1 mov al,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
2 add al,0x3f
3
4 ; _populate_operand_1:
5 mov ebx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
6 add ebx,[ebp+0x60]
7 xor ebx,0x02a59e86
8 mov edx,[ebp+0x1e] ; address 2
9 add edx,0x3897e232
10 cmp al,0x01
11 jnz _skip_byte_3
12 mov [edx],bl
13 ; _skip_byte_3:
14 cmp al,0x02
15 jnz _skip_word_3
16 mov [edx],bx
17 ; _skip_word_3:
18 cmp al,0x03
19 jnz _populate_operand_2
20 mov [edx],ebx
21
22 ; _populate_operand_2:
23 mov ebx,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
24 xor ebx,[ebp+0x60]
25 add ebx,0x1d937350
26 mov edi,[ebp+0x04] ; address 1
27 add edi,0x3897e232
28 cmp al,0x01
29 jnz _skip_byte_4
30 mov [edi],bl
31 ; _skip_byte_4:
32 cmp al,0x02
33 jnz _skip_word_4
34 mov [edi],bx
35 ; _skip_word_4:
36 cmp al,0x03
37 jnz _skip_dword_4
38 mov [edi],ebx
39 ; _skip_dword_4:
==PAGE:98==
B Themida FISH handlers
92
stack operation
1 [load mnemonic]
2 [load operand info (operand 1)]
3 [load operand data (operand 1)]
4 [resolve register (operand 1)]
5 [resolve memory (operand 1)]
1 ; _resolve_mnemonic:
2 mov edx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
3 sub edx,[ebp+0x60]
4 add edx,0x0378a6a3
5 mov cl,[ebp+0x57] ; mnemonic
6 add cl,0xa3
7 mov al,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
8 sub al,0x95
9 and al,0x0f
10
11 ; _resolve_push:
12 cmp cl,0x42 ; push
13 jnz _resolve_pop
14 cmp al,0x02
15 jnz _resolve_push32
16 push dx
17 jmp _resolve_pop
18 ; _resolve_push32:
19 push edx
20
21 ; _resolve_pop:
22 cmp cl,0xb5 ; pop
23 jnz _resolve_stack
24 mov edx,[ebp+0x04] ; address 1
25 xor edx,0x7e3d72cd
26 cmp al,0x02
27 jnz _resolve_pop32
28 pop word ptr [edx]
29 jmp _resolve_stack
30 ; _resolve_pop32:
31 pop dword ptr [edx]
32
33 ; _resolve_stack:
34 mov edx,[ebp+0x08]
35 movzx edx,word ptr [edx+0x06]
36 add edx,ebp
37 mov cl,[ebp+0x70] ; size
38 sub cl,0x95
39 and cl,0x0f
40 mov al,[ebp+0x57] ; mnemonic
41 add al,0xa3
42
43 ; _resolve_stack_push:
44 cmp al,0x42 ; push
45 jnz _resolve_stack_pop
46 cmp cl,0x02
47 jnz _resolve_stack_pop32
48 sub dword ptr [edx],0x02
49 jmp _resolve_stack_pop
50 ; _resolve_stack_pop32:
51 sub dword ptr [edx],0x04
52
53 ; _resolve_stack_pop:
54 cmp al,0xb5 ; pop
55 jnz _skip_stack_pop
56 mov eax,[ebp+0x04] ; address 1
57 xor eax,0x7e3d72cd
58 cmp eax,edx
59 jz _skip_stack_pop
60 add dword ptr [edx],0x04
61 ; _skip_stack_pop:
==PAGE:99==
B Themida FISH handlers
93
unary operation
1 [load mnemonic]
2 [load operand info (operand 1)]
3 [load operand data (operand 1)]
4 [resolve register (operand 1)]
5 [resolve memory (operand 1)]
1 ; _resolve_neg:
2 mov bl,[ebp+0x57] ; mnemonic
3 sub bl,0x6f
4 cmp bl,0x96 ; neg
5 jnz _resolve_inc
6 mov esi,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
7 sub esi,[ebp+0x60]
8 xor esi,0x7551026f
9 neg esi
10 pushfd
11 add esi,0x3b264be3
12 mov [ebp+0x7f],esi ; result
13
14 ; _resolve_inc:
15 mov al,[ebp+0x57] ; mnemonic
16 sub al,0x6f
17 cmp al,0x41 ; inc
18 jnz _resolve_not
19 mov ecx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
20 sub ecx,[ebp+0x60]
21 xor ecx,0x7551026f
22 inc ecx
23 pushfd
24 add ecx,0x3b264be3
25 mov [ebp+0x7f],ecx ; result
26
27 ; _resolve_not:
28 mov al,[ebp+0x57] ; mnemonic
29 sub al,0x6f
30 cmp al,0x39 ; not
31 jnz _resolve_dec
32 mov eax,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
33 sub eax,[ebp+0x60]
34 xor eax,0x7551026f
35 not eax
36 cmp esi,edx
37 pushfd
38 add eax,0x3b264be3
39 mov [ebp+0x7f],eax ; result
40
41 ; _resolve_dec:
42 mov bl,[ebp+0x57] ; mnemonic
43 sub bl,0x6f
44 cmp bl,0x72 ; dec
45 jnz _store_eflags
46 mov eax,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
47 sub eax,[ebp+0x60]
48 xor eax,0x7551026f
49 dec eax
50 pushfd
51 add eax,0x3b264be3
52 mov [ebp+0x7f],eax ; result
53
54 ; _store_eflags:
55 pop eax
56 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
57 movzx ebx,byte ptr [ebx+0x06]
58 cmp ebx,0x00
59 jz _store_result
60 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
61 movzx ebx,word ptr [ebx+0x07]
62 mov [ebp+ebx],eax
63
64 ; _store_result:
65 mov dl,[ebp+0x57] ; mnemonic
66 sub dl,0x6f
67 cmp dl,0xc1 ; cmp
68 jz _skip_result
69 cmp dl,0x06 ; test
70 jz _skip_result
71 mov edi,[ebp+0x04] ; address 1
72 xor edi,0x465bb8a6
73 mov edx,[ebp+0x7f] ; result
74 sub edx,0x3b264be3
75 mov cl,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
76 xor cl,0x5a
77 cmp cl,0x01
78 jnz _skip_byte
79 mov [edi],dl
80 ; _skip_byte:
81 cmp cl,0x02
82 jnz _skip_word
83 mov [edi],dx
84 ; _skip_word:
85 cmp cl,0x03
86 jnz _skip_result
87 mov [edi],edx
88 ; _skip_result:
==PAGE:100==
B Themida FISH handlers
94
binary operation
1 [load mnemonic]
2 [load operand info (operand 1)]
3 [load operand data (operand 1)]
4 [resolve register (operand 1)]
5 [resolve memory (operand 1)]
6 [load operand info (operand 2)]
7 [load operand data (operand 2)]
8 [resolve register (operand 2)]
9 [resolve memory (operand 2)]
1 ; _resolve_movsx:
2 mov bl,[ebp+0x57]
3 add bl,0x35
4 cmp bl,0xca ; movsx
5 jnz _resolve_imul
6 mov edx,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
7 sub edx,[ebp+0x60]
8 xor edx,0x4953dd03
9 mov al,[ebp+0x3a] ; size 2
10 xor al,0xc7
11 cmp al,0x01
12 jnz _skip_movsx_byte:
13 movsx ecx,dl
14 ; _skip_movsx_byte:
15 cmp al,0x02
16 jnz _skip_movsx_word
17 movsx ecx,dx
18 ; _skip_movsx_word:
19 add edx,ecx
20 pushfd
21 add ecx,0x5b6fd93a
22 mov [ebp+0x7f],ecx ; result
23
24 ; _resolve_imul:
25 mov al,[ebp+0x57]
26 add al,0x35
27 cmp al,0xc4 ; imul
28 jnz _resolve_add
29 mov ecx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
30 sub ecx,[ebp+0x60]
31 sub ecx,0x7f25f135
32 mov edi,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
33 sub edi,[ebp+0x60]
34 xor edi,0x4953dd03
35 imul ecx,edi
36 pushfd
37 add ecx,0x5b6fd93a
38 mov [ebp+0x7f],ecx ; result
39
40 ; _resolve_mov:
41 mov dl,[ebp+0x57]
42 add dl,0x35
43 cmp dl,0xd7 ; mov
44 jnz _resolve_rcr
45 mov ecx,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
46 sub ecx,[ebp+0x60]
47 xor ecx,0x4953dd03
48 mov eax,ecx
49 add ecx,eax
50 pushfd
51 add eax,0x5b6fd93a
52 mov [ebp+0x7f],eax ; result
53
54 ; _resolve_rcr:
55 mov al,[ebp+0x57]
56 add al,0x35
57 cmp al,0x4d ; rcr
58 jnz _resolve_or
59 mov edx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
60 sub edx,[ebp+0x60]
61 sub edx,0x7f25f135
62 mov edi,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
63 sub edi,[ebp+0x60]
64 xor edi,0x4953dd03
65 mov ecx,edi
66 mov al,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
67 xor al,0x3f
68 cmp al,0x01
69 jnz _skip_rcr_byte
70 rcr dl,cl
71 pushfd
72 ; _skip_rcr_byte:
73 cmp al,0x02
74 jnz _skip_rcr_word
75 rcr dx,cl
76 pushfd
77 ; _skip_rcr_word:
78 cmp al,0x03
79 jnz _skip_rcr_dword
80 rcr edx,cl
81 pushfd
82 ; _skip_rcr_dword:
83 add edx,0x5b6fd93a
84 mov [ebp+0x7f],edx ; result
85
86 ; _resolve_or:
==PAGE:101==
B Themida FISH handlers
95
87 mov al,[ebp+0x57]
88 add al,0x35
89 cmp al,0x40 ; or
90 jnz _resolve_shl
91 mov eax,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
92 sub eax,[ebp+0x60]
93 sub eax,0x7f25f135
94 mov ecx,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
95 sub ecx,[ebp+0x60]
96 xor ecx,0x4953dd03
97 or eax,ecx
98 pushfd
99 add eax,0x5b6fd93a
100 mov [ebp+0x7f],eax ; result
101
102 ; _resolve_shl:
103 mov al,[ebp+0x57]
104 add al,0x35
105 cmp al,0x8d ; shl
106 jnz _resolve_cmp
107 mov ebx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
108 sub ebx,[ebp+0x60]
109 sub ebx,0x7f25f135
110 mov edx,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
111 sub edx,[ebp+0x60]
112 xor edx,0x4953dd03
113 mov ecx,edx
114 mov al,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
115 xor al,0x3f
116 cmp al,0x01
117 jnz _skip_shl_byte
118 shl bl,cl
119 pushfd
120 ; _skip_shl_byte:
121 cmp al,0x02
122 jnz _skip_shl_word
123 shl bx,cl
124 pushfd
125 ; _skip_shl_word:
126 cmp al,0x03
127 jnz _skip_shl_dword
128 shl ebx,cl
129 pushfd
130 ; _skip_shl_dword:
131 add ebx,0x5b6fd93a
132 mov [ebp+0x7f],ebx ; result
133
134 ; _resolve_cmp:
135 mov cl,[ebp+0x57]
136 add cl,0x35
137 cmp cl,0xc1 ; cmp
138 jnz _resolve_sub
139 mov edx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
140 sub edx,[ebp+0x60]
141 sub edx,0x7f25f135
142 mov ebx,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
143 sub ebx,[ebp+0x60]
144 xor ebx,0x4953dd03
145 mov cl,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
146 xor cl,0x3f
147 cmp cl,0x01
148 jnz _skip_cmp_byte
149 cmp dl,bl
150 pushfd
151 ; _skip_cmp_byte:
152 cmp cl,0x02
153 jnz _skip_cmp_word
154 cmp dx,bx
155 pushfd
156 ; _skip_cmp_word:
157 cmp cl,0x03
158 jnz _skip_cmp_dword
159 cmp edx,ebx
160 pushfd
161 ; _skip_cmp_dword:
162 add edx,0x5b6fd93a
163 mov [ebp+0x7f],edx ; result
164
165 ; _resolve_sub:
166 mov al,[ebp+0x57]
167 add al,0x35
168 cmp al,0x10 ; sub
169 jnz _resolve_rcl
170 mov ebx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
171 sub ebx,[ebp+0x60]
172 sub ebx,0x7f25f135
173 mov eax,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
174 sub eax,[ebp+0x60]
175 xor eax,0x4953dd03
176 sub ebx,eax
177 pushfd
178 add ebx,0x5b6fd93a
179 mov [ebp+0x7f],ebx ; result
180
181 ; _resolve_rcl:
182 mov bl,[ebp+0x57]
183 add bl,0x35
184 cmp bl,0x05 ; rcl
185 jnz _resolve_add
186 mov eax,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
187 sub eax,[ebp+0x60]
188 sub eax,0x7f25f135
189 mov edx,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
190 sub edx,[ebp+0x60]
191 xor edx,0x4953dd03
192 mov ecx,edx
193 mov bl,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
194 xor bl,0x3f
195 cmp bl,0x01
196 jnz _skip_rcl_byte
197 rcl al,cl
198 pushfd
199 ; _skip_rcl_byte:
200 cmp bl,0x02
==PAGE:102==
B Themida FISH handlers
96
201 jnz _skip_rcl_word
202 rcl ax,cl
203 pushfd
204 ; _skip_rcl_word:
205 cmp bl,0x03
206 jnz _skip_rcl_dword
207 rcl eax,cl
208 pushfd
209 ; _skip_rcl_dword:
210 add eax,0x5b6fd93a
211 mov [ebp+0x7f],eax ; result
212
213 ; _resolve_add:
214 mov al,[ebp+0x57]
215 add al,0x35
216 cmp al,0xa2 ; add
217 jnz _resolve_rol
218 mov ebx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
219 sub ebx,[ebp+0x60]
220 sub ebx,0x7f25f135
221 mov edx,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
222 sub edx,[ebp+0x60]
223 xor edx,0x4953dd03
224 add ebx,edx
225 pushfd
226 add ebx,0x5b6fd93a
227 mov [ebp+0x7f],ebx ; result
228
229 ; _resolve_rol:
230 mov bl,[ebp+0x57]
231 add bl,0x35
232 cmp bl,0xe3 ; rol
233 jnz _resolve_test
234 mov edx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
235 sub edx,[ebp+0x60]
236 sub edx,0x7f25f135
237 mov eax,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
238 sub eax,[ebp+0x60]
239 xor eax,0x4953dd03
240 mov ecx,eax
241 mov bl,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
242 xor bl,0x3f
243 cmp bl,0x01
244 jnz _skip_rol_byte
245 rol dl,cl
246 pushfd
247 ; _skip_rol_byte:
248 cmp bl,0x02
249 jnz _skip_rol_word
250 rol dx,cl
251 pushfd
252 ; _skip_rol_word:
253 cmp bl,0x03
254 jnz _skip_rol_dword
255 rol edx,cl
256 pushfd
257 ; _skip_rol_dword:
258 add edx,0x5b6fd93a
259 mov [ebp+0x7f],edx ; result
260
261 ; _resolve_test:
262 mov cl,[ebp+0x57]
263 add cl,0x35
264 cmp cl,0x06 ; test
265 jnz _resolve_movzx
266 mov ebx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
267 sub ebx,[ebp+0x60]
268 sub ebx,0x7f25f135
269 mov edx,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
270 sub edx,[ebp+0x60]
271 xor edx,0x4953dd03
272 mov cl,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
273 xor cl,0x3f
274 cmp cl,0x01
275 jnz _skip_test_byte
276 test bl,dl
277 pushfd
278 ; _skip_test_byte:
279 cmp cl,0x02
280 jnz _skip_test_word
281 test bx,dx
282 pushfd
283 ; _skip_test_word:
284 cmp cl,0x03
285 jnz _skip_test_dword
286 test ebx,edx
287 pushfd
288 ; _skip_test_dword:
289 add ebx,0x5b6fd93a
290 mov [ebp+0x7f],ebx ; result
291
292 ; _resolve_movzx:
293 mov al,[ebp+0x57]
294 add al,0x35
295 cmp al,0x9c ; movzx
296 jnz _resolve_shr
297 mov ecx,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
298 sub ecx,[ebp+0x60]
299 xor ecx,0x4953dd03
300 mov al,[ebp+0x3a] ; size 2
301 xor al,0xc7
302 cmp al,0x01
303 jnz _skip_movzx_byte
304 movzx esi,cl
305 ; _skip_movzx_byte:
306 cmp al,0x02
307 jnz _skip_movzx_word
308 movzx esi,cx
309 ; _skip_movzx_word:
310 add ecx,esi
311 pushfd
312 add esi,0x5b6fd93a
313 mov [ebp+0x7f],esi ; result
314
==PAGE:103==
B Themida FISH handlers
97
315 ; _resolve_shr:
316 mov bl,[ebp+0x57]
317 add bl,0x35
318 cmp bl,0x1f ; shr
319 jnz _resolve_ror
320 mov edx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
321 sub edx,[ebp+0x60]
322 sub edx,0x7f25f135
323 mov eax,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
324 sub eax,[ebp+0x60]
325 xor eax,0x4953dd03
326 mov ecx,eax
327 mov bl,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
328 xor bl,0x3f
329 cmp bl,0x01
330 jnz _skip_shr_byte
331 shr dl,cl
332 pushfd
333 ; _skip_shr_byte:
334 cmp bl,0x02
335 jnz _skip_shr_word
336 shr dx,cl
337 pushfd
338 ; _skip_shr_word:
339 cmp bl,0x03
340 jnz _skip_shr_dword
341 shr edx,cl
342 pushfd
343 ; _skip_shr_dword:
344 add edx,0x5b6fd93a
345 mov [ebp+0x7f],edx ; result
346
347 ; _resolve_ror:
348 mov dl,[ebp+0x57]
349 add dl,0x35
350 cmp dl,0x15 ; ror
351 jnz _resolve_xor
352 mov eax,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
353 sub eax,[ebp+0x60]
354 sub eax,0x7f25f135
355 mov esi,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
356 sub esi,[ebp+0x60]
357 xor esi,0x4953dd03
358 mov ecx,esi
359 mov dl,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
360 xor dl,0x3f
361 cmp dl,0x01
362 jnz _skip_ror_byte
363 ror al,cl
364 pushfd
365 ; _skip_ror_byte:
366 cmp dl,0x02
367 jnz _skip_ror_word
368 ror ax,cl
369 pushfd
370 ; _skip_ror_word:
371 cmp dl,0x03
372 jnz _skip_ror_dword
373 ror eax,cl
374 pushfd
375 ; _skip_ror_dword:
376 add eax,0x5b6fd93a
377 mov [ebp+0x7f],eax ; result
378
379 ; _resolve_xor:
380 mov cl,[ebp+0x57]
381 add cl,0x35
382 cmp cl,0x08 ; xor
383 jnz _resolve_and
384 mov ebx,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
385 sub ebx,[ebp+0x60]
386 sub ebx,0x7f25f135
387 mov ecx,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
388 sub ecx,[ebp+0x60]
389 xor ecx,0x4953dd03
390 xor ebx,ecx
391 pushfd
392 add ebx,0x5b6fd93a
393 mov [ebp+0x7f],ebx
394
395 ; _resolve_and:
396 mov dl,[ebp+0x57]
397 add dl,0x35
398 cmp dl,0x49 ; and
399 jnz _store_eflags
400 mov esi,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
401 sub esi,[ebp+0x60]
402 sub esi,0x7f25f135
403 mov ecx,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
404 sub ecx,[ebp+0x60]
405 xor ecx,0x4953dd03
406 and esi,ecx
407 pushfd
408 add esi,0x5b6fd93a
409 mov [ebp+0x7f],esi ; result
410
411 ; _store_eflags:
412 pop eax
413 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
414 movzx ebx,byte ptr [ebx+0x0b]
415 cmp ebx,0x00
416 jz _store_result
417 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
418 movzx ebx,word ptr [ebx+0x0c]
419 mov [ebp+ebx],eax
420
421 ; _store_result:
422 mov bl,[ebp+0x57] ; mnemonic
423 add bl,0x35
424 cmp bl,0xc1 ; cmp
425 jz _skip_result
426 cmp bl,0x06 ; test
427 jz _skip_result
428 mov esi,[ebp+0x04] ; address 1
==PAGE:104==
B Themida FISH handlers
98
429 add esi,0x0435f803
430 mov ebx,[ebp+0x7f] ; result
431 sub ebx,0x5b6fd93a
432 mov dl,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
433 xor dl,0x3f
434 cmp dl,0x01
435 jnz skip_byte
436 mov [esi],bl
437 ; skip_byte:
438 cmp dl,0x02
439 jnz skip_word
440 mov [esi],bx
441 ; skip_word:
442 cmp dl,0x03
443 jnz _skip_result
444 mov [esi],ebx
445 ; _skip_result:
==PAGE:105==
APPENDIX C
Themida FISH
subhandlers
load mnemonic
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,byte ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 add eax,[ebp+0x53]
4 add eax,[ebp+0xa7]
5 add eax,[ebp+0x68]
6 xor eax,[ebp+0x89]
7 xor [ebp+0x57],al ; mnemonic
load operand info (operand 1)
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,byte ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 mov bl,al
4 and bl,0x0f
5 sub bl,0x3f
6 and al,0xf0
7 shr al,0x04
8 xor al,0x0f
9 mov [ebp+0x4c],al ; type 1
10 mov [ebp+0x70],bl ; size 1
load operand data (operand 1)
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 mov eax,[ebx+0x00]
3 sub eax,0x0378a6a3
4 add eax,[ebp+0x60]
5 mov [ebp+0x26],eax ; value 1
load operand info (operand 2)
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 movzx eax,byte ptr [ebx+0x00]
3 mov bl,al
4 and bl,0x0f
5 sub bl,0x82
6 and al,0xf0
7 shr al,0x04
8 sub al,0x9b
9 mov [ebp+0xa2],al ; type 2
10 mov [ebp+0x3a],bl ; size 2
load operand data (operand 2)
1 mov ebx,[ebp+0x08]
2 mov eax,[ebx+0x00]
3 sub eax,0x1d937350
4 xor eax,[ebp+0x60]
5 mov [ebp+0x32],eax ; value 2
==PAGE:106==
C Themida FISH subhandlers
100
resolve register (operand 1)
1 mov al,[ebp+0x4c] ; type 1
2 xor al,0x0f
3 cmp al,0x01
4 jnz _skip
5 mov eax,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
6 add eax,[ebp+0x60]
7 xor eax,0x02a59e86
8 and eax,0xffff
9 add eax,ebp
10 mov ebx,eax
11 sub eax,0x3897e232
12 mov [ebp+0x04],eax ; address 1
13 mov eax,[ebx]
14 xor eax,0x2a59e86
15 sub eax,[ebp+0x60]
16 mov [ebp+0x26],eax ; value 1
17 ; _skip:
resolve memory (operand 1)
1 mov al,[ebp+0x4c] ; type 1
2 xor al,0x0f
3 cmp al,0x02
4 jnz _skip
5 mov eax,[ebp+0x26] ; value 1
6 add eax,[ebp+0x60]
7 xor eax,0x02a59e86
8 and eax,0xffff
9 add eax,ebp
10 mov eax,[eax]
11 mov ebx,eax
12 sub ebx,0x3897e232
13 mov [ebp+0x04],ebx ; address 1
14 mov bl,[ebp+0x70] ; size 1
15 add bl,0x3f
16 cmp bl,0x01
17 jnz _skip_byte
18 mov al,[eax]
19 ; _skip_byte:
20 cmp bl,0x02
21 jnz _skip_word
22 mov ax,[eax]
23 ; _skip_word:
24 cmp bl,0x03
25 jnz _skip_dword
26 mov eax,[eax]
27 ; _skip_dword:
28 xor eax,0x02a59e86
29 sub eax,[ebp+0x60]
30 mov [ebp+0x26],eax ; value 1
31 ; _skip:
resolve register (operand 2)
1 mov al,[ebp+0xa2] ; type 2
2 add al,0x9b
3 cmp al,0x01
4 jnz _skip
5 mov eax,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
6 xor eax,[ebp+0x60]
7 add eax,0x1d937350
8 and eax,0xffff
9 add eax,ebp
10 mov ebx,eax
11 sub eax,0x3897e232
12 mov [ebp+0x1e],eax ; address 2
13 mov eax,[ebx]
14 sub eax,0x1d937350
15 xor eax,[ebp+0x60]
16 mov [ebp+0x32],eax ; value 2
17 ; _skip:
resolve memory (operand 2)
1 mov al,[ebp+0xa2] ; type 2
2 add al,0x9b
3 cmp al,0x02
4 jnz _skip
5 mov eax,[ebp+0x32] ; value 2
6 xor eax,[ebp+0x60]
7 add eax,0x1d937350
8 and eax,0xffff
9 add eax,ebp
10 mov eax,[eax]
11 mov ebx,eax
12 sub ebx,0x3897e232
13 mov [ebp+0x1e],ebx ; address 2
14 mov bl,[ebp+0x3a] ; size 2
15 add bl,0x82
16 cmp bl,0x01
17 jnz _skip_byte
18 mov al,[eax]
19 ; _skip_byte:
20 cmp bl,0x02
21 jnz _skip_word
22 mov ax,[eax]
23 ; _skip_word:
24 cmp bl,0x03
25 jnz _skip_dword
26 mov eax,[eax]
27 ; _skip_dword:
28 sub eax,0x1d937350
29 xor eax,[ebp+0x60]
30 mov [ebp+0x32],eax ; value 2
31 ; _skip:
==PAGE:107==
Bibliography
[1]
Rolf Rolles. Unpacking Virtualization Obfuscators. url:
https://static.usenix.org/event/woot09/tech/full_papers/rolles.pdf
(visited on May 20, 2021).
[2]
Tom Brosch. Runtime Packers: The Hidden Problem? url:
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Tom-
Brosch/publication/268030543_Runtime_Packers_The_Hidden_Problem/
links/55f1c23a08ae199d47c47583/Runtime-Packers-The-Hidden-
Problem.pdf (visited on May 20, 2021).
[3]
Scherzo. “Inside Code Virtualizer”. In: (February 2007). url: http://index-
of.es/Reverse-Engineering/Inside%20Code%20Virtualizer.pdf (visited on
May 20, 2021).
[4]
Rolf Rolles. VMProtect, Part 0: Basics. August 2008. url:
https://www.msreverseengineering.com/blog/2014/6/23/vmprotect-part-
0-basics (visited on May 20, 2021).
[5]
Rolf Rolles. VMProtect, Part 1: Bytecode and IR. August 2008. url:
https://www.msreverseengineering.com/blog/2014/6/23/
1v20av0uhf5kygyyaprvj2i6u5ze2a (visited on May 20, 2021).
[6]
Rolf Rolles. VMProtect, Part 2: Primer on Optimization. August 2008. url:
https://www.msreverseengineering.com/blog/2014/6/23/vmprotect-part-
2-primer-on-optimization (visited on May 20, 2021).
[7]
Rolf Rolles. VMProtect, Part 3: Optimizng and Compiling. August 2008. url:
https://www.msreverseengineering.com/blog/2014/6/23/vmprotect-part-
3-optimization-and-code-generation (visited on May 20, 2021).
[8]
Automatic Reverse Engineering of Malware Emulators. May 2009. url:
http://index-of.es/EBooks/lee-re-malware-emulators.pdf (visited on
May 20, 2021).
[9]
Zhenxiang Jim Wang. Virtual Machine Protection Technology and AV industry.
2010. url: https://archive.f-secure.com/weblog/archives/Zhenxian_Wang-
Virtual_machine_protection.pdf (visited on May 20, 2021).
[10]
Rolf Rolles. Control flow deobfuscation via abstract interpretation. July 2011. url:
https://www.msreverseengineering.com/blog/2014/6/23/control-flow-
deobfuscation-via-abstract-interpretation (visited on May 20, 2021).
==PAGE:108==
Bibliography
102
[11]
Kevin Coogan, Gen Lu, Saumya Debray. Deobfuscation of
Virtualization-Obfuscated Software. October 2011. url: https:
//www2.cs.arizona.edu/~debray/Publications/ccs-unvirtualize.pdf
(visited on May 20, 2021).
[12]
Tora. Devirtualizing FinSpy. 2012. url:
https://web.archive.org/web/20180712010754/http:
//linuxch.org/poc2012/Tora,%20Devirtualizing%20FinSpy.pdf (visited on
May 20, 2021).
[13]
Dr. Mafaz Mohsin Khalil Al-Anezi. Generic Packing Detection using Several
Complexity Analysis for Accurate Malware Detection. 2014. url:
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.428.9726&
rep=rep1&type=pdf (visited on May 20, 2021).
[14]
Artem Baranov. FinFisher rootkit analysis. January 2017. url:
https://artemonsecurity.blogspot.com/2017/01/finfisher-rootkit-
analysis.html (visited on May 20, 2021).
[15]
Filip Kafka. “Eset’s guide to deobfuscating and devirtualizing FinFisher”. In:
(January 2018). url: https://www.welivesecurity.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/01/WP-FinFisher.pdf (visited on May 20, 2021).
[16]
Rolf Rolles. A walk-through tutorial, with code, on statically unpacking the FinSpy
VM: Part One, x86 deobfuscation. January 2018. url:
https://www.msreverseengineering.com/blog/2018/1/23/a-walk-through-
tutorial-with-code-on-statically-unpacking-the-finspy-vm-part-one-
x86-deobfuscation (visited on May 20, 2021).
[17]
Rolf Rolles. FinSpy VM Part 2: VM analysis and bytecode disassembly. February
2018. url: https://www.msreverseengineering.com/blog/2018/1/31/finspy-
vm-part-2-vm-analysis-and-bytecode-disassembly (visited on May 20,
2021).
[18]
Rolf Rolles. FinSpy VM Unpacking Tutorial Part 3: Devirtualization. February
2018. url: https://www.msreverseengineering.com/blog/2018/2/21/finspy-
vm-unpacking-tutorial-part-3-devirtualization (visited on May 20, 2021).
[19]
Andrea Allievi, Elia Florio. FinFisher exposed: A researcher’s tale of defeating
traps, tricks, and complex virtual machines. March 2018. url:
https://www.microsoft.com/security/blog/2018/03/01/finfisher-
exposed-a-researchers-tale-of-defeating-traps-tricks-and-complex-
virtual-machines/ (visited on May 20, 2021).
