==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Sustainable Energy
Modelling of regulation and certificates for
hydrogen and renewable gases
Itzel Nayeli Balderas Sánchez
(s193107)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management-Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Energy Economics and Systems Analysis Section
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet
Building 424
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +4550200132
inbsa@.dtu.dk
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This master thesis presents an analysis of the influence of taxes and green certificates
for renewable gases in the energy system. Renewable gases, particularly hydrogen, are
studied and their potential to replace natural gas is analysed. In addition, hydrogen
transport and its influence on hydrogen trade between countries are investigated.
An extensive literature review was done to describe the current situation of certificate
registries for electricity and biomethane. Moreover, statistics of the current flows for
biomethane are presented, together with a comparison among European and national
registries. The possible transport technologies for renewable gases are also analysed and
compared in relation to natural gas.
The energy system model, Balmorel, was used to model and optimise the electricity,
heat and hydrogen commodities in 10 countries in Western Europe. Different scenarios
are modelled for taxes, certificates and hydrogen transport in the years 2030 and 2050.
According to the results, taxes influence the energy mix mainly in heating and hydrogen,
as renewable technologies for electricity are competitive compared to conventional fuels.
The maximum share of natural gas in heat production will be 19% in 2030 and 11% in
2050. This share can be potentially replaced by electric heating, biogas and biomethane.
Moreover, environmental taxes will influence the fuel mix for hydrogen, leading to com-
petition between grey and blue hydrogen.
A certificate of 2 e/MWh was found as the optimal level for hydrogen. It will drive
an increased share of green hydrogen, as well as changes in the location of production
and transmission flows. The potential for certificates in 2030 is 110 TWh. On the hand,
biomethane is not competitive in 2030 and thereby the minimum certificate level was
found to be 12 e/MWh.
The most eﬀicient transport technology for hydrogen is through pipelines. In particu-
lar, the optimal option is the conversion of existing natural gas pipelines. The cost of
conversion affects the installed transmission capacity and also the transmission flows.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This Master’s Thesis was prepared at the Department of Technology, Management and
Economics at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements
for acquiring a MSc. degree in Sustainable Energy from the Technical University of
Denmark. This thesis started in February 2020 and corresponds to an oﬀicial workload
of 30 ECTS points. The project was under the supervision of Henrik Klinge Jacobsen
(DTU), Rasmus Bo Bramstoft Pedersen (DTU), Erasmus Damgaard Rothuizen (DTU)
and Peter Perey (RUG).
Kongens Lyngby, July 17, 2021
Itzel Nayeli Balderas Sánchez (s193107)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my main supervisor Henrik Klinge Jacobsen for guiding me through
this work, for all his advice, his support and for all the interesting discussions we had.
Thanks to Rasmus Bo Bramstoft Pedersen for sharing his work on the development of
Balmorel, for introducing me to the model and guiding me through it. I would also
like to express my gratitude to Erasmus Damgaard Rothuizen and Peter Perey for his
support developing this project.
A special thanks to my friends who shared with me these two years in the master’s
programme, forming lifelong friendships.
Specially to Izzy, Paula, Martijn, Fabrizia,
Mari, Francesca, Morten, Irene, Lidia and the Mexicalpan team. I am grateful to the
High5Girls team: Ali, Ade, Chris, Pau and Giuli, thank you for sharing such incredible
projects together. Finally, I am eternally thankful to my family, Diana, Ana, Carolina
and Antolin, for their unconditional support, for giving me the opportunity to fulfil my
dreams and for all the love you give me.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Contents
6
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Classification and description of renewable gases . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Power-to-Gas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Problem statement and project scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theory and implementation of regulation and certificates for renewable gases
8
2.1
Certificates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Renewable gas certificates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
National registries for biomethane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Electricity guarantees of origin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5
Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6
Emission trading system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3
Green gas transport theory
25
3.1
Natural gas transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Transport of renewable gases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Methodology and model description
32
4.1
Balmorel, energy system model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Model characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3
Scenario formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5
Results
48
5.1
Base case scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.2
Taxes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Green certificate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.4
Transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Analysis
61
6.1
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.3
Discussion on the main findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.4
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
==PAGE:7==
Contents
7
7
Conclusions
72
Bibliography
74
A
National registries for biomethane
83
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
The European Union (EU) aims to be climate neutral by 2050 in response to the climate
change action under the Paris Agreement [1]. On the other hand, energy production and
consumption are the largest sources of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions accounting for
almost 80% of the total emissions. In particular, as can be seen in Figure 1.1, the energy
industries (i.e. public electricity, heat production and petroleum refinery) accounts for
29%; while fuel combustion by energy users (excluding transport) represents the 25.5%,
and the transport sector 23.8% [2].
Figure 1.1: Share of EU greenhouse gas emission by source, 2017. [2].
As part of the EU 2050 vision, the European Commission has proposed an European
Green Deal, a set of initiatives to make Europe climate neutral by 2050 [3]. To reach this
target, actions in different sectors are suggested, some include: renovation of buildings
to cut their energy usage, support industry to move towards a green economy, roll out
new forms of transport, and mainly the decarbonisation of the energy sector.
In this context, the climate challenge is largely an energy challenge and energy tran-
sition is crucial to achieving EU goals by 2050. Besides, the EU energy roadmap [4]
states as fundamental actions the diversification of supply energy technologies, a high
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Classification and description of renewable gases
2
renewable energy share (75% in 2050), and the decentralisation of energy systems. Accor-
ding to this plan, gas plays a fundamental role in the energy transition, substitution of
coal, oil and natural gas will reduce emissions using the existing technologies. Although
electricity share is expected to increase, gas is a key component of the energy sector to
ensure flexibility of electricity markets, provide baseload generation and ensure supply
of energy for high intense sectors such as industry.
Moreover, not only the electricity, but also the gas industry has to decarbonise itself.
Demand for natural gas may decrease due to the electrification of different sectors, while
the remaining demand can be replaced by renewable gases such as biogas, biomethane
and hydrogen. In the following section, a brief description of these will be made.
1.2
Classification and description of
renewable gases
According to the European Commission (EC), renewable gases are biogas, biomethane
and renewable hydrogen [5]. Its production process is shown in Figure 1.2 and they can
be classified according to their impact on the environment as follows:
1. High GHG emissions: Biomethane produced from specific crops with high emi-
ssions from land-use change.
2. Low GHG emissions: Biomethane that uses wastes or crops with low carbon dio-
xide (CO2) emissions as raw materials. Fossil base hydrogen with carbon capture
and storage.
3. GHG neutral: Hydrogen or synthetic methane produced from renewable electri-
city. Also, biomethane produced from wastes whose avoided emissions exceed the
production and combustion emissions.
Biogas is created from organic materials such as manure, food waste, wastewater
energy crops, crop residues, etc. through anaerobic digestion. In anaerobic digestion,
micro-organisms break down the organic matter in the absence of oxygen. In this pro-
cess, biogas and other sub-products are generated. Anaerobic digestion plants are usually
small-scale and located close to the feedstock site. Biogas is composed of methane (50-
75%), carbon dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, water vapor and other gases [6]. Due to its low
concentration of methane, it cannot be injected directly into the natural gas grid. It is
used mainly as feedstock for electricity and heat production in combined heat and power
(CHP) plants.
Biomethane can be produced in two ways, the first one is by thermal gasification of
solid biomass such as forest residues. This process is carried out at high temperatures
and pressures in a low-oxygen environment. Thermal gasification is commonly carried
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Classification and description of renewable gases
3
Figure 1.2: Supply chain of renewable gases.
out in large scale facilities, typical sizes are around 200 MW, but they could be up to
1000 MW of capacity. The second way to produce biomethane is by biogas upgrading.
Biogas can be upgraded through a methanation process to create biomethane.
Cur-
rently, upgraded biogas accounts for 90% of the biomethane production [7]. However,
the potential of biogas and biomethane production is constrained by technical and en-
vironmental factors, such as the proximity of the feedstock and land cover substitution.
In fact, its sustainable potential in the EU is estimated to cover only 25% of the natural
gas demand in the region [8]. Thus, hydrogen can be a potential source to cover the
residual gas demand.
Hydrogen can be produced from fossil fuels or renewable energy through electrolysis.
Renewable hydrogen is produced in power-to-gas (PtG) or power-to-X (PtX) technolo-
gies, where renewable energy in form of electricity is used to provide the energy required
for electrolysis. The difference between these two technologies is the end products and
processes involved. In PtG, the only end product is gas, while in PtX plants, other by-
products such as fertilisers are created. PtG technologies can contribute to the overall
eﬀiciency and the balancing of the energy system; in addition, they can also transfer the
green energy to end-use sectors. The hydrogen produced can then be used as an energy
source or as feedstock in different industrial processes. Moreover, by adding carbon to
the process, biomethane can be created and used as fuel in shipping, heavy transport or
aviation [9].
Natural gas is the most common and used gas today. In Europe, it is one of the main
components in the energy mix, it accounts for 23.5% of the primary energy consump-
tion, this means that one-quarter of the energy consumed comes from this source [10].
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Power-to-Gas
4
The share of natural gas is expected to decline in the future, while the energy sector
will increase its level of electrification. However, electricity cannot completely replace
gas since some sectors require high temperatures, this is the case of the industry where
some industrial processes require temperatures that electric technologies cannot provide.
In the future, renewable gases will replace fossil fuels with a medium or high carbon
content, and mainly natural gas. In this process, regulation and certificates can play
an important role in ensuring that renewable gases can be competitive with fossil fuels.
Depending on the technology available, the renewable gas used will vary. For example,
biogas can be used to produce electricity and heat in CHP plants, while hydrogen can
be used as an input fuel in industry.
The share of renewable gases in the substitution of natural gas is uncertain, several
scenario analyses have been carried out on this issue. In some of them, biomethane
replace natural gas by 3% in 2030 [11], while in others the percentage increases to 8%
[12].
For hydrogen, this numbers varies between 3% and 6%.
Additionally, 90% of
today’s hydrogen supply is grey hydrogen [13], but by 2030, it is expected that gray
hydrogen will decrease exponentially and account only for approximately 20%.To ensure
the climate neutrality by 2050, all the hydrogen must be green and blue hydrogen,
therefore, several electrolysis plants have start its construction and will be operable
by 2030. The EU hydrogen strategy has set a target of installing at least 40 GW of
electrolyser capacity by 2030 [14].
1.3
Power-to-Gas
Hydrogen can be produced by many sources through electrolysis, if the energy used in
the process is from fossil fuels it is known as ”grey hydrogen”, in this type of process, the
CO2 produced during the combustion of the conventional fuels is not stored or captured.
On the other hand, if in the process, the CO2 is captured and safely stored underground
it is called ”blue hydrogen”. Finally, the third type is the ”green hydrogen”, which is
the one produced using renewable energies such as wind, solar or hydropower [15]. Grey
hydrogen has been produced for many years using methane reforming technologies, since
is the only one that is currently produced in large quantities, most of the hydrogen used
in the industry is grey. Green hydrogen requires big investments and significant rene-
wable energy expansion. Then, in the short term, blue hydrogen can be an alternative
to help the transition from grey to green hydrogen. In long term, neither grey nor blue
hydrogen represent a viable solution to ensure sustainability and the decarbonisation
of the energy sector. Thus, the only alternative is to develop and increase the share of
green hydrogen technologies.
Green hydrogen production can benefit many sectors as seen in Figure 1.3.
Hy-
drogen produced by electrolysis can be injected directly into the existing natural gas
==PAGE:12==
1.3 Power-to-Gas
5
infrastructure, thus, it can substitute natural gas for heating and cooling purposes or
other industries. Moreover, by adding carbon, it can be converted to biomethane and
substitute the fossil fuels used in the petrochemical industry to produce fuels for trans-
port. In the transport sector, hydrogen can be used directly as fuel or indirectly to
produce biomethane for cars, heavy trucks, aviation and maritime vehicles. Finally, by
adding nitrogen to the process, ammonia can be produced which is one of the main
fertilizers used in agriculture.
Figure 1.3: Power-to-X for decarbonisation of all sectors [16].
Additionally, hydrogen can substitute conventional technologies and act as baseload
plants, thus providing flexibility to the electrical system and helping to solve intermit-
tency problems of other renewable technologies, e.g. wind or solar. In particular, Van
Leeuwen and Mulder [17] identify 3 types of flexibility that PtG can provide to the
electricity system. The first one related to time, if a PtG plant can store the hydrogen,
the production process can be adapted to the fluctuations of electricity prices while the
storage ensures that hydrogen is delivered on time to the consumers. The second one is
location, PtG technologies can be placed in different locations to reduce transportation
cost. Considering that high-voltage electricity grids are expensive, PtG can transform
directly the electricity produced by other renewable energies (e.g. wind and solar) to
hydrogen and transport it to the final users. The last one is the end-use, PtG can sup-
ply energy other than electricity to consumers without the need to change their energy
systems, hydrogen can be used directly or can be converted to other fuels.
Despite the advantages that this technology can provide to the energy system, the
technology has to be feasible in order to be commercialised.Several studies [17, 18, 19,
==PAGE:13==
1.4 Problem statement and project scope
6
20] have assessed the feasibility of PtG technologies, however, they are case-specific for a
size or a region. A general conclusion of PtG competitiveness cannot be directly inferred,
but the cost of hydrogen production is related to and therefore depends on electricity
prices. In addition, the cost is influenced by its geographical location, capacity and
operation time [21].
Moraga et al. [8] estimated the European break-even price of different renewable
technologies, this parameter represents the minimum output price for a given production
process to be profitable. It was estimated that the break-even price for green hydrogen
production is around 83 e/MWh, for biomethane based on anaerobic digestion is around
100 e/MWh, and for biomethane from biogas upgrading is between 40 and 55 e/MWh.
For natural gas, this number corresponds to 20 e/MW [8].
Therefore, the price of
renewable gases is 2 to 5 times higher than that of natural gas. This confirms that, under
the current market conditions, hydrogen and other renewable gases cannot compete with
conventional technologies.
1.4
Problem statement and project scope
The current situation for renewable gases technologies and power to gas is described
in the previous sections. In conclusion, under the current techno-economical situation,
renewable gases, and in particular renewable hydrogen, are in an unfavourable posi-
tion compared to fossil fuels. In order to be competitive, it is necessary to modify the
current regulations. Some regulatory measurements have already been considered for
biomethane, however, given that hydrogen is an emerging topic for regulating authori-
ties, policy development is limited.
This master thesis focuses on analysing two main regulatory aspects: green energy
certificates and taxes. Taxes are an instrument to account for externalities in fossil fuels,
while certificates help to keep track of the origin of the fuels used. Thus, certificates are
a way of verifying and guaranteeing that the energy consumed comes from renewable
energy. How regulation will impact hydrogen production and reduce natural gas will be
extensively analyzed.
To be able to investigate these policy measurements, the energy system model Bal-
morel will be used. Balmorel is an optimisation model that have different technologies
implemented for electricity, heating and renewable gases production. The modelling
work aims to include regulatory instruments in the optimisation of future energy sys-
tems. In particular, the focus will be on the effect on production and international trade
of renewable gases. This model includes 10 countries in Western Europe and different
technologies for electricity, heating and renewable gases.
Moreover, to be able to transport renewable gases among different locations and
==PAGE:14==
1.4 Problem statement and project scope
7
countries, different means of transport can be used. In this study, only pipelines will be
considered, as they are the most cost-eﬀicient technology for long distances [22]. Other
means of transport are more expensive, e.g. shipping is only competitive in interconti-
nental trade separated by ocean, while trucks can help to supply hydrogen in a local
area. However, the model does not capture these details, so only the use of pipelines is
taken into account.
The current natural gas infrastructure has to be adapted. Another alternative is the
investment on new pipelines to transport the renewable gases separately. This decision
is driven mainly by investment costs; the natural gas grids already exist, but it is not
clear whether they can be used directly for other fuels or whether additional investment
is needed. Therefore, the transport technologies will also be analyzed in order to find
the most suitable method for international trade in renewable gases.
Finally, different scenarios are developed and analyzed looking into the regulatory
aspects and transport technologies. These scenarios are developed for the medium and
long term: 2030 and 2050. Special attention will be given to hydrogen, as it is the most
emerging technology and has a great potential to replace conventional fuels.
The main research questions formulated and to be addressed in this thesis are:
• How certificates are addressed in the current renewable gas regulation?
• How does the certificate system for renewable gas work?
• What do future energy scenarios based on optimisation with Balmorel look like?
• How taxes influence the future energy mix?
• How much certificates affect the production of hydrogen?
• How will certificates affect international trade of hydrogen?
• What is the possible future of hydrogen transport?
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Theory and
implementation of
regulation and certificates
for renewable gases
Green hydrogen may be an important energy carrier in the medium to long term tran-
sition of the European energy system. Other renewable gases already play a role in
particular biomethane and biogas. The hydrogen roadmap for Europe [23] sets the path
for its development.
Hydrogen demand in 2050 may represent the 12% of the final
energy demand in the region. The uncertainty lies in the extent to which the hydrogen
market will develop automatically or to what extent it has to be supported by regulation.
In a perfect market, under perfect conditions, goods are produced and allocated in
the most eﬀicient way. In theory, energy should be generated by the producers with the
lowest cost and consumed by the actors with the highest willingness to pay. However,
after the liberalisation of the markets in the 1980s, even if the main goal of liberalisation
is to develop an effective competition, most of the market models face problems in
imperfectly competitive markets [24]. Imperfect markets are characterised by market
failures. These are briefly described below [25]:
• Positive externalities: The result or activity made by one actor benefits other actors
at no cost. Since the full value of an activity cannot be internalised, the level of
market activity will then be underestimated and the actors will not invest enough.
Then, the marginal social revenue is higher than the marginal private revenue.
E.g. research benefits technology development, but its cost is not internalised in
the final product.
• Negative externalities: Costs are reflected on other actors without any compensa-
tion. Since the full value is not reflected in the price, there is an overestimation.
Then marginal social costs are higher than the marginal private cost. E.g. carbon
emissions from fossil fuel combustion are not considered in the final energy price.
==PAGE:16==
2 Theory and implementation of regulation and certificates for renewable gases
9
This is especially relevant in this project for the use of natural gas, where a tax
will be analysed to account for negative externalities.
• Information asymmetries: Occurs when all actors do not have the same informa-
tion. Then the evaluation of the quality of goods and services is diﬀicult. This
may lead to prices different from the equilibrium price. This can be solved by
creating a reliable and transparent certificate system.
• Coordination failures: this occurs when some technologies are connected to others,
but they are not coordinated causing wrong investment decisions. E.g. hydrogen
industry and car manufacturers may have to coordinate to develop engines for this
fuel.
• Economies of scale: The marginal cost of the product decreases with increasing
production volume. This leads to monopolies and imperfect competition markets.
Also, the marginal cost price is unlikely to be reached.
• Capital market failures: Differences in willingness to take risks between private
companies and society, leading to different private and discount rates. For high
risky technologies, the time to break even is longer than expected, thus, regulation
is needed to give investors more certainty about future revenues.
If any of the market failures occur, it is necessary to regulate the market to make
it as close as possible to perfect markets. Natural gas pipeline have natural monopoly
characteristics, liquefied or compressed transport can create some competition. Also,
negative externalities caused by fossil fuels can be internalised by introducing taxes on
CO2 emissions, which increases the price of conventional fuels and improves the po-
sitioning of hydrogen compared to these fuels. Coordination failures could be due to
infrastructure disagreements with different actors (e.g. car manufacturers, transmission
system operator). Since natural gas, hydrogen and bio-methane share the same transmi-
ssion lines, it is diﬀicult to differentiate between them, then certificates can provide
transparency and guarantee the origin of the fuel consumed. Economies of scale from
substitution products may decrease hydrogen demand. Capital market failures are also
present, PtG is not a mature technology, so the investment is limited and its future is still
uncertain. Finally, in the case of positive externalities, regulation should be applied only
to the extent that is necessary, taking into account the cost of research and development.
Given that some of the above failures are already covered by existing electricity and
gas regulations, it is possible to learn from them. For instance, both commodities are
characterised by economies of scale. To avoid monopolies, the third party access reg-
ulation was implemented. This implies that the owners grant access to the facilities
to parties other than their own consumers. Moreover, to divide the activities and not
depend on a single actor, a vertical separation of activities is enforced, meaning that the
different activities are not done by the same company avoiding strategic behaviour and
excessive market power. Finally, the current electricity and gas networks are managed
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Certificates
10
by the Transmission System Operator (TSO) or Distribution System Operator (DSO)
[26].
2.1
Certificates
To avoid information asymmetries and capital market failures, certificates are imple-
mented and sometimes linked to a support mechanism. Renewable gas with the same
physical characteristics as natural gas uses the existing NG infrastructure. However,
once it is injected into the grid, it is impossible to separate it or distinguish it from
natural gas. Thus, it is not possible to know the origin of the gas we are consuming.
Clearly, this is a problem of information asymmetries where the consumers do not have
the same information as the producers.
In the absence of regulation, renewable gas producers face an adverse selection effect.
This effect is present when market participants have different information on the product,
in this case, producers cannot prove the sustainability component of the gas, therefore,
the correct market equilibrium is not found [27]. Also, producers cannot receive a pre-
mium for generating green gas as the consumers cannot be sure that the purchased gas
comes from renewable energy. This results in insuﬀicient income for the green producers
who have diﬀiculty in receiving an additional revenue for the green property.
Certificates are a way to prove that the gas produced or consumed meets certain
criteria, for instance, a certain contribution of renewable energy. For electricity, the
Guarantees of Origin (GOs) report that the energy consumed in Europe comes from
renewable energy sources. GOs are a voluntary system that EU members are required
to follow in order to meet the individual and overall EU target for renewable energy con-
sumption. However, for gas, there is no such certificate applicable to all EU members
and only few countries have their own internal certification for biomethane.
In the current market setup, the main difference between electricity and gas certifi-
cates is the trading approach. Electricity is based on a book-and-claim system where
the trade of physical products is completely decoupled from the trade of sustainability
certificates [28], this implies that countries without any physical border are able to trade
green energy certificates, e.g. Denmark and Spain. On the other hand, gas certificates
are restricted under a mass balancing approach by the Renewable Energy Directive
2018/2001/EU (RED II) [29].
Once the renewable gases are injected into the grid, it is impossible to trace them,
to ensure proper accounting of renewable energy as well as avoiding double incentives
resulting from support schemes in different countries, the mass balance is imposed by the
RED II. Under this approach, the physical mixing of certified and non-certified products
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Renewable gas certificates
11
is allowed. It is not necessary to track or document the gas within the system, but only
at the injection and withdrawal points. Thus, the international trade of gas certificates
can only be done between countries that share a physical border.
In conclusion, by providing a support mechanism, a higher value in renewable gases
and hydrogen is placed.
In addition, the certification may speed the investment in
the technologies involved. In the following sections, the current market regulation for
renewable gases and electricity is presented in the European Union and in some countries
as an overview of the current national certificates.
2.2
Renewable gas certificates
The RED II [29] establishes guidelines and rules for achieving a share of at least 32%
of renewable energy consumption in Europe by 2030. In particular, the transportation
sector must achieve at least a 14% share of renewable energy by 2030. It calls to the
decarbonisation of other sectors besides electricity, specifically it states that GOs which
are currently used for renewable electricity should be extended to cover renewable gas,
heating and cooling. This will provide final consumers with a proof that the origin of
the gas they use is renewable, as well as enabling the creation of the market for other
renewable gases such as hydrogen.
RED II also imposed an obligation on Member States to require fuel suppliers to
guarantee a minimum share of advanced biofuels, which are biofuels produced by sus-
tainable feedstock. Directive 2009/28/EC (RED I) [30] establish different criteria for
biomass to be considered sustainable, this excludes crops and other biomass that have
a high land use. Besides, for gas grids and liquid fuels, the injection into a natural
gas grid and cross-border trade must be in a mass balance approach to ensure proper
accounting of renewable energy and to avoid double incentives. Moreover, the guarantee
of origin should be standardized to 1 MWh of energy produced by the renewable source
and shall be valid for 12 months after the production of the relevant energy unit. Finally,
a guarantee of origin should specify at least:
• The energy source from which the energy was produced and the start and end
dates of production.
• Commodity type: electricity, gas (included hydrogen) or heating and cooling.
• The identity, location, type and capacity of the production plant.
• Whether the installation has benefited from investment support and whether the
unit of energy has benefited from any other support scheme.
• The start day of operation.
• Date and country of issue and unique identification number.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Renewable gas certificates
12
In the European Union, the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER)
[31] is responsible for ensuring the eﬀicient decarbonisation energy market. ACER pro-
vides guidelines to allow cross-border collaboration in electricity and gas networks. It
drafts network codes, market monitoring and infrastructure plans. It is the entity that
ensures that the integration of national energy markets and the implementation of legis-
lation are met according to the EU objectives and regulatory frameworks. Additionally,
three initiatives exist for renewable gas certification: ERGaR, AIB and CertifHy. Each
of them will are explained and a comparison among them is presented in the next sec-
tions.
2.2.1
ERGaR
The European Renewable Gas Register (ERGaR) [32] was created to enable cross border
transfer of renewable gas certificates. The association currently has 26 members from
14 EU countries. This organization is focusing on biomethane certificates, but is not yet
in operation. ERGar is expected to be the European organisation responsible for the
administration and mass balance volumes of renewable gases throughout the European
natural gas network. Two schemes are currently being considered (Figure 2.1):
1. ERGaR RED MB scheme: It is the scheme that complies with the require-
ments of RED II and operates under mass balance (MB). The final instrument is a
Proof of Origin (PoO) that includes a Proof of Sustainability (PoS). It is only for
biomethane destined for transportation, which will be exported and not counted
in the country of production to meet national biofuel quota targets. This certifica-
tion is the voluntary scheme recognised by the European Commission and operates
under the mass balancing approach. Biomethane goes through a chain of custody
from feedstock supply through production to injection into the natural gas grid.
The chain also covers pipeline transportation from the point of grid injection until
the withdrawal by the end-user.
The mass balancing must be carried out on a consignment by consignment basis due
to the different sustainability characteristics of biomethane. For each consignment,
the volume of biomethane injected and the volume of methane withdrawn must
be equal and must be converted to energy units to be quantified for the mass
balancing. Moreover, only the volume that has been injected and then booked
through ERGaR RED MB can be withdrawn and booked out.
2. ERGaR CoO: The Certificates of Origin (CoO) are similar to the guarantees
of origin for electricity since they operate under the book-and-claim approach,
they are not implemented yet, but it is expected to go-live soon. Different from
the PoO, the CoO apply to biomethane destined for any use, not only transport.
It describes documentation of renewable gas injections that hold the same infor-
mation as a guarantee of origin under RED II, but not have been created by a
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Renewable gas certificates
13
national biomethane registry that has been accredited as a competent body, thus
is not recognised by the European Commission. The certificates may also include
greenhouse gas emission intensity or a proof of sustainability. The purpose of this
mechanism is to facilitate the cross-border title transfer of certificates between
participants of the National Biomethane Registries. The participants can operate
with or without a government mandate and may or not be the competent body
under RED II.
Figure 2.1: Mass balancing system according to the ERGaR [32].
2.2.2
AIB
The Association of Issuing Bodies (AIB) is in charge of electricity GOs through the
European Energy Certificate System (EECS). EECS for electricity has been operating
for many years, and in 2019, EECS Gas Scheme was launched to facilitate the GOs for
gaseous energy carriers, included hydrogen and their effective cross border transfer. The
EECS Gas Scheme is not operating yet since is still in the design phase.
The EECS rules [33] were modified in 2020. Appendix O provides specific rules for
the gas scheme. It is stated that the EECS Gas should be issued for 1 MWh of energy
production. The production plant must be registered and provide detailed information
of the plant, such as pumping and compression stations, input raw material and output
gas (biomethane, hydrogen or other), the calorific value of the feed-stock, among other
details. Additional details will also be stated in the certificate, these include data re-
lated to CO2 emissions produced and saved, sustainability criteria of the feedstock and
end-use of gas.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Renewable gas certificates
14
2.2.3
CertifHy
Related to hydrogen certificates, the CertifHy project [34] is the first EU initiative de-
veloping Guarantees of Origin for Hydrogen. It is a pilot project financed by the Fuel
Cell and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking (FCH JU) that seeks to create a GO scheme and
a stakeholder platform. This initiative developed procedures along the GOs life cycle,
from the auditing of hydrogen production plants, certification of green hydrogen through
issuing, trading and cancelling the GOs. Between 2018-2020 Certifhy had designed a
GO scheme and a stakeholder platform where different working groups set the rules and
methods that will be used for the future hydrogen certification. Currently, the first
guarantees of origin have been issued and the registry is now available for all the users.
CertifHy considers both, the origin of hydrogen and also the GHG intensity. For
the evaluation of the GHG intensity, the GHG intensity of the production of hydrogen
from natural gas is considered as a benchmark. Therefore, if the GHG intensity of the
hydrogen production process is at least 60% below the intensity of the process using
natural gas, then a certificate will be issued.
There are two certificates considered
(Figure 2.2(a)), the first one is the CertifHy Green Hydrogen and is issued in case the
hydrogen is made from renewable energy.
The second one is CertifHy Low Carbon
Hydrogen and is issued for non-renewable technologies, but that is GHG intensely low,
e.g. nuclear and fossil with Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS).
(a) Schemes. [35]
(b) Main actors. [36]
Figure 2.2: CertifHy characteristics.
The certificate is managed and operated from a central registry that is in charge of
the issuance, transfer and cancellation of the certificates. The cancellation process is
done directly on the online platform. The certificates contain information related to the
energy source of the hydrogen, information of the plant (location, operator, the start
date of operation, etc.), time of production of hydrogen, GHG intensity of the hydrogen
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Renewable gas certificates
15
in an amount of CO2 equivalent per unit of energy and the date of issue of the GO.
Currently, CertifHy has issued more than 75,000 guarantees of origin in the 4 pi-
lot projects. The certificates can be traded across the European Economic Area and
Switzerland. It can be used for any kind of application. The certification management
is done through the online stakeholder platform. The main actors involved in the pro-
cess are shown in Figure 2.2(b), the certification body verifies the eligibility and audits
the potential account holders. The issuing body supervises the issuing, transfer and
cancellation of certificates, this body also manages the operation of the CertifHy Regis-
try. Finally, the account holder is responsible for requesting any action related to the
GO (issuance, transfer or cancellation). The GOs last 12 months after the end of the
production period. The cancellation of the certificate includes information related to the
beneficiary, the location, the purpose of cancellation and the period during which the
associated hydrogen was consumed. Finally, CertifHy assists the AIB in the develop-
ment of a scheme for renewable hydrogen under the ECTS Gas Scheme. It also works in
collaboration with ERGaR for cooperation and knowledge sharing for renewable gases
certification [37].
2.2.4
Comparison among European gas certificates
The Renewable Gas Trade Centre in Europe (REGATRACE) reported a comparison
study among biomethane and renewable guarantees of origin. Table 2.1 summarizes the
main findings and characteristics of the different institutions in the European Union.
Renewable fuels for non-biological origin (RFNBO) are not considered on ERGaR MB
scheme since it is a non-sustainable feedstock according to the RED II. The recycled
carbon fuels (RCF) refer to waste-to-energy technologies where the feedstock is derived
from fossil fuels such as plastics, rubber, among others; these fuels are also not consi-
dered by ERGaR schemes since the RED II does not recognise them as renewable energy
or sustainable feedstock. All three institutions consider hydrogen, but none of them is
yet operating.
The methodology for the sustainability criteria imposed by the RED II is under de-
velopment in some cases, but most of them include it. The three institutions will issue
certificates for renewable fuels injected into the European gas grid or isolated gas grids,
however only the AIB and CertifHy are considering other means of transport. All the
schemes will be valid for countries within the European Union, some of them also include
the European Economic Area (EEA) and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA).
Since none of the European renewable certificates is in operation, no statistics are
available for the trading of renewable gases. Moreover, most of the data and statistics in
the national biomethane registries are not public. However, the German Energy Agency
published a map with the international biomethane transfers in 2019 in Europe. Fi-
==PAGE:23==
2.3 National registries for biomethane
16
Table 2.1: Comparison among the EU renewable gas registries.
Criteria
AIB
CertifHy
ERGaR (CoO)
ERGaR (MB)
Energy
carrier
Biomass
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
RFNBO
Yes
Yes
Only PtG
No
RCF
Yes
Yes
No
No
Fossil
Yes
Yes
No
No
Hydrogen
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Mass balancing
Yes
Not yet
No
Yes
Sustainability criteria
Yes
No
Optional
Yes
Gas
transport
European gas grid
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Isolated gas grid
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Off-grid transport
Yes
Yes
Not yet
No
Financial
support
Yes
Not yet
Yes
Yes
Methodology on calculation
of sustainability and GHG
saving criteria
Under development.
Optional for CO2
emissions saved
and produced.
Methodology
developed in
accordance
with RED II
On voluntary basis
In accordance
with one of the
voluntary schemes
or by national
systems established
under the RED
Geographical scope
EU (future and
former members),
EFTA
EU, EEA,
Switzerland
Countries
interconnected
to the European
gas grid network
EU, EFTA
Countries participating
(01/2021)
None, 6 appointed
Only pilot now
Still in process
Not in operation
gure 2.3 shows that the biggest drivers of the biomethane market are Switzerland and
Sweden, as the majority of transactions are destined for these countries. Imports to
Switzerland represented 536 GWh in 2019 mainly from Denmark, Germany and to a
lesser extent from Great Britain. Imports to Sweden accounted for 1400 GWh in 2019
and are from Denmark. The stratification occurs due to the large difference in the price
of biomethane certificates from one country to another. Biomethane from Great Britain,
the Netherlands and Denmark can be offered much cheaper, as biomethane has already
received funding to feed the natural gas grid in these countries [38]. Germany is the
second largest importer with 155 GWh, these biomethane quantities are mainly from
Denmark and Great Britain and to a lesser extent from the Netherlands. Therefore,
Denmark is the biggest exporter with 1772 GWh in 2019.
2.3
National registries for biomethane
The national registries for renewable gases are managed either by the national Transmi-
ssion System Operator or the Distribution System Operator. Therefore, the certificate
markets and platforms are also responsibility of these actors. This thesis aligns with
the Super Power to Gas project (SuperP2G) which creates synergies between Denmark,
Austria, Italy, Germany and the Netherlands for PtG development. These countries
are involved in the trade of biomethane certificates, therefore their national biomethane
==PAGE:24==
2.3 National registries for biomethane
17
Figure 2.3: International biomethane transfers in 2019 [38] .
registries are described in Appendix A.
2.3.1
Statistics from national registers
Figure 2.4(a) shows the biomethane statistics for Denmark in previous years. Danish
certificates are issued per every MWh of energy delivered; thus, the number of certifi-
cates corresponds to the quantity of energy produced in MWh. Denmark has increased
its biomethane market in the last years, the number of certificates issued increased from
2.2 million in 2018 to 4.2 million in 2020. In 2020, 1.4 million certificates were cancelled
on the border with Sweden, 180.3 thousand on the border with Germany, 714.2 thou-
sand were transferred to DENA and only 598.9 thousand were sold in Denmark. This
indicates that 80% of the cancelled certificates are exported to other countries and only
a quarter is sold nationally.
The biomethane volume for Austria is shown in Figure 2.4(b). The blue color cor-
responds to the quantity of biomethane in MWh injected in the grid, while the gray
quantities refer to the biomethane for which certificates were issued. Austrian certifi-
cates are not standardised to 1 MWh, thus, the amount of energy does not correspond
to the number of certificates. Compared to the Danish market, the Austrian one is
relatively small. In 2020, only 135 mil MWh were certified, this represents the 3.2% of
the Danish market. It is worth mentioning that almost all biomethane injected into the
==PAGE:25==
2.3 National registries for biomethane
18
(a) Denmark [39]
(b) Austria [40]
(c) Netherlands [41]
Figure 2.4: Biomethane certificate statistics.
grid has a guarantee of origin certification.
Figure 2.4(c) shows the development of the guarantees of origin in the Netherlands,
the quantities in MWh also corresponds to the number of certificates. The market for
green gas certificates increased significantly from 2019 to 2020. The issued certificates
increased by 70% approximately, while the traded and cancelled certificates increased
in a lower proportion. Most of the transactions are due to trading, however, it is not
specified if it is on a national or international level. The transferred certificates to the
Dutch Emission Autorithy (NEa, Nederlandse Emissieautoriteit) are relatively low with
0.4 million approximately.
2.3.2
Comparison among national registries
The previous sections, described some examples of national registries in European coun-
tries, the main criteria and characteristics are shown in Table 2.2, where the different
certificates and documents emitted by the national registries are shown. From this table,
it can be seen that all the documents are issued on a monthly basis, however, this is
the only parameter that is valid for all countries. While the RED II calls for the use of
mass balancing for trade between countries, some of the certificates are only used in a
==PAGE:26==
2.3 National registries for biomethane
19
national level and works under the book-and-claim approach since the gas is delivered
directly to the final consumer without being injected in the natural gas grid.
In addition, most of the certificates can be traded among countries, but the renewable
characteristic counts for the country of origin, this mean that if there is biomethane
export from Denmark to Germany, the use of the renewable fuel counts towards the re-
duction of GHG emissions in Denmark. The certificates are mostly for biomethane and
only one is for biogas. The Italian schemes do not allow other types of support from the
producers, but only the certificates and the final use is defined to be either transport or
electricity. In the other countries, the final use of biomethane is not specified, therefore
it is assumed that they can be used for any purpose.
Finally, the different schemes are not standardised per energy quantity, some of them
are for 1 MWh, others can be for any quantity and divided up to 1 kWh, in the case
of Italy, these are for a specific energy quantity in GCal. Most of the certificates last 1
year, however, the Austrian is unlimited, while the CIC in Italy is given for a specific
amount of time.
Table 2.2: Comparison among national biomethane registries.
Criteria
Austria
Denmark
Netherlands
Germany
Italy
Document
name
Guarantees
of Origin
Biomethane
certificate
Guarantees
of Origin
Biomethane
registry
statement
on the gas
delivery
Biomethane
registry
statement
on the
gas GO
Guarantee
of Origin
Certificati di
Immissione in
Consumo di
biocarburanti
(CIC)
CIC for
advance
biomethane
Period
Monthly
Approach
Mass
balancing
-
Mass
balancing
Book
and claim
Mass
balancing
Trade
between
countries
Yes
No
Standardised
No, splitted
up to 1 kWh
1 MWh
Not
standardized
1 MWh
10 Gcal =
11.62 MWh
5 Gcal=
5.81 MWh
Fuel
Biomethane
Biogas
Biomethane
Expiration
Unlimited
1 year
1 year
-
-
1 year
20 years
10 years
Other
supports
Yes
Yes
-
-
-
No
No
No
Sectors
Any
Electricity
Transport
As it was discussed, the national registries have particular characteristics according
to the national needs and requirements. Moreover, the national targets for gases are
not the same, some countries are more focused on renewable gases for the transport
sector, while others use them for industries and the heating sector. For international
trade, all biomethane should be traded on a common platform to ensure cross-country
validity. Therefore, the homogenization of the different schemes is needed. Currently,
no certificate or scheme is working in the whole Europe, but the rules and guidelines are
being developed for renewable gases.
==PAGE:27==
2.4 Electricity guarantees of origin
20
2.4
Electricity guarantees of origin
The EU directives 2009/28/EC and 2001/77/EC promoted the use of energy from rene-
wable sources. These documents mandate each state member to develop a certification
scheme for renewable electricity.
The GOs were then created to reduce information
asymmetry between different stakeholders involved. National certification is mandatory
for all members, however, each country has freedom in designing its own certificate. This
has led to substantial differences that hinder trade between countries.
Several counties have adopted a common international standard for their GOs. These
certificates are managed and standardized by the Association of Issuing Bodies through
the European Energy Certificate System (EECS). The EECS is an electronic registry
applicable to ”energy from renewable non-fossil sources, namely wind, solar, aerothermal,
geothermal, hydrothermal and ocean energy, hydropower, biomass, landfill gas, sewage
treatment plant gas and biogases” [42]. Currently, 18 EU members are part of the AIB
together with Norway and Switzerland. The AIB issues certificates to provide evidence
of the source, time and means of production. They are issued for 1 MWh of electrical
energy produced every month and contain the following information [43]:
• The issuer.
• Time and date of production.
• The source of energy and the technology used for conversion into electricity.
• Capacity, commissioning date and location of the generation plant.
• Purpose and eligibility under various schemes and directives, and whether other
certificates have been issued for that unit of energy.
• Whether the plant has received public aid (investment aid) or the owner of the
associated energy (production aid).
The certificates can be imported or exported from/to different countries and can be
transferred between market participants on the AIB registry. When the energy is sold
to the final consumer, the certificate is marked as non-transferrable which means that
is cancelled. The GOs certificate expires after a year the energy is produced, there is no
fixed price for GOs and their value depends on market demand. Certificates are emitted
for all types of energy so that anyone can know where the energy is coming from instead
of using the residual mix. Thus, certificates for fossil and nuclear energy are also emitted
by the EECS scheme.
Figure 2.5 shows the transactions of GOs per country in 2020. The issuing certifi-
cates refer to the GOs created in a month for electricity produced in an earlier month,
the transferred are GOs traded within the same country, the cancelled certificates are
GOs made non-transferable by the certificate holder and the expired relates to the
==PAGE:28==
2.4 Electricity guarantees of origin
21
GOs produced more than one year ago [44]. Norway is the country with the majority
of certificates emitted with 132 millions GOs issued. Other countries with important
contribution are Spain, Netherlands, Italy, France, Sweden, Switzerland and Austria.
Norway is also the largest exporter and importer of certificates. In general, most of
the certificates are transferred within the same country, however, Norway, Netherlands,
Finland, Denmark and Belgium imported more GOs than the transferred. Imports and
exports are the most common transactions on the certificates, they represent 30% of the
total transactions. Finally, only 2% of the GOs expired.
Figure 2.5: EECS transactions in 2020 per country.
Most of the certificate market is due to electricity production from hydro energy (Fi-
gure 2.6) which coincides with the last plot, where Norway was the bigger market player
in the GOs. More than half of the issued certificates are from hydro or marine energy,
20% from wind energy, solar and biomass represent a smaller share of GOs with 4%
and 6%, respectively. Nuclear only accounts for 4.37% of the issued certificates. Finally,
fossil fuels represent almost 9%, from which 86% are certificates from natural gas, this
confirms the need for green certificates for the gas industry.
Figure 2.7 shows the evolution of the issued certificates. The first certificate was
emitted in 2001, the first years, few countries made use of the certificate, mostly Aus-
tria, Finland, Norway and Sweden, the demand for certificates increased slowly during
the first 6 years and from 2007, the certificate demand doubled the one in 2006. The
demand for green certificates for electricity has increased considerably during the last 5
year. The year with the biggest number of certificates issued was 2019 with almost 800
million, in 2020 the demand decreased by 12%. If the renewable certificates are expected
to have a similar evolution, the market for a renewable gas certificate has a big potential.
Additionally, Hulshof et al. [45] studied the performance of markets for European
renewable electricity certificates and concluded that despite the increase in certification,
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Electricity guarantees of origin
22
Figure 2.6: Share of technology on the issued electricity certificates.
Figure 2.7: Development of electricity guarantees of origin.
certificate markets suffer poor liquidity and very volatile prices. Furthermore, adopting
a common international standard has a strong positive effect on volume markets, public
ownership and transparency. Currently, the lack of transparency on prices may damage
the confidence of the market participants and delay market entry. The lack of trans-
parency is due to the lack of standardised pricing, this means that the price of every
certificate is different since it is negotiated between the certificate holder and the end
user through power purchase agreements.
Lindberg [46] analysed the European market for renewable electricity, during 2018,
the electricity guarantees of origin were traded between 1-2.5 EUR per certificate. Howe-
ver, due to an increase in sold volumes, the certificate price dropped to 0.4-0.5 EUR in
2019 and to 0.75-0.85 EUR in 2020. On the other side, the average day-ahead electri-
city prices in Europe are shown in Figure 2.8. The prices in 2019 are around 40-50
==PAGE:30==
2.5 Taxes
23
EUR/MWh except for Greece and Poland that have slightly higher levels and Germany,
Denmark and Sweden have the lowest prices. In general, the European day-ahead mar-
kets fell 26% in 2020 compared with the previous year, Norway has the largest decrease
with 76% and Poland only decreased 12%. In 2020, there are different levels of prices,
but most of the countries are between 30-40 EUR/MWh. Comparing the certificate
and the electricity prices, certificates accounted for only 2-2.5% of the electricity price
in 2020 and only 1% in 2019. This indicates that certificates do not changed patterns
or drive demand, but are only used as an instrument to prove the origin of the electricity.
Figure 2.8: Average day-ahead electricity prices in Europe [47].
In conclusion, electricity certificates have existed for a long time and can serve as
a reference for the development of biomethane and hydrogen certificates. Electricity
certificates show that renewable gases can have a lot of potential. However, as renewable
gases are relatively new in the energy market, the price of their certificates is expected to
be higher than that of electricity. Finally, it is unclear to what extent these certificates
will drive investments or further production of green hydrogen.
2.5
Taxes
Burning fossil fuels for energy production has negative effects on the environment due to
the emission of GHG gases. Given that not all costs are reflected on its price and that the
marginal social cost results in a higher value than the marginal private cost, an additional
value has to be added. To account for the negative externalities, a tax is imposed on
fossil fuels such as natural gas, oil, coal, etc. The European directive 2003/96/EC [48]
indicates and frame the correct taxation of energy products and electricity. It sets the
minimum levels of taxation for the different fuels depending on their final use.
==PAGE:31==
2.6 Emission trading system
24
2.6
Emission trading system
To achieve climate neutrality by 2050, the European Union has the Emission Trading
System (EU ETS) [49] that is a policy instrument to tackle climate change. It is the
first and biggest carbon market in the world, operates in EU countries plus Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway. It limits emissions from around 10,000 installations in the
power sector, energy-intensive industries and airlines.
The EU ETS system works under a ”cap and trade” principle, where a cap is set
on the total amount of certain GHG that can be emitted by the different industries
covered by the system, this limit is reduced over time so that the total emissions are
also reduced. Within the limit, the industries can buy or receive emission allowances,
which they can trade as needed in order to fulfil their cap. In this way, if an industry
reduces its emissions, it can keep the spare allowances to cover its future needs or it can
sell them to the EU ETS market. In case that an installation does not fully cover its
emission cap, heavy fines are imposed.
The benefit of having the EU ETS system is that it promotes investments in low-
carbon technologies and renewable energy. Moreover, trading ensures that emissions are
cut. It covers CO2 emissions, nitrous oxide (N2O) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs). Finally,
in the sectors covered by EU ETS, participation is mandatory for all companies in these
areas.
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3
Green gas transport theory
To be able to transport renewable gases among different places, different means of trans-
port can be used. In this study, only pipelines will be considered, as they are the most
cost-eﬀicient technology for long distances [22]. Other means of transport may be used
for local distribution, but the model does not contain this geographical resolution, so
only the use of pipelines is taken into account.
In this chapter, the natural gas network is described together with its main compo-
nents and characteristics. Subsequently, the hydrogen mixing in natural gas pipelines is
assessed. Finally, the main characteristics of the pure hydrogen infrastructure, its costs
and risks are presented.
3.1
Natural gas transport
While natural gas demand is expected to decrease in the upcoming years, in the most op-
timistic scenario, renewable gases will replace the natural gas demand. One of the main
drivers for this transition is gas transport, renewable gases must be able to be traced and
traded between different regions and countries. Natural gas is transported via pipelines
throughout the European Union, therefore, renewable gases can be transported in the
same way. Pipeline transport is the most attractive technology compared to hydrogen
transport by ship or truck, as the distance covered by the alternative transport systems
is limited and less cost-effective.
The current natural gas infrastructure network is mature and well-developed.
It
consists of 260, 000 km of high-pressure pipelines (around 100 bars) mainly operated by
transmission system operators and 1.4 million km of medium and low pressure (around
20-50 bar) pipelines operated by distribution system operators [50].
The key infras-
tructure components of a natural gas grid are shown in Figure 3.1. The transmission
pipelines carry the gas from the injection points to the final consumers which are high-
pressure steel pipes with different diameters. The most common ones are 20 inches (510
mm), 36 inches (900 mm) y 48 inches (1200 mm).
Then, compression stations ensure the correct circulation of gas flows, compensating
for the pressure losses that occur during transport. The control of gas flows is carried out
from facilities where measurements of pressures, temperatures, flow rates and calorific
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Transport of renewable gases
26
values are received. There are several compression stations throughout the network, the
distance between them depends on the system design. Another key component is the
valves, which are used to manage flow movements, regulate, start and stop the flow.
These are placed every 8-30 km and ensure that operation and maintenance activities
are carried out safely.
Metering stations are placed at transit, entry and exit points. They enable TSO
to control and measure the gas quantities extracted or injected in the pipes, moreover,
they allow for a balance in the system. The city gate stations reduce the gas pressure
levels and feed gas to the local distribution companies. It is the point where the transmi-
ssion network is converted to a distribution network. They are owned and managed by
the municipality or gas utility companies, are composed of multiple valves, pipes and
pressure reduction devices. Finally, the distribution networks will provide natural gas
to the final users, these are composed of smaller diameter service pipes and individual
customer meters.
Figure 3.1: Natural gas transport infrastructure.
3.2
Transport of renewable gases
Biomethane is the most developed renewable gas, it has already been upgraded and
processed so it meets natural gas quality before the injection into the natural gas. The
European Committee for Standardization (CEN, Comité Européen de Normalisation)
drafted the Mandate M475 that standardize the quality of biomethane in order to be
used for transport and discharge into natural gas networks [51]. Thus, biomethane can
be injected into the natural gas grid without the need to change any equipment or set-
tings [52].
On the other side, hydrogen has different properties than natural gas and biomethane.
Thus, in its entirety, it cannot be directly injected into the existing natural gas grids.
The most cost-effective way of transport hydrogen is through pipelines, other ways of
==PAGE:34==
3.2 Transport of renewable gases
27
transport like trucks are not attractive due to the limited volume and the short dis-
tances that can travel [22]. Pipeline transport of hydrogen can be hydrogen blending
with methane or it can also be hydrogen-only transport. Blending is the starting point
when hydrogen volumes are small, however, when hydrogen volumes increase, dedicated
hydrogen transport will be required.
3.2.1
Hydrogen Blending
Blending of hydrogen into natural gas has been studied in [53] and [54], both studies
concluded that hydrogen can be blended into methane only in low concentration, maxi-
mum 15% hydrogen by volume. If the hydrogen exceeds this quantity, the infrastructure
needs to be modified and the integrity of the existing pipes will be compromised, this
is due to the hydrogen properties that are different than the natural gas and can cause
degradation of common used materials. However, the appropriate mix varies between
pipeline network systems and natural gas composition, thus, it has to be assessed on an
individual basis.
Wlodek et al. [55] analyzes the thermodynamic properties of different concentrations
of hydrogen into natural gas. Figure 3.2 shows the main parameters studied assuming
constant temperature, a diameter of 200 mm and a flow rate of 20 000 m3/h. Pressure
drop (Figure 3.2(a)) for pure hydrogen is 5 MPa constant, while smaller pressure drops
are presented in blended hydrogen. The lower the hydrogen content, the smaller is the
pressure drop, the smallest pressure drop is presented in only methane. Moreover, at
these conditions, blended hydrogen can be only transported for a limited distance, for
instance the mixture with 10% hydrogen can be only transported for 180 km distance
and pure methane 160 km.
The density is strongly related to pressure and temperature conditions, in Figure 3.2(b),
pure hydrogen presents a slight decrease of density due to low pressure drops, the average
value obtained is around 4 kg/m3. On the mixture and pure methane, the density drops
are higher because of higher pressure drops. Pure methane has the highest density, this
value decreases according to the distance and the hydrogen content. The flow velocity
can be seen in Figure 3.2(c), the velocity of methane and blended hydrogen is lower
in the inlet (around 3.5 m/s) than the velocity of pure hydrogen that is around 4 m/s.
However, the flow velocity for not pure hydrogen increased rapidly with pipeline lenght,
while in the pure hydrogen the flow rate is almost constant due to small pressure drops.
The main difference between natural gas and hydrogen is the energy content, hydro-
gen has low energy content per volume unit, therefore, higher amount of hydrogen is
required to provide the same energy than methane. The combustion heat of hydrogen
is around 142 MJ/kg and the one of methane is 54 MJ/kg. However, because of the hy-
drogen low density, hydrogen has a lower heat of combustion per volume unit in normal
conditions (12.7 MJ/m3) than methane (38.6 MJ/m3). Therefore, when the hydrogen
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Transport of renewable gases
28
(a) Pressure drop
(b) Density
(c) Flow velocity
(d) Energy transport
Figure 3.2: Thermodynamic properties of hydrogen blended into natural gas [55].
content increase, the heat of combustion decreases significantly. Due to the low heating
value and heat of combustion, transportation of hydrogen is less energy eﬀicient than
transport of methane and it can take 4 times more energy to move hydrogen through a
pipeline than natural gas [56].
3.2.2
Hydrogen-only transport
Blending is only evaluated in the short them, while from 2030, dedicated hydrogen trans-
port will be required. In order to have dedicated hydrogen transmission pipelines, there
are two alternatives: the first one is to modify and adapt the current gas grids, so they
can handle hydrogen; the second option is to invest in new infrastructure only for hy-
drogen transport. Both options are analysed in the European Hydrogen Backbone [57]
study, in which infrastructure companies present their vision for the future of hydrogen
transport infrastructure.
Figure 3.3 shows the Backbone study’s vision of hydrogen pipelines in 2040. By 2040,
the total length of the hydrogen network will be around 39,700 km consisting of 69%
re-purposed existing infrastructure for natural gas and 31% of new hydrogen pipelines.
==PAGE:36==
3.2 Transport of renewable gases
29
Moreover, half of the total network will have medium size pipelines of around 36 inches
(900 mm).
This study concluded that it is more cost-eﬀicient to operate hydrogen
pipelines at less than their maximum capacity, since there are savings in the compressor
investment (smaller compressor, lower investment) and in the energy consumption.
Figure 3.3: European hydrogen backbone 2040 [58].
The final hydrogen infrastructure diagram can be seen in Figure 3.4, where the same
elements of natural gas exists. The differences are mainly in the fuel origin and the hy-
drogen storage. The re-purpose of hydrogen pipelines do not have several changes, the
main modification is to include nitrogen purging, pipeline monitoring to identify cracks
replacement and maintenance of existing valves and other equipment. Relating to valves,
there are still ongoing studies to see if any modification is needed, but it is expected to
have a partial replacement of the current valves to prevent leakages. Moreover, the purity
of the hydrogen will depend on the final use, the largest consumption group will be the
one determining the chosen quality. In principle, re-purposed pipelines cannot deliver
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Transport of renewable gases
30
99.999% purity, but it is unlikely that this purity level is required. For hydrogen produc-
tion, electrolyzers produce a purity of 99.999% and steam reforming between 97.5-98.5%.
Figure 3.4: Hydrogen transport infrastructure .
Another problem is that hydrogen has a different chemical composition that accel-
erates pipe degradation and causes cracks on natural gas pipes, to solve this problem,
different technologies are being proposed, these included applying an inner coating to
chemically protect the steel layer, monitoring regularly the pipes, keeping pressure steady
to prevent cracks formation and use more ductile steel [59]. Gases are moved through
pipelines as a result of pressure differences, this pressure is determined by the volume,
friction losses, elevation, properties of the gas, among other factors. To ensure that
hydrogen remains pressurized and control pressure drops, compression stations are re-
quired. The energy density, or calorific value, of hydrogen is 3 times lower than that of
natural gas. Therefore, to provide the same amount of energy, the volume of hydrogen
transported must be 3 times greater than the one of natural gas.
The metering stations, in charge of measuring the gas in the pipes, need to be
adapted since hydrogen has different chemical composition. Small errors in these de-
vices can cause financial losses. Finally, the city gate is responsible for reducing the
hydrogen pressure, when this process occurs, a Joule Thompson effect is produced. This
effect consists of decreasing the temperature to allow the system to expand while main-
taining a constant enthalpy. When pressure is reduced, the temperature of natural gas
decreases by around 0.5◦C/bar, however, hydrogen has the opposite effect, and its tem-
perature increases by 0.035◦C/bar. Therefore, the city gate must be adjusted to handle
these changes.
In terms of costs, Table 3.1 contains the information regarding the cost for new and
re-purposed hydrogen infrastructure. According to the European Hydrogen Backbone
Report, the pipeline and compressor are the components that drive the investment costs.
In the operational costs (OPEX), the main driver is the electricity consumption from
the compressor that accounts for 60% of the annual OPEX. As explained before, the
main characteristics that will change are the pipelines, the compressor, the valves and
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Transport of renewable gases
31
internal coating.
By reusing the existing infrastructure, there are money savings of around 60-70%
compared to construct new hydrogen infrastructure.
This is because new hydrogen
pipelines require 10-50% more investment than the natural gas pipes, the compressor is
40-80% more expensive and the gas metering stations are only 10-20% more expensive.
The valve, seal replacements and internal coating must be applied to both, new and
re-purposed infrastructure.
Table 3.1: Cost of construction and re-purposed of hydrogen pipeline infrastructure.
Component
Status
Units
Value
Pipeline
capex
New
% of natural gas pipeline
110-150%
Re-purposed
% of new hydrogen pipeline
10-35%
Compression
capex
New
% of natural gas compressor
140-180%
Re-purposed
% of new hydrogen compressor
100%
Gas metering
station
New
% of natural metering station
110-120%
Re-purposed
% of new hydrogen metering stations
20-40%
Valve and seal
replacements
New and
re-purposed
k€/km
40
Internal coating
k€/km
40
The safety of hydrogen transport is a discussed topic. Witkowski et al. [60] evaluated
the risks of hydrogen transport, finding that the main causes of failures are due to
corrosion damage, material defects, mechanical failure or human errors.
In case of
damage to the pipeline, hydrogen can be released into the atmosphere causing danger
to humans and the environment. The most catastrophic scenario will be hydrogen jet
fire, where areas within 120 m of the pipe radius will be fatally damaged. The zones
considered as hazardous for human health and life depend on hydrogen pressure and the
size of pipeline damage.
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology and model
description
In order to find the answers to the research questions presented in section 1.4, a compre-
hensive literature review has first been conducted. The main information gathered can
be found in Chapters 2 and 3, where the current background of certificates, taxation
and hydrogen transport is presented.
The energy system model Balmorel will be used to simulate the regulation and trans-
port aspects studied in this project. Balmorel has been chosen for this study because
it is an open source model and has been developed mainly at the Technical University
of Denmark. This model is used to optimise the future energy system and contains
different technologies for electricity, heating and hydrogen.
This chapter explains the working principle of the model and will later describe the
main changes and how they have been implemented. In section 4.1, an overview of energy
system modelling is given, also the main characteristics of Balmorel for electricity, heat
and renewable gases are presented. Section 4.1 includes the model specific features, the
geographical limitation, the data included and the specific add-ons used.
4.1
Balmorel, energy system model
4.1.1
Energy System Modeling
Energy systems models were designed after the 1970s oil crisis in order to maintain
energy stability. However, with the climate change crisis, the emphasis of models has
changed towards environmental energy scenarios [61]. Energy systems models integrate
the different technologies for electricity, heat, transport, industry, residential, storage
and other sectors on energy systems. Moreover, different actors are considered, such as
producers, suppliers, end-users, regulation bodies, etc. The models not only consider
technical parameters (eﬀiciency, capacity, etc.), but also economical aspects and social
aspects such as costs, policy, tariffs, planning, among others [62].
==PAGE:40==
4.1 Balmorel, energy system model
33
Current energy system models are applied to analyse future energy systems at a na-
tional or international scale. Some of the applications include grid control and planning,
dispatch and unit commitment, expansion planning, energy market design, environmen-
tal and social analysis of energy systems [63]. The models can be classified as top-down
and bottom-up approaches [64]. The first ones are focus on relating the energy sys-
tem with other macroeconomic sectors, therefore, simplifications are made to reduce the
complexity of the systems and are more used for the evaluation of impacts of energy
and climate policies on socioeconomic sectors. On the other hand, the bottom down
approach is characterized by a detailed analysis of the components and the connection
between different energy sectors, therefore, are used to compare the impact of different
technologies on future energy systems and to evaluate different scenarios to lower GHG
emissions.
Other classifications of energy system models were described and analysed by Ringkjøb
et al. [65], these include geographical scope, temporal resolution, purpose (power sys-
tem analysis, operation or decision support and scenarios) and methodology (simulation,
optimisation or equilibrium). The simulation models reproduce the energy system accor-
ding to specific equations and characteristics, the optimisation models optimise a given
parameter, usually the system operation or investment, the equilibrium ones take an
economic approach, and the partial equilibrium focuses on modelling the energy market
without considering the rest of the economy.
4.1.2
Balmorel
Balmorel is a bottom-up model, it is partial equilibrium tool that focuses on finding the
optimal dispatch or the capacity expansion for the energy system [66]. It specialises in
electricity and district heating sectors, however, gas and renewable fuels were recently
implemented. The model was firstly developed by Hans Ravn in 2001 [67] to simulate
the electricity and CHP markets in the Baltic Sea Region, and since then, a lot of im-
provements have been made to model different energy sectors in a national and regional
level. Nowadays, it is used by many private companies, governmental institutions and
universities not only in Europe, but also in other countries, e.g. Mexico, China and
Indonesia.
It is an open-source tool coded in the GAMS modelling language (General Algebraic
Modeling System) and it can be found on the oﬀicial webpage [68]. The core model is
linear, however, mixed-integer modelling can be applied to represent economies of scale
and unit commitment as described by Wiese et al. [69]. Additionally, it is designed in a
modular way that allows its expansion to specific cases, this flexibility is done by using
add-ons.
It does a simultaneous hourly optimisation of generation, transmission and consump-
tion of energy assuming perfect competitive markets. Therefore, the objective function
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Balmorel, energy system model
34
of model is to maximise social welfare, subject to physical, technical and regulatory
constrains. These constraints include balancing equations between demand and supply
in each time step for every geographical region, capacity constraints of each technology
used, energy constraints, operation constraints representing the technical characteristics
of the technologies, and others such as regulation measures and political targets.
There are 4 different Balmorel running models, each of them with different cha-
racteristics. The selection of the correct model is made according to the optimisation
period and whether the model allows for endogenous investments or not. The key cha-
racteristics are shown in Table 4.1, in all running modes, the level of detail in temporal
resolution can vary according to user choice depending on the complexity, data availa-
bility and the purpose of the constructed model. Balbase 4 is the most complex model,
it includes all the characteristics of Balbase 1 and 2, but with an optimisation period of
more than 1 year. This is the most recent version and therefore is the one used in the
present thesis.
Table 4.1: Balmorel: running modes [69].
Balbase 1
Balbase 2
Balbase 3
Balbase 4
Temporal resolution
medium
medium to low
high
medium to low
Optimisation period
one year
one year
one season
user-specified ≥one year
Model horizon
user-specified ≥one Year
user-specified ≥one year
up to one year
user-specified ≥one Year
Seasonal optimisation of storage
yes
yes
no
yes
The core structure of the model is depicted in Figure 4.1, where district heating and
electricity flows can be seen in red and blue arrows respectively. Different technologies
operating with both, fossil fuels and renewable energy, are used to generate electricity
and/or heat in condensing power plants, combined heat and power, boilers and pumps.
Moreover, the electricity imports and exports from different regions are included. The
primary idea is that production and demand must be equal during the simulation period.
Since the previous diagram is not updated for renewable gases, the Balmorel struc-
ture for this topic is shown in Figure 4.2, where biogas produced from biomass is used
in boilers and CHP units to produce heat and/or electricity. The process of upgrading
biogas to biomethane is not included in the model, biomethane can be used in CHP tech-
nologies or it can be sold to the gas market. Green hydrogen is generated in electrolyzers,
depending on the technology, renewable electricity or renewable heat is used as input.
Later, the hydrogen can be directly used, stored or converted to heat and electricity in
fuel cells. Hydrogen from fossil fuels (FF) is also included, since only technologies using
CCS are used, the resulting fuel is blue-hydrogen. In the current project, hydrogen will
be the main aspect of analysis. Additionally, hydrogen production is driven by exoge-
nous demand and therefore there is not competition between hydrogen and other gases.
Moreover, the available technologies for hydrogen production are the following:
• Grey hydrogen: Steam methane reformation.
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Balmorel, energy system model
35
Figure 4.1: Balmorel: core structure [69].
Figure 4.2: Balmorel structure for renewable gases.
• Blue hydrogen: Steam methane reformation with carbon capture and storage.
• Green hydrogen: Alkaline (AEC), proton exchange membrane (PEMEC) and solid
oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) electrolyzers.
• Biomethane can be used in combined heat and power technologies. Also, hydrogen
can be used to produce biomethane through a methanation process.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Balmorel, energy system model
36
• Hydrogen storage: Salt caverns.
• Fuel cells: Solid oxide fuel cells.
4.1.2.1
Geographical resolution
Balmorel is divided into three geographical layers, the first one is the Country (C), then
the Region (R) and the last one is the Area (A) as seen in Figure 4.3. These layers
are hierarchically organised so that one country contains many regions and one region
is composed by many areas. Policy measures, renewable energy targets, resource availa-
bility and fuel prices are defined at a country level. Electricity demand and transmission
capacity are defined in at regional level. Since the electricity balance is maintained in
at a regional level, the marginal cost of electricity results in this layer and represents
the market price of electricity. Moreover, power transmission constraints can be added
between regions to simulate nodes and congestion within a country or between countries.
The regions can be also seen as bidding entities, for instance, Denmark is divided into
two regions DK1 and DK2 representing the two bidding areas.
Figure 4.3: Balmorel: geographical resolution.
Finally, areas are used for characteristics that are similar within a region, for instance,
weather conditions and resource availability such as wind, solar, hydro potential. The
type and capacity of the power plants, heating and storage technologies are also set in
the Area level. Regions can have many areas, for instance, one region can have two or
more different wind conditions. Regarding district heating, the areas can represent only
one district heating network or multiple ones connected.
4.1.2.2
Time resolution
As for the geographical resolution, the temporal one is also divided into three hierar-
chically ordered layers: the first one is the Years (Y), then the Season (S) and the last
one is the Term (T). The model can include one or more years according to the user’s
specifications, each year is divided into an equal number of seasons which in turn are
==PAGE:44==
4.2 Model characteristics
37
divided into an equal number of terms. The number of temporal layers is determined by
the user according to their preferences. The number of seasons and terms determine the
total number of segments in a year. Furthermore, the model allows to assign different
weights or duration to each segment giving more flexibility to the temporal represen-
tation.
Investments and policy measures are usually analysed in one or more years.
Seasons are useful for modeling the seasonality of renewable energy technologies within
a year. Finally, the optimal heat and power dispatch, as well as the storage technology,
is determined on each term.
In the present model, one year is divided into 52 seasons representing the number of
weeks in a year. Moreover, each season is divided into 168 terms that correspond to every
hour in a week. Therefore, to run one day, one should indicate 24 terms and 1 season
in the corresponding year. The model contains different information from the year 2030
to 2050, however, more years can be added according to the user needs. In this thesis, 4
representative weeks will be used to simulate a full year in order to reduce the calculation
time. These weeks are 1, 14, 27 and 40. The analysis will be done considering 2030 and
2050, as these are usually the decisive years addressed by the European Commission.
4.2
Model characteristics
This section describes the specific add-ons and main features of the model. The geo-
graphical delimitation and the current and future demand for hydrogen are presented.
Subsequently, information is given on how taxes, certificates and transport technologies
are implemented in Balmorel.
The main Balmorel model for electricity and heat was used as a reference for this
thesis. In addition, as biomethane and biogas technologies were not included in the
original model, they were added. Energy production using biogas and biomethane is
an endogenous parameter. Therefore, when doing an optimization, the model decides
whether it will use these fuels and in what quantity. The use is affected mainly by
economical and technological characteristics, such as fuel price, emissions, capital expen-
diture (CAPEX), operational expenditure (OPEX), lifetime, capacity, among others.
On the other side, hydrogen demand is an exogenous parameter and it is constrained
by the input data provided in subsection 4.2.2. Green hydrogen is simulated in the same
way as biomethane and biogas, with the main difference being electricity as the input
fuel. For grey and blue hydrogen, the steam reforming process is not included in the
model, therefore, two fuels were introduced (”GREY-H2” and ”BLUE-H2”) to account
for their production costs.
Fuel cost is an exogenous parameter that determines the cost of grey and blue hydro-
gen. Two parameters determine the competitiveness between these fuels: the CO2 cost
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Model characteristics
38
added to the grey hydrogen and the extra cost of using Carbon Capture and Storage
to the blue hydrogen. By adding CCS, the production cost of blue hydrogen is higher
than that of grey hydrogen. However, by adding the carbon cost to grey hydrogen, blue
hydrogen becomes competitive. Finally, the production of grey hydrogen is not expected
to increase in the future and, on the contrary, its production will be replaced by blue
and green hydrogen. Thus, grey hydrogen production was constrained by a maximum
capacity that corresponds to the maximum demand in 2030.
4.2.1
Geographical delimitation
The geographical scope of the present project is shown in Figure 4.4. The countries
included in the model are the 5 countries taken as reference in section 2.3, together
with their neighbouring countries: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden and Switzerland. In principle, limiting the geographical
scope of the project reduces the complexity and therefore the calculation time, so the
model was limited to 10 Western European countries.
Figure 4.4: Countries included in the model.
Moreover, the available regions per country are shown in Table 4.2. It can be seen
that Scandinavian countries are divided into more regions than the rest of Europe, this
is because originally the model was created for Denmark, Norway and Sweden, in these
countries, the regions corresponds to the electricity price areas.
For Germany, it is
divided into four regions, north (DE4-N), east (DE4-E), west (DE4-W) and south (DE4-
S). The rest of the countries have only one region and for geographical effects, its location
is assumed to be in the centre of the country.
==PAGE:46==
4.2 Model characteristics
39
Table 4.2: Existing regions per country.
Country
Regions
Country
Regions
Austria
AT
Belgium
BE
Denmark
DK1, DK2
France
FR
Germany
DE4-N,DE4-S, DE4-W, DE4-E
Italy
IT
Netherlands
NL
Norway
NO1, NO2, NO3, NO4, NO5
Sweden
SE1, SE2, SE3, SE4, SE5
Switzerland
CH
4.2.2
Future hydrogen demand
The current hydrogen demand is shown in Figure 4.5, Germany is the country with
the highest hydrogen demand, with around 62 TWh/year, followed by the Netherlands
with 39 TWh/year. Denmark and Switzerland have almost none, while the rest of the
countries have less than 20 TWh/year. As can be seen, current demand is mainly related
to industrial use, demand for other sectors such as transport and energy is negligible.
In the future, the demand from industry is expected to remain the highest, but other
sectors like transport and heating for buildings will also increase their demand.
Figure 4.5: Current demand of hydrogen.
The future of hydrogen demand is very uncertain. It is not clear to what extent
it will replace natural gas and how it will be compared to biomethane. The hydrogen
roadmap Europe [23], presents different scenarios on future hydrogen demand per sector.
It is expected that in 2030, some grey and blue hydrogen will remain, but by 2050, most
of the hydrogen will be green from central and regional electrolyzers.
European hydrogen demand in a business-as-usual scenario is projected to be 481
TWh in 2030 and 780 TWh in 2050. Therefore, these numbers were considered as the
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Model characteristics
40
target demands. Moreover, it was assumed that the hydrogen share per country will
remain as it is now. Figure 4.6 shows the demand from 2030 to 2050 for the countries
in the simulation. Germany is the country with the highest demand with 107 TWh in
2030 and 174 TWh in 2050, however, this demand is distributed among the 4 regions.
The second largest demand is from the Netherlands with 69 TWh in 2030, followed by
France and Belgium. The rest of the countries have significantly lower demand.
It is worthy to mention that the 10 countries in this study account for the 60% of the
total hydrogen demand in Europe. Finally, it was assumed a linear increment from 2030
to 2050, but the distribution remains the same. Again, the countries with the lowest
demand are Denmark and Switzerland.
Figure 4.6: Future hydrogen demand.
4.2.3
Taxes
Taxes in Balmorel are considered in two different ways. Figure 4.7 shows the type of
taxes included in Balmorel. The first type is environmental taxes, where fuels are taxed
based on their CO2 emission intensity. This tax is the one that simulates the EU ETS
and it is included in the core Balmorel model. The second group is the tax on fuel use, in
this case, two end uses can be distinguished: for electricity and heat generation. These
taxes are not part of the core Balmorel model, but are defined on an add-on called taxes.
==PAGE:48==
4.2 Model characteristics
41
Figure 4.7: Taxes in Balmorel.
The EU ETS is the world’s major carbon market and it covers electricity and heat
generation, energy-intensive industry and commercial aviation. The level of taxation
implemented in the model is shown in Figure 4.8, this corresponds to the future carbon
price. Taxes are represented in euros per tonne of CO2 emitted. The current level is
25 EUR/ton CO2 and it increases constantly up to 2050. The CO2 price is uncertain,
however, Pietzcker et al. [70] studied different scenarios of future carbon prices. Under
a reference, or business as usual scenario, the CO2 price is expected to increase up to
50 EUR/tonCO2 in 2030. In 2050, the carbon price increases to 100 EUR/tonCO2. To
account for the CO2 emitted by grey hydrogen production, the CO2 cost was added to
the fuel cost of grey hydrogen, this corresponds to 2.5 EUR/GJ in 2030 and 5.1 in 2050.
Figure 4.8: Environmental tax level.
On the other hand, fuel taxes for every EU member are reported by the European
Commission. Taxes for energy products are available in [71], where every country has a
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Model characteristics
42
specific tax level depending on the fuel and its end-use. Two distinctions are made: the
use of fuel for electricity generation and for heating production. For Switzerland and
Norway, this number was considered as the average European one since no information
was available. The numbers are for January 1st, 2021 and can be seen on Table 4.3 and
Table 4.4 where NG refers to Natural Gas, LPG liquefied petroleum gas and HFO heavy
fuel oil. The tax is applied in euros per GJ of energy produced, and it varies according
to each country and fuel type.
Table 4.3: Taxes on fuel use. Heating for business use (Euros/GJ) .
NG
Coal
Fuel Oil
Light Oil
HFO
LPG
Electric
Coke
Austria
1.66
1.70
3.22
13.31
1.44
0.87
4.17
1.70
Belgium
0.48
0.37
0.47
15.91
0.39
0.38
1.41
0.37
Denmark
9.81
10.71
9.23
16.50
10.04
9.26
0.15
10.71
France
2.34
4.06
4.59
17.65
3.35
4.18
6.25
4.06
Germany
1.14
0.33
1.54
17.31
0.60
0.92
4.27
0.33
Italy
0.34
0.38
10.16
18.82
1.53
0.38
3.47
0.38
Netherlands
12.33
0.48
13.14
21.01
0.92
7.16
34.52
0.48
Norway
4.23
0.63
3.62
0.39
0.39
10.60
0.39
0.65
Sweden
6.87
9.66
8.93
16.61
8.95
7.64
0.16
9.66
Switzerland
4.06
0.61
3.49
0.38
0.38
10.19
0.38
0.61
NG= Natural Gas, LPG= Liquefied petroleum gas, HFO=Heavy Fuel Oil
Comparing fuel end-use, it is not clear which is more expensive, however, the price
level varies from one country to another. This means that in some countries, the taxation
level is higher for heating generation than for electricity, while in others, the opposite
effect occurs. For heat production, light oil is by far the most heavily taxed product,
followed by fuel oil. The least taxed fuels are coal and coke. For electricity generation,
light oil and fuel oil have the highest taxes, while natural gas has the lowest tax level.
Table 4.4: Taxes on fuel use. Fuel for electricity generation (Euros/GJ) .
NG
Fuel Oil
Light Oil
LPG
Austria
1.66
10.71
13.31
5.26
Belgium
2.60
15.51
15.91
2.52
Denmark
11.89
10.95
16.50
10.93
France
1.45
14.96
17.65
4.18
Germany
3.86
12.23
17.31
6.40
Italy
0.09
15.55
18.82
5.40
Netherlands
4.83
13.14
21.01
7.16
Norway
4.23
3.62
0.39
10.60
Sweden
6.15
12.55
16.61
6.97
Switzerland
4.06
3.49
0.38
10.19
==PAGE:50==
4.2 Model characteristics
43
For natural gas, the tax level is shown in Figure 4.9. Denmark has the highest tax
level for electricity generation followed by Sweden. For heating use, the Netherlands is
the country with the highest taxes, followed by Denmark and Sweden. Overall, Den-
mark, the Netherlands and Sweden have the highest taxation levels; while Italy, Austria
and Belgium have a very low taxation level for both heating and electricity.
Figure 4.9: Taxes applied to natural gas.
By analysing the tax level in previous years, it was found that some countries have
significantly increased their level in the last 7 years. However, this increment was not
the same for all the countries, therefore to model the future development of fuel taxes,
it was considered that in 2030 all the countries will unify their tax levels. Thus, in 2030,
all EU countries have the same tax level, the tax levels for natural gas correspond to 2.9
and 3.7 EUR/GJ for heating and electricity respectively. This value is doubled in 2050
to ensure carbon neutrality in Europe.
4.2.4
Certificates for renewable gases
The level of certificate support for renewable gases is uncertain. Due to the current
non-existence of a certificate for renewable gases in the EU, there are no statistics that
serve as a reference. Moreover, the certificate price is agreed directly between the trader
and the final consumer, therefore there is not a standard price. However, since rene-
wable gases are less developed and more diﬀicult to obtain compared to electricity, it is
expected that the price of certificates will be higher than the one for electricity guaran-
tees of origin. Moreover, there are no studies available determining or suggesting a value.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Model characteristics
44
Li and Mulder [72] developed a short-run partial equilibrium model of the electri-
city and hydrogen markets, in which green certificates for electricity and hydrogen are
considered as supplier revenues. The demand for certificates is represented as an ag-
gregated demand function, while the supply equals the production of green hydrogen.
When clearing the equilibrium model, the price of the certificates is given by the simu-
lation. Different scenarios are analyzed for both, demand and supply. Table 4.5 shows
the average prices of green certificates found by this study. The certificate price varies
according to the supply and demand scenarios, when there is low demand, the average
price is around 1 EUR/MWh, this price is only higher if there is high demand and low
supply (8.29 EUR/MWh).
Table 4.5: Average price of green certificate (EUR/MWh) [72].
No PtG
Low PtG
High PtG
Low hydrogen demand
0
0.98
0.88
High hydrogen demand
0
8.29
1.50
The certificate level is established considering the study of Li and Mulder. In the
base scenario, a price of 2 EUR/MWh is considered. Certificates are an extra income
for the suppliers producing green hydrogen, in this case, the certificates were added as
a negative cost per unit of energy, thus reducing the operation and maintenance cost of
electrolyzers, making green hydrogen more competitive than blue and grey hydrogen.
4.2.5
Transmission costs and capacities
In Balmorel, the existing natural gas infrastructure is not simulated because the tech-
nology already exists, is operational and has a long lifetime. Therefore, it is assumed
that natural gas can be always transported and supplied to the final users. On the other
hand, to transport hydrogen, new investments or modifications are required.
Hydrogen can be transported in Balmorel in two ways:
• Building new hydrogen pipelines. The Danish Energy Agency estimated that the
cost of new hydrogen pipelines is around 1.5 DKK/MW/km [15]. This cost was
considered and further multiplied by the number of kilometres from one region to
another.
• Converting the existing natural gas pipelines. In subsection 3.2.2 was seen that the
re-purposing of existing pipes accounts for only 10-35% of the investment in new
hydrogen pipelines. In this study, it is assumed that the conversion costs account
for only 30% of the construction of new pipelines, i.e. around 0.45 DKK/MW/km.
Figure 4.10 shows the regions that can be connected, this distribution coincides with
the gas infrastructure and the European backbone study. However, it is considered that
==PAGE:52==
4.3 Scenario formulation
45
the transmission is from the middle of region A (black dot points) to the middle of
region B. This assumption limits the study, but allow us to have a general vision of
future investments. For instance, France can be connected to Italy, Belgium, Southern
Germany and Switzerland, while DK1 is only connected to DK2 and SE4.
Figure 4.10: Transmission line connections included in Balmorel.
4.3
Scenario formulation
In the base scenario, all the technologies for electricity, heating and hydrogen are in-
cluded. The main data assumptions are presented in Table 4.6, fuel and CO2 taxes are
applied to all the fossil fuels depending on their level of emissions. An emission tax is
applied to grey hydrogen, which is also restricted by a maximum capacity. Certificates
are not included and the cost of natural gas pipeline conversion is 30% of the cost of
new pipeline construction.
The gas for climate initiative analysed the cost of hydrogen in Europe [22]. Blue
and grey hydrogen cost is dependent on natural gas price, their cost varies between 1
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Scenario formulation
46
and 1.6 e/kg, corresponding to 7.5 and 12 euros/GJ respectively. For this study, it was
decided to have a hydrogen price of 9 e/GJ in 2030 and 10 e/GJ in 2050, these prices
are without considering the carbon tax. Later, the carbon cost was added to the grey
hydrogen, resulting in 11.5 in 2030. On the other side, the biomethane price is presented
by the International Energy Agency (IEA), in 2018 the European biomethane price was
13.1 e/GJ [73]. IEA expects this price to fall to around 11.3 e/GJ by 2040. Therefore,
the price in 2030 was set to 12 e/GJ and in 2050 10 e/GJ.
Table 4.6: Main data applied to the base scenario.
Parameter
2030
2050
Unit
Fuel cost - blue hydrogen
9
10
e/GJ
Fuel cost - grey hydrogen
11.5
15.1
e/GJ
Fuel cost - biomethane
12
10
e/GJ
Fuel cost - natural gas
7.1
8.9
e/GJ
Carbon price
48.3
100
e/tonCO2
Natural gas tax-heating
2.9
5.79
e/GJ
Natural gas tax-electricity
3.7
7.41
e/GJ
Cost of conversion natural gas pipes
30 %
30%
%
4.3.1
Scenarios for taxes
• All tax: This corresponds to the base scenario, in which both types of taxes,
fuel taxes and CO2 tax, are included. Moreover, CO2 tax is also applied to grey
hydrogen.
• CO2 tax: In this scenario, fuel taxes are not included for any fossil fuel. Therefore
only their emission intensity is accounted for the total emissions. Moreover, CO2
tax is also applied to grey hydrogen.
• Fuel tax: Only fuel taxes are included, there is no existence of EU ETS system
and thus, CO2 taxes are not considered. In this case, grey hydrogen is not taxed
on its level of CO2 emissions.
• No taxes: Under this scenario, there is no tax or limit on emissions, all the
fossil fuels can be used and the model decides which technologies will prioritize to
produce energy.
4.3.2
Scenarios for certificates
Since hydrogen demand is an exogenous parameter and there is no competition between
biomethane and hydrogen, certificates applied to both fuels will be analysed separately.
• No certificate: It has the same features as the base scenario.
==PAGE:54==
4.3 Scenario formulation
47
• Certificate: This scenario contains the characteristics of the base one, with the
addition of a certificate. The level of certificate is 2 EUR/MWh for hydrogen and
12 EUR/MWh for biomethane. These levels were identified as the critical ones
from the test simulations.
4.3.3
Scenarios for hydrogen pipeline infrastructure
Since the transmission flows in 2030 are limited and represents only 6% of the total
production as explained in the section 5.1. Scenarios for transmission capacity will be
analysed only in 2050. The two scenarios are:
• Optimal: It is the same as the baseline scenario.
The conversion of existing
natural gas pipelines is considered to be 30% the cost of building new hydrogen-
only pipes. The maximum capacity for conversion or investment in new hydrogen
pipelines is not restricted. Therefore, the model performs an optimisation and
decides where it is more profitable to invest.
• Restricted: As the conversion of existing pipelines is much cheaper, most likely
the model will decide to not construct new ones. However, in reality, there will be
some investments in new pipelines for hydrogen. Thus, a restriction is imposed so
that investments in new hydrogen pipelines occurs. In this scenario, 40% of the
total capacity should be new hydrogen pipelines and the 60% remaining will be
conversion of the existing natural gas pipelines.
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Results
This chapter presents the results obtained by the model presented in chapter 4. First,
section 5.1 presents the main results of the base case scenario. The specific scenarios
of taxation, hydrogen certificates and transport and their effect on different parameters
are explained below.
5.1
Base case scenario
The base case scenario considers the EU ETS system and fuel taxes for energy purposes.
The results represent 4 weeks of a year, where optimisation takes place every hour and
covers the years 2030 and 2050. The main results of this scenario are presented below.
The energy production by end-use is shown in Table 5.1. In 2030, the electricity
sector accounted for 43 % of the total energy production, heating for 49% and hydrogen
for 8%. This share changes in 2050, where energy production for electricity increases to
48%, heating decreases to 31% and hydrogen accounts for 21%. The high share of hydro-
gen in 2050 is due to the limitations of the model’s scope. The model does not simulate
energy intense sectors such as transport and industries, therefore the final energy pro-
duction considers only the heating and electricity sectors in detail. Furthermore, the
figures given do not take into account transmission and generation losses.
In 2030, electricity is produced in all countries, distributed according to the country’s
demand. However, electricity production is increased by 93.2% in 2050. Moreover, a
geographical stratification occurs and most of the electricity is produced in France and
Germany. The production in France is due to the low electricity prices in this country
(5.1), Norway and Sweden also have low electricity prices, however, they are located far
from the big consumers (Germany, France and Italy). Therefore, the increase in elec-
trification in France is due to low electricity prices, together with its strategic location
that allows exporting electricity to many countries.
For the heating sector in 2030, Germany accounts for 43% of the production, France
for 21% and the others have a smaller share, in this case, there is no stratification and
heating production does not increase in 2050. Finally, hydrogen production in 2030 is
distributed according to demand. In 2050, the hydrogen production increases signifi-
cantly from 342 to 1512 TWh. Furthermore, the distribution changes and in 2050 most
==PAGE:56==
5.1 Base case scenario
49
Table 5.1: Energy production by country.
Contry
Electricity [TWh]
Heating [TWh]
Hydrogen [TWh]
2030
2050
2030
2050
2030
2050
Austria
71
82
55
55
10
0.4
Belgium
67
87
125
127
36
19
Denmark
42
75
50
52
-
28
France
587
1594
421
578
40
931
Germany
404
783
882
895
108
344
Italy
184
272
162
163
38
53
Netherlands
74
107
162
169
72
-
Norway
167
202
41
47
16
50
Sweden
128
189
116
119
19
84
Switzerland
88
98
15
16
3
4
Total
1812
3490
2030
2219
342
1513
Figure 5.1: Average electricity prices per country.
of the hydrogen is produced in France due to high electricity production and low electri-
city prices.
The electricity mix per country is shown in Figure 5.2(a), it is already decarbonised
by 2030 with hydro, wind and solar as the main technologies used. Nuclear energy also
accounts for some of the energy production, mainly in France; while waste accounts
only for 3% of the electricity production. The energy mix does not change significantly
in 2050, except for the fact that biomethane appears. In France, the share of nuclear
energy decreases from 53% in 2050 to 20% in 2050, and the share of solar energy in-
creases. Italy is increasing its solar energy production, while in Sweden it is wind energy
that is increasing. Biomethane is used for electricity production in Germany, Italy and
the Netherlands.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Base case scenario
50
On the other side, the heating energy mix can be seen in Figure 5.2(b). Electrification
on heating is clear since most of the heating production comes from electric boilers and
heat pumps, in 2030 the electricity share is 73% and in 2050 74%. In 2030, there is still
some coal, natural gas and oil, but the total share of all three is around 5%. The same
occurs with biogas that accounts for 5% of the total heat production, this share is 12%
for biomass, 2% for solar energy and 4% for waste. In 2050, fossil fuels are displaced
totally, and all the heating is produced by renewable sources. Additionally, in 2050,
the share of technologies is similar to the one in 2030, however, biomethane appears
in Germany, Italy and the Netherlands accounting for 3% of the total. The remaining
fuels are distributed as follows: 10% for biogas, 7% for biomass, 1% for solar and 4% for
waste. Therefore, fossil fuels are replaced by renewable gases (biomethane and biogas).
(a) Electricity
(b) Heating
Figure 5.2: Energy production mix.
Figure 5.3(a) shows the hydrogen production by country in 2030, the production is
distributed according to the countries where the demand exists, in this way, most of
the hydrogen is produced in Germany and the Netherlands. Moreover, from the whole
production, only 4% is grey hydrogen, 17% is green and the remaining 79% is blue. The
low grey hydrogen production is due to the effect of environmental taxes affecting its
fuel cost. Green hydrogen is produced in Norway, Sweden and France where electricity
prices are low as seen in Figure 5.1. In 2050, all the hydrogen is green and the distribu-
tion among the countries can be seen in Figure 5.3(b). Hydrogen is mainly produced in
France due to the low electricity prices, followed by Germany with 23%. The rest of the
countries produce the 16% remaining. Netherlands has the highest electricity prices in all
the countries simulated and therefore there is no hydrogen production from this country.
Green hydrogen production is then dependent on electricity prices. As an example,
in Figure 5.4 the hourly hydrogen production (left axis) is depicted together with the
electricity prices (right axis) in France. This plot shows the hourly variation on blue
and green production during week 1 of 2030.
It can be noticed that blue hydrogen
peaks coincides with zero green-H2 production, and with peaks in electricity prices. For
==PAGE:58==
5.1 Base case scenario
51
(a) 2030
(b) 2050
Figure 5.3: Hydrogen production by country.
instance, during hours 8-10, as electricity price increased to 36-37 e/MWh, there is no
green hydrogen production and the blue technology is producing around 5270 MWh.
The same tendency occurs during other hours in the week. On the other side, when
electricity price is below 31 e/MWh, the green hydrogen production is constant at 2910
MWh.
Figure 5.4: Hydrogen production in France during Week 1, 2030.
Electricity prices also affect the mix of energy generation. Figure 5.5(a) shows the
variation of the heating mix in Italy on April 2nd, 2030. Heat pumps and electric boilers
are the main technologies used to produce heating through electricity, these are opera-
ting mainly between 8 and 17h that is when electricity prices are low (left axis). During
the rest of the day, when electricity prices are higher, there is little or no electric heating,
but instead, boilers using biogas are the technologies replacing electricity. Solar energy
in heating is constant as it is solar thermal with a storage tank that can provide constant
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Base case scenario
52
heating throughout the day.
On the other side, Figure 5.5(b) shows the electricity mix, it can be seen that low
electricity prices coincide with a high share in solar PV, during daylight hours, and PV
represents around the 60-80% of the energy mix. Hydro-energy is also the second-largest
technology used. Others as wind and waste are employed to a lesser extent. Finally,
biogas and biomass are almost not employed and their use coincides with the peaks in
electricity prices.
(a) Heating mix
(b) Electricity mix
Figure 5.5: Hourly energy mix in Italy, April 2nd, 2030.
One of the important parameters to consider is how hydrogen will be traded between
countries. As seen before, in 2030 hydrogen is produced locally according to demand,
therefore, there are not a lot of flows between countries. From the total 342 TWh pro-
duced, only 15.5 TWh (4.5%) are exported to other countries, and all of it is green
hydrogen as it is exported from Sweden and Norway to Denmark and Germany. In this
document two types of transmission are discussed, the gross exports and the net exports.
The first ones account for all types of transmission, considering that some countries are
used as intermediaries for the passage of hydrogen flows. On the other side, in the net
flows, the double-counting is subtracted and only the final imports are considered.
Hydrogen flows in 2050 are higher due to a change in hydrogen production, as hydro-
gen is generated mainly in France and Germany. The gross hydrogen flows are depicted
in Figure 5.6. As well as being the largest producer, France is also the largest exporter
and accounts for the 49% of all the flows. From the 607 TWh exported by France, 381
are to Switzerland and 227 TWh to Belgium. Then, Switzerland exports 234 TWh to
Italy and 117 TWh to Germany. Belgium is the 3rd larger exported, selling hydrogen
mainly to Netherlands and to a lesser extent to Germany. Therefore, most of the flows
are having as final destination Germany, Italy and Netherlands. The flows to Germany
are due to the high hydrogen demand from this country, while to Italy and Netherlands
is due to low or nonexistent national production compared to the demand as electricity
==PAGE:60==
5.2 Taxes
53
prices are high in these countries. The net hydrogen transmission account for 694 TWh
that is the 46% of the hydrogen production in 2050.
Figure 5.6: Gross hydrogen exports in 2050.
5.2
Taxes
In this section different tax scenarios are described, as taxes have a direct impact on
the energy production mix and CO2 emissions, these two parameters will be analysed in
this section.
For electricity, Figure 5.7(a) shows the fuel mix under the different scenarios ana-
lysed. Under the scenario No-Tax, in 2030, there are few fossil fuels: 4% of lignite, 4%
of coal, 1% of natural gas. The energy mix with a fuel tax is slightly different and coal
decreases its share to 2% and natural gas to 0.5%. Under the base and the CO2-Tax
scenarios the energy mix is similar and contains almost no fossil fuels. Moreover, during
the base and the CO2-Tax scenarios, the electricity generation is higher which means
that more electricity is required for the heating sector. It can be concluded that rene-
wable electricity is competitive compared to fossil fuel technologies under the current
circumstances, even without taxes in 2030. Therefore, the year 2050 has not been ana-
lyzed for electricity, since fossil fuels no longer exist in that year.
The heating mix under different scenarios is presented in Figure 5.7(b). The level
of heating production is the same in all years in 2030, however, the share under the
different scenarios is different. In all the scenarios, the level of electrification is high,
also biomass and municipal waste are always present in a similar share and the main
differences are in the share of fossil fuels. Under the No-Tax scenario, coal represents
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Taxes
54
(a) Electricity, 2030
(b) Heating
(c) Hydrogen
Figure 5.7: Energy production mix in different tax scenarios.
9% of the total heating production, lignite 1%, and natural gas 19%. By adding fuel
taxes, the share is similar for coal and lignite, and the only fossil fuel affected is natural
gas that decreases its production to 6%. Environmental taxes (CO2 taxes) have a bigger
impact in the model and completely removed lignite, while natural gas decreased to
6% and coal to 4%. Since under the base scenario, environmental and fuel taxes are
combined, the share of coal and natural gas is decreased even more to 2%.
In 2050, there is slightly more heating production that in 2030, electrification is more
evident and the only fossil fuel remaining is natural gas. In a no-tax scenario, natural
gas accounts for 11% of the total heating sector, this percentage drops to 9% in the fuel
tax scenario and is eliminated in the CO2 and baseline tax scenarios. Different than in
2030, in 2050, biogas is present in all the scenarios accounting for around 7%. Finally,
biomethane is only present under the base scenario. So, although the heating sector is
largely electrifying, taxation can be used to reduce the use of fossil fuels by opening up
the market for renewable gases, mainly for biogas and biomethane. In 2030, biogas is
competitive with other technologies and will be used under the base scenario, however,
biomethane will require additional support to be competitive.
Figure 5.7(c) presents the hydrogen share in different scenarios. Since hydrogen pro-
==PAGE:62==
5.3 Green certificate
55
duction is driven by demand, the level is the same in all the scenarios. Grey hydrogen
is more competitive than blue hydrogen without taxes and it represents the 85% of the
total share in the No-Tax scenario, the 15% left is blue hydrogen. The Fuel-Tax have
the same share as no fuel tax is levied on hydrogen production, but only on electricity
and heat.
Applying an environmental tax to account for grey technology emissions,
blue hydrogen is more competitive and dominates the market with 81%, grey hydrogen
production is reduced to 5% and green hydrogen becomes competitive representing the
14% of the total. In 2050, due to a decrease in cost and an increase in natural gas price,
blue and grey hydrogen become less competitive and most of the share is green. With
no taxes, there is still some (22%) grey hydrogen production in 2050.
As taxes influence the use of fossil fuels, the CO2 emissions are analysed. Figure 5.8
shows the total annual CO2 emissions in millions of tons. In 2030, under a No-Tax sce-
nario, the annual emissions are 295 million tons of CO2, this number decreased to 253 in
the Fuel-Tax scenario. Later, in the CO2-Tax scenario, emissions decreased significantly
to 70 million tons, in the base case these are only 37 million tons. In 2050, due to the
replacement of fossil fuels, there are only emissions in the No-Tax and Fuel-Tax scenario,
these correspond to 22.5 ad 22.4 million tons respectively.
Figure 5.8: CO2 emissions in different tax scenarios.
5.3
Green certificate
Hydrogen certificates will be analysed separately from the biomethane ones, as there is
no competition between these two gases. Therefore, in subsection 5.3.1, the effects of hy-
drogen certificates will be discussed and later in subsection 5.3.2 biomethane certificates
will be analysed.
==PAGE:63==
5.3 Green certificate
56
5.3.1
Certificates for green hydrogen
Certificates were only applied to green hydrogen and they will only be relevant in 2030,
the level of the certificate was set to 2 e/MWh. The average hydrogen price in 2030 is
41.93 e/MWh, therefore, certificates represents only 0.05% the hydrogen price. In 2050,
due to lower electricity prices, higher natural gas prices and technology development,
certificates will not be necessary for green hydrogen to be competitive with grey and
blue hydrogen, as was seen in section 5.1.
The hydrogen production in both scenarios, with and without a certificate, is shown
in Figure 5.9. When having a certificate (Figure 5.9(b), the green hydrogen production
increases from 59 to 285 TWh, increasing its share and accounting for 83% of the produc-
tion in the countries simulated. Moreover, hydrogen is produced in different countries,
France, Sweden and Norway increased their production, while the opposite happened in
the other countries. As the certificate is applied equally to all the countries, hydrogen
production is moved significantly to the countries where the electricity is cheap (France,
Norway and Sweden).
Different from that without a certificate, green hydrogen is now produced in most of
the countries, especially in France, Germany, Norway and Sweden. The remaining blue
is from Italy, Germany and to a lesser extent from other countries. Production of blue
hydrogen dropped from 269 TWh to 57 TWh that represents 17% of the total production.
Finally, grey hydrogen decreased from 15 to only 1.5 TWh (0.4 %). Therefore, by having
a certificate of 2 e/MWh, grey hydrogen is almost out of production, blue hydrogen
represents a minority, while green hydrogen dominates the market.
(a) No certificate
(b) Certificate
Figure 5.9: Hydrogen production share in 2030.
Moreover, as the certificate changed the location of hydrogen production, flows are
also affected. The gross exports of hydrogen are shown in Figure 5.10, Sweden, Denmark
and France are the biggest exporters.
The hydrogen produced in Sweden is sent to
==PAGE:64==
5.3 Green certificate
57
Denmark, the same occurs with Norway where 8.3 TWh are sent to Denmark and
11 TWh to Sweden. Denmark sent 66.3 TWh to the Netherlands, Germany exports
24.6 TWh to Austria, while France transports 25.1 TWh to Belgium and 27.5 TWh
to Switzerland. Finally, Switzerland exports 24.6 TWh to Germany. Then, the final
destination of the hydrogen exports is Germany, Netherlands and Austria. The high
imports to Netherlands and Austria are due to the low national production. The total net
transmission flows are 110 TWh that represents 32% of the total hydrogen production.
Figure 5.10: Gross transmission flows in 2030 with, scenario with certificate.
5.3.2
Certificates for biomethane
For biomethane, the influence of the certificate is also analysed only for 2030. In 2050,
biomethane is present in the future energy mix under the baseline scenario for both,
electricity and heating.
The average biomethane price in the model is 62 e/MWh,
from different simulations, it was found that a certificate price of 12 e/MWh helps
biomethane to enter the market, this represents the 19% of the biomethane price in the
areas simulated.
Figure 5.11 shows the energy mix for electricity and heating with the biomethane
certificate of 12 e/MWh in 2030. Biomethane is used for electricity production in the
Netherlands, Germany, Belgium and Denmark. In Netherlands it accounts for 11% of
the total electricity production, while in Germany is 4%, in Belgium 3% and in Den-
mark 0.1%. Biomethane is more used for heating generation and is present in all the
countries. In Switzerland, biomethane accounts for the 12% of the total heating mix, in
the Netherlands is 6%, in Italy 4%, in Germany and Austria 3% and in the remaining
countries is less than 2%.
It was demonstrated that with a certificate, biomethane is being used in the model in
2030. However, the level of support per MWh is much higher compared to the hydrogen
one and represents a high share of the biomethane cost. The certificate have to be higher
than 12 e/MWh. Therefore, biomethane is not competitive with the other technologies
==PAGE:65==
5.4 Transport
58
(a) Electricity
(b) Heating
Figure 5.11: Energy mix with biomethane certificate of 12 e/MWh in 2030.
for electricity and heating generation, furthermore, the electrification is happening to a
great extend in the heating sector.
5.4
Transport
The optimal scenario decides the optimal distribution between building new hydrogen
pipelines and converting the existing ones for hydrogen, while the restricted scenario con-
strains the conversion to 60% of the total investments. In the base scenario, transmission
flows are not relevant in 2030, thereby, this section presents only results from 2050. The
hydrogen production is the same in the optimal and the restricted scenario, however, the
share of countries where it is produced is different. Figure 5.12 shows the distribution
among different countries under the two scenarios analysed. In the restricted scenario,
the production in France is reduced from 931 TWh to 697 TWh. The difference in
hydrogen production is distributed then among the other countries. In particular, Italy
increases its production from 53 TWh to 200 TWh, Germany also increased its produc-
tion from 344 TWh to 376 TWh, in other countries the change was less significant.
Figure 5.13 presents the installed capacity in hydrogen transmission pipelines un-
der the two scenarios. In the optimal configuration (Figure 5.13(a)), all the hydrogen
transport is done by converting the existing natural gas pipelines. The total transmi-
ssion capacity is 177 GW, from which 79% is only from 4 transmission pipelines: 30%
is connecting France-Switzerland, 19% France-Belgium, 18% Italy-Switzerland and 12%
Netherlands-Belgium. The 20% left of conversion is occurring between the rest of the
countries, Sweden and Norway have only 1% of the total capacity.
On the other side, in Figure 5.13(b), the conversion is restricted to 60% and the model
==PAGE:66==
5.4 Transport
59
Figure 5.12: Hydrogen production in 2050 under different scenarios.
(a) Optimal scenario
(b) Restricting scenario
Figure 5.13: Hydrogen transmission capacity between two countries in 2050.
decides where to invest in new hydrogen-only pipelines. In this case, since the construc-
tion of new pipelines is very expensive, the transmission capacity has been reduced to
half of the baseline scenario. Therefore, only 89 GW of hydrogen transmission is installed
divided in 35 GW for new hydrogen-only pipelines and 54 GW for conversion. The new
hydrogen pipelines are being installed between France-Belgium, France-Switzerland and
Belgium-Netherlands. From the converted natural gas pipelines, distribution is equi-
table among several countries. There are mainly connections between France-Belgium,
France-Italy, France-Germany and France-Switzerland. Furthermore, transmission ca-
pacity between Switzerland-Austria, Switzerland-Germany and Switzerland-Italy is also
important. Once again, Norway and Sweden have very small transmission capacity ins-
talled, this is due to their low hydrogen production and unfavorable location, as they
are far from the countries with the highest hydrogen consumption and transmission cost
==PAGE:67==
5.4 Transport
60
are expensive compared to production.
Moreover, transmission flows will be also affected by transmission capacities, Fi-
gure 5.14 shows the gross hydrogen exports in the restricted scenario.
In the base
scenario (section 5.1), the net exports were 694 TWh, in the restricted scenario, exports
account for 306 TWh. This is due to the lower transmission capacity and the increase in
hydrogen production in a local level. France, Switzerland and Belgium continue being
the largest exporters. French exports account for 54% of the total gross exports and
are mainly to Belgium and Switzerland and to a lesser extent to Germany and Italy.
Switzerland exports hydrogen to Austria, Germany and Italy. While Belgium and Den-
mark exports to Netherlands and Germany. Therefore, Austria, Germany, Italy and the
Netherlands are the countries that import hydrogen.
Figure 5.14: Gross hydrogen exports in 2050. Restricted scenario.
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 6
Analysis
This chapter presents the sensitivity study of the main assumptions and analyses their
influence on the results obtained. Moreover, the limitations of the model are described.
Later, the discussion on the main findings is explained and the research questions raised
in chapter 1 are answered.
6.1
Sensitivity analysis
In this section, the most uncertain parameters will be tested under different values. The
impact of these parameters will be analysed considering the results shown in chapter 5.
These are divided into different sections: natural gas price, tax level, certificate price
and transmission cost.
6.1.1
Tax level
From the energy scenarios results in section 5.2, it was seen that environmental taxes
are the ones having a bigger effect on the heating and the hydrogen production mix. A
sensitivity analysis was carried out in the CO2 tax level and the results are presented in
Figure 6.1. The figure shows the results for 2030 only, since there are no fossil fuels in
2050 as a consequence of increased competitiveness from other renewable technologies.
Figure 6.1(a) illustrates the variation of the energy mix for heating. Electrification of
the energy system continues to be the optimal solution for the heating sector and the
only fossil fuels with a significant share are coal and natural gas. The CO2 tax in the
base scenario was 48 e/tonCO2, by decreasing the CO2 tax by 50% (24 e/tonCO2),
coal and natural gas increase their share to 7% and 10% respectively. This percentage
decreases respectively with an increase of the emission tax. Thereby, when the CO2
level increases by 20% (58 e/tonCO2), coal represents only 0.4% and natural gas 2%.
Fossil fuels are replaced by biogas, biomass and electrification.
On the other side, the hydrogen mix in 2030 is depicted in Figure 6.1. It is noted
that environmental taxes have high impact in the cost of grey hydrogen, therefore, when
the tax decreases by 20% (39 e/tonCO2), grey hydrogen represents 82% of the total
production, while blue and green hydrogen decrease their share compared to the base
case. Under the most extreme scenario, where CO2 prices are reduced by half, grey
hydrogen accounts for 85% of the production and the 15% left is green hydrogen. On
==PAGE:69==
6.1 Sensitivity analysis
62
the contrary, by increasing the CO2 level 20% (58 e/tonCO2), the energy mix does not
change considerably, grey hydrogen is replaced by blue hydrogen.
(a) Energy mix for heating
(b) Energy mix for hydrogen
Figure 6.1: Sensitivity analysis. Environmental tax, 2030.
6.1.2
Natural gas price
The price of natural gas is one of the most uncertain parameters, a reduction in de-
mand could drive lower prices, but, most likely the price will increase in the future to
encourage lower consumption. In the base case scenario, this price was 7.1 e/GJ in
2030. One of the results with the highest influence is the energy mix used for hydrogen.
Therefore, natural gas price was varied from -20% to +20% and the results obtained
in 2030 are shown in Figure 6.2(a). By decreasing the price by 20% (5.7 e/GJ), green
hydrogen is not competitive at all and only grey and blue technologies are present, green
hydrogen accounts for 86% of the total share and the rest is blue-H2. When the natural
gas decreases by 10% (6.4 e/GJ), blue and grey production is reduced and green-H2 is
competitive accounting for 4% of the total share. On the other side, when the natural
gas price is increased by 10% (7.8 e/GJ), grey-H2 is removed, blue hydrogen represents
7% and green is used for the 93% left.
The heating mix can be observed in Figure 6.2(b), where natural gas share increases
with lower natural gas prices, and substitutes biogas and coal. On the other side, when
natural gas prices increase, then biomethane and biogas replace the natural gas con-
sumption. Electricity is constant in all scenarios and fossil and renewable gases are not
competitive with it. Thereby, competition is happening between natural gas, coal, bio-
gas and biomethane.
==PAGE:70==
6.1 Sensitivity analysis
63
(a) Hydrogen mix
(b) Heating mix
Figure 6.2: Sensitivity analysis. Natural gas price, 2030.
6.1.3
Certificate price
The price level of the certificate is unknown, therefore, different prices were tested. For
hydrogen, Figure 6.3(a) shows the hydrogen production by different technologies (left
axis) at different certificate prices (right axis). When the certificate price is 0.5 e/MWh,
the green hydrogen represents 27% of the whole production, blue-H2 accounts for 70%
and the remaining 3% is grey-H2. If the certificate level increases to 1 e/MWh, green-H2
represents 40%, blue decreases to 58% and grey to 2%. At a higher certificate price, the
share of green hydrogen gradually increases. However, the optimal level will be between
2-3 e/MWh, since after this level, the share of green-H2 does not change considerably.
For a certificate price of 3 e/MWh, green-H2 accounts for 94%, blue-H2 for 6% and
grey-H2 is almost non-existent with 0.3%.
(a) Hydrogen
(b) Biomethane
Figure 6.3: Sensitivity analysis. Certificate level for hydrogen and biomethane in 2030.
On the other hand, Figure 6.3(b) illustrates the biomethane consumption (left axis)
with reference to the biomethane certificate level (right axis). Biomethane consumption
is divided between electricity and heating, in all cases, biomethane is used in a higher
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Sensitivity analysis
64
proportion in heating. The minimum certificate level is 12 e/MWh, at this level, the
biomethane production is 77 TWh and represents 2% of the total energy in the sys-
tem. At a certificate price of 14 e/MWh, the biomethane consumption increases to 287
TWh, accounting for 6% of the total energy. Finally, when the certificate increases to
16 e/MWh, the biomethane consumption is 368 TWh and accounts for 8% of the total
energy mix.
In chapter 5, it was seen that hydrogen certificates affect the flows and trade between
different countries. Therefore, the net variation of exports/imports between countries
is depicted in Figure 6.4, at a certificate price of 0.5 e/MWh, hydrogen net exports
are only 22 TWh. When the price increases to 1 e/MWh, net exports increase to 36
TWh. At a certificate price of 2 and 3 e/MWh, the net transmission flows increase
exponentially to 110 and 112 TWh respectively. After this certificate price, the trade
does not increment and remain constant at around 115 TWh.
Figure 6.4: Sensitivity analysis in hydrogen certificate level. Net hydrogen transmi-
ssion flows in 2030.
6.1.4
Transport
In the baseline scenario, the conversion of existing natural gas infrastructure was consi-
dered to be 30% of the investment on new natural gas pipelines.
However, this pa-
rameter can vary between 15-45% and affects both, transmission capacity installed and
transmission flows. As conversion is much cheaper than investments in new hydrogen
pipelines, the model only adapts the existing infrastructure to be able to handle hydro-
gen. The variation in conversion capacity with regards to the conversion cost is shown
in Figure 6.5, where the left axis represents the capacity installed and the right one the
conversion cost. Transmission installed capacity decreases with respect to the conversion
cost. This means that when the conversion is more expensive, the model decides to build
less transmission capacity, therefore, transmission flows are also affected. For instance,
when the conversion cost is 15% the cost of new NG pipelines, the transmission capacity
installed is 232 GW, however, if the cost increases to 45%, the capacity is reduced to
==PAGE:72==
6.2 Limitations
65
142 GW. The reduction in capacity will have a direct impact on exports/imports that
will also decrease.
Figure 6.5: Sensitivity analysis. Hydrogen transmission capacity in 2050.
6.2
Limitations
Balmorel presents different advantages to simulate the energy system in Europe, one of
them is that is an open software and does not require a license to be used. It allows to
implement different future energy scenarios and has several technologies implement for
electricity and heating. However, like any model, it has some limitations that have to
be considered when analysing the results. The main limitations are the following:
• Geographical resolution: The model includes only 10 countries in Western Europe
and considers them as an isolated area. Therefore, the connections and dependen-
cies with the rest of Europe are not considered. Including the countries in Eastern
and Southern Europe could have changed the results, especially in transmission
flows for electricity, heating and hydrogen. Moreover, Scandinavian countries and
Germany are divided into regions and areas that account for the bidding areas
for electricity or district heating areas, however, for the rest of the countries, it is
considered that energy is produced and transmitted from the center of the country
to others. Thereby, local distribution and production of energy are not captured
by the model.
• Temporal resolution: During the simulation, 4 weeks were considered to simulate
a whole year. The optimisation was done hourly, therefore 672 hours where used
instead of 8760. This was done to decrease computational time.
• New investments: The model simulates future energy systems considering new in-
vestments, however, in reality, there are existing technologies that will be operating
until at least 2030 and it is not feasible to replace them in the short term.
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Discussion on the main findings
66
• Optimisation: Balmorel does an hourly optimisation in investments considering
the countries as a whole area. Therefore, the optimisation assumes perfectly com-
petitive markets to maximise social welfare and achieve the lowest cost in the
energy system. However, in reality, this does not happen and each country seeks
its own progress.
• Energy system limitations: Balmorel is very well developed in the electricity and
heating sectors since these have been the focus in most of the studies. However,
for renewable gases and especially for hydrogen there are some limitations. First,
the production of blue and grey hydrogen is not modelled, but instead, a param-
eter called ”fuel cost” that considers blue H2 and grey H2 as exogenous fuels is
introduced. In addition, hydrogen does not compete or interact with biomethane
and natural gas, as production is restricted by an exogenous demand.
• Energy systems: The model does not take into account the demand for natural
gas as a fuel in energy-intensive industries, where hydrogen has great potential to
replace natural gas. Therefore, only some sectors are included as an aggregated
extra demand, but restrictions on the type of fuels that can be used for each
application are missing.
• Data included: As Balmorel is an open source model, the data has been included
by many institutions and contributors, therefore several assumptions have been
made to analyse and simplify the energy model. During this thesis, technologies
for electricity and heating were not modified, but only the ones for biomethane
and hydrogen production. Some of the main assumptions made are described in
section 4.2. Furthermore, fast technological developments have taken place in the
last years, and their implementation could lead to different results.
6.3
Discussion on the main findings
The energy system model, Balmorel, allows having an hourly optimisation of the energy
system. Thus, simulating the interactions between different sectors. The results ob-
tained are constrained and dependent on the input data of the model. For instance,
renewable energy, i.e. solar, hydro and wind, are already competitive against conven-
tional technologies in 2030. However, different considerations in cost could have lead
to a different share. In this thesis, the characteristics of the different technologies were
not modified from the reference model and further analysis on this area can change the
electricity mix.
Due to the high share of renewables in electricity, the average electricity prices are
low and this causes the electrification of the heating sector. Heat pumps and electric boi-
lers are the main technologies used to generate heating and account for around 70-75%
of the total share. The heating mix is sensitive to electricity prices and in periods where
==PAGE:74==
6.3 Discussion on the main findings
67
the electricity is expensive, other technologies such as biogas replace electrification. Fos-
sil fuels are almost phased out in 2030 and are completely non-existent in 2050. These
results are affected by the specific characteristics of the technologies and especially by
fuel costs.
This thesis aimed to study the substitution of renewable gases for natural gas, howe-
ver, due to the low share of this fuel in the future energy system, the effect was not
obvious. Falling natural gas prices increase the share of natural gas, in this case, there
is competition between natural gas, biogas and biomethane. This effect is also seen with
taxes, a high tax detail was attempted, however the share of fossil fuels was already low
even without taxes and the expected effect is occurring, but on a smaller scale.
The model considers future new investments, but in reality, there are many technolo-
gies that will still exist in 2030 and therefore fossil fuels will have a larger share. Taxes
influence the use of fossil fuels in a negative way, this means that the EU ETS system
is a good regulatory instrument to decrease the carbon emissions. The effect of the EU
ETS system was seen in this thesis, but at a relative low level. It is important to notice
that not all the energy system is modelled in Balmorel, but only electricity, heating and
hydrogen, therefore, energy intensive sectors as transport and industry are not included.
In reality, environmental taxes have a high impact on energy intensive industries.
Furthermore, tax levels are affecting the use of fossil fuels in the results. The carbon
price in this study was considered to be 48 e/tonCO2 in 2030. Some studies point
out that the level will be around 50 e/tonCO2 [70, 74], however, this level was already
achieved this year [75]. Thereby, the CO2 price will be much higher causing the replace-
ment of fossil fuels with renewable energy. The average level can be 40 e/tonCO2 in
2021 and could rise to 80 e/tonCO2 in 2030. The exponential increase in carbon price
is to ensure the 55% reduction in emissions by 2030 and achieve EU climate neutrality
by 2050.
In the base scenario, hydrogen in 2030 is produced locally according to the demand
and thereby, there are not a lot of flows occurring. However, in 2050, a stratification
is happening as all the hydrogen is green and the production location is driven mainly
by low electricity prices. France is by far the largest producer as electricity is cheap
in this country. While other countries that have relatively high demand (Netherlands,
Italy and Belgium) are not producing, but only importing energy. Therefore, it was
found that hydrogen production is highly dependent on three factors: electricity prices,
hydrogen transmission cost and demand. These factors are very uncertain and a change
on technology characteristics and demand will lead to different results.
Hydrogen production is constrained by demand, which is a constant parameter
throughout the year. Hourly variable demand was not considered, thereby, the model
does not capture demand effects. But, in reality hydrogen production will vary accor-
ding to the demand at a specific time. Also, hydrogen demand is purely exogenous
==PAGE:75==
6.3 Discussion on the main findings
68
and its distribution by country corresponds to the current distribution. However, this
may change in the future and countries that have low demand now may have higher
demand later. Moreover, the high production in France resulted to be a combination
between cheap electricity prices and a favourable location, as it is close to the countries
with high demand. Electricity prices are cheap also in Sweden and Norway, however,
due to their location, it is not convenient to transport hydrogen to the central/southern
Euro countries. There is therefore a trade-off between production and transmission costs.
Hydrogen will be traded across countries, the potential for transmission flows in
2030 are relatively low and only occurring in the North. But in 2050, almost half of the
production is traded across borders. France is the largest exporter as it produces much
more than its demand, while Italy, Netherlands and Belgium are the countries impor-
ting hydrogen. These flows may change if the price of electricity falls in the countries
importing hydrogen. For instance, it can be feasible to produce green hydrogen using
solar PV technology in Italy. SNAM [76] reported that hydrogen production with PV in
Italy is cost-competitive in the country. Therefore, hydrogen flows can change if lower
costs of solar PV are achieved compared to the ones in France, however, this effect was
not studied in the project.
Certificates, implemented as lower OPEX cost for hydrogen, proved to be a useful
instrument to accelerate green hydrogen production in 2030. In a scenario where only
taxes are taken into account (baseline scenario), most hydrogen production was blue
and very little grey hydrogen existed. But, with the implementation of certificates the
share of green energy increases rapidly. The effect is influenced by the certificate level,
with a certificate of 2 e/MWh the green-H2 share is already 83%. This indicates that
with the assumptions made, the certificate level will not be much larger than the one of
electricity that is around 0.8-1 e/MWh.
In the base case, the certificate level was set to 2 e/MWh and the average hydro-
gen price in 2030 was 42 e/MWh, which means that the certificate level accounts for
5% of the hydrogen price. For electricity, certificates represent 1-2.5% of the electricity
price. Additionally, the average prices for hydrogen reported by IEA [77] are between
48 e/MWh- 116 e/MWh in 2019, and 20-50 e/MWh in 2060. According to the results,
the average prices in 2030 and 2050 were 42 and 36 e/MWh respectively. Therefore,
the prices obtained in this project are within the range reported by the International
Energy Agency.
The implementation of certificates will drive a larger trade as the production among
the countries is affected.
Without a certificate, only 15.5 TWh were traded across
borders in 2030, this represents 4.5% of the total production. However, with the imple-
mentation of a green certificate of 2 e/MWh, the net exports increased to 110 TWh
that is 32% of the total hydrogen production. Thus, hydrogen certificates can drive
trade between different countries.
==PAGE:76==
6.4 Research questions
69
Biomethane is already used in 2050 without any certificate, thus this instrument
was only modelled in 2030. Compared to hydrogen, biomethane certificates are higher
and its level was found to be at least 12 e/MWh in 2030. Biomethane is therefore
not competitive in the short term compared with other renewable technologies and es-
pecially compared to electricity. Moreover, biomethane is used mainly in the heating
sector and to a lesser extent in electricity production. Furthermore, as hydrogen pro-
duction is driven by exogenous demand, hydrogen does not compete with natural gas
and biomethane. Therefore, it is not clear whether or not hydrogen is competitive with
other gases.
Finally, it was found that the most optimal solution for transport hydrogen at large
distances will be to convert existing natural gas pipelines. In reality, as natural gas
will continue to be used in the future, conversion must be curtailed and new hydrogen
pipelines must be built. As trades in 2030 were small, the analysis was done only in 2050.
By increasing the conversion cost of pipelines, the transmission capacity was reduced,
which affected not only the production location of hydrogen, but also the transmission
flows. An alternative scenario was also made, in which the model was forced to invest
in new hydrogen pipelines. In the alternative scenario, 40% of the transmission infras-
tructure was forced to be new hydrogen-only pipelines and 60% conversion of existing
natural gas pipelines.
The results in the restricted scenario for hydrogen transmission showed a considerable
decrease in transmission capacity and promoted local hydrogen production. Therefore,
the transmission flows were reduced significantly in comparison with the base scenario.
Allowing the optimal conversion of pipelines, the net exports accounted for 694 TWh,
while restricting the model causes a decrease in the net exports to 306 TWh. In reality,
how the distribution will be in the future is uncertain, investments will vary depending on
the demand and production locations as well as the cost of infrastructure. The European
Hydrogen Backbone [57] set the share of new and conversion of pipelines to be 31% for
new hydrogen-only and 69% for conversion of existing natural gas pipelines, but in reality,
this percentage will depend on the industry and country-specific investments.
6.4
Research questions
•
How certificates are addressed in the current renewable gas regulation?
The main regulatory document for the development of future energy systems in
Europe is the Renewable Energy Directive 2018/2001/EU. The RED II addressed
the topic of certificates for renewable gases, calling for their implementation in a
common EU platform as the existing one for electricity. It also imposed the mass
balance approach to account properly for the quantities and avoid double-counting.
Under this approach, energy can be traded only between countries that share a
physical boundary and the energy transmitted is measured at gas transport entry-
==PAGE:77==
6.4 Research questions
70
exit points. Moreover, the RED II calls for the standardization of the certificates,
this process and their management will be done through the European Renewable
Gas Register.
• How does the certificate system for renewable gas work?
There is no common EU certificate for renewable gases, different projects are star-
ting to look into a common platform to unify and manage the national registries.
Currently, certificates are registered in a national level and are only for biomethane,
however, these are not standardized and the main characteristics vary between
countries. Biomethane is traded mainly between Denmark and other countries
i.e. Sweden, Switzerland and Germany. Also, there is no certificate that includes
hydrogen, however, an ongoing project ”CertifHy” is operating in pilot plants and
is the first approach to a hydrogen certificate.
CertifHy includes two types of
certificate, one for green hydrogen and another for blue.
• What do future energy scenarios based on optimisation with Balmorel look like?
The energy model Balmorel was used to simulate the electricity, heating and hy-
drogen mix in 2030 and 2050, in the base model, fuel and environmental taxes were
included. The future energy mix for electricity is mainly using hydro-energy, wind,
solar and nuclear, and some coal is also present in 2030, however, it represents less
than 5% of the total mix. In 2050, fossil fuels won’t appear in the electricity mix.
On the other side, the heating sector is been electrified due to low electricity prices
caused by a high share of renewable energy. In 2030, biogas accounts for 5% of the
total heat, and by 2050 biomethane is also competitive. Biomethane represents
3% of the heating sector in 2050 and biogas 10%.
Finally, blue hydrogen will account for the majority of the hydrogen demand in
2030, grey hydrogen represents a small proportion (4%) and green hydrogen is
produced in Norway, Sweden and France where electricity prices are low. In 2050,
all the hydrogen will be green due to low electricity prices compared to the natural
gas one. Finally, the production will be placed in countries where electricity is
cheaper.
• How taxes influence future energy mix?
Two types of taxes were analysed in this project, environmental taxes in the form
of CO2 tax and fuel taxes for fossil fuels used in heating and electricity production.
Environmental taxes were found to have the greatest impact on the future energy
system and their level determines the existence and share of fossil fuels in the
future energy mix. Thus, an increase in the price of CO2 will drive a decrease
in the use of natural gas and coal for heating production, leading to competition
between natural gas, biogas and biomethane. Hydrogen will be also affected by
this type of tax that will make grey hydrogen more competitive compared to blue
and green hydrogen. In case of low CO2 price, grey hydrogen will dominate the
market in 2030, but if they rise, blue hydrogen will.
==PAGE:78==
6.4 Research questions
71
• How much certificates affect the production of hydrogen?
Certificates for hydrogen were implemented at a level of 2 e/MWh. The final
production level is not affected by certificates since is constrained by its demand,
however, it changes the distribution of technologies used. Certificates were only
analysed in 2030 since in 2050, green hydrogen is already competitive. In a scenario
without certificates, green hydrogen represents 17%, while with the certificate of
2 e/MWh, the share increased to 83%.
• How will certificates affect international trade of hydrogen?
As green hydrogen dominates the market in a scenario with a certificate, the geo-
graphical production is also affected and green-H2 is produced in countries with the
lowest electricity prices. With the segregation of the production location, transmi-
ssion flows are also affected. Exports are mainly from countries where hydrogen
production is high and demand is low, i.e. France, Norway and Sweden. Nether-
lands, Germany, Belgium and Austria will be importers as high electricity prices
drive low hydrogen production. The potential for hydrogen certificate trade in
2030 is 110-115 TWh depending on the certificate level.
• What is the possible future of hydrogen transport?
The most cost-effective way of transporting hydrogen is through pipelines. Other
means of transport are relevant for shorter distances, but these details are not
captured by the model. For pipeline investments, two options were included, one
was the conversion of existing pipelines and the other was to build new hydrogen
infrastructure. Considering that conversion cost represents only between 10-45%
the cost of new hydrogen pipelines, the optimal solution will be to only convert
the existing natural gas pipelines. As transmission flows are much lower in 2030
than in 2050, different conversion costs were analysed only in 2050 where the hy-
drogen mix is completely green. Decreasing the cost of conversion drives to lower
transmission capacity and therefore lower flows.
The decrease in transmission
comes with a change in the production’s location, which means that in some coun-
tries, is cheaper to produce green-H2 at higher electricity prices than invest in new
hydrogen pipelines.
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusions
Achieving climate neutrality by 2050 requires an energy transition to renewable energies.
In this context, sectors other than electricity must be decarbonised. Renewable gases
can be used as alternative fuels, however, under the current situation, renewable gases
do not compete with conventional technologies. The aim of this study was to model and
analyse the influence of taxes and certificates in future energy systems. Like natural
gas and electricity, renewable gases will be traded across borders, therefore transport
through pipelines was also studied.
Certificates as guarantees of origin are currently used in electricity and biomethane.
In the case of electricity, there is a common platform and a well-established market, but
for biomethane, this is not the case. Biomethane certificates only exist at national level,
although the Renewable Energy Directive calls for a European certification platform,
as well as a common standard certificate to be able to market renewable gases across
borders. Trade in renewable gases occurs mainly due to biomethane transfers and the
main exporter is Denmark. On the other side, the countries importing biomethane are
Sweden, Germany and Switzerland. The trade of certificates is done through power
purchase agreements and the level of the certificates is unknown.
The energy system model, Balmorel was used to simulate the electricity, heating
and hydrogen sectors under different scenarios. According to the results, in a scenario
with environmental and fuel taxes, renewable electricity is highly competitive against
conventional technologies and therefore, the share of fossil fuels in the electricity sector
is marginal. The high share of renewables in electricity is reflected in low electricity
prices and thereby, the heating sector is also electrified. Electric heating accounts for
70-75% of the total heating production, while natural gas and coal are present only in
2030 and in 2050 these are replaced by biomethane and biogas. Therefore, biomethane
and biogas can replace natural gas in the heating sector.
Hydrogen was simulated as an exogenous parameter and the competition between
this fuel and natural gas is not considered. In 2030, 79% of the hydrogen production
will be blue, 17% green and 4% grey. Environmental taxes limit the production of grey
hydrogen which increases the competitiveness of technology with Carbon Capture and
Storage over that without it. In addition, in 2030, the production of hydrogen is done
at a national level according to the demand and the potential of trade is 15.5 TWh. By
2050, green hydrogen is competitive, and its production is highly dependent on electri-
city prices and demand location. In 2050, due to the concentration of production in
==PAGE:80==
7 Conclusions
73
certain countries, net transport flows will represent 46% of total production.
Taxes have almost no effect on the electricity mix and in a scenario without taxes,
9% of the energy mix are fossil fuels from which only 1% is natural gas in 2030; in 2050
fossil fuels are removed from electricity production. In the heating sector, in a scenario
with taxes, natural gas represents 2% of the total production. But, in a scenario without
them, natural gas share increases to 19% in 2030 and to 11% in 2050. Hydrogen has
a similar effect, in a scenario with taxes, grey hydrogen share accounts for 4% in 2030
and does not exist in 2050. However, in a scenario without taxes, grey hydrogen share
increases to 85% in 2030 and to 22% in 2050.
Already with a certificate between 2-3 e/MWh, most of the hydrogen production
will be shifted to green technology. With a certificate of 2 e/MWh, the share of green
hydrogen increases from 17% to 83%. Certificates impact also the location of hydrogen
production and thereby the transmission flows. Certificate potential in 2030 is 110 TWh
and represents 32% of the total hydrogen production. The countries exporting hydro-
gen are France, Sweden and Norway where electricity prices are low and production
is higher than demand. The potential importing countries are Netherlands, Germany,
Austria and Belgium. Biomethane is not competitive with other technologies in 2030,
therefore, a high level of certificate is required. The minimum level found in 2030 is 12
e/MWh. Finally, biomethane is specially used in the heating sector.
According to the literature review, the most eﬀicient way to transport hydrogen at
large distances is through pipelines. Other means of transport can be relevant for local
distribution, but those were not studied. The optimal option will only be to convert
existing natural gas pipelines, however, in reality investments in new hydrogen pipelines
will be done. The conversion cost will affect the installed transmission capacity and
thereby the transmission flows. Higher transmission costs translate into higher local
hydrogen production and lower transmission capacity.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
European Commission. 2050 long-term strategy. 2019. url: https://ec.europa.
eu/clima/policies/strategies/2050_en (visited on 02/08/2021).
[2]
European Environmental Agency. Source of EU greenhouse gas emission by source
2017. 2017. url: https : / / ec . europa . eu / eurostat / cache / infographs /
energy/bloc-4a.html (visited on 02/08/2021).
[3]
European Commission. European Green Deal. 2019. url: https://ec.europa.
eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/fs_19_6714 (visited on 02/08/2021).
[4]
European
Commission.
Energy
roadmap
2050.
2012.
url:
https : / /
europeanpowergeneration.eu/files/Energy_Roadmap_2050pdf.pdf (visited
on 02/08/2021).
[5]
The International Council of Clean Transportation. Gas definitions for the Euro-
pean Union. European Commission, 2019. url: https://ec.europa.eu/info/
sites/info/files/icct_-_gas_definitions_for_the_european_union.pdf
(visited on 02/27/2021).
[6]
United States Environmental Protection Agency. How Does Anaerobic Digestion
Work? United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2021. url: https://
www . epa . gov / agstar / how - does - anaerobic - digestion - work (visited on
02/27/2021).
[7]
International Energy Agency. An introduction to biogas and biomethane. Interna-
tional Energy Agency, 2021. url: https://www.iea.org/reports/outlook-for-
biogas-and-biomethane-prospects-for-organic-growth/an-introduction-
to-biogas-and-biomethane (visited on 02/27/2021).
[8]
Moraga González José, Mulder Machiel, and Perey Peter. Future markets for rene-
wable gases and hydrogen. 2019.
[9]
Future Gas. Future Gas Project. 2020. url: https://futuregas.dk/wp-content/
uploads/2020/10/FG-Final-report-5-10.pdf (visited on 02/08/2021).
[10]
David C. Broadstock, Raymond Li, and Linjin Wang. “Integration reforms in the
European natural gas market: A rolling-window spillover analysis.” In: Energy
Economics 92 (2020), p. 104939. issn: 0140-9883. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.eneco.2020.104939. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0140988320302796.
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
75
[11]
European Biogas Association. Biomethane with bright opportunities towards the
2030 target. 2021. url: https://www.europeanbiogas.eu/biomethane-bright-
opportunities-towards-2030-target/ (visited on 04/10/2021).
[12]
Matthias Schimmel, Daan Peters, Kees van der Leun. Setting a binding target for
11% renewable gas. 2021. url: https://gasforclimate2050.eu/publications/
(visited on 04/10/2021).
[13]
Carmen Wouters, Maud Buseman, Juriaan van Tilburg, Tom Berg, Jan Cihlar, Ain-
hoa Villar Lejarreta, Jaro Jens, Anthony Wang, Daan Peters, Kees van der Leun.
2020 Market state and trends report. 2021. url: https://gasforclimate2050.
eu/publications/ (visited on 04/10/2021).
[14]
European Commission. A hydrogen strategy for a climate-neutral Europe. 2021.
url: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/hydrogen_strategy.
pdf (visited on 04/10/2021).
[15]
ENERGINET. Winds of change in a hydrogen perspective. PtX Strategic Action
Plan. 2019.
[16]
Manuel Kuehn. Siemens UAE: ”Hydrogen – Bridging Sectors and Regions”. 24th
World Energy Congress, 2019. url: https://www.cigre.org/article/GB/
hydrogen - power - to - gas - p2g - and - gas - to - power - g2p - interesting -
technologies-which-need-additional-rd-and-analyses-within-a-system-
approach (visited on 02/10/2021).
[17]
Charlotte van Leeuwen and Machiel Mulder. “Power-to-gas in electricity markets
dominated by renewables.” In: Applied Energy 232 (2018), pp. 258–272. issn: 0306-
2619. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.09.217. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261918315319.
[18]
Bin Miao and Siew Hwa Chan. “The economic feasibility study of a 100-MW
Power-to-Gas plant.” In: International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 44.38 (2019).
Special Issue on HYPOTHESIS XIII, pp. 20978–20986. issn: 0360-3199. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.02.044. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360319919305932.
[19]
Grazia Leonzio. “Design and feasibility analysis of a Power-to-Gas plant in Ger-
many.” In: Journal of Cleaner Production 162 (2017), pp. 609–623. issn: 0959-
6526. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.05.168. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652617311204.
[20]
Vibeke Højberg Strebøl. AFeasibility study of Power to Gas in the Danish energy
system. 2019.
[21]
Manuel Götz et al. “Renewable Power-to-Gas: A technological and economic re-
view.” In: Renewable Energy 85 (2016), pp. 1371–1390. issn: 0960-1481. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2015.07.066. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960148115301610.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
76
[22]
David Mavins Marissa Moultak Matthias Schimmel Kees van der Leun Daan Pe-
ters Maud Buseman Anthony Wang Jaro Jens. Analysing future demand, sup-
ply, and transport of hydrogen. 2021. url: https://gasforclimate2050.eu/
publications/ (visited on 06/10/2021).
[23]
Fuel Cells and Hydrogen 2 Joint Undertaking. Hydrogen roadmap Europe. 2019.
url: https : / / www . fch . europa . eu / sites / default / files / Hydrogen %
20Roadmap%20Europe_Report.pdf (visited on 03/10/2021).
[24]
Julia de Frutos Cachorro, Gwen Willeghems, and Jeroen Buysse. “Exploring in-
vestment potential in a context of nuclear phase-out uncertainty: Perfect vs. im-
perfect electricity markets.” In: Energy Policy 144 (2020), p. 111640. issn: 0301-
4215. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2020.111640. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421520303736.
[25]
Staffan Jacobsson, Anna Bergek, and Björn Sandén. “Improving the European
Commission’s analytical base for designing instrument mixes in the energy sector:
Market failures versus system weaknesses.” In: Energy Research Social Science 33
(2017). Policy mixes for energy transitions, pp. 11–20. issn: 2214-6296. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.09.009. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S221462961730275X.
[26]
Aad Correljé. “The European Natural Gas Market.” In: Current Sustainable/Re-
newable Energy Reports 3 (Sept. 2016). doi: 10.1007/s40518-016-0048-y.
[27]
Tara Sabbagh Amirkhizi. FutureGas- Markets and Regulation for Renewable Gases
in an Integrated Energy System. 2020.
[28]
Gemma Toop Sacha Alberici Ismail Yildiz Jasper van de Staaij Arno van den Bos.
Analysis of the operation of the mass balance system and alternatives. 2012. url:
https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/ener/files/documents/2013_task_1_
mass_balance_and_alternatives.pdf (visited on 02/18/2021).
[29]
European Parliament. Renewable Energy Directive (2018/2001/EU). 2018. url:
https://eur- lex.europa.eu/legal- content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:
32018L2001&from=EN (visited on 02/18/2021).
[30]
European Parliament. Renewable Energy Directive (2009/28/EC). 2009. url:
https://eur- lex.europa.eu/legal- content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:
32009L0028&from=EN (visited on 03/01/2021).
[31]
European Union Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators. About ACER.
2020. url: https://www.acer.europa.eu/en/The_agency/Pages/default.
aspx (visited on 03/03/2021).
[32]
European Renewable Gas Registry. The core principles of the ERGaR RED MB
scheme. European Renewable Gas Registry, 2021. url: http://www.ergar.org/
mass-balance/ (visited on 02/18/2021).
[33]
Association of Issuing Bodies. Principles Rules of Operation. Association of Issuing
Bodies, 2020. url: https://www.aib-net.org/eecs/eecsr-rules (visited on
02/23/2021).
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
77
[34]
CertifHy. Project description. CertifHy, 2021. url: https://www.certifhy.eu/
project-description/project-description.html (visited on 02/23/2021).
[35]
CertifHy. CertifHy - The first European Guarantee of Origin for Green Low Carbon
Hydrogen. CertifHy, 2021. url: http://www.certifhy.eu/images/media/files/
CertifHy_Leaflet_final-compressed.pdf (visited on 05/23/2021).
[36]
CertifHy. CertifHy Scheme. CertifHy, 2019. url: https : / / www . certifhy .
eu / images / media / files / CertifHy _ 2 _ deliverables / CertifHy _ Scheme -
Document_V1-0_2019-03-11_endorsed.pdf (visited on 05/23/2021).
[37]
CertifHy. CertifHy phase III. CertifHy, 2020. url: https://www.certifhy.eu/
images/media/files/201214_Press_release_CertifHy_3_Launch_EN_Final.
pdf (visited on 02/23/2021).
[38]
Deutsche
Energie-Agentur.
Branchenbarometer
Biomethan
2020.
Deutsche
Energie-Agentur, 2020. url: https : / / www . dena . de / fileadmin / dena /
Publikationen/PDFs/2020/Brachenbarometer_Biomethan_2020.pdf (visited
on 03/02/2021).
[39]
Energinet. Certificates of biogas in numbers. Energinet, 2021. url: https : / /
energinet.dk/Gas/Biogas/Certifikater-i-tal (visited on 03/02/2021).
[40]
AGCS Biomethan Register Austria. Biomethane statistics 2020. 2020. url: https:
//www.biomethanregister.at/de/statistik/2020 (visited on 03/02/2021).
[41]
Vertogas. Newsletter. Vertoga, 2021. url: https : / / www . vertogas . nl /
hoofdmenu/nieuws/newsletter-january-2021 (visited on 05/22/2021).
[42]
Manuel Kuehn. Association of issuing bodies. Association of issuing bodies, 2021.
url: https://www.aib-net.org/certification/certificates-supported/
renewable-energy-guarantees-origin.
[43]
Association of Issuing Bodies. Types of certificate. What is a EECS certificate?
Association of Issuing Bodies, 2021. url: https://www.aib-net.org/faq/types-
certificate (visited on 02/23/2021).
[44]
Association of Issuing Bodies. Statistics. Association of Issuing Bodies, 2021. url:
https://www.aib-net.org/facts/market-information/statistics (visited
on 02/23/2021).
[45]
Daan Hulshof, Catrinus Jepma, and Machiel Mulder. “Performance of markets for
European renewable energy certificates.” In: Energy Policy 128 (2019), pp. 697–710.
issn: 0301-4215. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2019.01.051. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301421519300709.
[46]
Lindberg Tom. The European market for renewable energy reaches new heightse.
2019. url: https://www.ecohz.com/press-releases/the-european-market-
for-renewable-energy-reaches-new-heights/ (visited on 04/30/2021).
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
78
[47]
Kern Timo. European day-ahead electricity prices in 2020. 2021. url: https :
/ / www . ffegmbh . de / kompetenzen / wissenschaftliche - analysen - system -
und-energiemaerkte/strommarkt/1041-european-day-ahead-electricity-
prices-in-2020 (visited on 06/03/2021).
[48]
European Commission. Council directive 2003/96/EC. European Commission,
2003. url: https : / / eur - lex . europa . eu / legal - content / EN / TXT / PDF /
?uri=CELEX:32003L0096&from=EN (visited on 03/16/2021).
[49]
European Comission. EU Emissions Trading System. 2021. url: https://ec.
europa.eu/clima/policies/ets_en (visited on 06/03/2021).
[50]
Mihnea Cătuţi, Christian Egenhofer Milan Elkerbout. The future of gas in Europe:
Review of recent studies on the future of gas. 2019. url: https://www.ceps.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2019/08/RR2019- 03_Future- of- gas- in- Europe.pdf
(visited on 06/05/2021).
[51]
L. Maggioni, C. Pieroni. Report on the biomethane injection into national gas
grid. 2016. url: https://ec.europa.eu/research/participants/documents/
downloadPublic ? documentIds = 080166e5abba7376 & appId = PPGMS (visited on
06/05/2021).
[52]
Wolfgang Urban. “16 - Biomethane injection into natural gas networks.” In: The
Biogas Handbook. Ed. by Arthur Wellinger, Jerry Murphy, and David Baxter.
Woodhead Publishing Series in Energy. Woodhead Publishing, 2013, pp. 378–403.
isbn: 978-0-85709-498-8. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1533 / 9780857097415 .
3 . 378. url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
B9780857094988500166.
[53]
M. W. Melaina, O. Antonia, and M. Penev. Blending Hydrogen into Natural Gas
Pipeline Networks: A Review of Key Issues. 2010. url: https://www.nrel.gov/
docs/fy13osti/51995.pdf (visited on 05/05/2021).
[54]
Kunihiro Takahashi. “Transportation of hydrogen by pipeline.” In: Energy carriers
and conversion systems 2 (). url: http://www.eolss.net/sample-chapters/
c08/E3-13-08-01.pdf.
[55]
Tomasz Wlodek et al. “Thermodynamic analysis of hydrogen pipeline transporta-
tion – selected aspects.” In: AGH DRILLING, OIL, GAS 33 (May 2016), pp. 379–
396. doi: 10.7494/drill.2016.33.2.379.
[56]
Ulf Bossel. “Does a Hydrogen Economy Make Sense?” In: Proceedings of the IEEE
94.10 (2006), pp. 1826–1837. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2006.883715.
[57]
European Hydrogen Backbone. 2020. url: https://gasforclimate2050.eu/sdm_
downloads/european-hydrogen-backbone/ (visited on 06/05/2021).
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography
79
[58]
Creos, DESFA, Elering, Enagás, Energinet, Eustream, FGSZ, Fluxys Bel-
gium, Gasgrid Finland, Gasunie, GAZ-SYSTEM, GCA, GNI, GRTgaz, National
Grid, NET4GAS, Nordion Energi, OGE, ONTRAS, Plinovodi, Snam, TAG,
Teréga. Extending the European Hydrogen Backbone. 2021. url: https : / /
gasforclimate2050.eu/sdm_downloads/european-hydrogen-backbone/ (vis-
ited on 06/05/2021).
[59]
U.S. Department of Energy. Hydrogen Pipelines. 2021. url: https://www.energy.
gov/eere/fuelcells/hydrogen-pipelines (visited on 06/05/2021).
[60]
Andrzej Witkowski et al. “Comprehensive analysis of hydrogen compression and
pipeline transportation from thermodynamics and safety aspects.” In: Energy 141
(2017), pp. 2508–2518. issn: 0360-5442. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
energy . 2017 . 05 . 141. url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science /
article/pii/S036054421730899X.
[61]
Yi-Ming Wei et al. “Progress in energy complex system modelling and analysis.”
In: International Journal of Global Energy Issues 25 (Feb. 2006). doi: 10.1504/
IJGEI.2006.008387.
[62]
Lisa M.H. Hall and Alastair R. Buckley. “A review of energy systems models
in the UK: Prevalent usage and categorisation.” In: Applied Energy 169 (2016),
pp. 607–628. issn: 0306-2619. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.
2016.02.044. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261916301672.
[63]
Frauke Wiese et al. “A qualitative evaluation approach for energy system modelling
frameworks.” In: Energy, Sustainability and Society 8.1 (2018), pp. 1–16.
[64]
Matteo Giacomo Prina et al. “Classification and challenges of bottom-up energy
system models - A review.” In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 129
(2020), p. 109917. issn: 1364-0321. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.
2020.109917. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1364032120302082.
[65]
Hans-Kristian Ringkjøb, Peter M. Haugan, and Ida Marie Solbrekke. “A review
of modelling tools for energy and electricity systems with large shares of variable
renewables.” In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 96 (2018), pp. 440–459.
issn: 1364-0321. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2018.08.002. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032118305690.
[66]
Ea Energy Analyses. Balmorel user guide. 2018. url: https://usercontent.
one/wp/www.eaedu.dk/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Balmorel-manual.pdf
(visited on 03/04/2021).
[67]
M. Petersen R. Schmidt R. Bøg P.E. Gronheit H.V. Larsen J. Munksgaard J. Ram-
skov M.-R. Esop G. Klavs A. Galinis R. Paprocki M. Wawrzyszczuk A. Gloukhov
H. Ravn M. Hindsberger. Balmorel:A Model for Analyses of the Electricity and
CHP Markets in the Baltic Sea Region. 2001. url: http://www.balmorel.com/
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
80
images/downloads/balmorel-a-model-for-analyses-of-the-electricity-
and-chp-markets-in-the-baltic-sea-region.pdf (visited on 03/04/2021).
[68]
Hans Ravn. Balmorel. Energy System Model. 2021. url: http://balmorel.com/
(visited on 03/04/2021).
[69]
Frauke Wiese et al. “Balmorel open source energy system model.” In: Energy Strat-
egy Reviews 20 (2018), pp. 26–34. issn: 2211-467X. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.esr.2018.01.003. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2211467X18300038.
[70]
Robert C. Pietzcker, Sebastian Osorio, and Renato Rodrigues. “Tightening EU
ETS targets in line with the European Green Deal: Impacts on the decarbonization
of the EU power sector.” In: Applied Energy 293 (2021), p. 116914. issn: 0306-
2619. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.116914. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261921003962.
[71]
European Commission. Taxes in Europe. European Commission, 2021. url: https:
//ec.europa.eu/taxation_customs/tedb/splSearchForm.html (visited on
04/16/2021).
[72]
Xinyu Li and Machiel Mulder. Value of Power-to-Gas as a Flexibility Option in
Integrated Electricity and Hydrogen Markets. 2021. url: https://www.superp2g.
eu/fileadmin/user_upload/2021004-eef-def.pdf (visited on 06/10/2021).
[73]
International Energy Agency. Sustainable supply potential and costs. 2021. url:
https://www.iea.org/reports/outlook- for- biogas- and- biomethane-
prospects-for-organic-growth/sustainable-supply-potential-and-costs
(visited on 06/25/2021).
[74]
Stig Schjølset. The MSR: Impact on market balance and prices. 2021. url: https:
//ec.europa.eu/clima/sites/clima/files/docs/0094/thomson_reuters_
point_carbon_en.pdf (visited on 07/10/2021).
[75]
Sam Meredith. Why the world’s largest carbon market is experiencing a boom like
never before. 2021. url: https://www.cnbc.com/2021/05/18/why-europes-
carbon-market-is-experiencing-a-boom-like-never-before.html (visited
on 07/10/2021).
[76]
Snam SPA. The potential for hydrogen in Italy. 2021. url: https://www.snam.it/
en/hydrogen_challenge/potential_hydrogen_italy/ (visited on 07/10/2021).
[77]
International Energy Agency. Global average levelised cost of hydrogen production
by energy source and technology, 2019 and 2050. 2021. url: https://www.iea.
org/data-and-statistics/charts/global-average-levelised-cost-of-
hydrogen-production-by-energy-source-and-technology-2019-and-2050
(visited on 07/10/2021).
[78]
Energy Danish Ministry of Climate and Utilities. Denmark’s Integrated National
Energy and Climate Plan. 2019. url: https : / / ec . europa . eu / energy /
sites / default / files / documents / dk _ final _ necp _ main _ en . pdf (visited
on 02/19/2021).
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
81
[79]
Energinet. Biomethane certificates. Energinet, 2021. url: https://en.energinet.
dk/Gas/Biomethane/Biomethane-Certificates (visited on 02/19/2021).
[80]
Energinet. Model Paper for Rules for Biomethane Certificates in Denmarks. En-
erginet, 2021.
[81]
Federal Ministry Republic of Austria. Sustainability and Tourism. Integrated Na-
tional Energy and Climate Plan for Austria. 2019. url: https://ec.europa.
eu/energy/sites/default/files/documents/at_final_necp_main_en.pdf
(visited on 02/19/2021).
[82]
Austria Parlament. Renewable Energy Expansion Act. 2020. url: https://www.
parlament.gv.at/PAKT/VHG/XXVII/ME/ME_00058/index.shtml (visited on
02/19/2021).
[83]
Andreas Wolf. Austrian Biomethane Registry. AGCS, 2019. url: https://www.
regatrace.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/REGATRACE_AGCS-1.pdf (visited
on 02/19/2021).
[84]
et al. Matthias Edel. D3.1 Guidelines for establishing nationalbiomethane registries.
REGATRACE. Renewable gas trade centre Europe, 2019. url: https://www.
regatrace.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/REGATRACE-D3.1.pdf (visited on
02/19/2021).
[85]
Ministry of Economic Development. Ministry of the Environment et al. Integrated
National Energy and Climate Plan. 2019. url: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/
sites/default/files/documents/it_final_necp_main_en.pdf (visited on
02/19/2021).
[86]
Arturo Sferruzza Ginevra Biadico and Luigi Costa. Renewable future: government
incentives to increase biomethane production. Law Business Research, 2020. url:
https://www.internationallawoffice.com/Newsletters/Energy-Natural-
Resources / Italy / Norton - Rose - Fulbright - Studio - Legale / Renewable -
future - government - incentives - to - increase - biomethane - production ?
redir=1#reg (visited on 02/20/2021).
[87]
Gestore dei Servizi Energetici. Obbligo di immissione in consumo. Gestore Servizi
Energetici, 2020. url: https://www.gse.it/servizi-per-te/rinnovabili-
per-i-trasporti/obbligo-di-immissione-in-consumo/certificati-di-
immisione-in-consumo (visited on 02/20/2021).
[88]
Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy. Integrated National Energy and
Climate Plan. 2019. url: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/default/
files/documents/de_final_necp_main_en.pdf (visited on 02/21/2021).
[89]
Deutsche Energie-Agentur. German Biogas Register. Deutsche Energie-Agentur,
2020. url: https://www.dena.de/en/topics-projects/projects/renewable-
energies/german-biogas-register/ (visited on 02/21/2021).
[90]
Deutsche Energie-Agentur. DENA Biogas register. Deutsche Energie-Agentur,
2020. url: https : / / www . biogasregister . de / en / an - introduction /
introducing-biogas-register/ (visited on 02/21/2021).
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
82
[91]
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy. Integrated National Energy and
Climate Plan. 2019. url: https://ec.europa.eu/energy/sites/default/
files/documents/nl_final_necp_main_en.pdf (visited on 02/21/2021).
[92]
Vertogas. What does Vertogas do? Vertogas, 2021. url: https://www.vertogas.
nl/hoofdmenu/wat-doet-vertogas (visited on 02/22/2021).
[93]
European Commission. Voluntary schemes. European Commission, 2021. url:
https : / / ec . europa . eu / energy / topics / renewable - energy / biofuels /
voluntary-schemes_en?redir=1 (visited on 02/22/2021).
==PAGE:90==
APPENDIX A
National registries for
biomethane
A.0.1
Denmark
Denmark’s National Energy and Climate Plan [78] has as its main target a 70%
reduction in GHG emissions in 2030 compared to 1990 levels. In particular, Denmark
is committed to 55% of renewable energy in gross final consumption in 2030. It sets
specific goals for the share of renewables in electricity, but not for gas. Green gases
and PtX are only mentioned as alternative fuels mostly for the transport sector. In
the short term, it is not expected that PtG and hydrogen play an important role in
ensuring the security of supply, however, investments have been made to establish two
PtX projects for big scale production and storage of green hydrogen.
Moreover, Denmark has a PtX action plan [15] recognizing the importance in the
future of hydrogen and identifying as one of the actions the establishment of green
certificates for hydrogen.
Green certificates will increase the value of hydrogen and
kick-start its demand. The idea of providing partial certifications is also addressed by
the Danish TSO, Energinet, for instance when electrolyzers run in situations with less
than 100% renewables, a proportional certificate can be made based on the electricity
declaration. In this context, green hydrogen can be differentiated from grey hydrogen in
the short term, while in long term it is expected that 100% of the electricity production
is covered by renewable sources.
For biomethane, Energinet issues certificates for every MWh of biomethane injected
into the natural gas grid [79]. To receive the certificates, each producer must register
in the Energinet database, this certificate can be traded across countries under mass
balancing.
Moreover, electricity production using biomass is supported by fixed
premiums. In 2019, a grant pool was established to foster new capacity for electricity
production using biomass, biogas or other green gases.
Biomethane certificates are
issued based on the quantities of upgraded biogas for which support is granted.
However, the plant owner can apply for an exception of the support.
Then, the
month later, Energinet will issue certificates using the metered data received from
the grid companies, specifying whether or not the plant has received production support.
The certificates are managed through a Certificate Register online platform where
==PAGE:91==
A National registries for biomethane
84
each MWh of biomethane is traded electronically with an identification number. In the
current form, information about the raw material used for biomethane production and
the CO2 replacement is not specified. Once the certificate is issued, it can be traded
by account holders before the final transfer to a consumer. When the final consumer
purchases the certificates, these must be cancelled in the Certificate register.
The
cancellation may be due to energy consumption in Denmark, or due to exportation
showing that the biomethane has not been supplied for consumption in Denmark.
However, there is not yet a model for trade certificates across other European countries
which is necessary to have common standards and establish a green gas market.[80]
The expiration day of the certificates is 12 months after the date of production and
the registration must be made within the first 10 calendar days of production. The
certificate is purely electronic, the producers are responsible for their online registration
that includes personal information and details associated with the facility (e.g. feed-
stock, address, capacity, etc.). To verify that the provided information is truthful, an
audition process takes place. Finally, the certificates are recognised under the emission
trading system, thus companies may use biomethane certificates to offset CO2 emissions.
A.0.2
Austria
Austria states as its main objective for 2030 the reduction of GHG emissions by 36%
compared to 2005 [81]. Particularly, the increase in renewable energy in the gross final
energy consumption of 46-50% and 100% in electricity. However, specific targets for
renewable gases are not set. Biogas and renewable hydrogen will be supported by tax
exemptions or favourable tax treatment under the Natural Gas Tax Act. Biofuels and
hydrogen are expected to play an important role in the transport sector, as well as
replacing natural gas in the long term. The hydrogen strategy includes the planning
on generation, infrastructure and storage, mechanisms for generating demand and the
regulatory framework for using hydrogen on industry, mobility and buildings.
Under the Renewable Energy Expansion Act [82], renewable gas injected into the
natural gas distribution system will be supported by feed-in, for example as a quota
system. Thus, guarantees of origin must be established not only for electricity, but also
for renewable gases. Additionally, Austria is part of the Pentalateral Energy Forum,
the Penta countries will examine possible common approaches for guarantees of origin,
cross-border infrastructure, the role of TSOs and DSOs and standards for hydrogen
blending, as well as support schemes for hydrogen and innovation projects.
Austria has a biomethane registry managed by AGCS Gas Clearing & Settlement
AG [83].
AGCS is in charge of the calculation and clearing on balancing energy,
data concerning gas injections and withdrawal.
Based on the renewable energy act,
AGCS provides monthly biomethane guarantees of origin through mass balancing. The
==PAGE:92==
A National registries for biomethane
85
registry is a centralized database with a direct link to the Austrian gas clearing system,
that started operating in 2012.
The electricity generated from biomethane is supported by feed-in tariff, the
certificates may be used as proof that the feedstock fulfils all requirements to receive
the feed-in tariff support. They can also be traded to provide renewable gas to the final
consumers. AGCS has close cooperation with the German Energy Agency, who operates
the German biogas registry, enabling the sale of biomethane between these countries.
Additionally, AGCS is related to the Environmental Agency Austria, who operates
the registry of biofuels to prevent double-counting and double sale by exchanging
information related to biomethane volumes injected and consumed from the grid. [84]
The biomethane certification contains information related to the production period,
the energy quantity in kWh, details of the production plant, the owner of the guarantees
of origin, its status and other details. The certificates are issued every month and can
be divided up to 1 kWh. Authorised auditors evaluate the authenticity of the certificate
and verify the data provided by the facility owner. The biomethane registry does not
contain or collect any information regarding the price of the certificates. Finally, the
certificates are cancelled usually by the owner, the certificates do not have an expiration
date, thus their validity is unlimited. However, energy plants that want to apply for
feed-in-tariff require an audited certificate with an issue date from the present year.
A.0.3
Italy
The Italian National Energy and Climate Plan [85] establishes as goals the increase of
renewable energy up to 30% of the gross final energy consumption by 2030, particularly
22% of the gross final consumption on the transport sector.
Biomethane, synthetic
methane and hydrogen are expected to play a key role in the transport sector and high
intense industries in the medium term. In the long term, it is expected that electricity
and gas will be merged into a single sector. In particular, mandatory quotas for biofuels
in the transport sector are established, also hydrogen from renewable sources is added
to the list of biofuels and fuels that can be used for meeting the quotas.
The regulatory framework exists only for biomethane, the energy service system
operator (GSE, for its acronym in Italian, Gestore dei Servizi Energetici) is responsible
for managing renewable energy incentives. From 2013, all the energy companies must
cancel the same amount of certificates as the renewable electricity sold. Three main
mechanism are used [86, 87]:
• Guarantees of origin: Plants producing biomethane from certain raw materials
can obtain a GO for the avoided emissions. These materials include animal by-
products not used for human consumption, by-products from food, agro-industrial
and agricultural activities, livestock and forest management. GOs can be sold
==PAGE:93==
A National registries for biomethane
86
through bilateral contracts or the Italian Power Exchange (IPEX). IPEX is the
exchange for spot trading of electricity and natural gas in Italy. Moreover, GOs
are incompatible with any other incentive.
• Certificates of supply for consumption: Called CICs (Certificati di Immissione in
Consumo di biocarburanti): Biomethane intended specifically for transport may
receive a CIC for every 10 GCal (11.62 MWh) of biomethane released for consump-
tion. The procedure includes the accreditation of the producer, the application
must be submitted to the GSE within one year after the plant started operating.
After the accreditation, the producer must inform the GSE of the supply agree-
ments and the entities/buyers involved. Once the biomethane released has been
verified, the corresponding CICs are emitted every month, the CICs can be sold
to fuel suppliers who are subject to a biofuel annual quota. This quota is 7% for
biofuels and also a share of biomethane of 0.45%, from 2022 the quota will be 9%
and 1.39% respectively. The incentive last 20 years counting from when the fuel
was inserted into the supply chain.
• CICs for advanced biomethane: Advanced biomethane for transport is referred to
biomethane produced from waste, sludge, algae or any other sustainable feedstock
that does not change land use. Advance biomethane is subject to a certificate
per 5 GCal (5.81 MWh) of energy produced. A quantity of advanced biomethane
up to the annual target can be sold through the GSE. The GSE will pay for this
quantity the monthly average spot price for gas minus 5% and also pay e 375 per
CIC. This incentive is granted for 10 years from the start of the incentive period,
after this period, the producers will be entitled only to receive normal CICs for
the remaining incentive period.
A.0.4
Germany
The national energy and climate plan for Germany [88] specifies as the main goal
the decrease of 55% greenhouse gases emissions by 2030 compared to 1990. To reach
this target a 30% share of renewable energy in the gross final energy consumption is
considered. The share of renewable gases is not specified in the plan, but it is stated
that renewable gases (hydrogen included) will play an important role mainly on base
demand electricity, transport and industrial sectors. Since alternative options to fossil
fuel sources will be still needed, electricity is not expected to replace gas in various
processes in the long term.
In the future, there will be no additional support for
first-generation biofuels based on food crops, the future production of biofuels will be
based on waste materials and residues (advanced biofuels). In addition, a specific quota
for advanced biofuels will be introduced.
The German Energy Agency or Deutsche Energie Agentur (DENA) [89] manages
the German biogas register, which is a platform for the standardisation and verification
of quantities and qualities of biomethane in the natural gas network.
In particular,
==PAGE:94==
A National registries for biomethane
87
biomethane is subsidised through different policies: act on renewable energy sources for
electricity production, act on renewable heating for heat production and the European
Emissions Trading System. In order to get the benefits of these acts, the origin and
quality of biomethane must be verified through the German biogas register by neutral
auditors.
The verification process starts with measuring the renewable gas transferred to
the grid in the injection point, then a third-party auditor certifies the quality and
quantity injected. Later, producers and traders can split and trade different quantities
of renewable gas. Finally, consumers receive individual guarantees of origin and quality
for the purchased gas, all these processes are registered online.
The GOs increase
the trust in biomethane producers and promotes the development of the market. For
consumers, its easier to prove and satisfy their obligations, while consumers receive the
corresponding payment [90].
Two types of biomethane registries statements exist [84]: the first one is referred
to Biomethane registry statement on the gas delivery, it requires mass balancing since
the quantity will be transported from the plant to the end consumer directly, thus any
transfer of rights within the natural gas network will be documented. The second is a
Biomethane registration statement on the gas guarantees of origin, in this case, mass
balancing is not required since the gas property is separated from the other biogenic
properties during the transport, and later the properties are connected upon arrival to
the consumer.
A.0.5
Netherlands
The Integrated National Energy and Climate Plan for the Netherlands [91] sets a
goal of 49% reduction in greenhouse gases emissions by 2030 compared with 1990.
For electricity, a target share of 27% renewable energy is set.
For renewable gas, a
specific target is only detailed for the transport sector to 1.1% of total gas consumption.
Moreover, to fulfil the demand for natural gas, technologies such as biogas and hydrogen
will be considered. The Netherlands, as Austria are part of the Penta countries; thus,
the initiatives described in subsection A.0.2. In particular, the goal is to achieve 3-4 GW
installed electrolysis capacity by 2030 and increase the share of sustainable advanced
biofuels. Renewable gases will play an important role in the transport, electricity and
industrial sector.
To demonstrate the sustainability of biomass and hydrogen, the
implementation of certificates is necessary.
Vertogas is an autonomous and independent institution, mandated by the Ministry
of Economic Affairs and Climate, that facilitates the trade in green gas through its
certificate system [92].
It provides Guarantees of Originto demonstrate that green
gas is produced from renewable energy sources and is of the same quality as natural
==PAGE:95==
A National registries for biomethane
88
gas. One GO stands for 1 MWh of energy from green gas. The production facility is
checked whether the production process meets the requirements set by Vertogas, the
requirements include the points where energy is measured and the verification of raw
materials, after this procedure producers are included in the Vertogas register.
The characteristics stated in the certificate are: type raw material, day of production
and whether or not the biomethane was fed into the public gas network. The biomass
is always classified according to the Dutch Technical Agreement 8003 (NTA8003). The
sustainability of biomass used for biomethane production can be detailed in the GOs,
however, this is not a mandatory step. Vertogas provides a list of approved institutions
[93] to accredit the sustainability of biomass, some of them are NTA8080 and ISCC. The
first one is a Dutch Technical Agreement that describes the requirements for sustainable
biomass for energy purposes. The second one is the International Sustainability and
Carbon Certification valid for more than 100 countries.
The certificate is freely marketable between traders and end consumers, both need to
be registered in Vertogas database. Currently, only trade on a national level is possible.
Traders have different options for the certificates [8]:
• Sell certificates through bilateral contracts. Thus, all renewable energy production
is added to the trader account every month.
• Exchange the certificates with other traders. In this option, Vertogas only update
the accounts.
• Sell renewable gas and thus the certificate to the end-users.
In this case, the
certificates are cancelled by Vertogas.
• Transfer the certificates to Renewable Fuel Units (HBEs), which represents 1 GJ
of renewable energy that is delivered to the Dutch transport market. These units
are used by companies within the Energy for Transport system to comply with
their annual obligation.
