==PAGE:1==
Femtosecond mode-locked
ytterbium ’¼übre-laser
Master Thesis
by
Nicholas Egebak
s153919
June 2021
Ole Bang
Patrick Bowen
Christian Rosenberg Petersen
Peter Morten Moselund
In collaboration with
==PAGE:2==
Project period:
January 2021 ŌĆō Juli 2021
supervisors:
Professor Ole Bang
Christian Rosenberg Petersen
Patrick Bowen
Peter Morten Moselund
Hand-in date:
June 25, 2021
Defence date:
July 2, 2021
Censor:
Dan Birkedal @ Alight
Institutes:
DTU Fotonik
NKT Photonics A/S
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis is a study, design, and construction of a mode-locked ytterbium ’¼übre laser
operating at 1030 nm. The e’¼Ćects of di’¼Ćerent system parameters are investigated in
a numerical simulation, which solves the nonlinear Schr├Čdinger equation, and uses a
SESAM as a mode-locking element with a long recovery time of 12 ps. The simulated
laser cavity is all-normal dispersion and produces linearly chirped pulses, which can be
compressed to tens and hundreds of femtoseconds with repetition rates of a few MHz.
Pros and cons in the experimental coupling to the SESAM are investigated, along
with the position of cavity elements and ’¼übre lengths.
Experimental results cover
continuous wave emission, Q-switching, and Q-switched mode-locking. Mode-locking,
however, was not observed, probably due to a long recovery time on the SESAM.
i
==PAGE:4==
Resum├®
Denne afhandling er et studie, design og konstruktion af en tilstands-l├źst ytterbium
’¼überlaser, der opererer ved 1030 nm. E’¼Ćekterne af forskellige komponentparametre
unders├Ėges i en numerisk simulering, der l├Ėser den ikke-line├”re Schr├Čdingerligning, og
som bruger en SESAM som tilstands-l├źsningselement med en lang tilbagefaldstid p├ź
12 ps.
Den simulerede laserkavitet er fuld-normal dispersion og producerer line├”rt
chirpede pulser, som kan komprimeres til tiere og hundreder af femtosekunder med
repetitionsrater p├ź f├ź MHz. Fordele og ulemper ved den eksperimentelle kobling til
SESAMŌĆÖen unders├Ėges s├źvel som positionen af kavitetselementerne og l├”ngden af op-
tiske ’¼übre. Eksperimentelle resultater viser udelukkende kontinuerlig b├Ėlge-emission,
Q-skiftning og Q-skiftende tilstands-l├źsning. Tilstands-l├źsning blev ikke observeret,
formentligt p├ź grund af SESAMŌĆÖens lange tilbagefaldstid.
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Many people have been involved in this project during its six month duration, and I
owe all of them a thank you. Particularly, I would like thank the people who made
this project possible. I was lucky that a small project with Associate professor
Christos Markos led to meeting with my supervisor Ole Bang, who made the proper
arrangements with NKT Photonics.
At NKT my supervisor Patrick Bowen has in all aspects been incredibly kind and
patient to work along side with ŌĆō especially when I was working on computer
simulations, which was entirely new to me. He and all the other acquaintances,
among others the ŌĆÖSplice GirlsŌĆÖ, Andreas and Sacha, stand out to me as both
competent, kind, and helpful. After a short time, I called them my friends. Their
in’¼éuence has made me a better engineer and provided several laughs in Jazz Lab 2.
At home, my dear friends Andreas and David have both encouraged, helped, and
listened to me as well as helped me proof-read. I owe you guys a tremendous thank
you and a bunch of delicious Italian wines and Danish beers. This would have been
beyond tough to get through without you.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my loyal companion: my dear ASUS laptop
for not failing me completely as it is approaching its 10 year anniversary.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resum├®
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
1
Thesis overview
1
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.1.2
Ultrashort pulse generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3
Thesis goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Theory
7
2.1
Waveguides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Polarisation-maintaining ’¼übres
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2.1
Tayloring the dispersion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Nonlinear optics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Gain dynamics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.5
Light propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.5.1
The split-step Fourier method (SSFM) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
2.6
The laser
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
2.6.1
Introduction to laser theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
iv
==PAGE:7==
2.6.2
Self-similar pulse propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.6.3
Pulse ampli’¼ücation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.6.4
Fibre Bragg Grating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
2.6.5
Mode-locking a semiconductor saturable absorber-mirror . . . . .
36
2.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3
Simulation of mode-locked laser
42
3.1
Pulse propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.2
SESAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3
Laser cavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.1
Compression stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
3.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4
Experiments
52
4.1
Characterisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.2
Setup I ŌĆō 3 lenses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3
Setup II ŌĆō 2 lenses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.4
Setup III ŌĆō 1 lens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.5
Setup VI ŌĆō WDM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5
Discussion
64
6
Conclusion
67
Bibliography
71
Additional reading
75
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
1
|
Thesis overview
Chapter 1 provides a motivation of this thesis. A summary of ultrashort pulse gener-
ation in ’¼übre lasers is given, and the goals of this thesis are de’¼üned.
Chapter 2 explores the theory of light propagation in optical ’¼übres in linear and non-
linear regimes. The gain dynamics of a 1 ┬Ąm gain medium is described along with a
summary of all the laser elements used in this thesis. A mathematical approach for
solving the nonlinear Schr├Čdinger equation is given.
Chapter 3 investigates the in’¼éuence of di’¼Ćerent cavity element parameters using a nu-
merical split-step method to solve the nonlinear Schr├Čdinger equation.
Chapter 4 presents experimental setups and the discusses the pros and cons in various
setups.
Chapter 5 discusses the ’¼ündings in the thesis.
Chapter 6 concludes the thesis.
1
==PAGE:10==
1.1. INTRODUCTION
1.1
Introduction
1.1.1
Motivation
In medical sciences, it has long been of interest to picture the inside of an object. Non-
invasive techniques have found use in diagnostics, that being telling the gender of a
child with ultrasound imaging [1], soft tissue analysis with magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) [2], or bone-fracture screening with X-rays [3], all with di’¼Ćerent advantages and
disadvantages. The laser emerged just some 40 years after EinsteinŌĆÖs quantum mechan-
ical description of absorption and emission in 1917 [4], and the concurrent development
of semiconductor light source technology in terms of size, cost, and bandwidth etc. has
paved the way for optical imaging in medicine [5].
A novel method was the 1991 demonstration of optical coherence tomography (OCT)
by David Huang [6]. This non-invasive technique relies on white light that self-interferes
with weak re’¼éections from a semi transparent sample to generate a structural image
of e.g. the retina at an ophthalmology clinic. OCT is divided into three families; time-
domain (TD) OCT, spectral-domain (SD) OCT, and swept-source (SS) OCT, where
the latter two have established themselves as superior in terms of sensitivity and speed
[5].
The axial resolution of OCT depends on the coherence length, which is inversely
proportional to the bandwidth of the light source [7], making ultra broadband sources
advantageous for OCT. For this reason, the multi-octave spanning supercontinuum
sources are intuitively the best choices in terms of bandwidth. However, apart from
being expensive, they exhibit noise which is inherited in the ’¼ünal image [5]. This is
due to the stochastic supercontinuum process which is the powerful break-up of ul-
trashort pulses, forming solitons in the anomalous dispersion regime [5]. The process
is complex, and chaotic, involving linear and nonlinear phenomena which expand the
spectrum of a seed pulse. Usually, this is not a problem, because thousands of pulses
are averaged in a single A-scan (line scan), or because a long integration time is used
[7]. If a long integration time is used, the image will form slowly, thus a high repetition
2
==PAGE:11==
1.1. INTRODUCTION
rate is needed for the averaging of the pulses. The high repetition rate will naturally
imply a high average power, completely superior to what is required by OCT technol-
ogy.
Turning our gaze towards the deterministic supercontinuum process formed in the
normal dispersion regime, self-phase modulation and wave breaking will create a smooth
and wide spectrum when seeded with a high-powered pulse [5]. The pulse is typically
launched into a photonic crystal ’¼übre in which the supercontinuum is generated [8]. Re-
ducing the repetition rate of such a seed laser will allow for a reduction in noise, limited
to the intensity noise from the pump laser only, potentially enabling shot noise-limited
supercontinuum-based OCT [5].
Figure 1.1: Spectrograms of supercontinuum processes; (a) stochastic (soliton-based),
and (b) deterministic (ANDi-based). Figure taken from [5].
1.1.2
Ultrashort pulse generation
Several approaches towards ultrashort pulse generation exist, and the ’¼ürst ’¼übre-based
realisation was an Er-doped, passively mode-locked laser [9]. Here, anomalous disper-
sion competed with the self-phase modulation (SPM)-induced nonlinear phase shift to
form femtosecond pulses, called solitons, in regular intervals.
The mechanism which causes a train of pulses to be emitted from a laser with a
’¼üxed phase relationship is called mode-locking. E’¼Ćectively, the mode-locking element
acts as a gate, allowing or denying passage for a signal. When the signal is denied,
3
==PAGE:12==
1.1. INTRODUCTION
severe attenuation will take place, until the gate opens. This way, only a strong or
well-timed pulse may escape the laser cavity. The mode-locking element can be either
active or passive, controlled externally as ’¼ürst shown by Alcock et al [10], or by a
material response, respectively. Over the years, these elements have been developed
into robust and stable components [11].
Passive mode-locking exploits the nonlinear responsivity of materials [9].
Active
mode-locking is in general easier to initiate, however, passive mode-locking is gener-
ally capable of producing shorter pulses due to a faster loss modulation [11]. In all
passive mode-locking elements the pulse-narrowing e’¼Ćect is due to a saturable ab-
sorber (SA). SAs are divided into two categories; real and arti’¼ücial. Real SAs rely
on a response originating from the material itself and include semiconductor saturable
absorber-mirrors (SESAMs) and quantum dots as well as more modern 2D-materials,
such as graphene [12]. A pitfall of real SAs is the material degradation over time,
along with their low damage threshold [11], which limits the operation power of the
laser. The arti’¼ücial SAs, on the other hand, su’¼Ćer from environmental instabilities
such as temperature ’¼éuctuations [12]. These instabilities can to a large extend be re-
duced by using all-polarisation maintaining ’¼übre components in the laser cavity [12].
Examples of arti’¼ücial absorbers are nonlinear loop-mirrors and Kerr lensing with an
aperture [11], which utilise a nonlinear phase shift [13] and self-focusing [14], respec-
tively. Before choosing the mode-locking element, one must clarify whether an easy
implementation is more important than having di’¼Ćerent design options or stability.
Multiple mode-locking elements in one cavity has been demonstrated [15], exploiting
high modulation depth as well as a more e’¼Ćective mode-locking [11].
The road towards higher powers did not include soliton lasers as they were limited in
their output power [16]. Instead, a growing interest of normally dispersive ’¼übres opened
the ’¼üeld of self-similar propagation. These ’¼übres were doped with the rare-earth Yb3+-
ion, which had for a long time been overshadowed by the Nd3+-ion [17]. The renewed
interest led to the discovery of pulses that, with an appropriate input signal, could be
4
==PAGE:13==
1.1. INTRODUCTION
created and grown into parabolic shapes while maintaining their shape and distribution
of frequencies (chirp) inside the laser cavity as long as gain and loss were present [16].
Lasers built from these ’¼übres exhibited an advantage in the sense that pulses could be
made temporally and spectrally broad and contain large amounts of energy with a linear
chirp, and thus, a linear compression stage with opposite dispersion could be added
to produce femtosecond pulses with high peak powers [16]. Since their development,
these lasers have been immensely updated to generate peak powers of hundreds of
kilowatts around 1 ┬Ąm [11]. Their all-normal dispersion design named them all-normal
dispersion (ANDi) lasers.
Comparing the soliton lasers to the ANDi lasers, the soliton cavities are somewhat
simpler in the sense that they balance anomalous dispersion and the nonlinear phase
shift. The ANDi lasers, on the other hand, require both the normal dispersion-induced
pulse spreading, as well as a reset of the pulse duration each roundtrip. A solution
was to induce great gain and loss each roundtrip [18]. This way, the peak power was
high, and the spectral width grew. Because the pulse was chirped, a band-pass ’¼ülter
not only cut the pulse spectrally into its initial state after each roundtrip, but also
cut the pulse in time. Balancing these parameters are somewhat similar to the soliton
balance, and people refer to the area as dissipative soliton lasers [18].
1.1.3
Thesis goals
Operated at 1 ┬Ąm, ANDi laser cavities are state-of-the-art. Pulse energies above 20
nJ have been reported [19], and the pulses can be compressed to around 100 fs [20].
Repetition rates between Ōēł500 kHz [21] and 1 GHz [22] have been reported. This
parameter space obviously hosts many potential applications. The desired parameters
in this thesis are summed up as:
5
==PAGE:14==
1.1. INTRODUCTION
ANDi
Femtosecond
1 ┬Ąm
1-5 MHz
All-PM
Passive
SESAM
Supercontinu
um
Low noise
Low rep. rate
Swept source 
OCT
Thesis
Further work
Mode-lock
Figure 1.2: These parameters are chosen as building blocks for a seed laser for low
noise, low repetition rate, supercontinuum generation for a cheaper, yet adequate OCT
system.
This thesis focuses on building a low repetition rate, passively mode-locked laser,
operated at 1 ┬Ąm in an all-normal dispersion setup using all-polarisation-maintaining
’¼übres for a supercontinuum source for swept-source OCT.
6
==PAGE:15==
2
|
Theory
Usually, when young students begin their studies of light and electromagnetism, they
are introduced to the famous four equations of Maxwell. These equations describe the
electric- and magnetic ’¼üelds in various media and provide a solid understanding of
light propagation in waveguides as well as in free space with analytical solutions in, for
example, optical ’¼übres. In this thesis, however, we shall deal with mode-locked ’¼übre
lasers which produce ultrashort pulses. We describe the pulse propagation by the sim-
pli’¼üed nonlinear Schr├Čdinger equation (NLSE), which can be derived from MaxwellŌĆÖs
equations [23], [24].
We shall introduce the most general form of the NLSE, which accounts for the linear
e’¼Ćect of dispersion and the nonlinear optical Kerr e’¼Ćect. Throughout the subsequent
sections, additions to the equation will be made for it to contain SPM, stimulated Ra-
man scattering (SRS), dispersion of nonlinearity, and implementation of gain dynamics.
The canonical form of the NLSE is given by [23]:
ŌłéA (t, z)
Ōłéz
= ŌłÆi╬▓2
2
Ōłé2A
Ōłét2 + i╬│ |A|2 A,
(2.1)
where A (t, z) describes the pulse envelope in time t at the position z. ╬▓2 is the second
order dispersion. The exclusion of the zeroth and ’¼ürst order dispersions, ╬▓0 and ╬▓1,
is discussed brie’¼éy in Sec. 2.2. Before we enter the realm of the NLSE and how the
additions to it are made, we shall discuss the propagation of light in optical ’¼übres as
well as the linear and nonlinear material responses. All the e’¼Ćects are summed up in
the NLSE and a numerical approach for the solution is given. The cavity elements are
7
==PAGE:16==
described, and a mathematical modelling of the elements is developed. Finally, a laser
cavity design with an ampli’¼ücation stage is presented.
8
==PAGE:17==
2.1. WAVEGUIDES
2.1
Waveguides
A waveguide is a means to guide light, very much like electrons are guided in copper
wires from a wallplug to a TV. They have become an important tool since their devel-
opment in the 1960ŌĆÖs [25], and they come in all sorts of shapes ranging from rectangular
to circular. Typically, they are comprised by glasses like silica and chalcogenides, poly-
mers like TOPAS and PMMA or semiconductors like Germanium and Silicon.
All
these materials may guide light after di’¼Ćerent principles and at di’¼Ćerent wavelengths.
In this thesis, we are only concerned with silica ’¼übres, which consist of an inner, solid
core made of silica, doped with e.g. Germanium and an outer cladding of pure silica.
The light is con’¼üned to the core due to the slightly higher refractive index caused by the
Germanium (+1-2%), a phenomenon called index-guiding which causes a mirror-like
e’¼Ćect called total internal re’¼éection (TIR) [26]. Often, these ’¼übres are called step-index
’¼übres, due to their refractive index pro’¼üle, constituting a step between the cladding
and core area. The low loss around the telecommunication wavelength of 1550 nm as
well as their dispersion properties in this region has made these ’¼übres a corner stone
in the optical communication industry 1.
1The low attenuation that has made this a huge industry is today described by dB/km, whereas it
in 1966 when Kao et al. published their novel work was given in dB/m [25].
9
==PAGE:18==
2.1. WAVEGUIDES
r
n
Core
Cladding
N.A.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.1: (a) Schematic of a standard single mode ’¼übre. The core is encapsulated
by the cladding which has a lower refractive index. The numerical aperture (NA) is
the core of light that can couple to a ’¼übre. Rays with higher angles will leak out as
illustrated by the red rays. (b): The refractive index pro’¼üle of the step-index ’¼übre.
The di’¼Ćerence in refractive index is usually Ōł╝1%. (c) Loss curve from a single mode
’¼übre provided by OFS Fitel, Denmark. The loss at lower wavelengths is dominated by
Rayleigh scattering and by infrared absorption after 1550 nm. The OH-absorption has
been signi’¼ücantly reduced over the years.
Though the TIR picture is neat, it does not describe the full picture of how optical
’¼übres work. The light may propagate in various ways, even at the same time. Each
kind of transverse light distribution is called a mode and are described by Bessel func-
tions [26]. We are concerned with single-mode ’¼übres, which only support the ’¼ürst mode,
called the fundamental mode, which can be regarded as having a Gaussian pro’¼üle. The
Gaussian amplitude is an approximate solution to the Helmholtz equation, but its com-
plex envelope is an exact solution [26]. The di’¼Ćerence is quite clear, as the intensity of
the Bessel beam decreases in an oscillatory manner J2
0 (hŽü) Ōēł(2/ŽĆhŽü) cos2 (hŽü ŌłÆŽĆ/4),
and the Gaussian is simply decreasing exponentially exp
 ŌłÆ2Žü2/W 2 (z)

, where W (z)
is the beam waist at a distance of z [26]. Due to the circular geometry of the ’¼übre,
the cross sectional ’¼üeld can be described with cylindrical coordinates. In 1D, the ’¼üeld
10
==PAGE:19==
2.1. WAVEGUIDES
expression is [26]:
Ez (r, z, t) = E (r) A0 exp (ŌłÆi (Žēt ŌłÆ╬▓z)) ,
(2.2)
where E (r) describe the Gaussian pro’¼üle of the single mode, A0 is the amplitude, Žē is
the angular frequency, t is time, ╬▓ is the propagation constant, and z is the propagation
distance.
Within the core of the ’¼übre, a Bessel function of ’¼ürst kind, called J0, can describe
E (r), given as a solution to MaxwellŌĆÖs equations. The area surrounding the core is
called the cladding. In this region, the radius r is large, and the electric ’¼üeld decay is
described by the modi’¼üed Bessel function of ’¼ürst kind, K0. These two solutions may
be related through two auxiliary variables, h and q, which relates the actual radius to
the curve of the Bessel functions [23].
E (r) = J0 (hr)
for
r Ōēża
where
h =
q
n2
1k2
0 ŌłÆ╬▓2
E (r) = K0 (qr)
for
r Ōēźa
where
h =
q
╬▓2 ŌłÆn2
2k2
0,
(2.3)
where k0 = 2ŽĆ/╬╗0 is the wavenumber in vacuum, and n1 and n2 are the refractive
indices of the core and cladding, respectively, and a is the boundary between core
and cladding.
A normalised frequency parameter, V , which determines the cut-o’¼Ć
frequency for the amount of modes in a given waveguide, can be expressed by relating
the two Bessel functions [26]:
V 2 =
2ŽĆ
╬╗0
a
q
n2
1 ŌłÆn2
2,
2
= (ha)2 + (qa)2
(2.4)
where ╬╗0 is the central wavelength (or simply the continuous wave (CW) signal) in air.
For a step-index ’¼übre, the cut-o’¼Ćis located at V = 2.4, meaning everything below will
be single-mode [23]. This parameter provides important knowledge about what kind
of ’¼übre, one must use for di’¼Ćerent applications. The importance of the intensity pro’¼üle
given by the mode is easily understood when looking at the solutions in Fig. 2.2.
11
==PAGE:20==
2.1. WAVEGUIDES
Figure 2.2: The ’¼ürst six linearly polarised (LP) modes, calculated from the scalar
approximation, not taking into account the two polarisation states available.
The
warmer the colour, the higher the intensity. Figure is adopted from [27].
The modes are referred to as linearly polarised (LP) modes, and the intensity pro-
’¼üles are vastly di’¼Ćerent. The modes in Fig. 2.2 are calculated from the so-called scalar
approximation which only takes into account geometrical degeneracy, but not polari-
sation degeneracy. Thus, two fundamental modes exist with di’¼Ćerent polarisation. We
shall return to the matter of polarisation in Sec. 2.1.1.
In nonlinear optics, the intensity pro’¼üle plays an important role, as it goes into the
e’¼Ćective area de’¼üned as [23]:
Aeff = 2ŽĆ
 R Ōł×
0 I (r) rdr
2
R Ōł×
0 I2 (r) rdr
,
(2.5)
where I = |E|2 is the intensity distribution. An important relation to the e’¼Ćective
area is the mode ’¼üeld diameter (MFD). The Petermann II and the Marcuse approxi-
mations both describe the relationship between the MFD and the e’¼Ćective area. For
comparison, both relations are plotted in Fig. 2.3 [11]:
w
a Ōēł0.651.619
V 3/2 + 2.879
V 6 ŌłÆ0.016 ŌłÆ1.561V ŌłÆ7,
(2.6)
12
==PAGE:21==
2.1. WAVEGUIDES
where w is the width of the e’¼Ćective area, and a is the radius of the core and the red
is the Petermann II perturbation to MarcuseŌĆÖs original equation.
Figure 2.3: The Marcuse and Petermann II approximations for the mode ’¼üeld radius
from Eq.2.6. We notice that light with higher frequencies become more con’¼üned.
Fig. 2.3 demonstrates the important point of frequency dependent con’¼ünement; the
higher the frequency, the more tight the con’¼ünement and vice versa. This way, more
modes can be squeezed into the ’¼übre, if the ’¼übre is operated with high frequencies.
Another point related to the con’¼ünement of light is the mode overlap in a ŌĆÖgain ’¼übreŌĆÖ,
which has a doped cross section. Here, it is straight forwardly seen that the strength
of the gain is tunable in these ’¼übres from their size.
2.1.1
Polarisation-maintaining ’¼übres
If the rotational symmetry in a ’¼übre is more than twofold, two orthogonally polarised
modes will be degenerate [8]. In the case that the ’¼übre is asymmetric, causing twofold
rotational symmetry, the propagation constants of two linearly polarised modes will
in general be di’¼Ćerent. Such a ’¼übre is said to be birefringent [28], which is typically
obtained by form birefringence from an asymmetric core shape or by stress-induced
birefringence [8]. Stress rods may be embedded in the material during the ’¼übre fabri-
cation process, and the di’¼Ćerent thermal expansion coe’¼ācients induce a strain in the
material.
When designing mode-locked ’¼übre lasers, birefringence is an important property, due
13
==PAGE:22==
2.1. WAVEGUIDES
to the fact that light polarised along one axis of the ’¼übre is prohibited from coupling
into the other. This holds even if the ’¼übre is twisted and bent. If the twist is relatively
small, the guided light may rotate its polarisation state according to the ’¼übre axis. For
this reason, ’¼übres exhibiting strong birefringence are called polarisation-maintaining
(PM) ’¼übres. We use them to control the polarisation state of light inside a ’¼übre laser.
The ’¼übres used in this thesis are all PM ’¼übres of the type PANDA (PM-980 and Yb-
401 PM). The axis through the rods and core is referred to as the slow axis, and a 90
degree rotation is the fast axis. The rods are typically made of heavily B-doped silica
[28]. Naturally, when splicing such ’¼übres, the stress rods must be well-aligned, and
semi-automatic methods have been developed over the years.
Figure 2.4: Schematic cross section of the PANDA-design for a PM ’¼übre. Two stress
rods (large circles) lie asymmetrically around the core (small), causing a stress induced
polarisation dependent refractive index inside of the ’¼übre core.
When stress is applied to a non- or low birefringent ’¼übre, birefringence is induced,
which will a’¼Ćect the polarisation state of the light. If the perturbation is larger than the
intrinsic birefringence, the ’¼übre is said to be a non-PM ’¼übre. It is di’¼ācult to avoid ’¼übre
bends if the length is larger than 1 m, and hence uncontrollable polarisation evolution.
Such bends result in a ’¼ünal, di’¼Ćerent polarisation than the launched one, and therefore,
it can be compensated with wave-plates at the ’¼übre output. The random temperature
’¼éuctuations, air-convection, structural vibrations, humidity [29] etc. are impossible to
compensate for over time ŌĆō even in the lab. Thus, eliminating the possibility for light
to change its polarisation using polarisation maintaining ’¼übres (PMFs) is the only way
to make an environmentally stable ’¼übre laser.
14
==PAGE:23==
2.2. DISPERSION
2.2
Dispersion
When a dielectric is subjected to electromagnetic waves, the electrical ’¼üeld from the
photons interacts with the bound electrons of the medium, causing a material response
which depends on the wavelength of the light [23], altering the speed of light. This is
called chromatic dispersion, and every material has its own (chromatic) dispersion and
refractive index due to their material resonances and strengths. ╬▓ is referred to as the
propagation constant, and by making a Taylor expansion around the frequency Žē0, a
sum of dispersion orders drop out, making it frequency dependent [23]:
╬▓ (Žē) = n (Žē) Žē
c = ╬▓0 + ╬▓1 (Žē ŌłÆŽē0) + 1
2╬▓2 (Žē) + ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę,
(2.7)
where n is the refractive index and Žē is the angular frequency of light. The di’¼Ćerent
orders of ╬▓ are given by:
╬▓m =
dm╬▓
dŽēm

Žē=Žē0
for
m = 0, 1, 2, ...
(2.8)
╬▓1 and ╬▓2 are related to the refractive index and its derivatives by [26]:
╬▓1 = 1
vg
= ng
c = 1
c

n + Žē dn
dŽē

(2.9)
╬▓2 = 1
c

2dn
dŽē + Žē d2n
dŽē2

,
(2.10)
where ng is the group index and vg is the group velocity. The envelope of a pulse moves
with the group velocity. The ╬▓2 parameter is the dispersion of the group velocity and
describes the temporal broadening of the pulse.
This phenomenon is called group
velocity dispersion (GVD), which relates to ╬▓2 by: [26]:
D = d╬▓1
d╬╗ = ŌłÆ2ŽĆc
╬╗2 ╬▓2.
(2.11)
The interpretation is that a pulse propagating over a ’¼übre of length L will approxi-
15
==PAGE:24==
2.2. DISPERSION
mately experience a broadening of ŌłåT given by [26]:
ŌłåT = |D| LŌłå╬╗,
(2.12)
where Ōłå╬╗ is the width of the pulse in wavelength space. For a certain wavelength, the
dispersion is actually zero and is referred to as the zero dispersion wavelength (ZDW).
It indicates the transition between the normal and anomalous dispersion regimes which
act opposite each other in such a way that long wavelengths are ŌĆÖfastŌĆÖ and short wave-
lengths are ŌĆÖslowŌĆÖ, respectively.
Figure 2.5: Material dispersion pro’¼üle for pure silica in units of 1/c╬╗. The ZDW has
been indicated as the point where the two dashed lines intercept, dividing the anoma-
lous and normal dispersion regimes. Here, one must be aware of the two di’¼Ćerent units
in GVD originating from wavelength or frequency derivatives, resulting in di’¼Ćerent
signs. Figure is modi’¼üed from [27].
Dispersion is typically undesired in communication networks, for example, due to the
fact that frequency components escape their original pulse and catch up with the slower
components from the pulse before it. This temporal broadening can be compensated
for by adding a piece of waveguide with the opposite sign of GVD and appropriate
length. Other dispersion e’¼Ćects exist such as polarisation mode dispersion (PMD),
intra-modal dispersion etc. [28]. By using polarisation maintaining ’¼übres, these two
16
==PAGE:25==
2.2. DISPERSION
dispersion e’¼Ćects are not present.
Returning to Eq. 2.1, it only contains ╬▓2. It can be shown that ╬▓0 is cancelled out
during the derivation of the NLSE [24], and the exclusion of ╬▓1 is due to the de’¼ünition
of a moving frame of reference which follows the central wavelength of the pulse by
T = tobserved ŌłÆ╬▓1z which is done for computational reasons [23]. In this thesis, we
include seven orders of dispersion (the amount provided by the manufacturer) in the
equation for high precision. For this reason, it can be advantageous to describe the
entire dispersion with a dispersion operator de’¼üned as
╦åD

i Ōłé
Ōłét

=
X
k>1
╬▓k
k!

i Ōłé
Ōłét
k
.
(2.13)
Eq. 2.1 is obtained by setting k = 2 in the addition of the dispersion operator:
ŌłéA
Ōłéz = i ╦åD

i Ōłé
Ōłét

A + i╬│ |A|2 A.
(2.14)
2.2.1
Tayloring the dispersion
So far, we have considered the complete dispersion and regarded it as a material pa-
rameter caused by the dipoles and their frequencies and strengths. The refractive index
curves of bulks are usually parametrised by the so-called Sellmeier polynomial [26]:
n (╬╗) =
v
u
u
t1 +
N
X
i=1
╬╗2ai
╬╗2 ŌłÆbi
.
(2.15)
The ai and bi coe’¼ācients are ’¼ütted from experimental data, and usually for silica, it is
customary to use just three terms (N = 3). Then, the total coe’¼ācient in a bulk piece
of silica is given by [26]:
Dm = ŌłÆ╬╗
c
d2nm
d╬╗2 ,
(2.16)
with nm given by Eq.
2.15 and coe’¼ācients from Tab.
2.1.
The results from the
Sellmeier equation for fused silica are valid in the wavelength range of 0.21-3.71 ┬Ąm
[26].
17
==PAGE:26==
2.3. NONLINEAR OPTICS
a1 = 0.6962
a2 = 0.4079
a3 = 0.8975
b1 = 4.679 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ3┬Ąm2
b2 = 1.350 ┬Ę 10ŌłÆ2┬Ąm2
b3 = 97.935 ┬Ę 101┬Ąm2
Table 2.1: The silica resonances and strengths from [26].
This material dispersion is not o’¼Ćering much freedom of operation as it is intrinsic.
However, one can dope the material, like the core of a typical single mode ’¼übre (SMF)
with Germanium, which increases the refractive index. On the other hand, doping
silica with Fluorine, will lower the refractive index. In most cases, doping is used to
shift the material dispersion by a constant amount, which will maintain the overall
shape. Fortunately, if the core-cladding index contrast is small (e.g. in the SMF), we
can describe the entire dispersion as a sum [30]:
D ŌēłDm + Dw,
(2.17)
where Dm is the material dispersion and Dw is the waveguide dispersion. The latter
is controllable and therefore, waveguides exhibit numerous dispersion pro’¼üles.
2.3
Nonlinear optics
Dispersion is a linear response to light. Nonlinear responses also exist in any dielectric
once the intensity becomes su’¼āciently high. This is due to an anharmonic response
from the dipoles within the material. Thus, with intense light, the induced polarisation
is no longer linear with the electric ’¼üeld, yielding a polarisation of [23]:
P = ŽĄ0

Žć(1) ┬Ę E + Žć(2) ┬Ę EE + Žć(3) ┬Ę EEE + ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę + Žć(j)Ej
,
(2.18)
where ŽĄ0 is the vacuum permittivity, and Žć(j) is the jth order susceptibility. Silica,
SiO2, is an inversion symmetrical molecule, making Žć(2) Ōēł0, thus we shall just focus
on the third order susceptibility [23].
The third order susceptibility is responsible for many nonlinear e’¼Ćects derived from
18
==PAGE:27==
2.3. NONLINEAR OPTICS
the optical Kerr e’¼Ćect. Among these are modulation instability (MI), four-wave mixing
(FWM), cross-phase modulation (XPM), and SPM. The nature of the Kerr nonlinearity
is an increase in refractive index, when the intensity of light becomes high [26]:
n = n0 + n2I,
(2.19)
where n0 is the initial refractive index, n2 is the nonlinear refractive index, and I is
the optical intensity. This equation describes how a so-called Žć(3)-medium responds
to light to change its refractive index. In the following, a brief introduction to SPM,
SRS, and nonlinear dispersion is given.
Self-phase modulation
When a pulse enters a medium, it will perturb it via the optical Kerr e’¼Ćect, yielding
a time-dependent refractive index. If the pulse is an arbitrary Gaussian I(t) = I0 ┬Ę
exp
 ŌłÆt2/Žä 2
, where I(t) is the time-dependent intensity pro’¼üle, t is time, and Žä/2
is the pulse duration, the temporal derivative of the time dependent refractive index
becomes:
d
dtn(I(t)) = ŌłÆ2n2I0t
Žä 2
exp

ŌłÆt2
Žä 2

.
(2.20)
Because of the changed refractive index, the phase is shifted by
Žå(t) = Žē0t ŌłÆkz = Žē0t ŌłÆ2ŽĆ
╬╗0
n(I(t))L,
(2.21)
leading to a chirp (i.e. the frequency distribution) inside the pulse after a propagation
length of L given by:
Žē(t) = dŽå(t)
dt
= Žē0 + 4ŽĆLn2I0t
╬╗0Žä 2
exp
 ŌłÆt2/Žä 2
.
(2.22)
19
==PAGE:28==
2.3. NONLINEAR OPTICS
Figure 2.6: The nonlinear phase shift. The linear part of the phase shift in the middle
of the pulse has been shaded red. Curves are not for scale.
The phase shift is anti-symmetric around the pulse centre, but the chirp is to a large
extend linear inside the pulse as illustrated in Fig. 2.6. The ’¼ünal nonlinear phase shift
expressed with the e’¼Ćective area is [23]:
ŽåNL (L, t) = ╬│L |A (A, t)|2 ,
(2.23)
where ╬│ =
2ŽĆn2
╬╗0Aeff is the nonlinear coe’¼ācient. E’¼Ćectively, when SPM acts on a pulse
which has no chirp or a positive chirp, the spectrum is broadened by new frequency
components generated at the edges of the spectrum. In our laser system, SPM is the
dominant e’¼Ćect that provides the broadband pulses [5]. The combination of SPM and
normal GVD will result in the phenomenon known as optical wave breaking (OWB)
which creates fringes in leading and trailing edges of the pulse [31]. This is due to
the fact that the red-shifted light from the SPM is travelling faster than the unshifted
20
==PAGE:29==
2.3. NONLINEAR OPTICS
light. It can be understood as a FWM phenomenon, where the presence of light at two
widely spaced frequencies generates light shifted by their di’¼Ćerence frequency.
Stimulated Raman scattering
High intensity or short pulses over long distances will experience a frequency down-shift
from the inelastic scattering between optical phonons (material waves) and photons.
Stimulated Raman scattering transfers energy from high frequency components to low
frequency components by exciting electrons to a vibrational state [23], or virtual be-
cause it is not electronic.
As the electron decays from the virtual state, energy is
transferred mainly to generate a photon and the remaining energy births a phonon. In
silica, the emission spectrum is located 13.2 THz from its source [23].
The e’¼Ćect of SRS is particularly noticeable when powerful pulses, as such as fem-
tosecond pulses, propagate through a ’¼übre. The spectrum can become asymmetric as
the longer wavelengths will experience a gain originating from the shorter wavelengths.
When the e’¼Ćect is strong, the pulse may shift its central wavelength towards the longer
wavelengths due to this gain. This phenomenon is called soliton self-frequency shift
[32]. In the non-extreme case with longer pulse durations with a ’¼üxed central wave-
length, however, the SRS can destabilise the pulse by creating a pulse train [11].
21
==PAGE:30==
2.3. NONLINEAR OPTICS
Figure 2.7: The quantum processes of stimulated Raman scattering. A pump photon
excites the system to a virtual state from which it decays radiatively to a vibrational
state. At this point, the rest of the energy becomes vibrational in the glass matrix.
We incorporate SRS by a delayed response function [23]:
ŌłéA
Ōłéz = i ╦åD

i Ōłé
Ōłét

A + i╬│

A (z, t)
Z Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
R
 tŌĆ▓ A
 z, t ŌłÆtŌĆ▓2 dtŌĆ▓

,
(2.24)
where R(tŌĆ▓) = (1 ŌłÆfR) Ōłé(tŌĆ▓) + fRhR(tŌĆ▓) is the nonlinear response function. fR is the
Raman fraction and indicates the optical energy lost from the non-radiative transition.
In silica, this is 0.18 [23], [33]. hR(t) is the time-domain Raman response function
originating from the optical ’¼üeld-induced vibrations of the silica molecules2.
2This quantity is usually obtained from experimental data, though almost identical results have
been produced analytically [33].
22
==PAGE:31==
2.4. GAIN DYNAMICS
Nonlinearity dispersion
The last perturbation to the NLSE comes from the wavelength dependency of the
nonlinear coe’¼ācient. It is necessary to include it when working with broadband signals
[11].
The e’¼Ćect is included by incorporating a time derivative in Eq.
2.24 with a
constant, Žäshock = 1/Žē0, adjusting for the increase in nonlinearity with wavelength.
Eq. 2.24 now reads [11]:
ŌłéA
Ōłéz = i ╦åD

i Ōłé
Ōłét

A + i╬│

1 + iŽäshock
Ōłé
Ōłét

┬Ę

A (z, t)
Z Ōł×
ŌłÆŌł×
R
 tŌĆ▓ A
 z, t ŌłÆtŌĆ▓2 dtŌĆ▓

(2.25)
2.4
Gain dynamics
In general, all lasers rely on three quantum processes, namely spontaneous emission,
stimulated emission, and absorption. These processes were proposed by Einstein in
1917 [4], stating that an atom could capture a very speci’¼üc amount of energy from a
photon, provided it had a wavelength corresponding to that energy. At some point in
time, an emission process would release the energy in the form of a new photon. The
emission can be stimulated by another photon, in which case it will be a clone (i.e.
same polarisation, energy, phase, and direction), or it can be emitted spontaneously to
a lower energy state in a random manner. These are the processes that make up the
laser (Light Ampli’¼ücation by Stimulated Emission Radiation), which causes coherent
and collimated beams of light.
Optical gain is only possible in a medium where the electronic transitions can occur,
matching the wavelength of the desired light, if a population inversion is present.
Population is the term used to describe the electrons in an atomic system. If inverted,
more electrons are found in the excited state than in the ground state of the system.
23
==PAGE:32==
2.4. GAIN DYNAMICS
Figure 2.8: left: The quasi-three-level system of Ytterbium.
The ground state is
excited to the highest state, after which it will quickly decay non-radiatively to the
upper lasing level. The lifetime here is long, causing a bottle neck. The lower lasing
level has a short lifetime, returning the electrons quickly back into the ground state.
Right: A schematic of the states in an Yb-ion (Yb+3). Two main electronic transition
are available from spin-orbit interactions, which are split by Stark splitting into even
more states [17].
The gain medium for solid-state lasers is typically made from glasses doped with
rare-earth ions like Erbium, Ytterbium, and Thulium, because they have partially
’¼ülled 4f-orbitals which are tightly bound to the atom. Thus, they do not participate
in the bonding to the glass host. Instead, they form well-de’¼üned atomic levels with
long lifetimes inside the glass host, making them suitable for laser operation. Ytter-
bium forfeits 3 electrons to the surroundings, resulting in 13 of 14 electrons in the
4f-shell, allowing for a hole that can shift position between the sub-levels of the shell.
A large separation is caused by spin-orbit interactions, in each of which Stark splittings
occur [17]. These are the electronic levels of concern when we describe absorption and
emission.
Moving up the ladder of atomic levels in Fig.
2.8(right) implies absorption and
moving down implies emission. The level spacing corresponds to the energy of that
level. Unpumped, Ytterbium has the majority of its electrons in the ground state, ŌĆÖaŌĆÖ.
Ytterbium has a so-called quasi-three-level system as shown in Fig. 2.8(left) [17]. The
ground state can be excited to the highest state, which has a short lifetime due to
24
==PAGE:33==
2.4. GAIN DYNAMICS
a non-radiative transition (i.e. vibrational transition), causing the electron to decay
quickly to the upper lasing level.
Here, the lifetime is long, creating a bottle neck
e’¼Ćect [17]. The emission wavelength is determined by the transition from this level to
the lower lasing level, where an ultrashort lifetime (thus quasi-three level) will let the
electron transition to the ground state again. In this picture, the lasing wavelength is
at 1030 nm, corresponding to the e-c transition, yielding a high quantum e’¼āciency, as
pumping at 974 nm is very close to the lasing transition. Ytterbium ’¼übres also o’¼Ćer
the possibility of very high doping concentrations, allowing for high single-pass gain,
and the broad emission spectrum allows for ultrashort pulses[8].
We use the 3- or 4-level systems to write up the rate equations for the laser, but it
is important to note that these systems are somewhat inaccurate, since temperature
and operation wavelength in’¼éuence what kind of system the material is in. Ytterbium-
doped glass for example behaves like a three-level system for wavelengths below Ōł╝1060
nm [34], and at cryogenic temperatures, the thermal broadening e’¼Ćect vanishes, making
it a 4-level system [35]. For this reason and the fact that ytterbium has a broad gain
spectrum, we obtain a more accurate (spectral) picture if we consider the absorption
and emission cross sections of the material.
25
==PAGE:34==
2.4. GAIN DYNAMICS
Figure 2.9: Cross section of Yb. The dashed curves are the emission (blue) and absorp-
tion (red) spectra, and the black curves indicates the di’¼Ćerence between them. The
blue, shaded area is where e’¼ācient pumping can occur, and the shaded red area is the
e’¼ācient emission.
Fig. 2.9 is understood as the e’¼ācacy of pumping an ytterbium-doped ’¼übre at certain
wavelengths. Considering the di’¼Ćerence cross section, we see that e’¼ācient pumping can
occur in a narrow section between 970-980 nm with large net-absorption. Contrary, a
broad section between 1010-1070 nm gives large net-emission. A simple gain model can
be built from the di’¼Ćerence cross section: By normalising the di’¼Ćerence cross section
to our desired emission wavelength, we can create a di’¼Ćerential gain. In our case, with
a pump at 976 nm, the gain for 1030 nm is unity and peaking a few of nanometers
beyond. Wavelengths below experience loss. The absolute value of the gain depends on
the total Yb-concentration, however, it is not available from the supplier (CorActive).
We can make a guess as to what this gain strength parameter should be and compare
simulation with experiments3. This way, a constant gain pr. unit length is obtained.
This model is crude for two reasons: A depletion of the pump from absorption takes
place, lowering the gain, and secondly, the exponential ampli’¼ücation of the signal causes
the upper-state level to be depleted most e’¼āciently at the output of the gain medium
3A cutback method can be used to determine the doping density of the ’¼übre via BeerŌĆÖs law if a
constant doping along the ’¼übre is assumed [17].
26
==PAGE:35==
2.5. LIGHT PROPAGATION
[17].
2.5
Light propagation
Now that the gain dynamics and the optical properties of waveguides have been de-
scribed, we can proceed to the actual propagation of light with all the above e’¼Ćects
included. First, we revisit Eq. 2.1 and implement the dispersion and nonlinear opera-
tors:
ŌłéA (t, z)
Ōłéz
= ŌłÆi╬▓2
2
Ōłé2A
Ōłét2 + i╬│ |A|2 A =
h
╦åD + ╦åN
i
A.
(2.26)
Furthermore, we can split the equation into linear and nonlinear parts, denoted AD
and AN respectively. This is done due to the numerical method chosen and discussed
in the section below. The linear part is denoted D, which is associated with dispersion:
ŌłéAD (t, z)
Ōłéz
= i╬▓2
2
Ōłé2A
Ōłét2 = ╦åDA,
(2.27)
and the nonlinear part is denoted N for nonlinear:
ŌłéAN (t, z)
Ōłéz
= i╬│ |A|2 A = ╦åNA
(2.28)
2.5.1
The split-step Fourier method (SSFM)
In order to solve the NLSE, we must turn to numerical approaches as the di’¼Ćerential
equation does not have an analytical solution. Usually, either ’¼ünite-di’¼Ćerence meth-
ods or split-step methods are used to solve the problem.
The latter is a so-called
pseudospectral method and is usually faster by up to one order of magnitude when
employed in nonlinear dispersive media, complements to the ’¼ünite-Fourier transform
(FFT) algorithm [23].
Dispersion and nonlinear e’¼Ćects happen simultaneously as a pulse propagates along
a ’¼übre length. The split-step Fourier method (SSFM) will propagate the pulse a small
distance h with an approximate solution while assuming that dispersive and nonlinear
27
==PAGE:36==
2.5. LIGHT PROPAGATION
e’¼Ćects act independently. The distance h is ’¼ürst purely nonlinear in nature, meaning
╦åD = 0. Next, ╦åN = 0, which means that the dispersion acts alone. The dominant error
term can be shown to arise from the way the operators ╦åN and ╦åD commute, making
the method accurate to the second order of h [23].
Figure 2.10: Schematic view of symmetrised split-step Fourier method (SSFM). The
entire ’¼übre length is divided into small pieces of with h. The dispersion acts ’¼ürst for
half a step, then at the midplane (dashed lines), nonlinear e’¼Ćects are factored in for
a whole step. Finally, the last h/2 dispersion step is taken, obtaining A (z + h, T).
Figure is inspired by [23].
For further accuracy, a di’¼Ćerent propagation algorithm can be used (the symmetrised
SSFM), where the nonlinear e’¼Ćects are not included until in the middle of the step;
The optical ’¼üeld is propagated with dispersion for a distance of h/2, then the nonlinear
term is multiplied for a distance of h, and ’¼ünally, the last half of the dispersion step is
applied, this way, we obtain A (z + h, T) [23].
Multiple approaches for higher accuracy exist as well as guidelines for appropriate
step size [33], depending on various parameters. Ideally, trials for the necessary step
size should be conducted. When using FFT with SSFM, periodic boundary conditions
are used, hosting a potential problem regarding the size of the de’¼üned temporal window
[23]. The temporal window must be much wider than the pulse that is being propagated
for acceptable and realistic simulations, thus the dispersion parameters, for example,
28
==PAGE:37==
2.6. THE LASER
must be considered due to the widening e’¼Ćect they can have. Arti’¼ücial absorption
can be advantageous to implement at the boundary of the window, if a large temporal
window is undesired [33].
2.6
The laser
Dozens of laser designs exist, and they all have their advantages and disadvantages in
operation and production. Therefore, the purpose of the laser dictates the design. As
discussed earlier, our goal is a seed ’¼übre laser source for deterministic supercontinuum
generation rather than stochastic. Our approach is all-’¼übre-based with polarisation-
maintaining ’¼übres in the entire cavity. Fibre lasers are somewhat di’¼Ćerent from the
well-described dye and solid-state lasers. Analytical theories describing laser dynamics
developed by Haus is based on a linearisation of the e’¼Ćects of all cavity elements on
the pulse, and thus, the theory only applies if these e’¼Ćects are acting weakly on the
pulse each roundtrip [8]. In ’¼übre lasers in general, and especially in this thesis, cavity
elements modulate the pulses strongly, and for this reason, we introduced the NLSE in
the sections above. In this section, however, we shall discuss the basics of laser theory
with references to the previous sections. From that, an overview of each element is
given as well as how they can be modelled.
2.6.1
Introduction to laser theory
The list of vital components of a simple laser is short. All it takes is a resonator, a ’¼éow
of energy (pump) and a gain medium with matching parameters. The resonator serves
to keep the energy in its system and only let out a fraction in a continuous manner
for a CW laser or at special times for a pulsed laser system [26]. The resonator can be
designed in various ways, like the ’¼ügure-of-eight con’¼üguration [36], whispering-gallery-
modes [37], or, more commonly the Fabry-Perot cavity. The Fabry-Perot cavity is the
simplest form of oscillator, as it consists of two mirrors between which light bounces
back and forth. The mirrors absorb and transmit a small fraction of the energy at each
bounce, ultimately leaving no light behind in the resonator.
29
==PAGE:38==
2.6. THE LASER
Thus, to balance or increase the light inside the resonator, energy must be supplied
externally. For semiconductor lasers, the energy is provided electrically [26], and for
solid-state lasers 4, light is the source of energy, originating from a semiconductor laser
or a ’¼éash tube/’¼éash lamps 5. If the energy gain from the external pump is equal to the
losses in the resonator system, the threshold has been reached, and the laser will with
any extra power emit coherent light according to its design. We may think of the gain
medium and pump combined as an ampli’¼üer that supplies additional photons to the
system. However, the gain can be saturated due to the lack of atoms in their ground
state as well as spontaneous emission.
Figure 2.11: An illustration of the the laser ampli’¼üer.
A pump supplies the gain
medium with power that it stores in the atomic system until it is released through
emission, causing population inversion as discussed in Sec. 2.4. Figure taken from [26].
When working with ’¼übres lasers compared to free-space solid-state lasers, the cavity
is not only de’¼üned from its length, but also from the dispersion properties and nonlinear
response. The cavity contains transverse modes that are ampli’¼üed, and in the context
of a mode-locked laser, this length determines the repetition rate as:
frep =
c
2dne’¼Ć
,
(2.29)
where d is the distance, c is the speed of light, and ne’¼Ćis the e’¼Ćective refractive index.
The factor of 2 comes from the fact that the pulse is extracted through one of the
4Fibre lasers are essentially a subcategory of solid-state lasers.
5The ’¼éash tube is a rather old technique and it has been completely replaced by the diode lasers
for many reasons, among things energy e’¼āciency and simplicity [38].
30
==PAGE:39==
2.6. THE LASER
two mirrors, making the pathway twice the resonator length. In our case, 100 m of
resonator ’¼übres with refractive index of 1.46 is approximately 1 MHz.
2.6.2
Self-similar pulse propagation
Several solutions to the NLSE exist, and the newest addition is the self-similar pulses,
similaritons. Before the addition of similaritons, soliton and stretched-pulse (or dispersion-
managed) lasers were the leading concepts. Soliton lasers are limited to low pulse ener-
gies due to wave breaking, causing a circulation of multiple pulses rather than just one
[16]. They rely on the balance of anomalous dispersion and nonlinearities, and they
maintain an almost constant temporal width during one roundtrip [23]. Dispersion
management relies on having segments of ’¼übre with opposite signs of GVD. By having
normal dispersion, the pulse can temporally breathe. Thus it can contain more energy
and the average intensity can be lowered. These cavities can be designed carefully to
have e.g. a net-zero dispersion or an arbitrary chirp [11]. The solitons formed here
can tolerate 10 times higher nonlinear phase shifts and thus 10 times higher soliton
energies [16].
The di’¼Ćerence between self-similar and stretched-pulse propagation is the alternat-
ing positive/negative dispersion during one roundtrip. The removal of the anomalous
dispersion ’¼übres paved the way for the self-similar propagation. Its name comes from
the mathematical concept of self-similarity. It refers to the fact that these pulses can
propagate in a ’¼übre and increase their amplitude and duration while the spectral or
temporal width remain constant. The pulses, sometimes referred to as ŌĆÖsimilaritonsŌĆÖ,
are parabolic in shape and can be extremely powerful. In addition, the pulses accumu-
late a linear chirp, making them close to the transform limit if compressed [16]. Lasers
operating with all-normal dispersion are called all-normal dispersion (ANDi) lasers.
Where soliton lasers relied on the simple balance of the optical Kerr e’¼Ćect and
anomalous dispersion, the normal dispersion in ANDi laser cavities required a total
31
==PAGE:40==
2.6. THE LASER
reset of the pulse each roundtrip; when the pulse starts its roundtrip, it has a narrow
temporal and spectral width, and it will expand throughout the cavity. A reshaping
mechanism such as a band-pass ’¼ülter can keep the equilibrium.
The width of the
’¼ülter is important as it severely changes the spectrum which has been investigated by
Chong et al. [39]. Equally important in the pulse-shaping process is the dispersion
and nonlinear phase-shift as illustrated in Fig. 2.12.
Figure 2.12: The pulse shape of similaritons. The parameters GVD, nonlinear phase-
shift, and spectral ’¼ülter width e’¼Ćects the pulse in di’¼Ćerent directions as indicated by
the arrows. When the ’¼ülter is varied, from 25, 12, 11, and 8 nm, the shape above
appear. Figure taken from [39].
As the width of the ’¼ülter is increased, the spectrum becomes smooth and parabolic
due to the SPM, whereas fringes appear with a narrow ’¼ülter. To illustrate the processes
taking place in the cavity, it can be advantageous to look at the chirp, GVD, and
duration of the pulse throughout the cavity.
Fig.
2.13 shows the pulse evolution
throughout cavities.
32
==PAGE:41==
2.6. THE LASER
Figure 2.13: Illustration of pulse duration and chirp in di’¼Ćerent cavities. Solitons can
be di’¼Ćerent in orders, changing the pulse duration in a compression and expansion
scheme [40], but this illustration is the ’¼ürst order. The stretched pulse cavity ’¼ürst
compresses the pulse by dispersion until it has reached its maximum, and the pulse
is broadened again. The similariton accumulates a chirp and energy throughout the
cavity, until it is reset by a band-pass ’¼ülter.
The pulse duration as a function of the pulse position inside the cavity provides some
important insight to where di’¼Ćerent elements should be placed in the cavity. Ideally,
the pulse should be extracted after all elements have perturbed the pulse ŌĆō i.e. after
the spectral ’¼ülter. Extracting a pulse from a ’¼übre system can be done with di’¼Ćerent
components, which is discussed in Ch. 4. Depending on the method of extraction, one
must make sure that the cavity has the self-similar dynamics: A coupler, for example,
can disturb the energy balance by introducing a loss.
Also the position of such a
seemingly passive element will change the output and perhaps ruin the mode-lock.
Clearly, if the cavity is made very long, the pulses can accumulate more chirp and thus
be compressed even more. However, SRS will be enhanced by the elongation, making
the laser operation unstable. Such low-repetition rate cavities, some times called giant
chirp oscillators (GCOs), can bene’¼üt from mode-locking elements that posses very
narrow spectral widths such as a SESAM [11].
33
==PAGE:42==
2.6. THE LASER
2.6.3
Pulse ampli’¼ücation
When the cavity sends out ultrashort pulses one would typically want to amplify them.
This can be done by the direct pulse ampli’¼ücation or chirped pulse ampli’¼ücation [41].
The ’¼ürst method is straight forward as the pulse is simply injected into a gain ’¼übre,
making it low-cost due to the all-’¼übre solution which also will maintain the stability
of the system. The main drawback from this technique is the handling of high powers,
as SPM e’¼Ćects become noticeable as well as reaching the damage threshold of the ’¼ü-
bre. The work-around for this problem is to use large mode-’¼üeld ’¼übres, short ampli’¼üer
lengths, as well as a longer pulse duration as means to minimise nonlinearities [11].
The chirped pulse ampli’¼ücation is a di’¼Ćerent approach to circumvent SPM e’¼Ćects;
the cavity injects pulses into a dispersive medium, broadening the pulse. Next, the
pulse is ampli’¼üed and recompressed afterwards. The dispersive broadening can take
place in long ’¼übres with the appropriate sign of GVD or via chirped mirrors. This
method is indeed more complicated and costly because of the extra components. For
ultrashort pulses, however, this is necessary [11].
2.6.4
Fibre Bragg Grating
A Fibre Bragg Grating (FBG) is a so-called spectral ’¼ülter as well as a highly re’¼éec-
tive mirror with a (typically) narrow re’¼éection band. Light outside this band will be
transmitted. Thus, a laser pump far away from the FBG re’¼éection band can be put
directly in front of it and the cavity.
34
==PAGE:43==
2.6. THE LASER
Figure 2.14: Illustration of a FBG. (a) Small variations in the refractive index in the
core yield several re’¼éection which are phase-matched. (b) The refractive index pro’¼üle
inside the ’¼übre core. (c) Input, re’¼éection, and transmission spectra.
The FBG is easily modelled in frequency space with an appropriate shape, which
is factored onto the electric ’¼üeld. The mathematical representation of the shape is
typically rather complex, however, a Gaussian or supergaussian re’¼éection pro’¼üle may
mimic it nicely. Usually, the actual data from the supplier of the FBG can be used.
In our case, we combined a graph from the supplier of the re’¼éection spectrum with
a supergaussian in order to smoothen out the manually-picked data points from a
logarithmic graph. Points lying outside the supergaussian and the actual data is set
to high attenuation (50 dB).
35
==PAGE:44==
2.6. THE LASER
Figure 2.15: Re’¼éectance spectrum of the modelled FBG. The left and right parts
are interpolations from data points picked from a datasheet graph (logarithmic) from
Teraxion. The middle part is a supergaussian: y = exp

ŌłÆ
  ╬╗ŌłÆ1030
1.15
8
ŌłÆ0.01, yielding
a peak re’¼éection of 0.99 at 1030 nm and 3 nm at FWHM.
2.6.5
Mode-locking a semiconductor saturable absorber-mirror
Several approaches for pulsed laser operation exist, and the choice of modulator de-
pends on the application of the laser. Some applications require a low average power
but the power from a single ultrashort pulse should still be high enough to initiate
e.g. biological processes or dissipation of material in micro-machining, others might be
satis’¼üed by a more random pulsating behaviour. The next consideration is how well
and to what degree a modulator can provide the desired pulse parameters, for how
long as well as the level of implementation di’¼āculty, and price etc.
We are particularly interested in a pulse train emitted in highly regular intervals
with high peak powers for supercontinuum generation. Thus, we opt for a mode-locked
laser rather than the more powerful, slowly oscillating Q-switched laser which can be
both regular and highly irregular in its pulse emission. When it comes to mode-locking
elements, one must consider the pros and cons of each element. Elements that are
easily implemented often o’¼Ćer poor tuning of parameters. An arti’¼ücial absorber such
as the nonlinear polarisation rotation method, for example, will need wave-plates or
36
==PAGE:45==
2.6. THE LASER
polarisation controllers. As the polarisation can drift with temperature etc., readjust-
ments must be made on a regular basis, and it is di’¼ācult to experimentally quantify
and reproduce the saturation power and modulation depth achieved in prior experi-
ments. To circumvent this problem, PM-’¼übres can be deployed with Faraday rotators
[42], [43]. This technique, however, is not easily realised in an all-’¼übre setup [44].
The other possibility considered was the SESAMs, which are commercially avail-
able from [45]. Together with nonlinear polarisation rotation, SESAMs are the most
researched mechanisms in mode-locked ’¼übre lasers [8]. In this thesis, we only work
one particular SESAM as presented in Ch. 4. In a prototyping project such as this,
the adjustable spotsize on a SESAM provides a high degree of freedom when it comes
to the nonlinear absorption e’¼Ćect, and being a well-known component in company
production, this choice aligns well with company interests.
The SESAM is a piece of wafer like GaAs, consisting of a small dielectric protection
layer on top. Underneath is an absorption layer with quantum wells in front of a Bragg
mirror. When light is absorbed, electron-hole pairs are generated in the absorption
layer, and when all carriers are excited, the material becomes transparent, exposing
the Bragg re’¼éector. The energy needed to saturate a speci’¼üc area on the SESAM is
referred to as the saturation ’¼éuence. After a certain time, the electron-hole pairs will
decay non-radiatively and recombine to the absorbing ground state once again [8].
37
==PAGE:46==
2.6. THE LASER
Figure 2.16: Illustration of the SESAM. A small dielectric layer is on top of the device
for protection. Next, the absorption layer and Bragg-like mirror are placed. Figure
adopted from [45].
The key parameters when choosing a SESAM for a mode-locked laser are the re-
covery time, modulation depth (di’¼Ćerence in regular absorption or re’¼éection and the
maximum), saturation ’¼éuence, the bandwidth of the re’¼éector as well as the absorber,
and the non-saturable losses. For a speci’¼üc setup it is easier to choose some parameters
than others, such as the re’¼éector or absorber bandwidths, which must obviously be
chosen to re’¼éect the laser wavelength and to absorb within the bandwidth of the laser,
respectively. The saturation ’¼éuence is more di’¼ācult due to the complexity of laser
cavities ŌĆō computer models may provide an idea of this value. Fortunately, the spot
size can be varied on the SESAM at the expense of the all-’¼übre setup by the use of
lenses. Trials can be carried out with lenses, until a butt-coupled solution with the
right SESAM saturation ’¼éuence is known for a particular laser. Ideally, the recovery
time should be as small as possible for ultrashort pulses [8]. A recovery time on the
same order of magnitude as the pulse duration will tend to cause asymmetric spectra
if the pulse is chirped [8]. This e’¼Ćect is used in our setup for both a temporal and
spectral cut of the pulse as shown in Fig. 2.17, where a Gaussian pulse is modulated.
A high degree of modulation depth has been reported to tend to initiate Q-switching
38
==PAGE:47==
2.6. THE LASER
instabilities [8].
The non-saturable losses in a SESAM must remain low, however,
the roundtrip gain in ’¼übre lasers is so high that the non-saturable losses become less
important [8]. We model the time-dependent absorption of the SESAM as [45]:
A (t) = A0 ┬Ę exp

ŌłÆ
Z 1
Žä + 2I (t)
Fsat
dt

┬Ę

1 +
Z 1
Žä ┬Ę exp
Z 1
Žä + 2I (t)
Fsat
dt

dt

,
(2.30)
where A0 is the non-saturated absorption, Žä is the electronic recovery time, I is the
intensity, and Fsat is the saturation ’¼éuence. Fig. 2.17 shows the re’¼éection as a function
of time as a Gaussian pulse interacts with it, and Fig. 3.1 shows the temporal cutting
of di’¼Ćerent ’¼éuences.
Figure 2.17: Time-dependent re’¼éection of the SESAM as it is exposed to a Gaussian
pulse with arbitrary strength. Before the pulse interacts with the absorber, the re-
’¼éection is 50%. Then, as the ’¼éuence of the pulse saturates the absorber, it becomes
transparent quickly. The re’¼éectance is normalised so that when the absorber is trans-
parent, the re’¼éectance is at its maximum.
The particular SESAM that we are using has a complicated re’¼éection spectrum
which we neglect and model as having a ’¼éat re’¼éection band across all wavelengths,
see Fig.
2.18.
Other e’¼Ćects that are not included in the model are: two-photon
39
==PAGE:48==
2.6. THE LASER
absorption6, dispersion, and heat in’¼éuence on the operation. The exclusion of these
parameters was justi’¼üed by the use of amongst other things the crude gain model.
Figure 2.18: Re’¼éection spectrum of the SESAM when the absorber is saturated. It
can be seen that it favours wavelengths between 1005 and 1040 nm and 1070 to 1115
nm.
In general, mode-locked lasers with saturable absorbers with ’¼ünite recovery times
tend to do Q-switching or Q-switching mode-lock (QML). Q-switching is a slow cavity
energy dump whose pulses contain much energy in slow oscillations. These oscillations
are typically in the nanosecond range [46] and are usually seen as the next lasing
state after CW [47]. After Q-switching, QML is usually seen, where the slower Q-
switching oscillations carry the faster mode-locking in its envelope. Typically, a high
modulation depth of the SESAM will tend to initiate the QML [8]. This can be avoided
by decreasing the spotsize on the SESAM, or increasing the cavity average power by
either decreasing the output coupling or increasing the pump power. However, the
limiting factor lies at the damage threshold of the SESAM, which, if crossed, will
result in small burns on the surface of the SESAM, causing low, over-all re’¼éectance.
Burns on the SESAM are discussed in Sec. 4.3. The speci’¼ücations for the SESAM
used in this thesis are shown in Tab. 2.2.
6Two-photon absorption is the main contributor to non-saturable absorption, which increases with
decreasing pulse duration (or high ’¼éuences) [45].
40
==PAGE:49==
2.7. SUMMARY
╬╗
A0
ŌłåR
Ans
Žåsat
Žä
Žå
1040 nm
50%
40%
10%
19 ┬ĄJ/cm2
12 ps
800 ┬ĄJ/cm2
Table 2.2: SESAM speci’¼ücations; design wavelength, absorbance, modulation depth,
non-saturable loss, saturation ’¼éuence, recovery time constant, and damage threshold.
2.7
Summary
In this chapter, we have broadly described the optical phenomena governing laser sci-
ence, starting from light propagation to dispersion, and nonlinear e’¼Ćects. The canonical
form of the nonlinear Schr├Čdinger equation was introduced, taking into account group
velocity dispersion and the optical Kerr e’¼Ćect. Self-phase modulation, Stimulated Ra-
man scattering, and the dispersion of nonlinearity were added to the equation.
A
simple gain model built on the emission and absorption cross sections of Ytterbium
was developed to simply describe the complex gain dynamics of an active medium with
wavelength dependence. Next, the general theory of lasers was brie’¼éy described fol-
lowed by an overview of the pulse shaping mechanisms arising from band-pass ’¼ülters,
dispersion, and nonlinear phase shift in ANDi ’¼übre lasers. Two approaches for external
pulse ampli’¼ücation were presented. Lastly, the elements in the laser cavity used in this
thesis were introduced along with the modelling of them.
41
==PAGE:50==
3
|
Simulation of mode-locked laser
The simulation is built in Matlab, and the code is displayed in App. ??. The model
consists of ’¼übre parts in which the nonlinear Schr├Čdinger equation (NLSE) is solved,
and the point-components including splice losses, Fibre Bragg Grating (FBG), coupler
losses, and semiconductor saturable absorber-mirror (SESAM). Because the pulse is
de’¼üned as the moving frame of reference, the cavity goes through the pulse in one
direction, and thus the cavity elements must have mirror-like entries, when it travels
back to its initial coordinate. The elements are collected in external ’¼üles and are called
in short entries ŌĆō the ’¼übres are de’¼üned with di’¼Ćerent lengths and called similarly.
The length of the simulation is determined by the length of the for-loop, dictating
the amount of roundtrips simulated. The simulation is seeded with a Gaussian pulse
with random noise on top, rather than ampli’¼ücation of vacuum ’¼éuctuation etc. The
elements will perturbate the pulse, and a mode-locked state is therefore enforced.
42
==PAGE:51==
3.1. PULSE PROPAGATION
3.1
Pulse propagation
The pulse is initially launched into a passive ’¼übre de’¼üned from eight orders of ╬▓ pro-
vided by the manufacturer, Nufern for the PM-980 ’¼übre. The Petermann II approxi-
mation translates between the MFD and e’¼Ćective area. The refractive index is assumed
to be 1.46, which is that of a standard germanium-doped silica ’¼übre at the IR range.
The active ’¼übre (CorActive YB-401 PM) is modelled with equal parameters, but the
Yb-doping increases the refractive index slightly. We assume it enhances the e’¼Ćective
area by 10 %. The gain from this ’¼übre is crudely described by a constant di’¼Ćerential
gain pr meter as discussed in Sec. 2.4. Splices are assumed to only cause a small
optical loss of 6% between ’¼übres of equal or similar MFDs, and propagation losses are
neglected. Whenever the pulse passes a coupler, the power is reduced appropriately
and equally at all wavelengths.
3.2
SESAM
The linear, positive chirp of the normally dispersive ’¼übres in combination with the
time-dependent absorption of the SESAM causes both a spectral and temporal cut of
the pulse due to the chirp of the pulses. In Fig. 3.1 Gaussian pulses with di’¼Ćerent
’¼éuences are impinging on the SESAM. The front of the pulse will experience a high
loss, as it will saturated the SESAM, whereas the back of the pulse remains unchanged.
The Bragg-re’¼éector is set to re’¼éect all light equally and with 100 %.
43
==PAGE:52==
3.3. LASER CAVITY
Figure 3.1: Unchirped pulses after passing the SESAM, normalised to their input peak
power. The re’¼éectance of the Bragg-mirror was set to 100%. The blue curve (bottom)
is a pulse with half the saturation ’¼éuence of the SESAM, and the orange (top) is 50
times the saturation ’¼éuence. The insert shows the evolution of the peak as function of
’¼éuence in units of 1/2Fsat ┬Ę i2.
3.3
Laser cavity
We simulate various scenarios in our model to witness the e’¼Ćects of di’¼Ćerent parame-
ters. The primary parameters of interest are the ones that we can tune in the lab i.e.
’¼übres lengths, the ’¼éuence on the SESAM, and coupler ratio. First, we run a cavity
with no splice losses, which we know are present in the lab of a few percent to see the
in’¼éuence. The gain ’¼übre is 2 metres long and placed after the FBG and before the
coupler. The cavity is formed in the 80% direction. In order to make the simulation
more real, we incorporate a distribution of the passive ’¼übre, because the coupler and
FBG are located in passive ’¼übres.
It has previously been shown that the position
of passive ’¼übre can have an impact on the stability of the laser and actually prevent
mode-locking all together [11]. The spot size on the SESAM is set to be that of the
mode-’¼üeld area (MFA) of the (passive) ’¼übre: 6.6 ┬Ąm. We observe a linear chirp of the
pulse in the stable cavity along with an expansion of the spectral bandwidth compared
to the launched pulse.
44
==PAGE:53==
3.3. LASER CAVITY
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.2: Splice loss in’¼éuence. (a) and (b) are the spectra of the ’¼ünal pulse for 0
and 6% splice loss, respectively. (c) and (d) are the output pulses and chirp in the
time-domain with 0 and 6% loss, respectively.
An identical simulation with splice losses set to 6%, shown in Fig. 3.2(b,c), yields a
signi’¼ücantly lower power, but a comparable chirp, and an almost 10 nm wider spectrum.
Such di’¼Ćerent results require attention, and all cavities in the following have this splice
loss.
Next, we investigate the in’¼éuence of having longer pieces of ’¼übre (13 m vs.
22
m) after the coupler, making the cavity 7.9 MHz and 4.7 MHz in total. The chirp
is decreasing with longer ’¼übre, suggesting that SPM is the main contributor to the
chirp mechanism. The spectrum is broadened by the longer cavity. The 11 metres
of additional ’¼übre shrinks the spectrum by more than 10 nm. The pulse duration,
however, is increased by 700 fs.
45
==PAGE:54==
3.3. LASER CAVITY
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3.3: (a) and (c) are the 13 m cavity in the frequency and time-domains, respec-
tively. (b) and (d) are the 22 m cavity in frequency and time-domains, respectively.
The spectral width is signi’¼ücantly reduced from extra ’¼übre, though the pulse durations
are similar. The chirp is slightly higher in the shorter cavity, suggesting that SPM is
the main mechanism in chirping the pulses.
We change the ’¼éuence on the SESAM by varying the area associated with the
pulse energy.
By increasing the spot size by a factor of two, we steer clear of the
damage threshold, which we in experimental work otherwise would be approaching by
decreasing the spot size. Interestingly, we notice that the chirp and peak power in
Fig. 3.4(b) are signi’¼ücantly higher than before. Since the ’¼éuence was decreased, we
expected an energy loss in the cavity due to the bigger absorption area.
46
==PAGE:55==
3.3. LASER CAVITY
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.4: Simulation of a doubled spot size. (a) is the input pulse (blue) in the
frequency-domain with the output pulse (red), (b) is the output pulse (blue) in the
time-domain and the chirp (orange) of it.
The couplers available in the lab are 80-20 and 50-50, allowing for three di’¼Ćerent
cavities. In the same way as the doubled spot size was believed to produce less powerful
pulses, an induced loss from a 50-50 coupler is expected to yield lower average power
and peak power.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.5: (a) Initial pulse and ’¼ünal pulse in frequency-domain. The spectral width
is rather narrow, and the top is ’¼éat compared to the other simulations. (b) The pulse
is indeed much more narrow than the other simulations, however, the full-width half
maximum (FWHM) is similar to the other results.
These fundamental trials provide an indication as to how the di’¼Ćerent parameters
in’¼éuence the pulses. Since the entire parameter space has not been swept, we do not
know how the parameters cross-correlate.
For this reason, we assume a best-guess
scenario, by combining the highest chirp and peak power. The high peak power and
chirp can yield even higher powers when the pulse is compressed. That being said, we
47
==PAGE:56==
3.3. LASER CAVITY
must stay within 1-5 MHz. Thus, we simulate a cavity with 23 m of ’¼übre; 2 m gain
’¼übre and 20 m passive ’¼übre. The latter is distributed in the same way as previous
simulations. The SESAM spot size is set to twice the MFA of the passive ’¼übre, and
we use an 80-20 coupler to form an 80% cavity.
3.3.1
Compression stage
The pulses from the stable cavity are launched into at a dispersive medium. In this
case, we propagate it in a ’¼übre with an opposite ╬▓2. Higher orders of ╬▓ are excluded.
This way, we can correlate the amount of ’¼übre and thus dispersion needed to compress
the pulse the most. Fig. 3.6 shows the breathing of the "best guess" pulse as it is
being compressed, and a couple of kW are present at the highest compression.
Figure 3.6: Pulse evolution in time during compression, ŌĆÖbreathingŌĆÖ, in ’¼übre with oppo-
site ╬▓2 for the 2 MFD spot size on the SESAM. It peaks after 86 m of ’¼übre corresponding
to a group delay dispersion of ŌłÆ780 ├Ś 103 fs2 with peak a peak power of 34 kW
Below are the results of the compression for all the scenarios simulated. It is clear
that less ’¼übre result in a higher chirp and initial peak power, causing the compressed
pulse to be more powerful. The 50-50 coupler reduced the peak power as expected
compared to the results of an 80-20. The spot size on the SESAM seems to have the
biggest impact on the obtainable peak power after compression. However, a simulation
of a 90-10 coupler combined with the bigger SESAM spot size turned out to disappoint
as well and act oppositely to our expectations regarding cavity energy and resulting
peak power as shown in Fig. 3.7.
48
==PAGE:57==
3.3. LASER CAVITY
Figure 3.7: Peak power comparison of all simulations. Highlighted are the maximum
from the doubled spot size, the best guess scenario based on the uncompressed pulse,
and best guess based on the peak powers of the compressions (90-10 coupler with 2
MFD).
Many parameters go into the supercontinuum generation process, and peak power
is not enough to characterise the generated spectrum1. Pulses with a chirp behave
di’¼Ćerently from pulses with zero chirp [33] (in the context of anomalous dispersion),
and the pulse duration also in’¼éuences the dominating processes involved. Fig. 3.8(a)
shows the maximum compression with a ŌĆÖ’¼éatŌĆÖ chirp for the SESAM with spot size equal
to 2 times the MFD. Fig. 3.8(b) sums up the compression of our trails, comparing pulse
durations.
1This analysis is outside the scope of this thesis. However in the anomalous supercontinuum gener-
ation regime, these parameters in’¼éuence the dynamics. For long pulses, for example, the combination
of modulation instability and Raman scattering make up the long wavelength content.
49
==PAGE:58==
3.4. SUMMARY
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: (a) maximum compression of the bigger spot size. The chirp is somewhat
noise, but overall ’¼éat at this point. (b) A collection of the trails in terms of pulse
duration.
3.4
Summary
We have investigated the cavity dynamics of the Fabry-Perot ’¼übre cavity with the sym-
metrised Fourier split-step method by varying di’¼Ćerent parameters. We saw di’¼Ćerent
spectra, pulse durations and chirps. It seems that SPM is the dominant factor in this
model when it comes to creating a chirp of the pulse rather than normal dispersion.
All pulses were compressible and yielded peak powers above 1kW. A bigger spot size
on the SESAM appeared to yield the highest peak power before and after compression.
Also the pulse duration was investigated. All pulses were between, 134 fs and 73 fs.
Surprisingly, two di’¼Ćerent con’¼ügurations were compressed to the same duration with
50
==PAGE:59==
3.4. SUMMARY
similar peak powers.
The cavityŌĆÖs simple mathematical description does not instill deep analysis of the
stability of the system. Yet, initial trails for long (100 m) as well as short cavities (5 m)
showed that even a small pulse could grow in the cavity only to form pulses identical to
those made from larger seed pulses. A small pulse would need to do more roundtrips
to get stable than its stronger counterparts.
51
==PAGE:60==
4
|
Experiments
Much work was put into the experimental part of this thesis. Several designs of the laser
cavity were considered during the initial trials. Not only the laser cavity changed, but
also how the pump would couple to the cavity as well as how to extract the pulses. We
begin with fundamental investigations such as the laser pump diode characterisation
and loss traces after each ’¼übre piece. The ’¼ürst iteration was a complicated three-lens
telescope, which was eventually changed to contain just two lenses. The reduction
of complexity continued throughout the trials to contain just one or no lenses. The
behaviour of the laser in the di’¼Ćerent setups are presented along with the pros and
cons of each setup.
52
==PAGE:61==
4.1. CHARACTERISATION
4.1
Characterisation
Multiple diodes were used, because the diodes a some point were exposed to either too
high temperature from a failing TEC (temperature controller) feedback or a strong
re’¼éection, forcing them to operate in an LED-like manner after being burnt. Their
peak wavelength were 976 nm and 974 nm, making the gain dynamics very similar.
Each characterisation was performed in the same way. The laser diode was driven by
a PLD500 from Wavelength Electronics along with a temperature controller from the
same manufacturer via a Thorlabs diode connector. The voltage across the diode is
correlated to the ’¼übre output from the diode, forming a linear relationship as shown
in Fig. 4.1. The splice was made with a Fujikura arc-splicer (FSM-100P).
Figure 4.1: Diode characteristics before and after isolator and FBG. Splices were made
by a Fujikura arc (FSM-100P).
The FBG ’¼übre is a PM1060L which has a di’¼Ćerent (5.9 ┬Ąm) MFD from all the other
’¼übres. Thus, the coupling loss to this ’¼übre, especially from a non-PM ’¼übre, is expected
to be high. To optimise these splices, we use a Vytran splicer (FFS-2000). This splicer
uses argon gas to fuse the ’¼übres, and it has a ’¼üre-polishing feature that enhances the
53
==PAGE:62==
4.2. SETUP I ŌĆō 3 LENSES
splice. The ’¼übres are aligned with the pump turned on (active alignment), and the
output is monitored and optimised in the plane and with their rotation.
4.2
Setup I ŌĆō 3 lenses
A natural ’¼ürst approach was to design the cavity in such a way that a collimating beam
could hit the SESAM at an arbitrary distance. A telescope setup with a collimating
lens in front of the ’¼übre output, followed by a focusing lens and yet another collimating
lens lens (all aspheric) can generate magni’¼ücation within the limits of Gaussian beam
optics. The biggest challenge using this method is by far the alignment. Cage systems
and lens tubes o’¼Ćer partly solutions to the problem.
However, they can be quite
rigorous to deal with, and monitoring the beam along its path is extremely di’¼ācult.
Because each lens changes the images of the its received image, and the fact that
we need to couple back through the system, six images most be so well-aligned and
decoupled from vibrations that, in practice, it was impossible to realise. Despite the
two or more degrees of freedom of all lenses and mounts, we succeeded in a partial
coupling to the ’¼übre, which was suspended in a bare-’¼übre adaptor on a custom-built
3D-stage.
The ’¼übre part of the setup consisted of a 400 mW pump diode from Lumentum,
operating at 976 nm with a band-pass ’¼ülter (BPF) in front of it, connecting to a PM
1060 ’¼übre which contains the FBG. The splice was performed with the Vytran. The
gain ’¼übre is 1 m of CorActive Yb-401 PM. To match better the di’¼Ćerent MFDs of
the FBG ’¼übre and gain ’¼übre, a small piece of PM-980 is spliced in between with the
Vytran. The gain ’¼übre is launched into a 1060 nm 80-20 coupler and the cavity is
formed in the 80% transmission arm of the coupler. All ’¼übre ends were angle cleaved
with an 8ŌŚ”angle to avoid the coupling of re’¼éections from the facets.
54
==PAGE:63==
4.2. SETUP I ŌĆō 3 LENSES
Pump @ 
976 nm
BPF
FBG
Gain fibre
In-line 
polarisor
SESAM
Passive 
fibre
80/20 
coupler
SMF
Setup ŌĆō 3 lenses
Figure 4.2: Original experimental setup. The pump and isolator are SMF28 non-PM
’¼übre, and the FBG is a HI-1080 PM ’¼übre. Splices involving this ’¼übre are Vytran due to
MFD mismatch. After the gain ’¼übre, an inline polarisor ’¼ülters out the leftover pump.
The cavity is formed in the 80%-direction of the coupler. Passive ’¼übre connects to the
telescope and onto the SESAM. SMF: single mode ’¼übre, BPF: Band-pass ’¼ülter
When passive ’¼übres were spliced, it is easy to keep track of the losses in the system.
However, as the gain ’¼übre is spliced into the cavity, ASE happens, which was unquan-
ti’¼üable and highly ’¼éuctuating. The ’¼éuctuations made it di’¼ācult to perform the lens
alignment which was needed every few minutes with one lens system and completely
impossible when one lens was changed. For this reason, we replaced the pump with a
PILAS (NKT Photonics) 1064 nm laser (frep = 11000000 Hz) which did not engage
with the gain dynamics of the ytterbium, and thus, a stable, incremental alignment
could be made, before the pump was spliced back on at the expense of a huge work
load. This method provided highly irregular pulses as well as a CW signal. We collect
the pulses through the 20% coupler arm, which is the direct re’¼éection of the SESAM.
A lens tube setup was attempted, but did not provide any noteworthy change.
55
==PAGE:64==
4.3. SETUP II ŌĆō 2 LENSES
Figure 4.3: Highly irregular pulses from the 3-lens system which was aligned seconds
before data capture.
4.3
Setup II ŌĆō 2 lenses
It became apparent that every lens that could be removed from the free-space optics in-
creased the durability of the setup when exposed to environmental instabilities. Apart
from that the alignment process can also be sped up. The working principle was to re-
place the third (i.e. ’¼ünal) lens with the SESAM mount. Gaussian beam optics dictate
that a beam waist is formed after a focusing lens rather than a focus. If the spot size is
to be that of the ’¼übre (i.e. the MFA), identical lenses need to be deployed. Two Thor-
labs lenses with focal lengths of 4 mm were used, making the Rayleigh range1 narrow.
Despite the fact that the focusing lens and SESAM now must be close together, and
IR-cards and the IR-viewer are more or less useless, the alignment was much faster.
The PILAS needed still be used for rough alignment.
1The distance in the propagation direction at which the beam radius has been doubled. For circular
beams, the MFA is doubled
56
==PAGE:65==
4.3. SETUP II ŌĆō 2 LENSES
Pump @ 
976 nm
BPF
FBG
Gain fibre
SESAM
Passive 
fibre
80/20 
coupler
SMF
Setup ŌĆō 2 lenses
Figure 4.4: 2 lenses are used to image the laser spot on the SESAM, which is put
within the Rayleigh range of the focusing lens.
As discussed in the previous chapter, our numerical model cannot provide any in-
formation as to what power we should pump with, directly. Nor can it tell us the
necessary ’¼éuence to initiate a mode-lock. Moreover, the physical cavity su’¼Ćers from
complex re’¼éections from e.g. ’¼übre end facets that still re’¼éect and form a cavity, and
possibly multiple pulses could be present. These factors and their position in’¼éuence
the cavity dynamics as hinted in Fig. 2.13. Because of this, we are unable to actually
determine the circulating power, and thus what level of ’¼éuence should be used ŌĆō that
being initiating a mode-lock or avoiding the damage threshold.
This early in the trials, splices were not optimised, and some components were acting
di’¼Ćerently from their speci’¼ücations, most likely due to the exposure to pump powers
exceeding their damage threshold. Oblivious of this, we falsely concluded that the
’¼éuence on the SESAM was not high enough. Thus, we reduced the spot size by a
factor of two and realigned the system. After an unimpressive improvement, we splice
optimised the Fujikura splices, which led to a removal of the in-line polarisor, which
allowed for much higher powers in the cavity. The alignment was easier, and could be
optimised well, until at certain point where the power would drop, when the SESAM
was moved in the beam direction (i.e. in and out of the Rayleigh range). It was hinted
that the SESAM was burnt, though the re’¼éection from it still was quite high. A visual
inspection of the SESAM from this setup revealed burns which matched the di’¼Ćerent
57
==PAGE:66==
4.3. SETUP II ŌĆō 2 LENSES
MFDs.
Figure 4.5: Microscope images of SESAM surface. Several burns ŌĆō ’¼ürst believed to
be scratches ŌĆō are visible to the naked eye. The lines originate from optimisations
of the focus, and the sizes of the burns match the expected spot size. Even bigger
burns appear, but they are ill-de’¼üned as they are believed to originate from several
focus attempts in the same area. In (c), two di’¼Ćerent alignment tracks almost overlap,
causing a larger burn-area. The circular burns in (d) during an alignment track are
believed to be caused by changing the angle of the SESAM mount randomly and by
leaving the laser at the same spot for longer periods of time.
Unexpectedly, the SESAM was capable of producing pulses when it was burnt as
well as when the beam path was blocked. The duration of the pulses were signi’¼ücantly
di’¼Ćerent. Changing the spot position on the SESAM con’¼ürmed that the pulses were
indeed modulated by the SESAM ŌĆō burnt or not. The parasitic lasing observed when
the beam path was blocked originates from re’¼éections in the system that form one or
more cavities. Apparently, one of our angle-cleaved ’¼übres caused so much re’¼éection
that it formed a strong cavity for the light Q-switch in. When it was cut with a scissor,
all parasitic lasing disappeared (until very high pump powers were reached). After a
thorough elimination of these re’¼éections, a pure Q-switching is observed, and when
the power is increased, as observed in most of our experiments, the pulse duration is
decrease.
58
==PAGE:67==
4.4. SETUP III ŌĆō 1 LENS
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: Q-switching at (a) 78 mW pump power and (b) 125 mW into the cavity.
When the power was increased slightly to 134 mW, Q-switched mode-locking was
possible if the ’¼übre was tapped as shown in Fig. 4.7. The repetition rate matches that
of a Ōł╝23 m long ’¼übre cavity. Adding more ’¼übre and higher pump power resulted in an
even longer pulse separation, verifying that it indeed was a mode-lock. The Q-switched
mode-locking was self-starting at 140 mW.
Mode-lock rep.rate: 4 MHz ~ 26 m
Figure 4.7: Tapping the ’¼übre ’¼übre spool initiated strong Q-switching with a mode-lock
on top brie’¼éy around 3 to 10 ┬Ąs. Large Q-switching oscillations were probably partly
due to the tapping of the ’¼übre itself, and partly oscillations that misaligned the ’¼übre
momentarily in the ’¼übre adaptor and 3D-stage.
4.4
Setup III ŌĆō 1 lens
In e’¼Ćort to increase the stability of the system further, we searched the literature and
were inspired by a setup [48], in which just one lens was used to focus the light. By
59
==PAGE:68==
4.4. SETUP III ŌĆō 1 LENS
moving an aspheric lens out of its focal length, the beam can be focused at multiple
positions along its axis of propagation. We put it 27 cm away. By doing so, the align-
ment was easy2, because the SESAM mirror-mount could isolate x and y movement,
and the PILAS was no longer necessary. Also the mirror post was changed from a stan-
dard 1 inch post to a 2 inch along with a proper 3D-stage for the bare ’¼übre coupler.
To dampen the oscillations from steps, knocks etc. we placed polystyrene under the
breadboard, LD driver, and table. These acts resulted in a highly stable setup. The
overshadowing pitfall was the lack of tuning ability from just one lens. Furthermore,
we did not manage to actually ’¼ünd a way to determine the spot size as Gaussian beam
propagation simulations [49] failed to recreate our observations from our parameters.
Most likely due to the more complicated aspheric lenses.
Pump @ 
976 nm
BPF
FBG
Gain fibre
Passive 
fibre
80/20 
coupler
SMF
Setup ŌĆō 1 lens
SESAM
Figure 4.8: One lens setup. The aspheric lens is shifted from its focal length to make
a focus on the SESAM. Di’¼Ćerent lenses were tried out, but yielded similar spot sizes.
We saw much the same behaviour as in the previous setups with ’¼ürst CW emis-
sion, then Q-switching, Q-switched mode-locking, and lastly CW with occasional Q-
switching at maximum pump power. Since this was our most stable system, we carried
out experiments in any way imaginable; di’¼Ćerent ’¼übre lengths ŌĆō both passive (including
its position in the cavity) and active, di’¼Ćerent coupler ration (20, 50, 80) and lenses.
Two things were consistent: the ration between the amount of active and passive ’¼übre
2The alignment took less than a minute, compared to the two previous setups that easily took a
day from scratch
60
==PAGE:69==
4.5. SETUP VI ŌĆō WDM
was essential for observing Q-switched mode-locking, and the more power in the cavity
during Q-switched mode-locking, the less the Q-switching instabilities.
Mode-lock rep.rate: 4 MHz ~ 26 m
Figure 4.9: Q-switched mode-locking from a Ōł╝23 m passive and Ōł╝2.3 m active ’¼übre
cavity pumped with 256 mW. The coupling ratio was 80-20, favouring the cavity. The
spot on the SESAM was formed 27 cm away from the lens, which was 6 mm from the
’¼übre.
4.5
Setup VI ŌĆō WDM
The elimination of Q-switching instabilities is di’¼ācult, and the study of it has been
extensive [50]. One way towards a clean mode-lock is to increase the power in the cavity,
and in order to investigate this idea, we let us inspire by [43]. This approach includes
a wavelength-demultiplexer (WDM) in di’¼Ćerent con’¼üguration, and it does not contain
a coupler as the light is extracted through the FBG. A WDM is a mixer of signals, and
it will allow the pump signal to be transmitted into the cavity, where the Yb-doped
’¼übre will transform it into 1030 nm, which will not leave the cavity through the WDM.
Thus, 25% more light can be kept inside from removing the coupler. The striking
disadvantage here is that whatever pulses are emitted are also strongly attenuated and
mixed with light outside the operation of the laser due to the transmitting e’¼Ćect of the
FBG. This makes the setup di’¼ācult to tune.
61
==PAGE:70==
4.5. SETUP VI ŌĆō WDM
Pump @ 
976 nm
BPF
FBG
Gain fibre
Passive 
fibre
1030 
WDM
Setup ŌĆō butt-coupling
SESAM
Figure 4.10: Experimental setup of WDM-setup. We couple the pump to the cavity
with a 1030 WDM. The cavity is still PM. The SESAM was both tried butt-coupled
and coupled with one lens.
We couple the SESAM by ’¼ürst butt-coupling the ’¼übre, and thus making the spot
size equal to the MFA. Because the ’¼übre is angle-cleaved this is an extremely delicate
process, where one is working in the dark.
Also, the ’¼übre end-facet was prone to
breaking. Unfortunately, we never tried approaching the ’¼übre with index-matching oil.
This trick allows us to couple better as the light is not seen the air, but oil, which, with
is matching refractive index, leads to guidance in it. Using this butt-coupling method,
our diode failed. It was probably due to a strong re’¼éection, where the coupling to the
SESAM was high. The WDM, however, was functioning, suggesting that it transmitted
light that it was not supposed to. Components designed for ŌĆÖirregular wavelengthsŌĆÖ such
as 1030 or 2000 nm are not nearly as established as for 1550, where isolators, WDMs
etc. function very well. Thus, with a new diode, we attempted again with exactly the
same result. Since we had no isolators for this wavelength (that could prevent a mode-
lock or strong Q-switched pulse), we decided to use the FBG as a pump protector and
a 50-50 coupler as a ’¼übre loop mirror. a 50-50 coupler may be regarded as a Sagnac
interferometer [51]. Only irregular Q-switching was present, though more steadily with
increasing pump power. The MFDs and the birefringence and PM-to-non-PM of the
62
==PAGE:71==
4.5. SETUP VI ŌĆō WDM
FBG ’¼übre resulted in too much loss of power outside the cavity, and we could never
investigate the cavity with higher powers that potentially could operate in a mode-
locked scheme.
63
==PAGE:72==
5
|
Discussion
The purpose of this project was to build was to build a femtosecond ytterbium-doped
mode-locked ’¼übre laser for use in OCT. However, much e’¼Ćort was also put into develop-
ing a numerical simulation with the goal of understanding the steady-state fundamental
mode-lock.
The simulation was made from a crude model, especially in one way: The cavity
was seeded with a pulse which enforces a mode-lock. This approach was simple to
model, however, it lacks detailed information about the mechanisms inside the cavity.
By imposing a moving frame of reference at the pulse position, the cavity was forced
through the pulse, opposed to propagating the pulse through the cavity.
Because
this happens in propagation steps rather than time steps, we did not include any
dynamic behaviour with losses as function of time apart from the SESAM. This would
otherwise have allowed the cavity to Q-switch and leave us with similar conclusions as
experimental results. Another phenomenon not described by the model is harmonic
mode-locking i.e.
circulation of multiple pulses inside the cavity.
In this, multiple
computational frames would have to be de’¼üned with a smaller step size in order to
capture pulse interactions. However, the gain dynamics would also have to be described
in a di’¼Ćerent way, because the population may not be inverted locally. A di’¼Ćerent
option would be to simulate the entire cavity simultaneously in small time steps. This
level of detail has been omitted due to its computational complexity e.g. simulation
time. Since the goal of this project was to understand the steady-state behaviour of
the mode-locked laser, its initialisation and deeper analysis of the dynamics was not
investigated.
64
==PAGE:73==
The challenges of building the actual laser were twofold: The ’¼ürst one was the
alignment of the SESAM with free-space optics. We attempted to build a telescope
to reduce the spot size impinging the SESAM. In theory, this is simply a matter
placing lenses with the correct distances and focal lengths. However, in practice, small
misalignment in the system ŌĆō static or dynamic ŌĆō changed the ’¼ünal image substantially.
This is true even with components such 3D-stages kinetic mounts that o’¼Ćer great
’¼éexibility in terms of position and angle adjustment. Unknowing of how sensitive the
system was, we attempted to reduce the beam via three lenses. For the sake of stability,
all but one lens were removed, which also allowed for better visual inspection with IR-
cards and IR-viewer, making alignment much faster. This reduction of complexity,
combined with many e’¼Ćorts towards isolating the parts from vibrations, was evidently
necessary for a stable setup.
The other challenge was related to the di’¼Ćerent MFDs in the ’¼übres. When these
’¼übres were spliced, it introduced major losses of pump photons before these could reach
the cavity. The problem was encountered twice over; when the cavity was ’¼ürst built
and when the WDM was deployed. We partly solved the problem by using the Vytran
fusion splicer and its ’¼üre-polishing e’¼Ćect.
The versatility of this splicer is striking
compared to the much automated Fujikura arc-splicer as it o’¼Ćers many parameters.
For this reason, an analysis of the optimal splice should be performed prior to cavity
splices. This is a lengthy process, which was not performed very well, but it yielded
better transmission than the arc-splicer. If these splices were optimised, perhaps a
mode-lock could have been initiated.
The potential problem of our mode-locking element for this project became apparent
after multiple observations of stable Q-switching and Q-switched mode-locking. Those
observations originated from the SESAM, and were all self-starting. Despite the fact
that di’¼Ćerent ’¼übre lengths, their position, pump powers, and ’¼éuences were tested in
di’¼Ćerent combinations, no pure mode-locking was observed.
A subsequent literature review of similar lasers and SESAMs revealed other recom-
mendations regarding the parameters of the SESAM. Ours were chosen from an idea
65
==PAGE:74==
that the recovery time should be on the order of the expected pulse duration. This
statement was, however, not in agreement with [8], in which it is stated that the relax-
ation time should be as low as possible. This led us to believe that all our trials should
have hit the correct cavity parameters at some point, provided that the SESAM had
the correct speci’¼ücations ŌĆō seemingly, no con’¼ügurations were left unexplored.
Going forward, the issue of the SESAM recovery time should be investigated further.
Another thing to consider is the saturation ’¼éuence, which is related to the spot size of
the laser beam. This value should be correlated with the spot size in such a way that
the initial spot is only magni’¼üed in order to increase ’¼éuence and avoid the damage
threshold.
At the same time, the saturation ’¼éuence must not be so low that the
spot exceeds the SESAM area. Once the correct ’¼éuence has been found, appropriate
parameters for the SESAM with an MFD spot size can be ordered for a butt-coupled
solution.
66
==PAGE:75==
6
|
Conclusion
This work has resulted in two products:
1. Numerical model of a laser cavity
2. Q-switched mode-locking laser
A numerical model of the laser cavity similar to our experimental setup was devel-
oped. Various components were simulated using the symmetrised Fourier split-step
method to solve the nonlinear Schr├Čdinger equation, which was developed to include
stimulated Raman scattering, self-phase modulation, and dispersion of nonlinearity.
The simulations produced linearly chirped pulses as expected. A simple, linear com-
pression stage could compress the pulses with anomalous dispersion to less than 150
fs. The in’¼éuence of di’¼Ćerent parameters was investigated through OFAT-simulations.
The experimental work was an investigation of di’¼Ćerent components and their in-
’¼éuence on the initialisation of pure mode-locking.
The produced pulses had peak
wavelengths around 1029-1031 nm and was produced with pure Q-switching and Q-
switched mode-locking only. The Q-switched mode-locking was obtained with di’¼Ćerent
repetition rates, lens systems, and pump powers. We observed a tendency of stronger
mode-locking with increasing pump power, up until continuous wave operation was
reached.
Unfortunately, it has not been possible to correlate the results of the simulation
with experimental work. The simulation enforced a mode-locked operation, and thus,
it developed into a steady-state mode-lock. Our experimental work never developed
into a similar steady-state, deeming the two incomparable. It is also not certain that
67
==PAGE:76==
the cavity would ever become stable in the experiment, because the SESAM parameters
ŌĆō namely the recovery time and modulation depth ŌĆō are not within the range of what is
required to sustain a mode-lock. Our model might be emulating how the cavity would
act, if the impossible was possible.
68
==PAGE:77==
List of Acronyms
ANDi all-normal dispersion.
ASE ampli’¼üed spontaneous emission.
BPF band-pass ’¼ülter.
CW continuous wave.
FBG Fibre Bragg Grating.
FFT ’¼ünite-Fourier transform.
FWHM full-width half maximum.
FWM four-wave mixing.
GCO giant chirp oscillator.
GVD group velocity dispersion.
MFA mode-’¼üeld area.
MFD mode ’¼üeld diameter.
MI modulation instability.
NA numerical aperture.
NLSE nonlinear Schr├Čdinger equation.
OCT optical coherence tomography.
OWB optical wave breaking.
PM polarisation-maintaining.
PMD polarisation mode dispersion.
PMF polarisation maintaining ’¼übre.
QML Q-switching mode-lock.
69
==PAGE:78==
List of Acronyms
SA saturable absorber.
SD spectral-domain.
SESAM semiconductor saturable absorber-mirror.
SMF single mode ’¼übre.
SPM self-phase modulation.
SRS stimulated Raman scattering.
SS swept-source.
SSFM split-step Fourier method.
TD time-domain.
TIR total internal re’¼éection.
WDM wavelength-demultiplexer.
XPM cross-phase modulation.
ZDW zero dispersion wavelength.
70
==PAGE:79==
Bibliography
[1]
Aaron Fenster, Donal B Downey, and H Neale Cardinal. ŌĆ£Three-dimensional
ultrasound imagingŌĆØ. In: Physics in medicine & biology 46.5 (2001), R67.
[2]
David I Hoult and Balram Bhakar. ŌĆ£NMR signal reception: Virtual photons and
coherent spontaneous emissionŌĆØ. In: Concepts in Magnetic Resonance: An Edu-
cational Journal 9.5 (1997), pp. 277ŌĆō297.
[3]
Max Roser, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, and Hannah Ritchie. ŌĆ£Life expectancyŌĆØ. In:
Our World in Data (2013).
[4]
AI Miller. The collected papers of Albert Einstein; volume 6 the Berlin years:
Writings 1914-1917. 1997.
[5]
Mikkel Jensen. ŌĆ£High-speed Time-stretch Optical Coherence TomographyŌĆØ. PhD
thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[6]
David Huang, Eric A Swanson, Charles P Lin, et al. ŌĆ£Optical coherence tomog-
raphyŌĆØ. In: science 254.5035 (1991), pp. 1178ŌĆō1181.
[7]
Mikkel Jensen, Iv├Īn Bravo Gonzalo, Rasmus Dybbro Engelsholm, et al. ŌĆ£Noise of
supercontinuum sources in spectral domain optical coherence tomographyŌĆØ. In:
JOSA B 36.2 (2019), A154ŌĆōA160.
[8]
Carsten Krogh Nielsen. ŌĆ£Mode locked ’¼über lasers: Theoretical and experimental
developmentsŌĆØ. In: Department of Physics and Astronomy (2006), p. 146.
[9]
DJ Richardson, RI Laming, DN Payne, et al. ŌĆ£320 fs soliton generation with
passively mode-locked erbium ’¼übre laserŌĆØ. In: Electronics Letters 27.9 (1991),
pp. 730ŌĆō732.
[10]
IP Alcock, AI Ferguson, DC Hanna, et al. ŌĆ£Mode-locking of a neodymium-doped
monomode ’¼übre laserŌĆØ. In: Electronics Letters 22.5 (1986), pp. 268ŌĆō269.
[11]
Patrick G. Bowen. ŌĆ£Environmentally Stable Mode-locked Fibre Lasers in the
Near-InfraredŌĆØ. PhD thesis. University of Auckland, 2017.
[12]
Lei Zhang, Jiaqi Zhou, Zhaokun Wang, et al. ŌĆ£SESAM mode-locked, environ-
mentally stable, and compact dissipative soliton ’¼über laserŌĆØ. In: IEEE Photonics
Technology Letters 26.13 (2014), pp. 1314ŌĆō1316.
[13]
IN Duling, C-J Chen, Ping Kong Alexander Wai, et al. ŌĆ£Operation of a nonlin-
ear loop mirror in a laser cavityŌĆØ. In: IEEE journal of quantum electronics 30.1
(1994), pp. 194ŌĆō199.
[14]
Francois Salin, Je’¼ĆSquier, and Michel Piche. ŌĆ£Mode locking of Ti: Al 2 O 3 lasers
and self-focusing: a Gaussian approximationŌĆØ. In: Optics letters 16.21 (1991),
pp. 1674ŌĆō1676.
71
==PAGE:80==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[15]
Dirk H Sutter, G├╝nter Steinmeyer, Lukas Gallmann, et al. ŌĆ£Semiconductor saturable-
absorber mirrorŌĆōassisted Kerr-lens mode-locked Ti: sapphire laser producing pulses
in the two-cycle regimeŌĆØ. In: Optics letters 24.9 (1999), pp. 631ŌĆō633.
[16]
F├¢ Ilday, JR Buckley, WG Clark, et al. ŌĆ£Self-similar evolution of parabolic pulses
in a laserŌĆØ. In: Physical review letters 92.21 (2004), p. 213902.
[17]
HM Pask, Robert J Carman, David C Hanna, et al. ŌĆ£Ytterbium-doped silica
’¼über lasers: versatile sources for the 1-1.2/spl mu/m regionŌĆØ. In: IEEE Journal
of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 1.1 (1995), pp. 2ŌĆō13.
[18]
Brandon G Bale, J Nathan Kutz, Andy Chong, et al. ŌĆ£Spectral ’¼ültering for high-
energy mode-locking in normal dispersion ’¼über lasersŌĆØ. In: JOSA B 25.10 (2008),
pp. 1763ŌĆō1770.
[19]
Andy Chong, William H Renninger, and Frank W Wise. ŌĆ£All-normal-dispersion
femtosecond ’¼über laser with pulse energy above 20nJŌĆØ. In: Optics letters 32.16
(2007), pp. 2408ŌĆō2410.
[20]
JR Buckley, FW Wise, F├¢ Ilday, et al. ŌĆ£Femtosecond ’¼über lasers with pulse
energies above 10? nJŌĆØ. In: Optics letters 30.14 (2005), pp. 1888ŌĆō1890.
[21]
Patrick Bowen, Miro Erkintalo, Richard Provo, et al. ŌĆ£Mode-locked Yb-doped
’¼über laser emitting broadband pulses at ultralow repetition ratesŌĆØ. In: Optics
letters 41.22 (2016), pp. 5270ŌĆō5273.
[22]
Daping Luo, Wenxue Li, Yang Liu, et al. ŌĆ£High-power self-similar ampli’¼ücation
seeded by a 1 GHz harmonically mode-locked Yb-’¼über laserŌĆØ. In: Applied Physics
Express 9.8 (2016), p. 082702.
[23]
Govind Agrawal. Nonlinear Fiber Optics. Elsevier, 2013.
[24]
Rasmus Engelsholm Dybbro. ŌĆ£Low Noise Supercontinuum Lasers for Optical Co-
herence Tomography SystemsŌĆØ. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark,
2018.
[25]
K Charles Kao and George A Hockham. ŌĆ£Dielectric-’¼übre surface waveguides for
optical frequenciesŌĆØ. In: Proceedings of the Institution of Electrical Engineers.
Vol. 113. 7. IET. 1966, pp. 1151ŌĆō1158.
[26]
Bahaa EA Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich. Fundamentals of photonics. John Wiley
& Sons, 2019.
[27]
Jesper L├”gsgaard. Lecture notes, Waveguide Optics. 2013.
[28]
Juichi Noda, Katsunari Okamoto, and Yutaka Sasaki. ŌĆ£Polarization-maintaining
’¼übers and their applicationsŌĆØ. In: Journal of Lightwave Technology 4.8 (1986),
pp. 1071ŌĆō1089.
[29]
Wolfgang H├żnsel, Heinar Hoogland, Michele Giunta, et al. ŌĆ£All polarization-
maintaining ’¼über laser architecture for robust femtosecond pulse generationŌĆØ.
In: Applied Physics B 123.1 (2017), p. 41.
[30]
M DiDomenico. ŌĆ£Material dispersion in optical ’¼über waveguidesŌĆØ. In: Applied
optics 11.3 (1972), pp. 652ŌĆō654.
[31]
WJ Tomlinson, Roger H Stolen, and Anthony M Johnson. ŌĆ£Optical wave breaking
of pulses in nonlinear optical ’¼übersŌĆØ. In: Optics letters 10.9 (1985), pp. 457ŌĆō459.
72
==PAGE:81==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[32]
Fedor M Mitschke and Linn F Mollenauer. ŌĆ£Discovery of the soliton self-frequency
shiftŌĆØ. In: Optics letters 11.10 (1986), pp. 659ŌĆō661.
[33]
John M Dudley, Go├½ry Genty, and St├®phane Coen. ŌĆ£Supercontinuum generation
in photonic crystal ’¼überŌĆØ. In: Reviews of modern physics 78.4 (2006), p. 1135.
[34]
Lasse Orsila and Oleg G Okhotnikov. ŌĆ£Three-and four-level transition dynamics
in Yb-’¼über laserŌĆØ. In: Optics express 13.9 (2005), pp. 3218ŌĆō3223.
[35]
TC Newell, P Peterson, A Gavrielides, et al. ŌĆ£Temperature e’¼Ćects on the emission
properties of Yb-doped optical ’¼übersŌĆØ. In: Optics communications 273.1 (2007),
pp. 256ŌĆō259.
[36]
MJ Guy, DU Noske, and JR Taylor. ŌĆ£Generation of femtosecond soliton pulses
by passive mode locking of an ytterbium-erbium ’¼ügure-of-eight ’¼über laserŌĆØ. In:
Optics letters 18.17 (1993), pp. 1447ŌĆō1449.
[37]
Andrey B Matsko and Vladimir S Ilchenko. ŌĆ£Optical resonators with whispering-
gallery modes-part I: basicsŌĆØ. In: IEEE Journal of selected topics in quantum
electronics 12.1 (2006), pp. 3ŌĆō14.
[38]
Tso Yee Fan and Robert L Byer. ŌĆ£Diode laser-pumped solid-state lasersŌĆØ. In:
IEEE journal of Quantum Electronics 24.6 (1988), pp. 895ŌĆō912.
[39]
Andy Chong, William H Renninger, and Frank W Wise. ŌĆ£Properties of normal-
dispersion femtosecond ’¼über lasersŌĆØ. In: JOSA B 25.2 (2008), pp. 140ŌĆō148.
[40]
Chia-Ming Chen and Paul L Kelley. ŌĆ£Nonlinear pulse compression in optical
’¼übers: scaling laws and numerical analysisŌĆØ. In: JOSA B 19.9 (2002), pp. 1961ŌĆō
1967.
[41]
Martin E Fermann and Ingmar Hartl. ŌĆ£Ultrafast ’¼übre lasersŌĆØ. In: Nature photonics
7.11 (2013), pp. 868ŌĆō874.
[42]
ME Fermann, MJ Andrejco, Y Silberberg, et al. ŌĆ£Passive mode locking by us-
ing nonlinear polarization evolution in a polarization-maintaining erbium-doped
’¼überŌĆØ. In: Optics letters 18.11 (1993), pp. 894ŌĆō896.
[43]
MJ Hekmat, A Gholami, M Omoomi, et al. ŌĆ£Stable linear SESAM femtosecond
’¼über laser by use of faraday rotator mirrorsŌĆØ. In: High-Power Lasers and Appli-
cations VIII. Vol. 10016. International Society for Optics and Photonics. 2016,
p. 1001615.
[44]
RP Photonics, nonlinear polarization rotation. url: https://www.rp-photonics.
com/nonlinear_polarization_rotation.html. (accessed: 06.06.2021).
[45]
Batop, Saturable Absorber Mirror, Time-dependent absorption. url: https://
www.batop.de/information/SAM_infos.html. (accessed: 16.03.2021).
[46]
RP Photonics, Q switching. url: https://www.rp-photonics.com/q_switching.
html. (accessed: 18.06.2021).
[47]
Herman A Haus. ŌĆ£Mode-locking of lasersŌĆØ. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Quantum Electronics 6.6 (2000), pp. 1173ŌĆō1185.
[48]
Huibo Wang, Hainian Han, Yang Xie, et al. ŌĆ£Stable SESAM-mode-locked Yb
’¼über laser in the similariton regimeŌĆØ. In: Advanced Solid State Lasers. Optical
Society of America. 2017, JTh2AŌĆō37.
73
==PAGE:82==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[49]
Gaussian beam propagation. url: https://lightmachinery.com/optical-
design-center/more-optical-design-tools/gaussian-beam-propagation/.
(accessed: 23.06.2021).
[50]
Theodore Kolokolnikov, Michel Nizette, Thomas Erneux, et al. ŌĆ£The Q-switching
instability in passively mode-locked lasersŌĆØ. In: Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena
219.1 (2006), pp. 13ŌĆō21.
[51]
Brian Culshaw. ŌĆ£The optical ’¼übre Sagnac interferometer: an overview of its prin-
ciples and applicationsŌĆØ. In: Measurement Science and Technology 17.1 (2005),
R1.
74
==PAGE:83==
Additional reading
[1]
. R Paschotta, J Nilsson, A C Tropper, et al. ŌĆ£Ytterbium-doped ’¼über ampli’¼üersŌĆØ.
In: IEEE J.Quantum Electron (1997).
[2]
Mateusz Pielach, Bernard Piechal, Jan Szczepanek, et al. ŌĆ£Energy Scaling of an
Ultrafast All-PM-Fiber Laser OscillatorŌĆØ. In: IEEE Access 8 (2020), pp. 145087ŌĆō
145091.
[3]
Antonio Agnesi, Luca Carr├Ī, Federico Pirzio, et al. ŌĆ£Low repetition rate, hy-
brid ’¼über/solid-state, 1064 nm picosecond master oscillator power ampli’¼üer laser
systemŌĆØ. In: JOSA B 30.11 (2013), pp. 2960ŌĆō2965.
[4]
Wei Chen, Youjian Song, Kwangyun Jung, et al. ŌĆ£Few-femtosecond timing jitter
from a picosecond all-polarization-maintaining Yb-’¼über laserŌĆØ. In: Optics express
24.2 (2016), pp. 1347ŌĆō1357.
[5]
Charles J Koester and Elias Snitzer. ŌĆ£Ampli’¼ücation in a ’¼über laserŌĆØ. In: Applied
optics 3.10 (1964), pp. 1182ŌĆō1186.
[6]
IP Alcock, AI Ferguson, DC Hanna, et al. ŌĆ£Continuous-wave oscillation of a
monomode neodymium-doped ’¼übre laser at 0.9 ┬Ąm on the 4F32ŌåÆ4I92 transi-
tionŌĆØ. In: Optics communications 58.6 (1986), pp. 405ŌĆō408.
[7]
J Stone and C_A Burrus. ŌĆ£Neodymium-doped silica lasers in end-pumped ’¼über
geometryŌĆØ. In: Applied Physics Letters 23.7 (1973), pp. 388ŌĆō389.
[8]
RJ Mears, L Reekie, SB Poole, et al. ŌĆ£Neodymium-doped silica single-mode ’¼übre
lasersŌĆØ. In: Electronics letters 21.17 (1985), pp. 738ŌĆō740.
[9]
E Snitzer, H Po, F Hakimi, et al. ŌĆ£Double clad, o’¼Ćset core Nd ’¼über laserŌĆØ. In:
Optical ’¼über sensors. Optical Society of America. 1988, PD5.
[10]
D Kuizenga and A Siegman. ŌĆ£FM and AM mode locking of the homogeneous
laser-Part I: TheoryŌĆØ. In: IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics 6.11 (1970),
pp. 694ŌĆō708.
[11]
Frank W Wise, Andy Chong, and William H Renninger. ŌĆ£High-energy femtosec-
ond ’¼über lasers based on pulse propagation at normal dispersionŌĆØ. In: Laser &
Photonics Reviews 2.1-2 (2008), pp. 58ŌĆō73.
[12]
Mikkel Jensen, Iv├Īn Bravo Gonzalo, Rasmus Dybbro Engelsholm, et al. ŌĆ£Noise of
supercontinuum sources in spectral domain optical coherence tomographyŌĆØ. In:
JOSA B 36.2 (2019), A154ŌĆōA160.
[13]
Ryan C Niemeier, Zach J Simmons, and Jeremy D Rogers. ŌĆ£Noise reduction
in supercontinuum sources for OCT by single-pulse spectral normalizationŌĆØ. In:
Applied Optics 59.18 (2020), pp. 5521ŌĆō5526.
75
==PAGE:84==
ADDITIONAL READING
[14]
John M Dudley, Go├½ry Genty, and St├®phane Coen. ŌĆ£Supercontinuum generation
in photonic crystal ’¼überŌĆØ. In: Reviews of modern physics 78.4 (2006), p. 1135.
[15]
Martin E Fermann, VI Kruglov, BC Thomsen, et al. ŌĆ£Self-similar propagation
and ampli’¼ücation of parabolic pulses in optical ’¼übersŌĆØ. In: Physical Review Letters
84.26 (2000), p. 6010.
[16]
B├╝lend Orta├¦, Marco Pl├Čtner, Jens Limpert, et al. ŌĆ£Self-starting passively mode-
locked chirped-pulse ’¼über laserŌĆØ. In: Optics express 15.25 (2007), pp. 16794ŌĆō
16799.
[17]
M Zhang, LL Chen, C Zhou, et al. ŌĆ£Mode-locked ytterbium-doped linear-cavity
’¼über laser operated at low repetition rateŌĆØ. In: Laser physics letters 6.9 (2009),
pp. 657ŌĆō660.
[18]
Gary D Luker and Kathryn E Luker. ŌĆ£Optical imaging: current applications and
future directionsŌĆØ. In: Journal of Nuclear Medicine 49.1 (2008), pp. 1ŌĆō4.
76
