==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
The Cost of Security in Container Orchestration Sys-
tems
A comprehensive study of Azure Kubernetes Service
By Alexander Hansen Kappel (s182861)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The cost associated with security often has a negative impact of whether a company wants the system to
use the bare minimum of security rather than investing heavily into security hardening tools. With the
gained popularity of cloud service providers like Microsoft’s Azure or Amazon’s AWS, adding a higher
level of security seems more approachable as these services often offers a full suite of tools, without
having to pay for and learn other third party tools. However, these tool are typically a ”as-a-service”
platform and owners will be billed monthly based on the usage of the ones they implement. These
features can be hard to estimate as they are sometimes branded as ”free” with users then paying for
the amount of resources they use.
Therefore, a comprehensive study of the costs associated with a specific service was carried out. This
thesis seeks to answer whether adding security features generates more costs to the system than a
system without security features. The specific service in question is Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS). A
managed Kubernetes service that is offered by Microsoft. The thesis will use both security features from
Azure specific resource, and security features from the container orchestration system (Kubernetes).
The first part of the thesis sets up the design and investigate which features to use. The second part
implements and builds the resource to generate data, that can then be collected for evaluation.
The study found that the security features did not affect the overall cost of the Kubernetes clusters and
that users should implement these security features without concerns of a higher cost.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a M.Sc. degree
in Computer Science Engineering with the study line Computer Security.
Kongens Lyngby, July 12, 2021
By Alexander Hansen Kappel (s182861)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
In front of you lies my master thesis focusing on The Cost of Security in Container Orchestration
Systems. This master thesis is written as final work to complete my master’s education in Computer
Science Engineering at The Technical University of Denmark (DTU). I want to express my appreciation
to the company I collaborated with during the writing of the thesis. They were the ones who provided
me with this topic and gave deep insights in the technology and made many resources available to me. I
am also grateful for my thesis supervisor Xenofon Fafoutis, who supported me and helped me along this
journey. Without their participation, I would not have been able to write this thesis. Furthermore, I
would like to give a special thanks to my girlfriend who were a huge support and encouraged me during
the often tough times of writing a thesis in isolation during the global pandemic. Lastly, I also want to
express my gratitude to my family and friends who supported me during the process.
Thank you,
Alexander Hansen Kappel
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background & Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis Overview / Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
4
2.1
Virtualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Identifying Security Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Design
13
3.1
Part 1: AKS Security
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Part 2: AKS Cost analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Implementation
22
4.1
Infrastructure Provisioning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Evaluation
32
5.1
Security Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.2
Cost Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Discussion
41
6.1
Reflection/Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7
Conclusion
43
A
Original Project Plan
44
B
Revised Project Plan
45
Bibliography
46
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
More often than not security are being implemented in one of the last steps of development or put as
a low priorities within a company. Either it perceived as being too time-consuming or as being too ex-
pensive to implement. Sometimes the lack of security implementation can also be the lack of knowledge
within a team or security features made available by the solutions. Depending on what the opinion
within a company’s management might be, security today, still stands as being an often overlooked
aspect. As the Global Head Information Security for Société Générale International Banking once said
[Nap]:
“It takes 20 years to build a reputation and few minutes of cyber-incident to ruin it.” – Stephane
Nappo.
However, one other reason as to the lack of security, can also be that a technology is so new that
vulnerabilities has not yet been found and zero-day attacks have yet to come, or that a proper matured
security documentation has yet been developed by the service provide. Just like the wide-spread use
of IoT devices not considering themselves as being a gateway for hackers to enter the private network.
With the success of Docker developers saw the ease of use and increase in productivity by containerizing
their projects or even small parts of their project. In addition to the increase in popularity of micro-
services - developers needed a way to manage all of these containers. This have led to new tools being
developed - called container orchestrators - that seeks to organize and automate container provisioning
and configurations.
As companies around the world have also seen the potential of cloud services providers, many choose
to move to these platforms. One of these cloud solutions are Azure Kubernetes service. Kubernetes
enables automation of many repetitive and time-consuming processes when developing web-services, but
is still considered to just hit maturity. This leaves a lot space left for improvements and development.
These containers are just as vulnerable to attacks and exploits as traditional development environments.
Therefore, companies are interested in knowing how to secure them and what securing them would cost.
1.1
Background & Motivation
Netcompany are one of the companies that are in the process of migrating to this type of container
orchestration. Therefore, they are interested in understanding the the security capabilities of running
their project on Azure Kubernetes service. Investigating the feature, capabilities, opportunities provided
by Azure while maintaining high productivity and ease-of-use, would be beneficial to Netcompany. The
research would be a part of the operations team in the Netherlands and hopefully serve as a blueprint
for other departments of Netcompany as well.
1.2
Problem Statement
The benefits of switching all (or some) of your on-premise IT infrastructure to cloud service providers
such as Microsoft Azure and other company’s with either Software-as-a-Service (SaaS), Platform-as-a-
Service (PaaS), or Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) is why it has gained such a mass appeal. This is
==PAGE:8==
1.2 Problem Statement
2
important when you are dealing with clients. Clients seeking for a IT company to develop a solution,
are interested in having cost low and tend to settle upon Service-level-agreements (SLAs) before hand.
This means that it is important for a company using these cloud services, to be aware of what each
resource is costing. This means you go away from having your own hardware and on-premise system
that in some cases are already payed for. This means that you cannot just launch the biggest virtual
machine with the fastest SSDs available to each customers. When you go Cloud you will leave this
possibility behind and must consider that each resource being used comes with a monthly price tag. A
price tag that will matter to the client who paid a great amount of money for the software company to
develop.
Figuring out which security features are being provided by your cloud service provider (and which are
lacking) are important to both the customer (Client) and the IT solutions company. In addition, being
able to more accurately approximate cost associated with projects are equally as important when you
get billed by the second. Another problem is the lack of knowledge on security implementations using
AKS. As earlier mentioned, the solution in still young and leaves many companies with little information
about how to use it. They may have good knowledge about the concepts such as containers, docker or
role-based access control, but not likely to have to implement that using AKS.
Therefore, the purpose and main task of this thesis is to analyze the current security situation for
implementing new services securely, and then to see if this has an impact for the costs. The solution
would consist of two parts. The first being finding the security features available by Azure Kubernetes
service, the second part will be focusing on costs analysis. The purpose of this thesis can be expressed
by this sentence:
How much would security cost to implement in AKS?
Goals / Research Questions / Methods
The goal of this thesis is to determine if there are any costs associate with adding security features in
Azure. The thesis should answer whether having a larger budget would make a more secure system.
The project should investigate security features and capabilities of Azure Kubernetes Service, while
documenting the cost associated with each feature. This will result in a system design composing of
said features that must be applied in order to be security compliant. In addition there will be conducted
a cost analysis on the resources.
To help aid the completion of this goal and analysing the problem statement, these research questions
should be answered throughout this report:
• Which security concepts should be considered?
• Are the price estimates made by Azure accurate?
• Does budget affect the overall level of security?
Limitations / Scoping
Azure provides security in all areas of their platform.
Many more than just AKS and in order to
scope the project, only security features related to containers are considered. Topics such as Microsoft
defender, Azure Policies, Azure Key Vault are considered to be out-of-the-scope.
Lastly, the thesis will focus on the features made available by AKS, meaning that a combination of
using different tools from other cloud service providers like Amazon’s AWS or the firewall capabilities
of Cloudflare, would not be considered. It is possible that one could achieve a more robust or cheaper
security solution by combining different providers, but will require a lot more research than the scope
of this thesis.
==PAGE:9==
1.3 Contributions
3
1.3
Contributions
This thesis provides the implementation process, system testing and cost analysis of implementing
security features to Azure Kubernetes Service. The solution is now being used by the company who
provided the problem and has received the answers and solution they wanted. Information such as
hidden costs has been provided and the knowledge on what the technology does and how to use it,
has been a great help and useful addition to the company. The research has provided insights for the
management and engineers with a baseline on the impact that this technology provides.
1.4
Thesis Overview / Structure
The rest of the thesis is structured as follows:
Chapter 2: Theory / State of the Art - This chapter describes the concepts behind container orches-
trations and its connection to Azure Kubernetes Service. Different techniques would be investigated
that are needed for the proposed system solution. The chapter starts with a brief description of the
technologies that makes up AKS such as Docker and Kubernetes. Hereafter, there will be considered
the benefits and trade-offs by using virtual machines versus containers. As AKS would be the main
focus for the thesis, a overview of the architecture would be presented. Followed by a section describing
how clients of Azure are charged of using its service. Lastly, the chapter would end with a look on
some of the common vulnerabilities associated with containers and the security challenges associated
with containers. This chapter will serve as the knowledge foundation to which the design of chapter 3
would be based on.
Chapter 3: Design - In chapter three, there will be looked at the task at hand. The will be presented
a proposed system solution in two parts. The first part would focus on the AKS-side of the system.
Mainly being the which security features that should be implemented in the following chapter. This will
serve as the proposed security baseline. Hereafter, costs will be introduced. What does the different
features cost to apply and how should the system be tested?
Chapter 4: Implementation - The Implementation chapter will look at how the infrastructure of the
system setup proposed in previous chapter, is provisioned and configured to run. This will serve as a
proof of concept, but also as the foundation to which the evaluation and results can be drawn from.
Chapter 5: Evaluation / Results - Chapter five will describe the results of the system designed and
implemented in the previous chapters. Are the security features functioning as intended, and are the
system robust against the vulnerabilities that is wants to secure. Furthermore, the chapter will evalu-
ated on the different costs associated with the system design. What are the results of adding security?
Chapter 6: Discussion - This chapter will dive into the proposed system design’s approach to secu-
rity. There will be reflected on the security properties of the design and the methods used for generating
results. Lastly, there will also be discussed further work possibilities. The chapter will end with a re-
flection on future work improvement propositions. Specifically concepts that were out-of-the-scope for
the thesis but could be the next step for more research.
Chapter 7: Conclusion - The thesis will conclude with a summary of the thesis, its solutions and
results. It will draw conclusions from the accumulated costs and the results of the tests.
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
To begin this thesis, this chapter will provide the proper theory behind the concepts that will be
used throughout the rest of the report. It is important to understand the building blocks of container
orchestration and how containers work.
This is a system composing of a series of different layers
that work together in order to create a container. Concepts such as virtualization, containers, Docker,
Kubernetes, images, nodes, clusters are all a part of what makes a running service when using AKS.
2.1
Virtualization
Virtualization is to create a simulated computing environment as opposed to be running in a physical
environment. [Hat18] Meaning that virtualization can run what appears to be multiple full-sized com-
puters each configured with its own operating system on hardware of a single physical machines.
Let us say that a company owns multiple servers for hosting different services. In order to give the
users and the developers the smoothest experience, the company bought expensive high performance
machines. Like a sports-car owner, they want a fast high performance car well aware that they can’t
go more than 110km/t on the road and most likely will never utilize 100% of the car’s power. The
same is often true for the high performance servers who might be running at under half of the machines
capabilities or storage utilization. Now imagine a company having more than just a mail server, and
would by such a server for each of their services, all running at half the performance utilization. This
is what virtualization is trying to solve.
The appeal of virtualization came from having the option to utilize all of the capacity of a machine
by running other applications that would otherwise be bound to the physical hardware. Besides the
benefit of having a scalable solution that can handle a variable workloads - by running multiple services
from one server, virtualization makes its possible for companies to reducing the infrastructure cost,
physical space requirements, and maintenance cost, while using less power consumption.
This is done by what is known as a hypervisor. Without it these computing instances would not be
possible. A hypervisor can be seen as the service that monitors the virtualization process. It can sit
on top of the operating systems or directly on the hardware and is the software that orchestrates and
partition the different available resources to each virtual environment. The hypervisor therefore divides
a portion of the physical available storage, RAM, CPU, power etc. and allocate it amongst the virtual
environments.
There are several types of virtualization (sometimes used in tandem) like Desktop-virtualization,
Hardware-virtualization, Application-Virtualization, Network-virtualization, Storage-virtualization, and
Containerization - the latter being what will become one of the topics of this chapter.
2.1.1
Containerization
Containerization is the act of package software code and bundling together its dependencies that enables
it to run. By doing to, ensuring that it can run consistently regarding of the environment its being
run from. This approach makes it easy for developers to deploy applications much faster and more
reliable as the phrasing ”it works on my computer” is no longer an issue. This is because traditional
software development methods take place on the individual work environment.
Then, its deployed
to a different location with a different operating system that can result in errors. software can runs
==PAGE:11==
2.1 Virtualization
5
perfectly in the development environment, but can run with errors or bugs in another. By containerizing
applications, developers can write software and replicate it across multiple environments and make it
run consistently. A single encapsulation of software is known as a Container and one of the most popular
tools to containerize applications is Docker. [BRB20]
The concept of containerizing applications is not a recent practice and dates back to the 1980s in
linux systems. The reason to its recent rise in popularity came with the launch of the Docker Engine in
2013. Docker introduced the Docker Engine and Docker CLI that utilizes docker images and dockerfiles,
that made it much more accessible and easy to use (see section 2.1.3 Docker). [Inc]
What is a container?
A container is a fully packaged portable computing environment. Its abstracted away form the operating
system and can be run from virtual machines, physical hardware or in the cloud. All the necessary
configuration files, libraries, binaries, and dependencies are compiled and encapsulated into what is
known as a container image. Once a container image is run is will become a container. Because it is
abstracted outside of the operating system, containers are considered light weight as it shares the local
OS kernel and is thus very eﬀicient, agile, portable, and fast and easy to deploy. [Cit]
What is Container Orchestrations?
Managing one or more containers can easily be done via docker cli, however, most will find themselves
having hundreds or even thousands containers to manage. Manually scaling and across multiple con-
tainers without an automated tool is a time-consuming and complex task as there has to be manually
allocated resources, load-balancing, and network configuration. A container orchestration tool auto-
mates that process of scaling deploying, scheduling, resource managing, and load-balancing of processes.
In a nutshell, container orchestration automates the container lifecycle management, thus improving
scalability and productivity. [Con20] One of the most popular container orchestration tools are Kuber-
netes (see section 2.1.4 kubernets).
2.1.2
Virtual Machines vs. Containers
Although it might seem as virtual machines (VMs) are the technology of yesteryear and containers have
taken over as the new gold-standard, virtual machines still has its application and are still widely used.
Virtualization tools like Oracle’s VirtualBox are widely popular for learning purposes. Many students
or professionals are simulating sandbox PC-environments for testing and practicing skills, like ethical
hacking. Therefore, its worth knowing a little about how containers are different from virtual machines
and why you should choose one over the other.
Figure 2.1 illustrates the difference in the architecture between the two.
==PAGE:12==
2.1 Virtualization
6
Figure 2.1: Containers vs. virtual machines architecture [BRB20].
Let us first have a look at why you should use containers:
• Speed. Each virtual machines has its own guest operating system that requires a full start-up
process to initialize the VM. This process takes several times longer than running a container and
might have a lot of overhead in what the VM would actually be used for.
• This leads up to the second point - cost. If the machines are made available by cloud providers,
customers have to request a whole machine that each needs a specified amount of storage, power
and memory. A resource that the customer has to pay for no matter how much they are actually
using.
• Agility. Containers will behave the same no matter the environment. Therefore, containers can be
shared across many platforms and teams without the risk of environment-dependency or human-
related errors.
• Fault-isolation. The underlying host-OS would not be affected if one or more containers fail at
run-time - as is the case for other containers. Orchestration services will scale, repair, redeploy
containers without causing downtime.
• Automation. Containers are typically deployed and managed by a orchestration platform like
Kubernetes. This allows for automated scaling, load-balancing, network configuration, including
logging and monitoring. Setup and configuration of VMs can be time consuming especially when
having more than a few to manage
As earlier mentioned, there are still reasons to be using a VM. Here is some of the most prominent
ones;
• Kernel-Isolation. As can be seen from Figure 2.1, containers run at kernel-level as opposed to
virtual machines that runs on top of the hypervisor - the hardware abstraction level - with its
own guest OS. As a result, virtual machines are more isolated than containers.
This is also
why containers are typically being perceived as less secure than VMs (see section 2.4 Identifying
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Virtualization
7
security challenges).Since the OS is shared, a malicious attack against the kernel would affect all
containers.
• Monolithic applications. In some cases it can be preferred to have resources isolation. Also, it
might be that the application needs to have access to interact with an OS, then VMs could be
the better option.
• Mature technology. Adoption of containers can be challenging as the technology is rather new and
therefore will have a steep learning for employees. This can be a downside to some companies, as
they have to invest in training in order to adopt the technology.
When choosing a virtual machine or a container, the bottom-line is that there always will be some
trade-offs in convenience, performance, price or security. Trying to answer the question; whether con-
tainers are better than VMs or should you use one to use one or the other, are probably the wrong
way to think about the two technologies. Yes, there are many cases where one should decide between
the two, but that does not mean you could not use both technologies in a powerful way. As cloud
computing have become one of the most used infrastructure services, thousands of companies today
are already running their software on resources dependent on VMs. By doing so, providers will have
several VMs hosting thousands of containers, combining many of the advantages between the two types
of virtualization.
2.1.3
Docker
Now that there have been address the concept of virtualization and Containerization - what makes
containers work? As briefly mentioned earlier, containers use what is known as a container engine. A
container engines builds, runs, and stored container images. One of such engines is Docker. Docker
is an open source containerization platform. While software engineers can create containers without
Docker, it will not offer the same toolkit as Docker provides. Docker can automatically build containers
while also keep track of container versioning. In addition, docker provides container reuse. Through the
open-source registry, developers can contribute with container libraries and container images. This way
developers can use base images as templates for new containers. These are known as Docker images.
Docker images are essentially the same as container images - a read-only file containing the executable
source code, dependencies, libraries (see section 2.1.1 containerization) - except that Docker images are
made up of a series of layers. Docker uses that for improving the speed, size and eﬀiciency of traditional
linux containers. Typically, projects starts with a base image, and then Docker adds a layer called a
container layer that will contain the project and only exist while its running. In addition these layers
are used as a form of version control, that each can be rolled back. This means that the user can go
back to a previous iteration of the image.
Figure 2.2: Docker vs. regular container architecture [Hat].
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Virtualization
8
Containerizing with docker i fairly simple from a developers perspective. After installing the Docker
engine, developers just have to add a file known as a Docker file. Docker files are the set of instructions
on how to build the Docker image, that will become a container. Just like a script, a Docker file is a
list of commands that the Docker engine will execute to build the image.
Additionally, Docker offers a way of using processes from different containers running on the same
host. This is done via a second file called Docker Compose. Much like Docker files, Docker compose is a
yaml-file that resides in the project-directory of the project to be containerized. But, instead of listing
the different commands, a Docker compose files consist of all the services that should be included in
the project. Essentially, it allows for application to consist of a collection of containers.
To summarize Docker is more than a containerization tool, is a actually several things: a format for
container images, a container registry, a runtime library, a command line interface i.e. CLI (Docker file
commands), a container version controller, and an API for container management. Docker is without
a doubt a powerful container engine, however, once the containers are running there are still aspects
of a containers lifecycle that is not managed. Furthermore, until now, there have mainly been used a
couple of containers as examples but its most likely that one would have to manage hundreds or even
thousands containers. This is what containers orchestration tool are trying to solve.
2.1.4
Kubernetes
Before containers had the mass appeals a s today, even before Kubernetes existed, Google we running all
their applications in containers. That included their search engine, Gmail, Maps etc. Considering the
size of Google, one can imagine the scale of how many containers that had to be managed. As no reliable
orchestration tool existed at that time, Google were interested in building their own. After intermediate
solutions like Borg or Omega - which mainly served Googles own services - Google founded Kubernetes.
Named after the Greek word helmsman or pilot (which explains the logo of a ship wheel), Kubernetes
(often styrelized as K8s) is a portable, extensible open-source container orchestration platform. Just
like Docker was not the first containerization tool, Kubernetes is not the first platform to perform
container orchestration. However, what it did differently was to be completely open-sourced. At the
time, most container orchestrators were tied to a vendor.
Instead, by offering a free and portable
solution, Kubernetes sky-rocketed in success when it was released to the public in 2014. Kubernetes is
also an open platform, meaning that it will allow the users to build applications no matter their preferred
programming language or what types of OS they are running. It s now considered the standard for
container orchestration, with all the big cloud service providers like Google’s GKE, Amazon’s EKS,
IBM’s Cloud, and Microsoft’s AKS all are offerings managed Kubernetes service. [AD19]
As previously mentioned, Kubernetes manages Docker containers, thus to distinguish between the
two, let’s establish what Kubernetes is adding on top of the benefits from Docker:
• Service discovery: Kubernetes will use DNS naming convention and assign their own IP address
to different services.
• Load balancing: Kubernetes will load balance network traﬀic so that applications remain stable.
• Automated deployment of replication of containers
• Scaling in and out of containers
• Self healing. Kubernetes can autorestart, automatic replacement, and auto scale pods
2.1.4.1
Kubernetes Components
The architecture of Kubernetes consist of several components that all are a part of the orchestration
process. Figure Figure 2.3 gives a visual representation of the Kubernetes Architecture.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Virtualization
9
Figure 2.3: Overview of Kubernetes components [Cor20].
2.1.5
Azure Kubernetes Service
Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) is Microsoft’s version of a managed Kubernetes service integrated
into the Microsoft’s Azure platform. AKS will get control over the Kubernetes control plane and are
responsible for managing all Kubernetes operations. AKS eases the process of setting up Kubernetes
cluster by automating many of the intermediate steps and underlying commands needed. Furthermore,
AKS eases hosting and management and monitoring of the Kubernetes environment.
A managed
Kubernetes service like AKS is the perfect balance between containerization and cloud solutions that
combines the benefits of virtualization and Cloud capabilities into a powerful platform for building
applications. [CK19]
The following are some of the features that AKS provides:
• Azure Portal, a user interface for managing, configuring, infrastructure provision, visualizing the
Kubernetes environment. Azure portal allows for a great overview of resources, clusters, groups,
users, user access etc. that otherwise would have to be managed via a terminal.
• Azure provides its own CLI that can either be run from Azure portal or locally via a terminal.
• Access to other intergrated Azure enterprise services like Visual Studio Code, Azure DevOps,
Azure key vault, Azure security advisory, Managed identities, and networking features like network
security groups (NSGs).
• Identity management with Azure Active Directory, to control access to each resource.
• AKS has an integrated cluster monitoring and maintenance tool compiled into graphs.
• Automate tasks like run jobs on a daily, weekly or monthly schedule.
• AKS also provides its own container registry to allow fast retrieval and private storage of container
images.
• High availability from data centers across one of the larges regions of availability zones amongst
cloud providers
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Virtualization
10
• AKS supports Azure Policies for auditing environments implementing resource governance. It
will allow for control over resources that developers can deploy and the requirements for staying
compliant to company requirements. It can also optimize costs by putting limits on numbers and
sizes of clusters. Policy data can be easily be reviewed via compiled compliance reports.
2.1.5.1
AKS Architecture
Figure 2.4: Overview of Azure Kubernetes Service [Mic20b].
As can be seen from Figure 2.4, AKS manages the control plane, and the user manages the agent nodes
where the clusters resides [Mic19]. From Figure 2.5 you see a typical architecture for microservices at
AKS.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Identifying Security Challenges
11
Figure 2.5: Overview of microservice architecture in AKS [Micb].
2.1.6
AKS pricing
Azure provides several billing or subscription methods, but two of the main models are pay-as-you-go
and enterprise. Pay-as-you-go does not require the user to pay up front and allows for purchasing the
services they use. Enterprise method is specific agreements made for organization. Besides the billing
method, Azure allows for certain type of subscriptions which will then grant certain discount. Users’
can sign-up for 1 or 3 year that will allow for additional savings [Micd].
As mentioned earlier, the cluster management of the Kubernetes environment in AKS - which will
be the cloud service of choice for this thesis - is a free service. It is only the cloud resources that is the
source paid feature. This includes the underlying VMs that hosts the Kubernetes nodepools and the
network traﬀic the user consumes (see Figure 2.4.
2.2
Identifying Security Challenges
Doing a quick Google search on concerns from clients and cloud challenges, will show that what tops
all the rankings is - Security. According to (insert the ref I have) the prime concern is security.
As a disclaimer: the security challenges stated here are taken from the perspective of running
containers in Kubernetes managed via AKS. AKS, as has now been established, utilizes both VMs
and containers in tandem. Therefore, the argument whether VMs are more secure than containers is
considered out-of-the-scope for this section. There will be some challenges only specific to each of the
virtualization method, but the goal of this section is not to determine which is less secure. [Ric20]
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Identifying Security Challenges
12
Containers share the kernel As was seen from the overview of containerization, Containers share
the kernel. The is one of the most important aspects to protect. If an attacker gains access tot he kernel,
then it won’t matter how much many efforts has been put into the securing the clusters.
Badly configured containers This has do to with the user and not the service. As the technology
is still new, the lack of knowledge amongst engineers is scarce. It diﬀicult to find certified cloud engineer
at the moment, and this is why badly configured containers are a challenge.
Gaining elevated permissions via role assignment As AKS can be integrated with Azure
Active Directory (Azure AD), then the system poses a risk of an attacker to gain leveraged access. This
can also be as simple as employees that gets assign to a roles or group that has more permissions than
they will need. A tester might not need a permission that allows for creating clusters.
Exposed secrets: Often containers will have to fetch information from other processes like databases.
In order to for them to authenticate and connect developers have to store the keys and passwords within
the YAML-files. It does not take a security expert to understand that storing passwords and secrets in
plain text is a bad practice.
Network configurations: There are many aspects of networking that can pose a thread to a
system. However one of the most common is deploying a container with a public address without any
firewall. Applications, if not configured correctly, can be exposed to the public if given a public IP
address. If so then potential malicious attacker can get easy access or awareness to your application.
In addition, having applications that enforce network security features like mutual-TLS (mTLS) for
authenticating both the server and the client or DNSSEC will minimize the risks.
Giving containers more privilege than needed: Some containers are configured to run as Root
by default. This is a serious vulnerability if the container ever gets compromised
Security Boundaries: Containers needs to be configured, so that traﬀic can only exist between
permitted containers and nodes. An attacker might not have direct access to a container, but could
access a less secure container and then gain access via that container to the other.
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 3
Design
This chapter will dive into the groundwork laid by the previous chapter - theory. The different topics
will be investigated and then design a solution. The chapter is separated into two parts: AKS security
features and a cost analysis. The first part will focus on finding the security features that is possible to
implement via Azure and Kubernetes that the system should have enabled for the upcoming chapters.
The second part focuses on the expenses associated with running AKS and by its security features. The
chapter concludes with an overview of the designed solutions that should be implemented and tested
and evaluated later.
3.1
Part 1: AKS Security
3.1.1
Azure Active Directory
Azure active directory is the directory that manages and stores all the user connected to a subscription
[Mic20c]. It is highly relevant for enterprise use, as companies need an effective way of management user
access within a team or organisation. By using AAD managers can from a single point employees mange
employees and their permissions, by assigning them to groups based on project or area of concern. As
an example, Imagine having multiple directories and project within Azure. Now, say that an employee
resigns or switch from Team 1 to Team 2 - in this case, an team with different directories - then the
manager will have to revoke access to every individual directory that they have been invited to. This
can first and foremost be a tedious task but also one that can end up being quite repetitive. As with
most human-related task, mistakes can happen and the risk one leaving access to one environment
is plausible. As a result, using AAD will allow for users to become a member of a group. This is
important because groups can then be assigned to multiple directories and subscriptions. This way,
should an employee want to resign or switch team, then all there needs to be done is to remove them
from the group - or if they have resign removed them completely from AAD. As the group is now
assigned to different resources, then if the user is removed form the group, then they will lose access to
everything the group has rights to.
Figure 3.1: Overview of Azure AD implementation [Mic20a].
==PAGE:20==
3.1 Part 1: AKS Security
14
3.1.1.1
Managed Identities
To begin with there should first be created either an Azure Active Directory (AD or AAD) service
principle or a managed identity.
This is because AKS requires an identity for creating additional
resources within a cluster. This will allows the Azure APIs to interact between the cluster and other
Azure resources. Examples of These resources include a load-balancer or the Azure Container Registry
(ACR).
The difference between a service principle and Managed Identities are that a services principle needs
to be renewed manually as they will reach a state of runtime stop. This process is automatic by AKS
and will minimize complexity of use. In addition, service principles has to be provided by the user
where managed identities can automatically be created by AKS on cluster creation. Managed identities
are in its simple form a wrapper around service principles.
The work and complexity that managed identities solves is the management of credentials and
secrets between services. This will allow for secure communication between the services the previously
had to be managed by the developers. Managed Identities are thus a great way to improve security of
applications as users are not provided with secrets and config-files - that should not be risked of getting
compromised.
3.1.1.2
Namespaces
Namespaces is a way of logically separating an AKS cluster. It is an out-of-the-box feature of Kuber-
netes and are not unique to AKS. Namespace are in fact virtualization of multiple cluster within a
single cluster, are a simply called namespaces by the Kubernetes in order to distinguish between the
different aspects of Kubernetes and to ease understanding. Namespaces are great for improving isola-
tion. Namespaces allow for better organization of a cluster by separating environments when multiple
users are sharing the same cluster. This way one can separate the cluster into dev environments, test
environments, and production environments, all within the same cluster. This way teams can work
without risking to impact the another team’s work. Isolation of the cluster also improves security, as
namespaces support the Kubernetes RBAC implementation. This way users with the tester-role for
example, would only be allowed to use their own namespace without impacting the dev environment.
Although namespaces are separated, they can interact and communicate with each other. As there
will be discussed in the following section about network policies, this communication can be restricted.
However, namespaces cannot reside in each other and each name must be unique.
Taking the above into account, for this project, namespaces should definitely be used to improve
the isolation of the cluster and improve security by only allowing the right users to their respected
namespace with just the right amount of permissions to perform their tasks.
3.1.1.3
Role-Based Access Control
Access control is key for managing permissions for the different resources. It is unlikely that a handful of
individuals will work on building an application. On enterprise scale of software development a dosing
to hundreds of employees will have their hand in the development process of a system. This can be
everything from developers, testers, clients, product owners, scrum masters, intern etc. and since they
will need to perform different tasks on the system a common way of hardening a system and minimizing
risks are to grant different people different permissions. Just enough for them to do their work. This
is also known as the principle of least-privilege. Since companies are typically organized in teams, a
common practice is to enforce Role-based Access Control. Role-based access control or RBAC grants
permissions based on an individual’s (or group’s) ’role’. This be by roles like tester, owner, or developer
etc. The granularity to which this applies depends on the specific use case, but a common practice is
to give read/write access. So tester might only need read access. However, another benefits besides
delegating read or read/write access to all resource, is to block entire resources. Team-members might
only need to access to 4 out of 11 resources, and then within those 4 services one will permit read/write
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Part 1: AKS Security
15
accesses.
AKS takes this concept and separates it into different scopes. Authorization are managed through are
separation of Kubernetes RBAC, Azure RBAC and identity are managed with Azure Active Directory.
With Kubernetes RBAC one can give access to only the resources that a user, group or service accounts
needs.
Azure RBAC further enhanced security by only authorize the users who should be able to
configure AKS clusters. this is a vey powerful combination as a developer easily can perform their
task on the pod-level, where other employees such as operations engineers can be authorized to access
the cluster-level management.
Other models might give access based on the whole project, where
this method separates the resources, thus maintaining the principle of least privilege. In addition by
incorporating Azure AD to manage the identities of the users, one can have an easy overview of the
total amount of users and categorize and grant access based on their Azure role to the specific resource.
Whether access should be granted to a group or individual.
Keeping track of these scopes for applying RBAC can be a little overwhelming, therefore it the two
concepts can be boiled down to this sentence:
Azure RBAC controls resources within the Azure subscription, and Kubernetes RBAC controls the the
resources within the Kubernetes cluster. From a technical perspective, this can also be remembered
by the different APIs. Azure REST API is recognized with az-
aks-commands hence Azure RBAC
affect the use of these. Kubernetes is recognized by kubectl-commands respectively, thus the use of these
are affected by Kubernetes RBAC. For the design of this system, all three access control mechanisms
mentioned above, will be used.
In order to design the RBAC setup for this system and being able to implement the design solu-
tion, there are a couple of ways to go about it. Let’s first look at Kubernetes RBAC. Here their
must be decided on whether to use Roles and ClusterRoles. It important to note that Kubernetes does
not deny permissions, you can only allow access (again, enforcing least-privilege), otherwise access are
denied. As a result, their has to be created roles based on the access their has to be allowed. Roles
grant permission within namepaces and ClusterRoles grants permission across an entire cluster. This is
handy when you want to have multiple environments distributed to multiple teams. An example of this
could be to have a Dev-environment, a Test-environment, and a Prod-environment. Normally, with a
standard RBAC setup, developers would have both read/write and testers would have read access an
all resources. With ClusterRoles their can be specified which resources these should apply, but with
Roles you can further enhance the security by using a form of version control. By using different roles
within namespaces, testers’ could essentially have both read/write access within their own namespace
as actions would not affect the dev-namespace. Therefore using Roles instead of ClusterRoles would
allow for a finer granularity of access control. though it does not means that it is then always the
method to use. It depends on the user. ClusterRole-permissions are well suited for administrators or
operation engineers as they need access to support and configure all resources in an AKS cluster.
Once, Roles (or ClusterRoles) have been created they will have to be bound to a resource. This is
done with the concept of ’Bindings’ and more specifically RoleBinding and ClusterRoleBinding. This is
how the users (or groups) get assigned to the roles - the roles that contains permissions. RoleBinding
and ClusterRoleBinding functions in the same way as the roles definitions by RoleBinding bind roles
for a given namespace and ClusterRoleBinding bind roles to users across the entire cluster.
With Azure RBAC, as mentioned in the beginning of this section, it functions on a different scope
and should be used to provide users permissions to different Azure resources instead of kubernetes. This
includes what resources their can create, delete configure and which clusters they can access. The main
choice is to decide whether to use individual users or Groups. With the AAD integration, Roles can be
assigned to groups. This means that if a user becomes a member of a group, they will automatically
receive the same permissions as the group has. Additionally, individual users have their own Azure roles
that is bound to the them when they are a being allowed access to an Azure directory. This means,
that a user could have multiple roles, even within the same directory. A better visualization of this can
==PAGE:22==
3.1 Part 1: AKS Security
16
be seen in figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Overview of Azure RBAC [Mic20d].
Different from Kubernetes RBAC, Azure recently got updated with both allow AND deny models,
meaning that deny-assignments is possible. This is because Azure RBAC is a sum of the access allowed
at different scopes. Meaning that, the higher up a scope that permissions are granted, the more it can
make other access redundant. Consider the example below in figure 3.3. In this example, if the user
has already a contributor role that allows both read/write then assigning a reader-role at a lower level
scope will have no impact. This is what Microsoft calls their ’additive model’.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Part 1: AKS Security
17
Figure 3.3: Multiple role assignment example [Mic20d].
3.1.2
Network Security
As a project in Azure grow larger more services eventually will be created. These resources will auto-
matically be provided with network connectivity, thus they need to be able to securely communicate
with each and transmit data on secure channels. For traﬀic to flow, different network resources such
as IP addresses, load balancer will be created as part of provisioning other resources. These resources
needs to be configured in a secure manor. This section will focus on network connectivity between
Azure resources. There will investigated the azure network model, and network policies.
3.1.2.1
Azure Virtual Network Model
AKS offers to use one of two network models - Kubenet or Azure CNI. With Kubenet network resources
are configured at cluster creation and is the default configuration method. Nodes gets an IP address
form the Azure virtual network subnet and pods gets an IP address from a different address space than
the nodes, but is configured to use NAT so that it can communicate and reach the nodes and resources
within the Azure virtual network. This method ease the setup process and minimize the size of the
reserved IP-space.
The Azure CNI networking model is the ”advanced” option. The main difference is that every pod
gets an IP address that can be accessed directly. Therefore another difference is that the traﬀic doesn’t
have to be routed through the NAT. This method requires a bit more planning as the IP address has
to be provided, they must be unique and has a maximum number of supported pods. The calculated
number of IP addresses based on this maximum number of supported pods get reserved on the node and
cannot be changed. Thus, if the demand grows for the application, the whole cluster has to be rebuild.
This results in a solution that requires more IP address space than kubenet. The increase number of
IP addresses could potentially increase the price for the solution, as IP addresses are charged via azure.
For this project there will be used both to try and see if they also affect prices.
3.1.2.2
Network Policies
Up until now, there have been discussed the logical separation of a cluster by using namespaces, then
limiting access to clusters or pods by using Kubernetes RBAC and limit access to Azure resources by
using Azure RBAC, however, traﬀic can still flow between pods. Even though a user has access to
one pods but not another, pods still have access to communicate to each. This can be exploited by
making request from one pods that a user has access to and then to another they don’t. This is a
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Part 2: AKS Cost analysis
18
security vulnerability since if one pods gets compromised then the actor can more easier gain access or
transmit malicious data to another pods. As a result, connectivity between pods should be confined to
a minimum based on use-cases.
By default all traﬀic is allowed within a cluster. Network policies is used to allow or deny traﬀic to
pods within a cluster. These are created using yaml-files that specifies which resources, ports, groups,
namespaces or users should have access to the resources [Mic21e].
Network policies are going to be a key element of this project. It restriction and permission to
different resources on a wide area of application (i.e. based on namespace, individual users, groups etc.)
makes it an important security feature to use and is one of the few specific to Kubernetes-level and
not a Azure feature. It is going to be interesting to experiment with the potential cost that will or will
generate. It is however likely that it will not add additional cost as the feature is not associated with
Azure and since most azure features are free but charged on usages, then restricted access might end
up saving costs if resources would reduces its data flow.
3.2
Part 2: AKS Cost analysis
3.2.1
Criteria/limitations
According to Microsoft, there are 7 ways or optimizing cost:
1. Shut down unused resources
2. Right=size underused resources
3. Reserve instances for consistent workload
4. Take advantage of the Azure Hybrid Benefit
5. Configure autoscaling
6. Set up budgets and allocate costs to teams and projects
7. Choose the right Azure compute service
The analysis will focus on optimizations only for AKS clusters, security features and Kubernetes. As
now well established, Azure subscriptions spans across more than just building applications with AKS
and therefore cost optimization could be applied at several layers within the Azure ecosystem. Some of
the recommended cost optimization ways like item no. 7 about choosing the right compute service, is
irrelevant for this analysis as the compute unit has already been chosen (Azure Kubernetes Service).
In order to scope the cost analysis, there will only be used Microsoft’s own services. AKS is not
bound to strictly be using Azure services. This means that you can provide you own tools and setups in
combination with you AKS infrastructure. Examples of this would be services like a Web Application
Firewall or network service like Istio’s service mesh. As this would require research and knowledge of a
vast number of tools and pricing schemes, there must be made some boundaries. Therefore, the analysis
is made entirely from what is made available out-of-box by AKS.
3.2.2
Setup
The setup will consist of three different clusters: one baseline without security, one average, and one
cheap. It is important to note that these definitions are very subjective and should not be taken into
context of it being cheap relatively to a company’s total revenue. It should rather be considered from
a perspective of what Microsoft is capable of providing. With this in mind, the average would just use
the default values from Azure, as will the baseline cluster. In contrast the low-cost will not have certain
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Part 2: AKS Cost analysis
19
elements disabled but rather have the cheapest settings. One have to keep in mind that the thing being
tested is not how cheap or expensive a setup can be. Instead, it is interesting to find out whether or
not a higher budget will impact the overall level of security.
3.2.3
Cost Estimation
To try and establish a baseline for the analysis to which further conclusion can be drawn from, each
setup will have a estimated price before implementation made by Microsoft’s own Pricing calculator
[Micc]. This tool is developed by Microsoft Azure to help their clients (or future clients) estimate a total
price for their services and features all of Azure services, even beyond AKS. It is also a tool made for
planning ahead before actually setting anything into motion. This will further be used in the evaluation
(see chapter 5) to compare against and see the accuracy to which the Pricing calculator estimates.
3.2.4
Services & features that affect costs
One of the corner stones of costs and what will help being cost eﬀicient is to know what is a free service
and what service that will affect cost. The following list will present which services and features that
would affect the overall price and - if any - which services are free to enable. As an overall reminder,
since the billing are most commonly based on consumption, some of these features is not charged just
by enabling. Most are based on the amount of traﬀic or when running. Some are even billed by number
of executions like Azure Logic Apps. Therefore, it is important to state that an overall reducing in costs
can be solved by reducing the total hours a VM runs or the number of execution a task is prompted.
VMs can be deallocated to save cost by implementing shutdown schedules via Azure Portal. The answer
to this questions will ultimately come down to the use case, as some companies use strict SLAs (service-
level agreement) that hinders the amount of downtime a service are allowed. However, development
environments or test environments are usually being used during business hours, thus they work benefits
from being deallocated. This can either be done via an automated shutdown or a manual stop through
Azure Portal. Also, as an additional disclaimer, the following list does not contain all services. Services
such as Azure SQL Database and Azure API management are omitted. Only services related to AKS
and Security of containers are considered within the scope.
These are the items that Azure themselves claims to affect costs:
• Node-size/VM-size
• Storage
• Networking/bandwith
These are the factors that could generate costs, but is not explicitly described to do so:
• Namespace: Namespaces are not listed in the azure pricing list as it is a Kubernetes offering,
but as it should improve performance as the Kubernetes API should search through fewer items
on operations. This could result in a cost savings from the added benefit in speed and thus less
traﬀic is being used, when is one of the ways Azure billings works.
• RBAC
• Network policies
• Authorized IP-ranges
• Load balancer SKU
• Availability Zones:
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Part 2: AKS Cost analysis
20
Azure services that do not affect price:
• Azure Kubernetes Service is free to use.
• Azure Cost Management: tool mentioned is a free service offered as part of your Azure
subscription ans will therefore not affect cost. The Azure Cost Management tool will be used later
when implementation of the proposed design have been implemented (see chapter 5 - Evaluation).
• Azure Advisor: is a free services and will also be used for evaluation of the results (see chapter
5 - Evaluation).
3.2.5
Solutions
The three different setups are to be implemented as seen below. Two setups have security enabled and
one is the baseline cluster, that does not have any security features enabled.
3.2.5.1
Cluster Setup 1 - Baseline
Configuration:
• Node-size: D-size
• nodecount: 1
• RBAC disabled
• Namespace: no namespace
• Network model: Kubenet
• Load balancer: Basic.
3.2.5.2
Cluster Setup 2 - Average
Configuration:
• Node-size: D-series v2
• nodecount: 1
• AAD enabled
• RBAC enabled
• Kubernetes RBAC enabled
• network policy
• Namespace: two namespaces, dev and test.
• Network model: Azure CNI
• Load balancer: Standard
• Authorized IP-ranges
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Part 2: AKS Cost analysis
21
3.2.5.3
Cluster Setup 3 - cheap
Configuration:
• Node-size: B-series
• AAD enabled
• RBAC enabled
• Kubernetes RBAC enabled
• network policy
• Namespace: two namespaces, dev and test.
• Network model: Kubenet
• Load balancer: basic
• Availability zones: only 1, 2
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 4
Implementation
This chapter will discuss the implementation process and the technical aspects of building the designed
setup from the previous chapter. The chapter will start with a section on the provisioning of the clusters
and enabling the security features. Hereafter the second part will focus on the process of gathering costs
related to the Azure resources. By doing so, the chapter will by the end have taken you through the
whole process of implementation and will have setup the structure thus enabling collection of results
that can be evaluated in the upcoming chapter.
4.1
Infrastructure Provisioning
4.1.1
Tools
Azure resources can be created by using a few different tools - some of the main methods include
the Azure Portal (the web client), Azure Powershell, Azure CLI, and Infrastructure-as-Code (IaC) like
Azure ARM tables or HashiCorp’s Terraform.
As part of the experimentation process, it would be interesting to also investigate if it matters what
method of resource-creation (tool) that you use. Are there different options or limitations when using
certain methods of creation. From past experiences, when creating a cluster in the Azure Portal the
type of load balancer is locked to the default value of ”Standard” and cannot be changed to ”basic”.
This can however be set with the Azure CLI by using the flag --load-balancer-sku basic.Sometime
the Azure documentation has also been known to sometime refer to the CLI when the Portal does not
feature a specific toggle yet. Example like this includes new features, often it takes time for the Azure
Portal to have these updated.
Azure Portal: The Azure web client or Portal will be the option that most users would be familiar
with. It is the hub to which all your resources in Azure can be viewed. Going over the full feature of
Azure Portal could easily take up a large portion of this thesis, instead the focus will be on the creation
of new resources. It is a place from where you can view, manage, configure, create or delete resources.
It also the place you would most likely be creating resources from - especially in the beginning. From a
technical stand point, it is a graphical user interface (GUI) on top of the underlying workings of Azure.
In this case it is a skin on top of the Azure REST API. This means that the features are limited to
what microsoft has made available to toggle on/off but not what the REST API is fully capable of. The
benefits of the Portal is that it is very easy for humans to read and get an overview of what is configured.
In addition, GUIs tend to be better at automating tedious tasks, meaning that the additional commands
being run behind the scenes will save a lot of time, compared to being manually performed. However,
more advanced users might need some different settings than what is the most common.
Before comparing to Azure CLI, there are a few things to note. First, the benefits of using the
Portal (as mentioned earlier) is in fact true here. The portal allows for multiple resources to be created
at once. It will create additional resources such as a resource group or log analytics workspaces - if not
created already.
Azure CLI: The command line interface of Azure, Azure CLI commands performs HTTP request
against the REST API - Azure’s single point for providing consistent service - like the portal. It is a way
to connect and manage Azure resources cross-platform. The command-line tool enables users to execute
commands or run scripts against Azure resources. It can be installed locally (linux, mac or windows)
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Infrastructure Provisioning
23
and is then accessible via any terminal, but can also be used through Azure portal’s integrated cloud
shell or from within a docker container.
Connecting to resources:
Azure CLI is not bound to a specific account and will work with any tenant, subscription or ac-
count. Navigating to a specific resource is instead perform with a az login command [Mic21b]. This
will prompt the user to open a browser and login with an account (@example.com). An user account
can be linked to multiple tenants (azure active directories) and subscriptions, thus this command will
allow access to all accesses granted to that user account. However, this is not always desired as some
resources/tenant etc. needs to be separated or users with different project directories or in the case
where the user account has access to multiple tenants that might not be related to others (i.e. your
friend invites you to his directory, but has no access to yours). Therefore, to view the different per-
mission/subscription linked to the account/tenant, there is theaz account show command. In order
to then specify which resources to connect to, different flags can be added to the before mentioned
commands. To assign a specific tenant then add the --tenant flag to the az login command. Again,
as a single tenant can have multiple subscriptions, one might still have to narrow down the specific
subscription that they want to link to. This is done with the az account set command and add the
--subscription "my-subscription-name" flag. This way it ensures that only the resources to affect
is set, thus eliminating the risk of applying changes to multiple resources.
CLI vs Portal:
Using the CLI does provide a higher level of detail in configurability. The OS disk size is not currently
supported to be set in the Portal, but can be set using the CLI with the flag ”–node-osdisk-size”
Furthermore, there were also found a missing feature in AKS on the drive type which is currently
locked at performance SSDs. However, the payoff is eﬀiciency. The benefits of using the Portal is the
automation of additional steps in connecting the different Azure resources. For example, in the creation
of a cluster the portal ask for resource group, log analytics workspace, azure active directory, vnets,
tags etc. If these are not already created then it allows you to create new ones at the same time as the
cluster being created, and also connect them to each other. Using the Azure CLI is more manual-labor
intensive as you only create the specified resources. Say you want to create a log analytics workspace,
you will likely just be creating the resources, but the rest of the configuration - like attaching data
sources - will have to be manually set after the creation of the resource.
Whereas using the portal to create a cluster, the portal can create a log analytics workspace and
simultaneously attach the cluster as a data source all in the same step of creating a cluster.
Although, needless to say, that it is possible to combine the CLI with an Azure Resource Manager
(ARM template) that defines more variables. It seems, the ideal way to use it might be to use them
in tandem. Use the Portal to understand how to connect-the-dots or for daily manual labour intensive
tasks and then use the CLI when more detailed configuration is necessary.
This hands-on testing with Azure portal and CLI was a useful semi-test that gave answers to how
the rest of the implementation should be handled. On behalf of the results of this evaluation the method
to be used for this project will mainly be Azure CLI, in combination with the Azure portal as GUI
for evaluation of the results. As the solution will require yaml-files and scripts to be written, it would
be beneficial to use the Azure CLI to run the scripts locally. For the second part of the solution, the
portal will become more relevant, as cost are much more visible in the portal with the inclusion of other
easy-of-use features such as cluster configurations templates and cost charts diagrams. These will be
crucial for generating results and data to be used in the next chapter, evaluation.
4.1.2
Setting up the test environment
This section provides the process of how the environment for the test was setup using the following
configurations. All tests were performed using the same core environment setup. The tests will use the
==PAGE:30==
4.1 Infrastructure Provisioning
24
same amount of users, AAD groups, Azure Admin group, roles and network policy. The overview for
the setup looks like this:
• Users: 2 demo-users, 1 tester (akapTester) 1 developer (akapDeveloper)
• Groups: 2 active directory security groups, appDev appTest
• AAD admin groups: 1 admin group, for the adminstrator account (akap)
• Roles: 1 role for each group with the roles as ”Azure Kubernetes Service Cluster User Role”
• Network Policy: 1 policy for the cluster that allows traﬀic based on the namespace and otherwise
denies traﬀic.
• Tools: Azure Portal, Azure CLI
4.1.2.1
Resource groups
The command for setting up the resource groups can be seen in listing 4.1. This is the first step as
most other resources will need to reference a resource group for the Rest API to know where it should
be created.
1 # Create AKS Resource group
2
az group create --name <groupName> --location westeurope
Listing 4.1: Create AKS Resource group.
4.1.2.2
Adding AAD admin group
As mentioned in the last chapter, a security best practice of managing user accounts, is to add them to a
AD security group, once they have been invited to the AAD and becomes a member of a group, they can
receive access control based on what that group has been giving. The first step is to create the Admin
group. Here the users with Azure roles such as Owner should be added. Also, the group ID is needed
for enabling AAD integration on the AKS cluster. The Group will not receive any additional role, as
the member would be the user ”akap” who already has inherited the Owner role and can administrate
most access on the whole subscription. The remaining groups for the demo-users will be created in the
RBAC implementation section.
1 # Create Azure Active Directory Admin Group
2
az ad group create --display-name akapTesyAdminGroup --mail-nickname akapTestAdminGroup
3
4 # Copy tenant ID and Group Object ID or get them here:
5
Get Tenant ID (Tenant ID is NOT the same as microsoft subscription ID)
6
Go to Azure portal under AAD -> manage -> properties
7
Get groupId
8
az ad group show --group akapTesyAdminGroup --query objectId -o tsv
Listing 4.2: Create Azure Active Directory Admin Group.
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Infrastructure Provisioning
25
Figure 4.1: Cost results.
Above in figure 4.1 the resulting resources has been created from the script above.
4.1.3
Creating clusters
The environment has now been configured, thus the creation of the AKS clusters can begin. Starting
with the baseline cluster. Recall, this one should not have any security enabled and will otherwise be
configures with the default values.
Baseline cluster:
1 # Create AKS Baseline Cluster
2
az aks create \
3
--resource-group akapTest-baseline-rg \
4
--name akapTest-baseline-cluster \
5
--disable-rbac \
6
--node-count 1 \
7
--enable-addons monitoring \
8
--generate-ssh-keys \
9
--enable-managed-identity \
10
--load-balancer-sku standard \
11
--node-vm-size Standard_DS2_v2
Listing 4.3: CLI command for creating the baseline cluster.
It is important to note that the security enabled clusters, does not have a flag that explicitly states
that RBAC should be enabled. This is because RBAC implementation is enabled by default. As a
result in the baseline cluster seen above, there is a flag --disable-rbac to explicitly disable RBAC.
Note, that the --generate-ssh-keys is not a security feature, adn does not generate cost. Instead, it
is needed for connection to the cluster.
Cheap cluster:
1 # Create AKS Cluster
2
az aks create \
3
--resource-group akapTest-cheap-rg \
4
--name akapTest-cheap-cluster \
5
--node-count 1 \
6
--enable-addons monitoring
==PAGE:32==
4.1 Infrastructure Provisioning
26
7
--generate-ssh-keys \
8
--enable-aad \
9
--aad-admin-group-object-ids <groupID> \
10
--aad-tenant-id <tenantID> \
11
--enable-managed-identity \
12
--node-vm-size Standard_B2s \
13
--node-osdisk-size 30 \
14
--load-balancer-sku basic \
15
--api-server-authorized-ip-ranges <example IP range 73.140.245.0/24> \
16
--network-plugin kubenet \
17
--network-policy calico \
18
--zones 1, 2
Listing 4.4: CLI command for creating the cheap cluster.
The cheap cluster is the only one with the flag --load-balancer-sku basic. The default value is
”standard”. Also zones are set to just one availability zone, to also test if that should have an impact.
Lastly, --node-osdisk-size are lowered to 30GB instead of the default value of 128GB. One finding
during the investigation process was that changing the disk type from performance SSD to standard
HDD is not possible with AKS as per the time of writing this thesis. It is a requested feature in Azure’s
feedback page, which might make it a possibility in the future [Fee].
Average cluster:
1 # Create AKS Cluster
2
az aks create \
3
--resource-group akapTest-average-rg \
4
--name akapTest-average-cluster \
5
--node-count 1 \
6
--enable-addons monitoring
7
--generate-ssh-keys \
8
--enable-aad \
9
--aad-admin-group-object-ids <groupID> \
10
--aad-tenant-id <tenantID> \
11
--enable-managed-identity \
12
--node-vm-size Standard_DS2_v2 \
13
--load-balancer-sku standard \
14
--api-server-authorized-ip-ranges <example IP range 73.140.245.0/24> \
15
--network-plugin azure \
16
--network-policy azure
Listing 4.5: CLI command for creating the average cluster.
The average cluster is setup as close as possible to the default values set by Azure except for one
difference one difference, which is in the node count. The default value is three nodes. This change is
made to keep costs low for this rather low-budget of the thesis. Node-count greatly increase the price as
it increases the number of VMs. For the sake of this test it would not be necessary to take redundancy
into account as that would be out-of-the-scope of this thesis. The cluster configuration is also made
to resemble the baseline cluster. This way, the difference that might occur in price should only be in
security features and not be hidden in a more expensive node VM, node counts or other additional
settings.
4.1.4
Adding Security Features
Following the previous sections, clusters have been created and are ready for security hardening. As
discussed in the design chapter these features will include RBAC implementation and network policies.
There are additional features that adds security such as the AAD integration, Authorized IP-ranges
and network model, but these are mainly set at cluster creation. The features that will be explained in
this sections are features that requires additional configuration and setup.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Infrastructure Provisioning
27
4.1.4.1
Namespace implementation
As a preliminary steps, there should be created namespaces to be used in the next sections. These are
created using the following kubectl commands. This steps will be identical to each cluster, except for
the baseline cluster, that will not be namespaced.
1 # Create a new namespace
2
kubectl create namespace development
3
kubectl label namespace/development purpose=development
4
Create the second namespace:
5
kubectl create namespace testing
6
kubectl label namespace/testing purpose=testing
7
Show namespaces:
8
kubectl get namespaces --show-labels
Listing 4.6: CLI command for creating namespaces.
4.1.4.2
RBAC implementation
This RBAC implementation requires the use of both Azure RBAC and Kubernetes RBAC (see chapter
3 - design for a explanation of the difference between Azure RBAC and Kubernetes RBAC). In listing
4.7, the script can be seen for implementing Azure RBAC with AD integration.
1 # Set RBAC with Azure AD
2
Create appDev AD group:
3
az ad group create --display-name appDev --mail-nickname appDev --query objectId -o tsv
4
5
Create a role assignment for the group
6
az role assignment create \
7
--assignee <AccountID> \
8
--role "Azure Kubernetes Service Cluster User Role" \
9
--scope <resourceID >
10
11
Create apptest AD group:
12
az ad group create --display-name appTest --mail-nickname appTest --query objectId -o tsv
13
14
Create a role assignment for the group
15
az role assignment create \
16
--assignee <AccountID> \
17
--role "Azure Kubernetes Service Cluster User Role" \
18
--scope <resourceID >
Listing 4.7: CLI command for implementing RBAC.
It is best practice to assign users to groups. Mainly because managing users will be much more
eﬀicient and will lower the rate to which errors can be made. For instance, if a member of a team
resigns from his/hers position, then instead of having to remove them from every resource, then we can
assign the group to the resource. This will allow for the administrator to only have to remove the user
from the group, and then his/hers permissions will be revoked from all resources the group is assigned
to. This is why it is a good practice to assign a role to a group. This is even without considering the
time saved on not having to assigning every individual users a specific roles for a giving resource. As a
results, the script starts by creating an Azure AD group. Next, the group is assigned a Azure Role of
”Azure Kubernetes Service Cluster User Role”. This grants every user who is invited to the group, the
permission to read write on the cluster resource [Mic21a].
Now, the system is ready to have the demo-users created, so that they can be assigned to the groups.
1
Create demo users
2
az ad user create \
3
--display-name "Developer" \
4
--user-principal-name akapdeveloper@qdelftcloud.onmicrosoft.com \
==PAGE:34==
4.1 Infrastructure Provisioning
28
5
--password P@ssw0rd1 \
6
--query objectId -o tsv
7
8
az ad user create \
9
--display-name "Tester" \
10
--user-principal-name akaptester@qdelftcloud.onmicrosoft.com \
11
--password P@ssw0rd1 \
12
--query objectId -o tsv
13
14
Then add users to group
15
az ad group member add --group appTest --member-id <memberId>
16
az ad group member add --group appDev --member-id <memberId>
Listing 4.8: CLI command for creating demo users.
The script, create two demo-user the akapTester user and the akapDeveloper user. Afterward, they are
assigned to their group. Note, that the password is stored written in plaintext here. This is okay for
the sake of the test, as real users usually would have been available in the AD and created following
the regular process of adding real-users. This step is only necessary for testing purposes, so that we
can act as all users when testing the implementation. Figure ?? below show the results from the imple-
mentation and the user and their permission are setup correctly.
Figure 4.2: Azure RBAC implementation.
Now, that the Azure RBAC has been setup, it is time to setup the Kubernetes RBAC solution. In
order to implement Kubernetes RBAC, one has to run yaml-files against the cluster configuration. As
mention in the design chapter, Kubernetes will need both a Role file and a rolebinding file - defining
the roles and then to define to which these roles applies. The code-snippet below shows the yaml-file
for the developer.
1 # Now, let us configure the AKS cluster to allow these different groups access to specific
resources.
2
Create a Role for the development namespace, using a yaml file like this:
3
kind: Role
4
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
5
metadata:
6
name: dev-user-full-access
7
namespace: development
8
rules:
9
- apiGroups: ["", "extensions", "apps"]
10
resources: ["*"]
11
verbs: ["*"]
12
- apiGroups: ["batch"]
13
resources:
14
- jobs
15
- cronjobs
16
verbs: ["*"]
Listing 4.9: yaml-file for defining the role definition.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Infrastructure Provisioning
29
The role file is structured like this; the first line define that the file is of kind ”Role” and the API-
version. Below that, the information of the roles is giving - the name of the role is dev-user-full-access
and the namespace that it should be applied to is development. The second part of the files is the rules.
For the rules definitions, the listing below, list the possible variables and its function:
• apiGroups: List of API groups to allow users or groups. If one specify “ “ in the apiGroups that
indicates the core API group.
• available apiGroups: apps, extensions, batch.
• resources: List of resources to allow users or groups.
• Possible resources: pods, podlogs, nodes, services, endpoints, deployments, jobs, config maps,
secrets, persistentvolumes, persistentvolumesclaims.
• verbs:
• List of operations allowed for these resources are: get, list, watch, create, update, delete, edit,
exec.
• ’*’ defines ALL, instead of specifying all operations. Mainly used for ADMINs.
This particular role applies to a developer, the intent is for them to be able to perform most actions
within that namespace and for the sake of this example, we want the developers to access all resources
and performs all tasks. However, in a enterprise setting, the role might have been more suited for an
admin group, and then have more specific resources and operations listed for the developers.
Listing 4.10 below shows the configuration files for the binding of the role. It is structured in the
same manner as the role file, except that here are two different sections; roleRef and subjects. RoleRef,
as the name implies, references the role that you want to implement, hence the reference that is being
used is dev-user-full-access. Subjects is the section where the subjects who needs the roles should be
stated. It this case we want to assign it to the Azure AD group created earlier. This is simply done by
adding the right Azure groupObjectId.
1 Create a RoleBinding for the appdev group, using a yaml file like this:
2
kind: RoleBinding
3
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
4
metadata:
5
name: dev-user-access
6
namespace: development
7
roleRef:
8
apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
9
kind: Role
10
name: dev-user-full-access
11
subjects:
12
- kind: Group
13
namespace: development
14
name: <groupObjectId >
Listing 4.10: yaml-file for defining the role binding.
Both files are implemented by using the kubectl apply -f <filename>.yaml.
The same process has to be done for the other group and namespace - testers. The process is the same
as before and follows this structure:
• - Create a Role definition in yaml-format
• - Apply the role
• - get the resource ID
==PAGE:36==
4.2 Costs
30
• - Create a RoleBinding definition in yaml-format
• - Apply the RoleBinding to the AD group
Both Azure RBAC and Kubernetes RBAC has now been implemented successfully, the next step is
then to implement the network policy.
4.1.4.3
Network Policy
As described in the last chapter, network policies affects the traﬀic between pods. This is important
because a security weakness can be exploited by having access to one pod or namespace and then
create request from resources from another namespace. Therefore, the network policies that should be
implemented must allow only the traﬀic to be made between intended namespaces or pods. Listing 4.11
shows the network policy definition yaml-file.
1 # Deny traffic between namespaces
2
kind: NetworkPolicy
3
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
4
metadata:
5
name: backend-policy
6
namespace: development
7
spec:
8
podSelector:
9
matchLabels:
10
app: webapp
11
role: backend
12
ingress:
13
- from:
14
- namespaceSelector:
15
matchLabels:
16
purpose: development
17
podSelector:
18
matchLabels:
19
app: webapp
20
role: frontend
Listing 4.11: Yaml file for defining network policy.
The network policy demonstrates denial of incoming traﬀic from unwanted namespaces but also the
configurability of traﬀic between different pods - and in this case, even a pod that resides within the
same namespace. The ”spec:” section will select the pod to configure, then the second section specifies
the namespace. This is all wrapped under ”ingress” meaning that it affects in-going traﬀic.
4.2
Costs
This section will discuss the implementation process of monitoring costs and the necessary steps to
ensure that costs were being collected for the different resources created in the previous section.
4.2.1
Cost Estimations
All estimations where taken from the Azure pricing calculator as that is the most direct source reference
for costs associated with different resources from Microsoft themselves [Micc]. The cost were estimated
by choosing the AKS cluster and set the vm size as defined in the design chapter. The pricing calculator
is not in particular detailed. Is does not stated whether you need additional items for AKS to work or if
those are included in the calculation. For instances, if you create a AKS cluster via Azure Portal, it will
prompt the user to create a resource group, Azure Container Registry, Log Analytics Workspace and
or vnets. Furthermore, it creates an additional resource group with all components that Kubernetes
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Costs
31
consist of (load balancer, managed identity, network security group, routing table, public IP address
etc. ). From the Azure pricing calculator it is not very clear whether all these required resources are a
part of the calculation. Since some of these resources are required for the cluster to be created, then it
is also a possibility that they are included. This becomes more confusing when you consider the load
balancer. As mentioned, the internal load balancer is automatically created, so it is not a feature to
the user can disable when creating a cluster. But you can also add a load balancer separately in the
pricing calculator. Therefore, the test included four price calculations; one for each cluster and then
one with all the additional features that was available as a separate item.
Furthermore, these cost are based around the individual resources and not always on the use of said
resources. This is really important as Azure offers many ”free” resources, but then bills based on the
traﬀic and data being transmitted, on how many request there is made to the service, or on how many
instances are being created. The pricing calculator tries to sometimes make up for this by having a
field the allows you to insert estimated data stored, sent, HTTP requests etc. Still, there are far less
of these fields than expected. AKS cluster on has three fields; size of VM, uptime SLA enabled, and
managed OS disk.
A nice additions would be to either be more transparent in the calculations or simply to recommend
missing necessary resources to included.
Ultimately, the estimations was calculated in the following order.
• Baseline cluster = €91.82
• Average cluster = €91.82
• Cheap cluster = €31.57
• Additional Security features = €6.26
One interesting thing to notice from these results, is that since the pricing calculator could not toggle
AAD integration, RBAC enabled, Authorized IP-range or namespaces, the Baseline cluster and the
Average cluster is estimated to cost the same. That will have to wait for the next chapter evaluation
to tell if this is in fact true.
4.2.2
Data Collection
The process of setting up cost information collection was also done by using an Azure solution - namely
Azure’s cost management tab within the Azure Portal [Mic21d]. This page shows all the cost associated
to the subscription(s). These are all presentation nicely and has many options for sorting the data.
Data are presented both by the numbers and by visual representations. Visual representations can
be anything from pie-charts, histograms or to graphs. Data can be sorted based on resource groups,
resource type, subscription etc. Therefore, the tool will provided enough functionality for analyzing
results and thus using third party software will be necessary. All information can also be exported using
either as picture, csv-file or excel sheet.
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 5
Evaluation
Now that all the resources have been created and security feature has been enabled and configured on
Azure-side and Kubernetes-side, it is time to evaluate on the results and see the impact that security
had on the different setups.
In this chapter there will be evaluated against two main topics.
The
first one being the Security baseline: there will be tested that the features works as expected - does it
protect against what it is trying to protect? In addition, there will be compared how well it performs
according to Azure’s own security advisor - how compliant are the three different setups? are there
features lacking that was not taking into account? The second section will be an evaluation of the costs
associated with each setup - how much does each setup differ in price? Azure’s own cost management
tool, Cost Analysis, will be used to extract the data and will be the basis to which the results will be
drawn from. In addition the forecast made by Microsoft’s Azure Pricing calculator will be evaluated
against the actual cost of running the clusters. Is the calculation accurate? Does it give the user a good
indication of what it costs? Lastly, a compiled overview will be made. Both cost and security results
will be taken into account, in order to draw conclusions from.
5.1
Security Evaluation
5.1.1
Demonstration of Security Implementation
Before making any claims on the cost accumulated from the resources, the setup needs to be tested. Does
the implementation actually work? and more importantly, does it work was as intended. Therefore, Let
us setup a demo where the test-users created earlier will be used to act as the users from different team
- namely the developer and the testers, with one admin account that is allowed to configure policies and
security features within the cluster. To begin with we will start by testing the RBAC implementation.
1 # RBAC DEMO START
2
Login as the admin user (akap@xxxx.onmicrosoft.com)
3
az logout
4
az login
5
az aks get-credentials --resource-group akapTest-cheap-rg --name akapTest-cheap-cluster --
overwrite-existing
6
7
Show that they can get information about the whole cluster
8
Kubectl get nodes
9
Kubectl get pods
10
Kubectl get namespaces
Listing 5.1: RBAC demo script part 1.
==PAGE:39==
5.1 Security Evaluation
33
Figure 5.1: Results of RBAC demo - Part 1.
Figure 5.1 shows the test script for the test is the RBAC works as intended. The user is able to
request information from the whole cluster. This can be seen by the kubectl get namespaces, this
command would not have been successful if the user didn’t have access to all namespaces.
1
Now login as test-user Developer and show that he cannot get namespaces and delete namespaces
from testing namespace (akapDeveloper@xxxx.onmicrosoft.com)
2
az aks get-credentials --resource-group akapTest-cheap-rg --name akapTest-cheap-cluster --
overwrite-existing
3
kubectl get pods -n testing
4
kubectl get pods -n development
5
kubectl delete namespace Testing
6 # END OF RBAC DEMO
Listing 5.2: RBAC demo script part 2.
Figure 5.2: Results of RBAC demo - Part 2.
The test were successful as seen in figure 5.2 and the developer-user could not read/write from the
testing namespace.
Now that the RBAC implementation has been tested, let us test the network policy. First there
needs to be created a backend pod that is created in the development namespace.
1 # SETUP
2
Create a backend pod from an NGINX image:
3
kubectl run backend --image=nginx --labels app=webapp,role=backend --namespace development
--expose --port 80
==PAGE:40==
5.1 Security Evaluation
34
4
5
Create another pod and attach a terminal session:
6
kubectl run --rm -it --image=alpine network-policy --namespace development
7
8
Confirm that the user can access the default NGINX webpage (shell prompt):
9
wget -qO- --timeout=2 http://backend
10
11
Exit the terminal session. The test pod is automatically deleted:
12
exit
Listing 5.3: Network Policy script part 1.
Figure 5.3: Results of network policy demo - Part 1.
As can be seen in figure 5.3, the commands sets up a simple nginx pod named ”backend ”that is
exposed on port 80 and is accessible via http://backend.
Now, let’s remove that network policy applied in the implementation chapter and try to log in as
the tester-user akapTester and see if they can access a resources on the development environment.
1 # NETWORK POLICIES DEMO
2
First, delete the network policy set in the previous chapter
3
kubectl delete -f backend-policy.yaml
4
5
now:
6
az logout
7
az login (as akaptester@xxxx.onmicrosoft.com)
8
az aks get-credentials --resource-group akapTest-cheap-rg --name akapTest-cheap-cluster
9
10
show that data can flow between pods:
11
kubectl run --rm -it frontend --image=alpine --labels app=webapp,role=frontend --namespace
testing
12
wget -qO- http://backend.development
13
exit
Listing 5.4: Network Policy script part 2.
==PAGE:41==
5.1 Security Evaluation
35
Figure 5.4: Results of network policy demo - Part 2.
As can be seen from figure 5.4, akapTester is able to access the backend pod on the development
environment. After applying the backend-policy created in chapter 4, the user should not be able to
request data on the development environment, thus limiting flow of traﬀic between pods.
1
Now apply the policy
2
az logout
3
az login (as akap@netcompany.com)
4
az aks get-credentials --resource-group akapTest-cheap-rg --name akapTest-cheap-cluster
5
kubectl apply -f backend-policy.yaml
6
7
Login as tester again and show that it worked:
8
az logout
9
az login (as akaptester@qdelftcloud.onmicrosoft.com)
10
az aks get-credentials --resource-group akapTest-cheap-rg --name akapTest-cheap-cluster
11
12
kubectl run --rm -it frontend --image=alpine --labels app=webapp,role=frontend --namespace
testing
13
wget -qO- --timeout=2 http://backend.development
14
exit
15 # END OF NETWORK POLICY DEMO
Listing 5.5: Network Policy script part 3.
==PAGE:42==
5.1 Security Evaluation
36
Figure 5.5: Results of network policy demo - Part 3.
Figure 5.5 shows that the network policy was successful. The akapTester were not able to request
information from a pod located on different namespace.
This was just one example of how network policies can be used, but it allows for other applications too.
The one demonstrated allows traﬀic based on namespace, but it is also possible to set network policies
based on inbound or outbound traﬀic, or with a complete denial of any traﬀic too and from the pod.
That concludes the testing of the security implementation. The solution does in fact work against
what it is trying to protect. The cluster is now save against unauthorized users, has the Azure Active
Directory connected to the Kubernetes RBAC implementation and has secure traﬀic between pods
within the cluster.
5.1.2
Azure Security Advisor Reports
This section will compare the current setup against Azure’s security advisor tool. Which results does
the system have from Azure advisory reports and are there any ”holes” or improvements to make to
the configuration?
There are five different categories: Cost, Security, Reliability, Operational excellence, and Perfor-
mance.
According the security advisor, there are a total of 19 recommendation, 16 of them being
security related. Cost are said to be following all recommendations. This also applies for reliability
and performance. The three recommendations unrelated to security are operational and includes items
such as using Ephemeral OS disk, Uptime SLA and enable cluster autoscaler, all with ”low impact”.
Although these are relevant for a real-world setting, they will not be used for this evaluation. Switch-
ing the focus to the 16 security recommendations, there are 9 with ”high impact”, 3 with ”medium
impact” and 4 with ”low impact”. The advisor does not allow for any filtering based on resources, it
only shows how many and what types of resource are impacted. They can be view if you click on the
recommendation. The first five are Azure defender (Azure’s extended security protection integrated in
security center see chapter 6 - discussion), a features that is unrelated to AKS and is a recommendation
for the whole subscription. There are only three security related recommendation. The first one is to
enable Azure policies, a feature outside of the scope of this thesis but would allow to set limits on the
action that users are able to perform. Different from RBAC, policies are good for letting administrator
put limits and set boundaries to what users with read/write access should be to do. For example, put
a limit on the maximum size of VM they can create in order to keep costs down or to ensure fewer
human-errors.
The last one however, is something that has been implemented as could potentially raise a red
flag, as the first high-impact recommendation relevant to the subject of this project. That is, that a
service is lacking role-based access control. With closer inspection it shows that it in fact applies to
the baseline cluster. This is a good result as this cluster was the one without any security features
enabled. As a result, it was expected that if any security recommendations would be triggered for a
Kubernetes services it should be this one. Interestingly, the security advisory does not mention any of
==PAGE:43==
5.2 Cost Evaluation
37
the Kubernetes specific security features. This is unfortunate, as AKS is a managed Kubernetes service
and should also show Kubernetes-specific recommendations and not just Azure-specific. It might be
possible that, that is what Azure Defender is trying to solve and that it (via installing agents) will
be able to check these feature. This is an issue that is reflected onto other sides of Azure too. The
configurations made on the AKS clusters are not visible in Azure Portal. There are no way to view the
roles, rolebindings or network policies from the Azure Portal. It is only recently that the Kubernetes
resources tab was added so that namespaces, workloads and services/ingresses was possible to find,
which is also why most people tend to use AKS together with a third-party application like LENS
(Kubernetes IDE) to view every information about the cluster configuration. Nevertheless, the rest of
the ”medium impact” and ”low impact” are also not related to AKS and are for the subscription and
container registry. As a result, the report is overall good and does not show any lack of implementation.
5.2
Cost Evaluation
The evaluation has been made of the security implementation, now it is time to look a the cost. The
cost will indicate whether the security features actually adds any additional costs even though Microsoft
does not state the actual price of the features. This is was the tests seeks to answer. The section will
start by presenting the cost stated in Azure’s cost analysis tab. Hereafter, the actual costs will be
compared against the price estimations from the Azure Pricing Calculator.
During the project time frame several different tests where made.
Although the results might
indicate the only one run of the setup was made, the total of different test and trials are more than
fifteen and more than six complete setups with all features enabled, left to generate costs for at least
twenty-four hours. Twenty-four hours was a choice made based around the limited resources of the
subscription. The subscription only had 130€ worth of credits and it was uncertain for how much the
resources would generate. In order to ensure enough credits were left, so that there could be enough
for several attempt (also taking errors into account), the 24 hour limit was reasonable. Additionally,
twenty-four hours could more easily be used in a calculation for estimating the total cost for a month
that Azure bills on.
5.2.1
Azure Cost Management
Now that all the resources has been created, configured and has been running for more than 24 hours,
it is time to evaluate on the cost.
==PAGE:44==
5.2 Cost Evaluation
38
Figure 5.6: Cost results.
As seen in the figure 5.6 above, the overall generated cost with an overlap of 2 days to account for
any overlap, is €10.75. The total cost where then grouped by resource to view the individual cost per
resource, and then added a filter that only shows the results from the three resource groups; thesis-
baseline-rg, thesis-cheap-rg, and thesis-average-rg.
The AKS clusters themselves barely generate any cost. This makes sense since The Azure documentation
states the AKS is free, and you only get charged for the virtual machines, the storage and networking
resources [Mica]. This can be seen to be true, as the yellow pie-chart states that the highest costs
are generated by the virtual machines, a total of €6.23. The second highest consuming resource was
load balancers, a total of €2.16, and the third highest being storage at €1.97. These all fit within the
description as both the storage and virtual machines was mentioned, and the load balancer and the
virtual network are networking. There are no additional cost labeled as ”others” category, and the sum
of the cost from the resources add up to the €10.75.
Looking at the cost split between the different resource groups, one thing stands out and that is the
baseline-cluster. A thing to notice is that the baseline cluster is actually the highest costing resource
group, but the reason for that is because it was the first resources to be created. The average resource
group was the last, and had to be re-built due to a configuration error. However, looking into the cost
of the individual resources, from a specific date (see the pop-up box). then the prices for the baseline
and average cluster is the same (e.g. check the two first nodepools).
5.2.2
Pricing calculator comparison
Let us have a look at the comparison between the actual costs versus what was forecast by the Azure
Pricing Calculator. The goal is to determine if the Azure Pricing calculator does a good job of giving
precise estimates to what is actually costing. In addition, it is interesting to answer whether it only
includes the item - in this case that would be the AKS cluster - or of it also includes the necessary items
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Results
39
for creating an AKS cluster. For instance, creating an AKS automatically creates a virtual network.
IP-addresses, load balancer, application insights, managed identity, route table, and network security
group. Most of these features can be created separately in the pricing calculator. You can create a
item that is called ”virtual network or load balancing”, that cost 1,69€ per month or 0,42€ per month
(depending of the usage), but it is not described if these are already included in the price estimation
for the AKS cluster.
In regard to the security features, the calculator only has eight different security items available:
Azure sentinel, Key vault, application gateway, Azure dedicated HSM, vpn gateway, Azure Active Di-
rectory, Azure DDoS protection, and Azure defender - non of which are related to the security features
that have been discussed during this thesis.
Azure Pricing Calculator calculates price estimates per month, this means that whatever results the
is taken form Azure Portal should either be converted into price-per-month or divide the result into
price-per-day.
Starting with the cheap cluster, the estimates was 30,84€. This only had the AKS cluster, with the
B-sized instance. The actual cost results - divided into days - the total is was €0.97. Figure 5.6 showed
€2.61, but that was because the time range include a date before and after, giving a total of 3 days.
This translates to €30,07 for 31 days, which is very close to the estimation.
Next, the average cluster, the estimates was 91,82€. This also only had the AKS cluster, with the
D2-sized instance instead. A more powerful and expensive VM. Compared to the actual cost results
- divided into a day - then the total is is €1.68. This sums to €52.08, almost half the price that was
estimated. The reason for this is unknown as there were tried to look extensively for an answer without
any results. One possible solution might be that there were not generate enough traﬀic. All testing
were performed on the AKS cheap cluster, which is the one that fitted with the estimation.
However the price is identical to that of the baseline which is also €1.68. This further proofs that
there are no additional cost to adding AKS security. The price estimates - that didn’t include any
toggles for security configurations - calculated both the baseline and the average cluster to cost the
same, and the data for the cost manager shows us that it is true.
5.3
Results
To reflect on the results from the two evaluation of the project, what conclusions can be drawn? Starting
with the results of the security features, the system successfully protects against what is configured to do.
Moving to the report from the Azure Security Advisor, the results were that the system was following
the recommendations and that the RBAC or network policies did not appear as a lacking feature, meant
that is was compliant to the security advisor. Although the results were positive, the capability of the
advisor has to be taken with a grain of salt. The advisor was not able to catch any Kubernetes specific
implementations. It checked if RBAC was enabled on the cluster - meaning that one could enforce it on
the cluster - but not whether it was actually being used. Also, there were not any Kubernetes service
related features listed in the advisor. The baseline-cluster that had no Kubernetes RBAC configured
or network policies and the advisor did not react to these lacking features, hence the setup appeared
to be configured correctly. This indicated that is did not look into the resources themselves but rather
on the Azure-side of the configuration. This is what the Security center security defender plan (paid
subscription), claims to do by installing security agents to collect more analysis information. It can
therefore be concluded that the advisor should be used more as a check if one has missed something
in the setup, rather than one should count on getting information on what to implement based on the
advisor.
Now, considering the second factor cost it was clear that security feature did not have any impact on
the cost. The difference in cost was mainly in the size of the nodes as what is stated in the pricing
calculator. Based on the results, it appears that the reason why the security features are not included
in the pricing calculator, is because they do not generate any additional cost to enable. Therefore it can
==PAGE:46==
5.3 Results
40
be concluded that there are not any hidden costs associated to security features in Azure. It is therefore
highly recommended to implement these as it will not generate any additional cost to the company or
to the client. Something that cannot be said if there should ever be a security breach.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
Reflecting on the chosen method and approach, there are few things that could have changed the results
or generated a closer representation of how the system would react. To begin with, the test environment
did not run a proper-sized application. The test application used was existing small images of a frontend
and a backend service. Those were also detached once the test was exited. The project was about the
cost of having these security feature enabled, but a full-sized application-project would represent a closer
to real-world scenario. Secondly, the test environment were mostly idle and did not generate a lot of
traﬀic. This could both be to the tests benefit but also to a possible drawback. This was a deliberate
choice, so that it would give a clear image of just having an environment configured with security, but
as we saw most costs are associated with the data utilization of Azure resources. It is a possibility that
this also applies to the security features, but would make it more diﬀicult to test, as the cost of security
is already well-hidden in both the Azure Pricing Calculator and the cost manager.
Lastly, only a few resources were created and that is a potential drawback of the test evaluation. The
reason being that many features in Azure are free or have a free-boundary. As example this is true for
the Azure Active Directory (AAD). The AAD includes 500k directory objects for free and will start to
bill if that is exceeded. The sames is true for monitoring, there is free data retention for 31 days, if the
user wants to have look back more than 31 days in their logs, then they will have to pay. Again, there
is a small chance that this could lead to a different result, but would require a large enough system to
properly test, a size to which most people do not have for general purpose use.
6.1
Reflection/Limitations
There are a few potential factors that potentially could change the results of the project. As mentioned
earlier and as was clear from the evaluation chapter, traﬀic and resources usages are a huge impact
on cost associated with Azure. Due to the scope of the project the simple application used in the
test was small and was not exposed to the internet and had no database. This meant that no users
were interacting with the system and not much traﬀic was generated over the wire. In a real-world
application the results might have looked different as more traﬀic and an increase in system load could
have led to different results. The system tested was mainly tested in an idle state.
Additionally, the project faced an issue due to lack of resources. The free tier subscription via the
university ”azure student account” did not have cost analysis capabilities which is a huge part of the
thesis. A second subscription was linked to a part of my team to test Azure features. This was a
CSP-subscription and also had no cost analysis capabilities. Luckily, a solution was found in the end.
Our Visual studio enterprise account that is used for most other Microsoft solutions within my com-
pany had a free 130€ subscription. This type of subscription had cost analysis capabilities and made
evaluations possible. This lack of functionality was proven to be known by Azure as can be seen from
their cost-management and billing documentation [Mic21c]. This had unfortunately its own problems
as this subscription is company-wide and is managed by administration. This meant that I have the
right permissions to create or delete within the Azure Active Directory. Therefore costs associated with
active directory had to be inconclusive and some settings had to be omitted. However, it was still pos-
sible to demonstrate how the setup would have been configured. Cost was just not possible to analyze.
However, the policies, AAD and RBAC was enabled for the cluster on the Enterprise-subscription, there
was just not create any demo-users and the test used in the thesis was tested the the other account
==PAGE:48==
6.2 Future Work
42
where active directory was allowed.
The subscription also ran out of credits and deemed possible future attempts impossible. This was
not a huge problem as most tests were already done but it might have indicated whether the costs we
linear by having it run for a week. Despite having done most test by the time the subscription ran out
of credits, it would also have been interesting to perform a test with a new average-cluster that didn’t
use Azure network model. As mentioned in the evaluation the costs were different for this one as it had
a much smaller IP range and thus generated less costs.
6.2
Future Work
The focus of the thesis was around the cost associated with security in AKS. However there are more
areas to running an exposed application to the internet. AKS is just the containerization of the applica-
tion and its components but there are still other components to implement like an application gateway,
firewall implementation, secure storage and networking for internal operations. Should the system be
tested in a more close representation of a real-world scenario, it would be interesting to extend this
research to cost of security on all resources that together makes up a working application.
6.2.1
Additional Security Measures
If we imagine a fully operational application like a COVID-19 vaccination passport application, there
would be many more components to add and several other security hardening mechanisms to implement.
Web Application Firewall (Cloudflare) The first being an application gateway with a web
application firewall in front. Azure provides creation of Web Application Firewalls (WAFs). WAFs are
notorious for being some of the most expensive resources to have and Azures version are no different,
starting at 769,51€. However, this can be cost optimized by using other providers outside of Azure.
Services such as Cloudflare are a very popular choice because the offer the same service at a lower
cost starting at about 17€ [Clo]. This would be a good starting point for future work to be more cost
effective and also to look into the cost of securing a whole system.
Azure DDoS Protection Another security feature of Azure is their own DDoS protection. This
price is again clearly described in the pricing calculator and is also very expensive at the price of 2482,29€.
A features that is also available in Cloudflare’s 17€ price-tier. However, every Azure resource does
come with a basic-tier, protects against common network-attacks. A feature that would be interesting
to investigate the reason behind that cost for the standard version.
6.2.2
Infrastructure-as-Code
During the writing of this thesis, many tests and experiments were made. Some attempts had to be
restarted and reconfigured, do to misconfiguration of repetitive tasks and human-errors.
A way to
have saved time and ensured less mistakes, would have been to use a Infrastructure-as-Code tool like
Terraform [Has]. Terraform automates the provisioning of infrastructure by writing code. This allows
to setup the whole infrastructure and also destroy it all with a single push of a button. A method that
would also be highly beneficial in future testing. It would also ensure that fewer security incidents could
happen due to a misconfiguration or lack of implementation due to human-errors. A method a could
potentially raise the level of security of the system - at least ensure the is it not lacking.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In the beginning of this thesis this problem statement was presented:
How much would security cost to implement in AKS?
After a thorough investigation and experimentation with security offerings of Azure and Kubernetes
it was found that by enabling security features in the Azure, the costs are unaffected and the price es-
timation from Azure for a AKS cluster was either equal to the estimation or cheaper than estimated.
Although it was found that the information presented from Azure was vague and lacking description,
it did not generate a higher price than estimated. The price of the cluster with security enabled versus
the one without was the same even though several different features was enabled at the same time, to
try and generate the highest costing results.
On behalf of the results of the cost analysis it can be concluded that budget does not have an impact
on the level of security features that can be applied. This is positive results because, as a believer in
security-by-design, it is a relief to see that Microsoft does not put their users in a position of whether to
include extensive security hardening of there projects based on their budget. Often security are overlook
or added later in the process, because it often cost a lot of money for the companies to implement, and
since most companies only gain awareness of the benefits of having security once they have been hacked,
then it is good that their engineers can safely say that it will not cost them a lot more to add these
features.
The main cost associated with these security features are the man-hour to pay in salary, which is a
very small price to pay, compared to the expense associated with a security breach. It also helps, that
these features are not hard to implement and use, even without a security background. As with most
new service their will be a learning curve, but if an operations engineer already holds knowledge about
Kubernetes or cloud services, then this will not take long to master. Overall, the companies that uses
Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) have no reason - when considering cost - not to enable security on
their resources.
==PAGE:50==
APPENDIX A
Original Project Plan
Figure A.1: The original project plan.
==PAGE:51==
APPENDIX B
Revised Project Plan
Figure B.1: The revised project plan.
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
[AD19]
J. Arundel and J. Domingus. Cloud Native DevOps with Kubernetes: Building, Deploying,
and Scaling Modern Applications in the Cloud. O’Reilly Media, Incorporated, 2019. isbn:
978-1-4920-4076-7. url: https://books.google.nl/books?id=xZXfuQEACAAJ.
[BRB20]
Steve Buchanan, Janaka Rangama, and Ned Bellavance. Introducing Azure Kubernetes Ser-
vice: a practical guide to container orchestration. eng. 1st edition. Apress, 2020. isbn: 1-4842-
5519-4.
[Cit]
Citrix. What is Containerization. url: https://www.citrix.com/da-dk/glossary/what-
is-containerization.html (visited on 8 February 2021).
[CK19]
Harsh Chawla and Hemant Kathuria. Building Microservices Applications on Microsoft
Azure: Designing, Developing, Deploying, and Monitoring. 07/18/2019. Apress, 2019. isbn:
978-1-4842-4827-0.
[Clo]
Inc. Cloudflare. Our Plans. url: https://www.cloudflare.com/plans/1/ (visited on
11 July 2021).
[Con20]
John Conrad. What is Container Orchestration. October 2020. url: https://www.capitalone.
com/tech/cloud/what-is-container-orchestration/ (visited on 21 February 2021).
[Cor20]
The Linux Corporation. Kubernetes Components. Kubernetes Documentation. August 2020.
url: https : / / kubernetes . io / docs / concepts / overview / components/ (visited on
26 February 2021).
[Fee]
Microsoft Azure Feedback. Allow selecting disk type when creating AKS cluster. url: https:
//feedback.azure.com/forums/914020-azure-kubernetes-service-aks/suggestions/
35056588-allow-selecting-disk-type-when-creating-aks-cluste (visited on 12 July
2021).
[Has]
HasiCorp. Introduction to Terraform. url: https://www.terraform.io/intro/index.html
(visited on 12 July 2021).
[Hat]
Red Hat. What is Docker? url: https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/containers/what-
is-docker (visited on 26 February 2021).
[Hat18]
Red Hat. What is Virtualization. June 2018. url: https://www.redhat.com/en/topics/
virtualization/what-is-virtualization (visited on 6 February 2021).
[Inc]
Docker Inc. What is a Container. url: https://www.docker.com/resources/what-
container (visited on 20 February 2021).
[Mica]
Microsoft. Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) Pricing. url: https://azure.microsoft.com/
en-us/pricing/details/kubernetes-service/#overview (visited on 11 July 2021).
[Micb]
Microsoft. Microservices architecture on Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS). AKS Documen-
tation. url: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/reference-
architectures/containers/aks-microservices/aks-microservices (visited on 27 Febru-
ary 2021).
[Micc]
Microsoft. Microsoft Azure Pricing calculator. url: https://azure.microsoft.com/en-
us/pricing/calculator/ (visited on 2 March 2021).
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
47
[Micd]
Microsoft. Optimize your Azure costs. url: https : / / azure . microsoft . com / en - us /
overview/cost-optimization/ (visited on 2 March 2021).
[Mic19]
Microsoft. Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS). AKS Documentation. May 2019. url: https:
//docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/intro-kubernetes (visited on 31 January
2021).
[Mic20a]
Microsoft. Access and identity options for Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS). Azure AKS
Documentation. July 2020. url: https://docs.microsoft.com/en- us/azure/aks/
concepts-identity (visited on 13 March 2021).
[Mic20b]
Microsoft. Kubernetes core concepts for Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS). AKS Documen-
tation. July 2020. url: https://docs.microsoft.com/en- us/azure/aks/concepts-
clusters-workloads (visited on 27 February 2021).
[Mic20c]
Microsoft. What is Azure Active Directory. Azure AKS Documentation. Microsoft Azure,
June 2020. url: https : / / docs . microsoft . com / en - us / azure / active - directory /
fundamentals/active-directory-whatis (visited on 12 July 2021).
[Mic20d]
Microsoft. What is Azure role-based access control (Azure RBAC)? Azure RBAC Documen-
tation. September 2020. url: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/role-based-
access-control/overview (visited on 12 March 2021).
[Mic21a]
Microsoft. Azure built-in roles. Microsoft Azure, June 2021. url: https://docs.microsoft.
com/en-us/azure/role-based-access-control/built-in-roles#azure-kubernetes-
service-cluster-user-role (visited on 9 July 2021).
[Mic21b]
Microsoft. Azure CLI Documentation. Microsoft Azure, July 2021. url: https://docs.
microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/account?view=azure-cli-latest (visited on 6 April
2021).
[Mic21c]
Microsoft. Azure Cost Management + Billing Documentation. Microsoft Azure, May 2021.
url: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cost-management-billing/costs/
understand-cost-mgt-data (visited on 9 July 2021).
[Mic21d]
Microsoft. Quickstart: Explore and analyze costs with cost analysis. Microsoft Azure, March
2021. url: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cost-management-billing/
costs/quick-acm-cost-analysis?tabs=azure-portal (visited on 12 July 2021).
[Mic21e]
Microsoft. Secure traﬀic between pods using network policies in Azure Kubernetes Service
(AKS). Azure AKS Documentation. Microsoft Azure, March 2021. url: https://docs.
microsoft.com/en-us/azure/aks/use-network-policies (visited on 12 July 2021).
[Nap]
Stéphane Nappo. CISO of the Week, Stéphane Nappo, Société Générale. url: https://
cyberstartupobservatory.com/cyber- startup- observatory- ciso- week- stephane-
nappo-societe-generale/ (visited on 12 July 2021).
[Ric20]
L. Rice. Container Security: Fundamental Technology Concepts That Protect Containerized
Applications. 1st edition. O’Reilly Media, Incorporated, 2020. isbn: 978-1-4920-5670-6. url:
https://books.google.nl/books?id=6aoSywEACAAJ.
==PAGE:54==
