==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Modelling and performance assessment of
a Solar Powered Street Lighting product
for delivering light as a service.
Martin Sturdy (s192462)
Supervisors:
Sergiu Spataru, Sune
Thorsteinsson, Peter Poulsen
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Fotonik
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 340
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 45 25 63 52
info@fotonik.dtu.dk
http://www.fotonik.dtu.dk/English.aspx
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The modelling and performance assessment of solar powered street lights has been
undertaken in this study. The main focus, was directed towards the PV array and
power converter components which are used for the device’s power production and
conversion. Due to the complex layout of the PV array on five different sides, in depth
analyses were undertaken to fully understand this component’s operation. Further-
more, the different interconnection of each of the sides with each other, constituted
the biggest challenge in the project since different power production levels had to be
accurately modelled. The different converters used for each street-light also required
detailed investigation to ascertain their behaviour with regards to the PV-to-battery
and battery-to-LED conversion stages.
In the first parts of the project, lab tests were performed on the devices. After that,
using the open source Python software, the models that simulated the components’
behaviour were developed. Thanks to sensors placed on the street-lights deployed in
the field, validation of the created models was undertaken.
The results obtained after running the simulations, showed a close representation
of the PV array and converter’s behaviour. The presence of complex shading profiles
and of protection algorithms implemented to safeguard the systems from damage,
though, represented the main differences seen between the simulation and field results
Thanks to this study, in depth understanding of the different systems behaviour
was obtained. Further development of the models and component optimization can
therefore result in the implementation of solar powered street lights in more vast
applications.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Due to the complexity and inter-disciplinary nature of this thesis, the help of several
experts was at the basis of its completion.
I would like to thank my supervisors Sergiu Spataru, Peter Behrensdorff Poulsen
and SuneThorsteinsson for their great insights, teachings and constant support through-
out every step of this project. Without their help, I would have been misguided and
my efforts would have not resulted in the great work developed to complete this im-
portant jurney. I would like to also thank all the employees at Nordic Firefly and
Nerve battery systems for their help when most needed.
A big thank you goes also to my family and to my friends who have assisted me
during the intense times that I experienced during this Master Thesis.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Stand Alone PV street-light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.1
Project Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.1.2
Project Outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Operation principles and Modelling approaches
11
2.1
Solar geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Photo-Voltaic (PV) panel operation and characteristics . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Photovoltaic strings and arrays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.4
Electronic Converter Unit (ECU) operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.5
PV panels and array . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.6
Electronic converter
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.6.1
Driesse model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.6.2
Linear regression model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3
Component Characterization and Performance
25
3.1
Photovoltaic modules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.1
Flash Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.1.2
Electroluminescence Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.1.3
Photovoltaic panel and array modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2
Irradiance Sensors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.3
Converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.1
PV-to-Battery converter characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.3.2
PV-to-Battery converter modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.2.1
Driesse model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.3.2.2
Linear regression model of PV-to-battery converter
.
39
3.3.3
Battery-to-LED converter characterization . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
==PAGE:8==
vi
Contents
3.3.4
Battery-to-LED modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3.4.1
Driesse model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.3.4.2
Linear regression model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.4
Battery Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4
Field Validation
47
4.1
Irradiance sensor validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
PV panel model validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2.1
DTU Pole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2.2
Merkur 340 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.3
Converter model validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3.1
DTU Pole . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3.1.1
PV-to-battery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3.1.2
Battery-to-LED
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3.2
Merkur 340 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.3.2.1
PV-to-battery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
4.3.2.2
Battery-to-LED
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5
Conclusion
65
A
Appendix
70
A.1 Component Characterization and Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.1.1
EL Tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.2 Field Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
Bibliography
81
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
The rapid development of technology in recent centuries has significantly impacted
society and its way of living. It has also altered the planet we live on, initiating
unnatural processes which threaten its perfect balance. As the use of fossil based
energy sources began from the mid 20th century, global surface temperatures have
risen 0.74 ± 0.18 °C (1.33 ± 0.32 °F) [1] and are projected to continue rising also
throughout the 21st century if action is not taken against this. Fossil fuel powered
energy production systems, in particular, greatly contribute to damaging the planet;
for this reason, in recent years, utilization of different cleaner energy sources has
been greatly increased. The transition to alternative types of energy, though, is not
straightforward. Great consideration has to be taken into account for the introduc-
tion of these new technologies. The main challenge consists in predicting their energy
production since, by nature, the resource they depend on is uncertain and subject to
climatic conditions. In addition to this, their implementation in the already existing
energy production system requires regulation and support, in order ease their appli-
cation [2]. In lower to middle income countries (mostly located in the African, South
American and South Asian regions of the globe) [3], where fossil fuel resources may be
abundant and electric grid infrastructure less developed, renewables are challenging
to implement since the easily accessible natural sources are cheaper and more reliable
for energy production. Despite this though, the clean energy resource potential of
these areas is significant: as shown in figure 1.1, the solar resource is very high.
==PAGE:10==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1: Worldwide PV potential [4]
The benefits from renewable energy deployment, especially in underdeveloped and
decentralized rural areas, is likely to compete with conventional alternatives [5]. Great
insight into the renewables’ potential has also been seen in light of the recent COVID-
19 pandemic outbreak in the world during late 2019 and the beginning of 2020 [6].
During the initial phases of the outbreak, most of the countries in the world faced a
lockdown period, which resulted in a decline in energy utilization. During this period,
renewables had a growth in demand since their operation is not as dependent on man-
power as for conventional power plants and thanks to their prioritized dispatching
[7]. The increase of renewable energy sources during the COVID-19 pandemic can be
seen in figure 1.2.
==PAGE:11==
1.1 Stand Alone PV street-light
3
Figure 1.2: Worldwide PV potential [7]
With this information, a sense of security is also connected to renewable energy
sources, which keep supplying energy despite great challenges faced by the world’s
population.
Thanks to the attractive consequences of the transition to renewable energy sources
and the incentive to reach carbon neutrality and stop climate change, many new ap-
plications are developed in order to make full use of clean energy sources: one of
these is Stand-alone PV. The attractiveness of such systems lies in the fact that
their application does not rely on electric grid connection and are, as the name sug-
gests, independent. Stand-alone PV makes it possible for lower and medium income
countries, that lack or have unstable electric grid infrastructure, to still have access
to energy. Additionally to the benefits of being a non-harming form of energy, in-
stalling renewable energy based grid independent solutions is much cheaper than the
cost that would be incurred when creating an electric grid. [8].
1.1
Stand Alone PV street-light
In this Thesis project, three stand-alone PV lighting (SPVL) systems are presented
and studied. The goal of the project is to create a performance model for the stand-
alone street-lights: this will help ensure their operation in different locations (amongst
which lower to middle income sites such as Lagos, Nigeria and Jakarta, Indonesia)
and optimise their design. Currently, two SPVLs are deployed in the field and are
installed in DTU’s (Technical University of Denmark) Risø campus: these are the
==PAGE:12==
4
1 Introduction
Merkur 340 (SPVL-1A) and DTU Pole (SPVL-1B), which can be seen in figure1.3.
The Merkur 340 was the first street-light to be developed, followed by the DTU Pole.
The third street-light, the SPVL2, is the most recently developed system and was
installed during the last month of this Master’s project: for this reason, a complete
analysis was not possible to be undertaken for it. The operation of the SPVL system
entails utilizing the solar resource during the day to produce energy thanks to PV
panels and store it via a battery. Once a minimum light condition is reached, the
battery starts discharging and its energy is used to power an LED luminaire which
lights up its surrounding. The components which make up the three components are:
The LED and the PV array are the only visible components on the outside of the
street-light: the battery is located at the base of the system, whereas the converter
and circuitry used for the operation are stored in the lamp head.
• PV array: an ensemble of 9 mono crystalline 35W PV panels which is used
to produce the energy for the street-light’s operation. The PV panels are all
integrated in the SPVL’s pole and luminaire. For each of the four sides of the
pole there are two modules placed in a vertical fashion: they are incorporated
in the upper half of the pole, since this is where most of the radiation reaches
this part of the streetlight. The top module, instead, is placed on the top of the
luminaire, which is the most exposed part of the SPVL to the solar resource.
• Battery: used to store the power produced by the PV array when lighting is
not required. When lighting is needed, the battery supplies the energy for the
lamp’s operation. This component cannot be seen in 1.3 since it is located inside
the pole’s structure at its base.
• Electronic converter unit (ECU): system that converts PV to battery and bat-
tery to LED powers. It is located in the lamp head together with the SPVL’s
circuitry.
• LED Lamp: light source utilized to provide illumination to the lamp’s surround-
ings when the a minimum light condition is reached.
==PAGE:13==
1.1 Stand Alone PV street-light
5
Figure 1.3: SPVL system installed in the field
Despite having the same components, in order to create more optimized systems,
some changes were done to each of the two SPVLs following the first street-light
system. The specs of the three systems are summarized in table 1.1.
Merkur 340
(SPVL-1A)
DTU Pole
(SPVL-1B)
SPVL-2
PV Panels
9 S’Tile 32-cell
35W mono-Si
9 S’Tile 32-cell
35W mono-Si
9 Photinous 32-cell
35W mono-Si
ECU
Lumiax MPPT0650-DCLi
MPPT 3-port converter
5 Nordic Firefly (NFF)
MPPT 50W 3-port converters
2 Nordic Firefly (NFF)
MPPT 3-port converters
Battery
Lithium-ion phosphate battery
(12.8V, 66Ah)
Lithium-ion phosphate battery
(12.8V, 66Ah)
Battery bank of 26 3.2V and
25Ah series connected cells
LED
LED lamp 34V 1 : 18A
PWM-tacted 8000lm with
DWC optics
LED lamp 34V 1 : 18A
PWM-tacted 8000lm with
DWC optics
LED lamp (34V 1 : 18A
PWM-tacted 8000lm with
DWC optics
Table 1.1
Table 1.2: SPVL system components
The presence of different components in the three SPVL systems results in different
interconnections between them: this is represented for all three systems in figures 1.4
and 1.5 and 1.6 respectively.
==PAGE:14==
6
1 Introduction
Figure 1.4: Merkur 340 PV and converter configuration
Figure 1.5: DTU Pole PV and converter configuration
The complexity of the SPLV systems studied in this project requires an in depth
analysis to be performed in order to successfully understand and simulate their be-
haviour. The individual components’ operation and performance needs to be under-
stood before their interconnection to create a system is examined. Additionally, the
==PAGE:15==
1.1 Stand Alone PV street-light
7
sophisticated design of the different street-lights is a challenge for the development
of models that need to be implemented in order to simulate the system’s behaviour.
In particular, this project focuses on the SPVL’s PV panels and ECU testing and
modelling. In order to obtain the street-light system performance models, individual
performance models for the different components need to be developed first: by merg-
ing them together the simulation of the whole system can thereafter be accomplished.
The uniqueness of the PV array layout of the streetlights is that the five sides,
which can be connected independently or in parallel with each other, are exposed
to five different irradiance levels at all times. Commonly used models [9] [10] and
simulation softwares, such as SAM (System Advisor Model) [11] and PVSyst, do
not account for this mismatch level on PV arrays, since the majority of applications
usually have a fixed orientation: consequently all PV panels are subject to the same
irradiance level. For this reason, a performance model that takes into account the
different radiation levels falling on the PV modules has to be developed.
The 3 port converters used in the different SPVLs as well need to be modelled
in such a way that both the PV to battery and battery to LED conversion processes
are simulated correctly. Dependencies of the converter’s operation on the different
component’s parameters may be present, and need to consequently be accounted for
in the modelling.
Thanks to the data provided from the various sensors and data logging systems
present on the street-light, a more precise modelling approach could be developed.
Irradiance sensors were also installed on each of the street-light’s sides during the
project’s execution to increase the accuracy with which the PV array simulation
could be performed. Access to the data through the Living Lab database made it
possible to perform the validation of the models.
The successful completion of all the parts of the project depends on the execution
and completion of smaller objectives. Most of the Merkur 340 street-light component
characterization was already performed in the ”Optimisation of Solar Street Lighting
Via Simulation” [12] Master project and was therefore not repeated. The goals set
for this project are the following:
• SPVL-2 PV panel and array characterization with flash tests.
• SPVL-2 PV panels and array mismatched characterization tests.
• Find and develop model for the PV module and array.
• Installation of irradiance sensors on SPVL-1A and SPVL-1B for more accurate
modelling.
• Characterize the SPVL-1B and SPVL-2 converters.
• Find and develop converter models for the PV to battery and battery to LED
conversion processes.
• Validate the PV and converter models with field data stored in the Living Lab
database.
==PAGE:16==
8
1 Introduction
• Characterize SPVL-1B and SPVL-2 batteries. Data from these tests serves as
battery model validation for the ”Performance modelling and design optimiza-
tion of a Solar Powered Street Lighting system for delivering light as a service
in remote areas” project, performed at the same time as this one.
• Create SPVL performance models.
Figure 1.6: DTU Pole PV and converter configuration
1.1.1
Project Limitations
The completion of all project objectives was not possible though, due to time and
component availability limitations. The battery-to-LED tests for the DTU Pole 50W
3-port converter was not undertaken and test data form previous characterization by
Nordic Firefly was used instead. With regards to the new SPVL-2, since no spare
converter was available, its characterization in the lab was not performed. Addition-
ally, since the new SPVL-2 was only installed during the last weeks of the project,
the validation of the PV and converter models was not possible to be undertaken
either. The SPVL performance model was not implemented either, due to delays
which postponed the completion of previous objectives.
1.1.2
Project Outline
The remainder of this report is organised as follows: the next section covers some
theoretical topics regarding solar geometry, PV device characteristics and converter
==PAGE:17==
1.1 Stand Alone PV street-light
9
operation. Subsequent sections outline state of the art, component characterization
procedures, component modelling approaches and results of this project.
==PAGE:18==
10
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2
Operation principles
and Modelling
approaches
In this chapter, the theory that governs stand-alone PV systems is discussed. This
will help to better understand how the project’s components work.
In addition to the component theory, the solar resource is also presented in this chap-
ter. Due to its essential importance in the SPVL’s functioning, the characteristics of
the solar resource are described in a detailed manner in this section.
2.1
Solar geometry
The SVPL relies on the sun’s energy to function. Without it, the system cannot
operate and for this reason it is essential to know the sun’s position in the sky and
the intensity of its radiation during the system’s operation: this information can then
be used to estimate the solar energy capture and model the operation and performance
of the system. The solar geometry is also important to optimally install the SPVL
in a given location: this makes it possible to utilize as much of the solar irradiation
as possible for energy production: this consequently results in increased energy for
lighting.
The sun’s position in the sky can be defined by different angles [13]:
• Solar Azimuth Angle (αs, [◦]): is the sun’s angle with respect to the horizontal
plane. With the South reference condition, the Azimuth angle range is defined
as −90◦< αs < 90◦from East to West respectively.
• Solar Altitude Angle (γs, [◦]): is the angle that identifies the sun’s height (from
the centre of the sun’s disc) with respect to the horizontal. Its range is from
0◦< γs < 90◦
==PAGE:20==
12
2 Operation principles and Modelling approaches
• Solar Zenith Angle (θz, [◦]): is the complementary angle to the Altitude angle
and is defined as θz = 90 −γs
• Solar Declination Angle (δs, [◦]):is the sun’s angle at solar noon (Azimuth = 0◦)
with respect to the plane of the equator. In the North Equator, the Declination
angle is positive. −23.45◦< δs < 23.45◦
• Solar Hour Angle (ωs, [◦]): is the angular displacement of the sun east or west
of the local meridian due to the Earth’s rotation around its axis. This angle
changes by 15◦every hour, is negative before noon and positive in the afternoon.
Regardless of the sun’s position, a surface which is exposed to the sun experiences
different types of irradiance on it. Solar irradiance is defined as the ”power density
of radiation incident on a surface i.e. the quotient of the radiant flux incident on the
surface and the area of that surface”[14]. As the solar irradiance travels through the
atmosphere it is modified by particles that absorb or diffuse light and by the distance
it has to travel. It is then modified a second time when it hits the earth’s surface [15].
With respect to a horizontal surface exposed to the sunlight, the main components
of solar radiation are:
• Global Horizontal Irradiance (GHI, [ W
m2 ]): is the total solar radiation incident
on a horizontal surface. GHI is given by the sum of Direct Normal Irradiance
(DNI) and Diffuse Horizontal Irradiance (DHI).
• Direct Normal Irradiance (DNI, [ W
m2 ]): is the direct beam radiation coming
from the sun.
• Diffuse Horizontal Irradiance (DHI, [ W
m2 ]): is the radiation which is scattered
by the atmosphere
Equation 2.1 shows the relation between the three irradiance components where
DNI is corrected (with respect to the Zenith angle) to have only the direct radiation
component.
GHI = DNI · cos(θZ) + DHI
(2.1)
Most PV systems, including the SPVL studied in this project, are not placed on
a horizontal plane. In order to identify the correct solar irradiance reaching a system
in a tilted plane with a given orientation, the angles and irradiance components
mentioned above are implemented in equations to find two important quantities; these
are the Angle of Incidence (AOI) and the global irradiance in the plane of array.
• Angle of Incidence (θAOI, [◦]): is the angle between the line drawn from the
center of the sun to the irradiated surface and the normal to the surface. Its
range is 0◦< θAOI < 90◦and any AOI greater than 90◦tells us that the sun is
behind the surface in consideration. In 2.2 [16] the equation to determine the
AOI is shown: here βP V is the surface tilt in degrees and γP V is the azimuth
angle of the surface in question.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Photo-Voltaic (PV) panel operation and characteristics
13
• Global Irradiance in the Plane of Array (GP OA, [ W
m2 ]): is the total irradiance
experienced by a surface with a specific tilt and azimuth. The GP OA can be de-
constructed into its three components in the plane of array as shown in equation
2.3: these are the direct beam irradiance, diffuse irradiance and ground-reflected
(or albedo) irradiance. The albedo contribution in the GP OA equation is given
by the ρg coeﬀicient, representing the reflectance the ground generates.
θAOI = arccos(cos βPV · cos θZ + sin β · sin θZ · cos (γS −γPV))
(2.2)
GP OA = DNI · cos θAOI + DHI · 1 + cos(βPV)
2
+ GHI · ρg · 1 −cos(βPV)
2
(2.3)
The above stated concepts make it now possible to understand the interaction
between the solar resource and the PV modules and array.
2.2
Photo-Voltaic (PV) panel operation and
characteristics
PV panels convert the sun’s radiation into energy that can be used for various appli-
cations. They are composed of an ensemble of solar cells that are then interconnected
in the the panel. Solar cells are made of a semi-conductor material, the most used
being Silicon [17], which is treated to create an electric field and has a negative (p
side) and positive (n side) side: together they form a p-n junction. The electricity
production is achieved at an atomic level within the cell, thanks to what is called
the ”Photo-voltaic Effect”. As light hits the cells, photons of light are absorbed and
an electron-hole pair (negatively and positively charged respectively) is released. By
connecting the positive and negative terminals of the cell to a pair of conductors, a
circuit is formed. As the electron-hole pair is created, the circuit’s electric field makes
the two particles move and a current is generated. This electricity can then be used
to power a load. By connecting multiple cells together, panels are formed and more
electricity can be produced, making it possible to power bigger loads like the SPVL,
subject of this project.
The PV modules have specific current-voltage characteristics that depend on the solar
cell technology, number of cells and cell configuration on the panel. These relations
and characteristic points of operation are represented through the current-voltage
(I-V) and power-voltage (P-V) curves: these can be seen in figure 2.1.
==PAGE:22==
14
2 Operation principles and Modelling approaches
Figure 2.1: I-V and P-V characteristic curves of a Photo-Voltaic cell or module
In order to assess how the PV device functions, their main physical parameters
and the important points of their characteristic curves have been attributed specific
terminology. They are the following:
• Photo-generated current (Iph, [A]): is the current which is generated when light
hits the cell or module, with excited electrons moving from the n-side to the p-
side and holes moving in the opposite direction. Electrons and holes are referred
to majority carriers
• Reverse saturation current (I0 [A]): is the current resulting from flow of minority
electrons from the p-side to the n-side and the minority holes from the n-side to
the p-side when the cell or module is reversely biased in the dark: for this reason
it is also referred to as ”dark current”. Reverse saturation currents have very
small orders of magnitude [18] due to the very little concentration of minority
carriers.
• Short circuit current (Isc, [A]): is the current generated when the cell or module
is short circuited (i.e. has no voltage drop across it and resistance is zero) and
is the largest current that can be drawn. In an ideal scenario, Isc and Iph are
identical.
• Open circuit voltage (Voc, [A]): is the maximum voltage that can be obtained
from a PV device when there is no load connected: current is zero at this point.
• Maximum power point (MPP): is the point on the I-V curve where the product
between current and voltage is maximum. It is represented by the two points
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Photo-Voltaic (PV) panel operation and characteristics
15
defined as Imp ([A]) and Vmp ([V]): the product of the two is therefore Pmp
([W]) and is identified as the P-V curve’s absolute maxima.
• Fill Factor (FF, [%]): defines the I-V curve’s ”squareness” and tells what
percentage of the maximum ideal power (given by the product of Isc and Voc)
the PV device actually produces. It is defined as the ratio between the maximum
and ideal powers.
• Series resistance (Rs, [Ω]): is a parasitic resistance which is in series with
photo-generated current. It accounts for the resistance current is subject to
when moving between emitter and base of the cells, the resistance between the
device’s metal contacts and the resistance between the metal contacts and the
silicon [19]. In order to make as much of Iph reach the load, this resistance
should have the smallest possible value. High values of Rs will decrease the Fill
Factor as shown in figure 2.2(a).
• Shunt resistance (Rsh, [Ω]): represents a parallel current paths within the PV
cells and module, that decrease the output and eﬀiciency of the photovoltaic
device. It accounts for silicon manufacturing defects and impurities, such as
leakage currents through the p-n junction at the bulk [20]. Its value should
therefore be high in order to prevent the photo-generated current from going
through this alternative path. Decreasing values of Rsh decrease the PV device’s
Fill Factor as shown in figure 2.2(b).
(a) Rs effects on IV curve
(b) Rsh effects on IV curve
Figure 2.2: Series and shunt resistance effects
After having introduced the important parameters that characterize a PV device,
its electrical characteristic can be modelled using an equivalent circuit model, such
as the Shockley one diode model One diode model, represented in Figure 2.3. Its
simplicity, though, is often cause of accuracy problems with representation of the
device’s real behaviour [21]. By using basic electric circuit laws, the device’s effective
==PAGE:24==
16
2 Operation principles and Modelling approaches
current production can be calculated: this is shown in equation 2.4, found by applying
Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL).
Figure 2.3: One diode model
I = Iph −ID −IP
(2.4)
The diode D behaviour can be modelled with ease by using Shockley’s diode equa-
tion. In addition to this, by using Kirchhoff’s voltage law (KVL), we can determine
the current IP flowing through the shunt resistance. The newly found parameters
can be substituted in equation 2.4, obtaining the following complete expression of the
PV device’s output current:
I = Iph −I0
[
exp
(−V + I · Rs
n · VT
)
−1
]
−−V + I · Rs
Rsh
(2.5)
In equation 2.5, n represents the diode’s quality factor and VT is the thermal volt-
age which takes into account the relation between the electron’s elementary charge
(q=1.602 × 10−19 [C]), Boltzmann’s constant (k=1.381 × 10−23 [J/K]) and the p-n
junction temperature (Tc[◦C])
As previously stated, the one diode model has its limitations.
For this reason in
some cases, complexity is added in the form of a second diode which accounts for
recombination mechanisms that occur at the atomic level in the cells: this more com-
plex model is shown in figure 2.4. It is harder with this new circuit to solve for all
the parameters, which have become 7 instead of 5 due to the addition of the extra
diode: numerical methods, such as the Newton-Raphson method, are used in these
cases [22].
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Photo-Voltaic (PV) panel operation and characteristics
17
Figure 2.4: Two diode model
The representative equation of this new circuit now becomes equation 2.6 which
accounts for the second diode: a second Shockley equation is introduced and the
subscripts 1 and 2 are used to distinguish the two diodes. The two diode model will
be taken as representation of the PV devices under scrutiny and, as will be presented
in the following sections, is at the basis of the model used to simulate the PV device’s
performance studied in this project.
I = Iph−I01
[
exp
(−V + I · Rs
n1 · VT
)
−1
]
−I02
[
exp
(−V + I · Rs
n2 · VT
)
−1
]
−−V + I · Rs
Rsh
(2.6)
The characteristic I-V curve, as introduced previously, shows the relation between
voltage at the terminals of the PV device and the current flowing through it. Another
representation, the P-V curve, is also used to show the device’s power dependency
on the voltage: this curve can be seen in Figure 2.1 overlapped with the I-V curve.
The non ideal nature of the PV devices means that in real operating settings, the
device’s conditions can change and with it also its characteristic curves. The two
factors that mostly cause alterations in the normal functioning of a cell or module
are temperature and irradiance. Their effects can be seen in Figure 2.5: temperature
changes shown in the bottom two graphs cause a logarithmic decrease in the voltage
of the device. This is clearer when referring to equation 2.7. Changes in irradiance,
instead, affect the device’s current in a linear manner [23].
==PAGE:26==
18
2 Operation principles and Modelling approaches
(a) Irradiance effects on IV curve
(b) Irradiance effects on PV curve
(c) Temperature effects on IV curve
(d) Temperature effects on PV curve
Figure 2.5: Irradiance and temperature effects
The reference conditions for which a PV device’s performance is determined are
referred to as Standard Test Conditions (STC) and correspond to: incident irradiance
is of G = 1000 W
m2 , ambient temperature Ta = 25◦C and light spectrum of AM =
1.5 (air mass is the distance light has to travel through the atmosphere).
These
optimal conditions, though, are rarely experienced in real applications: it is therefore
important to know how the device behaves in these settings so that the maximum
power is always extracted.
VOC = nkT
q
ln
(IL
I0
+ 1
)
(2.7)
2.3
Photovoltaic strings and arrays
To scale up the power output of a PV system, multiple modules are connected together.
Ideally, the modules of a system should all have the same physical characteristics and
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Photovoltaic strings and arrays
19
parameters. In practice this does not occur since during their fabrication, manufac-
turing conditions are not the same at all times. Defects and damage are also cause
of differences from PV panel to PV panel. These divergences are referred to as ”mis-
matches”. In most cases, mismatching is minimal and solely results in some deviation
of the PV device’s typical parameters between one another; in other cases though,
these differences can result in serious damage which can impact the performance of
other modules in the PV system. In this project, mismatch is evaluated by check-
ing each module’s characteristic parameters at STC conditions and by performing
electro-luminescence (EL) tests: these procedures will be explained in more detail in
the following sections.
Modules can be connected in two different ways following the basic Kirchhoff
circuit laws:
• Series connection: the current flowing through all the PV modules is the same
as the system’s total current; the total voltage instead is given by the sum of
all the individual modules’ voltages.
• Parallel connection: in this configuration, the modules are connected so that
the voltage drop is the same on each and equivalent to the system’s total voltage.
The total current on the other had is given by the sum each of the PV devices’
currents.
The interconnection of multiple modules together introduces new problems with
the system’s functioning.
Module shading, for example, causes several losses and
significant power reduction for both types of setups. In the series connection, when
a module is shaded, reduced current is output: this becomes the new array current
which results in a lower array power output. To reduce this effect, bypass diodes have
been installed in parallel to groups of module cells. The diodes isolate the shaded
cells and offer a secondary path for the current through the module and to the load:
a performance decrease is still present since the shaded cells are ”isolated”, but it is
not as significant as it would be without diodes installed. Additionally, if in the series
configuration a module is mismatched or has a defect, a reduction in voltage occurs: in
addition to reducing the system’s power output, in the long run these problems could
permanently damage the device, jeopardizing the performance of the other modules.
In parallel connection, the degradation occurring from shading does not propagate
to other modules [24]: as previously seen, changes in irradiance affect current more
than voltage. Since each module is subject to the same voltage, the lower voltage will
be equal to the system’s one. Total current will be reduced based on the irradiance
quantity reaching each module, but this configuration is much less detrimental to the
system’s performance compared to the series connection. High currents produced in
this setting require large cables and can result in extra losses. The array configuration
design therefore is important for an optimal system behaviour.
==PAGE:28==
20
2 Operation principles and Modelling approaches
2.4
Electronic Converter Unit (ECU) operation
A DC-DC converter is used to step up (Boost) or step down (Buck) the input voltage
with high eﬀiciency. In PV applications such as the one presented in this project,
the converter is used to step down the maximum power point voltage of the PV
array to the battery’s charging voltage. This is only done thanks to the converter’s
tracker, named Maximum Power Point Tracker (MPPT). After having fixed a voltage
set-point, the maximum power point (MPP) is tracked at fixed timesteps thanks to
different algorithms. The most well known is the so called ”Perturbe and Observe
(PO) algorithm. In figure ??, the flow chart of the PO algorithm is represented.
In Perturb and Observe (PO) method, as the name indicates, the working is
based on the inspection of the array output power and on the perturbation (adding
or subtracting) of the power with respect to the change in array voltage or current.
This method continuously adds or subtracts the reference current or voltage with
respect to the previous power sample (Elgendy et al., 2012). The operation of the
PO MPPT is shown in Fig.
4.
The computation of actual state k and previous
state k-1 of parameters V and I are considered. The actual and previous state of the
parameters power P and voltage V
The performance of a converter is evaluated by considering 3 different parameters.
These are the tracking, conversion and total eﬀiciencies. The equations that identify
these three characteristic values are represented in 2.8.
ηT racking = Pin
PMP
· 100
ηConversion = Pout
Pin
· 100
ηT otal = Pout
PMP
· 100
(2.8)
As previously mentioned in the introduction of this project, in order to achieve a
performance model that is representative of the different SPVL systems, the operation
of their individual components needs to be modelled first.
This chapter outlines
the state of the art of current modelling approaches to PV and ECU components.
It outlines their compatibility with the studied SPVLs systems and introduces the
reader to the actual models used in this project.
2.5
PV panels and array
Following PV technology development and deployment in various settings, modelling
processes were engineered to accurately predict system’s electrical power output po-
tential and performance. The modelling follows a theoretical analysis of the different
physical processes that occur in the system and of the factors that influence these
processes. In the literature, several PV module models are proposed: these range
from simple models with few input parameters to elaborate models with complete
PV module characterization approaches [25]. PV models can be classified in two cat-
egories that are power models [26] and PV cell equivalent circuit models. The former
describe the PV array power outputs as function of the input parameters; the latter
==PAGE:29==
2.6 Electronic converter
21
instead implement the equations of the equivalent circuit that governs the physical
behaviour of the PV cell and output the characteristic parameters of the simulated
system. Of these, the most commonly used model to predict energy production of PV
cells and panels is the one diode circuit model [27], whose circuital representation was
shown in figure 2.3 in the previous chapter. Similarly to before, a two diode model is
also used to simulate the PV panel operation: the use of this second model results in
better modelling results and accuracy because of the addition of the extra diode [28].
The implementation of such models typically is done using different commercial
software for technical and engineering applications as Pspice [29] or Matlab/Simulink
[30]. Other models are also implemented utilizing PV libraries offered for open source
programming software such as PVLib in Python [10].
Most modelling projects are performed for systems that are made up of series
and/or parallel electrically connected panels: after having modelled one panel, the
system output is found multiplying the simulated parameters by the number of differ-
ently interconnected modules. Previously performed PV modelling projects presented
in literature and also most conventional PV applications for which modelling is per-
formed, represent systems that are designed in such a way that the array faces a fixed
orientation. For some applications though, like the SPVL systems studied in this
project, the orientation of the array is not only to one side. The mismatch due to
the different irradiances reaching different sides of the system, introduces complica-
tions with regards to modelling the complete system’s performance. The modelling
performed in this project therefore required to account for the mismatch introduced
by having five differently oriented sides. Thanks to its versatility and its easy acces-
sibility, the open source software Python package called PVMismatch was therefore
utilized.
PVMismatch models forward and reverse bias I-V curves of different combinations
of PV cells, modules and systems. The basic model used by PVMismatch is a 5-
parameter 2-diode equivalent circuit model based on previous work [31][27][32]. As
it is an object oriented program, after having declared the PV device’s characteristic
details, cell, module, string and array, classes are created: the system constraints
connected to them are all independent and variable. The desired number of points
in the I-V curve are specified, and the points are distributed using two log-space
distributions to increase density around the maximum power point and the reverse
breakdown voltage.
The user can also specify the module cell configuration, the
number of modules per string, and number of strings in the system. Changes to the
irradiance and temperature can be made from a cell level to a system level. In the
following chapters, the performance of this model will be discussed in detail.
2.6
Electronic converter
As the increased eﬀiciency and reliability of the PV system are of growing importance,
great emphasis has been put into developing the power conversion stages of these ap-
plication so that their best performance can be obtained for the majority of the time.
==PAGE:30==
22
2 Operation principles and Modelling approaches
For these reasons, the operation of the converter has been studied extensively, and
many models that predict its behaviour have been developed. Converter models can
be dynamic or performance and eﬀiciency based. Dynamic DC–DC converter models
can be categorized into switching and average converter models. The switching mod-
els are created using the differential equations of the converter’s electrical circuit. An
example of this is the PWM-switch modeling method which is used for pulse-width-
modulated (PWM) DC-DC converters operating in the continuous conduction mode.
The main advantage of this method is its versatility and simple implementation com-
pared to other methods [33][34]. The averaged method instead, is used to determine
the set of equations that describes the converter’s behaviour over one switching pe-
riod: this makes it possible for designers to understand relationships between control
parameters and converter states. The downside to these models is that some simu-
lation accuracy is lost, but simulation run and setup times are lower[35]. Dynamic
models, though, are used for the simulation of transient behaviour and not for longer
time-frame analyses.
If an assessment of the performance of a PV system is to be done, these mod-
elling approaches cannot be utilized. For this reason, the converter simulation that
is presented in this project was performed utilizing static eﬀiciency models that can
represent the system’s performance over longer time-frames. Such models are perfor-
mance and eﬀiciency based and are presented below.
2.6.1
Driesse model
The Driesse model is a state of the art model and used to calculate the power losses
and output power (and consequently also eﬀiciency) of a converter over its full range
of operation [36]. It does this by approximating the eﬀiciency of power converters
using the second order equation 2.9.
η(pin) = a0 + a1 · pin + a2 · p2
in
(2.9)
The three quadratic terms are representative of different components that affect
the converter eﬀiciency. They are referred to as self-consumption (power losses that
come from internal circuitry); losses proportional to the output current due to fixed
voltage drops in semiconductors; and ohmic losses that are proportional to I2
out. The
above stated equation though, does not account for input voltage dependencies that
the converter’s behaviour may be subject to: depending on the converter’s layout,
there are many ways the input voltage can influence the system’s eﬀiciency. Depen-
dencies of this type can only be seen by analyzing the converter’s test data. The
model also outlines a second equation that accounts for the possible input voltage
dependency: this is a double quadratic equation and is shown below.
η(p) = (b0,0 + b0,1 (vin −1)) + (b1,0 + b1,1 (vin −1)) · pin + (b2,0 + b2,1 (vin −1)) · p2
in
(2.10)
==PAGE:31==
2.6 Electronic converter
23
2.6.2
Linear regression model
As mentioned previously, the converter’s operation may depend on different param-
eters which can only be seen from test data analysis. Since the Driesse model may
not accurately represent the converter’s eﬀiciency characteristic, a higher accuracy
data driven model can be derived from converter eﬀiciency tests or field performance
data. This second performance model has been developed from a model validation
approach, presented in literature, which utilizes residual analysis to determine what
components are causing modelling errors and in what conditions these errors arise[37].
The first step to be performed is the determination of the parameters that want to
be analyzed: this is done by converter test data evaluation.
After that, stepwise regression is applied to the the data and is used to rank the con-
tribution of the chosen variables to their variance: variables with high contribution
will result in significant changes to the variance and are therefore responsible for the
errors between the modelled and measured values. In equation 2.11, the stepwise
regression is represented.
Y = bo +
P
∑
j=1
bjXj
(2.11)
Furthermore, the dependent variables are represented by the Y vector and the
independent ones by the X vector, that has dimension P depending on the number of
variables used in the model. By implementing the equation, the linear regression is
performed and the best linear fit (biggest R2 value which tells us how close the data
are to the fitted regression line) is established. This process is then repeated while
adding independent variables that give the highest R squared value. Furthermore, by
specifying a degree to which the independent variables can be raised to, polynomial
combinations of dependent variables are also investigated for further dependencies.
This process is repeated until an effect’s probability of being random is exceeded.
==PAGE:32==
24
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3
Component
Characterization and
Performance
In this chapter, the procedures forcharacterization of the various components of the
SPVL project are outlined. These tests were undertaken in the first place for collecting
data to be used in the component model creation and validation, and second to
confirm the correct behaviour and the parameters of the different sub-components of
the system. Since all the tested sub-compoents are of the same type or similar as
those on the installed SPVL systems, the tests give insight on how the setup should
function in real conditions. All the tested components are the following:
• PV modules: Photinus Linea-P1500, 1200mm x 175mm x 5mm, mono-crystalline
modules, rated at 35W power.
• Streetlight Irradiance Sensors: 0.2W poly-crystalline, 65mm x 35mm x 2.8mm
solar cells.
• SPVL batteries: 12.8V 66Ah LiFePO4 (Lithium Ion) battery; High Star IFpP2770180-
25 battery cells and battery pack.
• Electronic converter unit (ECU): NFF 50W converter.
3.1
Photovoltaic modules
In this project all 9 modules that are integrated in the new SPVL-2 system have been
tested. This street-light is the newest generation system and, as was shown in table
1.1, is equipped with new PV modules. The new SPVL-2 was delivered at DTU’s
Risø campus at the beginning of this project’s period: in order to perform its PV
panel’s characterization, it was stored in proximity to the lab where the tests were
==PAGE:34==
26
3 Component Characterization and Performance
conducted. After having extracted the modules from the structure, their labelling
was performed: this procedure is important for identification. The naming procedure
is simple and precise: each component is identified by a label placed on it and stating
FTNK-APV-0000xyz. The last part of the label, ”xyz”, is made of 3 digits that are
unique to each module: in table 3.1 the label names for the different modules can be
seen.
Module placement
ID
Top
FTNK-APV-0000531
North side - Upper
FTNK-APV-0000505
North side - Lower
FTNK-APV-0000509
East side - Upper
FTNK-APV-0000506
East side - Lower
FTNK-APV-0000510
South side - Upper
FTNK-APV-0000507
South side - Lower
FTNK-APV-0000511
West side - Upper
FTNK-APV-0000508
West side - Lower
FTNK-APV-0000512
Table 3.1: PV module identification
All PV panels have the same characteristic values and are therefore supposed
to be the identical to each other.
The back sheet of each module presents their
characteristic electrical parameters, which are also reported in the table below.
Voc [V]
Vmp [V]
Isc [A]
Imp [A]
Pmax [W]
20.10
17.10
2.16
2.06
35.00
Table 3.2
3.1.1
Flash Testing
In order to ensure that the PV panels are working correctly, flashing tests have been
undertaken on them to find their characteristic parameters and I-V characteristic
curves. These tests were performed using an Endeas Quicksun 540 XLi flasher, whose
light intensity ranges from 200 W/m2 to 1200 W/m2. The flash is generated by a 6
Xenon lamp system powered by the QuickSun Electronics Unit EUM64, which allows
the increase of the measurement time by lengthening the effective sweep time [38].
As indicated in [39], the flasher inherently has some non-uniformity with regards to
the flash given by the lamp system: this can become more relevant when the DUT
(device under test) takes up a larger area inside the flasher. The Endeas software
was then used to calibrate the flasher with a certified and tested PV module and to
insert Photinous PV panel’s scpecifications. Furthermore, the software was used to
set the flasher’s different settings in order to achieve a customized simulation. The
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Photovoltaic modules
27
first tests were performed on individual panels to determine their performance and
conformity with regards to the manufacturer’s parameters. The flash test setup is
shown in Figure 3.6.
Each PV panel was connected, thanks to the cables placed
on their backsides, to the flasher in order to measure voltage and current produced
when flashed. In addition to this, a temperature sensor was placed on the back of
the modules to obtain the different characteristic parameters at STC condition: the
Campbell ”CR1000X” series data logger interfaced with the Endeas software to use
its temperature correction feature. Despite the possibility of performing both forward
(Isc to Voc) and reverse (Voc to Isc) sweep measurements with the flasher software,
for the Photinous PV panels flashing only forward was performed. In table 3.3, the
summary of the PV module’s STC I-V curve parameters are displayed.
ID [FTNK-APV]
Voc [V]
Vmp [V]
Isc [A]
Imp [A]
Pmp [W]
Rs [Ω]
Rsh [Ω]
η (Eff.) [%]
Fill Factor (FF) [%]
0000505
21.47
17.53
2.23
1.93
33.87
1.21
153.85
17.21
70.76
0000506
21.39
17.18
2.24
1.99
34.26
1.19
166.67
16.77
69.39
0000507
21.38
17.25
2.28
2.08
35.84
1.13
217.39
17.52
72.18
0000508
21.41
17.19
2.29
2.09
36.03
1.15
147.06
17.66
72.29
0000509
21.38
17.16
2.21
2.03
34.88
1.18
232.56
17.72
70.89
0000510
21.28
17.09
2.22
2.06
35.17
1.17
196.08
17.87
71.90
0000511
21.15
16.93
2.24
2.03
34.41
1.19
129.87
17.53
70.00
0000512
21.23
17.03
2.23
2.06
35.05
1.17
250.00
18.11
71.20
0000531 (Top)
20.12
16.18
2.21
2.01
32.58
1.12
151.51
15.53
73.65
Table 3.3
By analyzing these results, the similarity to the rated specifications can be seen.
Looking at the first eight entries of table 3.3, representing all the side modules, a
1W difference between the rated and measured power can be noticed. In addition to
this, for panel FTNK-APV-0000505 a lower than expected Imp value is found: this
results in a lower maximum power value than the rated one, which can also be seen for
other array components. Since as previously mentioned, the tests were performed at
STC conditions thanks to the temperature correction, it can be assumed that physical
characteristics of the PV devices cause the above mentioned differences. With regards
to the top module instead, lower voltage values compared to the side PV arrays are
found, compared to the current values are very close to the rated ones. Looking at the
EL image for this module presented in Figure A.4 in the Appendix, a dark area can
be seen in one of the cells: this may be the cause for the cell disconnection. Since the
Voc for all the other panels is of approximately 21.4V and all modules are composed of
32 cells each, this results in each cell producing approximately 0.66V, which amounts
to the voltage reduction experienced by the top module. As a consequence, also the
maximum power is lower than what is expected. The differences can also be seen
from the I-V and P-V curves obtained by plotting the flash data-points. These are
displayed in Figures 3.1 and 3.2 for both the side and top modules. The two dots
on the different curves represent the location of the module’s maximum power point.
As expected, for the top module this is situated lower than for the side module: as
previously stated, also the lower Voc can be seen.
==PAGE:36==
28
3 Component Characterization and Performance
Figure 3.1: Side panel IV and PV curves
Figure 3.2: Top panel IV and PV curves
After having established that the different panel’s performance at STC conditions
was acceptable, additional tests were undertaken to evaluate the device’s performance
in different lighting conditions. The reason for this is that, during every-day operation
in the field, the panels will work under large irradiance deviations: this results form
the nature of the SPVL array configuration, weather fluctuations and possible shading
from the surroundings.
Taking into account the Risø’s irradiance levels shown in
Figure 3.3 and the Endeas flashing range, the PV modules were flashed at 1000
W/m2, 600 W/m2 and 200 W/m2.
Figure 3.3: Yearly GHI values measured in Risø
In Figures 3.4 and 3.5, the I-V and P-V curves for the FTNK-APV-0000510
module at the different irradiance levels are displayed. As outlined in the theoretical
concepts in chapter two, changes in irradiance affect the device’s current values to a
greater extent; at the same time, the greater number of charge carriers generated at
higher irradiance values influences voltage values. The effect of the variations of these
parameters can be seen from the changes in the I-V characteristic: as a consequence
of these changes, the device’s power is also reduced as shown by the dots on the
different curves in the right hand picture representing the P-V curves.
==PAGE:37==
3.1 Photovoltaic modules
29
Figure 3.4: IV curve
Figure 3.5: PV curve
After having tested the individual PV panels, flash test were also performed on
a side array since four out of the five sides of the SPVL present such configuration.
As mentioned earlier, within the array, modules are connected in parallel with each
other: the tested side array is therefore made of two parallelly wired modules. Figure
3.6 shows the flash tests setup for the side array inside the Endeas flasher.
Figure 3.6: PV panel flash testing
Figure 3.7: Covered PV flash testing
The flashing results for the side array setup are presented in Figures A.6 and ??
in the Appendix. Finally, in order to evaluate the PV panels’ performance in the
case of shading, flashing was performed with coverage on the modules. In figure 3.7
the cover used to perform the shading on the PV panels and array is shown. The
cover that was used to perform the shading has a transmittance of approximately
49%: this indicates the amount of light that the cover lets through to the PV panel
==PAGE:38==
30
3 Component Characterization and Performance
underneath. Other than checking the PV panel performance, these coverage tests
have been performed to assess the operation of the PV simulation model: further
discussions follow in the next sections.
3.1.2
Electroluminescence Tests
Electroluminescence (EL) tests are performed to find faults and malfunctions of a
PV device. The test procedure consists in the reverse mode of normal PV operation:
current is fed to the module through the power connectors, stimulating radiative re-
combination to occur. In this way, the module emits light to the surroundings in
the form of infrared (IR) radiation. The emitted light is dependent on the current
intensity, and higher currents will result in brighter light emission. Degraded solar
cells are seen as dark areas in the EL image, since in these regions recombination does
not occur and no photons are generated. The emitted radiation is infrared, and its
wavelength falls in the range of 1150nm: this cannot be seen with the naked eye and
to perform inspection, an near-infrared camera capable of acquiring such wavelengths
is required.
The EL testing was performed in a dark room situated in building 110 at DTU’s
Risø Campus. The reason for performing the imaging in the dark is that the amount
of infrared radiation near 1150nm emitted by the solar module is low compared to
the radiation emitted by the background lighting. After being cleaned, the module
was placed on a holder situated approximately 1.5m from the camera in order to
capture it in its entirety. The imaging was performed using a DSLR Si-based and
CMOS modified high resolution Nikon camera that had its IR filter has removed. For
a precise image acquisition, the camera was set in such a way that the fingers in the
module’s cells could be clearly identified. For the EL tests, the camera acquisition
was set with the following values:
• ISO: 100
• Exposure time: 4s
• Aperture: 1/8
The panel was connected to a BK precision 9205 power supply. In order to get a
high enough panel radiation for the imaging to be taken successfully, the voltage and
current of the power supply were selected as follows:
• Voltage: set at 23.1V, 3V higher than the module’s open circuit voltage at STC
• Current: set at 2.16A, the same as the module’s short circuit current at STC
The EL imaging was performed on all 9 modules for a complete overview of the
array’s quality control in terms of defects. Thanks to this imaging technique in fact,
==PAGE:39==
3.1 Photovoltaic modules
31
FTNK-APV-0000510
FTNK-APV-0000511
Figure 3.8: EL tests
faults like cracks, contact failures, shunted cells or fingers, mechanical load stress and
other problems can be detected [40].
In Figure 3.8, two out of the nine panel EL images are shown: these two pictures
represent a panel in good condition and a damaged one. These were chosen to inspect
the condition of the device, and determine the cause for reduced performance. The
rest of the EL tests is presented in Figures A.1, A.2, A.3 and A.4 in the Appendix.
Recalling the values of the characteristic parameters (table 3.4) for these two modules,
one can see that these do not differ substantially from each.
It can therefore be
concluded that the second panel’s detriment is not significant enough to have affected
its performance.
This gives a sense of security regarding the performance of the
modules: as long as the damage does not affect cell connection, the devices are still
able to operate close to their best.
==PAGE:40==
32
3 Component Characterization and Performance
ID [FTNK-APV]
Voc[V]
Vmp[V]
Vsc[A]
Imp[A]
Pmp[W]
η [%]
FF[%]
0000510
21.23
17.09
2.22
2.03
35.17
17.87
71.90
0000511
21.15
16.93
2.24
2.03
34.41
17.53
70.00
Table 3.4
3.1.3
Photovoltaic panel and array modelling
In this section, the evaluation of the PVMismatch model created for the SPVL’s PV
array is performed. Before utilizing the model to simulate field data, its validation
with the data from the lab tests was undertaken. This was done for both the single
modules and for a single side array, since all the sides have the same configuration.
After having input the characteristic parameters of the PV panel, the ”cell”, ”module”,
”string: and ”system” classes were defined. Thanks the ability to set the values for
irradiance and temperature that the system is exposed to, the same conditions under
which the components were tested at could be recreated. In Figures 3.9 and 3.10,
the measured and simulated I-V and P-V curves for a single PV module at different
irradiance levels are shown. The simulated curves are represented by the dashed lines
and their maximum power points by the xs; the test data instead is represented in
the same way as was previously shown.
Figure 3.9:
Tested and simulated IV
curves
Figure 3.10:
Tested and simulated PV
curves
For the single module simulation, all the PVMismatch classes were set to have
an individual module object. The results clearly show the confidence with which the
PVMismatch model approximates the test data: despite an overestimation of approx-
imately 1% in the I-V curve MPP and of 3% for the P-V curve, the test data is
simulated very precisely. When simulating the side array, instead, the PVMismatch
”system” class was set in such a way that two module objects were defined, account-
ing for their parallel connection: in this class, altering the ”numberStrs” parameter,
changes the number of parallel connected strings. Since the string class for the mod-
==PAGE:41==
3.1 Photovoltaic modules
33
elling was set to have one module, changing ”numberStrs” to two creates an array of
two panels connected in parallel: the code that implements this component is shown
in the Appendix. Pictures 3.15 and 3.16 display the results for this second testing
setup.
Figure 3.11: Side array tested and simu-
lated IV curves
Figure 3.12: Side array tested and simu-
lated PV curves
In this case, the previously seen over-estimation is more evident: the simulated
maximum power point is overestimated by approximately 4% for the I-V curve and 8%
for the P-V curve. As discussed in the section where the flash testing was described,
the Endeas has some non-uniformity associated to its measurements. In cases such as
the array flashing, which takes up a more widespread area in the flasher, the DUT may
not be experiencing the same level of radiation evenly. Despite this, the model still
approximates the test data in a close manner: higher irradiance levels are associated
with the greatest difference between the simulated and actual data, especially around
the MPP. For lower irradiance values instead, the difference is not that significant;
this is a positive aspect since irradiances that reach values close to 1000 W/m2 are
only obtained in the field during the summer period,as can be seen in Figure ??.
The final evaluation of the model’s operation was performed with the data from
the covered PV panel tests. Since during their operation the photovoltaic modules
may experience shading on them, the PVMismatch model’s validity has to also be
tested in these cases. What is more, due to the complexity of the PV array layout
facing five different orientations, the non-uniform irradiance falling on the individual
sides has be simulated by the model as well, hence the execution of this test. For
this analysis, the cover was overlayed on the PV panels once then twice: the entirety
of the modules was covered and a flash at 1000 W/m2 was performed.
Since, as
previously stated, the cover has a 49% transmittance, with the single coverage the
DUT experiences an irradiance of approximately 500 W/m2; for the double coverage
case instead an irradiance of approximately 260 W/m2 is recreated. These values were
found, after having performed the flash tests, using the ratio ISC(shaded)/ISC(ST C).
As the cover is placed on the modules, a reduction of the characteristic parameters
==PAGE:42==
34
3 Component Characterization and Performance
can be seen: the double coverage affects the system’s performance in an even greater
manner as shown in the figures below.
Figure 3.13:
Side array single coverage
tested and simulated IV curves
Figure 3.14:
Side array single coverage
tested and simulated P-V curves
Figure 3.15: Side array double coverage
tested and simulated IV curves
Figure 3.16: Side array double coverage
tested and simulated P-V curves
The PVMismatch model shows the ability to closely represent the shaded array’s
data also in this case.
The irradiance values set for the shaded array simulation,
were the ones determined with the current ratio talked about previously. The single
coverage test shows better results and the same overestimation as was shown for the
previous modelling results. The encouraging results obtained from the simulations,
show that the choice of using the PVMismatch model was an adequate one. In the
next chapter, its performance with field data is discussed more in detail.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Irradiance Sensors
35
3.2
Irradiance Sensors
As mentioned in the introduction, in order to measure the irradiance falling on each
of the five surfaces of the SPVL systems and to improve the PV model accuracy,
irradiance sensors were installed on the SPVL-1A and SPVL-1B street-lights installed
in the field. The devices used to perform these measurements are poly-Si cells and
measure 65mm x 35mm x 2.8mm. To assess the performance of these devices, the
linearity of their voltage with respect to irradiance was evaluated. The sensors were
tested in the PV Lab at DTU’s Risø Campus thanks to a Newport Sol3A Class
AAA Solar Simulator which is equipped with a Xenon lamp to provide the required
irradiance to the DUT, as can be seen in figure 3.17.
To measure the voltage drop across the sensors, small resistors were applied on
the backside of the cells. The sensors placed on the four sides of the street-lights were
fitted with 0.33Ωresistors: for the top sensors instead, 0.25Ωresistors were used. The
reason for this is that, since the top of the lamp is the one that receives the highest
levels of radiation, using the 0.33Ωresistors could potentially result in out of range
operation: this would consequently result in the registration of lower irradiance values
than the actual ones. The voltage drop across the sensors was measured for different
irradiance values, in order to obtain a voltage-irradiance characteristic: this is shown
in Table A.1 in the Appendix Figure 3.18 shows the results of the sensor calibration:
as should be expected, the voltage-irradiance characteristic follows a linear trend for
both the top and side sensors, thus confirming that the chosen cells are a good for
the selected application. The linearity test was also performed after the sensors were
boxed for their outdoor application and the linearity was maintained, as is shown in
Figure A.5 in the Appendix.
Figure 3.17: Irradiance sensor testing
Figure 3.18: Irradiance sensor calibration
==PAGE:44==
36
3 Component Characterization and Performance
3.3
Converter
In this section, the lab characterization procedure and results of one of the five SPVL-
1B’s converters are shown; thanks to the testing findings, the chosen models to rep-
resent the converter’s operation are validated.
3.3.1
PV-to-Battery converter characterization
This sub-section presents the testing procedure and performance results of the PV-
to-battery side of the converter. The characterization was performed using a solar
array simulator (SAS) representing the PV system, a load to reproduce the battery
and a power analyzer. The testing procedures were operated from a computer and
through the LabVIEW software: the schematic of the setup can be seen in figure 3.19.
Several tests were performed to determine the converter’s conversion, tracking and
consequently total eﬀiciencies. For different battery voltage levels, ranging from 8.6V
to 12.8V, the SAS was set to function between 15V and 28V. Ten voltage points in
the SAS’s voltage operation range were used for the test: for each of these voltages,
twelve current points were selected in order to simulate a wide reach of converter
operational conditions. The test’s output consisted of the PV and battery voltages,
currents and powers at each operation point : consequently, using Equations 2.8, the
different converter eﬀiciencies were calculated.
Figure 3.19: Converter characterization setup
Figures 3.20, 3.21 and 3.22 show the converter’s eﬀiciencies obtained from the
tests at a battery voltage of 10.8V.
The converter’s tracking eﬀiciency is very good, showing that for most of the
PV’s operating range it tracks at its best: as the PV voltage increases, though, its
performance worsens. With regards to the conversion eﬀiciency instead, a decrease
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Converter
37
Figure
3.20:
Converter
tracking eﬀiciency
Figure 3.21: Converter con-
version eﬀiciency
Figure 3.22: Converter to-
tal eﬀiciency
in its values is clearly seen as the PV voltage increases: this suggests that the con-
verter’s performance depends on this parameter. When the modelling is performed,
this dependency should therefore be taken into account, in order to obtain a precise
simulation of this component’s behaviour. The converter’s total eﬀiciency, as men-
tioned in the ”Theoretical concepts” chapter, results from the product of the tracking
and conversion eﬀiciencies. Consequently, the operational dependencies which appear
in the tracking and conversion eﬀiciencies are also present, to a lesser degree, for this
resulting performance parameter; despite this though, the total eﬀiciency is still high
and shows the converter’s satisfactory operation.
3.3.2
PV-to-Battery converter modelling
Using the acquired data from the converter’s lab characterization test, the validation
of the chosen converter models can be performed. As presented in the previous State
of the art chapter, the Driesse and Linear regression models were implemented to
represent the converter’s operation.
3.3.2.1
Driesse model
The Driesse model was parametrized using the converter test data, in both the one
and two parameter equation versions of the model. For the first case, PV power was
the single input of the model, whereas for the two parameter equation both PV power
and voltage were used as inpus of the model to estimate the battery charging power.
==PAGE:46==
38
3 Component Characterization and Performance
Figure 3.23: PP V input parameter
Figure 3.24: PP V , VP V input parameters
Figures 3.23 and 3.24 show the modelling results for a battery voltage of 10.8V
and Equations 3.1, 3.2 represent the parameters used
η = 0.1471 + 0.00776 · pP V + 0.000961 · p2
P V
(3.1)
η = (0.0648 + 0.02319 (VPV −1))
+ (−0.00301 + 0.00019 (VPV −1)) · PPV
+ (0.00165 −2.3754 (VPV −1)) · P2
PV
(3.2)
The total eﬀiciency curves at the different PV voltages are represented by the
blue scatter plots.
After having determined the model parameters, the modelled
output is represented by the red dashed line. Similarly to the results obtained from
the converter’s characterization, also this model performs better as the PV power
increases and at lower PV voltages. Furthermore, the contribution of the addition of
PV voltage as an input to the model improves the output, as expected from previous
tests and shown by the PV-to-battery error plots in the same figures.
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Converter
39
Figure 3.25: PV-to-battery absolute error
Figure 3.26: PV-to-battery relative error
Moreover, the relative and absolute error plots of Figures 3.25 and 3.26 also high-
light the increased accuracy obtained from the PV power ad voltage utilization. The
blue dots, that display the errors associated with this input choice, result in lower
values compared to the only PV power input option. Despite this, the error diver-
gence shown as the power increases and the diﬀiculty in representing the converter’s
behaviour at higher voltage values, point out that this model is not fully able to sim-
ulate all this component’s operation conditions. For these reasons, the more accurate
data driven ”Linear regression” model was also implemented.
3.3.2.2
Linear regression model of PV-to-battery converter
In order to improve the modelling of the converter’s full operation range, the more
data focused linear regression model was implemented. The converter test data was
split into training and test data sets in order to train the model and find the parame-
ters to use for the performance modelling. As mentioned in Chapter 2, the model uses
polynomial combinations of the inputs to find the best linear fit to the data. In this
project, the used inputs for the modelling were PV power, PV voltage and battery
power; the tested polynomial degree combinations, on the other hand, were second
and third degree. After testing various input parameter and degree combinations, a
second degree PV power and PV voltage one yielded the best results, as can be seen
in FIGURE 3.27: here, the modelling results for a battery voltage of 10.8V are shown.
Equation 3.3 below shows the model parameters and inputs.
Y = 8.778 · PP V + 0.000433 · VP V −0.2466 · P 2
P V −0.06164 · PP V · VP V + 0.07128 · V 2
P V
(3.3)
Results of the other combinations are displayed in Figures A.8 to A.16 in the
Appendix
==PAGE:48==
40
3 Component Characterization and Performance
Figure 3.27: Linear regression model re-
sults
Figure 3.28: Linear regression model er-
rors
Also for this model, the largest errors occur at low PV power values. From this it
can be understood that, for these values, an accurate representation of the converter’s
behaviour is not to be expected. Looking at FIGURE A.17, the low error values
indicate the model’s accuracy; furthermore, when comparing them with the Driesse
model ones, it is clear that implementing the Linear regression alternative yields more
confident results.
3.3.3
Battery-to-LED converter characterization
After having analyzed the PV-to-battery side of the converter which operates during
the charging processes, the battery-to-LED side that intervenes during the discharging
phases was also studied. Since its characterization in the lab was not possible, data
from previous test performed by NFF was used.
Figure 3.29: Battery-to-LED converter eﬀiciency
FIGURE 3.29 shows the eﬀiciency curves for different numbers operating LEDs
and consequently for different powers. The provided data though, was only available
up to the operation of 9 LEDs out of the 12 series connected LEDs that make up
the luminaire. After analyzing the plotted data, decreasing eﬀiciency is seen as the
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Converter
41
number of active LEDs increases. The converter’s overall performance is still satisfac-
tory and despite not having available data for its complete battery-to-LED operating
range, the modelling of the converter’s behaviour can still be performed.
3.3.4
Battery-to-LED modelling
Also for the discharging side of the converter the modelling, both the Driesse and
Linear regression models have been used to simulate this device’s performance.
3.3.4.1
Driesse model
Similarly to the PV-to-battery case, the single and two input parameter model repre-
senting equations have been applied for the battery-to-LED simulation. The inputs
in this case are the battery power and battery voltage, used to determine the LED
power through Equations 3.4 and 3.5.
η = 0.2694 + 0.00222 · PBat + 0.00199 · P 2
Bat
(3.4)
η = (0.0648 + 0.02319 (VBat −1))
+ (−0.00301 + 0.00019 (VBat −1)) · PBat
+ (0.00165 −2.3754 (VBat −1)) · P2
Bat
(3.5)
Presented in Figures 3.30 and 3.31 are the modelling results obtained utilizing the
LED test data.
Figure 3.30: PBat input parameter
Figure 3.31: PBat, VBat input parameters
Oppositely to the PV-to-battery modelling results, for the discharge stage the
model shows a very good representation of the converter’s behaviour: this can be
seen from the simulated LED power represented as the dashed red line that fits the
scattered test data well. Except for a slight difference at very low LED power values,
==PAGE:50==
42
3 Component Characterization and Performance
the difference between the single and double parameter model is almost indistinguish-
able. Given the similarity between these results, the dependency of the converter’s
behaviour on the battery voltage appears to be negligible.
Figure 3.32: Battery-to-LED absolute er-
ror
Figure 3.33: Battery-to-LED relative er-
ror
The similitude of the two Driesse model implementations is also highlighted from
the modelling error plots displayed in Figures 3.32 and 3.33 where the error values
differ marginally. As was shown for the converter’s charging stage modelling though,
the error divergence is still present also for the discharging case presented here. Once
again, this points out the fact that the Driesse model is not optimal for the represen-
tation of the converter’s complete operation range.
3.3.4.2
Linear regression model
Thanks to the ability of the Linear regression model to account for converter char-
acteristic parameter dependencies, it was implemented also for the battery-to-LED
conversion modelling. Similarly to the converter charging stage modelling, the input
parameters taken under scrutiny are three: battery power, battery voltage and LED
voltage for second and third polynomial degree combinations. After having performed
the simulations, the input parameter combination that best reproduced the converter
test data was a second degree battery power and LED voltage one. As was found
from the Driesse model implementation, the battery voltage does not influence the
component’s behaviour. Equation 3.6 demonstrates the parameters and inputs used
for the battery-to-LED modelling.
Y = 5.819·PBat−0.01589·VLED−0.23349·P 2
Bat+0.0920·PBat·VLED−0.11563·VLED
2
(3.6)
The modelling results are displayed in FIGURES 3.34 and 3.35.
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Battery Testing
43
Figure 3.34: Linear regression model re-
sults
Figure 3.35: Absolute and relative errors
The above mentioned parameter combination yields a very accurate simulation
of the converter’s performance. Additionally, comparing the errors from the Driesse
model with the ones from the Linear regression model, one can notice that the mag-
nitude of the latter’s ones is much lower; moreover, the error conversion to zero shows
the validity of the second modelling approach.
After having analyzed the performance of the Driesse and Linear regression mod-
els, the latter is deemed to be the one that performs the best out of the two. Its
strength lies in the ability to find dependencies between the converter’s operation
and input parameters: this cannot be found by implementing other models, which
use input parameters independently form each other. Thanks to this, the accurate
results presented previously are obtained.
3.4
Battery Testing
As mentioned in the introduction chapter to this report, the SPVL systems use a
battery pack to store the PV array’s energy harvested during daytime. The majority
of the characterization of the DTU Pole and of the SPVL-2 batteries has also been
undertaken in this project.
The results from the battery tests were used in the
”Performance modelling and design optimization of a Solar Powered Street Lighting
system for delivering light as a service in remote areas” project as inputs for the
SPVLs’ battery model validation.
FIGURES 3.36 and 3.38 represent the batteries installed on the DTU Pole and
SPVL-2 respectively and their technical specifications can be found in Table 1.1. Fig-
ure 3.37 instead shows two of the 26 series connected High Star cells that are inside
the SPVL-2 battery pack: since the battery pack only arrived in the last stages of
the project, its characterization was not performed.
The characterization was performed using several instruments. A BK Precision 9206
==PAGE:52==
44
3 Component Characterization and Performance
Figure 3.36: DTU Pole bat-
tery
Figure 3.37:
SPVL-2 bat-
tery cells
Figure 3.38:
SPVL-2 bat-
tery pack
power supply and BK Precision 8600 DC load were used to operate the batteries for
the different tests that were undertaken. The test control, on the other hand, was
performed using the BK Battery Test Software installed on one of the lab PCs. The
scheme of the battery testing setup can be seen in FIGURE 3.39.
Figure 3.39: Battery characterization setup
The testing software makes it possible to perform several types of tests: these can
consist of individual charging and discharging tests or of a combination of the two to
create programmed sequence tests. This second option was the one that was utilized
to perform the different SPVL battery characterizations. In particular, the testing
procedure consisted in an initial charge until maximum battery voltage: this was done
to ensure that the battery was charged at the beginning of every test. Subsequently,
a constant current discharge down to the lower voltage limit was performed. Finally,
a second charge was carried out to reach the maximum voltage level once again. The
mentioned procedures were not performed immediately one after the other: in order
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Battery Testing
45
to reach the battery’s thermodynamic stability at the beginning of each procedure,
between each test a one hour relaxation time was set. The different stages of the
battery testing procedure can be seen in a clearer way in Figure 3.40.
Figure 3.40: Complete battery cycling test results
After an analysis of the data from the battery’s performance in the field, the
chosen current values for which the device was to be tested at were determined: these
are 6A, 5A, 4A, 2A, 1A and 0.5A and could be set at the beginning of each test. The
data from the tests was acquired thanks to the software’s logging option which, for
every second of operation, registered battery voltage, current and capacity.
The DTU Pole battery was the first to be tested: since the device’s individual
cells were not accessible due to the protective casing, for this device a simple two
wire measurement was used for the power supply and load connections. After all the
required tests were performed for this component, the SPVL-2 (High Star) cells were
tested following the same procedures: in this case though, a four wire measurement
was utilized to exclude cable resistance from the test results.
In order to acquire a more representative modelling of the SPVLs’ batteries field
operation and since temperature was shown to influence this component’s perfor-
mance [41], characterization of the High Star cells was also carried out at different
temperature conditions. This was performed thanks to a ”Binder MKF 115” temper-
ature chamber in which the cells were placed: FIGURE 3.41 shows how these tests
were setup. Due to its size, it was not possible to perform the temperature test on
the DTU Pole battery.
==PAGE:54==
46
3 Component Characterization and Performance
Figure 3.41: High Star cell tests using Binder MKF 115 temperature controlled chamber
The results from a High Star cell test at 45◦C are shown in Figures 3.42 and ??.
Since it is not in the scope of the project, the discussion with regards to these findings
is not performed: for greater insight with regards to the battery operation, the reader
is referred to the ”Performance modelling and design optimization of a Solar Powered
Street Lighting system for delivering light as a service in remote areas” [41] project
report.
Figure 3.42:
High Star cell charging
curves for different currents at 45◦C
Figure 3.43: High Star cell discharging
curves for different currents at 45◦C
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4
Field Validation
This chapter outlines the validation of the chosen PV and converter performance
models using the data from the street-lights installed in the field.
As previously
mentioned, the SPVL systems are equipped with various sensors and data logging
devices which record parameters such as: side array PV current and voltage, backside
array temperatures, battery current and voltage, battery temperature, LED current
and voltage and LED temperature. The subsequent addition of irradiance sensors,
resulted in the ability to also record irradiance values for each of the five sides of
the street-lights. Thanks to these measurements, monitoring of the device’s correct
functioning can be done, calculations can be performed and model validation can be
carried out. Data for each of the above mentioned parameters is registered every 10
seconds by the loggers and stored in the ”Living Lab” database.
4.1
Irradiance sensor validation
The irradiance sensors were installed on the SPVL systems at the end of April 2021.
As can be seen in the figures below, they were placed at the bottom of each side PV
array (FIGURE 4.1) and beside the top PV panel (FIGURE 4.2) in such a way that
did not interfere with the proper functioning of the modules.
==PAGE:56==
48
4 Field Validation
Figure 4.1: SPVL side sensors
Figure 4.2: SPVL top sensors
After having firmly secured the sensors with plastic strips, they were connected
to the data loggers inside the lamp head through their wires. The validation was
performed by transposing the GHI radiation component to the different POAs (plane
of array) of the street-lights. The transposition is obtained thanks to the Hay-Davies
[42] model: inputting the different array azimuths and tilts as well as the different
sun position parameters which depend on the day for which the process is applied.
The transposition results are shown in the figures below.
==PAGE:57==
4.1 Irradiance sensor validation
49
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.3: (a) Top array (b) North array (c) East array (d) South array (e) West array
The transposition was performed for a relatively clear sky day: the results show
that overall sensor performance slightly underestimates the irradiance which falls on
each of the SPVL’s sides. The GHI measurements were obtained from a thermo-pile
pyranometer of the weather station placed on the top of Building 130 at DTU’s Risø
campus. Data obtained from the pyranometer is very precise compared to the irra-
diance sensors which, as mentioned in previous sections, are very simple silicon solar
cells: this could be one of the causes for the data discrepancy. In addition to this,
the transposition model also introduces errors. Moreover, the location in which the
SPVL systems have been installed presents several sources of shading, such as trees
and buildings: this can be seen in FIGURES 1.3, 4.1 and 4.2 which show a glimpse
of the trees surrounding the streetlights and some shadows.
These are all possible causes for the discrepancies between the solar resource and
what is measured by the irradiance sensors. Since the pyranometer is not placed in
the same location as the streetlight’s sensors though, the readings given by the latter
are still deemed satisfactory to serve as modelling inputs. Although a more in depth
analysis of the irradiance sensor’s performance could be pursued, this falls out of the
project’s scope and is therefore not undertaken.
==PAGE:58==
50
4 Field Validation
4.2
PV panel model validation
After having seen the very good performance of the PVMismatch model in simulating
the flash testing data, the model is also validated using field operation measurements
of the SPVL PV panels. As stated previously, thanks to the various sensors placed
on the SPVLs a more accurate modelling could be performed. Some of the module
backside temperature sensors, though, presented abnormal values which could not be
used for the simulations. For this reason the backside module temperature model pre-
sented in [43] was used instead: thanks to parameters such as incident radiation, wind
speed and ambient temperature, the wrong temperature values could be estimated.
The PVMismatch model was validated for both the DTU Pole and for the Merkur
340 street-lights’ operation: its results are shown and discussed in the subsections.
4.2.1
DTU Pole
The DTU Pole is the second generation SPVL and FIGURE 1.6 shows the compo-
nent’s interconnection for this system. Since the different sides function independently
from each other, five different PVSystem objects were created in the PVMismatch
model: the side arrays were modelled as systems of 2 parallel connected panels, while
for the top a single panel system was created. Measurements from the irradiance
sensors and the corrected backside module temperature values were given as inputs
to the model in order to simulate the PV array voltage, current and power of each
side of the SPVL.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.4: (a) Top array (b) North array (c) East array (d) South array (e) West array
==PAGE:59==
4.2 PV panel model validation
51
FIGURE 4.4 displays the modelling results for the five different SPVL sides on
May 5th 2021 from 7AM to 12PM. It is important also to keep in mind that, due to
the location’s latitude of 55.6926◦, in May the sun rises very early and its resource
is therefore utilized by the PV array already from these early hours of the day. The
model overall performs well in estimating the different array powers. With regards to
the North and South arrays though, the model over estimates the power production:
since the array power for other sides is simulated very accurately, the divergence for
the North and South sides is unexpected. A possible explanation for the difference
may be attributed to shading present on the array which is not detected by the sen-
sors: as was explained in previous sections, the irradiance sensors are placed at the
bottom of each side array in order not to affect the power production. For this reason,
any shading that falls on parts of the array above the sensor cannot be detected, and
can result in discrepancies between the field and simulated data.
Furthermore, the variation in results can also be attributed to the difference be-
tween the panels with which the PV model has been developed and the ones that
are installed on the two field deployed street-lights. As was shown in TABLE 1.1,
the modules come from two different manufacturers; what is more, the DTU Pole
modules may have experienced some degradation due to the field conditions, which
could affect their performance. Finally, DTU’s Risø campus is located close to the
Roskilde Fjord which serves as a home for several migratory bird species during the
late Spring period.
Figure 4.5: Aggressive soiling on PV top module caused by bird droppings
Significant amounts of soiling from bird droppings is therefore experienced on the
PV array and especially on the top module, as can be seen in 4.5. Seldom cleaning
can therefore affect the array power production significantly.
Looking at FIGURE 4.4 (a), a clear drop in power occurs at around 10AM for
the top module.
==PAGE:60==
52
4 Field Validation
Figure 4.6: Battery perfor-
mance May 5th
Figure 4.7: Top panel volt-
age
Figure 4.8: Top panel cur-
rent
Thanks to FIGURE 4.7, one can see how at this time the top module’s voltage
jumps from 20V to just below 22V representing the Voc point, resulting in zero power
produced by this module. The model, on the other hand, does not have the same
behaviour: it still simulates power and the voltage remains at the Vmp value.
It is only by looking at FIGURE 4.6 that the reason for the top PV panel’s power pro-
duction cessation is understood. Negative battery powers denote its charging process:
this is expected, since the PV array is producing power. The top module reaches Voc
point operation when the battery power exceeds 50W: this in fact is the maximum
load condition accepted by the NFF 50W converter. When this occurs, system pro-
tection processes activate, limiting the top module’s power production.
Similar results can be seen for May 24th: on this day though, not one but three
sides of the PV array go into open circuit operation as can be seen in figures 4.9 (a)
through (e). As the battery power reaches the 50W limit in FIGURE 4.10, the top
and south modules are the first to be limited by the protection processes; the south
array follows thereafter.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 PV panel model validation
53
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.9: (a) Top array (b) North array (c) East array (d) South array (e) West array
Comparing the two analyzed days, the higher power production from the East
facing array for May 24th can be considered a possible cause for the limitation of a
greater number of side arrays. In addition to this, in the first part of the day, the
Eastern array gets the majority of radiation: on a sunny day therefore, more energy
can be produced during the first hours of the day by the Eastern side of the streetlight.
Since the second analyzed day was in fact a sunny one (compared to May 5th which
was rainy), the significant amount of power difference produced from the Eastern
array is seen comparing FIGURES 4.9 (c) and 4.4 (c).
Figure 4.10: Battery performance May 24th
The weather each day also plays a role in the determination of the SPVL per-
formance. Since the battery power boundaries influence the array power limitations,
==PAGE:62==
54
4 Field Validation
during days that are characterized by high levels of radiation, the full battery charge
status will be reached in shorter periods of time. On cloudy or rainy days instead,
the battery may take longer or not reach complete charge states. Since May 5th and
the day before that were rainy, the battery’s state of charge may have been low. For
this reason longer time was required for the battery power to reach the 50W limit,
successively resulting in the disconnection of only the top panel for a short period
of time. On the other hand, the day before May 24th was characterized by over-
cast weather during which the diffuse radiation could have been suﬀicient to charge
the battery fully. Consequently, the sunny weather on May 24th allowed for high
PV array power production resulting in a fast battery charge and subsequent array
limitation processes.
The validation with field data results show that the PVMismatch model repre-
sents the PV array behaviour very closely. Since the model simulates the PV array
performance thanks to irradiance and temperature input parameters, internal power
limitation processes are not represented: with greater insight into these restriction
procedures, their implementation could be undertaken to further develop the model
increasing its accuracy. Lastly, since the irradiance sensors were only installed in the
Spring time during the last period of this project, analysis of winter day behaviour
was not undertaken.
4.2.2
Merkur 340
The PVMismatch model was implemented in a similar fashion for the first generation
Merkur 340 SPVL. As was previously shown in the Introduction though, the Merkur
340 is equipped with a 9 module PV array parallel connection: Figure 1.4 shows
the street-light system component’s interconnection. For this reason, differently from
the DTU Pole, in the model a PVSystem object made by 9 modules connected in
parallel was created. Also in this case, the irradiance sensors and corrected backside
module temperature values were used to run the model and simulate the SPVL-1A’s
performance. Both May 5th and May 24th were used for the Merkur 340 modelling in
order to compare the model’s performance for the two systems during the same days.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 PV panel model validation
55
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.11: (a) Top array (b) North array (c) East array (d) South array (e) West array
The outcome of the PVMismatch model is displayed in Figures 4.11, which show
the close representation of the different sides’ power output. Similarly to what was
found from the DTU Pole results, also in this case the model overestimates the power
production of the Top and North sides of the array, which can be seen in Figures
4.11 (a) and (b). Once again, this divergence can be attributed to possible shading
effects on the arrays which cannot be detected by the irradiance sensor; else, may
be the result of deterioration of the PV panels caused by their exposure to harsh
environmental conditions. The modelling results for the remaining PV array sides,
on the other hand, is very precise.
==PAGE:64==
56
4 Field Validation
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 4.12: (a) Top array (b) North array (c) East array (d) South array (e) West array
Results for May 24th instead, are different from the ones that were just presented.
It is reminded that the weather conditions on May 5th and May 24th are different:
the first is one of a few rainy days which occurred at the beginning of May 2021,
whereas the second is a sunny day. Figures 4.12 (a) to (e) demonstrate how the PV
array provides a significant amount of power to the battery, which reaches its charged
state in a quicker time compared to May 5th. The spike occurring just after 5AM in
almost all the figures, indicates the end of the battery charging process: after this in
fact, the battery power displayed in Figure ?? starts returning to zero.
==PAGE:65==
4.2 PV panel model validation
57
Figure 4.13: Merkur 340 battery performance May 24th
Some of the PV array powers instead start dropping to negative powers: this is
the result of their current which reaches values below zero. The power limitation
processes, similarly for the DTU Pole, start operating when the battery reaches its
fully charged state and limit the PV array power production. The MPP tracker is
moved from MPP voltage to higher values to reduce the system’s outputted power;
at these higher system voltages, the strings that are exposed to lower irradiance expe-
rience negative current values since their Voc is exceeded. These effects are depicted
in Figure 4.14: for simplicity, in this example a system of 3 PV panels connected in
parallel has been implemented. The green line represents the system’s representative
I-V curve and its operation point is shown by the cyan dot. The dashed lines instead,
portray the I-V characteristics of the three different modules, which have different
irradiance values falling on them. When the MPP tracker’s operation is moved to
the point represented by the black ”x”, all the modules operate at this voltage value
which, for the third module, is characterized by negative current values as shown from
the orange dot.
Although these operation points can be found using the PVMismatch model, this
operation was not accounted for in the modelling performed for the Merkur 340: for
this reason, after the power limitation processes intervene and negative current (and
consequently negative power) values are reached, the model is not able to simulate
this behaviour. The development of the model to account for these behaviours is
therefore left to following projects. Despite this, the PVMismatch model has proven
to output very precise estimations of the PV system’s operation and is therefore
adequate for its modelling.
==PAGE:66==
58
4 Field Validation
Figure 4.14: Negative PV string current values
4.3
Converter model validation
In the same way as for the PV array model validation, also the converter models’
performance was verified using field data. Thanks to the analysis performed on the
characterization results in Chapter 3, the Linear regression model was found to be the
one that best represented the functioning of the converter: this model was therefore
implemented and validated using data from the street-lights.
4.3.1
DTU Pole
4.3.1.1
PV-to-battery
The validation of the Linear regression model with the lab test data, showed that for
the PV-to-battery side of the NFF 50W converter, its behaviour could be represented
by a second degree PV power and PV voltage dependency. The parameters which
were determined from this test were therefore applied to the field data, outputting
the results represented in FIGURES 4.15 and 4.17.
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Converter model validation
59
Figure 4.15: Linear regression model re-
sults using field data inputs from midday
on May 5th
Figure 4.16: Linear regression model er-
rors from field validation at midday on
May 5th
The two cases once again represent May 5th and May 24th. For the first analysed
day, the operation during midday is shown; for May 24th instead, early morning per-
formance was simulated. The model predicts the converter’s field performance very
precisely: recalling the small reduction in the model’s performance at low power val-
ues, a slight underestimation is noticed in the simulated data for these circumstances.
Figure 4.17: Linear regression model re-
sults using field data inputs from the
morning on May 24th
Figure 4.18: Linear regression model er-
rors from field validation in the morning
on May 24th
By observing FIGURES 4.16 and 4.18 which represent the relative and absolute
errors for the two days, the divergences at reduced power levels can be seen more
clearly.
The validity of the Linear regression model for the representation of the
DTU Pole converter’s PV-to-battery conversion processes is therefore confirmed.
4.3.1.2
Battery-to-LED
The discharge conversion stage was also modelled using the Linear regression model:
for this case, the operational dependencies were found to be quadratic between the
==PAGE:68==
60
4 Field Validation
battery power and LED voltage. Whereas the charging phases were modelled using
daytime data, in order to predict the functioning of the converter while performing
the discharge, data for the night time was utilized. The application of the parameters
found for this stage to the field data, resulted in the following results.
Figure 4.19: Linear regression model re-
sults for LED power prediction using field
data inputs from May 5th
Figure 4.20: Linear regression model er-
rors for LED power from field validation
on May 5th
Since incorrect data for the DTU Pole’s LED was acquired in the first months of
2021 including May 5th, the same day from 2020 was taken under scrutiny. May 24th
2021 was still included in the validation, since the LED connected problems do not
appear. From both FIGURES 4.19 and 4.21, the results show the good performance
of the model in simulating the measured LED power. The simulated data though, has
a very narrow range compared to the field measured one. This difference is reflected
in the high relative errors that are shown in FIGURES 4.20 and 4.22: looking at
the absolute error though, one can see that the actual measurements does not exceed
more than 4W.
Figure 4.21: Linear regression model re-
sults for LED power prediction using field
data inputs from May 24th
Figure 4.22: Linear regression model er-
rors for LED power from field validation
on May 24th
To reiterate, the implemented modelling approach is based on the dependency of
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Converter model validation
61
the converter’s behaviour on battery power and LED voltage, as was previously dis-
cussed in Chapter 3. Despite this, there appears to be an additional parameter that
affects the converter’s behaviour in the field. Since temperature was not accounted
for in the modelling procedure, to evaluate if its contribution affected the results, the
simulation was also performed on a cold (February 5th) and warm days (June 18th).
The results are presented in the Appendix in Figures A.18 and A.20 and do not show
any correlation with the simulation outcome.
In order to determine the reason for the divergence between the field and modelled
data, a more in depth investigation with regards to the converter’s behaviour in the
field should be performed: this evaluation does not fall under the project’s scope
and is therefore not undertaken. Despite this, the Linear regression model proves to
replicate the behaviour of the converter well also in field conditions, and is therefore
recommended for a respectable simulation of its performance.
4.3.2
Merkur 340
Differently from the DTU Pole, the Merkur 340 is equipped with a Lumiax MPPT0650-
DCLiMPPT 3-port converter. This component was characterized during the project
presented in [12] and not repeated in this project. Although available, due to time
constraints an adequate analysis of the test data for this device wasn’t able to be per-
formed. Possible dependencies that may occur between parameters, could therefore
not be accounted for. Despite this, the same models were applied to the data from
the SPVL-1A: the results obtained from the simulations are shown below.
4.3.2.1
PV-to-battery
The Linear regression model was implemented for the converter’s charging side using
the same input parameters as for the NFF converter: these are a quadratic combi-
nation of PV power and PV voltage. After having run the simulation for the same
two days (May 5th and May 24th), the results shown in Figures 4.27 and 4.29 were
obtained.
==PAGE:70==
62
4 Field Validation
Figure 4.23: Linear regression model re-
sults for LED power prediction using field
data inputs from May 5th
Figure 4.24: Linear regression model er-
rors for LED power from field validation
on May 5th
Despite not having performed the analysis on the converter’s test data, the model
performs a good estimation using the above mentioned parameters.
Figure 4.25: Linear regression model re-
sults for LED power prediction using field
data inputs from May 24th
Figure 4.26: Linear regression model er-
rors for LED power from field validation
on May 24th
The results from the quadratic PV power and voltage parameter dependency,
exhibit an under estimation of the simulated data, which is emphasized more for low
power values. Relative error plots in figures 4.28 and 4.30 confirm this. Through a
thorough analysis of this converter’s operation, different input parameter correlations
could be found: nonetheless, the utilization of the same inputs and same simulation
approach used for the NFF converter modelling, validate the Linear regression model.
4.3.2.2
Battery-to-LED
Previous discussions hold true also for the discharging stage of the Lumiax converter.
The quadratic combination of battery power and LED voltage as Linear regression
model inputs results in the simulated points of Figures 4.27 and 4.29.
==PAGE:71==
4.3 Converter model validation
63
Figure 4.27: Linear regression model re-
sults for LED power prediction using field
data inputs from May 5th
Figure 4.28: Linear regression model er-
rors for LED power from field validation
on May 5th
Also in this case, the modelling outcomes closely represent the converter’s field
operation behaviour. What is more, in Figure 4.29, the transition to a smaller number
of active LEDs in the luminaire can be seen: the LED power in fact drops due to the
reduction of the power supplied by the battery. The depiction of the battery’s power
behaviour is shown in Figure 4.31.
Figure 4.29: Linear regression model re-
sults for LED power prediction using field
data inputs from May 24th
Figure 4.30: Linear regression model er-
rors for LED power from field validation
on May 24th
The model’s ability to simulate also these sudden variations which the SPVL sys-
tem is subject to, show that it is good for the simulation of the converter’s behaviour.
==PAGE:72==
64
4 Field Validation
Figure 4.31: Merkur 340 battery power on May 24th: the drop which results in decreased
LED power is shown
This concludes the validation of the models used for the PV array and converter
simulation. The positive results that were obtained, confirm that the PVMismatch
and Linear regression models are the ones that best mimic the behaviour of the
studied SPVL components.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
In this Master Thesis project, the analysis and modelling of three solar powered street-
light systems, the Merkur 340 (SPVL-1A), DTU Pole (SPVL-1B) and SPVL-2 was
undertaken. Thanks to the energy production transition towards greener and more
sustainable sources, an increasing number of systems that utilize renewable energy to
function have been developed. In addition to reducing carbon emissions and support-
ing the transition to carbon neutrality goals set by different countries worldwide, their
implementation in low and medium income countries can positively impact lives of
their inhabitants. The standalone PV street-lighting systems studied in this projects
in fact are able to provide lighting without having to be connected to an electric grid
that, in most low to medium income nations is missing in the first place.
The variety of components present in the SPVL systems and the complex compo-
nent interconnections for each street-light, constitute the biggest challenge for the
successful completion of the project. In particular, this thesis’ focus was put on the
SPVL’s PV array and converter components: each of these devices was tested and
modelled in order to assess their correct operation and to predict their behaviour
when deployed in field conditions.
Due to the unique disposition of the PV array over five different sides, each expe-
riencing distinct levels of irradiance, an in depth analysis was performed for this
SPVL component. Flashing and Electro-luminescence (EL) tests were carried out on
the SPVL-2’s Photinous 32 cell 35W rated panels in order to assess quality control
before being implemented in the field. The flashing tests, performed using an Endeas
Quicksun 540 XLi flasher, showed that the photovoltaic panel parameters are similar
to the ones specified by the manufacturer: some voltage differences though, especially
with regards to the top module, were found performing these tests. The subsequent
EL tests were pursued to discover possible damaging of the modules; thanks to this
further investigation a cell disconnection in the top module was revealed as the cause
for its reduction in performance. The modelling of the PV array was performed using
the open source software Python package called PVMismatch. Test data from the
flashing tests was used to verify the correct simulation results outputted by the model.
Characterization of the Nordic Firefly MPPT 3-port 50W converter, installed in
==PAGE:74==
66
5 Conclusion
the DTU Pole, was also performed for the PV-to-battery conversion stage using a
solar array simulator and load for the battery simulation; data for the battery-to-
LED stage was provided by NFF, since the tests could not be conducted. For both
stages a total conversion eﬀiciency of approximately 95% was found, highlighting this
component’s good performance. In order to simulate the converter’s behaviour, the
Driesse and the Linear regression models were implemented. Once again, the test
data was used for an initial validation of the models, which highlighted the greater
preciseness of the second modelling approach that was used from there on. Battery
cycling tests were conducted simultaneously to determine charge and discharge char-
acteristics that describe the storage’s properties. The SPVL’s exposure to various
field operation conditions the reason for testing this component also at different tem-
peratures: the resulting data was used to validate the model for the SPVL battery,
developed in another project.
The application of field data to the components’ models was carried out to confirm
the results obtained from their validation with lab test data. Field information was
collected by loggers placed inside the street-lights and by irradiance sensors which
were installed on each SPVL side: the data then seved as inputs to the different mod-
els. The PVMismatch model’s output was very accurate in representing the different
array sides’ power. For both DTU Pole and Merkur 340 discrepancies between the
field and simulated data could be attributed to panel degradation, undetected array
shading or soiling effects. Intervention of the system’s power limitation mechanisms
also resulted in divergences. What is more, due to the different connections of the
panels within the PV arrays of the different systems, the model was not able to ac-
count for particular operation conditions experienced in the Merkur 340 street-light.
The development of the model to account for such operation modes would therefore
result in a comprehensive simulation of the PV array’s performance.
Confirmation of the accuracy of the converter’s Linear regression model was also
observed with the utilization of field data. Despite some differences which can be at-
tributed to effects experienced in the field, the modelling results portray the measured
data closely. In particular, since the test data from NFF 50W 3-port converter was
used for the model development and validation, the modelling results for the DTU
Pole are more precise compared to the ones from the Merkur 340 which is equipped
with a different converter. A similar analysis to the one used for the NFF converter
would therefore result in a better behaviour simulation of the converter placed in the
first generation Merkur 340 street-light.
The groundwork for the characterization and modelling of solar powered street-
light systems for the delivery of light as a service has been laid in this project. Further
development of the models used to simulate the SPVL and the optimization of the
system’s components and interconnections, will consequently be an important step
==PAGE:75==
5 Conclusion
67
towards the deployment of the street-lights for bigger applications.
==PAGE:76==
68
==PAGE:77==
==PAGE:78==
70
A Appendix
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Component Characterization and Performance
A.1.1
EL Tests
Figure A.1: EL tests FTNK-APV-0000505 (top) and FTNK-APV-0000506 (bottom)
==PAGE:79==
A.1 Component Characterization and Performance
71
Figure A.2: EL tests FTNK-APV-0000507 (top) and FTNK-APV-0000508 (bottom)
==PAGE:80==
72
A Appendix
Figure A.3: EL tests FTNK-APV-0000509 (top) and FTNK-APV-0000512 (bottom)
==PAGE:81==
A.1 Component Characterization and Performance
73
Figure A.4: Top module EL test
PV module and array Python code
from pvmismatch import PVcell, PVconstants, PVmodule,
PVstring, PVsystem, pvmodule, pvstring, pvsystem
from pvmismatch.contrib import gen_coeffs
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import pvlib as pvl
#%% Modelling 1 module
pvconstants = PVconstants(npts=1001)
ncells = 32
npar = 1
isc = 2.2272
voc = 21.278
imp = 2.0585
vmp = 17.085
x0 = (1.1727e-08, 1.5e-6, 1.147, 166.66)
x, sol = gen_coeffs.gen_two_diode(isc, voc, imp, vmp, ncells, npar, 25,
method='lm', x0=x0)
==PAGE:82==
74
A Appendix
#%% cell
# pvc = PVcell(Rs=x[2], Rsh=x[3], Isat1_T0=x[0],
Isat2_T0=x[1], Isc0_T0=isc / npar, pvconst=pvconstants)
pvc = PVcell(Rs=x[2], Rsh=x[3], Isat1_T0=x[0], Isat2_T0=x[1],
Isc0_T0=isc / npar, pvconst=pvconstants)
pvc.plot()
#%% module
portraitorlandscape = 'portrait'
stdpl=np.array([[0]])
cellsy = len(stdpl)
##Creating the type of module we want
ncols_per_substr=[1]*cellsy
cell_pos = pvmodule.standard_cellpos_pat(ncells, ncols_per_substr)
pvm=PVmodule(cell_pos=cell_pos,pvcells=pvc, pvconst=pvconstants)
pvm.setSuns(1)
pvm.setTemps(298.15)
print(pvm.Pmod.max())
pvm.plotMod()
vmp, imp, pmp = (pvm.Vmod[pvm.Pmod.argmax()],
pvm.Imod[pvm.Pmod.argmax()], pvm.Pmod.max())
#%% string
pvs = PVstring(numberMods=1, pvmods=pvm, pvconst=pvconstants)
pvs.setSuns(1)
pvs.setTemps(298.15)
pvs.plotStr()
#%% system
pvsys = PVsystem(pvstrs=1, numberStrs=1, numberMods=1,
pvmods=pvm, pvconst=pvconstants)
# pvsys = PVsystem(pvstrs=1, numberStrs=2, numberMods=1,
pvmods=pvm, pvconst=pvconstants)
pvsys.setSuns(1)
# pvsys.setSuns(0.6)
# pvsys.setSuns(0.2)
==PAGE:83==
A.1 Component Characterization and Performance
75
pvsys.plotSys()
print(pvsys.Pmp)
print(pvsys.Vmp)
Sensor Calibration results
Cell
Irradiance W/m2
Voltage [V]
1 - 0.25Ohm
401
0,057
1 - 0.25Ohm
548
0,078
1 - 0.25Ohm
696
0,099
1 - 0.25Ohm
850
0,121
1 - 0.25Ohm
1010
0,143
1 - 0.25Ohm
1175
0,166
2 - 0.33Ohm
399
0,077
2 - 0.33Ohm
552
0,106
2 - 0.33Ohm
696
0,135
2 - 0.33Ohm
850
0,164
2 - 0.33Ohm
1014
0,196
2 - 0.33Ohm
1182
0,229
3 - 0.33Ohm
399
0,077
3 - 0.33Ohm
529
0,103
3 - 0.33Ohm
675
0,131
3 - 0.33Ohm
822
0,159
3 - 0.33Ohm
981
0,19
3 - 0.33Ohm
1150
0,223
4 - 0.25Ohm
382
0,055
4 - 0.25Ohm
517
0,075
4 - 0.25Ohm
668
0,096
4 - 0.25Ohm
818
0,118
4 - 0.25Ohm
984
0,141
4 - 0.25Ohm
1154
0,166
Table A.1
Boxed Sensor Calibration results
==PAGE:84==
76
A Appendix
Figure A.5: Boxed sensor calibration results
Side array flashing results
Figure A.6: Side array flash test I-V curve
Figure A.7:
Side array flash test P-V
curve
Linear regression converter model results for different input parameter
combinations
==PAGE:85==
A.1 Component Characterization and Performance
77
Figure A.8: PP V second degree input pa-
rameters
Figure A.9: Linear regression model er-
rors
Figure A.10: PP V third degree input pa-
rameters
Figure A.11: Linear regression model er-
rors
Figure A.12: PP V , VP V third degree in-
put parameters
Figure A.13: Linear regression model er-
rors
==PAGE:86==
78
A Appendix
Figure A.14: PP V , VP V , VBat second de-
gree input parameters
Figure A.15: Linear regression model er-
rors
Figure A.16: PP V , VP V , VBat third de-
gree input parameters
Figure A.17: Linear regression model er-
rors
A.2
Field Validation
Battery-to-LED cold and warm day plots
These plots show that temperature does not change the preciseness of the mod-
elling results
==PAGE:87==
A.2 Field Validation
79
Figure A.18: Linear regression model re-
sults using field data inputs on February
5th
Figure A.19: Linear regression model er-
rors from field validation on February 5th
Figure A.20: Linear regression model re-
sults using field data inputs on June 18th
Figure A.21: Linear regression model er-
rors from field validation on June 18th
==PAGE:88==
80
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
Himanshu S.K. Kumar S. and Gupta K.K. Effect of Global Warming on Mankind
- A Review. RFC 2549 (Informational). 2012.
[2]
International Renewable Energy Agency. Renewable Energy Policies in a Time
of Transition. 2018.
[3]
Neil Fantom and Umar Serajuddin. The World Bank’s Classification of Coun-
tries by Income. 2016.
[4]
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program. Global Photovoltaic Power
Pote ntial by Country. 2020.
[5]
Dilip Ahuja and Marika Tatsutani. Sustainable energy for developing countries.
2009.
[6]
Zaheer Allam. The First 50 days of COVID-19: A Detailed Chronological Time-
line and Extensive Review of Literature Documenting the Pandemic. 2020.
[7]
International Energy Agency. Global Energy Review 2020 - The impacts of the
Covid-19 crisis on global energy demand and CO2 emissions. 2020.
[8]
International Renewable Energy Agency. RENEWABLE POWER GENERA-
TION COSTS IN 2019. 2020.
[9]
Sofiane Kichou - Santiago Silvestre - Letizia Guglielminotti - Llanos Mora-López
- Emilio Muñoz-Cerón. Comparison of two PV array models for the simulation
of PV systems using five different algorithms for the parameters identification.
2016.
[10]
Tafadzwa Gurupira - Arnold Johan Rix. PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM MOD-
ELLING USING PVLIB-PYTHON. 2016.
[11]
NREL. System Advisor Model (SAM) General Description (Version 2017.9.5).
2017.
[12]
KAREEM SIYAM LEWIS. OPTIMISATION OF SOLAR STREET LIGHT-
NING VIA SIMULATION. 2019.
[13]
Akram Abdulameer Abood. A comprehensive solar angles simulation and cal-
culation using matlab. 2015.
==PAGE:90==
82
Bibliography
[14]
European Committee for Standardization. Solar Energy - Vocabulary (ISO 9488.
1999.
[15]
P. M. Rich P. Fu. The Solar Analyst 1.0, User Manual. 1999.
[16]
W. A. Beckman J. A. Duﬀie. Solar Engineering of Themal Processes. 2013.
[17]
Md. Atikur Rahman. A Review on Semiconductors Including Applications and
Temperature Effects in Semiconductors. 2014.
[18]
NPTEL. pn junction under bias.
[19]
ICE. Analysis of series and shunt resistance in silicon solar cells using single
and double exponential models Singh and Ravindra. 2011. url: http:%20//dx.
doi.org/10.1680/emr.11.00008.
[20]
Carlos Algora Iván Lombardero. Impact of shunt resistance on the assessment
of multijunction I-V. 2012. url: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5053525.
[21]
Valerio Lo Brano - Aldo Orioli - Giuseppina Ciulla - Alessandra Di Gangi. An
improved five-parameter model for photovoltaic modules. 2010.
[22]
First A. N. Belhaouas - M. S. Ait Cheikh - C.Larbes. Suitable Matlab-Simulink
simulator for PV system Based on a TwoDiode Model under shading conditions.
2013.
[23]
European Standards. Photovoltaic devices - Part 10: Methods of linear depen-
dence and linearity measurements (IEC 60904 - 10:2020). 2020.
[24]
Lijun Gao - Roger A. Dougal - Shengyi Liu - Albena P. Iotova. Parallel-Connected
Solar PV System to Address Partial and Rapidly Fluctuating Shadow Condi-
tions. 2009.
[25]
J.S. Stein - G.T. Klise. Models Used to Assess the Performance of Photovoltaic
Systems. 2009.
[26]
Lambert T. - Gilman P. - Lilienthal P. Micropower System Modeling with Homer.
2006.
[27]
W. De Soto - S.A. Klein - W.A. Beckman. Improvement and validation of a
model for photovoltaic array performance. 2005.
[28]
Nahla Mohamed - Nor Zaihar Yahaya - Balbir Singh Mahinder Singh. Single-
Diode Model and Two-Diode Model of PV Modules: A Comparison. 2013.
[29]
L. Castañer - S. Silvestre. Modelling PV Systems Using Pspice. 2002.
[30]
Hongmei Tian - Fernando Mancilla-David - Kevin Ellis - Eduard Muljadi. A
Detailed Performance Model for Photovoltaic Systems. 2012.
[31]
David L. King - James K. Dudley - William E. Boyson. A Simulation Program
for Photovoltaic Cells, Modules, and Arrays. 1996.
[32]
J.W. Bishop. Computer simulation of the effects of electrical mismatches in
photovoltaic cell interconnection circuits. 1988.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
83
[33]
Edwin van Dijk - Herman J. N. Spruijt - Dermot M. O’Sullivan - J. Ben
Klaassens. PWM-Switch Modeling of DC-DC Converters. 1995.
[34]
Sumukh Surya - Sheldon Williamson. Generalized Circuit Averaging Technique
for Two-Switch PWM DC-DC Converters in CCM. 2021.
[35]
Sungmin Park - Weiqiang Chen - Ali M. Bazzi - Sung-Yeul Park. A Time-
Eﬀicient Approach for Modelling and Simulation of Aggregated Multiple Photo-
voltaic Microinverters. 2017.
[36]
Anton Driesse - Praveen Jain - Steve Harrison. BEYOND THE CURVES: MOD-
ELING THE ELECTRICAL EFFICIENCY OF PHOTOVOLTAIC INVERT-
ERS. 2008.
[37]
Joshua S. Stein - Christopher P. Cameron - Ben Bourne - Adrianne Kimber -
Jean Posbic - Terry Jester. A STANDARDIZED APPROACH TO PV SYSTEM
PERFORMANCE MODEL VALIDATION. 2010.
[38]
Endeas. User’s Guide to Electronics Unit EUM64. 2017.
[39]
Endeas. Flash System Guide 500-Series. 2019.
[40]
Köntges et al. Review of Failures of Photovoltaic Modules. 2014.
[41]
Marina García-Agúndez Blanco. Performance modelling and design optimiza-
tion of a Solar Powered Street Lighting system for delivering light as a service
in remote areas. 2021.
[42]
J.A Hay J.E. - Davies. Calculations of the solar radiation incident on an inclined
surface. 1980.
[43]
Sandia National Laboratories. Photovoltaic Array Performance Model. 2004.
==PAGE:92==
