==PAGE:1==
Measuring human hearing with functional
near­infrared spectroscopy
Test­retest reliability
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
Test­retest reliability
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Anaïs BOUCHET
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
fNIRS cap used in this study on a mannequin head in the CHBC booth,
05/2021
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Copenhagen Hearing and Balance
Center, which is a joint lab of DTU Hearing Systems, Department of Health Technology,
Technical University of Denmark, and the Ear, Nose, Throat, and Audiology department of
Rigshospitalet, Denmark, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master Engineering Acoustics,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of audiology.
Anaïs BOUCHET ­ s201613
Signature
Date
ii
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Functional near­infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) is a relatively recent imaging technique
and presents many advantages for clinical use in audiology: it is silent, compatible with
cochlear implants, child­friendly, and can measure cortical activation in response to acous­
tic stimuli. Most studies report results at the group level, with the responses averaged
across participants. However, for clinical applications, a good test­retest reliability at the
individual level is required. Furthermore, a challenge when using fNIRS is to remove
physiological confounds from the data, such as the heartbeat and motion artefacts. While
various processing methods have been developed, the procedure to follow is not yet stan­
dardized. One promising new approach for improving the test­retest reliability is to use
short­channel separations. The aim of this study was therefore to investigate individ­
ual level test­retest reliability of the fNIRS responses evoked by auditory stimulation for
normal­hearing participants. The fNIRS responses of fourteen participants were recorded
during silence, a speech­shaped modulated noise, a speech passage, and a music sam­
ple. In addition, the speech­shaped noise was presented at two different intensities. The
stimuli were presented in a block paradigm. The same testing procedure was repeated
with an interval between sessions of one week. Results show a high variability of test­
retest reliability of the fNIRS response across individuals. The correlation between cortical
activation time course was excellent for one participant for each condition ; fair to excellent
for 64 % of them in response to speech ; and bad to fair for at least half the participants in
response to the other conditions. However, the questionnaires that participants filled be­
fore and after each measurement help to explain why some participants presented good
test­retest reliability but others did not. Data from participants with consistent mood tend
to be more reliable. Moreover, short and light hair resulted in higher data quality than thick
and long dark hair. Nonetheless, reproducibility of channel data quality was excellent for
long channels but poor for short channels. Only 13% of short channels had sufficient
data quality to be included in the analysis so the influence of short channel separation
could not be shown. Furthermore, at the group level, cortical activation was significantly
higher in response to speech and music than to ICRA noise and there was no significant
change in HRF amplitude between sessions. Results do not show strong consistency with
Weder’s HRF curves: no significant effect of sound intensity nor perfect resemblance in
HRF times courses. Moreover, test­retest reliability at the group level was not as good as
what previous fNIRS test­retest research demonstrated.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
To Maaike Charlotte Van Eeckhoutte, postdoc
• Hearing Systems Section, Department of Health Technology, Technical University
of Denmark, Lyngby
• Hearing and Balance Center, Ear, Nose, and Throat (ENT) & Audiology Clinic,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital
Main supervisor of this study, I would like to thank her a lot for the encouragement and
support she provided me all along the project.
To Abigail Anne Kressner, assistant professor
• Hearing Systems Section, Department of Health Technology, Technical University
of Denmark, Lyngby
• Hearing and Balance Center, Ear, Nose, and Throat (ENT) & Audiology Clinic,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital
Co­supervisor of this study, I really appreciated her scientific advice.
To Erik Finn Kjærbøl, civil engineer
• Hearing and Balance Center, Ear, Nose, and Throat (ENT) & Audiology Clinic,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital
Co­supervisor of this study, his technical support was very helpful.
To the 14 participants, mainly friends, who came twice to the hospital and accepted to
participate in this study.
To Rigshospitalet, Hospital of Copenhagen, where I could perform all the pilot tests and
measurements.
To the researchers at the Translational Hearing Research, The Bionics Institute, East
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia for their help with analysing the data.
iv
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background about fNIRS
3
2.1
Principle of fNIRS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Processing of fNIRS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Analysis of fNIRS data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methods
7
3.1
Study participants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Questionnaires . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
fNIRS hardware and experimental montage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4
fNIRS experimental protocol and set up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Data pre­processing and analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.6
Reliability analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4
Results
17
4.1
Questionnaire results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.2
fNIRS data quality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.3
Hemodynamic Response Functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4.4
Reliability results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5
Discussion
33
5.1
Test­retest reliability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Data quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.3
Consistency with previous studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
6
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
A Appendix
47
A.1 Questionnaire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.2 Technical properties of the light emitted by NIRX device . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.3 Coordinates of sources and detectors in the montage and corresponding
channels and cortical areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
A.4 Wave forms, Fourier Transforms and STFTs of the stimuli . . . . . . . . . . 49
A.5 Background noise measurement results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
A.6 Matlab code used in data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A.7 Questionnaire results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.8 Hemodynamic response functions : results at the individual level . . . . . . 56
A.9 Group results of HRF averaged over ROI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
A.10 Correlation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
A.11 HRF amplitude variation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Functional near­infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) enables non­invasive neuroimaging, which
has the benefits of being silent, compatible with cochlear implants, and child­friendly [1].
Within the past five years, fNIRS has gained attention in the auditory field and research
demonstrated that cortical activation in response to acoustic stimuli can be measured with
fNIRS. For instance, Bauernfeind recorded fNIRS data on four adults listening passively to
pure tone binaurally or monaurally at two different intensities (40 and 70 dB SPL) in 2016
[2] and 2018 [3], concluding that cortical activation increases with increasing intensity of
the acoustic stimuli. Weder has shown the same effect with four intensity levels (15, 40,
65 and 90 dB SPL) of speech modulated noise (ICRA noise) presented to some twenty
participants in 2018 [4]. By reproducing the same protocol in 2020 and measuring par­
ticipants’ loudness perception, Weder’s team demonstrated that the amplitude of cortical
activation is more correlated to loudness than to intensity [5]. Some research has also
been done with speech material: fNIRS revealed a correlation between speech intelligi­
bility and cortical activation at the group level for adults [6] and children [7]. According to
Lawrence et al. 2018, fNIRS could be used for objectively measuring speech intelligibility
and listening effort. It could also have application for subjects with cochlear implants and
tinnitus [1]. Thus, fNIRS has a strong potential for clinical use in the auditory domain.
For clinical applications, fNIRS measurements need to be reproducible and to show a
high reliability of the results at the individual level. However, until now, most studies were
done at the group level. Wiggins [8] published in 2016 a test­retest reliability fNIRS study
of speech­evoked fNIRS responses. Wiggins’ study was conducted by test and retest
sessions separated by three months, with relatively older participants (36­75, median 65)
listening to speech material. A wavelet transformation and a band­pass filtering were
done to process the data, prior to a group linear model analysis at both the individual and
group levels. Statistical analysis has shown test­retest results to be highly reliable at the
group level while on the individual level, excellent for some individuals, but poor for others.
This variability of reliability across individuals was not investigated. Furthermore, Wiggins
concluded that any processing method that could more efficiently remove physiological
artefacts from data could potentially improve reliability [8].
Indeed, fNIRS data is affected by physiological confounds [9] e.g. heartbeat, respiration,
Mayer waves and changes in blood flow and pressure ; thus, complex data processing is
needed. As a result, a lot of processing methods have been developed, and the proce­
dure to follow is not yet standardized [9][10]. One promising new approach for improving
reliability is short­channel separation [11] which was not possible to do until recently. Its
principle is to isolate hemoglobin concentration variation only due to cortical activation at
cortical depth with recorded data in the scalp, containing only physiological noise. Such
an efficient method to remove physiological confounds could lead to higher reliability at
the individual level, especially in comparison with Wiggins’ results [8].
A highly variable individual reliability was also shown in other studies. In the auditory
domain, test­retest reliability of fNIRS measurements was investigated with infants who
were presented with auditory and visual stimuli [12]. This study showed a highly variable
individual reliability. In other fields, fNIRS measurement demonstrated high reliability at
the group level but not consistent reliability at the individual level, as reported by Plitcha
[13] and Huang [14] concerning respectively occipital and prefrontal brain areas. None of
these studies made use of short channel separation.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
1
==PAGE:10==
This study aimed to investigate individual level test­retest reliability of the responses
evoked by acoustic stimulation, using short channels to correct for physiological con­
founds. Since Wiggins’ results were obtained with relatively old participants, this study
is restricted to young normal hearing subjects to rule out any effects of age. Participants
were asked to fill in a questionnaire about themselves before and after fNIRS measure­
ments to assess the factors that could explain inter­subjects variability in reliability. The
questionnaires included phenotypic (hair and skin color) and psychological parameters
(mood, focus, etc.). In order to be able to compare with previous studies, the testing pro­
cedure is inspired by the methods employed by Weder [4]. Three kinds of stimuli were
considered here: speech modulated noise, speech material and music. Acoustic stimuli
were presented with a loudspeaker instead of insert phones. The ICRA noise is presented
at two intensity levels (40 and 65 dB SPL) and the two latter only at 65 dB SPL. The par­
ticipants are presented to the same acoustic stimuli twice, with one­week interval. The
process workflow used to analyse data included a group linear model (GLM) with short
channel regression, while a block averaging analysis was applied in the case of Weder’
study. However, Luke has recently proven that both methods lead to similar results [15],
so cortical activation results for ICRA noise are expected to be similar to Weder’s [4].
The main hypothesis of this study was to achieve higher test­retest reliability compared to
Wiggins’ results [8] by adding short channel regression in the analysis. Furthermore, we
hypothesized to find an effect of habituation for some stimuli, leading to lower responses
in the second session compared to the first one, as was reported in the case of a verbal
fluency task [16] with an test­retest interval of two months. Moreover, ICRA noise­evoked
responses are expected not to be lateralized [4] but cortical activation in response to
speech and music might be lateralized. For instance, left superior temporal cortex has
been shown to be sensitive to speech intelligibility [6]. On the other way, music is more
likely to be processed by the right side of the brain whereas speech is usually treated by
the left one [17].
2
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:11==
2
Background about fNIRS
2.1
Principle of fNIRS
Functional Near­InfraRed Spectroscopy (fNIRS) is an emerging technique whose principle
is based on light absorption by blood [18]. Through human tissue, wavelengths between
0.6 and 1 µm are absorbed by blood, and more accurately by oxygenated hemoglobin
(HbO) and deoxygenated hemoglobin (HbR). These two chromophores absorb near in­
frared light with two different absorption coefficients. Once these coefficients are known,
with the measure of the amount of absorption by a tissue of two distinct wavelengths, it is
possible to determine the concentration of HbO and HbR and therefore the oxygenation of
the tissue [19]. As the oxygenation is a marker of cerebral activation [20], the key­concept
of fNIRS is to image oxygenation in the brain with near infrared light.
More accurately, infrared light is relevant because its frequencies belong to the ”biological
window” [21]. Frequencies out of this window are strongly absorbed by human tissue,
as it can be seen on the absorption spectra of tissue chromophores (fig 2.1a) . It can
be noticed that melanin also absorbs in this biological window, so the light absorption
can vary across individuals, relatively to their skin tones. Indeed, for darker skin, light
absorption is stronger than for lighter skin and is not anymore negligible when applying
the modified Beer­Lambert law (cf point 2.2.2 below) [22].
(a) Absorption spectra of important tissue chro­
mophores [21]
(b) Schema of the statistical path followed by the
light relatively to the distance inter­optodes [23]
Figure 2.1
When near­infrared light passes through tissue, it is absorbed by oxy­ and deoxygenated
hemoglobin, but it is also scattered. Therefore, when a light is emitted onto the scalp, the
scattered light goes in every direction. The statistical travel followed by the collected light
is changing depending on the detector position. The statistical path followed by the light
between one source and one detector is called a channel. Sources and detectors are
also both referred to optodes. Usually, fNIRS sources and detectors are spaced by 3 cm.
In that configuration, the penetration depth of the collected light is about 1.5 cm. At this
depth, light passes through cortical tissue (cf light red channel fig 2.1b). Thus, by knowing
exactly where to place near­infrared sources and detectors, it is possible to do functional
spectroscopy. Indeed, by placing fNIRS sources and detectors in a way that channels cor­
respond to auditory­evoked regions of the brain, imaging the cortical response to acoustic
stimuli becomes possible, as demonstrated by several studies [2][3][4][5][6][8].
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Processing of fNIRS data
2.2.1
Conversion of raw data to optical densities
The raw data collected by the fNIRS device are the fluence emitted for each source and
fluence detected for each detector. A range of methods to process the reponses has
been employed [15][9], and no standards exist. However, the data are usually converted
to optical densities, which is the change in light intensity between sources and detectors
[19]. Optical density (OD) can be calculated for each channel and each wavelength by
applying the formula 2.1 with rs, rd, Φ(rs, rd, λ, t), Φ0(rs, rd, λ, t) being respectively the
source position,the detector position, the fluence detected and the fluence emitted.
OD(rs, rd, λ, t) = −ln
( Φ(rs, rd, λ, t)
Φ0(rs, rd, λ, t)
)
(2.1)
2.2.2
From optical densities to hemodynamic signals
The second usual step is to apply the modified Beer Lambert law stating that optical
density is proportional to the absorption variation (cf eq. 2.2) [19]. B is the differential
pathlength factor which is the length of light travel considering scattering, and L is the dis­
tance between source and detector for a given channel. Furthermore, ∆µa depends on
the change in oxy­ and deoxygenated hemoglobin concentration (cf eq. 2.3) [19]. ϵHbO(λ)
and ϵHbR(λ) are the extinction coefficients of the chromophores HbO and HbR at the given
wavelength λ. Thus, the change in HbO and HbR concentrations, e.g. the hemodynamic
signals, can be directly deduced from the optical densities for two distinct wavelengths (cf
eq. 2.4).
OD(rs, rd, λ, t) = ∆µa(rs, rd, λ, t) ∗B ∗L
(2.2)
∆µa(rs, rd, λ, t) = ϵHbO(λ) ∗∆[HbO] + ϵHbR(λ) ∗∆[HbR]
(2.3)
(∆µa(rs, rd, t)
∆µa(rs, rd, t)
)
= B ∗L ∗
(ϵHbO(λ1)
ϵHbR(λ1)
ϵHbO(λ2)
ϵHbR(λ2)
)
∗
(OD(rs, rd, λ1, t)
OD(rs, rd, λ2, t)
)
(2.4)
2.2.3
Removing physiological counfounds
Hemodynamic signals contain information concerning change in oxygenation due to cor­
tical oxygenation but also other changes due to heart beat, respiration, and change in
blood pressure [9]. Therefore, there is a need to remove these physiological confounds
from the data: this is the major challenge for an fNIRS study [24]. A lot of methods can be
done to extract only relevant information, such as high­pass and/or low­pass filtering at
different time in the latter presented process [10]. Otherwise, the analysis can also take
into account the physiological confounds. Indeed, it is possible to collect only physiologi­
cal confounds with the use of short separation channels. For these channels, the distance
between source and detector is around 10 mm, so the light penetrates through the scalp
but not through cortical tissue (cf dark red channel on schema 2.1b). The resulting data
contains only physiological confounds and can be used either for pre­filtering or during
the analysis in the case of short­separation regression.
4
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:13==
2.3
Analysis of fNIRS data
Two main ways have been used to analyse the hemodynamic data [9]. The first one is
the block averaging over epoch. An epoch is the hemodynamic data recorded around
a stimulation event and extracted from a few seconds before the stimulus onset to a few
seconds after its offset (cf. illustration on fig 2.2a). All these epochs are then averaged to
obtain the hemodynamic response function (HRF). In this analysis process, the data
needs to be pre­filtered to remove artefacts as much as possible before the block aver­
aging.
(a) Example of an epoch in the case of an acous­
tic stimulation
(b) Canonical HRF
Figure 2.2
The second approach is the general linear model (GLM). This method is based on the
decomposition of the fNIRS data (Y ) as a product of the design matrix (X) by a weight
matrix (β) and a residual error (ε), as synthesized through the equation 2.5.
Y = X ∗β + ε
(2.5)
Each column of the design matrix X corresponds to one condition of stimulation plus
additional parameters of regression such as short separation ones. The second dimen­
sion of X is time. The coefficients of X are zero whenever there is no stimulation at the
corresponding time and condition. Elsewhere, the coefficents can be derived from the
canonical HRF (cf fig 2.2b) or simply be delta functions at different stimulus onsets in the
case of a finite impulse response (FIR) deconvolution. In the first case, the HRF is as­
sumped to have the same shape as the canonical one. In the latter, no assumption is
made concerning the shape of the HRF.
In both cases, two hypothesis should be made before applying the GLM. The first one
is the linearity of the evoked response. This criteria is usually assumed to be valid [25].
The second one is that the noise term ε has a gaussian distribution which is not validated.
Indeed, physiological confounds have frequency components concentrated around a few
frequencies (for instance around 1­2 Hz in the case of heartbeat)[25]. However, this can
be re­weighted by applying noise pre­whitening and/or pre­coloring [25] or by applying
iterative autoregressive least­squares (AR­IRLS) as a regressive method [26].
Finally, there are several resolution algorithms for solving the GLM equation 2.5 such as
the ordinary least­squares (OLS) or the AR­IRLS. Once β coefficients are obtained, it is
either possible to do statistical analysis on these coefficients or, in the case of deconvolu­
tion analysis, to derive the HRF for each condition and each channel. Moreover, analysis
can be conducted at individual or at group level.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
5
==PAGE:14==
Myriad methods for removing artefacts and for analysing fNIRS are available. As fNIRS
is a relatively new field of research, the data processing is not standardized yet [9][10].
However, research has been conducted to compare methods. It has been shown that
group averaging and GLM methods lead to similar results at the group level [15]. Mean­
while, GLM can account for simultaneous contribution so this method could provide « a
less biased estimate of the HRF », according to Yucel [9]. Santosa has recently inves­
tigated many different processing protocols of GLM analysis and has demonstrated the
processing performed better when using short­separation channels [11] in terms of sensi­
tivity and specificity[11]. Indeed, the optimal processing is obtained with low­pass filtering
(below 0.5 Hz) before the GLM, short­separation channels as additional regressors and
AR­IRLS as the regressive method of the GLM [11]. The higher efficiency of AR­IRLS
compared to OLS one is verified both for canonical model [11][26] and FIR deconvolution
[26].
6
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:15==
3
Methods
3.1
Study participants
The participants of this study were young normal hearing adults. 14 young normal hearing
adults participated. Their mean age is 24 ± 4 years (range 20­35). There are 5 women
and 9 men, and only one of them is left­handed (P012) ; the others are right handed.
The majority (40%) reported not to have tinnitus, 30% to have tinnitus rarely, 30% only
sometimes, and one participant reported to have hyperacusis (P006). None of them have
current ear troubles, three of them used to have otitis when they were children (P010,
P011 and P012).
All participants had unobstructed ear canals as measured by otoscopy. Pure­tone au­
diometry using the Affinity Compact (Interacoustics) and TDH­39 headphones in a sound­
proof booth confirmed normal hearing thresholds across all octave frequencies between
0.125 Hz and 8 kHz except for P001, P013 and P014 at 4 and/or 8 kHz (see Figure 3.1).
(a) Left ear
(b) Right ear
Figure 3.1: Hearing thresholds for each participant
It has been reported in some studies that data from dark­haired participants were not
considered because of poor data quality [4]. To keep track of this parameter, the hair
color and skin tone of the participants were self reported using the Fitzpatrick scale [27]
(cf table 3.1).
Almost all participants are students (except P014), with most (93%) participants attending
Master/Bachelor classes taught in English, or using English on a daily basis for work
(7%), all participants were considered to have a high level of English understanding. And
as a classical music piece and a speech in English are to be presented to them, they
were asked to estimate their English understanding and how much they enjoy listening
to classical music on a scale from 1 to 5. Results for the English understanding and
classical music enjoyment are presented in table 3.1. On average, participants report
that they ”understand almost all speech in any context”.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
7
==PAGE:16==
Subject
Skin tone
Hair color
English
understanding
Classical music
appreciation
P001
White, Fair
Blond
4
5
P002
Light, Pale White
Brown
4
4
P003
Medium, White to Olive
Dark
5
2
P004
Black, Very dark
Dark
3
3
P005
Light, Pale White
Blond
5
3
P006
Medium, White to Olive
Dark
4
4
P007
Light, Pale White
Brown
4
2
P008
White, Fair
Blond
5
4
P009
White, Fair
Blond
4
3
P010
Medium, White to Olive
Dark
4
3
P011
White, Fair
Blond
4
2
P012
Light, Pale White
Brown
4
2
P013
Light, Pale White
Brown
4
2
P014
Light, Pale White
Brown
4
3
Table 3.1: Skin tone, hair color of the participants; their level of English understanding
and how much they like listening to classical music
Scale for the English understanding: 3 = ”understand conversations containing some unfamiliar
vocabulary on many everyday subjects, with a need for repetition, rewording or slower speech, 4
= ”understand almost all speech in any context”, 5 = ”equal to that of a native speaker”.
Scale for the music appreciation : 1 = ”not at all”, 5 = ”very much”.
The participants came twice, with one week interval (7,14 days ± 0.36 days). Before and
after each of the two fNIRS measurement, participants were asked to fill in a question­
naire about their hair style and their mood, as presented in section 3.2. In fact, mood
can modulate cortical activation [28]. Furthermore, as the consumption of coffee or tea
can impact cognitive performance [29], participants were asked not to take any coffee
nor tea within 6 hours before the fNIRS measurement. Participants were also asked if
they have any neuropathology, psychological disorder or anything that can influence their
neural activation (e.g. medication, tranquilizer, drugs, etc.). One of them reported to have
anxiety and to take sertraline (P008), another one mentioned to be diagnosed with PTSD
and ADHD (P006). All participants provided informed consent and all experiments were
approved by the Science­Ethics Committee for the Capital Region of Denmark (reference
H­16036391) and had the option to be compensated for their time.
8
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:17==
3.2
Questionnaires
Before each fNIRS measurement, participants are asked to answer the following ques­
tions, about their hair style, mood and ability to focus :
• ”First, how is your hairstyle today? Please select as many relevant description as possible”
The suggested items are ”Very short hair”, ”Middle long hair”, ”Long hair”, ”Straight hair”,
”Curly hair”, ”Thin hair” and ”Curly hair”.
• ”How would you describe your mood today in a few words?” (free response)
• ”Do you feel...?” The suggested items are ”Excited”, ”Anxious”, ”Nervous”, ”Interested”,
”Tired”, ”Hungry”, ”Thirsty”, ”Sleepy” and ”Bored”.
• ”How much do you feel able to focus on something right now?” (5 points scale)
• ”Is there something else you would like to mention about how you are today?” (free answer)
Before the second measurement only, participants had extra questions to answer. The
first one was ”Have you been exposed to loud sounds during since the first experiment ?”
(5­points scale, with a caption under 1 (”not exposed”) and 5 (”very much exposed”)). The
second one was ”Was there anything that happened since last week and that is disturbing
you ?”, with a free field to answer. The last one was ”In which way are you feeling different
from the last time ? Or do you feel exactly the same ?”, also with a free field to answer.
After each measurement, participants were asked to fill in a feedback questionnaire. The
objective of this questionnaire was to estimate how much the subjects were focusing on
the stimuli, and how they were experiencing the experiment. Below are the questions
they were asked to answer :
• ”What is your first reaction about the measurement?” (free response).
• Only after the second measurement : ”In which way was this measurement different from
the previous one?” (free response).
• ”How much have you focused on the stimuli?” (5 points scale)
• ”How much did you enjoy the speech stimuli?” (5 points scale)
• ”How much did you enjoy the music stimuli?” (5 points scale)
• ”How much did you enjoy the noise stimuli?” (5 points scale)
• ”Were the two breaks useful to keep focus?” (5 points scale)
• ”What is your feeling about the length of the measurement?” (5 points scale)
• ”Was it hurtful?” The options were : ”Not at all!”, ”At the end, yes” and ”Yes, it was”. If yes,
they were asked to explain what was hurtful.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
9
==PAGE:18==
3.3
fNIRS hardware and experimental montage
3.3.1
fNIRS device characteristics
The continuous­wave fNIRS device that was used is the NirScoutX 64x32 from NIRX
company. The laser light sources produce near­infrared light of two distinct wavelengths :
785 and 830 nm. More details related to the NIRS light emitted are provided in appendix in
table A.1. The light source is switching frequency at 62.5 Hz and the sampling frequency
is 3.906 Hz. The NIRX software NirStar 15.3 is used to monitor fNIRS data collection.
3.3.2
Optode array design
The fNIRS montage is inspired from Weder’s one [4][5] and was generated with the NIRX
software NirSite. It uses 16 sources and 16 detectors, and the position of the long chan­
nels are exactly the same as in Weder’s montage. Source­detector distances are around
3 cm (from 29 to 42 mm as displayed in NIRSite software) and stabilizing links (NIXR, Ger­
many) were used to reduce variability of these distances over sessions. A short­detector
bundle linked to 8 short­distance channels is also used. In the case of short channels, the
source­detector distance is set as default to 8 mm in NirStar. The position of the sources
and detectors are presented in fig 3.2. Their accurate coordinates in the adult head model
ICBM 152 version 2009 are reported in table A.2 in appendix. Then, optodes are placed
on the fNIRS cap so that makers match (cf front page).
Figure 3.2: Position of fNIRS sources and detectors Sources correspond to red dots,
detectors to blue ones and short separation detectors are represented by blue circles.
Sources and detectors were placed according to the international 10/20 system over the left and
right hemisphere (A.2).
3.3.3
Channels and targeted brain regions
The optode array results in 32 channels (16 on each side) and 8 short separation channels,
as it can be seen on figures 3.3a and 3.3b. The targeted brain regions are the same as
in Weder’s study [4]. The channels’ name, location and corresponding anatomical area
of the brain are displayed in table A.3. This montage was designed to cover auditory
cortex and connected brain regions such as superior temporal gyrus, motor speech area
(Broca’s area), temporal pole and inferior frontal gyrus [4].
10
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:19==
(a) Left side
(b) Right side
Figure 3.3: Channels position
Sources correspond to red dots, detectors to blue ones and short separation detectors
are represented by blue circles.
3.4
fNIRS experimental protocol and set up
3.4.1
Acoustic stimuli
Three different stimuli are presented to the participants :
• an ICRA noise sample from Dreshler study [30].
The sound file used to extract one chunk is the same as Weder used as well [4] :
Number 6 : ”2 persons babble, 1 female 3bSMN, 1 male 3bSMN”, with idealized
speech spectrum and normal effort.
• a speech sample : an English­speaking woman explaining ”The concept of base”.
• a music sample : an extract of the overture of The Magic Flute composed by Mozart.
The sample corresponds from 4’32 to 4’50 of this video : Magic Flute overture.
In order to be able to compare some of the results with Weder ones ([4]), the stimuli has
been generated identically with a sampling frequency of 44,1 kHz. Indeed, each stimulus
is 18 seconds long and presents a 5ms ramp at its onset and offset. The wave form, the
Fourier Transform and the Short Term Fourier Fransform of each stimuli are presented in
the appendix (fig A.2, A.3 and A.4 ).
3.4.2
Experimental design
The paradigm considered here is a block design. Each block is composed of one stimulus
of 18 seconds length and some silence. The silence duration is set randomly between 25,
26, 27, 28, 29 and 30s. Thus each block lasts around 45.5s ± 2.5 s. Four conditions are
presented to the participants : the three different stimuli at 65 dB SPL and the ICRA noise
one also at 40 dB SPL. In a sequence all these conditions are played in a random order,
figure 3.4a provides an example. Each condition is presented 10 times so it requires
a total duration of about 30 minutes. However, participants are offered to take a break
twice during the measurement : after 4 and 8 sequences (cf fig 3.4b). The break lasts until
the participant is ready to continue. The presentation is managed through the software
PsychoPy3 (version 2021.1.2) and stimuli are played by a loudspeaker (Yamaha HS5I),
connected to the computer via a sound card Fireface UCX.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
11
==PAGE:20==
(a) Block design : 4 conditions are presented in a random order in each sequence
(b) Process of testing periods and breaks
Figure 3.4: Block design of the fNIRS experiment
3.4.3
Experimental set up
(a) Measurement configuration :
Loudspeaker placed in front of the chair
(b) Mic on the chair for background noise
measurement
Figure 3.5: Measurement booth
12
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:21==
During the measurement, participants are sitting on a chair in a darkened sound treated
booth. The chair is positioned so that their head is about 1 m from the loudspeaker (cf
fig 3.5a). Participants are said to try to focus at any incoming sound, to keep their eye
opened and to relax and stay awake.
The background noise of the booth has been measured at 16.6 dB A, with the mic on
the chair (cf fig 3.5b) and everything turned off. The NirScout device is placed inside the
booth and when it’s on, the background noise increases to 21.2 dB A and 21.3 dB A while
recording. Details about these measurements are provided in the appendix (cf A.5).
Prior to data collection, a calibration has been done to be sure that the stimuli are played at
the right sound pressure level and to define the correct intensity coefficients in Psychopy
for each condition. For this measurement, the mic is placed on the pillow at head height
(cf photo above). The sound pressure level is measured for 18 s and then averaged to
obtain 40 or 65 dB SPL ± 2 dB (with the options L_eq and spectr. selected on the sound
level meter). Before each measurement session, a checking is realized to confirm the
condition ICRA 65 dB is correctly presented.
3.5
Data pre­processing and analysis
Data processing is performed in Matlab R2020b (Mathworks, USA). All filtering and anal­
ysis are done using nirs­toolbox functions [31].
3.5.1
Signal quality evaluation and channel rejection
To evaluate data quality, the Scalp Coupling Index (SCI) was calculated. Indeed, when
optodes are well­coupled to the scalp, raw data contain cardiac oscillations and both
wavelength signals are well correlated [26]. After a band­pass filtering between 0.75 Hz
and 1.95 Hz, a cross­correlation of the two normalized signals corresponding to the two
wavelengths is computed and leads to the SCI. Channels with SCI lower than 0.75 were
rejected. Corresponding code is presented in appendix (cf listing A.1) and this functions
were written by Weder [4][5].
3.5.2
Process pipeline
The first step is to edit stimulus duration ­ set to 1 per default ­ and rename stimulus (cf list­
ing A.2). Then data was converted to optical densities and modified Beer­Lambert law was
applied (cf listing A.3). Applying this method requires two assumptions : fixed scattering
and fixed water concentration [19]. The differential pathlength factor (DPF) was set to : 0.1
(default value) and the extinctions coefficients used are : ϵHbO(785nm) = 169.3 cm−1M−1,
ϵHbR(785nm) = 225.0 cm−1M−1, ϵHbO(830nm) = 224.3 cm−1M−1, ϵHbR(830nm) = 159.6
cm−1M−1 [32]. Finally, hemodynamic data was low­pass filtered with cutting frequency
of 0.5 Hz, as advised by Santosa [11], cf listing A.4. Butterworth ’low­pass’ digital filter
with zero­phase forward IIR filtering of order 8 is applied.
3.5.3
Data Analysis
A GLM analysis with an FIR basis was performed. Provided some short separation chan­
nels were not all rejected, short­separation data were used in the regression. The pa­
rameters chosen to define the FIR basis are precised in the code in appendix (listing A.5).
Once the analysis was terminated, the HRF were extracted and was used for the reliability
analysis.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
13
==PAGE:22==
3.6
Reliability analysis
3.6.1
Reproducibility of fNIRS data quality
Because fNIRS data can be unusable when the optode coupling is deficient, channels can
be rejected because of poor SCI. So, between test and retest measurements, the amount
of exploitable channels can vary threatening the reproducibility of the measurements. In
order to investigate the similarity of the remaining data of the two sessions, the repro­
ducibility of the quantity (Rquantity) and the location (Roverlap) of remaining channels were
calculated both for normal channels and short­separation ones. They are defined by the
following equations (3.1 and 3.2) with A1 and A2 being the number are number of chan­
nels with sufficient SCI in data from session 1 and 2 respectively and Aoverlap being the
number of channels with sufficient SCI for both sessions. The closer Rquantity and Roverlap
are to 1, the better reproducibility. This definition is inspired from Wiggins’ study [8] who
considered significantly activated channels whereas here exploitable channels with SCI >
0.75 are considered. To characterize the results, the scale followed by Wiggins was used
: poor (<0.40), fair (0.40­0.59), good (0.60 ­ 0.74) and excellent (0.75­1.00) [8].
Rquantity = 1 −|A1 −A2|
A1 + A2
(3.1)
Roverlap = 2 ∗Aoverlap
A1 + A2
(3.2)
3.6.2
Regions of interest and HRF
After analysis, the HRF were obtained for each condition, chromophore and source­
detector couples. When a channel is covered by two source­detector couples, the HRF
are averaged to get one HRF per channel, whose names are presented on figure 3.6.
Besides, in order to be able to compare results with Weder’s ones [4], HRF data were
averaged over the 4 regions of interest (ROI) defined by Weder. Weder defined the ROI
by taking into account the similarity of activation pattern within the channels of a ROI, e
.g. all channels within a ROI were shown to present the very close hemodynamic patterns
[4]. No statistical analysis was done here to attest those results.
Figure 3.6: Channels and regions of interest (ROI)
14
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:23==
To investigate reliability visually, HRF of both sessions were presented in the same plot
for each participant and channel.
The grand average HRF were plotted to have results at the group level for comparison
with other studies’ results. Mean HRF amplitudes were also calculated with their standard
deviation. The grand average HRF were calculated over all participants data but also over
participants whose data could be processed with short­separation.
3.6.3
Individual reliability
For each channel, condition and participant, the Pearson correlation coefficient of the HRF
of both sessions, and the corresponding p­value were calculated with the matlab function
corrcoef.m. This correlation coefficient ρ was calculated from the mean (µ) and standard
deviations (σ) of the N­points HRF vectors, from session 1 and 2 (cf eq3.3 [33]).
ρ(HRF1, HRF2) =
1
N −1 ∗
N
∑
i=1
((HRF1(i) −µ1
σ1
)
∗
(HRF2(i) −µ2
σ2
))
(3.3)
The values of ρ(HRF1, HRF2) can range from ­1 to 1, with 1 (or ­1) meaning there is a pos­
itive (resp. negative) correlation between the two vectors. The closer the |ρ(HRF1, HRF2)|
to 1, the stronger the relationship between the vectors. On the other hand, the fact that
p­values very close to 0 mean that there is a significant correlation. Indeed, when p <
0.05, it is possible to reject the null hypothesis (no correlation) with a certainty of 95%.
The scale for interpreting the results is the one used also for Rquantity and Roverlap : poor
(<0.40), fair (0.40­0.59), good (0.60 ­ 0.74) and excellent (0.75­1.00) [8].
Because correlation does not provide any information concerning the difference in ampli­
tude between two sessions, the amplitudes of the HRF for both sessions were extracted
for each channel, condition, and participant. To highlight the change in between the two
sessions, the ratio r of the second HRF amplitude to the second one were calculated (cf
eq. 3.4).
r(Channel, Condition) = AmplitudeHRF2(Channel, Condition)
AmplitudeHRF1(Channel, Condition)
(3.4)
Statistical analysis was done to compare the HRF amplitudes between conditions, ses­
sions and hemisphere, for HbO data only. First a linear mixed effects model with factors
Condition, Session and Hemisphere set up as fixed effects and Participant as a random
effect was fit by maximum likelihood. It was applied to check which factor had an influence
on the HbO amplitudes. Then, paired­t­tests were done to investigate further significant
factors, with the Bonferroni correction to account for multiple comparisons.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:25==
4
Results
4.1
Questionnaire results
4.1.1
Hair style of the participants
None of the participant made any change of hair color and hair style between the two ses­
sions. The distribution of their answers concerning their hair length, texture and thickness
are reported in the charts below.
(a) Hair length
(b) Hair texture
(c) Hair thickness
Figure 4.1: Hair styles of the participants
4.1.2
Recorded mood of the participants
Before each measurement, participants have selected adjectives to describe their mood.
The number of participants who selected each adjective, before first and second session,
are presented on the bar chart 4.2 Most of the participant felt tired for both sessions,
and interested and excited especially before first measurement. More details concerning
participant’s personal adjectives selection and description of their mood are reported in
appendix (see figure A.6 and tables A.4 and A.5).
Figure 4.2: Feeling of the participants just before the measurements
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
17
==PAGE:26==
4.1.3
Focusing on stimuli
Prior to the measurement, participants were asked to evaluate how much they felt able
to focus. After the measurement, they were asked to estimate how much they focused
on the stimuli. Their estimations are presented on the bar chart 4.3. On average, for
both sessions, participants have selected 3.6 ± 0.7 to describe their ability to focus. Con­
cerning how they really have focused, they selected on average 3.9 ± 0.5 after the first
session, and 3.6 ± 0.5 after the second one. Even if their feeling of about their ability to
focus were similar for both sessions, the participants were probably more focusing during
the first session.
Figure 4.3: Estimation of how much the participant felt able to focus and how much they
really focused on the stimuli, for both sessions. Scale for the expectation : 1 = ”I am a bit
distracted”, 5 : ”I can focus easily”. Scale for their focus : 1 = ”not at all”; 5 = ”always”
4.1.4
Feedback about the measurements
Participant’s first reactions are recorded in appendix, in table A.6, as well as their descrip­
tion about how different the second session was different from the first one, in table A.7.
For the other feedback questions which were more guided, results are presented here.
How much participants enjoyed the stimuli
Figure 4.4: Feeling of the participants about how much they enjoyed listening to the stimuli
Scale : 1 = ”not at all”, 5 : ”a lot”.
18
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:27==
Participants’ ratings are presented on fig 4.4. On average, participants did enjoy the music
stimuli better than the other ones with a rating of 4.4 ± 0.6 after the first session and of 4.2
± 0.7 after the second one. The speech stimuli was more enjoyed that the ICRA noise.
On average, participants selected 3 ± 1.3 (resp. 3.1 ± 0.7) for the speech but only 2.7
± 0.9 (resp. 2.6 ± 0.8) for the noise. Moreover, it can be noticed that ratings tend to be
lower for the session than for the first one. Participants probably better enjoyed the stimuli
during the first measurement.
Length of the measurements
The length of the measurement was apparently acceptable for the participants, who se­
lected on average 3.1 ± 0.8 on the scale after both sessions (cf figure 4.5).
Figure 4.5: Feeling of the participants about the length of the measurement (30 minutes)
How comfortable were the measurements
The measurement on itself is not invasive but it appeared that the fNIRS cap could apply
some pressure on participant’s head and become uncomfortable. Prior to the measure­
ments, participant’s head size was measured and the fNIRS cap closest to their sizes was
selected. The available head sizes were 54, 56, 58 and 60 cm and if a head size was ex­
actly in between (e.g. 57 cm), the lower size was selected (e.g. 56 cm cap). Two third of
the participants did not feel any discomfort, for some of them the cap was uncomfortable
only at the end (cf charts 4.6a and 4.6b). Nevertheless, the head cap was hurtful for one
participant, who explained : ”I just felt a little bit of pressure and it gave me a headache
(but it wasn’t too bad)”.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
19
==PAGE:28==
(a) During session 1
(b) During session 2
Figure 4.6: Feeling of the participants about how much the measurement have been
hurtful
4.2
fNIRS data quality
4.2.1
Proportion of bad quality channels
Bad quality channels have been removed before analysis because of insufficient SCI
(<0.75), characteristic of bad quality channel. The amount of removed long channels
and short channels are presented in the bar chart 4.7 and 4.8 respectively. On average,
21.3% of the 36 long channels and 87.5% of the 8 short channels were removed for each
participant. The remaining short channels were mainly localized close to the forehead.
Figure 4.7: Proportion of bad quality long channels
20
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.8: Proportion of bad quality SS channels
4.2.2
Reproducibility
The distributions of Rquantity and Roverlap for long and short channels are displayed on
the bar chart 4.9. On the one hand, for long channels, Rquantity and Roverlap are about
0.91 ± 0.009 and 0.83 ± 0.013. These values are close to 1, meaning that the amount
of good quality channels is well reproducible. On the other hand, there is no consistency
about short channels with good quality given that Rquantity and Roverlap are much lower
(0.367 ± 0.406 and 0.179 ± 0.372 resp.). Because Rquantity and Roverlap are not defined
when all short channels have poor quality, they are set arbitrarily to 0 in these cases.
Figure 4.9: Distribution of Rquantity and Roverlap for long and short channels
LC : ”Long Channels”, SC : ”Short Channels”.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
21
==PAGE:30==
4.3
Hemodynamic Response Functions
4.3.1
Presentation of the HRFs measured for one subject
For each subject, each channel and both HbO and HbR data, the HRF are plotted, with
the y­axis corresponding to the variation of HbO/HbR concentration (in ∆µM) and the
x­axis being time from 0 (stimulus onset).
The averaged HRF over ROI for a representative participant (P007) are presented in the
figure 4.10. Corresponding HRF results for all channels are available in appendix (cf fig.
A.7 to A.10). HRF of same condition and same channel but for both sessions are not
overlapping perfectly but the amplitude range seems to be consistent (except for ROI2­R)
for this subject.
HRF results averaged over ROI for the rest of the participants are displayed in appendix,
section A.8.2.
Globally, these plots present an important variability of HRF evolution
across participant, condition and session. However, some HRF are consistent over ses­
sions, such as the HRF of ROI2­R HbR for Speech 65 dB (cf fig A.17) and the HRF of
ROi2­R HbO for ICRA 40 dB (cf fig A.16).
4.3.2
Grand average HRF
The averaged HRF for each ROI at the group level are presented in figure 4.11. The
variability between sessions seems to be higher than the one between conditions. HRF
of ROI1L and ROI 4L­4R (HbO & HbR) are very similar between sessions and conditions.
For the other ROI, HRF of the same session are closer to each other that HRF of the
same condition. By keeping only data processed with short separation channels, these
tendencies are not changing (cf fig. A.24).
At the channel scale, averaged HRF over all participants for each channel, condition and
sessions are presented in appendix, from figures A.25 to A.28. Same plots were gen­
erated over participants whose data could be processed with short separation at both
sessions (P003, P005, P007, P008, P009, P012, P013), cf figures A.29 to A.32.
For each channel and each condition, the averaged HRF are plotted with their standard
deviation, for both sessions. For example, concerning the channels in ROI 1, first session,
results are presented in the figure 4.12. The rest of the figures are provided in appendix
A.9.4. For some channels (eg 1R, 8L, 12R), the standard deviation is quite low (lower
than 10 ∆µM) whereas for other channels, this deviation reaches 60 ∆µM (channels
9L/9R) so HRF variance across subjects is not constant over channels. Nonetheless,
when averaged HRF are considered, some channels present similar HRF time courses
for both sessions, such as channel 1L­HbO, 1R­HbO, 3L­HbO, 4R­HbO, 10L­HbR, 12R
HbO and HbR.
22
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.10: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P007
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.11: HRF averaged over all participants. Legend: lines correspond to first session, dashed ones to second session ; each color color
corresponds to a condition: green ­ ”Speech 65 dB”, brown ­ ”Music 65 dB”, black ­ ”ICRA 65 dB”, blue ­ ”ICRA 40 dB”.
24
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.12: HRF averaged over all subjects with standard deviation ­ ROI 1 ­ Session 1
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
25
==PAGE:34==
4.4
Reliability results
4.4.1
Linear correlation results
The distribution of linear correlations between HRF of the two sessions are presented for
each participant and condition in the bar charts 4.13. Only correlation corresponding to a
good quality channel and to a p­value lower than 0.05 were taken into account.
Figure 4.13: Linear correlations results per participant and per condition. Dots corre­
spond to the correlation values between two session for each channel, chromophore (24
channels, HbO and HbR).
A good to excellent correlation is achieved for participant P010 for each condition. How­
ever, for other participants, linear correlations are widely spread between ­1 and 1 for at
least one condition. A lot of correlation coefficient are indeed higher or equal to 0.6, sign
of a good to excellent reliability but lots of them are also much lower.
On average, the correlation is slightly higher for the conditions ”Speech 65 dB” and ”Music
65 dB” than for the other two, as can been seen on the bar chart 4.14. Besides, correlation
is also a bit higher for HbO data that for HbR one. For example for ROI1­L, the averaged
correlation is 0.6 in the case of HbO HRF whereas it is only 0.2 in the case of HbR HRF (fig.
4.15). The linear correlation results per participant and per ROI ­ HbO and HbR together
­ are presented in appendix A.40 and there is no obvious difference in correlation across
ROI.
26
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.14: Linear correlations distribution per condition. Dots correspond to the cor­
relation values between two session for each channel, chromophore and participant (24
channels, HbO and HbR, 14 subjects).
Figure 4.15: Linear correlations results per ROI. Dots correspond to the correlation values
between two session for each channel, condition and participant (3 channels per ROI and
head side, 4 conditions, 14 subjects).
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
27
==PAGE:36==
4.4.2
Variation of response amplitude between the two sessions
For channels with sufficient quality for both sessions, the ratio of the amplitude of the
second HRF by the second one was calculated. The distribution of these ratios are pre­
sented, per condition and per subject, on figure 4.16 for HbO data (for HbR results, see
appendix A.41).
Figure 4.16: Ratio between HRF amplitudes (HbO) of the two sessions, per condition
and subject.The ratio r is defined by r = A2/A1, with A1 and A2 being respectively the
amplitudes of the HRF of the first and the second session, for given participant, channel
and condition.
For any condition, these distributions vary a lot across subjects. Indeed, for participant 10,
ratios are very close to 1 (interquartile range in 0.9­1.6) whereas for participant P009, the
interquartile range goes further than 5. Globally, participants P002, P004, P007, P010,
P013 and P014 have ratio concentrated around 1 whereas others have their ratio more
spread. For some subjects, ratio are much higher than 1 (eg P006, P008), which means
that the HRF amplitude is higher during the second sessions but for others, it is the op­
posite tendency (P004, P013, P014). For some subjects, ratio are lower than 1 for one
condition but higher than 1 for the other ones (example : for P009, r >1 for speech but
r<1 for ICRA 40 dB). To observe this tendency at the group level, the distribution of HRF
amplitude for both sessions and the four conditions are presented in the bar charts 4.17.
On average, the HRF amplitude is higher on the first session for the conditions ”Music
65 dB” and ”Speech 65 dB”. For the ICRA noise conditions, the two averaged of HRF
amplitudes for each intensity are very close. Nevertheless, HRF amplitudes are widely
distributed with, for each condition presented on fig 4.17, an interquartile range higher than
8 ∆µM. Indeed, HRF amplitude varies also across channels, as highlighted in figures
4.18 and 4.19, and in HRF plots. More details about HRF amplitude averaged per channel
and per condition are provided in appendix (fig A.42a to A.43f).
28
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.17: HRF amplitudes for each session, HbO data (left) and HbR data (right)
Figure 4.18: HRF amplitudes per channel, HbO data
Figure 4.19: HRF amplitudes per channel, HbR data
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
29
==PAGE:38==
4.4.3
Statistical analysis results
For each participant, condition and sessions, HRF amplitudes corresponding to HbO data,
were averaged over channels, for both left and right hemispheres. Averaged amplitudes
per condition, hemisphere and session, with standard deviations, are presented in figures
4.20a and 4.20b.
(a) data for both sessions presented per hemi­
sphere
(b) data for both hemispheres presented per ses­
sion
Figure 4.20: Distribution of individuals’ averaged HRF amplitudes over channels per con­
dition and per hemisphere or session (HbO data only).
The condition factor was demonstrated to have a significant effect: χ²(3) = 1710, p < 0.05,
see linear mixed effect results on fig 4.21. Session and hemisphere did not show any
significant effect on the amplitudes. Even if on fig. 4.20b, the amplitudes in response
to ”Speech 65 dB” are higher for session 1 than for the second one, it was not proven
statistically. Indeed, an interaction model between condition and session factors was
applied and did not show any significance (χ²(4) = 1715, p >> 0.05).
Figure 4.21: Linear mixed effect results
To further investigate significant differences in amplitude across conditions, paired­t­tests
were performed. Results are presented in the following table 4.1, with pc being the p­
value after Bonferroni correction. There is no significant difference in amplitude between
ICRA 65 dB and ICRA 40 dB conditions. Meanwhile, amplitudes in response to speech
are significantly different from amplitudes in response to ICRA noise, at both levels. Fur­
thermore, music and ICRA noise both at 65 dB elicited significantly different amplitudes
of activation. Those results are illustrated in figure 4.22.
30
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:39==
Conditions
Music 65 dB
Speech 65 dB
ICRA 65 dB
ICRA 40 dB
Music 65 dB
/
Speech 65 dB
mean difference
= ­1.537
t(55) = ­0.965
p = 0.338
pc = 1.00
/
ICRA 65 dB
mean difference
= 4.463
t(55) = 2.74
p = 0.00830
pc = 0.0498
mean difference
= 6.000
t(55) = 4.62
p = 2.38 e­5
pc = 1.43 e­4
/
ICRA 40 dB
mean difference
= 4.355
t(55) = 2.36
p = 0.0232
pc = 0.139
mean difference
= 5.892
t(55) = 3.49
p = 9.67 e­4
pc = 0.00580
mean difference
= ­0.1086
t(55) = ­0.0948
p = 0.92
pc = 1.00
/
Table 4.1: Results of paired t­tests
Figure 4.22: Distribution of HRF amplitudes per condition, with paired t­tests results pre­
cised.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
31
==PAGE:40==
32
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:41==
5
Discussion
5.1
Test­retest reliability
5.1.1
At the group level
Investigating group level was not the main aim of this study. However, the grand averaged
HRF time courses are quite similar between sessions particularly for some channels such
as 1L ­ HbO&HbR, 3L ­ HbO&HbR, 3R ­ HbR,4L ­ HbO, 7L ­ HbO, 10 L ­ HbO and
12R ­ HbR but do not perfectly overlap. At the ROI level, some HRF curves are almost
overlapping perfectly, especially for ROI 1 & 4 (left side only), and for HbO data (cf fig
4.11). Furthermore, other HRF curves are not matching perfectly but their variations are
simultaneous for a given session. This test­retest reliability has not been investigated
quantitatively at this level but the HRF time courses show that even if individual data is
highly variable, group level data looks consistent over sessions for ROI 1 and 4 (HbO
data especially) but not for all ROI. These differences in time courses suggest a lower
reliability at the group level than the one described in previous studies investigating test­
retest reliability of fNIRS such as Wiggins’ [8] and Blasi’s [12] research. Nevertheless,
a higher consistency is achieved at the ROI level than at the channel level on the one
hand, and for oxygenated data than for desoxygenated data on the other hand. This is in
agreement with previous results ([8], [34]).
5.1.2
At the individual level
At the individual level, test­retest reliability has not been found to be equivalent for all par­
ticipants. This is also in accordance with previous studies, as detailed in the introduction.
Figure 5.1: Characterization of test­retest reliability per subject and per condition, aligned
with estimated change in mood and change of first reaction after measurement.
When focusing on the HRF correlation between sessions, it is possible to establish a
rank of participants considering their correlation mean. The color table above illustrates
how reliable the measurements were, per participants and conditions (cf fig. 5.1). The
characterization of correlation was done interpreting figure 4.13. Thus, best test­retest
correlations were obtained with participants P010, P012, P007, P002 and P008. P013,
P004, P005, P009 and P006 showed a poor test­retest correlation.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
33
==PAGE:42==
Interestingly, participants who presented the best correlation had a similar first reaction
after the two measurements. Indeed, participant P010 wrote ”Relaxing” after both ses­
sions, participant P012 mentioned that it was fun/nice and participant P007 found the
measurements to be ”calm” (cf table A.6). On the contrary, participants who achieve poor­
est correlation had different reactions. For instance, participant P006 wrote ”Completely
new, curious” after first measurement and ”Very familiar” after the second one. Partici­
pant P009 mentioned a change after the second measurement: ”Easier than last time”.
First reactions of participants P005, P004 and P013 were also different from one time to
the other. To see this effect more clearly, the changes in mood and in first reaction after
measurement were estimated from the actual responses from participants (cf appendix
A.6 and A.6) and were reported in figure 5.1. Thus, the fact that participants had similar
feeling after both measurements seems to be correlated to a better HRF correlation.
Additionally, a change in mood could also explain poorer HRF correlation. On the first
hand, participant P006 ­ whose HRF were not well correlated ­ was ”interested” during
the first session while ”bored” during the second one (cf figure A.6). Same for P004 who
was first ”interested” and ”hungry” and then only ”tired”. On the other hand, participants
with higher HRF correlation show similarities in their mood, even if their mood descriptions
differ a little bit from one session to the other. For example, participants P010 and P007
were ”tired” on both sessions and P012 was ”sleepy” the two times. This is a tendency
visible on figure 5.1. Therefore, a consistency in mood could help achieving a better
correlation between two sessions.
Figure 5.2: Characterization of HRF amplitude variation per subject and per condition,
aligned with estimated change in mood and change of first reaction after measurement.
The ratio r is defined by r = A2/A1, with A1 and A2 being respectively the amplitudes of the HRF
of the first and the second session, for given participant, channel and condition.
This rank could also be seen in the light of change in HRF amplitudes. Indeed, even if
two HRF curves have a perfect correlation (coefficient of +1), there could yet be a change
in amplitude. The amount of change in amplitude ­ characterized by the averaged ratio
r of the second HRF amplitude over the first one ­ is summarized in the color table 5.2.
When the change in HRF amplitude is aligned with mood and first reaction changes, there
is no evidence of correlation between consistency in HRF amplitudes and consistency in
mood/first reaction (see fig. 5.2). Moreover, the ranking of participants related to their
correlation results is not consistent with the one related to their change is HRF amplitudes.
34
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:43==
For the above participants who presented high correlation of the HRF curves, the mean
change in amplitude is quite low (ratio close to 1), especially for participants P010 and
P012. However, some other participants showed low change in HRF amplitude as well,
but a low HRF correlation, such as participants P001, P003 and P011. For these partic­
ipants indeed, HRF curves are not very smooth, as if some noise remained (cf figures
A.11, A.14 and A.20). Probably their unsynchronized variations explain the low correla­
tion of the HRF between two sessions. It is also possible that HRF curves corresponding
to insignificant activation are just composed by noise so the amplitude variation is low
although HRF are un­correlated. It would be interesting to compare HRF correlation only
for channels with high HRF amplitude corresponding to a significant activation pattern.
This way, a more qualitative test­retest comparison could be done.
Moreover, it should be considered that test­retest HRF comparison could be achieved
only for channels with sufficient data quality for both sessions. No short channel data
had sufficient quality for lots of participants. For some subjects, few long channels were
missing as well, as can be seen in table 5.1 below. This inconsistency of the channels
considered in the comparison analysis could alter the results. For instance, participant
P010 corresponds to the best averaged correlation although only one third of the long
channels could be exploited in the analysis.
5.1.3
Effect of novelty
Even if the measurement could be perfectly reliable, on the second session participants
are presented to stimuli they already know. Indeed, questionnaire results show that from
the participants’ point of view, it is not exactly the same to do the first or the second
measurement. Firstly, most participants answered they were more focused and enjoyed
better the stimuli in the first session than during the second one. Secondly, their mood
changed: on average, they were less excited and interested before the second session
than before the first one. They were also more anxious, sleepy and bored which could
also be explained by the fact that the second session occurred during the exam period.
Nevertheless, 43% did find the experiment as long the first time than the second one.
For the other 57 %, half of them found the experiment longer, the other half found it
shorter. Furthermore, in participants’ first reaction after the second measurement, half of
the participants mentioned they knew what to expect (cf table A.7). Lastly, participants
could be less or more tired, due to exterior stimulation such as exams, as reported in table
A.5 in appendix. Thus, from the participant’s point of view, test and retest sessions differ.
In data, the mean HRF amplitude over participants corresponding to speech stimuli are
lower by few ∆µM for the second experiment than for the first one, as could seen in bar
charts 4.17. However, it the hemisphere level, no evidence of difference in amplitude
has been shown, for any condition (cf 4.22), meanwhile the amplitudes in response to
”Speech 65 dB” are higher for session 1 than for the second one (cf fig. 4.20b). Maybe
at the channel level, such an effect could be proven. For instance, channel 2R shows
an averaged amplitude in response to speech much higher during the first session that
during the second one, as visible on figure A.42b in appendix. Interestingly, this channel
(2) is situated in Broca’s area, with functions involved in speech production. It has to be
clarified if there is an effect of habituation to the speech stimuli in this area. For speech
and ICRA stimuli, not any clear difference in amplitude between sessions is visible (cf fig.
4.20b), and this is confirmed by statistical analysis. If a decrease of cortical activation in
response to speech could be proven for some channels, it could be explained by the fact
that the speech is easier to remember than ICRA noise and music, and participants heard
this stimulus a lot.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
35
==PAGE:44==
Not any effect of novelty is significantly found in this study even if a doubt remains concern­
ing cortical activation in response to speech at the channel level. Nevertheless, partici­
pants did feel differently during both measurements. On averaged, they felt less excited
and interested during the second session.
5.2
Data quality
5.2.1
Effect of hair and skin type on data quality
Considering the amount of removed channels per participant (cf table 5.1), hair and skin
seem to have an effect on data quality. On the one hand, participants with short blond hair
and white or light skin had very few removed channels. On the other hand, participants
with dark hair and/or middle or long hair had more removed channels and the participant
with dark skin had a lot of removed channels. Even if there was not enough participants
to draw a conclusion, it seems that short hair, light hair and light skin help achieving a
good data quality.
Amount of
removed channels
Subject
Skin
tone
Hair
color
Hair
length
Hair
thickness
Hair
texture
0,00 %
P008
white
blond
short
thick
straight
1,39 %
P005
light
blond
short
thin
straight
2,78 %
P007
light
brown
short
thin
straight
4,16 %
P006
medium
dark
middle
thin
straight
8,33 %
P003
medium
dark
short
thin
straight
12,5 %
P012
light
brown
long
thick
straight
16,67 %
P014
light
brown
middle
thin
straight
20,83 %
P009
white
blond
long
thin
straight
23,61 %
P013
light
brown
short
thin
straight
25,00 %
P001
white
blond
long
thin
straight
25,00 %
P011
white
blond
middle
thin
curly
40,28 %
P004
black
dark
short
thick
curly
54,16 %
P002
light
brown
short
thick
straight
67,89 %
P010
medium
dark
middle
thick
straight
Table 5.1: Ranking of data quality across participants
5.2.2
Impact of short separation
When comparing correlation results for participants whose data were processed with short
separation (P003, P005, P007, P008, P009, P012 and P013) with other’s, there is no clear
impact of short separation on correlation results. Indeed, when comparing group level
HRF obtained with all data or only with data processed with short separation, no significant
difference is noticed at the ROI level (cf figures 4.11 and A.24). At the channel level, some
channels present difference in amplitudes. For channels 1R­HbO, 3R­HbO&HbR, 4R­
HbO, 6L­Hbo and 10L­Hbo, the HRF amplitude corresponding to activation in response
to speech is higher over data process by short separation than over all data (see figures
A.25 to A.28 and A.29 to A.32 in appendix). Meanwhile, the variability across participants
is very high, so maybe including data from half the participants can explain those changes,
maybe this is not due to short separation. What could have been done is to compare
HRF results obtained with and without short separation, for a given participant with short
channel data. On the other hand, the amount of short channels with good data quality is
very low: 87,5 % of short channel data were removed. Because short channel detectors
36
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:45==
were placed under fNIRS cap, it was not possible to remove the hair between the scalp
and the detectors, unlike other channels’ optodes. The few remaining short channels
were mostly situated close to the forehead, where there is less hair. Maybe such a study
could be done with infants ­ which are usually less­haired ­ to avoid any problem of hair
and conclude more easily about the benefit of short separation over data quality.
5.3
Consistency with previous studies
5.3.1
Effect of sound intensity
Acoustic stimuli were presented at two different sound intensities to the participants. Mu­
sic, speech and ICRA samples were presented at 65 dB SPL. ICRA noise was also dis­
played at 40 dB. According to Weder [4], high cortical activation is correlated with high
intensity (or more precisely, with loudness [5]).
While comparing the activation induced by conditions ICRA 65 dB and ICRA 40 dB at the
group level, an effect of sound intensity could be noticed. Indeed, for all channels but
channels 3, 8, 9, 10 and 11, mean HRF amplitude is slightly higher for 65 dB than for
40 dB (cf figures A.42a to A.43f). At the ROI level, this tendency can also be observed,
cf figure A.24. However, at the hemisphere level, this potential difference was proven to
be insignificant, unlike what was expected from Weder’s results. Maybe this effect would
have been shown with significance if the difference in intensity would have been larger
than 25 dB SPL.
Additionally, HRF time courses can also be compared with the ones presented in Weder’s
publication [4]. HRF for ROI1 and ROI4 (cf fig. A.24), HbO have a peak during the first
part of the stimuli, so have the ones in Weder’s report (ROI1 & ROI2). Group averaged
HRF over ROI 2 and 3, for session 2 only, have also similar time courses than described
by Weder: a gradual increase during stimuli presentation and then a decrease after the
stimulus offset. Another difference is that here, HbR data have similar amplitude than
HbO data which is not the case in Weder’s result. The averaging over all participants,
whose HRF were not computed over the same amount of data (bad quality channels re­
moved) could explain such a difference. Weder had excluded data from a participant with
poor data quality [4], here, all good quality channels from any participants were included.
Moreover, HRF amplitudes for HbO data are very dispersed, in a negative and a positive
way (cf figures 4.12 and A.33 to A.39). The averaging could thus have led to a reduced
amplitude of HbO data at the group level, which would have then be closer to HbR ampli­
tudes. Therefore, HRF times courses show similarities with the one obtained by Weder,
but also some differences.
5.3.2
Effect of stimulus type
The three conditions presented at the same intensity level are not inducing the same am­
plitude, as proven by the statistical analysis: HRF amplitude tends to be higher for speech
than for ICRA stimuli at the hemisphere scale. So, there is a significant effect of stimulus
type.
Surprisingly, at the group level, there seems to be less difference in HRF time course
between stimulus types than between sessions. Indeed, on figures 4.11 and A.24, curves
of given session and ROI are closer to each other than curves of the same session, dif­
ferent condition in the case of ROI 2 and 3. Meanwhile, the session was not proven to be
influencing significantly the HRF amplitudes.
Concerning lateralization, statistical analysis has proven the difference in HRF amplitudes
averaged over hemispheres to be insignificant. At the channel scale, differences could
be noticed between stimulus types, but the statistical analysis was not done at this scale.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
37
==PAGE:46==
For instance, channel 9 shows a higher activation on the left side in response to speech
whereas a higher activation on the right side in response to music (cf figure A.43c). This
is in accordance with what was expected [17]. On the other hand, cortical activation
evoked by ICRA noise and speech did not generate major difference in mean amplitude
per channel (cf fig A.42a to A.43f), suggesting no lateralization in the left hemisphere.
This was expected for ICRA noise [4] but speech­evoked activation was expected to be
higher in the left hemisphere, which is not the case here.
Figure 5.3: Mean HRF amplitudes with standard deviation, per condition and session
For speech stimulus, a decrease in HRF amplitude between sessions is discussed, cf
subsection 5.1.3 above. Probably, participants were less stimulated by this stimulus dur­
ing the second session because the speech is easily remembered. If there is one at the
channel scale, the effect of novelty must be stronger for speech stimuli than for ICRA
noise. This stimulus, which sounds more like wind, is harder to remembered and there is
no doubt about decrease in HRF amplitudes between sessions. This means that the mea­
surement is better reproducible with ICRA noise than with a given sample of speech: test
and retest measurement would be more similar to the participant for ICRA stimulus that
with speech. Concerning music stimulus, which is also easily remembered, there was no
significant change in amplitude between sessions at the hemisphere level nor doubt about
potential significant change at the channel level. The measurement is then also more re­
producible than with speech. Nonetheless, if different speech samples would have be
presented to participants, instead of only one, the averaged HRF amplitudes could have
been closer: the possibility of making a reproducible measurement which speech material
is not rejected here.
Interestingly, better HRF correlation is achieved for music and speech stimuli. On aver­
age over participants and channels, music and speech stimuli achieved a ”fair” reliability
whereas ICRA noise achieved a ”poor” one (cf figure 4.13). On the other hand, speech and
music induced significantly larger HRF amplitude than ICRA noise at the same sound in­
tensity (cf figure 4.22). The fact that cortical activation evoked by speech and music stimuli
is stronger can explain this better correlation. Indeed, by assuming the amplitude of re­
38
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:47==
maining physiological noise to be stable, the higher the amplitude of the cortical response,
the larger the signal to noise ratio (SNR). The larger the SNR, the better correlation and
reliability. So music and speech led to better reliability than ICRA noise, but as discussed
just above, the measurement was less reproducible with speech. Therefore, the type of
stimulus has an effect on reliability, which is not necessarily correlated to reproducibility.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:49==
6
Conclusion
This study aimed at investigating the test­retest reliability of auditory­evoked responses
with functional Near­Infrared Spectroscopy. This paper supplements previous fNIRS test­
retest reliability research which showed fNIRS was more reliable at the group level. In the
auditory field, Wiggins et al. 2016 demonstrated a poor to fair reliability of fNIRS re­
sponses at the individual level [8], even if some participants showed a good test­retest
reliability. The data collection was been conducted over participants of all ages, and with­
out benefiting from short channel separation. This new promising method has the poten­
tial to improve fNIRS sensitivity and specificity by collecting only physiological noise such
as heartbeat, respiration in order to remove this physiological confounds from relevant
data [11]. Here, fourteen participants chosen to be young and normal hearing have been
tested twice with one week interval between sessions. Short channels have been used
to collect physiological noise apart and to help achieving a better reliability. Individual
parameters which could influence data quality and reliability have been recorded through
a questionnaire. Three kind of stimuli were presented to the participants during data col­
lection : speech, music and ICRA noise. The latter was played at two sound pressure
levels. The display procedure was inspired by the one followed by Weder et al [4]. Weder
showed cortical activation was correlated to the sound intensity at which the ICRA noise
was displayed [4]. Results were expected to be more reliable at the individual level on
the first hand, and to be in accordance with previous fNIRS studies on the second hand.
The outcome of this investigation did not meet perfectly these expectations. First, short
channel data quality was too poor to conduct a short channel regression on data from all
subjects in both sessions. Secondly, the test­retest reliability at the individual level was in
accordance with Wiggins’ conclusion, namely ”highly variable”. The correlation between
cortical activation time course was excellent for one participant and fair to good for most
of them. The amplitude of the auditory­evoked response also fluctuated across individ­
uals. Nevertheless, questionnaire results gave valuable data. The hair of participants
influenced the achieved data quality. Short and light hair advantaged more data quality
than thick and long dark hair. Furthermore, a better reliability was reached for participants
who had similar mood.
Despite missing channels and the fact that short separation could not be applied to all
the data, a comparison could be done with Weder’s results and revealed similarities and
differences. No significant higher activation was reached with the ICRA noise presented at
65 dB. There is also a resemblance between hemodynamic response functions averaged
at the group level, but for half the regions of interest only. Furthermore, not any significant
lateralization was proven, unlike what was hypothesized for speech and music stimuli.
Not all the three kinds of stimuli gave the same results. In particular, music and speech
stimuli significantly elicited higher cortical activation than ICRA noise. These two con­
ditions demonstrated a better correlation.
Although the decrease in amplitude of the
speech­evoked response was not significant when averaged over the hemispheres, a
doubt remains about a decrease for channels located in Broca’s area. More easily re­
membered than ICRA noise, speech sample might be less stimulating the participant
when they got used to it. Moreover, participants’ feedback attests they enjoyed more the
stimuli during the first session. Such an effect of novelty can impact the reproducibility of
the measurements.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
41
==PAGE:50==
Data from short channel had sufficient quality mainly when the corresponding short chan­
nel detectors were positioned close to the forehead. It would be interesting to conduct
such a study with infants, who have less hair, which can lead to a better data quality, and
potentially a better test­retest reliability at the individual level. Indeed, the use fNIRS for
auditory clinical purposes is particularly relevant for infants.
In summary, this study showed a high variability in test­retest reliability of measured corti­
cal activation at the individual level. Data from participants with consistent mood tend to be
more reliable. This study has also proven the measurement of auditory­evoked responses
with fNIRS to be well reproducible in terms of data quality for long channels. However,
short channel measurement revealed a poor reproducibility and a poor data quality. Short
separation could be performed in both sessions with half the data, otherwise, the data pro­
cessing did not include short separation. Individual test­retest reliability was not proven to
be better for participants whose data was processed with short separation. Furthermore,
cortical activation was significantly higher in response to speech and music than to ICRA
noise. Results do not show strong consistency with Weder’s HRF curves: no significant
effect of sound intensity nor perfect resemblance in HRF times courses. Moreover, test­
retest reliability at the group level was not as good as what previous fNIRS test­retest
research demonstrated.
42
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
G. J. Basura, X.­S. Hu, J. S. Juan, A.­M. Tessier, and I. Kovelman, “Human central
auditory plasticity: A review of functional near­infrared spectroscopy (fnirs) to mea­
sure cochlear implant performance and tinnitus perception,” eng, Laryngoscope In­
vestigative Otolaryngology, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 463–472, 2018. DOI: 10.1002/lio2.185.
[2]
G. Bauernfeind, S. Haumann, and T. Lenarz, “Fnirs for future use in auditory diag­
nostics,” Current Directions in Biomedical Engineering, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 229–232,
2016. DOI: 10.1515/cdbme-2016-0051.
[3]
G. Bauernfeind, S. C. Wriessnegger, S. Haumann, and T. Lenarz, “Cortical activa­
tion patterns to spatially presented pure tone stimuli with different intensities mea­
sured by functional near­infrared spectroscopy,” Human Brain Mapping, vol. 39,
no. 7, pp. 2710–2724, 2018. DOI: 10.1002/hbm.24034.
[4]
S. Weder, X. Zhou, M. Shoushtarian, H. Innes­Brown, and C. McKay, “Cortical
processing related to intensity of a modulated noise stimulus—a functional near­
infrared study,” Jaro ­ Journal of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology,
vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 273–286, 2018. DOI: 10.1007/s10162-018-0661-0.
[5]
S. Weder, M. Shoushtarian, V. Olivares, X. Zhou, H. Innes­Brown, and C. McKay,
“Cortical fnirs responses can be better explained by loudness percept than sound
intensity,” Ear & Hearing, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1187–1195, 2020. DOI: 10.1097/AUD.
0000000000000836.
[6]
R. J. Lawrence, I. M. Wiggins, C. A. Anderson, J. Davies­Thompson, and D. E.
Hartley, “Cortical correlates of speech intelligibility measured using functional near­
infrared spectroscopy (fnirs),” eng, Hearing Research, vol. 370, pp. 53–64, 2018.
DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2018.09.005.
[7]
R. J. Lawrence, I. M. Wiggins, J. C. Hodgson, and D. E. Hartley, “Evaluating corti­
cal responses to speech in children: A functional near­infrared spectroscopy (fnirs)
study,” Hearing Research, vol. 401, p. 108 155, 2021. DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2020.
108155.
[8]
I. M. Wiggins, C. A. Anderson, P. T. Kitterick, and D. E. Hartley, “Speech­evoked
activation in adult temporal cortex measured using functional near­infrared spec­
troscopy (fnirs): Are the measurements reliable?” Hearing Research, vol. 339, pp. 142–
154, 2016. DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2016.07.007.
[9]
M. A. Yucel, A. v. Luhmann, F. Scholkmann, J. Gervain, I. Dan, H. Ayaz, D. Boas,
R. J. Cooper, J. Culver, C. E. Elwell, A. Eggebrecht, M. A. Franceschini, C. Grova,
F. Homae, F. Lesage, H. Obrig, I. Tachtsidis, S. Tak, Y. Tong, A. Toricelli, H. Wabnitz,
and M. Wolf, “Best practices for fnirs publications,” Neurophotonics, vol. 8, no. 1,
p. 012 101, 2021. DOI: 10.1117/1.NPh.8.1.012101.
[10]
P. Pinti, F. Scholkmann, A. Hamilton, P. Burgess, and I. Tachtsidis, “Current status
and issues regarding pre­processing of fnirs neuroimaging data: An investigation of
diverse signal filtering methods within a general linear model framework,” Frontiers
in Human Neurosciences, vol. 12, no. 505, 2019. DOI: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00505.
[11]
H. Santosa, X. Zhai, F. Fishburn, P. J. Sparto, and T. J. Huppert, “Quantitative com­
parison of correction techniques for removing systemic physiological signal in func­
tional near­infrared spectroscopy studies,” Neurophotonics, vol. 7, no. 3, p. 035 009,
2020. DOI: 10.1117/1.NPh.7.3.035009.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
43
==PAGE:52==
[12]
A. Blasi, S. Lloyd­Fox, M. H. Johnson, and C. Elwell, “Test­retest reliability of func­
tional near infrared spectroscopy in infants,” eng, Neurophotonics, vol. 1, no. 2,
14014RRR, 2014. DOI: 10.1117/1.NPh.1.2.025005.
[13]
M. M. Plichta, M. J. Herrmann, C. G. Baehne, A. C. Ehlis, M. M. Richter, P. Pauli,
and A. J. Fallgatter, “Event­related functional near­infrared spectroscopy (fnirs): Are
the measurements reliable?” eng, Neuroimage, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 116–124, 2006.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.12.008.
[14]
Y. Huang, M. Mao, Z. Zhang, H. Zhou, Y. Zhao, L. Duan, U. Kreplin, X. Xiao, and C.
Zhu, “Test­retest reliability of the prefrontal response to affective pictures based on
functional near­infrared spectroscopy,” eng, Journal of Biomedical Optics, vol. 22,
no. 1, p. 016 011, 2017. DOI: 10.1117/1.JBO.22.1.016011.
[15]
R. Luke, E. Larson, M. J. Shader, H. Innes­Brown, L. Van Yper, A. K. C. Lee, P. F.
Sowman, and D. McAlpine, “Analysis methods for measuring passive auditory fnirs
responses generated by a block­design paradigm,” eng, Neurophotonics, vol. 8,
no. 2, p. 025 008, 2021. DOI: 10.1117/1.NPh.8.2.025008.
[16]
Y. Kakimoto, Y. Nishimura, N. Hara, M. Okada, H. Tanii, and Y. Okazaki, “Intrasub­
ject reproducibility of prefrontal cortex activities during a verbal fluency task over
two repeated sessions using multi￿channel near￿infrared spectroscopy,” Psychi­
atry and Clinical Neurosciences, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 491–499, 2009. DOI: 10.1111/j.
1440-1819.2009.01988.x,10.1111/j.1440-1819.2009.01988.x.
[17]
M. Tervaniemi and K. Hugdahl, “Lateralization of auditory­cortex functions,” eng,
Brain Research Reviews, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 231–246, 2003. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j .
brainresrev.2003.08.004.
[18]
A. Torricelli, D. Contini, A. Pifferi, M. Caffini, R. Re, L. Zucchelli, and L. Spinelli, “Time
domain functional nirs imaging for human brain mapping,” eng, Neuroimage, vol. 85,
no. Part 1, Sp. Iss. SI, pp. 28–50, 2014. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.106.
[19]
F. Scholkmann, S. Kleiser, A. J. Metz, R. Zimmermann, J. Mata Pavia, U. Wolf, and
M. Wolf, “A review on continuous wave functional near­infrared spectroscopy and
imaging instrumentation and methodology,” eng, Neuroimage, vol. 85, no. Part 1,
Sp. Iss. SI, pp. 6–27, 2014. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.004.
[20]
Y. Hoshi, “Hemodynamic signals in fnirs,” eng, Progress in Brain Research, vol. 225,
Y. K. Masamoto K Hirase H, Ed., pp. 153–179, 2016. DOI: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2016.03.
004.
[21]
“Extracted from the course introduction 22511 presentation,” eng, Biomedical optics
course, DTU, 2020.
[22]
A. Matas, M. G. Sowa, G. Taylor, and H. H. Mantsch, “Melanin as a confounding
factor in near infrared spectroscopy of skin,” eng, Vibrational Spectroscopy, vol. 28,
no. 1, p. 839, 2002. DOI: 10.1016/S0924-2031(01)00144-8.
[23]
NIRX Systemsfunctional near­infrared spectroscopy (fnirs), https://nirx.net/fnirs-
and-nirx/, Accessed: 2021­02­11.
[24]
T. J. Huppert, S. G. Diamond, M. A. Franceschini, and D. A. Boas, “Homer: A review
of time­series analysis methods for near­infrared spectroscopy of the brain,” eng,
Applied Optics, vol. 48, no. 10, pp. D280–D298, 2009. DOI: 10.1364/AO.48.00D280.
[25]
T. J. Huppert, Commentary on the statistical properties of noise and its implication
on general linear models in functional near­infrared spectroscopy, 2016. DOI: 10.
1117/1.NPh.3.1.010401.
[26]
L. Pollonini, H. Bortfeld, and J. S. Oghalai, “Phoebe: A method for real time mapping
of optodes­scalp coupling in functional nearinfrared spectroscopy,” eng, Biomedical
Optics Express, vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 5104–5119, 2016. DOI: 10.1364/BOE.7.005104.
44
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:53==
[27]
T. B. Fitzpatrick, “Soleil et peau,” Journal de Médecine Esthétique, no. 2, pp. 33–34,
1975.
[28]
L. Schock, M. Dyck, L. R. Demenescu, J. C. Edgar, I. Hertrich, W. Sturm, and K.
Mathiak, “Mood modulates auditory laterality of hemodynamic mismatch responses
during dichotic listening,” eng, Plos One, vol. 7, no. 2, C. Alain, Ed., e31936, 2012.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031936.
[29]
A. Sargent, J. Watson, Y. Topoglu, H. Ye, R. Suri, and H. Ayaz, “Impact of tea and
coffee consumption on cognitive performance: An fnirs and eda study,” eng, Applied
Sciences (switzerland), vol. 10, no. 7, p. 2390, 2020. DOI: 10.3390/app10072390.
[30]
W. A. Dreschler, H. Verschuure, C. Ludvigsen, and S. Westermann, “Icra noises:
Artificial noise signals with speech­like spectral and temporal properties for hear­
ing instrument assessment,” eng, International Journal of Audiology, vol. 40, no. 3,
pp. 148–157, 2001. DOI: 10.3109/00206090109073110.
[31]
H. Santosa, X. Zhai, F. Fishburn, and T. Huppert, “The nirs brain analyzir toolbox,”
eng, Algorithms, vol. 11, no. 5, p. 73, 2018. DOI: 10.3390/A11050073.
[32]
S. L. Jacques, “Optical properties of biological tissues: A review,” eng, Physics in
Medicine and Biology, vol. 58, no. 11, R37–R61, 2013. DOI: 10.1088/0031-9155/
58/11/R37.
[33]
MatWorks correlation coefficient function description, https://fr.mathworks.com/
help/matlab/ref/corrcoef.html, Accessed: 2021­06­03.
[34]
S. Dravida, J. A. Noah, X. Zhang, and J. Hirsch, “Comparison of oxyhemoglobin and
deoxyhemoglobin signal reliability with and without global mean removal for digit
manipulation motor tasks,” eng, Neurophotonics, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 011 006, 2018.
DOI: 10.1117/1.NPh.5.1.011006.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:55==
A
Appendix
A.1
Questionnaire
Figure A.1: The Fitzpatrick scale [27] : information provided to the participant to determine
their skin tone
A.2
Technical properties of the light emitted by NIRX device
Wavelength
785 nm
830 nm
Modulation Frequency
1500 Hz
1000 Hz
Modulation Amplitude
0.5 V
0.5 V
Modulation Threshold
0.37 V
0.18 V
Modulation Waveform
Sine
Sine
Table A.1: Properties of the light emitted
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
47
==PAGE:56==
A.3
Coordinates of sources and detectors in the montage
and corresponding channels and cortical areas
Left side
Right side
Source
Label
Coordinates (mm)
Detector
Label
Coordinates (mm)
S01
AF7
(­54.5, 68.8, ­18.3)
D01
F7
(­70.5, 42.9, ­19.3)
S02
F5
(­65.0, 49.6, 10.2)
D02
FFT7h
(­74.6, 31.7, ­1.9)
S03
FT7
(­79.2, 13.8, ­18.2)
D03
FC5
(­77.4, 19.0, 18.9)
S04
FTT7h
(­82.6, 0.7, 2.4)
D04
FCC5h
(­76.8, 4.6, 41.2)
S05
C5
(­84.1, ­13.8, 24.8)
D05
FTT9h
(­82.0, ­2.5, ­37.6)
S06
CCP5h
(­81.4, ­30.3, 47.2)
D06
T7
(­84.8, ­16.2, ­16.3)
S07
TP7
(­84.1, ­46.4, ­12.9)
D07
TTP7h
(­86.3, ­31.2, 5.6)
S08
TPP7h
(­78.9, ­62.4, 8.7)
D08
CP5
(­82.5, ­47.3, 27.8)
S09
F8
(70.1, 43.8, ­18.5)
D09
AF8
(54.0, 69.1, ­17.6)
S10
FFT8h
(74.2, 32.9, ­1.2)
D10
F6
(64.4, 50.4, 10.8)
S11
FC6
(77.2, 20.4, 19.5)
D11
FT8
(78.9, 15.2, ­17.4)
S12
FCC6h
(76.1, 6.2, 41.8)
D12
FTT8h
(82.3, 2.5, 3.3)
S13
FTT10h
(82.0, ­0.7, ­37.0)
D13
C6
(83.7, ­11.8, 25.5)
S14
T8
(84.6, ­14.2, ­15.6)
D14
CCP6h
(81.1, ­28.6, 48.0)
S15
TTP8h
(85.9, ­29.4, 6.6)
D15
TP8
(84.5, ­45.1, ­12.3)
S16
CP6
(82.8, ­46, 28.5)
D16
TPP8h
(79.3, ­61.2, 9.4)
Table A.2: Coordinates of sources and detectors
Left side
Right side
Name
Optodes
Anatomical area
Name
Optodes
Anatomical area
1L
S1­D1
inferior frontal gyrus,
pars orbitalis
1R
S9­D9
inferior frontal gyrus,
pars orbitalis
2L
S2­D1
inferior frontal gyrus,
pars triangularis
2R
S9­D10
inferior frontal gyrus,
pars triangularis
3L
S2­D3
inferior frontal gyrus,
pars triangularis
3R
S11­D10
inferior frontal gyrus,
pars triangularis
4L
S3­D1
temporal pole
4R
S9­D11
temporal pole
5L
S3­D3
S4­D2
inferior frontal gyrus,
pars opercularis
5R
S10­D12
S11­D11
rolandic operculum
6L
S3­D6
S4­D5
middle temporal gyrus
6R
S13­D12
S14­D11
middle temporal gyrus
7L
S4­D4
S5­D3
postcentral gyrus
7R
S11­D13
S12­D12
postcentral gyrus
8L
S4­D7
S5­D6
superior temporal gyrus
8R
S14­D13
S15­D12
superior temporal gyrus
9L
S7­D6
middle temporal gyrus
9R
S14­D15
middle temporal gyrus
10L
S6­D4
supramarginal gyrus
10R
S12­D14
supramarginal gyrus
11L
S5­D8
S6­D7
supramarginal gyrus
11R
S15­D14
S16­D13
supramarginal gyrus
12L
S7­D8
S8­D7
superior temporal gyrus
12R
S15­D16
S16­D15
superior temporal gyrus
Table A.3: Channel’s name, corresponding optodes and anatomical areas
48
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:57==
A.4
Wave forms, Fourier Transforms and STFTs of the stimuli
(a) Wave form _ ICRA
(b) Wave form _ Speech
(c) Wave form _ Music
Figure A.2: Wave forms of the stimuli
(a) FFT _ ICRA
(b) FFT _ Speech
(c) FFT _ Music
Figure A.3: Fourier transforms of the stimuli
(a) STFT _ ICRA
(b) STFT _ Speech
(c) STFT _ Music
Figure A.4: Short Time Fourier transforms of the stimuli
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
49
==PAGE:58==
A.5
Background noise measurement results
(a) Background noise with everything off (light, loudspeaker, NirScout)
(b) Background noise with NirScout on but not recording
(c) Background noise with NirScout recording
Figure A.5: Background noise measurement results
50
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:59==
A.6
Matlab code used in data processing
A.6.1
For checking signal quality and reject bad quality channels
1
% parameters for SCI
2
stimdur = 18; %the stimulus duration
3
silence = 20; %shorter that real silence (between 25-30s)
4
prestim = 5;
5
poststim = stimdur + silence;
6
jobSCI = [];
7
jobSCI = nirsGUI.modules.ScalpCouplingIndex(jobSCI);
8
jobSCI.HighCutOffFrequency = 0.75; %high pass filter , 0.75 = 45bpm
9
jobSCI.LowCutOffFrequency = 1.95; %low pass filter , 1.95 = 175bpm
10
jobSCI.HighFilterOrder = 8; %default value
11
jobSCI.LowFilterOrder = 8; %default value
12
jobSCI.Threshold = 0.75; %correlation threshold
13
jobSCI.Remove = true;
14
jobSCI.PreStimTime = prestim;
15
jobSCI.PostStimTime = poststim;
16
Data_with_SCI = jobSCI.run(raw);
17
raw=Data_with_SCI; %data with bad channels removed
Listing A.1: SCI calculation
A.6.2
Process pipeline
1
stim_dur = [stimdur stimdur]; %array with duration of each condition
2
raw = nirs.design.change_stimulus_duration(raw, [], stim_dur);
3
ren=nirs.modules.RenameStims();
4
ren.listOfChanges={'channel_1', 'Music 65 dB';
5
'channel_2','Speech 65 dB';
6
'channel_3','ICRA 65 dB';
7
'channel_4','ICRA 40 dB'};
8
raw=ren.run(raw);
Listing A.2: set stimulus properties
1
jobs=nirs.modules.OpticalDensity();
2
jobs=nirs.modules.BeerLambertLaw(jobs);
3
hb=jobs.run(raw);
Listing A.3: conversion to hemodynamic data
1
LP = nirsGUI.modules.LowPassFilter();
2
LP.CutOffFrequency = 0.5;
3
hb_clean = LP.run(hb);
Listing A.4: low­pass filtering
A.6.3
for analysis data
1
%% ANALYSIS - GLM with FIR deconvolution
2
% First create the basis set object
3
base = nirs.design.basis.FIR;
4
base.isIRF=true;
5
base.binwidth=3;
6
base.nbins= 24;
7
% Rename Stimulus before calculation if not GLM cannot be correctly performed
8
ren=nirs.modules.RenameStims();
9
ren.listOfChanges={'Music 65 dB', 'channel_1';
10
'Speech 65 dB','channel_2';
11
'ICRA 65 dB','channel_3';
12
'ICRA 40 dB','channel_4'};
13
hb_clean=ren.run(hb_clean);
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
51
==PAGE:60==
14
% GLM
15
job = nirs.modules.GLM();
16
job.AddShortSepRegressors =true; % if some SS channels remains , otherwise '
false'
17
job.type = 'AR-IRLS';
18
job.basis('default') = base; %
19
result = job.run(hb_clean);
20
HRF
= result.HRF;
Listing A.5: GLM analysis
A.7
Questionnaire results
A.7.1
Mood details
(a) before first session
(b) before second session
Figure A.6: Feeling of the participants just before the measurements
52
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:61==
Subject
Mood description
Other comments
P001
I have a headache
P002
I’m feeling good, it’s a pretty good day
and sun is shinning !
P003
I’m happy today!
Long day of work
P004
Chill
P005
Tired, enthusiastic, fine
P006
Tired during the morning, then feeling reactivated
in the afternoon after a nap in the noon !
P007
Happy, Calm and relax, and a bit tired
P008
Happy overall, busy, a little tired
P009
Happy, a bit tired, excited
A slight headache
P010
Relaxed, happy
P011
A small headache, A bit stressed by class
and assignment but rested after a nice WE
P012
I’m in a good mood today,
I’m however a little bit tired
P013
motivated, energetic
P014
Relaxed
Table A.4: Mood precision written by the participants before first session
Subject
Mood description
What’s different from last week
P001
A bit sleppy but ok
Less headache, more rested
P002
I am in good shape, well awaken
Same except that I came by bicycle
(I came by bus last week)
P003
Tired
It’s pretty much the same
P004
Fine
Same
P005
Hungry, a bit tired, focus
Less tired; less enthusiastic
P006
Sleeped well yesterday
More or less the same
P007
Tired, stressed
Less tired and sleepy
P008
Happy, a little stressed
A little bit more tired but nothing note­worthy
P009
Happy, relaxed
A bit less excited and more relaxed
P010
Calm, tired
I am more tired
P011
Tired, stressed, doubtful
I feel globally the same
P012
I am a little tired and stressed
I think I feel a little bit more stressed than last week
P013
Calm
More or less the same
P014
Relaxed
Exactly the same
Table A.5: Mood precision written by the participants before second session
nb : None of the participants wrote other comments
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
53
==PAGE:62==
A.7.2
Participants’ first reaction after the measurements
Subject
After first session
After second session
P001
hard
it was ok
P002
It was fun, maybe a bit hard to focus
More difficult to concentrate, due to repetition
P003
It was okay!
I was a bit tired but it was okay
P004
I’m tired
Good
P005
Repetitive
Happy
P006
Completely new, curious
Very familiar
P007
Pretty relax, repetitive
Calm and interesting
P008
Interesting ­ and a bit sleep­inducing
Repetitive, but interesting
P009
Interesting!
Easier than last time­ more relaxing.
P010
Relaxing
Relaxing
P011
Interesting
Easy pizy
P012
It was fun to experience!
It was nice and didn’t require much effort!
P013
relaxed
It felt shorter than the first one
P014
Ok !
Ok :)
Table A.6: First reaction written by the participants after the measurements
A.7.3
How second measurement was different from the first one
according to the participants
Subject
Explanation
P001
Less headache
P002
Because of the repetition and I’ve already heard that noises,
it was more difficult to focus
P003
I knew what was going to happen
P004
I was more awake
P005
None
P006
The sounds were more familiar, and feel more bored with listening the speech.
However I fell like I spent less mental resource to focus on the stimuli
P007
The expectations were different
P008
More repetitive and thus a little easier to feel tired
P009
I was less tired and I knew what would happen.
P010
I was more sleepy
P011
I feel it was shorter and easier to focus
P012
I already knew how it worked, so I knew what to expect
P013
I felt more comfortable since I knew already what was going to happen
P014
A little less ‘emotional’ reaction to the sounds, but also a bit more focus
(certainly towards the end of each session)
Table A.7: How second measurement was different from the first one according to the
participants
54
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:63==
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
55
==PAGE:64==
A.8
Hemodynamic response functions : results at the individual level
A.8.1
Example of P007, data per channel
Figure A.7: HRF of ROI 1 channels for participant P007
56
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.8: HRF of ROI 2 channels for participant P007
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.9: HRF of ROI 3 channels for participant P007
58
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.10: HRF of ROI 4 channels for participant P007
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
59
==PAGE:68==
A.8.2
Individual results of HRF averaged over ROI
Figure A.11: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P001
60
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.12: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P002
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.13: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P003
62
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:71==
Figure A.14: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P004
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.15: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P005
64
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.16: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P006
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.17: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P008
66
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:75==
Figure A.18: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P009
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
67
==PAGE:76==
Figure A.19: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P010
68
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:77==
Figure A.20: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P011
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure A.21: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P012
70
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.22: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P013
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
71
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.23: HRF averaged over ROI for participant P014
72
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:81==
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
73
==PAGE:82==
A.9
Group results of HRF averaged over ROI
A.9.1
HRF averaged over all participants with short separation channels, ROI level
Figure A.24: HRF averaged over all participants with short separation channels ­ ROI level. Legend: lines correspond to first session, dashed
ones to second session ; each color color corresponds to a condition: green ­ ”Speech 65 dB”, brown ­ ”Music 65 dB”, black ­ ”ICRA 65 dB”,
blue ­ ”ICRA 40 dB”.
74
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:83==
A.9.2
HRF averaged over all participants, channel level
Figure A.25: HRF averaged over all participants ­ channel level, ROI1
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure A.26: HRF averaged over all participants ­ channel level, ROI2
76
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:85==
Figure A.27: HRF averaged over all participants ­ channel level, ROI3
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.28: HRF averaged over all participants ­ channel level, ROI4
78
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:87==
A.9.3
HRF averaged over all participants with short separation channels, channel level
Figure A.29: HRF averaged over all participants with short separation channels ­ channel level, ROI1
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure A.30: HRF averaged over all participants with short separation channels ­ channel level, ROI2
80
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:89==
Figure A.31: HRF averaged over all participants with short separation channels ­ channel level, ROI3
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure A.32: HRF averaged over all participants with short separation channels ­ channel level, ROI4
82
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:91==
A.9.4
Distribution of HRF over channels
Figure A.33: HRF averaged over all subjects with standard deviation ­ ROI 1 ­ Session 2
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure A.34: HRF averaged over all subjects with standard deviation ­ ROI 2 ­ Session 1
84
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:93==
Figure A.35: HRF averaged over all subjects with standard deviation ­ ROI 2 ­ Session 2
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
85
==PAGE:94==
Figure A.36: HRF averaged over all subjects with standard deviation ­ ROI 3 ­ Session 1
86
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:95==
Figure A.37: HRF averaged over all subjects with standard deviation ­ ROI 3 ­ Session 2
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure A.38: HRF averaged over all subjects with standard deviation ­ ROI 4 ­ Session 1
88
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:97==
Figure A.39: HRF averaged over all subjects with standard deviation ­ ROI 4 ­ Session 2
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
89
==PAGE:98==
A.10
Correlation results
Figure A.40: Linear correlation results per participant and per ROI
90
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:99==
A.11
HRF amplitude variation results
A.11.1
per subject
Figure A.41: Ratio between HRF amplitudes (HbR) of the two sessions, per condition
and subject. The ratio r is defined by r = A2/A1, with A1 and A2 being respectively the
amplitudes of the HRF of the first and the second session, for a given participant, channel
and condition.
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
91
==PAGE:100==
A.11.2
per channel
(a) Channel 1
(b) Channel 2
(c) Channel 3
(d) Channel 4
(e) Channel 5
(f) Channel 6
Figure A.42: Mean HRF amplitudes with standard deviation averaged over participants,
per condition, session and channel (channel 1 to 6).
92
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
==PAGE:101==
(a) Channel 7
(b) Channel 8
(c) Channel 9
(d) Channel 10
(e) Channel 11
(f) Channel 12
Figure A.43: Mean HRF amplitudes with standard deviation averaged over participants,
per condition, session and channel (channel 7 to 12).
Measuring human hearing with functional near­infrared spectroscopy
93
==PAGE:102==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
