==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
Collection system optimization for hybrid power plants 
 
 
Claudia Maria Roselló Abad 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0480 
July 2021 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Claudia Maria Roselló Abad 
Title: Collection system optimization for hybrid power plants 
 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0480 
July 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
February – July 2021 
 
ECTS: 30 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisors: 
 
Katherine Dykes 
Kaushik Das 
Nicolaos Antonio Cutululis 
Juan-Andrés Pérez-Rúa 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Long has it been voiced by experts from the energy industry that the major
challenge for the expansive deployment of renewable energies is their intrinsic in-
termittency. The concept of Hybrid Power Plants (HPPs) emerges as a promising
alternative as it allows smoothing of fluctuations due to the complementary effects
of the technologies. So far, studies have mainly focused on sizing and operation
of HPPs. There is thus a further need to investigate the electrical infrastructure
and notably its optimization through the use of mathematical models.
In that setting, the present project addresses the design of the optimal electrical
collection system of a HPP which integrates onshore wind and solar photovoltaic
(PV), in order to save costs while increasing the electrical infrastructure uti-
lization. For this purpose, an optimization model is built and solved using the
Branch-and-Cut solver implemented in IBM ILOG CPLEX, in Python.
By means of this thesis it is proven that designing a shared electrical infras-
tructure for the two generation technologies leads to significant savings both in
terms of investment cables cost and cost associated to curtailed energy. The ex-
tracted results reveal that the implementation of the proposed solution, increases
the economic profitability by 20.26%. Moreover, unlike what has been carried
out up to the present for the cables dimensioning, consisting of assuming nominal
power operation of the generators throughout the HPP’s lifetime, the use of more
realistic power values that reflect the negative correlation of the renewable energy
sources (RES) leads to an increase of economic profitability of 39.46%.
Overall, it is foreseen the present study to be of crucial interest for broader
and more inclusive models targeting the design of the collection system of HPPs,
due to the aforementioned higher profitability. The application of the model to
real-life problems is expected to have a significant impact, thus triggering the
deployment of HPPs.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the department of Wind Energy at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a
Master degree in Sustainable Energy.
Copenhagen, July 16, 2021
Claudia María Roselló Abad (s192491)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervi-
sor Juan-Andrés Pérez Rúa, for his invaluable help, involvement and guidance
throughout the entire project. I would also like to thank my supervisors Kather-
ine Dykes and Kaushik Das for providing support and useful suggestions and
for giving me the opportunity to develop this project. I must also thank Carlos
Roldán Blay, my supervisor at UPV for his support and for being a big inspira-
tion all these years.
I want to deeply thank my friends, especially David, Marina, Madeleine, Laura
and Albert, for being my pillars and the greatest sources of joy during this jour-
ney. For standing by my side, motivating and supporting me all this time.
Thanks to DTU and my home university UPV for allowing me to grow personally
and professionally and get to where I am now.
Finally, I wish to show my appreciation to my family, my Mom, my Dad, Blanca,
Carlos and Miguel, who have always been there for me, and for their inconditional
love and encouragement.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
List of Figures
ix
List of Tables
xi
Abbreviations
xiii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Problem definition, assumptions and limitations . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature Review
7
2.1
Background on Hybrid Power Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Advantages and Functionalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Market Opportunities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Power electronics topologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Large scale photovoltaic power plants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.6
Large scale wind farms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Definition of model inputs
23
3.1
Generation technologies specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
HPP configuration design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Energy conversion and transmission equipment specifications
. . .
34
3.4
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Collection System Design
41
4.1
Problem description
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.2
Graph and model representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
4.3
MILP Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5
Results and Discussion
49
5.1
Test 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Test 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Test 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6
Conclusions and Future work
63
6.1
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2
Recommendations for Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
Bibliography
65
Appendix
69
Test 2 - Additional plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
Test 3 - Additional plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
List of Figures
x
1.1
Global power investment by generation source [4].
. . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Impact on levelised cost of electricity for newly commissioned renewable
power capacity [4]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
HPP collection system design and optimization: Decision flowchart.
.
5
2.1
Types of HPPS in terms of integration and operation of different gen-
erating modules.[11]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Configurations for: I. Co-Located HPP. II. WTG-coupled system inte-
gration. III. DC-coupled HPP for HVAC connection. IV. DC-coupled
HPP for HVDC connection [12].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
Foreseen benefits of wind-solar HPPs [11]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4
Grid-connected hybrid system [13] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.5
Comparison of market available PV inverter topologies for LS-PVPPs
[14]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
Connection of transformers at medium voltage. (a) Central PV inverter
with three winding transformer and (b) multistring PV inverter with
two winding transformer [14]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.7
PV inverter topologies. (a) Central, (b) string, (c) multistring, and (d)
module integrated [14]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1
Inputs for the Optimization problem. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Internal PV system setup. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
HPP layout 2 including 20 WTs and 3 PV systems. . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
HPP layout 3 including 20 WTs and 8 PV systems. . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
Procedure for establishing the set of Tests to be evaluated for the opti-
mization.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.6
Configuration with individual step-up transformer per energy source. .
31
3.7
Configuration with shared step-up transformer for both energy sources. 32
3.8
One year solar and wind time series normalized for 20 WTs and 1 PV
system.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
==PAGE:12==
x
List of Figures
3.9
One year solar and wind time series normalized for 20 WTs and 3 PV
systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.10 One year solar and wind time series normalized for 20 WTs and 8 PV
systems. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.11 Cables cost coeﬀicients.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.1
Collection system Optimization process: flow diagram. . . . . . . . . .
43
5.1
Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 0 to Test 1. .
51
5.2
Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 1 to Test 1. .
51
5.3
Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 2 to Test 1. .
52
5.4
Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 3 to Test 1. .
52
5.5
Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 0 to Test 3. .
55
5.6
Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 1 to Test 3. .
55
5.7
Optimal collection system layout for the base case of Test 3. . . . . . .
56
5.8
Optimal collection system layout for the base case of Test 3 layout when
forcing PV systems to be connected in series. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.9
Top: Time-series of power generated by 8 WTs over 1 week. Middle:
Time-series of power generated by 3 PV systems over 1 week. Bottom:
Power flow through cable 0-8 connecting 8 WTs and 3 PV systems over
1 week (3600 hour to 3800 hours. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.10 Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 1 to Test 3
with an electricity price of 100AC/MWh. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.11 Optimal collection system layout when testing an electricity price of
100AC/MWh in the Base Case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
1
Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 0 to Test 2. .
69
2
Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 1 to Test 2. .
70
3
Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 2 to Test 2. .
70
4
Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 3 to Test 2. .
71
5
Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 2 to Test 3. .
72
6
Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 3 to Test 3. .
73
==PAGE:13==
List of Tables
List of Tables
xi
3.1
Technical characteristics of installed wind turbines. . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
Technical characteristics of installed PV modules. . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3
Considerations for design of WTs layout. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.4
Internal PV system considerations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Basic information on the real-world cables used for the HPP collection
system.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.6
Capacities of cables used in the project. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.1
Optimal solution results for Test 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
Optimal solution results for Test 2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.3
Optimal solution results for Test 3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.4
Overview of results obtained from the evaluation of Test 6.
. . . . . .
58
==PAGE:14==
xii
==PAGE:15==
Abbreviations
AC
Alternating Current
a-Si
Amorphous Silicon
BoP
Balance-of Plant
BOS
Balance of System
CdTe
Cadmium Telluride
CIGS/CIS
Copper Indium (Gallium) Di-Selenide
c-Si
Crystalline silicon
DC
Direct Current
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
HPP
Hybrid Power Plant
HRES
Hybrid Renewable Energy Source
HV
High Voltage
kA
Kiloampere
kV
Kilovolt
kWh
Kilo Watt Hour
LCOE
Levelized Cost of Energy
LS-PVPP
Large Scale Photovoltaic Power Plant
MILP
Mixed Integer Linear Programming
mono-c-Si
Mono-Crystalline silicon
MPPT
Maximum Power Point Tracking
multi-c-Si
Multi-Crystalline silicon
MW
Mega Watt
==PAGE:16==
xiv
Abbreviations
MWh
Mega Watt Hour
MAC
Million euro
NPV
Net Present Value
PCC
Point of Common Coupling
PID
Potential Induced Degradation
PV
Photovoltaic
RES
Renewable Energy Source
TWh
Tera Watt Hour
USD
American Dollar
W
Watt
WT(s)
Wind Turbine(s)
5D
5 diameters
8D
8 diameters
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
For many years, fossil fuels have had a dominant deployment compared to renew-
able energy technologies in electric power systems. Nevertheless, this tendency
has changed considerably in recent times since renewables have gained maturity
and innovative solutions and technologies start delivering on the promise of a
clean energy future. This, in turn, has led to a reduction of wind and solar costs,
making them economically competitive against conventional power plants. As a
matter of fact, studies forecast that the fast ramping up of renewables will make
the share of solar photovoltaic (PV) and wind in the electricity mix reach a value
of 31% by 2050, displacing fossil fuels and diminishing considerably their contri-
bution to 17% [1]. In addition, the growing environmental concern and awareness
of governments and the population, together with global treaties and policies ([2],
[3]), have driven renewable energies to be the ever-increasing dominant choice for
new electricity generation systems. Of all renewable energy technologies, solar
and wind have proved to be the most competitive. For that reason, as illustrated
in Figure 1.1, they are the technologies in which it has been invested the most
[4]. Even if significant cost reductions in wind and solar PV have been reached
(Figure 1.2), these technologies are not free of inherent drawbacks. Variability,
uncertainty, low dispatchability, unavailability, unpredictability and low electric
grid reliability, are some of them. [5].
As a result, a discussion is currently open about the possibility of combining
different renewable sources, e.g., wind, solar photovoltaic, and potentially a stor-
age technology, to mitigate some of the problems mentioned above and to com-
pensate for the weaknesses of one with the strengths of another. This proposed
solution is known as Hybrid Power Plant (HPP) and there is a wide range of
arguments that supports its development. Some projects have even been recently
deployed, being the most famous the Kennedy Park in Australia, fruit of a joint
collaboration between Vestas and Winlab [6].
The present study focuses on hybrid power plants consisting of wind and so-
lar. When combining the latter technologies as a single power plant, it is shown
that numerous advantages can be attained, with respect to their independent
==PAGE:18==
2
1 Introduction
development. This may obey to the negative correlation they exhibit. Indeed,
this raises an intriguing question regarding the feasibility and cost-effectiveness
of proposing a shared electrical infrastructure for the two generation technologies,
rather than designing independent cable routings. The aim is to exploit the po-
tential derived from the geographical proximity and negative correlation of the
generation sources.
(a) Renewable power investment.
(b) Power generation investment.
Figure 1.1: Global power investment by generation source [4].
Figure 1.2: Impact on levelised cost of electricity for newly commissioned renew-
able power capacity [4].
==PAGE:19==
1.1 Motivation
3
Regarding the participation in energy markets, renewable energy sources (RES)
have encountered in general more hurdles to take part on them, as compared
to fossil fuels which have a stronger presence [5]. This is mainly a consequence
of their intrinsic variability and unpredictability. In that setting, HPPs can be
game-changers to ensure, in the coming future, a key place for renewables in en-
ergy markets and an ever more substantial share in the energy mix. The reason
behind the success of this energy generation alternative is its resemblance to con-
ventional power plants in terms of operation. Thus, allowing to provide ancillary
and other services to support the stability of the grid, as well as presenting a
higher dispatchability and reliability in a market characterized by time-varying
energy prices. This supposes a meaningful shift from old classic procedures as the
new operation mode consists of consistently producing power below the rated ca-
pacity, over dimensioning each technology and providing energy when demanded.
This subject opens up a new field of investigation that involves numerous subtopics:
analysis and selection of technologies to be combined, sizing of the plant, decision
on the overall topology, design of physical considerations, research of innovation
opportunities, and optimization of plant operation and control. Notably, the cou-
pling of the hybrid plant with the electrical system is of significant importance and
is considered as one of the most relevant subjects of study for ongoing research.
Hence, this Master Thesis focuses on the design and optimization of the electrical
infrastructure of HPPs and the combination and integration of Balance-of Plant
(BoP) elements.
It intends to provide an answer to the question formulated
above concerning the possibility of sharing electrical infrastructure, leaving aside
the traditional procedure carried up to the present.
The challenge of designing the cable routing network of the plant is of notable in-
terest because its cost, including both the cables and other electrical equipment,
presents the second most significant share in HPP budgets [7]. Consequently,
finding the optimal electrical network in terms of investment costs and curtailed
energy may provide great potential through performance of computational opti-
mization.
Nevertheless, since the current number of HPP projects under development or in
operation is limited, and the topic is fairly new, there is little literature on the
subject. This hinders access to existing specific data about the collection system
design of an HPP, which leads to several assumptions throughout the project.
==PAGE:20==
4
1 Introduction
1.2
Problem definition, assumptions and limitations
An optimisation program is proposed in this thesis where two generation technolo-
gies, namely wind and solar PV are integrated, presenting common cable routing
(also referred to as cable layout, collection layout or collection system). Addition-
ally, the concept of overplanting is deployed since the installed wind and solar
powers are higher than the grid rated capacity. Regarding the coupling between
the HPP and the grid, this is carried out through a unique substation and unique
connection point, referred to as Point of Common Coupling (PCC), from this
point forward. Two main drivers make this an attractive research subject. They
are as follows: the geographical proximity of PV modules with respect to the
WTs and the PCC, and the complementarity of wind and solar energy resources.
For the above-mentioned reasons, the purpose of installing independent collection
networks for each technology is questioned, as it leads to potential under usage
of cables, contrarily to what occurs when sharing electrical infrastructure, that
instead results in an utilisation factor increase.
The optimisation aims to find the collection network that results in lowest invest-
ment costs while minimising curtailment, due to operation of the HPP throughout
its lifetime. A mathematical optimisation model is built encompassing three types
of decision variables: investment (the design of the electrical system per se), flow
through the electrical system and curtailment in the generation units. Several
constraints related to, e.g., power flow capacities through cables, curtailment in
generation nodes, grid rated capacity and flow conservation are considered. The
goal of the project is to develop an optimisation tool that allows providing the
best electrical layout for a number of study cases where different parameters are
modified, i.e., number of WTs and PV systems installed, electricity price, grid
rated power and available cables. The extracted results are then compared to
determine which strategy provides a better NPV value. These strategies consist
of the clustering techniques applied to the power time-series data, used to reduce
the problem’s complexity (see Section 3.4.1). As it can be seen in Figure 1.3, the
selection of the clustering strategy directly affects the collection system design
and thus, the investment, flow and curtailment variables, as well as the optimal
solution value. Subsequently, the trade-offs between the degree of realism of the
clustering strategy and the best obtained solution can be assessed.
A flow diagram of the procedure conducted to develop the present project is
illustrated in Figure 1.3. It entails, in the first place, the determination of the
installed capacities of wind and solar PV, along with the number of turbines and
modules needed. Also, the establishment of the grid rated capacity, performed
by implementing the overplanting concept (further elaborated in Section 3.2.2).
==PAGE:21==
1.2 Problem definition, assumptions and limitations
5
This is followed by the integration and location of both technologies on the same
site, by taking into consideration technical constraints, e.g., spacing, voltage level,
and connection to inverters and transformers. Finally, the generated inputs, i.e.,
cables cost, electricity price and power time series, are introduced in the optimiza-
tion problem to calculate the optimal cable layout and its corresponding solution
value.
Set 
capacities 
of wind and 
solar [MW]
Calculate n º 
WTs 
(2.1MW/WT)
Calculate n º 
PV panels
Define PV 
panels 
layout
Define WTs 
layout
Spacing 
between 
WTs
8D in predominant 
wind direction
5D in perpendicular 
directions
Spacing 
between 
panels
Panel 
dimensions
Integrated layout
Calculate 
empty zone 
to avoid 
shadowing
Orientation of 
panels and 
wind
Define Internal 
PV plant 
configuration
Connection of 
inverters with panels 
and trafos
Voltage 
levels
Selection of 
inverters 
and trafos
Collection 
system design
Sí
Grid rated 
capacity
Cables 
cost 
Power time 
series Wind 
and Solar
Cost of 
electricity
Cable routing 
network 
Flow  through 
cables
Energy 
curtailment in 
generation nodes
Optimal solution 
value = Cost
Figure 1.3: HPP collection system design and optimization: Decision flowchart.
The limitations and main sources of uncertainty identified throughout the study
are identified, being mainly related to data collection, model choice and constraint
definition. On that basis, certain assumptions are made during the development
of the project in order to establish the boundaries of the research, and they are
outlined in the list below.
• The built collection system optimization model of HPP is developed based
on deterministic data.
• The HPP plant is assumed to be located in India.
• Infinite land availability is considered for the location of the generating
elements.
• The positions of the WTs and PV modules are determined by applying cer-
tain constraints, further explained in Section 3.2.1, but are not optimised.
• The power capacity or power rating of the HPP components are known.
==PAGE:22==
6
1 Introduction
• The average price of electricity in India and the discount rate are assumed
constant during the whole period.
• One-year power time series of wind and solar with hourly precision are used
in the problem and extrapolated for the entire lifetime of the HPP.
• Different clustering techniques, also referred to as strategies, are applied to
the power time-series data of wind and solar during the first stage of the
optimization process, which corresponds to the Investment problem, as it
is explained in detail in Section 3.4.1. In order to reduce the computational
time and complexity of the problem.
• Introduction of a constraint that allows the connection of each generation
node uniquely to the PCC and to its 5 or 15 nearest generation units,
depending on the study case.
• Assumption of a transportation power flow model.
• Power losses in cables are neglected in the problem formulation.
• Estimation of distance between each pair of nodes done by calculating the
Euclidean distance between them in 2D.
• Location of the PV systems on the downstream side of the WTs to avoid
potential wake effects.
• Overplanting is applied to increase the overall capacity factor of the HPP
plant.
• Consideration of only active power when determining the cables capacities,
omitting the reactive power contribution.
• Limited computational capacity resulting from the use of an Intel Core
i5-8250U CPU running at 1.60 GHz with 8 GB of RAM machine.
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
In order to assess the current state of the art on the problem of HPP collection
system optimization, a thorough literature review is pursued. When performing
such survey, due to the innovative character of the study, no previous literature
can be found. However, the problem in question is in turn composed of several
subjects that need to be investigated independently to shape the system as a
whole and define its technical specifications. Therefore, data has been gathered
about every one of them independently: PV systems, wind turbines, cables and
electronic equipment such as inverters and step-up transformers, and the inte-
grated HPP system. A review of the mentioned data is assessed in the following
subsections.
2.1
Background on Hybrid Power Plants
Renewable energy technologies are becoming more and more popular as their
validity as an electricity generation alternative to fossil fuels has been proved.
Apart from the continuous cost reductions attained, the utilisation of these clean
technologies entails a considerable abatement of greenhouse gas emissions. This
can significantly help facing climate change and addressing the problems and
conflicts associated to it.
HPPs in particular, exhibit certain benefits with respect to individual RES as
such. Being the result of the combination of several power generation sources,
they are able to compensate for some of the inherent drawbacks of renewable
energies [8]. Among the latter, unpredictability, intermittency, lack of reliability
and continuous availability of power. The integration of RES can ease the match-
ing of supply and demand and reduce the grid instabilities, thus maintaining the
voltage and frequency within their respective adequate levels. Furthermore, capi-
tal budgeting and investment planning metrics like the Net Present Value (NPV),
can be increased, hence, enhancing profitability.
This energy generation solution is expected to play a key role in the imminent
transition towards a more distributed generation system that allows the setting
of a so-called smart grid, leaving behind the current centralised scheme [9]. In-
==PAGE:24==
8
2 Literature Review
deed, research and development of Hybrid Renewable Energy Sources (HRES) are
progressing, intending to make their operation resemble that of a conventional
generation unit. One of the interests this encompasses is the greater adequacy of
HPPs to grid code stipulations and market structures formulated when the share
of fossil fuels prevailed over that of renewables.
In this regard, the grid integration community has agreed that hereinafter, mar-
ket structures will experience a transformation. As the share of renewables in
the power system increases, meaning that low-cost energy is added to the power
grid, the focus will be placed more on increasing revenue from capacity and ade-
quacy markets rather than from energy markets [5]. A more detailed review can
be found in Section 2.3. Thereby, even if more volatile and unpredictable renew-
able generation comes on stream, electricity supply will continue to meet demand.
Advances in certain areas of research have made it possible for the state of the
art of hybrid plants to be what it is today [10]. More innovative and high-quality
devices with higher conversion eﬀiciency are becoming available in the electronics
field, leading to the improvement of the system’s reliability. Also, the lifetime of
AC and DC gadgets is being extended. Consequently, the system’s performance
is enhanced and required maintenance work reduced due to the creation of tailor-
made automatic controllers. Besides, functional simulation software for hybrid
energy systems is emerging, and more and more optimisation software is devel-
oped and refined. It is also worth mentioning the continuous improvements that
renewable technologies are benefiting from. For example, PV panels are seeing
their eﬀiciency increased by means of advances in the manufacturing process and
improvement of the characteristics of the materials. On the other hand, modern
wind turbines are increasingly cost-effective, powerful, reliable, and more afford-
able for power producers. As companies aim to build more sophisticated wind
turbine technology, more refined tools are needed along the way.
Concerning the coupling of the HPP to the grid, it is made by a unique common
connection point (see Figure 2.1, with the consequent advantage of installing a
single substation, leading to a decrease in cost. Furthermore, there appears to
be a possibility to oversize the rated capacities of wind and solar over the power
capacity of the grid, meaning that the infrastructure use is exploited and power
fluctuations smoothed.
Other matters of interest are the connection and HPP possible configurations.
Four kinds have been identified as a function of the common integration and op-
eration of the generating power sources, as illustrated in Figure 2.2. Essentially,
all types allow maximising the use of the point of common coupling (PCC) with
==PAGE:25==
2.1 Background on Hybrid Power Plants
9
the grid, by improving the capacity factor and reducing the capital expenditure
and the permitting timing. Likewise, since the PV modules and wind turbines
share site and are in close proximity, the proposed configurations are also benefi-
cial during the resource assessment and site conditioning phases and considerably
reduce the operation and maintenance costs (O&M). In addition, through their
implementation, the optimisation of the sizing of the substation to the most prob-
able range of output power becomes more straightforward, but curtailment needs
to be carefully considered. The first configuration is the most used up until now,
while the other three are still just potential alternative solutions [11].
(a) Same substation and grid connection. (b) PV panels integrated with the turbines.
Figure 2.1: Types of HPPS in terms of integration and operation of different
generating modules.[11]
The first and most commonly deployed configuration consists of wind and solar
co-location with shared substation and coupling point to the grid. An example
can be seen in Figure 2.2.I. Among the advantages of this configuration, avoidance
of PV panels shading by the WT blades, flexibility during development and siz-
ing phases, and PV’s capacity not limited by turbines’ converters, are highlighted.
On the other hand, when PV modules are integrated at the wind turbine level
(Figure 2.2.II.), the PV inverter can be eliminated and replaced by a hybrid con-
verter sourcing AC & DC, since the WTG-coupled system leverages the already
existing conversion device inside the WTs. This is achieved by connecting the
PV to the converter of the WT. However, there are drawbacks to this setting: as
opposed to the first-mentioned configuration, shading of the PV panels by the
turbines’ blades is a problem, which could be potentially solved by installing the
panels further apart. Nonetheless, this can lead to the need of longer cables and,
thus, higher costs and active and reactive power losses in the lines.
==PAGE:26==
10
2 Literature Review
The third and fourth possible configurations (represented by configurations III.
and IV. in Figure 2.2) are DC-Coupled solutions, which are characterized by a
DC collector system to which the different generators are connected. For HVAC
connected systems, i.e., configuration III., the presence of a grid-side inverter is
required to transform the DC power extracted from each generation technology
into AC power to be connected to the HVAC grid. Whereas for HVDC connected
systems i.e., configuration IV., a DC/DC converter is used to couple the HPP
plant to the grid.
Figure 2.2: Configurations for: I. Co-Located HPP. II. WTG-coupled system
integration. III. DC-coupled HPP for HVAC connection. IV. DC-coupled HPP
for HVDC connection [12].
2.2
Advantages and Functionalities
As mentioned in previous sections, the deployment of HPPs offers several benefits
compared to pure renewable technologies like wind or solar. Some of them are
depicted in Figure 2.3.
In the first place, when installing wind and solar together, thanks to their negative
correlation, i.e., complementarity, and varying generation patterns, the yearly
capacity factor of the plant and the Annual Energy Production (AEP) increase.
This can be translated into better exploitation of the electrical infrastructure and
higher business case certainty, thus lower financing costs.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Advantages and Functionalities
11
Figure 2.3: Foreseen benefits of wind-solar HPPs [11].
In addition, the power output stability is reinforced over time, thus leading to
abatement of fluctuations and gradients, which is translated into an increased
dispatchability, that ultimately eases the meeting of demand. Most interestingly,
even when solar and wind are not correlated, HPP deployment results favorable.
For example, if the electricity market price is negatively correlated to wind power
due to a high share of wind, when prices are high, revenue can be obtained from
solar energy.
Another interest derived from HPPs is the possibility of optimising the network
use, achieved when developers install more capacity than the existing or autho-
rised in the connection agreement. Although this decision can involve energy
curtailment when generation exceeds the grid connection capacity, it is the pre-
ferred approach to take full advantage of the plant. Nevertheless, in [12] it is
estimated that wind and solar PV can be over-dimensioned at least by 20% with-
out incurring in energy curtailment. This is thus translated into savings in grid
development (CAPEX reduction).
The possibility of sharing the balance of system costs (BOS), both hardware
costs and soft costs, is also an important business driver behind HPPs.
Sav-
ings obtained through hardware costs depend on the configuration itself and soft
==PAGE:28==
12
2 Literature Review
costs are reduced when the technologies are built simultaneously. Among hard-
ware costs, the transmission lines, power electronics e.g. shared inverters between
technologies, and controllers, are the most significant. On the other hand, soft
costs are related to permitting, interconnection, land costs, customer acquisition
and labour.
In terms of Operation and Maintenance (O&M) costs, there can also be a sub-
stantial reduction since thanks to the joint development, the same technicians
can carry out maintenance operations for both PV and wind systems.
As commented in the previous section, HPPs usually require establishing one
unique connection point to the grid, commonly referred to as PCC. This leads
to a reduction in infrastructure investment costs. Also, since the installed power
and the energy output per square meter increase, the land is more eﬀiciently used.
Regarding permitting procedures, developers can harvest synergies since com-
bining the aspects mentioned above can help meeting the complex grid codes in
less time and supporting the customer to enter into new markets or to operate
the HPP even under challenging conditions.
Finally, HPPs can facilitate the electrification process of rural areas since they
can provide more scheduled power dispatch to meet demand in certain regions
characterised by weak power grids.
2.3
Market Opportunities
The economic potential drawn from an HPP not only depends on its resources
and costs, but also on other aspects like market context and structure.
In a
potential future scenario dominated by renewables, where ancillary services and
capacity markets are more relevant than the traditional energy market, the prof-
itability of HPPs will most likely be better than that of the individual technology
[5].
In the Capacity Market, power plants receive capacity payments as a function of
the correlation between their capacity availability and the energy demand. By
these means, system operators ensure that there is always the required capacity.
However, as a consequence of their uncertainty and lack of reliability, renewables
have hardly been able to take part in this kind of market. The development of
HPPs is hence of interest, as they allow the inherent variability of RES to be
reduced and production to be more constant, and thus easier to be scheduled.
==PAGE:29==
2.4 Power electronics topologies
13
Through the Ancillary service market, generators are paid for providing services
to keep the stability and reliability of the power grid in the short term. These
services generally include frequency and voltage control. Also in this case, renew-
ables have traditionally had a low presence, but in the near future, a rise in their
participation is intended to be promoted.
2.4
Power electronics topologies
Two possible configurations can be established when designing the topology of a
grid-connected wind and solar photovoltaic (PV) hybrid power plant: AC cou-
pled HPP and DC coupled HPP. The first two schemes in Figure 2.2 depict two
possible configurations that present an AC coupled topology, whereas the two
diagrams on the right, represent DC coupled topologies. In Section 2.5 a more
detailed description of AC coupled configurations will be presented, alongside
Figures 2.6 and 2.7.
When the decision is made to take an AC coupled topology, all subsystems have
a point of common coupling on the AC side within the HPP. For the case of
DC coupled HPPs, all technologies are connected to a DC bus. This requires
the wind turbines to divide their actual functionality of fully rated converter into
independent AC/DC inversion and DC/AC inversion.
The first mentioned topology exhibits the advantage of easier implementation
compared to the latter.
However, when selecting a DC configuration, better
utilization of the electrical infrastructure is achieved. On the other side, the dis-
advantage of the DC is that it is currently in a nascent stage and requires new
control architecture and algorithms.
Figure 2.4a depicts how in the AC configuration, the grid receives power directly
from the output of DC/AC and AC/DC-DC/AC devices. In this case, there is
no DC bus in the system [13].
In Figure 2.4b, it can be seen how the DC voltages at the output of the in-
dividual AC/DC and DC/DC units installed after the wind turbines, the PV
panels and the batteries are then combined on the DC side and pass through a
common DC/AC inverter before being connected to the grid. In the described
topology, the role of the DC/AC inverter remains also the voltage control at
the DC bus. Contrarily to individual electronic devices which can incorporate
a maximum power point tracking (MPPT) system to get the maximum power
from the electricity sources.
==PAGE:30==
14
2 Literature Review
(a) With common AC bus
(b) With common DC bus
Figure 2.4: Grid-connected hybrid system [13]
2.5
Large scale photovoltaic power plants
2.5.1
Electrical components
The fundamental elements that compose a utility-scale PV plant, also referred to
as Large Scale Photovoltaic Power Plant (LS-PVPP) have three main functions.
They are, converting solar energy into electricity, connecting the plant to the grid,
and ensuring adequate performance. These functions are respectively carried by
the PV panels, PV inverters and transformers.
PV panels
The main components of an LS-PVPP are the PV panels. They consist of so-
lar cells connected in series and encapsulated in a frame. They are responsible
for capturing the sun’s energy and transforming it into electricity, by the photo-
voltaic effect, that can be then delivered to the power grid customers. The PV
effect is a semiconductor effect that causes the movement of the electrons of the
PV cell when the light reaches it. The output power generated by a solar PV cell
is in DC mode. The LS-PVPP contains many solar cells connected in modules
and several modules forming strings that can be connected in parallel to produce
the required DC power output.
Depending on the materials used, different PV cells can be distinguished. Cur-
rently, two main types of PV cell technologies are available in the market: crys-
talline and thin-film, and others that are not yet available but are emerging, e.g.,
organic cells made from polymers. The former have been more commonly used at
a utility-scale level because of the higher stability, amount of land used, availabil-
==PAGE:31==
2.5 Large scale photovoltaic power plants
15
ity of primary resource and mostly, as they present higher eﬀiciencies (around
20%) when compared to thin-film that are a cheaper alternative and have eﬀi-
ciencies up to 15% [14]. Thin-film cells are a good alternative when the radiation
and temperature coeﬀicient are low.
Crystalline silicon (c-Si) cells are subdi-
vided into two groups: mono-crystalline silicon (mono-c-Si) and multi-crystalline
silicon (multi-c-Si). On the other hand, three possible types of thin-film exist:
Cadmium Telluride (CdTe), Copper Indium (Gallium) Di-Selenide (CIGS/CIS),
and Amorphous Silicon (a-Si).
The selection of the material used to manufacture the PV modules plays a key
role in the resulting occupied area by the LS-PVPP. Thus, better and improved
materials enable to have smaller areas since more power per square meter is ex-
tracted. This also reduces both installation costs and cost of the land, which are
two critical drivers when developing utility-scale PV projects.
Studies and acquired experience have demonstrated that the performance of the
PV modules decreases over time as a consequence of degradation. The degra-
dation pace depends directly on the environmental conditions, e.g.
humidity,
temperature, solar irradiation, and in that case is known as potential induced
degradation (PID). But also, the materials used, their quality and the manufac-
turing process play an important role in the degradation rate. On this account,
researchers are looking into new ways of enhancing the performance of the PV
cells, with more eﬀicient materials and characteristics that also lead to a decay
in prices. In particular, at the utility-scale level, other cells characteristics are
becoming crucial lately, i.g. CO2 generation reduction during the lifetime of the
cell, recyclability and sustainability [14].
PV inverters
Another vital element that affects the performance of large scale PV plants is
the inverter. The PV inverters are electronic devices used to convert the DC
power generated by the PV panels into AC electricity, for connection to the
internal AC grid. They can be arranged either in central configurations or in
strings, as depicted in Figure 2.7(a) and Figure 2.7(b), respectively. Many mod-
ules can be connected to one inverter, and they can be both arranged as series
strings or parallel strings. However, for LS-PVPPs it is more suitable to install
them according to a central configuration, as noted in Figure 2.5, both in terms
of eﬀiciency and power per area. This way, many modules are connected in se-
ries, constituting high voltage (HV) strings connected in parallel to the central
inverter. This configuration offers more straightforward installation and higher
reliability, at the expense of the lack of maximum power point tracking (MPPT)
==PAGE:32==
16
2 Literature Review
per string, characteristic of string inverters.
Figure 2.5: Comparison of market available PV inverter topologies for LS-PVPPs
[14].
Apart from the aforementioned task, PV inverters perform other functions to
maximise the plant’s output. These range from the protection and isolation of
the system from irregularities and grid or PV modules instability, to optimisa-
tion of the tension across the strings and functioning monitoring. PV inverters
need to compensate for some issues related to their interconnection with the PV
modules. In this respect, they are designed to have galvanic isolation for the
leakage current coming from the modules. Moreover, inverters’ disconnection is
forbidden and the provision of grid support functions must be ensured, as well as
voltage and frequency control and fault ride-through (FRT) capability. In addi-
tion, inverters must comply with the country standards and regulations. Finally,
an MPPT tracker is required due to the non-linear characteristics of the intensity
and voltage. In view of the current trend pointing towards power generation sys-
tems that perform more and more like conventional power plants, PV inverters
have to improve considerably their operation and controllability.
==PAGE:33==
2.5 Large scale photovoltaic power plants
17
Transformers
Step-up transformers are needed since, for LS-PVPPs, the output voltage of
the PV modules and inverter is below the level of the HPP collection system.
They take the power at the output of the PV inverter and raise its voltage to
the required grid level, i.e., 25kV, 33kV, 38kV, or 110kV, depending on the grid
connection and country electrical standards. Two main types can be found in so-
lar PV plants, distribution and transmission transformers, depending on whether
the desired voltage level is at the plant collection system or directly connected to
the transmission grid. The latter requires even further voltage stepping up.
Figure 2.6: Connection of transformers at medium voltage. (a) Central PV in-
verter with three winding transformer and (b) multistring PV inverter with two
winding transformer [14].
Another consideration is the power rating of the PV inverter. Article [14] points
out that, if this is below 500 kW, the transformer used is a two-windings trans-
former, while if it is higher than 500 kW, the most commonly used transformer
is the three windings transformer. Nonetheless, this article also reports that the
==PAGE:34==
18
2 Literature Review
two winding transformers were the most used in the last decades. However, the
development of central inverters with greater rating lead to the utilisation of im-
proved transformers. Lately, for real LS-PVPPs, the three winding transformer
is the most common as it allows to connect two central PV inverters. For the
case of multi-string inverters, the best option remains the use of two winding
transformers (Figure 2.6). Considering the rated power is relevant as it can have
severe consequences for the LS-PVPP operation. A transformer with a rated
power lower than the normal operating power of the plant could become a bot-
tleneck. Likewise, if the rated power is too high, the global performance may
be challenged. The selection is carried in any scenario according to the nominal
power, but also to its cost and eﬀiciency.
2.5.2
Internal PV plant configurations and topologies
When assessing the performance of an LS-PVPP, the internal topology is a key
factor, which entails the interconnection of the PV modules, PV inverters and
step-up transformers. Three basic configurations can be found: (i) central topol-
ogy, (ii) string and (iii) multi-string, and a fourth one, the AC module integrated
that has been studied but not yet implemented at utility-scale level. Figure 2.7
illustrates all the possible topologies mentioned.
The central topology is characterised by the connection of several thousands of
PV modules to one unique inverter. These PV panels are clustered in hundreds
of parallel strings containing hundreds of modules in series. Then, in the string
topology, each PV string is connected to one inverter. Finally, the multi-string
topology consists of the interconnection of one PV string to a DC-DC converter
and then, around 4 or 5 DC-DC converters, linked to one inverter.
As a general rule, the central topology has been the preferred option in projects
developed across the globe. This can be due to its simpler installation and the
fewer components present in the overall plant, compared to the multistring in-
verter topology. The drawback of the latter is its complex installation and the
large number of inverters installed, which combined, make this option less appeal-
ing to investors. However, they show higher eﬀiciency levels thanks to MPPT
control in each string; hence, more profound research on this matter should be
effectuated.
All in all, the proper election of the plant’s topology is of extreme importance,
and this may also obey to the influence that the solar radiation and shading effect
have on the power produced by the plant.
==PAGE:35==
2.6 Large scale wind farms
19
Figure 2.7: PV inverter topologies. (a) Central, (b) string, (c) multistring, and
(d) module integrated [14].
2.6
Large scale wind farms
The present section focuses mainly on the electrical network design of onshore
and offshore wind farms rather than on the technology itself. As reported in
the Literature [15], it is estimated that the cost of the electrical infrastructure
accounts for approximately 15–30% of the overall initial costs; thus the optimiza-
tion of its design becomes of particular relevance.
When conducting the literature survey for the HPP collection system design
problem, it is noted that in the past two decades, similar research was performed
for onshore and offshore wind farms, and that thus becomes a valuable source of
useful information. By virtue of the above, a comprehensive literature review of
the methods studied so far for the optimization of the electrical cables in onshore
and offshore wind farms is carried out. A detailed description of what was found
relevant is explained hereunder.
2.6.1
WTs Collection System Design
According to article [16], there are several steps for the design and optimisation
process of the collection system of wind farms. The starting point is the intro-
==PAGE:36==
20
2 Literature Review
duction of the data, i.e. parameters, variables, objective and constraints. Several
possibilities concerning these elements are identified. Variables can be integer,
binary and continuous, and the parameters can be bounds or limits to the vari-
ables, unit costs, time-series data or technical characteristics of the technologies.
Then, the next step is the choice of the network topology. A variety of options
exist, from radial, radial plus star, radial plus star plus splices to single looped
or other types. In any case, each topology should be designated together with
the desired optimisation objective, i.e. Length (L), Investment (I), Investment
plus Reliability (IR), Investment plus Losses (IL), and Investment plus Reliabil-
ity plus Losses (IRL). Finally, the last stage encompasses selecting the solution
method to apply: clustering, heuristics, metaheuristics, global optimisation or
hybrids.
Clustering consists of splitting the WTs into subgroups, maximising the resem-
blance of the individuals included in the cluster and minimising it for those that
belong to a different subgroup. Regarding heuristics, they are a fast technique,
but the quality of the solutions they provide tends to be weak. However, when
combining them with clustering, its limitations are reduced. Metaheuristic meth-
ods arise from the need to improve traditional heuristics to avoid limitations like
falling into a local minimum. They provide better solutions with no certified
optimality. Among the most popular, the following can be found: Genetic Al-
gorithm (GA), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), Simulated Annealing (SA).
Lastly, global optimisation techniques, also known as exact methods, provide cer-
tified optimal solutions for convex problems. They require the use of an external
commercial solver, generally used as a black box, which implements algorithms
like Branch-and-Cut or Benders Decomposition. They can be further split into:
Binary Integer Programming (BIP), Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP),
Mixed Integer Quadratic Programming (MIQP), and Mixed Integer Non-Linear
Programming (MINLP). Finally, hybrid methods appear as the combination of
different techniques, i.g. evolutionary algorithms and heuristic rules mixed with
exact formulations.
Regarding the applicability of the methods, it is noted that problems focused
on Total length (L), Investment (I), and Investment plus total electrical losses
(IL) have been tackled with heuristics, metaheuristics, and global optimisation
methods. While, when reliability is targeted, mathematical formulations are the
preferred approach.
According to the literature, each method presents advantages and disadvantages
and, as mentioned, is adequate depending on the purposes aimed.
Many authors with different approaches have addressed the cable routing prob-
==PAGE:37==
2.6 Large scale wind farms
21
lem. Due to its intrinsic complexity and the high number of constraints needed
for its formulation, many studies have opted for heuristics (i.e. [17], [18]). Meta-
heuristics are also the choice in some cases, such as [19], where the cable network
optimisation problem is solved by utilising a Multiobjective Genetic Algorithm.
Only a few preferred to use Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) (i.e. [20],
[21]). While, in some cases, the implemented technique was a matheuristic, which
is the hybridisation of metaheuristics with mathematical programming. The hall-
mark of this method lies in the possibility of defining heuristics over a black-box
MILP solver. As far as can be determined with the carried research, only three
studies have taken power losses along the cables into account and are proposed
in [22], [23] and [15]. Consideration of power losses makes it possible to optimise
not only for minimising investment costs but also for minimising future revenue
losses.
==PAGE:38==
22
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3
Definition of model inputs
Solving the optimization problem requires collecting, filtering, and fitting differ-
ent data. All the inputs needed to populate the equations and run the model, can
be visualized in Figure 3.1. These data range from the technical specifications of
both the generation technologies and the conversion and transmission equipment,
through financial factors, prices and costs, to the layout configuration where all
the nodes are previously located. The use of the mentioned data becomes more
evident when going through the mathematical formulation in Section 4.3.
In the present section, the general characteristics of the data and the methodol-
ogy conducted to define the model inputs are outlined. It is structured as follows:
first, the technical specifications of the two RES are presented, followed by a
description of the criteria used for their respective locations in the plant. Sub-
sequently, the integration of both energy generation technologies in the site is
carried out to constitute the HPP and aspects such as grid capacity are defined.
Then, in the following subsection, the technical specifications of the conversion
and transmission devices are described.
Finally, other data necessary for the
model are presented, such as the time series used, the price of electricity, the cost
of the cables and the interest rate.
Physical positions 
of the WTs, PV 
system and Grid
Power Time 
series of WTs 
and PV system
Nominal power 
of WTs, PV 
system and Grid 
List of available 
cables 
(thermal-electrical 
capacity and cost 
per unit of length)
Energy cost
Project Lifetime 
in years
Discount rate "r"
Scripts for 
the Inputs
Optimization 
problem
Figure 3.1: Inputs for the Optimization problem.
==PAGE:40==
24
3 Definition of model inputs
Apart from searching in the literature and benchmarking market available data, a
model was provided as an additional data source [8]. The latter provides a sizing
solution of the different technologies composing the HPP plant, from which some
of the technical specifications of the energy sources are extracted. The model
is used as a first approach for the estimation of the installed capacities of wind
and solar PV, as a reference for various calculations and to escalate parameters
needed along the way. These are described in detail throughout this section.
3.1
Generation technologies specifications
3.1.1
Wind turbines
The turbine model selected for the study is taken from the previously mentioned
sizing model and is characterized by a rated power of 2.1 MW and a nominal
voltage of 33 kV. The WT’s lifetime, which is estimated to be 30 years, and tech-
nical specifications used for carrying out some necessary calculations are listed
in Table 3.1.
Wind rated power
2.1 MW
Nominal voltage before step-up trafo
690 V
Nominal voltage with incorporated step-up trafo
33 kV
Rotor diameter
97 m
Hub height
120 m
Lifetime
30 years
Table 3.1: Technical characteristics of installed wind turbines.
3.1.2
Photovoltaic modules
Concerning the PV modules used to conform the PV system, they have been
extracted from [24]. They present a nominal power of 245 Wp and voltage and
current at maximum power of 30.2 V and 8.13 A, respectively. Their technical
specifications can be found in Table 3.2.
==PAGE:41==
3.2 HPP configuration design
25
Type
Multi-crystalline
Nominal power of PV panel
245 Wp
Voltage at Pmax (VMP P )
30.2 V
Current at Pmax (IMP P )
8.13 A
Dimensions
1650x992x40 mm
Module area
1.64 m2
Operating temperature
-40 to +85 ◦C
Lifetime
25 years
Table 3.2: Technical characteristics of installed PV modules.
3.2
HPP configuration design
3.2.1
Layout definition
A major stage for solving the problem is the location and distribution of the
turbines, photovoltaic panels and PCC. Therefore, the first step in the layout
creation process consists of the definition of the WTs positions, respecting the
separation criteria, and the PV systems positions and their internal configuration.
Finally, all the aforementioned are integrated to constitute the HPP overall lay-
out.
The wind turbines are organized according to a grid pattern. They are arranged
in two parallel strings composed of 10 turbines each. There is a total number
of 20 WTs in the HPP plant. Initially, the amount of turbines selected for the
project was 62, value extracted from the given sizing model and the result of di-
viding the optimal wind installed capacity of 129 MW by the rated power of the
WTs (2.1 MW). However, to reduce the system complexity and computational
time, the number is decreased to 20 WTs. Therefore, the total installed capacity
of wind reaches a value of 42 MW.
When defining the wind turbine layout, the aim is to avoid interrupting each
other’s wind profile and speed as a consequence of the wake effects. In order to
do so, different distances are kept between the turbines, depending on the wind.
As it can be seen in Table 3.3, the predominant wind direction in the HPP plant
location is East. The turbines are thus distributed keeping a minimum safe dis-
tance of 8-rotor-diameter in the prevailing wind direction and 5-rotor-diameters
in the perpendicular direction.
==PAGE:42==
26
3 Definition of model inputs
Nº of WTs
20
Nº of strings
2
Nº WTs per string
10
Turbine spacing predominant wind direction (m)
8D
Turbine spacing in perpendicular direction (m)
5D
Predominant wind direction
East
Table 3.3: Considerations for design of WTs layout.
The procedure to establish the internal configuration of the PV modules is dif-
ferent from that of the WTs. The PV modules are strategically allocated in 400
parallel strings containing 50 PV modules connected in series, hence forming PV
systems of 20000 modules.
The output of the whole system presents a rated
power of 4.9 MW, voltage of 1.5 kV (30.2 V multiplied by 50 modules in series),
and current of 3.25 kA (8.13 A multiplied by 400 strings), as it can be seen in
Figure 3.2. The output is directly connected to a central inverter to convert the
DC voltage into AC voltage. This configuration is selected among all the solu-
tions depicted in Figure 2.7, due to its simplicity and the possibility of connecting
several thousands of PV modules to a unique inverter.
Nº of PV systems
3 or 8
Nº of PV modules per PV system
20000
Nº of parallel strings in each PV system
400
Nº modules in series per string
50
Spacing between panels (m)
1.95
PV panels orientation
south
Table 3.4: Internal PV system considerations.
In the model presented in Section 4.2, the generation units positions are used as
nodes. However, for the sake of convenience, instead of establishing a different
node for each PV panel, the junction node between the PV inverter and the
PV system is selected. Contrarily to what is conducted for WTs, where each is
represented by a node in the problem. Furthermore, two layout alternatives are
evaluated in this study. The first encompasses the installation of 3 PV systems
and the second of 8 PV systems. The ultimate objective is to evaluate the ben-
==PAGE:43==
3.2 HPP configuration design
27
eficial effect of installing same power capacities of wind and solar PV, to obtain
the utmost HPP potential and maximise yields.
Figure 3.2: Internal PV system setup.
Analogously to the case of the wind turbines, the installed solar PV power is ini-
tially extracted from the sizing model. Since its value is significantly high, it can
lead to extremely long computing times and excessive computational complexity.
For these reasons, the total installed power is decided to be reduced.
Regarding the spacing between the panels, it is calculated by means of the equa-
tion in [24] that aims at determining row spacing to reduce inter-row shading and
associated shading losses. It takes into account parameters such as the latitude
and the dimensions of the PV module. The value of the latitude for India used
for the calculation is 20.59º. The value obtained is 1.95 m and is established
between both rows and columns.
In addition, in order to get the most from the solar panels, they must be ori-
entated pointing in the direction that captures most sunshine. Since the HPP
plant is placed in India, which is located in the northern hemisphere, the optimal
orientation of the PV modules is south.
==PAGE:44==
28
3 Definition of model inputs
After defining the distribution of the two generation technologies independently,
the HPP layout is settled. To start with, an assumption is made, consisting of
establishing the PV systems on the downstream side of the WTs to avoid po-
tential wake effects. Another aspect that needs to be taken into account when
integrating the RES is the shadowing effect. In a wind-solar hybrid plant, WTs
can cast shadows over the PV modules, incurring in energy generation losses,
faults or modules damage caused by hot spotting. The former can be originated
not only because of turbine towers shadows but also due to shadow flicker effect.
The latter affects the PV power output as a result of intermittent light intensity.
The issue described leads to the definition of the empty zone concept.
It is
essentially the empty space left around the WTs required to achieve very low
shadow losses. Results from the study [25], show that the value selected for the
empty zone shall be comprised between the values of the safety and operating
zones. Being the operating zone defined as the area devoted to maintenance work
on the wind turbine, and the safety zone the area defined for keeping a safe dis-
tance from, e.g., public roads and highways, buildings, and living habitats.
The equations used for obtaining the values of the safety and operating zones,
respectively, are 3.1 and 3.2.
Safety zone = hub height + 1/2 · rotor diameter + 5 meters
(3.1)
Operating zone = rotor diameter · 1.1
(3.2)
The input parameters needed for the calculations are listed in Table 3.1. Accord-
ing to those values, for the present project, the calculated safety zone is 173.5 m,
and the operating zone is 106.7 m. The empty zone is hence estimated as 120
m, value comprised between the safety zone and operating zone values. Meaning
that the PV systems are thus installed a minimum of 120 meters away from the
turbines.
After taking into account all the considerations described above, two different
layouts are finally generated. The resulting layouts studied in the project are
represented in Figures 3.3 and 3.4.
==PAGE:45==
3.2 HPP configuration design
29
0
200
400
600
800
1000
[m]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
[m]
WTs
PV panels 1
PV panels 2
PV panels 3
PCC
PV inverter 1
PV inverter 2
PV inverter 3
Figure 3.3: HPP layout 2 including 20 WTs and 3 PV systems.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
[m]
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
[m]
WTs
PV panels 1
PV panels 2
PV panels 3
PV panels 4
PV panels 5
PV panels 6
PV panels 7
PV panels 8
PCC
PV inverter 1
PV inverter 2
PV inverter 3
PV inverter 4
PV inverter 5
PV inverter 6
PV inverter 7
PV inverter 8
Figure 3.4: HPP layout 3 including 20 WTs and 8 PV systems.
==PAGE:46==
30
3 Definition of model inputs
Each HPP layout is analyzed for different study cases, hereinafter referred to
as Tests, conformed by acting upon certain parameters, e.g., grid capacity and
available cables. Figure 3.5 shows a diagram presenting the characteristics and
parameters chosen to shape each of the above-mentioned Tests. It is worth men-
tioning that six tests and associated simulations have been conducted during
the project, however, for the sake of conciseness, only three are presented and
analysed in this thesis. All the selected combinations are introduced in the op-
timization model to obtain the optimal cable routing network and its associated
cost, for each particular test. The purpose is to understand which is the best
approach when designing the electrical infrastructure for a given scenario.
HPP Layout
HPP layout 2
HPP layout 3
5 MW
21 MW
29.4 MW
5 MW
10 MW
15 MW
Available cables 
capacity?
5 MW
10 MW
15 MW
Available cables 
capacity?
Pgrid =  35 MW 
Pgrid =  35 MW 
Grid 
capacity?
Grid 
capacity?
Pgrid =  40 MW 
Grid 
capacity?
Test  1
Test 2
Test 3
Figure 3.5: Procedure for establishing the set of Tests to be evaluated for the
optimization.
==PAGE:47==
3.2 HPP configuration design
31
With regard to the topology of the HPP, two options are contemplated. In the
first alternative, the generators are connected at a voltage level of 690 V, meaning
that the voltage level within the HPP is 690 V. They share a step-up transformer
to elevate the voltage to 33 kV. The output from the transformer is then con-
nected to the PCC. Whereas in the second possible topology, each technology
presents a step-up transformer that increases the voltage from 690 V to 33 kV.
In this case, the voltage level in the HPP plant is 33 kV. These two potential
configuration are illustrated in Figures 3.7 and 3.6. For this project, it is decided
to implement the second topology (Figure 3.6) following with what is commonly
done in utility-scale wind and solar projects deployed all over the world. The
viability of the first topology of shared step-up transformer, could be evaluated
for future work by formulating an optimization problem. This analysis should
take into consideration several aspects, e.g., transformer costs, and power losses
incurred as a consequence of lower voltage in cables.
Figure 3.6: Configuration with individual step-up transformer per energy source.
==PAGE:48==
32
3 Definition of model inputs
Figure 3.7:
Configuration with shared step-up transformer for both energy
sources.
3.2.2
Overplanting and Grid rated capacity
Traditionally, the electrical infrastructure (collection and transmission systems)
design of wind farms has been done considering operation at nominal power. For
the sake of simplicity, the variability of the wind was not taken into account.
This approach ensures the system’s robustness, which means it can withstand
nominal power at all times. In addition, energy curtailment was not conceived,
since generally, developers and plant administrators aim at maximizing the power
supplied to be sold and made profit on. However, in some occasions, if supply
exceeds demand the price of energy is negative, becoming thus necessary to incur
in curtailment.
It was not until a decade ago that the importance of wind variability was ques-
tioned and better understood, leading to the emergence of a new concept known as
overplanting. The over dimensioning of the HPP plant consists of installing more
RES capacity than the grid connection’s. This practice of overplanting arises
because during most of the time the electrical infrastructure is unused, since the
capacity factors of wind and solar are 30-40% and less than 20%, respectively
[26]. Indeed, it rarely happens that nominal power operation is achieved. The
idea behind this new tendency is to increase the generated power when wind and
solar generation levels are low by setting more turbines and PV modules, and
==PAGE:49==
3.2 HPP configuration design
33
contrarily, curtailing energy when the resources allow providing nominal power.
The purpose is to exploit the resources more eﬀiciently to generate power close to
the evacuation capacity for maximizing the revenue, smoothing variability and
increasing capacity earnings. Indeed, there is a clear distinction between the con-
tracted capacity, which corresponds to the maximum amount of AC power that
can be delivered to the PCC, i.e. the maximum capacity that can be scheduled,
and the actual installed capacity. This should be possible as long as the total
exported power does not exceed the contracted one.
According to the Indian example found in [27], the RES installed capacity is
overdimensioned by 50%, doubling the grid connection capacity. Following this
example and the criteria applied in the sizing model provided, and then escalating
it to the problem of study according to installed wind and solar PV levels, three
possibilities are defined for the HPP grid connection capacity. In the first place,
when installing 20 WTGs of 2.1 MW of nominal power (resulting in a total value
of 42 MW) and 1 PV system of 4.9 MW, the grid power is set to 30 MW. On the
other hand, for the same amount of wind capacity and 3 PV systems (meaning
14.7 MW in total of solar PV), the grid connection capacity becomes 35 MW.
Besides, for the third studied configuration that comprises 20 WTs (42 MW of
installed wind) and 8 PV systems (39.2 MW of installed solar power), the value
of the grid rated capacity is established at 40 MW.
3.2.3
Lifetime
The technical lifetime of a power production plant is the expected time, in years,
during which it can operate with a performance close enough to its standards.
Many factors influence the lifetime duration of the plant, i.e., the number of us-
age hours, and may decrease its eﬀiciency slightly over the years. At the end
of its technical lifetime or after it reaches a poor performance level, the plant is
decommissioned or must undergo significant renovations to extend its operation.
Currently, a lot of effort is put into research and development of wind and solar
PV technologies with the aim of achieving higher eﬀiciencies and longer lifetimes.
When determining the overall lifetime of the HPP, it is vital to assure that
the technologies that compose it can withstand operation for the whole period
considered. Therefore, for the present study the HPP lifetime is 25 years, due
to the fact that the PV modules lifetime is 25 years and the lifetime of the wind
turbines is 30 years. The value selected is the most restraining of both. These
specifications are taken from the provided sizing model for the Indian case and
the technical datasheet of the PV modules.
==PAGE:50==
34
3 Definition of model inputs
3.3
Energy conversion and transmission equipment
specifications
Exhaustive benchmarking is conducted to select the market available cables, in-
verters and transformers that best suit the needs of the designed HPP.
3.3.1
Cables
Initially, the cables used for the project and their technical characteristics are
extracted from [15]. However, as the study is developed, it becomes clear that
the incorporation of new cables with lower capacities (5 and 10 MW) is beneficial.
Table 3.5 illustrates the collection of the selected market available cables.
N. of WTs supported
Cables
Type
2-megawatt
cb01
1
7
cb05
1
10
2
14
Table 3.5: Basic information on the real-world cables used for the HPP collection
system.
As it can be noted, the cable capacities are given as a function of the number
of wind turbines they connect. Moreover, the number of WTs each cable can
support is given for 2-megawatt WTs; however, the nominal power of the tur-
bines installed in the HPP plant is 2.1 MW. It is assumed that for this case, this
criterion can be also applied without posing any issue. The resulting capacities
of the cables are thus, 14.7 MW, 21 MW and 2.4 MW, respectively.
The capacities of the complete assortment of cables available for the project,
considering the additional cables of 5 and 10 MW, are depicted in table 3.6. De-
pending on the characteristics of the Test assessed, a different combination of
cables is used.
The incorporation of a new 5 MW capacity cable arises when analyzing the base
case, in which each geenration technology is connected to the grid through an
independent collection system, operating at its rated power. This value is chosen
since the nominal power of the PV systems is 4.9 MW. This way, it is ensured that
each of them is directly connected to the PCC through an independent feeder.
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Energy conversion and transmission equipment specifications
35
Cable capacities (MW)
5,
10,
14.7 ≃15,
21,
29.4
Table 3.6: Capacities of cables used in the project.
The cables of 10 and 15 MW are included as a last resort after running the model
and observing that for the installed powers and the established grid capacity, the
cables are overdimensioned since the power flows do not require cables with such
high capacities.
3.3.2
Inverters
For the selection of the PV inverters, there is a broad range of criteria to be
considered. The project capacity is one of the main drivers since it influences the
inverter connection concept. In the present study, central inverters are chosen
because the power level is on the megawatt scale and also due to the fact that the
PV modules orientation and specifications are assumed to be the same. There-
fore, there is no need to install string inverters with multiple MPPT. Another
fundamental aspect that needs to be taken into account is the desired input and
output voltage levels. The modules in the PV system are arranged in 400 parallel
strings, containing 50 modules connected in series, leading to output voltage and
current of 1.5 kV and 3.252 kA, respectively. Therefore, the inverter needs to be
selected according to those specifications. Indeed, high-eﬀiciency inverters must
be sought. The additional yield often more than compensates for their higher
cost.
After considering all the above-mentioned criteria, the model chosen is the SUN2000-
215KTL-H0 from Huawei. It presents an input voltage level of 1500 V and an
output voltage level of 690 V. This is an advantage since the voltage level after the
wind turbines is also 690 V, which means that regarding the step-up transformer,
two possibilities exist, as it is further explained in Section 3.2.1. A positive aspect
of this model is its high performance, which is greater than 98.6%.
3.3.3
Transformers
The output power from the inverters usually requires a further step-up in voltage.
The primary function of the transformer is to increase the voltage value to one
that is suitable for the transmission of the energy produced to the connection
point. It is thus responsibility of the step-up transformer to rise the voltage to
the required AC grid level, i.e., 25kV, 33kV, 38kV, or 110kV.
==PAGE:52==
36
3 Definition of model inputs
The choice of the voltage level within the HPP plant is essentially a question
of economy. Nevertheless, for plants where the transmittable power is within the
order of dozens of megawatts, the voltage level of the system is often medium,
i.e., 1 kV up to 35 kV. Therefore, a voltage of 33 kV is established inside the HPP.
Besides, as mentioned in previous sections, the voltage at the output of the PV
inverter is 690 V, as is the turbine’s output voltage. The selected transformer is
hence one that elevates the voltage from 690 V to 33 kV.
The turbines generate power at a low voltage level, i.e., below 1 kV. Concretely
in this project, at 690 V, so generally they are equipped with a transformer that
steps up the voltage from the generator level to a medium voltage below 36 kV.
Through this approach, each generation technology has its transformer, and the
junction of the two is thus conducted at a medium voltage of 33 kV. There is
another possibility that involves the connection of wind and solar generators to-
gether at low voltage level of 690 V, with the subsequent sharing of the step-up
transformer, used to bring the tension to 33 kV.
3.4
Data collection
3.4.1
Power time series
The time-series data for wind and solar power are the average series of the mea-
surements taken from 2 locations in India. They contain the time series of wind
and solar generation measured with hourly resolution for the period from Septem-
ber 1, 2018, to October 31, 2019. The data is filtered and the values correspond-
ing to 1 year, i.e. 8760 hours, are extracted, finally leading to a period between
September 1, 2018, to August 31, 2019. The time-series are given for installed
capacities of wind and solar PV power of 100 MW each. They are therefore nor-
malized and scaled to the actual installed power of the HPP. Since three different
cases are studied in this project, one for 20 WTs (42 MW) and 1 PV system (4.9
MW), one for the same number of WTs and 3 PV systems (14.7 MW) and one
for also 20 WTs and 8 PV systems (39.2 MW), the data series are normalized
three times, correspondingly.
Figures 3.8, 3.9 and 3.10 plotted below illustrate the wind and solar PV power
series for the above-mentioned cases.
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Data collection
37
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Hour of the year [h]
0
10
20
30
40
Power [MW]
p_wind
p_solar
Figure 3.8: One year solar and wind time series normalized for 20 WTs and 1 PV system.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Hour of the year [h]
0
10
20
30
40
Power [MW]
p_wind
p_solar
Figure 3.9: One year solar and wind time series normalized for 20 WTs and 3 PV systems.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Hour of the year [h]
0
10
20
30
40
Power [MW]
p_wind
p_solar
Figure 3.10: One year solar and wind time series normalized for 20 WTs and 8 PV systems.
==PAGE:54==
38
3 Definition of model inputs
As previously mentioned in subsection 1.2, in order to simplify the computational
complexity of the optimization problem, it is necessary to reduce the size of the
complete time series by applying various clustering strategies. It is clear that
this also leads to a considerable reduction of the model accuracy; therefore, at
the time of establishing the strategies, those that are more representative must
be applied. It is decided to proceed with four strategies that best capture the
different possible cases, one for nominal power, one for average generation values,
one for peak production values and one for low generation. In addition, a Base
Case is also defined.
Strategy 0
In this strategy, the generating nodes, both turbines and PV systems, op-
erate at their respective nominal powers (2.1 MW and 4.9 MW).
Strategy 1
Most realistic strategy, it intends to highlight the negative correlation be-
tween both technologies. Consists of defining an average production value
for each month, taking into account only the relevant hours for each tech-
nology. In the case of wind, it is decided that these hours are those between
20h and 8h. While for solar, the range of relevant hours is 6h to 18h.
Strategy 2
Strategy built to reflect a high generation scenario. The peak values of each
month are taken and assumed constant throughout the month.
Strategy 3
Aims at illustrating a case where production levels for each month are low.
To do so, for wind, it chooses the values corresponding to the 25-percentile
and, for solar, the values corresponding to the 50-percentile.
Base Case
A base case is defined to represent a scenario in which the collection sys-
tems of both technologies are designed independently. The traditional way
used so far is applied, which consists of dimensioning the cables for the
most demanding and conservative case, in which the generation technolo-
gies operate all the time at nominal power. The purpose of evaluating a
base case is to assess the profitability of designing the electrical collection
system for each energy technology separately, against the solution proposed
in this thesis of a shared electrical infrastructure for both energy generation
sources.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Data collection
39
3.4.2
Cables Costs
The mathematical model used to estimate the capital expenses of the cables is
extracted from [28]. This equation is widely used, and it is displayed below:
Ct = Apt + Bpt · e
( Cpt Snt
108
)2
(3.3)
Here, Ct stands for the cost of cable type t ∈T, given in AC/km, being T the
set of cables available. Apt, Bpt and Cpt are the coeﬀicients of the cost model
and are dependant on the nominal voltage Vn of the cable, as can be seen in Fig.
3.11.
Figure 3.11: Cables cost coeﬀicients.
The unit cost is also based on Snt, which is the rated apparent power of cable
t in V A and depends as well on the line to line voltage level. For the present
project, a power factor of 1 is assumed and thus,
cos φ = 1
(3.4)
This means that the nominal apparent power (Snt) is equal to the nominal active
power (Pnt).
Besides, since the voltage level is 33 kV, the values of Apt, Bpt and Cpt used in
the calculation are 0.411 · 106, 0.596 · 106 and 4.1, respectively.
3.4.3
Electricity prices
The responsible for the HPP development is considered a price-taker since cannot
influence the electricity price and therefore has to accept it.
==PAGE:56==
40
3 Definition of model inputs
The electricity price is used in the mathematical model in order to quantify
the cost of the energy that is curtailed instead of being sold to the power grid.
According to the Electricity Market Report of December 2020 [29], for the case
of India, it takes a value of USD 99/MWh, which corresponds to 82AC/MWh.
Even if the electricity prices are fluctuating and reflect the electricity demand
trend, it is assumed fixed for the whole lifetime of the HPP.
3.4.4
Interest rate
The debt interest rate r, namely the value used to reflect the capital costs of
a project, is a required input used in the objective function of the optimization
problem. It depends on the risk associated with the investment phase of the
project and the source responsible for the funding. In the present study, it is
used to compute the Net Present Value (NPV) of the HPP along its lifetime.
In [30], for the period of 2018 to 2030, for land-based wind and utility PV plants,
the debt interest rate is forecasted to have a value between 4 and 5%. Hence, for
this project, it is assumed to be 4.5%.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 4
Collection System Design
4.1
Problem description
The design of the electrical collection network of an HPP entails the optimal
interconnection of the wind turbines, PV system and Grid that guarantees the
minimization of the initial investment and the curtailed energy along the lifetime
of the plant. The former comprises both the capital cost and the installation cost
of the cables. The electrical losses have been excluded from the model due to
their minor impact on the optimization model.
Following what graph theory describes for wind farms and applying it to the
present case, the HPP can be represented by a tree graph with the root on the
Point of common coupling (PCC) with the power grid. The topology proposed
presents a radial configuration as it is the most common practice, since the inclu-
sion of closed loops can incur in issues when it comes to cable sizing, even if the
reliability of the system increases [23].
A deterministic approach for modelling cables is selected, considering exclusively
radial layouts, due to the fact that for collection systems (33 kV of rated voltage),
contrary to transmission systems (with voltage levels of the order of 110 kV and
higher), it is often done this way.
It is well known that the process of designing the radial cable layout is consider-
ably complex. As a matter of fact, finding the global optimum of this problem is
classified as NP-hard in terms of computational complexity [15]. Meaning that
its solutions can be verified in polynomial time. Regarding the different methods
that can be adopted to tackle the problem, four big clusters outstand.
They
are as follows: heuristics, metaheuristics, global optimization with mathematical
formulations, and hybrids, such as matheuristics [23].
Several options exist within the Global optimization category for modelling the
cable routing problem. The current project is an example of MILP problem as it
is more extensively described in Section 4.2. After completion of the problem’s
formulation, the solution can be found through an external commercial solver. In
particular, the chosen MILP solver is the branch-and-cut solver implemented in
==PAGE:58==
42
4 Collection System Design
IBM ILOG CPLEX Optimization Studio V20.1.0 [31].
As detailed in Section 3, several cable types with different unit costs and ca-
pacities are considered in the model. Thus, optimization also needs to be done
for the most suitable cable selection. Furthermore, given that the cost of the ca-
ble increases with its capacity, the one presenting the lowest price while meeting
the requirements will be optimal.
A critical step in the design process of an HPP is the location of its main com-
ponents: the PV modules and wind turbines. These have been previously de-
termined in Chapter 3.2.1, and are assumed fixed throughout the optimization
problem. The coordinates where the generation sources are located are used to
calculate the distances between the nodes, which are inputs to the mathematical
model. The estimation of the distance between each pair of nodes is done by
calculating the Euclidean distance between them, in 2D. Apart from the already
cited elements, the cost functions and the different scenarios also act as inputs
to solve the problem.
The optimization problem can be divided into two stages: the Investment problem
and the Recourse problem. The scheme in 4.1 is used to illustrate the ensemble
of phases followed in the optimization process. At first, the model is run with
the CPLEX solver, by introducing the resulting power values estimated from the
application of each clustering technique, as many times as defined strategies. By
doing so, the solutions of the investment variables for each strategy are obtained,
resulting in the optimal designs of the collection layout. Then, for the next stage
of the optimization process, namely the Recourse problem, the complete data
series containing one-year hourly power values are used. In addition, the values
of the binary investment variables calculated in the first subproblem are assumed
fixed and introduced in the model. Thereby, the problem becomes linear since it
only contains continuous variables and thus, easier to solve. The CPLEX solver
then provides the values of the flow and curtailment variables for the given layout.
As well as the optimal solution, which represents the investment cost, plus the
cost of the curtailed energy.
==PAGE:59==
4.2 Graph and model representation
43
One year Solar 
time series with 
hourly resolution
One year Wind 
time series with 
hourly resolution
Clustering reduction 
strategies:
S0, S1, S2, S3
Solar S0 values
Solar S1 values
Solar S2 values
Solar S3 values
Wind S0 values
Wind S1 values
Wind S2 values
Wind S3 values
CPLEX
Problem 
(Binary and 
continuous 
vars.)
Investment 
decision 1
Investment 
decision 2
Investment 
decision 3
Investment 
decision 4
CPLEX
Recourse 
Problem 
(Linear)
Optimal sol. 1 + flow 
+ curtailment vars.
Optimal sol. 2 + flow 
+ curtailment vars.
Optimal sol. 3 + flow 
+ curtailment vars.
Optimal sol. 4 + flow 
+ curtailment vars.
Which Strategy 
provides best optimal 
solution?
+
+
+
+
Figure 4.1: Collection system Optimization process: flow diagram.
4.2
Graph and model representation
The formulation of the optimization problem encompasses the design variables,
non-design input parameters, constraints and objectives, as well as the global
architecture of the algorithms used and the followed workflow. In the present
section, the Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP) model is described. Its
formulation has been carried out by defining in the first place the decision vari-
ables and the objective function and then by adding some real-world constraints
to the problem. It is defined as a MILP due to the presence of binary and con-
tinuous variables.
When formulating the mathematical model, two possibilities exist. It is decided
to go for a flow approach over the hop-indexed method for two main reasons
[23]. The first being the existence of two generation sources with different rated
power, which prevents from using the maximum permitted current of the cables
and utilizing instead their maximum allowed power. And secondly, the greater
flexibility and versatility achieved in the modelling process, allowing the inclusion
of energy curtailment, which is used in this case.
The optimization aims at designing the cable routing of the HPP collection sys-
tem for linking together the nW T wind turbines and the nP V inv PV systems
(output nodes of each PV inverter) to the grid node (nG). Concurrently, for each
wind turbine and PV system, a power evacuation route is defined to model the
possibility of energy curtailment.
==PAGE:60==
44
4 Collection System Design
A Set V is defined and divided into three different subsets: containing the WT
nodes VT , the grid position node VG and the nodes of the PV inverter VP. Let
the nodes set be V = VG ∪VT ∪VP, where the element h ∈V, such that
h = 0 corresponds to the PCC, VT = {1, ..., nW T } are the nodes of the WTs
and VP = {1 + nW T , ..., 1 + nW T + nP V inv}, the nodes of the PV systems. The
grid node is considered the root of the distribution network, for it collects in-
coming arcs, while the nodes from the WTs and PV system are the generation
nodes. All nodes h ∈V have associated coordinates in the plane and have been
previously used to calculate the Euclidean distance dij between the positions of
the points i and j.
All these inputs are then combined to form a weighted undirected graph G(V, E, D),
where V is the vertex set, E represents the set containing all available edges ar-
ranged as a pair-set [ij], where i ∈V ∧j ∈V. Finally, D is the set of associated
Euclidean distances for each member [ij] ∈E.
Additionally, let T be a predefined list of different market available cables t ∈T
that can be used to connect each pair of nodes. Where for each type of cable
t ∈T , K represents the set of their respective capacities (kt) sorted in ascending
order and measured in megawatts and U the set containing the cost per unit of
length of each cable type defined by ut. For every type of cable t, kt ≥0 and
ut ≥0.
Once the graph representation is described, the model can be formulated. The
Objective function presents two main components: the Investment costs (cables
capital cost and installation costs) and the cost of the curtailed energy in each
generation source.
The costs of the inverter and the transformers are not in-
cluded in the objective function because these two are inherent parameters from
the selected models. They have fix values, and therefore, as they cannot be acted
upon, they are not subject to optimization. Conversely, the Net Present Value
(NPV) of the generated energy must participate in it to capture the system’s
operation. The possibility of energy curtailment would otherwise force the model
to always propose the least possible production, leading to the dimensioning of
smaller and, thus, cheaper cables. Since the energy curtailed is wasted, there is
a crucial need to minimize it throughout the plant’s lifetime.
In order to consider the presence of several generation states, a set Ωis introduced.
It initially contains 8760 scenarios, one for every hour of the year. However, for
the sake of simplicity, these scenarios are clustered. When strategy 0 is applied,
the number of scenarios is reduced to 1. On the other side, when applying strate-
gies S1, S2 or S3, the scenarios are clustered into 12, one per month of the year.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Graph and model representation
45
These are characterized by ω ∈Ω, being the nominal generation scenario ω = 0,
representing the case where each power source operates at their rated capacity.
Scenarios ω = 1 to ω = 12 capture the generation’s time series for wind and
solar for each month. It is worth mentioning that the inclusion of scenarios in
the model adds significant complexity as the problem becomes a multi-period
planning problem.
In the model, two continuous variables f ω
ij and δh
ω are used in order to rep-
resent the energy that flows from node i to node j and the curtailed power in
node h for scenario ω. In addition, two binary variables are included, xij,t and
yij, and they are described below:
xij,t =



1
if edge[ij]
is constructed with cable type
t
0
otherwise.
[ij] ∈E,
t ∈T
(4.1)
yij =
∑
t∈T
xij,t
[ij] ∈E
(4.2)
yij depicts whether the edge[i j] has been constructed with any kind of cable.
In addition, parameter P ω
h is defined so the power produced in node h ∈V
for scenario ω is characterized. For the cases where h ∈VT and h ∈VP, as these
represent generation nodes where power is produced, P ω
h > 0. Regarding PG, it
stands for the rated power of the grid. Thus, the amount of power sent from the
energy sources to the grid cannot exceed this predefined value. This leads to the
definition of the above-mentioned variable δh
ω that is used to depict the energy
curtailed in node h.
Finally, there are cases in which, non-tree or disconnected solutions can be ob-
tained. For instance, when electricity prices are low, curtailing energy could be
more advantageous. It becomes therefore necessary to introduce some ”dummy”
variables and parameters to the model, to avoid these unfavourable situations.
The aim is constraining the formulation to only provide solutions that exhibit
a tree topology, where all the nodes are connected. These dummy parameters
and variables do not influence the Objective function, and thus, do not modify
the optimal solution.
In order to consider them, the inclusion of a ”dummy”
scenario is also required. Subindex d is used to characterize whether a variable
and a parameter is ”dummy”. This leads to the definition of P ωd
d , a virtual power
generated in each node being assigned a very low value. And f ωd
ij , that stands for
the ”dummy” flow that circulates through the cables in the scenario ”dummy”.
==PAGE:62==
46
4 Collection System Design
4.3
MILP Model
4.3.1
Objective function
Once the graph representation of the problem has been defined, the model for-
mulation is presented.
The Objective function is illustrated in the equation 4.3, where two main ele-
ments can be distinguished.
The first accounts for the cost associated to the initial Investment, which is com-
puted as the sum of the cables’ costs installed in each edge [ij]. It comprises the
capital expenditure of cable t and its installation cost.
The second term represents the reliability represented by the cost of the curtailed
energy at node h, for scenario ω and year µ. Thus, it evaluates the economical
loss incurred throughout the entire lifetime of the HPP (given by parameter m)
resulting from undispatched power. For its calculation, the cost of electricity (ce)
in [AC/MWh] and the discount rate r in [p.u.] are also used.
min

∑
[ij]∈E
∑
t∈T
ut · dij · xij,t +
m
∑
µ=1
∑
h∈VT ∪VP
∑
ω∈Ω
δω
h · ce
(1 + r)µ


(4.3)
Modifications can be implemented in the Equation if different objectives are
aimed. For instance, if only the initial investment optimization is targeted, the
second component of the formula needs to be zeroed.
If otherwise, the mini-
mization of the total length of cables without their associated costs is aimed,
the second term can be cancelled out, and the parameter ut disappears from the
Equation. These lead to simpler problem formulations.
When designing the model with the flow approach, as it is mentioned in the
previous section, a formulation with edges is chosen over arcs. This implies that
it is very hard to incorporate losses in the objective function. Despite this limita-
tion, and even though the arc formulation would allow to include the losses in a
linearized way, this procedure is preferred as the inclusion of power losses would
result in an increase of the model’s complexity.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 MILP Model
47
4.3.2
Constraints
The following Equations are defined to represent the equality and inequality con-
straints of the mixed-integer linear optimization problem.
s.t.
∑
t∈T
xij,t = yij
∀[ij] ∈E
(4.4)
∑
i∈V:i̸=h
∑
ω∈Ω
f ω
hi −f ω
ih + δω
h = P ω
h
∀h ∈VT ∪VP
∀ω ∈Ω
(4.5)
−
∑
t∈T
kt · xij,t ≤f ω
ij ≤
∑
t∈T
kt · xij,t
∀[ij] ∈E
∀ω ∈Ω
(4.6)
∑
h∈VT ∪VP
(P ω
h −δω
h) ≤PG
∀ω ∈Ω
(4.7)
∑
i∈V:i̸=h
(f ωd
hi −f ωd
ih ) = P ωd
d
∀h ∈VT ∪VP
(4.8)
∑
i∈V:i̸=h
f ωd
ih = P ωd
d
· (|VT | + |VP|)
∀h ∈VG
(4.9)
−P ωd
d
· (|VT | + |VP|) · yij ≤f ωd
ij ≤P ωd
d
· (|VT | + |VP|) · yij
∀[ij] ∈E
(4.10)
∑
[ij]∈E
yij = |VT | + |VP|
(4.11)
0 ≤δω
h ≤P ω
h
∀h ∈VT ∪VP
∀ω ∈Ω
(4.12)
xij,t ∈{0, 1}
∀[ij] ∈E
∀t ∈T
(4.13)
yij ∈{0, 1}
∀[ij] ∈E
(4.14)
f ω
ij ∈R
∀[ij] ∈E
∀ω ∈Ω
(4.15)
f ωd
ij ∈R
∀[ij] ∈E
(4.16)
Constraint 4.4 imposes that for each edge [ij] ∈E built between two nodes i and
j, only one kind of cable t can be used.
The flow conservation is depicted by Constraint 4.5. It states that the energy
flow that enters a node (f ω
ih) added to the amount of power generated at that
==PAGE:64==
48
4 Collection System Design
node (P w
h ) must be equal to the sum of the exiting flow (f ω
hi) and the energy
that is curtailed at it (δω
h). Note that this constraint is not imposed to the node
h ∈VG, as it corresponds to the grid, where power is not produced.
On the other hand, the inclusion of Constraint 4.6 ensures that for any scenario,
the power flow through a cable does not exceed its corresponding capacity. This
restriction is composed of two subconstraints, as the flow f ω
ih can be negative or
positive depending on its direction. If f ω
ih is positive it means that the flow goes
from node i to node j, and if it is negative, from j to i.
In addition, Constraint 4.7 aims to illustrate that if the total amount of power
produced in the generating nodes, for each scenario, is greater than the grid rated
power, the excess of electricity needs to be curtailed.
Regarding equations 4.8, 4.9 and 4.10, they are implemented to guarantee that
the cable connections can uniquely follow a tree topology with the root established
in the PCC. The first one depicts the dummy flow conservation. It imposes that
in the dummy scenario, for each WT and PV system node, the sum of power
flows entering the node must be equal to the sum of flows exiting it, added to the
dummy power generated on it. By applying the second Constraint, it is ensured
that the grid receives the sum of all the dummy powers generated in the turbines
and PV system nodes. Lastly, the third equation is used to illustrate that the
dummy flow that can be supported by any installed cable has to be equal to the
capacity of the smallest cable, i.e. if all generators were connected in series to a
cable, that cable could withstand the total dummy power.
Finally, Constraint 4.11 ensures that the total number of edges is strictly the
same that the number of generating nodes. Thus, it is guaranteed that the en-
ergy leaving a generating node must be supported by a single cable.
It is also worth noting that, unlike offshore wind farms, in onshore cases, cable
crossing is not discouraged in application, indeed, it can be beneficial to reduce
the investment costs incurred when installing parallel cables [7]. Therefore, no
restrictions have been applied on this regard.
The mathematical model presented in this section, along with the inputs de-
scribed in Section 3 are used to obtain the optimal solutions of the tests, whose
results are presented in Section 5.
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 5
Results and Discussion
As described in section 3.2.1 and illustrated in Fig. 3.5, diverse tests are run to
evaluate the behaviour of the model and the solutions it provides under each con-
figuration, originated from the combination of a certain layout with other selected
parameters, i.e., grid capacity and cables capacities. The evaluated cases have
been assigned different names, these being tests 1, 2 and 3. Two main analysis
points are highlighted: the comparison between the results from the integrated
optimisation and the optimisation for wind and solar independently, and the
comparison between the results obtained when applying the different clustering
strategies.
The computational tests presented in this section have been carried out on an In-
tel Core i5-8250U CPU running at 1.60 GHz and with 8 GB of RAM. Regarding
the solver, the IBM ILOG CPLEX Optimization Studio V20.1.0, has been used.
In order to control the termination of the MIP optimization, the relative MIP
gap tolerance is set to 0.001 (i.e., 0.1%). The purpose of defining this parameter
is to instruct CPLEX to stop the optimization as soon as it has found a feasible
integer solution proved to be within 0.1% of optimal.
5.1
Test 1
As seen in Figure 3.5, Test 1 corresponds to the case where 3 cable types of
capacities 5, 21 and 29.4 MW are available, 3 PV systems are installed and the
rated capacity of the grid is established at 35 MW.
As described in Section 4.1, the optimization problem has two stages, the Invest-
ment and the Recourse problems. The optimal solution of the whole optimization
corresponds to that of the Recourse problem, since it represents the integration of
the investment cost of the cables and the cost resulting from the energy curtailed.
From Table 5.1, it is noted that the best optimal solution is obtained when
applying strategy S1. This means that taking into account the negative correla-
tion of wind and solar PV results beneficial, due to the fact that the sum of the
investment cost, and the cost associated to curtailed energy, shows the lowest
==PAGE:66==
50
5 Results and Discussion
value of all.
Strategy
solution_value
Investment
solution_value2
Recourse
S0 nominal
€ 140,392,134.10
€ 25,026,193.87
S1 average
€ 11,134,534.73
€ 21,055,920.05
S2 peak values
€ 126,201,071.42
€ 21,272,270.93
S3 low values
€ 9,921,368.92
€ 57,014,492.16
Table 5.1: Optimal solution results for Test 1.
Based on the result from S0, it can be observed that the solution of the Invest-
ment problem leads to the discard of a considerable amount of energy.
This
being mainly due to the nominal power operation of the generating nodes, which
provide a total power of 56.7 MW, higher than the grid’s 35 MW capacity. This
results in the optimal solution reaching a value of approximately 140 MAC. Sub-
sequently, the generated layout is introduced in the model along with the power
time-series, resulting in a considerable decrease of the curtailed energy, due to
the lower power values (using the nominal power as a reference).
Strategy S2 reveals a similar trend to that of strategy S0, since it uses peak
generation values that are slightly lower than the nominal values, thus incurring
in a marginally lower amount of discarded energy.
Finally, results obtained while running strategy S3 display a different pattern.
Indeed, in the first-stage problem, the cables are dimensioned considering low
power values in the generating nodes. Moreover, since the total power produced
does not exceed the grid limit, there is no energy curtailment. Nevertheless, when
the second-stage problem is run with the layout obtained in the previous prob-
lem in conjunction with the real-time series, since these are higher than those of
strategy S3 and the installed cables do not have enough capacity, the curtailed
energy rises considerably. As in can be appreciated also in Table 5.1, this results
in a significant cost value.
The resulting collection system networks obtained by each strategy are illustrated
in Figures 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4. It is observed that for strategy S0 (Figure 5.1),
PV systems in nodes 21 and 22 are connected directly to the PCC, and do not
share the electrical infrastructure with the WTs.
==PAGE:67==
5.1 Test 1
51
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
-0.0
2
0.0
3
0.0
4
0.0
5
0.542
6
0.0
7
-0.0
8
-0.0
9
-0.0
10
-0.0
11
-0.0
12
0.0
13
0.0
14
0.0
15
0.0
16
0.924
17
0.0
18
0.0
19
0.542
20
-0.0
21
0.0
22
0.0
23
0.0
3.173
3.173
14.638
5.0
0.924
1.847
2.771
10.944
4.618
3.695
2.771
1.847
0.924
0.924
1.847
2.771
5.0
4.076
3.153
3.153
2.229
1.305
0.924
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Figure 5.1: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 0 to Test 1.
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
-0.0
2
0.0
3
0.0
4
0.0
5
0.0
6
0.0
7
0.0
8
0.0
9
0.0
10
-0.0
11
-0.0
12
0.0
13
0.0
14
0.0
15
-0.0
16
0.0
17
0.0
18
0.0
19
0.0
20
-0.0
21
0.0
22
0.0
23
0.0
14.659
13.333
0.924
1.847
2.771
11.486
7.791
10.16
4.618
3.695
2.771
1.847
0.924
0.924
1.847
2.771
4.618
0.924
3.695
4.618
2.771
1.847
0.924
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Figure 5.2: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 1 to Test 1.
==PAGE:68==
52
5 Results and Discussion
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
-0.0
2
0.0
3
0.0
4
0.0
5
0.0
6
0.0
7
0.0
8
0.0
9
0.0
10
-0.0
11
-0.0
12
0.0
13
0.0
14
0.0
15
0.542
16
-0.0
17
-0.0
18
-0.0
19
0.0
20
-0.0
21
0.0
22
0.0
23
0.0
3.173
8.715
15.562
0.924
1.847
2.771
11.867
0.924
3.695
4.618
2.771
1.847
0.924
0.924
1.847
2.771
3.695
4.618
5.0
3.695
2.771
1.847
0.924
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Figure 5.3: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 2 to Test 1.
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
0.924
2
0.924
3
0.02
4
0.0
5
0.0
6
0.924
7
0.924
8
0.02
9
0.924
10
0.924
11
0.924
12
0.924
13
0.924
14
0.924
15
0.924
16
0.924
17
0.924
18
0.924
19
0.924
20
0.924
21
0.0
22
0.0
23
3.173
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.903
1.827
0.0
1.827
0.903
0.903
0.903
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Figure 5.4: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 3 to Test 1.
==PAGE:69==
5.2 Test 2
53
5.2
Test 2
The next studied test, namely Test 2, also consists of 3 PV systems, 20 WTs and
a grid rated capacity of 35 MW, although it differs from Test 1 in the available
cables. For the present test the cables capacities are lower, these being 5, 10 and
15 MW, and they adjust better to the actual installed power of the HPP. The
consequence is a reduction in the value of the best optimal solution, which is also
achieved by means of strategy S1. The results obtained in Test 2 are listed in
Table 5.2, and present a similar behaviour to those from Test 1.
Strategy
solution_value
Investment
solution_value2
Recourse
S0 nominal
€ 140,294,721.06
€ 29,563,520.05
S1 average
€ 10,613,970.39
€ 20,600,466.41
S2 peak values
€ 125,965,525.92
€ 21,054,239.47
S3 low values
€ 10,173,399.76
€ 57,266,523.00
Table 5.2: Optimal solution results for Test 2.
The results from the implementation of strategies S0 and S2 perform the same way
as they did in the previous test. Concerning the investment problem, also known
as first-stage problem, they exhibit very high values, that are then reduced when
running the model with the power time-series. Again, strategy 3 shows the worst
performance, since it underdimensions the cables, thus leading to high values of
curtailed energy. Strategy 1, provides an optimal solution value which is even
lower than the value calculated in Test 1. It can therefore be concluded that
it is worthwhile to select cables with capacities large enough to withstand the
required power flow without incurring in oversizing, i.e., to match the installed
power level of the plant.
5.3
Test 3
The configuration corresponding to test 3 is the most relevant as it is the one that
most accurately depicts an HPP plant. The reason is that the installed capaci-
ties of wind and solar present similar values (42 MW and 39.2 MW, respectively),
and the grid capacity value is set at half of the total installed capacity (40 MW,
compared to a total installed power of 81.2 MW). Regarding the cables, three
different types are available, with capacities of 5, 10, 15 MW, being adequate for
the power level of the plant.
==PAGE:70==
54
5 Results and Discussion
In Table 5.3, it is observed that the result from strategy S1 is significantly lower
than the values obtained from the other strategies. This certainly shows that,
in terms of profitability, taking into consideration the negative correlation of the
generating technologies is advantageous.
Strategy
solution_value
Investment
solution_value2
Recourse
S0 nominal
€ 259,527,253.62
€ 47,104,251.01
S1 average
€ 14,152,950.43
€ 28,518,115.08
S2 peak values
€ 232,938,096.14
€ 46,898,109.11
S3 low values
€ 11,273,282.03
€ 89,970,859.34
Base Case
€ 14,324,182.50
€ 35,764,540.41
Base Case PV in series
€ 15,825,764.74
€ 48,382,644.33
Table 5.3: Optimal solution results for Test 3.
In addition, strategy S1 presents the lowest change from the provided solution
when running the model with the clustering strategy, with respect to the solu-
tion obtained for the whole data series. This gives an idea of the accuracy of the
clustering technique, whose data is a much better representation of the real time-
series data. It is thus desirable to use more realistic power values for determining
the cables to be installed, rather than dimensioning them based on the nominal
power ratings of the generators, as it is done with strategy S0 and similarly, with
S2. The S1 approach leads to less energy curtailment. Moreover, the capacities
of the main feeders in the electrical collection system generated with strategy
S1 are more eﬀiciently exploited than those generated through strategy S0 and
analogously with S2, as it can be appreciated in Figures 5.6 and 5.5.
The practice that is most strongly discouraged is that of sizing for very low
generation values (strategy S3), since for all the tests, it results in very high costs
(see Tables 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3). The reason behind is that the cabling is designed
considering that the generation nodes produce small amounts of power. However,
when the selected cabling is run with the actual power series, the cables do not
have suﬀicient capacity and a very high amount of energy has to be discarded.
This curtailed energy has a huge associated cost.
==PAGE:71==
5.3 Test 3
55
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
0.0
2
0.0
3
0.0
4
0.0
5
0.924
6
0.924
7
0.0
8
0.0
9
0.0
10
0.0
11
0.542
12
0.0
13
0.0
14
0.924
15
0.0
16
0.924
17
0.0
18
0.0
19
0.0
20
0.0
21
1.867
22
3.173
23
3.173
24
1.346
25
0.0
26
0.0
27
0.0
28
0.0
0.924
0.924
10.944
6.847
11.346
1.847
2.771
1.305
0.0
5.0
5.0
5.0
3.173
9.097
10.02
0.382
1.305
2.229
2.229
3.153
3.153
4.076
5.0
5.924
1.305
1.827
3.173
5.0
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Cable type 3
Figure 5.5: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 0 to Test 3.
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
0.0
2
0.0
3
0.0
4
0.0
5
0.0
6
0.0
7
0.924
8
0.924
9
0.0
10
0.0
11
0.0
12
0.0
13
0.0
14
0.0
15
0.0
16
0.16
17
0.0
18
0.0
19
0.0
20
0.0
21
0.0
22
0.0
23
0.061
24
0.0
25
0.0
26
1.788
27
0.0
28
0.0
0.924
0.924
15.0
9.076
15.0
1.847
2.771
6.346
3.112
13.153
14.076
15.0
15.0
14.076
0.924
1.847
2.771
3.695
4.618
5.382
6.305
7.229
8.153
3.173
3.173
3.173
1.385
6.346
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Cable type 3
Figure 5.6: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 1 to Test 3.
==PAGE:72==
56
5 Results and Discussion
After having analysed the strategies explained above, two variants of the Base
Case are studied. The optimisation problem is run only with the WTs, provid-
ing a network. Then, the PVs are connected directly, without performing any
optimisation. In the first studied case, each PV system is forced to be directly
connected to the PCC, while in the second case, the PV systems are connected
in series among each other and then connected to the PCC. The two alternatives
are depicted in Figures 5.7 and 5.8.
Particularly, implementing the latter alternative results more expensive that con-
necting each PV system directly to the PCC. In both cases, the solution values
depicted in Table 5.3 are worse than those obtained with strategy S1, confirming
that the approach of establishing a common electricity infrastructure for both
generation technologies is much more cost-effective and beneficial.
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
0.924
2
0.924
3
0.924
4
0.924
5
0.0
6
0.0
7
0.0
8
0.0
9
0.0
10
0.0
11
0.0
12
0.0
13
0.0
14
0.0
15
0.0
16
0.0
17
0.0
18
0.0
19
0.0
20
0.0
21
0.0
22
0.0
23
0.0
24
0.0
25
0.0
26
0.161
27
0.0
28
0.0
0.924
0.0
4.618
5.542
3.173
3.011
3.173
3.173
3.173
3.173
3.173
3.173
3.695
0.0
0.0
0.924
1.847
2.771
3.695
0.924
1.847
2.771
0.0
0.924
1.847
2.771
3.695
4.618
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Cable type 3
Figure 5.7: Optimal collection system layout for the base case of Test 3.
==PAGE:73==
5.3 Test 3
57
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
0.0
2
0.0
3
0.0
4
0.0
5
0.0
6
0.0
7
0.0
8
0.0
9
0.0
10
0.0
11
0.0
12
0.0
13
0.0
14
0.0
15
0.0
16
0.0
17
0.0
18
0.0
19
0.0
20
0.0
21
1.346
22
0.0
23
0.0
24
0.0
25
1.346
26
1.346
27
3.173
28
3.173
2.771
0.924
2.771
5.0
5.0
5.0
6.466
6.466
1.847
0.924
1.847
2.771
0.924
4.618
0.924
1.847
0.924
3.695
4.618
5.542
0.924
0.924
1.847
1.827
3.173
3.173
5.0
5.0
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Cable type 3
Figure 5.8: Optimal collection system layout for the base case of Test 3 layout
when forcing PV systems to be connected in series.
Another advantage that results from building a common electrical infrastructure
for the energy technologies wind and solar PV and proves its profitability, is the
increased utilisation factor. The installation of cables that collect the power flow
from the energy generated in both the WTs and the PV systems allows the cable
to be in use during longer hours. Whereas if a cable is only used for solar PV, it
will not reach its full capacity (or not even be used at all) during the full range
of night-time hours.
For this reason, the utilization factor of the main feeders is calculated for Test 3
and for the Base Case. From Test 3, the strategy that yields the best solution,
which is strategy S1, is selected for the calculation. The results obtained show
that when running the Base case, the utilization factors of the main feeders, ca-
bles connecting the PCC to node 14 and cable connecting the PCC with node 9
(see Figure 5.7), are 26.40% and 22.39%, respectively. On the other hand, the
cable selected for the calculation of the utilization factor in Test 3, strategy S1 is
cable 0-8. This particular cable is chosen as it connects 8 WTs and 3 PV systems,
as it can be seen in Figure 5.6. The value obtained is of 53.40%, which represents
an increase of 103% and 138.5%, with reference to the 26.40% and 22.39% values
obtained from the Base cases.
==PAGE:74==
58
5 Results and Discussion
Table 5.4 displays a summary of the most relevant results extracted from the
conducted analyses.
Optimal solution
Profitability Increase
Strategy 0
€ 47,104,251.01
Strategy 1
€ 28,518,115.08
39.46%
Strategy 1
€ 28,518,115.08
Base Case (independent collection systems)
€ 35,764,540.41
20,26%
Main feeder utilization factor
Increase
Strategy 1
53.40%
Base Case (cable with only Wind)
22.40%
138.42%
Strategy 1
53.40%
Base Case (cable with only PV)
22.78%
134.42%
Table 5.4: Overview of results obtained from the evaluation of Test 6.
Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that for the present test, the computational
time elapsed for solving the optimization problem rises substantially as a conse-
quence of its elevated complexity with respect to Tests 1 and 2. The total time
incurred by the solver to find the optimal solution of Test 3 through branch and
cut optimization is of 3612.19 seconds, whereas for Tests 1 and 2 is of 22.95 and
19.41 seconds, respectively.
All things considered, the results obtained from Test 3 are much more conclu-
sive.
It can be appreciated how beneficial it is to design a shared electrical
infrastructure for wind and solar PV, in which the cables are dimensioned con-
sidering power values resembling the real generation values. Hence, taking into
account the negative correlation of wind and solar.
Moreover, throughout the project, it has been mentioned on numerous occasions
how beneficial is the integration of wind and solar in the same plant, with shared
electrical infrastructure. For this purpose, the result of Test 3 obtained for strat-
egy S1, is chosen to be assessed. More specifically, the behavior of the power
flow through the cable linking nodes 0 and 8. The plots in Figure 5.9 intend to
illustrate this fact. The first subplot is a representation of the wind power series
of the 8 WTs that are connected to cable 0-8, over the course of a week. Like-
wise, the solar series of 3 PV systems connected to the same cable are plotted in
the second subplot. Finally, the third graph depicts the actual power that flows
through the aforementioned cable, obtained from the optimization problem.
==PAGE:75==
5.3 Test 3
59
3600
3625
3650
3675
3700
3725
3750
3775
3800
0
5
10
15
Wind power time series [MW] per hour
3600
3625
3650
3675
3700
3725
3750
3775
3800
0
5
10
15
Solar power time series [MW] per hour
3600
3625
3650
3675
3700
3725
3750
3775
3800
0
5
10
15
Flow cable 0-8 (8 WTs and 3 PV syst) [MW] per hour
Figure 5.9: Top: Time-series of power generated by 8 WTs over 1 week. Middle:
Time-series of power generated by 3 PV systems over 1 week. Bottom: Power
flow through cable 0-8 connecting 8 WTs and 3 PV systems over 1 week (3600
hour to 3800 hours.
It can be appreciated how the negative correlation between both generation tech-
nologies allows the power flow through the cable to be significantly more con-
stant and to slightly reduce the inherent fluctuations from the operation of both
technologies independently. The power supply becomes more dispatchable and
moments of very low or even zero production can be more easily avoided. On
the other hand, the fact that only a few cases arise in which the generation from
the RES exceeds the capacity of the installed cable (15 MW) is representative
of a well performed dimensioning. If only PV systems were connected to this
cable, generation would only be available during daylight hours and it would be
impossible to meet the demand. Besides, if more PV systems were connected to
the cable in question, the positive effect of the combination would become even
greater. Due to the fact that during periods of low wind generation, the energy
production of solar would increase and it would result in a flatter combined power
flow.
Finally, a sensitivity analysis is conducted to test the robustness of the outcomes
and evaluate the sensitivity of the conclusions and results to variations of inputs
entered in the optimizer. Due to the significant weight the electricity price has
==PAGE:76==
60
5 Results and Discussion
on the objective function, it is decided to assess how variations in this parameter
can affect the optimal solution proposed by the model.
The price of electricity introduced in Test 6 is increased from an initial value of
82AC/MWh to 100AC/MWh, to evaluate its influence on the solution. Analogously,
the same variation is implemented in the Base Case in order to compare both
results. Figures 5.10 and 5.11 illustrate the layouts resulting from the considera-
tion of the aforementioned electricity price. The values of the optimal solutions
obtained from both cases are 28,429,440.81AC and 36,852,570.71AC, respectively.
This proves that for a scenario with higher electricity prices, the implementation
of a shared electrical infrastructure is still more advantageous than the installa-
tion of independent collection systems.
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
0.0
2
0.0
3
0.924
4
0.04
5
0.0
6
0.0
7
0.924
8
0.0
9
0.0
10
0.0
11
0.0
12
0.0
13
0.0
14
0.0
15
0.0
16
0.0
17
0.0
18
0.0
19
0.0
20
0.0
21
0.0
22
0.0
23
0.0
24
2.692
25
0.0
26
0.02
27
0.0
28
0.0
0.924
0.924
10.924
12.409
15.0
1.847
1.847
6.346
9.076
10.0
10.924
3.153
14.076
10.0
0.924
1.847
2.771
3.173
6.867
7.791
8.715
9.638
10.562
11.486
3.173
0.481
3.173
3.654
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Cable type 3
Figure 5.10: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 1 to Test
3 with an electricity price of 100AC/MWh.
==PAGE:77==
5.3 Test 3
61
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
0.924
2
0.924
3
0.924
4
0.924
5
0.0
6
0.0
7
0.0
8
0.0
9
0.0
10
0.0
11
0.0
12
0.0
13
0.0
14
0.0
15
0.0
16
0.0
17
0.0
18
0.0
19
0.0
20
0.0
21
0.0
22
0.0
23
0.0
24
0.0
25
0.0
26
0.161
27
0.0
28
0.0
0.924
0.0
4.618
5.542
3.173
3.011
3.173
3.173
3.173
3.173
3.173
3.173
3.695
0.0
0.0
0.924
1.847
2.771
3.695
0.924
1.847
2.771
0.0
0.924
1.847
2.771
3.695
4.618
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Cable type 3
Figure 5.11: Optimal collection system layout when testing an electricity price
of 100AC/MWh in the Base Case.
==PAGE:78==
62
==PAGE:79==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusions and Future work
6.1
Conclusions
The aim of this project is to investigate the economic profitability of designing
a shared collection network for a Hybrid Power Plant (HPP) composed of two
Renewable Energy Sources (RES), namely wind and solar photovoltaic (PV). To
do so, a mathematical optimisation model has been built to find the optimal
electrical infrastructure, minimizing investment costs as well as curtailed energy
throughout the plant’s lifetime. This topic is of crucial interest due to the geo-
graphical closeness of the generation assets and their complementary nature.
For this purpose, three different configurations, referred to as tests throughout the
thesis, have been proposed and analysed. The latter consist of the combination
of diverse HPP layouts and system specifications, namely cables and grid rated
capacities. Each test has been evaluated under different clustering strategies, de-
fined to reduce the computational time and complexity of the optimisation model.
After conducting the analysis of all the tests, Test 3, in which the renewable
generation technologies present similar installed powers and a grid rated capac-
ity of ca. 50% of the total installed capacity, is found to be the most realistic one,
thus leading to the most reliable results. Then, the optimal solution from the
strategy leading to the lowest cost (i.e., strategy S1) is identified and compared
to the solution obtained when running the Base Case (i.e., nominal power oper-
ation and independent collection systems). It is proven that it is substantially
more economically profitable to design a shared electrical infrastructure for the
RES, leading to a cost of 28.52 MAC, instead of designing them independently,
resulting in 35.76 MAC. Quantitatively, the profitability of the former alternative
is improved by 20.25%, with respect to the latter. Additional benefits resulting
from installing a shared electrical collection network are, a more eﬀiciently ex-
ploited electrical infrastructure and an increased cables utilization factor. The
latter shows a value of 22.39% in the Base Case, and of 53.40% for strategy S1,
representing an increase of 138.5%. It is also noted that for all the assessed tests,
strategy S1 exhibits a better performance. This demonstrates that, in terms of
cost-effectiveness, it is undoubtedly more beneficial to use power generation val-
ues of wind and solar that reflect their negative correlation, rather than opting
==PAGE:80==
64
6 Conclusions and Future work
for the conventional procedure of assuming constant nominal power operation.
It is anticipated that this work will serve as a first step for the development of
more comprehensive models aiming at designing the collection network of HPPs,
and ultimately encourage the implementation of such plants. Indeed, this study
contributes to enhance their economic profitability.
6.2
Recommendations for Future work
Several imitations and assumptions are highlighted throughout the thesis, and
further recommendations are therefore suggested in the followings, to improve
the comprehensiveness and reduce the uncertainties of future studies on HPPs:
• Evaluation of more precise clustering strategies for the power series to assess
a potential enhancement of the model.
• Analysis of optimal HPP topology, (i.e., installation of shared or individual
transformer) when considering power losses incurred in cables, in order to
assess the trade-offs between the cost associated to electrical losses in the
cables and cost of the installed transformers.
• Study of the result and possible benefits of implementing a DC-coupled
HPP for HVAC or HVDC connection.
• Incorporation of a storage technology in the HPP to further enhance the
benefits of the RES.
• Utilization of time-varying electricity prices in the Recourse problem in
order to make the model more realistic.
• Consideration of the reactive power of cables, in fact interesting for Wind
Turbine controllability, may lead to the need of cables having bigger cross-
sectional areas.
• Inclusion of the costs of transformers and inverters in the model to assess
the system more accurately.
Considering these aspects could broaden the definition of the optimal collection
system of an HPP and strengthen the outcomes of the study.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1]
Energy transition Outlook 2020. DNV GL, 2020.
[2]
United Nations. Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). https://www.
undp.org/sustainable- development- goals?utm_source=EN&utm_
medium=GSR&utm_content=US_UNDP_PaidSearch_Brand_English&utm_
campaign=CENTRAL&c_src=CENTRAL&c_src2=GSR&gclid=CjwKCAjwlrqHBhByEiwAnLmYUB96KycM
YH-ceo9XYTPWBfn4n3BoC8coQAvD_BwE.
[3]
United Nations. Paris Agreement. https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/
international/negotiations/paris_en.
[4]
International Energy Agency. World Energy Investment 2020. IEA, 2020.
[5]
Katherine Dykes, Jennifer King, Nicholas Diorio. “Research Opportunities
in the Physical Design Optimization of Hybrid Power Plants.” In: 4th In-
ternational Hybrid Power Systems Workshop (2019).
[6]
Windlab. Construction to start on $160 million Kennedy Energy Park in
North Queensland. windlab. Dec. 2017.
[7]
Kaan Deveci, Burak Barutçu, Emre Alpman, Akın Ta¸scıkarao˘glu. “Elec-
trical Layout Optimization of Onshore Wind Farms Based on a Two-Stage
Approach.” In: IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy (2020).
[8]
Alessandra Cossu. “Optimal sizing of hybrid power plant.” In: (July 2020).
[9]
Arnau González, Jordi-Roger Riba, Antoni Rius, Rita Puig Escola. “Opti-
mal sizing of a hybrid grid-connected photovoltaic and wind power system.”
In: Journal Applied Energy (2015).
[10]
Pragya Nema, R.K. Nemab, Saroj Rangnekar. “A current and future state
of art development of hybrid energy system using wind and PV-solar: A
review.” In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews (2009).
[11]
Renewable Hybrid Power Plants: Exploring the benefits and market oppor-
tunities. Wind Europe, July 2019.
[12]
Petersen, Lennart; Hesselbæk, Bo; Martinez, Antonio; Borsotti-Andruszkiewicz,
Roberto M.; Tarnowski, German Claudio; Steggel, Nathan; Osmond, Dave.
“Vestas Power Plant Solutions Integrating Wind, Solar PV and Energy
Storage.” In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Hybrid Power Systems
Workshop (2018).
==PAGE:82==
66
Bibliography
[13]
Badwawi, Rashid Al Abusara, Mohammad Mallick. “A Review of Hybrid
Solar PV and Wind Energy System.” In: Journal Smart Science (2015).
[14]
Ana Cabrera-Tobar, Eduard Bullich-Massagué, Mònica Aragüés-Peñalba,
Oriol Gomis-Bellmunt. “Topologies for large scale photovoltaic power plants.”
In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews (June 2016).
[15]
Martina Fischetti, David Pisinger. “Optimizing wind farm cable routing
considering power losses.” In: European Journal of Operational Research
(2018).
[16]
Juan-Andrés Pérez-Rúa, Nicolaos A. Cutululis. “Electrical Cable Optimiza-
tion in Offshore Wind Farms - A review.” In: IEEE Access (2019).
[17]
S. Dutta and T. J. Overbye. “A clustering based wind farm collector sys-
tem cable layout design.” In: 2011 IEEE Power and Energy Conference at
Illinois (2011).
[18]
Francisco M. Gonzalez-Longatt et al. “Optimal Electric Network Design
for a Large Offshore Wind Farm Based on a Modified Genetic Algorithm
Approach.” In: IEEE Systems Journal 6.1 (2012), pp. 164–172.
[19]
T. D. Daly A. M. J. Pemberton and N. Ertugrul. “On-Shore Wind Farm
Cable Network Optimisation Utilising a Multiobjective Genetic Algorithm.”
In: Journal of the Operational Research Society 37.6 (2013), pp. 659–673.
[20]
Jens Lysgaard. Joanna Bauer. “The offshore wind farm array cable lay-
out problem: a planar open vehicle routing problem.” In: Journal of the
Operational Research Society 66.3 (2015), pp. 360–368.
[21]
Alain Hertz et al. “Optimizing the design of a wind farm collection network.”
eng. In: Infor 50.2 (2012), pp. 95–104. issn: 19160615, 03155986. doi: 10.
3138/infor.50.2.095.
[22]
Adelaide Cerveira et al. “Optimal Cable Design of Wind Farms: The In-
frastructure and Losses Cost Minimization Case.” In: IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems 31.6 (2012), pp. 4319–4329.
[23]
Juan-Andrés Pérez-Rúa. “Electrical Network Design for Offshore Wind:
Analysis, Mathematical Modelling, and Optimization.” In: (May 2020).
[24]
International Finance Corporation. “Utility-Scale Solar Photovoltaic Power
Plants.” In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews (2015).
[25]
United States Agency for International Development (USAID). “NTPC
Solar Wind Hybrid at Kudgi. White paper on Design Approach for Wind-
solar Hybrids.” In: (2017).
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
67
[26]
Kaushik Das et al. “Enhanced Features of Wind based Hybrid Power Plants.”
In: Proceedings of the 4th International Hybrid Power Systems Workshop.
4th International Hybrid Power Systems Workshop ; Conference date: 22-05-
2019 Through 23-05-2019. 2019. url: http://hybridpowersystems.org/.
[27]
Juanita Ojeda. “Hybrid Renewables: collaborating towards a greener fu-
ture.” In: General Electric Company, 2019.
[28]
Junxian Li, Weihao Hu, Xiawei Wu, Qi Huang, Zhou Liu, Cong Chen, Zhe
Chen. “Cable Connection Optimization for Onshore Wind Farms Consid-
ering Restricted Area and Topography.” In: IEEE Systems Journal (2020).
[29]
International Energy Agency. Electricity Market Report: December 2020.
IEA, 2020.
[30]
David Feldman, Mark Bolinger, Paul Schwabe. “Current and Future Costs
of Renewable Energy Project Finance Across Technologies.” In: NREL/TP-
6A20-76881 (2020).
[31]
IBM. Introducing IBM ILOG CPLEX Optimization Studio 20.1.0. https:
//www.ibm.com/docs/en/icos/20.1.0?topic=2010-introducing-ilog-
cplex-optimization-studio.
==PAGE:84==
68
==PAGE:85==
Appendix
Test 2 - Additional plots
The following plots (Figures 1, 2, 3 and 4) have not been included in Chapter 5
for the sake of conciseness, since they lead to solutions which are similar to those
obtained from Test 1. It is observed that they do not provide significant added
value. Nevertheless, the results extracted serve to support the main findings and
conclusions deduced from the overall analysis.
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
-0.0
2
0.0
3
0.0
4
0.0
5
0.0
6
0.0
7
0.0
8
0.0
9
0.0
10
-0.0
11
-0.0
12
0.0
13
0.0
14
0.0
15
0.924
16
0.0
17
0.924
18
0.542
19
0.924
20
0.924
21
0.0
22
0.0
23
0.0
5.944
3.173
9.097
5.542
0.924
1.847
2.771
8.173
4.618
3.695
2.771
1.847
0.924
0.924
1.847
2.771
5.0
1.305
1.305
0.382
0.382
0.0
0.0
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Cable type 3
Figure 1: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 0 to Test 2.
==PAGE:86==
70
Appendix
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
-0.0
2
0.0
3
0.0
4
0.0
5
0.0
6
0.0
7
0.0
8
0.0
9
0.0
10
-0.0
11
-0.0
12
0.0
13
0.0
14
0.0
15
0.0
16
0.0
17
0.0
18
0.0
19
0.0
20
-0.0
21
0.0
22
0.0
23
0.0
5.944
8.715
13.333
0.924
1.847
2.771
12.409
5.542
4.618
3.695
2.771
1.847
0.924
0.924
1.847
2.771
9.237
5.542
4.618
3.695
2.771
1.847
0.924
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Cable type 3
Figure 2: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 1 to Test 2.
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
-0.0
2
0.0
3
0.0
4
0.0
5
0.0
6
0.0
7
0.0
8
0.0
9
0.0
10
-0.0
11
-0.0
12
0.0
13
0.0
14
0.0
15
0.0
16
0.542
17
0.0
18
-0.0
19
0.0
20
-0.0
21
0.0
22
0.0
23
0.0
5.944
8.715
12.791
0.924
1.847
2.771
11.867
5.542
4.618
3.695
2.771
1.847
0.924
0.924
1.847
2.771
8.695
5.0
4.076
3.695
2.771
1.847
0.924
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Cable type 3
Figure 3: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 2 to Test 2.
==PAGE:87==
Test 2 - Additional plots
71
200
400
600
800
1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
0.924
2
0.924
3
0.02
4
0.0
5
0.0
6
0.924
7
0.924
8
0.02
9
0.924
10
0.924
11
0.924
12
0.924
13
0.924
14
0.924
15
0.924
16
0.924
17
0.924
18
0.924
19
0.924
20
0.924
21
0.0
22
0.0
23
3.173
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.903
1.827
0.0
1.827
0.903
0.903
0.903
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Figure 4: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 3 to Test 2.
==PAGE:88==
72
Appendix
Test 3 - Additional plots
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
0.924
2
0.924
3
0.02
4
0.924
5
0.924
6
0.924
7
0.0
8
0.0
9
0.0
10
0.0
11
0.924
12
0.924
13
0.0
14
0.924
15
0.0
16
0.0
17
0.0
18
0.0
19
0.0
20
0.0
21
3.173
22
3.173
23
0.0
24
0.0
25
0.0
26
0.0
27
0.0
28
0.0
0.924
0.0
10.944
5.542
12.692
0.0
0.903
0.0
4.097
5.0
5.0
5.0
3.173
9.097
10.02
0.0
0.0
0.924
0.924
0.924
1.847
2.771
3.695
4.618
0.0
3.173
3.173
6.346
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Cable type 3
Figure 5: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 2 to Test 3.
==PAGE:89==
Test 3 - Additional plots
73
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
0.0
1
0.924
2
0.924
3
0.924
4
0.924
5
0.0
6
0.0
7
0.0
8
0.0
9
0.924
10
0.0
11
0.924
12
0.0
13
0.924
14
0.924
15
0.924
16
0.924
17
0.924
18
0.0
19
0.924
20
0.924
21
3.173
22
3.173
23
0.02
24
3.173
25
2.791
26
3.173
27
3.173
28
3.173
10.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.924
1.847
7.771
5.0
8.153
9.076
9.076
0.0
0.924
0.924
3.153
4.076
4.076
4.076
5.0
0.924
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
8.153
0.0
Curtailment [MW]
Power flow [MW]
PCC
WTs
PVs
Cable type 1
Cable type 2
Figure 6: Optimal collection system layout when applying strategy 3 to Test 3.
