==PAGE:1==
Distant Management Challenges At the Time
of the COVID­19 Pandemic
Investigating the effects of teleworking on or­
ganizational performance
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
Investigating the effects of teleworking on organizational performance
Master Thesis
01 of July, 2021
By
Lars Christian Jacobsen & Thomas Giannoulopoulos
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU,
Department
of
Technology,
Management
and
Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
rrrXKMX/imX/F
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This report has been prepared over five months at the Department of Technology, Man­
agement and Economics, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of research.
Lars Christian Jacobsen & Thomas Giannoulopoulos ­ s192932, s192419
Signature
Date
ii
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
01.07.2021
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In 2020, the world faced a pandemic that would change the way millions of people lived
their life. The corona virus (COVID­19) outbreak forced governments across the world to
enforce restrictions regarding social distancing and work. Consequently, organizations
had to send their employees home to work remotely. This way of working is called tele­
working. Teleworking refers to working from a different location than the traditional work­
place using particular telecommunications tools and practices. Teleworking has been in
practice for a long time, but not in a complete level as happened in many organizations
due to the COVID­19 lockdown.
This unfamiliar way of working provoke numerous new challenges for managers and em­
ployees that few have experienced before. Limited research have been conducted on the
matter and therefore it was found to be an interesting research topic. This master thesis
will focus on managerial challenges faced during the lockdown period of 2020 until spring
2021. The main topics of investigation are communication, productivity, well­being and
performance. These topics was considered to represent real evidence regarding changes,
implementations of new communication techniques and performance metrics in a remote
setup. The present research is focusing on the direction to determine the positive and
negative effects and characteristics of teleworking. Through literature review, qualitative
structured interviews with managers and questionnaires with employees of engineering
organizations, this master thesis aims to answer these questions with the goal of creating
suggestions on how managers can improve efficiency in teleworking conditions.
The findings proved that teleworking facilitates flexibility and work life balance for a no­
ticeable proportion of the participants. This flexibility allows employees and administrators
to create their own work­schedule without geographical limitations. In addition, the use
of teleconferencing platforms provides satisfactory level of efficiency in meetings. How­
ever, this virtual setting has it’s limitations. It was reported that managers struggled to
maintain proper information flow. Moreover, monitoring and understanding employees’
individual needs became more challenging. Decreased active participation in meetings
creates barriers for creative processes and discussions, limiting the performance of the
organization. Productivity has also been effected as distraction at home and continuous
meetings causes a tight schedule that eventually force employees to sometimes work
longer than before. Combined with limited funds for the proper office equipment at home,
these shortcomings, eventually affected job satisfaction and fatigue, negatively. The lim­
ited social interactions were the biggest challenge for employees well­being, as it led to
reduced motivation and lack of the feeling of connection with their colleagues.
Most of the managers stated that to achieve efficient teleworking more effort is required to
make sure that employees received the right information, have the necessary equipment
and are experiencing a pleasant well­being. It is an unknown situation that brings to the
surface new challenges compared to what the managers are used to in a regular work­
ing environment. High performance in teleworking is suggested to include more constant
meetings to facilitate better information flow between colleagues and follow up on both
task progression and mental health. Strict planning and well defined working schedules
are proposed to promote work­life balance and avoid long nights in front of the computer.
Combined with appropriate office equipment and regular virtual social events, teleworking
is a promising way of working that allows for a flexible and autonomous working environ­
ment in the future.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Lars Christian Jacobsen & Thomas Giannoulopoulos, MSc Industrial Engineering and
Management, DTU
Creator of this report.
Kasper Edwards, Senior Researcher, DTU Management, supervisor
A special thanks goes to our supervisor Kasper Edwards, who has helped us through the
process and allowed us to indentify interesting perspectives to investigate. Also, a big
thanks to all the managers and employees who took their time to be part of this investi­
gation.
iv
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
General Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
Specific Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.3
Scope of the Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Theory
3
2.1
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Barriers of effective communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Communication Channel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.3
Organizational communication
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.4
Significance of effective organizational communication . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Productivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Productivity and work environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.3
Goal­setting theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2.4
Frederick Herzberg’s Theory (The Dual Structure Theory) . . . . . . 10
2.3
Well­Being
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.1
Affective Well­being . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.3.2
Professional well­being
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3.3
Social well­being . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3.4
Cognitive well­being . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3.5
Psychosomatic well­being . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.4
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3
Methodology
21
3.1
Research Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Methods of Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3.1
Thematic Analysis of Qualitative Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3.2
Questionnaires ­ Critical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Results
29
4.1
Interview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.1.1
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.1.2
Productivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
4.1.3
Well­Being
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.1.4
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.2
Questionnaire results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
4.2.1
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
4.2.2
Productivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
4.2.3
Well­Being
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
4.2.4
Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
v
==PAGE:8==
5
Discussion
75
5.1
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
5.2
Productivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
5.3
Well­Being
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
5.4
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
6
Conclusion
83
6.1
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
Bibliography
91
A Appendices
101
A.1 Thematic Analysis ­ A practical example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
A.1.1
Interview Questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
A.2 Questionnaire Questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
vi
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background of the Study
Organizational performance is the productive result of collaboration between employees
and management. Humans have evolved to hunt and work in collaborative groups to take
care of one another and survive. This closeness is necessary to create strong bonds and
relationships between people of a group. In today’s civilisation, the manager’s role is to
facilitate this connection at the office. A good manager should communicate in a proactive
manner that allows employees to connect with the organization and maintain social and
professional association.
In a global world where companies are allocated across cities and borders, with employ­
ees working from different locations, it is necessary to acquire managerial skills suitable
for distance work. Distance management (Charoenngam et al. 2004) is a challenging
subject for many administrators. Communication between employees and leaders re­
quires new tools and skills to optimize digital collaboration. Making sure productivity and
employee’s well­being is high, enhances peak performance outcomes.
In March of 2020, the World Health Organization categorized the outbreak of corona virus
COVID­19 as a pandemic (WHO 2021), leading to a global lockdown. Numerous gov­
ernments imposed strict rules regarding private and work life, particularly with respect to
physical contact. Consequently, offices, schools and restaurants closed down temporar­
ily, and working from home became the new reality for the vast majority. This new way of
working is referred to in literature as, telework (DIMARTINO and WIRTH 1990). Telecom­
muting, remote work or virtual work is also used for working from a decentralized location,
distant from the organization’s main location. However, literature refers to telework in dif­
ferent ways. Some use it to describe situations where only a handful of employees work
remotely on a specific task, others refer to companies where only a few employees work
from different countries. In this thesis, teleworking is used to describe the totality of a
workforce which was urged to work remotely due to the COVID­19 lockdown.
Communication in teleworking has slow development over the last decades where phone
calls and emails have been the primarily tool of communication (DeSanctis et al. 1996).
Since the beginning of the 2020, Microsoft Teams, Zoom and other teleconferencing plat­
forms started to be widely used due to the COVID­19 lockdown (Weekly n.d.). These
tools benefited employees and managers in maintaining interaction at work. Teleworking
brought to surface additional challenges for leaders to follow up employees’ productivity.
The new situation consists of various stressors from both internal and external environ­
ment. Literature suggest a connection between these stressors and an increase in emo­
tional exhaustion (Abdel Hadi, Bakker, and Jan A. Häusser 2021), different from what
most managers and employees were used before the pandemic. It is a complex situa­
tion where the relationship between work environment, diverse employees’ characteristics
and well­being need to be considered carefully by organizations through the teleworking
period (A. J. Anderson, Kaplan, and Vega 2015).
All these new challenges are linked together through the overall performance of the or­
ganization. It is the managers role to make sure that organization continues to perform
in the remote setting and understandably, managers need to consider resilient actions in
order to achieve peak performance.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
1
==PAGE:10==
1.2
Research Objectives
1.2.1
General Objective
The general objective of the present research is to investigate which extent telework­
ing has influenced organizational performance according to observation of manages and
employees during the pandemic. It is, therefore, targeted to collect evidence from people
that have experienced the immediate transition to a remote work environment during the
COVID­19 lockdown.
1.2.2
Specific Objectives
In order to accomplish the research’s purpose, key aspects that are related to distance
management and organizational performance have been examined. Aiming to report
the deviation before and during the lockdown. This comparative approach supports the
identification of changes and managerial challenges during the pandemic, and will lead
to relevant conclusions regarding the efficiency of a total remote work setting.
The specific topics of investigation that are all connected to organizational performance
are categorized below:
• 1. Communication in the work environment
• 2. Employees’ Productivity
• 3. Employees’ Well­being
• 4. Performance
1.2.3
Scope of the Study
The present study is focusing on the examination of the negative and positive effects of
the COVID­19 outbreak in engineering organizations. Based on literature review, inter­
views and questionnaires, the aim of the research is to investigate performance aspects
that have changed due to remote working, understand the weaknesses and propose rec­
ommendations of improvements for an advanced and optimized distance management
framework.
2
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
2.1
Communication
Communication is a necessity that every living entity is making use to survive. Keyton
(2011) gave a definition for communication as the procedure of exchanging information
and knowledge between one individual to another (Keyton 2010). In addition, it is de­
termined as the generation or transmission of thoughts, feelings, beliefs, and common
understanding among two or more living entities(Bucata and Rizescu 2017). Commu­
nication is a tool that allows people to build interpersonal relationships. When it comes
to the work environment communication is the basis of collaboration, team performance,
reporting issues as well as administration and management functions(Adu­Oppong and
Agyin­Birikorang 2014).
Establishing efficient communication requires the audience or receiver to have accepted,
understood, and decoded the given information (Adu­Oppong and Agyin­Birikorang 2014).
An audience or recipient could listen a source of information but that is not ensuring that
the information is clear and understandable(Adu­Oppong and Agyin­Birikorang 2014).
Therefore, sending the message to a receiver does not mean that the message can be
easily decoded. It is of utmost importance administrative workforce to master their capa­
bilities in relation to effective communication in order to achieve peak performance and
accomplish organizational goals (MSG n.d.).
Different points of view regarding the human needs for communication have been ex­
pressed in various literature sources. The common accepted perspectives are summa­
rized below (Antos 2011):
• Mechanistic – This approach refers to communication as an exchange of informa­
tion between two individuals.
• Psychological – The psychological expresses a different point of view that commu­
nication does not only covers the need of a transmission of information but includes
also thoughts, beliefs, emotional expressions and mental aspects of the individuals
involved in the process
• Social – This angle specifies communication as a result of a societal and collective
synergy between two or more living entities
• Systemic – In consonance with the systematic approach it is reported that commu­
nication is a constant re­expression of messages which are processed by numerous
senders over time and reshaped according to their individual beliefs
• Critical – As stated critical communication is simply a way with the help of which an
individual expresses his power and authority among other individuals
The process of communication consists of two main parts, the sender and the receiver.
(McShane and Von Glinow 2003). In order to start the communication, the sender must
place phrases, expressions or symbols in a form of information or message and then
send it to the recipient. Respectively, in a workplace, a person who wants to transmit
information,or knowledge to its associates, follows the same procedure and sends the
appropriate information by intrinsically applying the process of communication (Keyton
2011). A message could be a combination of ideas, theories, technical knowledge and
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
3
==PAGE:12==
even moods and desires. After sending the message, the recipient must decode the in­
formation and understand the key points of its importance in order to prepare a response
process if it is necessary. Detailed and analytical decoding of the information of a mes­
sage is necessary, when the efficiency and accuracy of communication is desired (Keyton
2011).
By examining the scenario where the meaning of the message is distorted, it may deviate
from the initial motive and purpose and could lead to undesirable results, such as misun­
derstandings(Antos 2011). Any barriers should be proactively surpassed by the sender
with accurate and detailed content, as well as by the recipient’s side, with systematic de­
coding of the message. The recipient, then, needs to start the creation of a response
message. Now the recipient becomes the sender, and the original sender becomes the
recipient. Encoding and sending of the new message takes place and this is the princi­
ple of dialogue (Keyton 2011). Now that the roles have switched it is the sender’s turn
to decode the information. Communication is therefore a continuous process within a
circular feedback loop, that all living organisms use during their lifetime in various forms.
The following figure depicts the key aspects of communication process(McShane and Von
Glinow 2003).
Figure 2.1: The Communication process, (McShane and Von Glinow 2003)
2.1.1
Barriers of effective communication
Leadership and administration in the work environment has the duty and authority to build
effective communication channels (Gareth and . M. George J. 2003). If barriers exist
in these elements in any way, complete clarity of meaning and understanding does not
occur. One of the greatest problems with communication is the delusion that it has been
rightly accomplished. As illustrated in Figure 2.1, several forms of barriers can impede
the communication process. The barriers are categorized as follows: environmental and
personal. Both barriers can block, filter, or distort the message as it is encoded and sent,
as well as when it is decoded and received (Gareth and . M. George J. 2003).
The design of communication practices in a company is very important and should aim
at the understandable and valid transfer of the necessary information at the right time.
Therefore any obstacles that may alter the significance of a message or communication
content should be prevented and avoided when creating the original message that is in­
tended to be communicated (Ruck and Welch 2012). The main problem with incorrect
communication is related to the fact that the message is supposed to have been received
and decoded correctly by the receiver when in reality it does not happen. Barriers to com­
4
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:13==
munication are divided into two main categories, environmental barriers and personal
barriers (Adu­Oppong and Agyin­Birikorang 2014).
Environmental barriers are defined as any factors that can affect effective communication
between sender and receiver and are related to the surrounding environment or external
factors. There are many aspects that can lead to incorrect and invalid decoding of a
message (Sanchez and Guo 2005). Some examples are noise,lack of concentration or
attention from the receiver, as well as the delayed delivery time of a message that can be
sent often affects its proper decoding (Gareth and . M. George J. 2003).
Personal barriers are those that arise from individual perceptions, ideology, and philos­
ophy of a sender. As mentioned above, communication is related to the expression of
emotions, passions, mental stimuli and biological signals (Gareth and . M. George J.
2003).Therefore, the personal vision of an individual sender can lead to a deterioration
of the initial meaning of the signal. It is evident that communication as a process always
contains a dose of subjectivity as the way each person expresses and sends signals is
unique. However, the level may differ and specifically in the case of healthy and effec­
tive organizational communication it is essential that information flow is not influenced
by empathy, emotional instability or personal perceptions and beliefs (Ruck and Welch
2012).
2.1.2
Communication Channel
The intermediate link that transmits the information to the receiver is named communica­
tion channel. The selection of a communication channel may vary as due to the evolu­
tion of telecommunications, the options are numerous. The main types of channels are
described as: verbal, non­verbal, written and digital. Verbal channels include physical
meetings, phone calls, video calls, recorded conversations, slide shows and live presen­
tations, etc. The non­verbal media are related to body language, emotional or facial reac­
tions.(Bucata and Rizescu 2017) The written version of communication channel consists
of all types of written forms of communications like letters, messages, emails, chats etc.
On the digital side are included various options such as social media, emails, teleconfer­
encing apps, instant or private messaging, as well as online learning programs (Keyton
2010).
Regarding digital communication channels, it is worth mentioning that the COVID­19 pan­
demic made a large proportion of workers around the globe to move in teleworking condi­
tion. Several additional tools and practices were applied to ensure effective communica­
tion in a distance setting due to the need for replacement of the physical communication
(Nguyen Hao et al. 2020). Workplace digital platforms and communication tools have
been used to facilitate employees’ tasks, maintain organizational culture and employee
communities in a distance management setting. Moreover, online on­boarding was a
challenge both for administrators as well as for new candidates. Thus, the need for well­
defined communication channels was necessary (Nguyen Hao et al. 2020). Teleworking,
results to a significant increase in the use of digital apps and virtual platforms to host
meetings, share information and lead virtual teams. Communication channels and media
that have been widely used during the COVID­19 lockdown are summarized in the follow­
ing categories: teleconferencing apps, instant messaging platforms, project management
tools, document sharing software, internal podcasts, employee newsletters, etc (Ontario
Hospital Association n.d.).
2.1.3
Organizational communication
Practices promoting effective organizational communication have developed tremendously
over the past decades. Many analysts, theorists and scientists dealing with the principles
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
5
==PAGE:14==
of management and organizational performance have demonstrated the importance of
effective communication in the workplace. There are four main types of organizational
communication as shown below (Adu­Oppong and Agyin­Birikorang 2014):
Formal or informal business communication. The level of formality is a criterion to
categorize communication applied in a message. Formal communication follows specified
standards and structured formats of writing or speaking. On the other hand, informal
communication is the common and accepted way that peers are communicating in the
workplace.
Directional communication is specified within three categories, upward, downward and
horizontal. Upward communication refers to cases when information and messages are
moving from the lower­level employees to middle or top managers that are higher in the
organizational hierarchy. Upward communication includes also reporting issues to the
supervisors. Downward is the opposite scenario, where guidelines, messages, feedback
or information moves from the superiors and administrators to the lower­level personnel.
The horizontal business communication is related to communication among employees
in the same hierarchical level.
Internal and External communication. The differentiation between this two categories
comes from the boundaries of location of the receiver. When the receiver of a message is
an individual that is working within the business then this is considered as internal commu­
nication. In the case, that a message is sent to receivers that not belong to the organiza­
tion, such as distributors, partners, clients, governmental agencies, etc., it is categorized
as external communication.
Oral and Written Communication. It is obvious that there is a distinction among oral and
written communication. Oral communication in the business consists of physical contacts,
face­to­face meetings and any kind of physical interaction with co­workers or superiors,
while written includes any kind of written form messages, emails, notes, instant messaging
chats, etc.
2.1.4
Significance of effective organizational communication
Effectiveness regarding organizational communication reinforces two fundamental man­
agement functions in business.(Sanchez and Guo 2005) Firstly, it supports the circulation
of the appropriate information to the workforce of the organization and sets the tasks that
need to be accomplished. Secondly, serves the creation of interpersonal relationships
among co­workers, upholds collaboration and team performance. It is the medium to
build trust, common norms and sharpen cultural behaviours in the workplace. Dialogue
is also an important “tool” that allows the exchange ideas between people that came from
diverse background, ethnicity, gender as well as beliefs.(Antos 2011) Therefore, effec­
tive communication plays a fundamental role in the workplace and could lead to various
positive effects that are going to be described as follows:
Improves employees’ well­being
It is accepted that open dialogue, clear instructions and continuous support of employees
from their superiors promote communication efficiency which is a key component of em­
powered productivity in the work environment. In addition, proper communication and a
friendly atmosphere in the workplace increases job satisfaction and employee well­being
(Keyton 2011).
Upholds employees’ productivity
6
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:15==
Emphasis was given on the results of surveys revealed that employees who were eval­
uated as highly productive, were those who in their work environment had experienced
well­defined and structured communication practices (Pulse n.d.). Furthermore it is ac­
knowledged that upward communication in business is beneficial, as it reinforces reporting
issues to the administrators at the appropriate time and facilitates their preventive actions
and solutions (Keyton 2011).
Supports establishment of strong interpersonal relationships
When an organisation faces communication issues, this phenomenon results to poor re­
source management and leads to financial losses and delays due to lack of proper uti­
lization of the company’s assets. Proper communication enhances detailed control and
accurate resource management (Antos 2011).
Optimizes resource management
When in a job are communication issues and poor management then it has negative
effects on resource management and leads to losses and delays as there is no better
distribution and utilization of the company’s assets. Inadequate handling of resources has
an immediate direct impact on the profitability of the organization. Proper communication
enhances detailed control and accurate resource management (Sanchez and Guo 2005).
Lessens conflicts
Another key factor that benefits from effective communication is the extent of quarrels in
the workplace. Constant tension and disagreements in the work environment are nega­
tively influencing mental state of employees as well as their willingness to be productive.
Clear communication rules, open and friendly environment, and healthy competition can
be achieved through effective communication practices (Sanchez and Guo 2005).
Boosts peak performance
Effective communication is a fundamental part of achieving peak performance. Organiza­
tions that fail to implement clear communication strategies risk losing their market share
and competitive advantage in the near future. In addition, it is observed that in organi­
zations where there is a poor quality of communication, low performance outcomes are
recorder due to unmotivated employees and increased employee turnover(McShane and
Von Glinow 2003). Replacement of employees and hiring new employees can cost up to
three times the salary of an existing employee. Therefore, it is evident that effectiveness
regarding communication can have a beneficial impact on absenteeism and employee
turnover rates. Overall, summarizing all the previous aspects are depicting the mag­
nitude of effective communication on targeting and accomplishing high performance in
organisations (McShane and Von Glinow 2003).
After the COVID­19 outbreak business climate has rapidly revised, while teleworking was
implemented in various organisations (Nguyen Hao et al. 2020). For many organisations
it was an unexpected phenomenon that required to operate totally remotely without having
enough time to examine the needs and define operational steps. Thus, it is evident that it
was an experimental period for administrators, top level executives and leaders to keep
tracking performance aspects when everyone is working from home (Nguyen Hao et al.
2020). ”Distance management” required even more clearly defined communication prac­
tices, accurate scheduling of meetings, efficient information flow and continuous support
to the employees in comparison with before the pandemic era. In a challenging period
like the pandemic communication can easily be influenced by uncertainty and confusion
with unfavorable results on the performance of an organisation. Poor communication is
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
7
==PAGE:16==
associated with rising stress levels or the feeling of depression for employees (Ontario
Hospital Association n.d.). Additionally, anxiety and mental instability in the workplace is
driving to negative results such as absenteeism and a significant decline in job satisfac­
tion. As a result of the COVID­19 outbreak, the bottom line of the personnel could be
affected. Occupational health and safety episodes such as stress­related incidents cost
enormous amounts in organizations and individuals every year. Insufficient communica­
tion is one of the main causes associated with safety incidents in the workplace. Effective
communication channels serve the timely detection, prevention and avoidance of such
incidents related to the mental stability of employees.(Ruck and Welch 2012)
2.2
Productivity
Conditions and characteristics of a work environment are key aspects regarding employ­
ees’ productivity(Bophela and Govender 2015). Therefore, it is evident that work envi­
ronment parameters could considerably influence employees’ productivity in a positive or
negative way. (Chandrasekar 2011). A proportion of 66% of people globally, spend almost
half of their lives in their workplace (Pandey 2017). The aforementioned fact, is showing
the significance of the work environment plight on the employees’ mental health, work­life
balance, creativity, ambition and productivity (Mathews and Khann 2013). Greater re­
sults and high level of productivity are observed in organizations with higher qualities and
conditions provided to the employees’ in their work environment (Panimalar and Kannan
2013). Parameters such as new building design and layout, comfortable office setup,
appropriate office equipment, lighting, hygiene and safety, comfort, concentration are
empowering the desired outcomes of increased productivity that boosts the overall or­
ganizational performance (Taiwo 2009). Numerous studies investigating the relationship
between employees’ productivity as a function of the work environment have shown that
poor working conditions, lack of necessary work equipment, noise, offensive behaviors
by superiors lead to employee dissatisfaction and to a dramatic downturn in employees’
productivity (Dorgan 1994)(Bophela and Govender 2015)(Panimalar and Kannan 2013).
2.2.1
Productivity and work environment
The work environment is defined as a living entity that encompasses the overall abilities,
activities and other critical aspects which are directly connected with the employees’ per­
forming actions and productivity (Carnevale 1992). More specifically, it is considered as
the totality of an ecosystem created by the inter­dependencies and interactions of the em­
ployees in the place they are working. It is a shield that shapes productivity of employees
as it creates the first stimuli and impressions, while influences ambitions and personal
development (Kuruparensothynathan, Vimalendran, and Ganga 2016).
A different point of view argued that “knowledge sharing within an organization is formed
on how the working environment is composed” (Brill 1990). Utilization of the work envi­
ronment in the optimal way is important for the viability of a business. That is a reason
that makes work environment to be considered as an asset. Moreover, it is stated that the
designation of a well­equipped and convenient work­space that is aiming to employees’
satisfaction, ensures moderate to high levels of employees’ productivity (BUSHIRI 2014).
Another delightful viewpoint was expressed by Opperman (2002) who stated that “the
working environment is an amalgamation of three shorter sub­systems: the technical en­
vironment, the human environment and the organizational environment. The first one is
related to techniques, machinery, materials, industrial layout and similar parameters. The
technical environment generates components which empower the workforce to operate
and achieve the desired goals (Opperman 2002). The second category relates to the hu­
man factor, such as human resources, colleagues or business partners, project teams,
8
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:17==
collaboration and interpersonal relationships, as well as leadership and administration.
The human environment is built to allow the flow of information, knowledge exchange,
collaboration between teams, diagonal management and problem reporting (Opperman
2002). All of the above factors of the human environment are playing a vital role for the
level of productivity of an organization and could contribute to high efficiency when they
are used in the right way. Organizational environment consists of processes, patents,
measurements, ideas and theories. Leadership and management is responsible for the
proper functionality of the organizational sub­systems (Opperman 2002). Although the
first two subsystems are measured and rewarded based on the quantity and speed of
outcome’s production, the organizational subsystem deals with the optimization of the
quality of the processes. Therefore, it is a key part of controlling and improving produc­
tivity in a real organization (Opperman 2002).
2.2.2
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs
Maslow was an American Psychologist who proposed the hierarchy of human needs.
Maslow argued that: “Man is a wanting creature and rarely achieves a state of complete
satisfaction for a long time. When one accomplishment is made, another arrives to take
its place” (Ramlall 2004). The hierarchy of needs is a motivational theory in psychology
compromising a five­tier model of human needs. The need is defined as physiological
gap that an individual must conquer and overcome to feel satisfied. This feeling is able to
generate motives which can affect human work demeanour and actions (Ramlall 2004).
Figure 2.2 is illustrating the hierarchical pyramid and showing the stages that a person
need to surpass in order to rich self actualisation.
Figure 2.2: Maslow’s pyramid ­ Hierarchy of needs, (Ramlall 2004)
Any individual begins from the last stage of the hierarchy where standard needs are in­
cluded like water, food, housing, etc. When the first step is gratified, new incentives
motivate an individual to achieve the next step of security and safety needs. This step
is related with financial stability, hygiene, dependency, freedom, law, etc. A person that
does not feel secure and safe both psychologically or economically, is not able to move
to the next steps of the pyramid. If an individual achieved these needs, then social needs
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
9
==PAGE:18==
are following that need to be established. These types of needs refer to the creation of in­
terpersonal relationships, friendship, love, family, belonging, sexual intimacy. Individuals
that cannot overcome this step could have mental health issues, such as stress, anxiety,
or loneliness (Ramlall 2004).
After the establishment of social relations, esteem needs are the next motivator for a
person to gratify. It is divided in two sub­categories. The first one is self­esteem where
an individual is feeling confident regarding a capability or competence. The self­esteem
needs include the desire for achievement, success, power, and authority. The second
subcategory is related to gaining and feeling respect from those around us. Examples of
this kind of needs are recognition from others, social status, reputation, and dignity. The
final step of the pyramid is self­actualization. It is the stage where a person can reveal all
its potentials without limitations. Also it refers to self­fulfilment and self­realization where
an individual is seeking for exploration, peak experiences and further personal growth in
order to become the best version of itself. Maslow connected this pyramid with high moti­
vated employees as a result accompanied by greater levels of productivity. Therefore, it is
important to take into account various parameters to assess productivity. Leadership and
management are responsible to monitor and understand the special and personal needs
of the employees when high productivity is the required outcome to boost organizational
performance (Ramlall 2004).
2.2.3
Goal­setting theory
In addition, according to Edwin Locke, it is considered necessary to focus on building
and providing the necessary incentive systems, rewards as well as technical layout and
equipment in order to promote advanced performance and motivate employees to achieve
the organisational goals (Opperman 2002). Training of the employees for continuous
personal development in a regular basis plays a crucial role. Leaders and executives
of each should use a human­centered management approach when the purpose is to
achieve high productivity and peak performance (Ramlall 2004).
One pillar on which such a management perspective is based is monitoring of individual
employee’s needs and development and regular provision of technical assistance and
mental support in cases deemed necessary by the supervisors (Sabir et al. 2012). There­
fore, creating a convenient, fully equipped, inviting, and pleasant work environment is a
key criterion for increased employee productivity which contributes to improving the over­
all performance. At last, an attractive working environment creates high status and repu­
tation for an organization, and attracts more new candidates, provide more opportunities
and options to hire high­qualified candidates (Sabir et al. 2012).
2.2.4
Frederick Herzberg’s Theory (The Dual Structure Theory)
A theoretical approach proposed by Herzberg points out the significance of job satisfac­
tion in the work environment (Sabir et al. 2012). Furthermore, it is argued that several
factors are influencing job satisfaction and are changing over time, thus the leadership
role is to investigate and proactively define future needs. It is a matter of adaptability to
understand the continuously changing employees needs in order to promote productivity.
If factors that are affecting employees’ motivation and job satisfaction are not gratified,
there is no chance to obtain high scores in productivity among the employees. Herzberg
differentiates the motive forces in two categories (Sabir et al. 2012):
• Personal motivators: which are directly linked with individual job satisfaction of
employees, such as training, achievement recognition, friendly work environment,
and absence of conflicts.
10
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:19==
• Safety factors: although indirectly linked to motivation and job satisfaction, are key
criteria for a person’s willingness to perform in a high extent. Examples are prestige,
stable income, and secure work environment.
Figure 2.3 illustrates the relation between dual factors and productivity in the work envi­
ronment.
Figure 2.3: The Dual Structure Theory (Sabir et al. 2012)
Herzberg made clear that motivated employees are willing to be more productive and
that will lead to peak performance outcomes. The next section is related to employees’
wellbeing and it is worth mentioning that all these aspects are strongly connected and are
influencing performance.
2.3
Well­Being
The concept of well­being has been getting more attention over the last decade, as people
and government started realizing the impact that bad well­being could have on people’s
personal and work life (Diseses Control and Prevention n.d.(a)). Well­being is defined
as the experience of good health, happiness, high life satisfaction and sense of purpose
(WHO 2021). According to previous studies, high levels of well­being are beneficial for
both individuals and society as it facilitates effective learning, productivity and creativity
(Huppert and So 2013). United Nations recognise the need for increased focus on well­
being and therefore included it in the Sustainable Development Goals for 2030. Good
Health and Well­being stands as the third goal out of 17 goals in total. Although, this goal
mainly focuses on improving medicine and finding cures for diseases, it also focuses on
prevention, treatment and promotion of mental health and well­being (UN n.d.).
As a consequence of the COVID­19 pandemic, several business sectors and workplaces
forced get closed. (OurWorldInData n.d.) (WHO 2021). During this new and unprece­
dented situation where people experience difficulties due to uncertainty that lead to in­
creased anxiety, frustration and social isolation. In situations where increased levels of
stressed and uncertainties are observed, promoting the significance of mental health is
essential (health n.d.), (Diseses Control and Prevention n.d.(b)), (University of California
n.d.). It is therefore important, for the present study, to map how employees and managers
endure with the new way of working and try to identify what influence their well­being.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
11
==PAGE:20==
At the work place, subjective well­being is referred to as the individual affective state on
the job (Diener et al. 1999). In principal, this affective state relates to feeling of good
health, happiness and the level of job satisfaction (Grant, Christianson, and Price 2007).
However, the concept of well­being have been expanded to include not only affects, but
also behaviors and motivational concepts (D. Ryff 1989), (Warr 1994). This challenges
the way subjective well­being should be understood, as can describe both affective events
that occur in people’s lives (Diener et al. 1999),or be understood as a broader aspect of
non­affective emotions. This is especially relevant in work and occupational well­being
theory where both affective well­being (e.g. commitment, job satisfaction and depression)
and non­affective well­being (e.g. motivation, efficacy and competence) determine the
overall well­being of the employee.
While Ryff’s model focuses on three aspects of well­being (affective, motivational and
behavioural), Warr’s model is focused directly at affective and motivational well­being of
employees. Although there are differences between the concepts, these two approaches
overlap substantially as both are valuable in defining occupational well­being. Van Horn
aimed to create a more collective definition of well­being (Joan E. Van Horn et al. 2004),
based on Ryff and Warr’s concepts: affective, social and professional. Another two di­
mensions were added (cognitive and psychosomatic), based on previous research that
provides evidence for their relation to Ryff and Warr dimensions (Broadbent et al. 1982),
(J. E. Van Horn, W. B. Schaufeli, and T. W. Taris 2001).
1. Affective well­being: emotional exhaustion/fatigue ,job satisfaction, organizational
commitment
2. Professional well­being: autonomy, aspiration and competence at work
3. Social well­being: depersonalization towards colleagues, quality of social function­
ing at work
4. Cognitive well­being: the capacity to take up new information and the capability
to concentrate at work
5. Psychosomatic well­being: health complaints such as headaches, stomach aches
In Van Horn’s model, the affective dimension is more extensive in the approach on well­
being, including emotional exhaustion, job satisfaction,and organizational commitment.
Emotional exhaustion; also used in Warr’s model, represents the feeling of being depleted
of emotional resources or fatigue. Recent research suggest that job satisfaction also in­
clude behavioural and cognitive dimensions (Brief and Weiss 2002). However, emotional
exhaustion is considered to drain affective well­being (Liu et al. 2003) and is therefore,
included. Lastly, organizational commitment refers to the employees identification and
involvement with their work environment. Professional well­being centers around auton­
omy, aspiration and professional competence. These concepts touch upon aspects of job
related motivation, ambition, achievement and self­efficacy. The third dimension; social
well­being, concentrates on the aspect of behavior. This dimension address two different
concepts. Denationalization; referring to an indifferent or negative attitude towards the
people around you (Wright 1997), and how well you cooperate and create relations with
other colleagues. Cognitive well­being touch on the ability to absorb new information and
work efficiently. Lastly, psychosomatic well­being refers to how someone is feeling in re­
lation to headaches and back pains caused by long working hours, high demanding work
or low job control (Hulst 2003).
12
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:21==
2.3.1
Affective Well­being
As previously defined, emotional exhaustion is a term used to describe the feeling of being
drained of emotional resources or fatigue, where an individual is not able to behave in a
desirable manner, due to external factors. Bullying is one of those factors that can deplete
someone of their emotional resources (Niedl 1996), (Zapf, Knorz, and Kulla 1996). On
the other hand, self accomplishment has shown positive impact on emotional exhaustion
(Maslach and Leiter 2008), (Toon W. Taris et al. 2005). Overcoming difficult challenges or
reaching set goals releases positive feeling and can give energy in and outside of work
(Maslach and Leiter 2008).
A recent study from Germany reports that telework has a slight positive effect on emo­
tional exhaustion as 21% said they experienced emotional exhaustion at home, where as
26% of those working in the office reported the same (Kunze, Hampel, and Zimmermann
2020). Similar findings were also discovered in a research from 2021, where employ­
ees reported a positive relation between working from home and emotional exhaustion
(Abdel Hadi, Bakker, and Jan A. Häusser 2021). However, the percentages are not sig­
nificantly different from one another and it would be difficult to draw a conclusion from this.
It is probably a representation of personal preference as other literature sources indicate
several challenges regarding teleworking.
Rumination is a behavioural aspect that can result negative effects in teleworking condi­
tions. Rumination is defined as ones focus attention on causes and negative outcomes
(Nolen­Hoeksema 2008), and was claimed to be a background stressor for people work­
ing remotely, having negative effects on emotional exhaustion(Abdel Hadi, Bakker, and
Jan A. Häusser 2021),(A. J. Anderson, Kaplan, and Vega 2015). Most people do not
have time to reflect on work during the office hours. However, according to a study from
America in 2013, one in two office workers spend time outside of office hours to reflect
on work or do work related tasks(Association n.d.). The latter is especially dangerous for
teleworkers, where distinction between work and leisure can become defuse. It is proven
in multiple research that lack of mental detachment from work has negative effect on ones
mental well­being (Sonnentag 2012), (Berset et al. 2011), (Cropley et al. 2020). Another
aspect that ties in with negative effects on emotional exhaustion is high home demand.
Defined as obligations individuals face at home (C. W. Peeters et al. 2015), making food,
cleaning or taking care of children. These demands can prove to be quite challenging for
teleworkers. Especially the last one has got a lot of attention lately due to the lockdown
(WHO 2021) as schools are forced to closed down. Literature indicates that high home
demand can lead to a higher level of stress, further draining the emotions (Konradt, Hertel,
and Schmook 2003).
One way to counter emotional exhaustion is to increase the level of social support. So­
cial support is expressed as the creation of social relationships that promotes sharing of
thoughts and emotions in situations of need (Long 2001). Research on the subject shows
that limited social support results in higher emotional exhaustion that is common issue for
teleworkers (Sardeshmukh, Sharma, and Golden 2012). Leadership should take actions
on investigating the employees well­being when working from home. Specifically, it is es­
sential to pay attention to employees that have shown low openness and high rumination
traits (A. J. Anderson, Kaplan, and Vega 2015).
Additionally, literature suggests to focus on leisure time for the employees as it promotes
higher levels of well­being (Sonnentag 2012), (Janurek et al. 2018). Managers should
specify the importance of taking time off from work to make room for hobbies and other
activities. Including physical activities, gamification techniques, create a detachment from
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
13
==PAGE:22==
work and help employees to recover from teleworking (Sonnentag and Fritz 2016), (Jan
Alexander Häusser and Mojzisch 2017), (Sonnentag and Fritz 2016). This can be intro­
duced during lunch breaks or once a week during work. Due to the intensive teleworking
circumstances, it is important to encourage employees to take breaks, considering that it
creates social connection between employees that act as a barrier against negative af­
fective well­being (A. J. Anderson, Kaplan, and Vega 2015). This connection between
employees is also believed to increase work commitment (Fay and Kline 2011).
Creating a culture of high well­being will also benefit the manager as it often leads to
higher job satisfaction and performance among the employees (Lyubomirsky, King, and
Ed Diener 2016). According to (Golden 2006), employees that are trusted to work re­
motely often take advantage of this position to work harder to maintain this trust, rather
than use the time for non­work related activities. The freedom to control when and where
work is conducted creates a stronger connection to the job and it can reduce work­family
conflict (Kossek, Lautsch, and Eaton 2009).
As many of the aforementioned aspects can indirectly affect employees’ satisfaction, lit­
tle research have been conducted on direct negative relations between telework and job
satisfaction. However, low diversity in work, long work hours, administrative burdens and
lack of recognition is often mentioned as factors that decrease job satisfaction with tele­
workers (Van Ham et al. 2006), (Bakker and Demerouti 2007), (Jan Alexander Häusser,
Mojzisch, et al. 2010).
2.3.2
Professional well­being
Professional well­being enclose the aspiration of pleasant existence and progress at work,
the perception on how well one is mastering their job and autonomy. A research from 2009
suggest that more time spent away from work due to teleworking can harm employee’s
awareness regarding career opportunities and how much effort the organization invest
in development and training of them (Redman, Snape, and Ashurst 2009). Managers
are therefore encouraged to clarify opportunities and focus on employee development
regularly.
Autonomy is a responsibility many employees appreciate from teleworking (Sardesh­
mukh, Sharma, and Golden 2012). Autonomy can reduce work related strain (Suh and
Lee 2017) and be beneficial fro job satisfaction (Gajendran and Harrison 2007), (Hor­
nung and Glaser 2009) as employees are more free to schedule their work day in a way
that benefit them. However, research suggest that this freedom comes at a cost, stating
that work often becomes intensified and the work hours become longer (Dimitrova 2003).
The boundary between work and leisure becomes overlapping and harmful for employees
well­being. Literature questions whether overwork comes willingly or as a natural conse­
quence of working remotely where the employees feel the need to work more to satisfy
their superiors (Kelliher and D. Anderson 2010). This phenomena is referred to as the au­
tonomy paradox(Mazmanian, Orlikowski, and Yates 2013), (Putnam, Myers, and Gailliard
2014), (Hoeven and Zoonen 2015). Even though employees have the ICT (Information,
Communication Technology) tools available to work flexible from home, they feel subcon­
sciously forced to respond to work related matters outside of working hours. A research
on the subject found evidence for that people with good time management skills, self­
disciplined and self­driven tend to have higher well­being and work less outside of work
hours (Baruch 2000), (Richardson and Mckenna 2014).
2.3.3
Social well­being
Although, autonomy can benefit many employees, the flexibility of telework also comes
at a social cost(Sardeshmukh, Sharma, and Golden 2012). In the context of telework,
14
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:23==
social isolation is a phenomenon where employees feel out of touch with other employ­
ees (Golden, Veiga, and Dino 2008). Social isolation is hard to avoid during teleworking
where everyone works in separate locations. According to literature, there is a connec­
tion between social isolation during telework and reduced social well­being(Morganson
et al. 2010), (Baker, Moon, and Ward 2006). Most managers should be aware of this
connection as they let people work remotely. The challenge lays with effectively manage
interpersonal relationships and team building (Golden, Veiga, and Dino 2008). Creating
a culture of good relations can reduce the feeling of isolation and increase the employees
well­being, according to Golden.
Perceived Organisational Support (POS) is another aspect to consider for managers.
POS represent the level of how well employees believes their contribution and well­being
is valued by the organisation (Eisenberger et al. 2015). A huge portion of this aspect is
feedback and close communication with the employees. While this might come natural
to many managers at the office, research shows that teleworkers can sometimes be less
prioritized than those in the office (Redman, Snape, and Ashurst 2009). Although, the
research focus on situations where some employees work from the office and others re­
motely, quite different from a global lockdown where everyone works from home, this is
something managers should be aware of and try to avoided.
Another aspect for managers to consider is the perceived social support (PSS) that focus
on the level of which the employees feel supported by the organization (O’Driscoll 1970).
Both aspects are understood to be positively related to job satisfaction and well­being,
and is therefore important for teleworking outcomes (Bentley et al. 2016). If done prop­
erly, it has shown to have a positive relation with lower work­life conflict and improved
work performance too (Lautsch, Kossek, and Eaton 2009). Literature highlights the im­
portance of relationship­oriented management behaviors, as opposed to task­oriented
when managing teleworkers (Dahlstrom 2013). The additional attention on managerial
support, communication and trust building are important factors for successful telework­
ing (Kowalski and Swanson 2005). Trust between manager and employees appears to
be a key influence on telework effectiveness, improving motivation and work performance
(Baker, Moon, and Ward 2006). Technology support is also mentioned to be important for
well­being as it reduces problems of connectivity and work related tasks (Bentley et al.
2016).
2.3.4
Cognitive well­being
Cognitive well­being is associated with one’s cognitive mental state. Cognitive people of­
ten have thoughts of anxiety, fearful anticipation and poor concentration (Calibo, Blanco,
and Firebaugh 2013). These traits can be amplified during telework as employees spend
a lot of time alone at home. Vittersø identified contradicting evidence of teleworking that
suggest a positive relation between autonomy and better concentration. The findings
rather suggested that employees working from home experienced more distraction and
a lower sense of freedom (Vittersø et al. 2003). Similar results were identified in a study
from 2017 were the context of cognitive and low social support showed a negative im­
pact on the teleworking employee’s well­being. The study also highlighted an increase
in cognitive stress complains from the participants. Again, highlighting the importance of
social interactions with other employees (Vander Elst et al. 2017). These findings corre­
lates with research suggesting that teleworkers considers home to be a place of recovery,
rather than a place of demands (Hartig, Kylin, and Johansson 2007).
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
15
==PAGE:24==
2.3.5
Psychosomatic well­being
Little research have been conducted on the subject of psychosomatic symptoms and tele­
working. (Lapierre and Allen 2006), (Mann and Holdsworth 2003) both did a research on
the subject without finding any evidence linking teleworking with individuals’ psychoso­
matic symptoms. (Montreuil and Lippel 2003) identifies some connection between mus­
culoskeletal problems and teleworking and highlights the importance of proper equipment
when working from home. Although, a limited amount of research focus on telework and
psychosomatic well­being, research on ergonomics at the workplace (Kirkhorn, Earle­
Richardson, and Banks 2010), (Widana, Sumetri, and Ketut Sutapa 2018) highlights the
importance of good ergonomics at work in order to prevent back pain and fatigue at work.
Based on these findings, it is reasonable to assume that these issues are equally as
important when teleworking, where lack of ergonomic equipment or resources might be
facts.
2.4
Performance
All of the above μεντιονεδ factors are influential criteria for achieving high performance.
Performance is a broad topic that sometimes is hard to define. Athletes spend thousands
of hours practicing to achieve their goals and perform at the highest level. In sports, per­
formance is often linked with something that is easy to quantify, like lap time or how many
goals were scored. Running fast or scoring goals are activities that are easy to quantify
and plays a huge role in that athlete’s pursuit for performance. These key activities are
measured and monitored continuously to track progress and its easy to see why they
are important to the athlete. Neely defines performance as ”the process of quantifying
actions, where measurement is the process of quantification and action leads to perfor­
mance”(Neely, Gregory, and Platts 1995). It is not necessarily the running speed and
goals scored separately that is important, but more so, how the athlete use actions in
combination to create results and therefore perform.
In the office environment, performance is equally as important. Companies achieve and
maintain their competitive advantage by performing better than it’s competitors (Herrmann
and Hodgson 2014). Previous literature draws a connection between performance and
the efficiency and effectiveness of a company (Kotler 1997), (Westerlund 2008). Empha­
sising that the actions of being more efficient and more effective than the competitors is
key to conduct good performance. Multiple research support this claim an show evidence
of a link between high effectiveness and high performance (Chletsos and Saiti 2020),
(Houck 2013), (Dyckhoff and Souren 2020).
So fare it has been established what performance is and that efficiency and effectiveness
impacts how well someone perform. Performance in the context of this thesis is used
to investigate weather companies perform better or worse in a remote setting compared
with a normal office environment. To be able to answer this question it is important to
understand how companies can achieve this performance. Even though, remote work
has become the new reality for most office workers in 2020 (WHO 2021), the subject
of remote work has been around for decades. Globalized companies got workers all
around the world. Though, these companies usually have offices located around the
world, this distance eventually leads to some sort of remote cooperation. Maintaining
the effectiveness and efficiency of these companies is equally as important as for those
located in only one office space, but it creates a separate line of challenges to do so.
In order to battle the challenges of working from different locations in the world, the con­
cept of High Performance Teams were introduced to the remote setting. The concept;
high performance teams, builds on creating a common focus in the team (Blinn 1996). To
16
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:25==
achieve a high team focus, two main conditions needs to be in place. Firstly, the right
mindset is obtained through a clear mission statement. The mission statement should fo­
cus on the long term role for the organization and include a well defined action plans, goals
and measures of success along the way. If the manager manages to deliver these state­
ments successfully, the employees will know in what direction the organization is moving
and therefore, guiding the team to be effective. Secondly, and arguably the most impor­
tant, define clear task, responsibilities and expectations. To utilize most of the resources
within the team, it is important that everyone knows what they need to do, what is expected
of them and make sure that employees do not overlap other employees work (Blinn 1996).
Fulfilling these requirements will improving the overall efficiency of the group.
In 1998, Academy of Management Executives posted a research covering the role of vir­
tual teams in a remote setting (Townsend, DeMarie, and Hendrickson 1998). The head­
quarter of the company was located in America while smaller offices and employees were
located in Europe and Asia. The research focused on how to keep the competitive ad­
vantage while operating remotely by using different virtual conference tools and software.
Although, the findings concluded to the need for improved network facilities to increase ef­
ficiency. Special requirements such as human attributes and skills to succeed in a remote
work environment and proposals regarding digital team collaboration were highlighted as
presented in the table 2.1.
Virtual Team Competencies
Intercultural
Compe­
tencies
Traits of Remote Team Members
1.
Project
Management
and Execution
Organizational Skills
• Strives to improve the structures,
processes and morale to promote a
positive environment.
• Coordinates with other team mem­
bers, follows up and adjusts to meet
goals.
2.
Knowledge and Infor­
mation Management
Cultural Modesty and
Respect
• Is able to extrapolate useful infor­
mation and use it appropriately
• Deciphers critical information from a
variety of sources
• Is modest about one’s own culture
and has a respect for the ways of
the local culture
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
17
==PAGE:26==
Virtual Team Competencies
Intercultural
Compe­
tencies
Traits of Remote Team Members
3.
Networking
Knowledge
and
Un­
derstanding
of
the
receiver’s
Country
or
Culture
• Works within a globally diverse and
multicultural context
• Has an understanding of how cul­
ture effects life and work of other
countries
• Navigates across functional and hi­
erarchical areas of the organization
4.
Communication
Technology
Intercultural Communi­
cation
• Shows proficient and effective use
of different technologies to aid com­
munications
• Willingly tries new communication
and collaboration methods
5.
Teamwork
and
Trust
Building
Relationship building
• Possesses good relationship skills
• Deals with conflict appropriately
• Knows when to lead and when to
follow
• Supports the ideas of others
• Provides constructive feedback
6.
Virtual Interaction
Adaptation skills
• Finds new ways to communicate
and interact effectively within the
digital context
• Has tolerance for ambiguity
• Is open­minded and oriented toward
change
• Demonstrates effective email mes­
sages and conferencing skills
7.
Self­Management
• Personal and pro­
fessional commit­
ment
• Self­knowledge
and
self­
awareness
• Copes personally and profession­
ally with the conditions and chal­
lenges of working in another culture
• Has a high level of personal and
professional commitment to the as­
signment
• Takes initiative to get the job done
• Asserts himself or herself when nec­
essary
• Gets the job done in a non rou­
tine environment and without being
closely monitored
Table 2.1: Attributes required to succeed in a remote team across multiple cultures
18
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:27==
Similar results were discussed in a research from 2008 that studied high performance in
a remote setting (Westerlund 2008). Three aspect erupted from this study and all three
aspects need to be in place for an organization to perform at a high level remotely. Firstly,
Robust Organizational Support and Structure. This part covers clear goals and require­
ments definition. Engage all employees in a long term strategy of the organization and
highlight their importance to the organizational mission. Furthermore, a flat structure is
encouraged where employees do not hesitate to bring up organizational or personal chal­
lenges. Secondly, Leadership That Walks the Talk. High performing teams need leaders
that acquire good verbal skills to encourage employees and convey organizational core
values into concrete behaviors or actions. It is important that the leader includes everyone
in the process and utilizes all their managerial skills to ensure good employee well­being
and progress. Lastly, Teach about what good team building is. Provide knowledge about
the significance of group development and cohesiveness theory. Informed employees
have higher probability of rapid and successful team building during teleworking (Jones
and J. M. George 2017). This research showed that by introducing the employees to
the theory behind building a team, the employees got a better understanding of how to
behave during the team building process.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:29==
3
Methodology
3.1
Research Design
The present research’s design is a qualitative phenomenological approach that aims to
investigate the distance management challenges in engineering systems during the pan­
demic. It is worth mentioning that the research scope is focusing only on the effects of
teleworking during the COVID­19 lockdown on the organizational performance of “engi­
neering systems”, without taking into account any other business field. In addition, it is
categorized as a “phenomenological” research as it is examining the results of an un­
expected phenomenon, the COVID­19 pandemic, and aims to collect evidence from hu­
man experiences in relation to remote working. It is an effort to understand and analyse
the complex reality of the leadership difficulties, the distance management practices and
changes that have been implemented in order to ensure viability and profitability in engi­
neering companies (Gill et al. 2008).
The reason why a qualitative approach was chosen was that provides direct access to the
targeted sample to be examined and more specifically, administrators and employees.
Therefore, the research findings are based on realistic data extracted from the selected
qualitative methods. More specifically, discussion and collection of complex descriptive
data of human experiences in a distance management environment were carried out.
Qualitative methods are commonly accepted to be effective in identifying intangible or
invisible factors in the work environment that could affect negatively organizational per­
formance, such as social norms, socioeconomic aspects, gender roles, nationality, and
individual experiences. In this way, relevant information and ideas were discussed, such
as observations, challenges, mistakes’ review, takeaways and legacy activities related to
the remote framework (Hammarberg, Kirkman, and Lacey 2015).
In addition, the structure of the present research is divided into two parts where two differ­
ent methods have been performed. The first part consists of the conduction of interviews
with administrators in the case organizations. The purpose of the interviews was to collect
and record data from people who have leadership roles and knows how the organization
have operated over the past year (Palmer and Bolderston 2006). On the other hand,
it was considered legitimate to take into account the perspective of employees as they
are a living entity within an organization. Furthermore, as they have experienced remote
working the past year, it was another source for identifying relevant data. Due to the large
size of the employees’ sample, the most appropriate method to gather information found
to be questionnaires. The main motive that led to the selection of questionnaires, was
the ability to collect data from a large number of respondents in a short time (Business
Research Methodology n.d.).
As administrators and employees are two components of the same system, the work en­
vironment, it was essential to check both sides. The implementation of two qualitative
methods, in two different samples that are parts of a common system, enhances validity
and reliability of the findings due to comparison among the results (Hammarberg, Kirk­
man, and Lacey 2015). For example, if most of the administrators in the interviews stated
that there was not identified any significant issue related to knowledge sharing and em­
ployees questionnaires reveal the opposite, then a misalignment that will lead to a better
understanding of the teleworking situation would be concluded. Hence, the comparison
serves the identification of missing aspects from the managerial side regarding employ­
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
21
==PAGE:30==
ees’ difficulties when working remotely and allows the formulation of useful conclusions
which are addressing the research questions (Gill et al. 2008).
3.2
Data Collection
For the data collection, the main goal was to gather data from people that acquires the
most knowledge about the organization and how it has been operating since the lockdown
of 2020. Therefore, it was important to talk with managers of the different organisations.
For this purpose, interviews were chosen. The interview questions used a structured
setup and were based on question created by the danish working environment act (Ar­
bejdsmiljøinstituttet. and AMI. 2000). These questions had already been tested on other
subjects; prior to this thesis, and was designed to get information about specific subjects
within the area of work environment. The respondents were selected based on three
different criteria. Firstly and most critically, all the respondents have to be a high ad­
ministrative or managerial position. Secondly, as this thesis focus on investigating how
communication, productivity, well­being and performance have been affected as a result
of working remotely during the lockdown of 2020­21, the selected respondents should
have experienced remote working for more than a year since the pandemic had started.
Lastly, the respondents should be working within a specified area of expertise that was
engineering systems.
The interviews for this thesis were all conducted and recorded using Microsoft Teams. All
interviews took place between March and May of 2021. Based on a structured form, the
interview were divided into six section: introduction, one section for each topic, and an
overall assessment of how the period had been. As an introduction, the participants were
explained the procedure of the interview and the objective of the study. This part was also
created to establish what role they have in the company and what kind of responsibilities
the respondents got.
The first section focused on communication where the aim was to examine and determine
weak points of communication in remote working conditions. Moreover, as communica­
tion plays a fundamental role for achieving high performance it was found necessary to
examine additional practices that have been implemented due to the immediate transition
to a teleworking model (Wang et al. 2021). Then, the next area of investigation was se­
lected to be productivity in a distance framework. As high productivity is related with well
defined communication processes, work environment qualities, and well­being of employ­
ees it was considered reasonable to be investigated as a performance aspect (Chandran­
shu 2012). Examination of the changes on the productivity during a total remote working
setup will lead to the collection of relevant information according to the research scope.
Section three, was related to the aspect of well­being as it was considered legitimate to
be examined (Wilmar B. Schaufeli and Toon W. Taris 2014) as the lack of human inter­
action as part of working remotely can have a negative impact on the well­being (health
n.d.), (Sonnentag 2012). The first question aimed to understand how remote work have
influenced the overall well­being of the employees, linking it with Van Horn’s five dimen­
sions of well­being (Joan E. Van Horn et al. 2004). Two additional questions were asked
about the employees change in motivation and what the manager have done to improve
the motivation during the remote work setting (D. Ryff 1989), (Warr 1994).
As all these sections tie together with performance, the fourth section address this subject.
The first question aimed to understand how the organization measure performance in a
distance setting. The next question aimed to understand how teleworking had influenced
performance. It was important to understand the leadership difficulties and also to col­
22
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:31==
lect managerial observations regarding remote working during the COVID­19 lockdown.
(Townsend, DeMarie, and Hendrickson 1998).
As one goal of this interview was to understand pros and cons from working remotely and
to create a toolbox for proactive use. All sections ended with a question regarding positive
and negative experiences from the remote setting. We also wanted to learn whether any
tools or techniques adapted during the remote work would be useful for future adaptation.
To minimize bias within the collected data set from the interviews, it was important to have
a passive and not interfering role as interviewers. It was also informed that all the answers
were confidential, interviewees are anonymous and no relation to their company is kept.
This was done to facilitate data security as a request of the respondents. A pilot study
was conducted to test how the questions were received and to get an overview of the time
it took before proceeding with the redefined interview. The final version of the interviews
consisted of 26 questions and it took roughly 45­60 minutes to conduct. Participants were
found through networks of friends, colleagues and family and contacted by email or phone.
Six different managers from Norway and two from Denmark participated in the interviews.
Additionally, a questionnaire ;for the employees of the same organisations, was created.
It consisted of 9 multiple choice questions, 16 questions that were measured on a 5 point
scale and one question asking for personal suggestions for improvement, regarding the
scenario of continuity of remote working in the future. The 9 multiple choice questions
focused mainly on different tools or ways of remote work the respondents had experi­
enced, while the 16 scale questions were more directly linked to how satisfied the employ­
ees were with their current situation and their managers job over the past year. These
questions were based on the same working environment act as the interview questions
(Arbejdsmiljøinstituttet. and AMI. 2000). The aim was to learn how the managers imple­
mentations during the lockdown, had effected the employees by statistically comparing
the answers of the employees with that of the managers. The questionnaire were created
in google docs and designed to take between eight and ten minutes to complete. The link
for the questionnaire was sent to the employees using email after the interviews with the
managers. In total, 82 employees answered the questionnaire. Similar to the interviews,
the respondents were given a short introduction of the purpose of the questionnaire and
ensured that the results were confidential.
3.3
Methods of Analysis
As already mentioned, two types of data collection methods were implemented. Thus,
there was a need to apply two different types of data analysis techniques. First, the in­
terview data of the qualitative approach were analysed by applying a thematic analysis
framework. As for the questionnaires, the results were depicted and illustrated via statistic
graphs and schemes. Both of the selected methods for analysing the data are going to
be described in detail in the following subsections 3.1 and 3.2 respectively.
3.3.1
Thematic Analysis of Qualitative Data
After the data collection that took place via the structured interviews conducted with top
managers of the case organisations, there was a need for data analysis to conclude into
clear findings, tendencies and deviations among the participants’ answers. Furthermore,
the initial qualitative approach of the research and the design of the interviews was se­
lected in order to follow the concept of a thematic analysis to identify relevant information
from the data set.
Thematic analysis is an established technique that is commonly used to systemically or­
ganise qualitative data across a data set. Aiming to identify and report repeated patterns
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
23
==PAGE:32==
(themes) and extract knowledge on behaviours or reactions of people in relation to ex­
amined phenomena (Alhojailan 2012). Before describing the phases of the thematic data
analysis technique, it is essential to specify the term “theme”. A “theme” can be defined
as a specific division or patterned answer extracted from interviews or qualitative data
set that apprises the researcher about a specific meaning or subject (Braun and Clarke
2012). In other words, it is a way of categorization of items which allows identification and
in­depth examination of the non­organised qualitative data. The most important advan­
tage of a thematic analysis is the flexibility that provides to the researcher, as a theme
is a broad entity which allows a higher level of interpretation and clarification of a data
set (Alhojailan 2012). It is worth mentioning that the researchers are able to determine
themes regardless the frequency that a specific topic or meaning is reported or said in an
interview.
Although, the significance of a theme is not automatically depicted according to its repe­
tition within a data set, but it is still provide evidence on areas for further investigation if
a topic was mentioned from multiple participants (Kiger and Varpio 2020). The frequency
of appearance of a specific response is indicating about the proportion of the participants
that have stated the same, and concerns the researchers about a popular topic that should
be taken into account when the assessment of the findings takes place (Braun and Clarke
2012).
The qualitative thematic method was applied according to the predefined areas of inves­
tigation, which are communication, productivity, well­being, and overall, performance in
a remote setting. That means that the coding and interpretation of the data was influ­
enced and based on the aforementioned four topics of investigation. This approach is
considered as deductive coding that is based on targeted areas of examination that the
researchers want to pay attention (Kiger and Varpio 2020). The scope of the interviews
was predefined in order to get insights regarding distant work experiences and challenges
of their teleworking leadership role during the pandemic situation.
To implement a thematic analysis and organise the qualitative data a 6­phase process was
applied (Kiger and Varpio 2020). A step­by­step description of the phases is provided as
follows. A graphical representation of the stages is given in Figure 3.1.
24
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.1: Phases of thematic analysis methodology
Phase 1. Familiarization with the interview data
The interviews were video recorded and then transcribed orthographically, reproducing
all spoken words and sounds including hesitations and cut­offs in speech. After the tran­
scription of the video recordings it was necessary to run through every detail of the data
set (AUCKLAND n.d.). Repeated reading and in­depth analysis of every item that is said
and stated during the interviews was necessary. The entire data set was examined twice
or more until the data content was understood intimately. Additionally, at this initial step,
every transcript was examined individually by making notes and trying to categorize or
divide opinions, statements and important parts within the data set.
It is the stage where preliminary concepts and categories are defined and reported to em­
power the following phase of coding (Mortensen n.d.). Then, the transcripts were edited
to cut down parts that found to be not compatible to the research’s scope. The editing
process included the elimination of repetitive words within a sentence or irrelevant sen­
tences and phrases to the research’s questions. This step was conducted to strengthen
the overall meaning of a data extract and remove aspects that are not supporting a clear
understanding of a response. As this research examines distance management chal­
lenges regarding specific performance aspects, the parts of the interviews that practically
found to be not relevant were neglected so as to proceed to a smoother and more accurate
definition of codes (AUCKLAND n.d.).
Phase 2. Generating initial codes
First, active examination of the notes from the previous step and identification of linkage,
deviation, or common points among the data set took place. This stage involves gener­
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
25
==PAGE:34==
ation of codes, not specific themes (Mortensen n.d.). A code is specified as a primary
division or segment, of the unprocessed data set which can be estimated as a purposeful
and essential measure or observation of a phenomenon. A code should be precisely de­
termined and delimited in order to avoid overlapping within other selected codes (Braun
and Clarke 2012).
When the coding scheme is designated, the selected codes are applied to the complete
data set. The data that are in alignment with the chosen codes are collected and deter­
mined. (Alhojailan 2012). Every part of the interview can be labelled with several codes,
and they should include a sizeable section of text to allow the specification of themes.
Coding is possible to be conducted manually or with thematic analysis software solutions
which are making use of artificial intelligence(AI), natural language processing (NLP) and
machine learning algorithms (AUCKLAND n.d.). For the aim of this research the coding
process was conducted manually as the number of interviews allowed the manual detailed
examination of the collected information.
Phase 3. Searching and finalisation of specific themes
In this phase, the data analysis starts to take shape as moving from codes to themes. A
theme “captures something important about the data in relation to the research question
and represents some level of significance or meaning within the data set” (Kiger and
Varpio 2020). Another important element of this stage is starting to explore the relationship
between themes, and to consider how themes will work together in describing a coherent
story. Good themes are distinctive and have a high level of autonomy as findings, but
also need to generate a cohesive and clear outcome (Alhojailan 2012).
Phase 4. Reviewing themes
The fourth step consists of the re­examination of the previous stages whether they are
related to the research scope. Assessment of the relation between the selected codes
and the identified themes takes place. Essentially quality­checking, is important to check
the connectivity of the identified themes with the research questions. If the identified
thematic data are not satisfactorily addressing the research purpose, there is a need to
discard codes or and generate new. Alternatively, increase the thematic boundaries, in a
way that ensures the determination of relevant information. (Alhojailan 2012).
Phase 5 Defining and naming themes
This is the final stage where clear determination of thematic data and attributes takes
place. It is important to name the themes by checking specific and unique aspects in order
to avoid overlapping among the thematic topics. Every identified thematic finding should
clearly show which research question is addressing. At the end each theme must give a
solid outcome that can be further used to drive relevant conclusions and recommendations
(Braun and Clarke 2012).
Phase 6 Visualization and representation of findings
The last step include the data display and representation. According to the research de­
sign and purpose there are various ways to present thematic data, and this is a decision
that the researcher should take. Clear and descriptive way o visualizing thematic data is
essential in order to provide coherency and present the meaning of each theme. Before
the data display, an assessment regarding the significance of the findings is necessary.
Not relevant or useful data should be removed, and then the results are going to be pre­
sented in tables, showing codes, themes and thematic data or phrases that will lead to
meaningful observations (Alhojailan 2012).
26
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:35==
3.3.2
Questionnaires ­ Critical Analysis
The nature of the questions was designed in order to support the reliability of the inter­
view data of the present qualitative research by examining a different angle. As already
mentioned, the interviews were conducted to collect data and relevant information from
top managers of selected case organizations, while the questionnaires are aiming to in­
vestigate the employees experiences during the strict COVID­19 lockdown. The ques­
tionnaires were created and forwarded via “Google forms” and the statistic results were
displayed automatically in an Excel sheet, then the generation of graphs and charts took
place. It was a complementary method added to the research scope with the purpose to
highlight intangible parameters that the employees might have experienced that are not
visible from the administrators side..
A critical appraisal of the qualitative data derived from the questionnaire was conducted.
The aim of the critical analysis is to systematically criticize and assess the employees’ re­
sponses and experiences regarding remote working during the lockdown and determine
whether the interview findings were in alignment with the questionnaires’ data, as they
were a living entity of distance management functions over the last year. Moreover, it
was a way to check the robustness of the managerial thematic data and identify differ­
ences and deviation from the employees’ experiences during the pandemic. By taking into
account and assessing both qualitative results extracted from both methods(interviews
and questionnaires), this benefited the formulation of clear and reliable recommendations
and suggestions for future improvement, in the direction of an optimized remote working
model, by learning from experience.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
27
==PAGE:36==
28
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:37==
4
Results
4.1
Interview
After the data collection from the interviews and the thematic analysis of the qualitative
data set the present chapter provide the findings per respondent and tries to determine
similarities among statements and themes that most of the respondents have mentioned
during their speech. The following subsections are presenting the qualitative thematic
findings of the interviews for all participants regarding the four topics of investigation.
Starting with the aggregated managerial data sets in relation to communication in a vir­
tual setting, then observations and thematic data in regard to the employees’ productivity
and well­being during the strict lockdown, and last are presented findings regarding perfor­
mance aspects, changes and additions. After showing a specific table for each respon­
dent, a summarized table highlighting the most important points that have been stated
several times among the interviews from more than two participants are designed. The
purpose of the summarized tables for each category is to provide an overview in terms
of significance of the results among the data set, and interpretation and discussion of the
data.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
29
==PAGE:38==
4.1.1
Communication
The first interviewee, on the subject of virtual communication, pointed out that it was an
experiment that had not been tried before and if the pandemic did not occur, the steps
of testing a completely remote model would take much longer. Now they had to abruptly
adopt it and test the effectiveness of such a model of screen communication. As a major
positive consequence of the pandemic, he said that replacing physical communication
with platforms proved to be effective and accurate enough in terms of performance with
a slight delay in the first few months for all employees to get used to the new way of
communicating. As the main disadvantages of communication during the pandemic he
noted that there was a need to increase employees’ engagement when working remotely.
Also, emphasis was given on the difficulty to understand individual needs of employees
working from home so short meetings in a weekly basis to follow up all individuals as much
as possible tried to be applied. The following table summarizes all relevant thematic data
from interview one and points out the highlighted themes derived.
Figure 4.1: Extracted thematic data regarding virtual communication from the speech of
respondent 1
30
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:39==
The second respondent pointed out that while all departments of the company have been
working remotely for the past year due to the pandemic, the level of phone call had de­
creased compared to before the pandemic and the main body of communication had now
changed and moved to teleconferencing and internal communication platforms as well as
emails. On the positive side, it is acknowledged that the chosen platforms of communica­
tion, information exchange, and file processing did not seem to be particularly difficult for
most of the employees who worked from home. His willingness to adapt in a future state
these ways of digital communication was a expressed. However, he pointed out that with
a completely remote model, team collaboration and training became harder as the ab­
sence of physical interaction affected the creation of common norms. Therefore, the new
way of communicating remotely seems to have affected team performance compared to
before the lockdown and he emphasized there is space for improvement in this area. All
important elements that were analysed and identified from the speech of the respondent
are shown in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Extracted thematic data regarding virtual communication from the speech of
respondent 2
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
31
==PAGE:40==
In the third interview, the participant commented that the platforms used for distance com­
munication proved to be effective and helped to avoid misunderstandings in everyday
tasks in a satisfactory level. In the negative comments he attributed that communication
related to technical or special items is more difficult through a screen, and pointed out
that short daily insignificant corrections and discussions were lost resulting in the need
for more regular monitoring of the progress of the employees. The aforementioned fact
also affected proactive reporting of problems as it did not allow the top managers to have
a complete picture of who needs help and guidance in real time. In more detail, the data
collected from the part of the decoded interview of respondent 3 regarding communication
during the lockdown are presented in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Extracted thematic data regarding virtual communication from the speech of
respondent 3
32
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:41==
Examining the findings after decoding the transcript of the fourth interview, it became clear
that the new form of communication during the COVID­19 outbreak appears to adequately
replace physical communication accompanied by satisfactory efficiency in regards to Mi­
crosoft Teams environment. However, a major disadvantage of virtual communication
revealed weaknesses in coordinating meetings and ensuring that all stakeholders and
employees are fully informed. Furthermore, it was mentioned that this process, now, is
significantly more time consuming than in the pre­pandemic era. As stated from respon­
dent 4, ”often it is necessary to have more than 6 meetings in a row, without breaks, which
adds workload and time that is not adding value to the outcome. The evidence derived
from the fourth interview related to communication in a remote setting are given in the
Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Extracted thematic data regarding virtual communication from the speech of
respondent 4
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
33
==PAGE:42==
According to the fifth respondent, it took a few months for everyone to find their footing
and adapt to the condition of distance work. It was pointed out that remote work provides
the possibility of hiring and collaborating with people regardless geographical constraints
in cases of professional expertise that had not been tried before. On the other hand, em­
phasis was placed on the difficulties he faced as a manager in promoting social interaction
even in digital setup. The process of integrating new employees into existing projects in
a remote setting, as well as group formation of existing employees for the aim of new
projects, proved to be more demanding and required considerable care and precise guid­
ance to achieve competent team building and keep performance in the same level as
before the covid­19 lockdown. Last but not least the need for identification of innovative
solutions to promote active participation of employees who work remotely was pointed
out in the speech. Figure 4.5 depicts all relevant findings.
Figure 4.5: Extracted thematic data regarding virtual communication from the speech of
respondent 5
34
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:43==
The sixth respondent initially focused on the fact that it was out of his expectations that
construction projects could be managed through a completely telecommunication model.
This experience has, therefore, had a positive impact as they have applied new practices
that are going to stay for future use in order to offer flexibility to employees to be able to
work remotely. Although, a considerable disadvantage was that large number of partici­
pants in virtual meetings is decreasing digital communication’s efficiency. Emphasis was
also placed on the fact that there was no clearly structured work schedule for those work­
ing from home and sometimes it was difficult to gather the right information at the right
time. Finally, he recommended that there is a need to explore and create guidelines and
advisory tools to enhance and adequate information flow in distance management func­
tions.Figure 4.6 points out all relevant information acquired from the speech of interviewee
6.
Figure 4.6: Extracted thematic data regarding virtual communication from the speech of
respondent 6
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
35
==PAGE:44==
The main positive points mentioned during the seventh interview were that the internal
communication channels (Microsoft Teams, Yammer, Share­point, etc.)
strengthened
communication and appeared as satisfactory means to enhance performance in a dis­
tance framework. On the downside it was reported that there were implications related to
reporting issues on time as it was not easy for a large number of employees to get in touch
with their supervisors in a daily basis. Moreover, as stated, the remote setting affected
negatively knowledge sharing among co­workers. Isolation and working from home did
not serve establishment of interpersonal relationships for new project teams. Last but not
least, determination of specific protocols regarding effective digital meetings and ways of
leading virtual teams was noted.All data extracts are given in Figure 4.7.
Figure 4.7: Extracted thematic data regarding virtual communication from the speech of
respondent 7
The last respondent said that the employees became more active users of the telecon­
ferencing platforms and internal communication networks, something that did not happen
before the quarantine of COVID­19. In addition, it was reported that the schedule of hours
worked by each employee was not clear and was influenced by various factors at home
and often created problems in the effectiveness of communication. Finally, he pointed
36
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:45==
out that it is necessary to determine the balance between physical and virtual commu­
nication, in order to take advantage of the pros of both models and find an innovative
model that proposes a renewed or mixed form of communication that leads to advanced
performance in teleworking engineering systems. All notable aspects extracted from the
speech of respondent 8 are presented in the Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Extracted thematic data regarding virtual communication from the speech of
respondent 8
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
37
==PAGE:46==
In order to provide an overview of the most emphasized elements derived from all inter­
views regarding communication in a virtual setting, a summarized table was created. This
table is pointing out the significance of themes identified by conducting the thematic anal­
ysis and the coding of the data sets. Moreover, how many times a theme was mentioned
and from which respondent is shown. It is a way to determine similar points stated among
the interviews and extract useful conclusions. In Figure 4.9 all relevant topics that have
been stated from more than two respondents are presented.
Figure 4.9: Summarized findings per respondent regarding communication in a virtual
setting during the lockdown
38
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:47==
4.1.2
Productivity
According to the collected data from the first interview, the work­space setup has changed
for all employees as the company is operating remotely for more than a year. The re­
spondent said that they did not have enough time to get prepared so they provided only
basic equipment such as screens and computers to their employees working from home.
Furthermore, the interviewee commented on the delivery of tasks that the first 4 months
several tasks were delayed but in a later stage everyone get used to this situation and
then consistency on delivery of tasks was almost same as before the pandemic era. High­
lighted pros were travel and time savings, while on the cons there were several parame­
ters discussed that have affected productivity of employees during the lockdown such as
distraction at home (kids, noise, pets, etc.), lack of office space and proper equipment, ab­
sence of defined breaks and work schedule. The following table contains the key factors
emerged from the thematic analysis of the first interview.
Figure 4.10: Extracted thematic data regarding productivity in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 1
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
39
==PAGE:48==
The second respondent stated that everyone had been working remotely for the last year
since the pandemic began.
They have provided their employees with the necessary
equipment and a monetary amount to let them equip their home office according to their
personal needs and preferences. As a positive impact was acknowledged the flexibility of
working from home and structuring your own work schedule, as well as travel savings that
for some cases was beneficial when people live far from their work. However, it has been
reported that ”it was challenging for many people who do not have a well­equipped office
space at home to work from their kitchen table for a year”. He also added that there were
many cases with employees who have children at home who were forced to work late
at night because during the day their concentration was affected and consequently their
productivity.All notable elements regarding productivity derived from the second interview
are presented below.
Figure 4.11: Extracted thematic data regarding productivity in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 2
40
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:49==
From the thematic analysis of the data set emerged from the third interview on factors
influencing productivity in distance work setup, various interesting elements emerged.
Initially, as the third interviewee works in the same organization as respondent 2, made
clear that everyone worked from home for more than a year. All employees were provided
with the necessary equipment and additional monetary support to organize their space in
a well­equipped office. However, it was emphasized that there was a relative reduction
in the productivity of the remote working employees for various factors that have been
reported and presented in the following table.
Figure 4.12: Extracted thematic data regarding productivity in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 3
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
41
==PAGE:50==
From the data collected and clarified from the fourth interview regarding office equipment
that have been provided to increase productivity to those who work from home, only mon­
itors and laptops were in the list. Different types of rewards for boosting motivation and
increasing productivity were introduced, such as achievement recognition emails, wish
cards, breakfast and flowers at door. On the negative side, a significant delay was re­
ported in the execution and delivery of tasks, as some projects were delayed due to un­
certainty. The first period of 3 months was a stage where the necessary decisions had to
be made on how to manage the unexpected situation. In addition, according to respon­
dent 4, many employees at home spend more time on screen, but the quality of results
is not equal to working hours.The highlights regarding productivity from the speech of
respondent 4 are provided in the table below.
Figure 4.13: Extracted thematic data regarding productivity in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 4
42
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:51==
Respondent 5 made clear that 75% of the employees worked remotely and the rest 25%
who worked on the workshops needed to keep going by following the new restrictions
and guidelines. The standard equipment provided was also screens, laptops and in some
cases with doctor’s approval, anatomical office chairs and desks. Gift cards were given
as a reward to boost morale and people’s productivity at home. Regarding the delivery
of tasks, it was emphasized that the beginning, coordination and organization of new
projects during this period appeared to be challenging and required more time than be­
fore the pandemic. Nevertheless, common daily tasks were delivered almost the same
as before the pandemic. Disadvantages were attributed to various parameters that neg­
atively affected the productivity of employees during the lockdown period.The identified
parameters and relevant data are displayed in the following table.
Figure 4.14: Extracted thematic data regarding productivity in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 5
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
43
==PAGE:52==
From the sixth interview several interesting observations were extracted. First, it was
highlighted that projects that were at the early stages when the pandemic had started
were delayed due to need for extended decision making. Moreover, issues related to the
virtual communication, distraction at home and lack of appropriate office setup at home
created a slight decrease on the overall productivity of the employees. That does not
mean they were not working the same but the quality of the results did not reflect the
time spent. All findings derive from the coding and theme identification of interview 6 are
provided in the table below.
Figure 4.15: Extracted thematic data regarding productivity in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 6
44
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:53==
In this case, the organization was operating partially remote for the administrative em­
ployees while the technicians and employees in the construction fields had to continue
their work in the normal way as there was no option. As it is a large case organization
only screens and monitors were provided to the administrative employees, something that
created difficulties for some employees to work from home for more than a year. Another
issue that emphasis was given was that there were no proper breaks within the day as
people from home made their own schedule, and that lead virtual teams and supervise
every individual in the optimal way. Also another factor that influences productivity in a
negative way was on­boarding process, as it was much more difficult to train and share
proper knowledge with new members in the project teams. Below, the extracted informa­
tion from the speech of respondent 7 are given.
Figure 4.16: Extracted thematic data regarding productivity in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 7
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
45
==PAGE:54==
Respondent 8 gave emphasis that on the difficulty to asses productivity in a virtual set­
ting as it is not easy to check individual needs and evaluate the real working hours of an
employee. In the normal physical way it was easier to pass by and check if everything
is going fine, make small corrections on the way, answer questions and interact with the
employees even with body language. However, it was stated that travel saving and flexi­
bility are the most popular aspects that employees found as benefits of the remote setting.
The collected data from interview 8 are presented in the following table.
Figure 4.17: Extracted thematic data regarding productivity in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 8
Finally, in order to give a complete picture of the notable elements that could lead to the
46
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:55==
examination of relevant topics for further discussion, a summary table with the findings
related to productivity was created. This table shows the times a specific topic was men­
tioned among the interviews and which respondent highlighted it. In this way the points
where there is a convergence of views between the respondents and what data.
Figure 4.18: Summary of highlighted themes identified regarding productivity in a remote
setting from all interviews
4.1.3
Well­Being
Respondent 1 emphasized that the social limitations of telework makes the office hours
less fun and distractions at home can be cumbersome, but was surprised how the em­
ployees handles the situation.
Figure 4.19: Extracted thematic data regarding well­being in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 1
The main drawbacks from the lockdown period is that the creative process and educa­
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
47
==PAGE:56==
tional communication between employees is reduced. To improve well­being during tele­
work, respondent 1 suggest to actively listen to the employees needs and create an arena
for openness and trust.
Respondent 2, similar to respondent 1, mentions that the social fun is gone with telework.
The respondent sees an increase in workload and a reduction in motivation. However,
there are some positives to highlight, physical activities like yoga and gym sessions has a
positive effects on moral and due to no commuting, one can sleep longer in the morning. In
order to improve telework in the future, strict working hours rules needs to be established.
Figure 4.20: Extracted thematic data regarding well­being in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 2
48
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:57==
Respondent 3 reports an increase in tiredness in managers and employees. Emphasizing
that lack of social interactions reduces motivation among the employees and distractions
at home can lead to late night of work. Adding that both concentration and self­motivation
is reduced. One action to reduce the lack of social interactions is to organize virtual coffee
meetings. The respondent does not see a solution for improving the well­being in a fully
remote working environment, it needs to be balanced with physical work.
Figure 4.21: Extracted thematic data regarding well­being in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 3
Respondent 4 highlights that distractions at home is a big disadvantage of telework. The
respondent also sees a drop in motivation among the employees. The manager occa­
sionally experienced longer working hours because the day was full of meetings and other
work had to be done later in the evening. However, the flexibility benefit some employees
as they get more work done during the day. A clear structure and more regular follow up
is important for remote work in the future.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.22: Extracted thematic data regarding well­being in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 4
Respondent 5 experience a decrease in employee engagement and team spirit from tele­
work. Adding that distractions at home and limited equipment at home is reducing the
motivation. This respondent recognized the importance of clear and well defined tasks,
together with making sure the right people get the right information. As it is important not
only for performance, but for well­being too.
Figure 4.23: Extracted thematic data regarding well­being in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 5
50
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:59==
Respondent 6 do not feel a personal change in well­being from teleworking. However,
distractions at home can reduce productivity and well­being at work. The respondent
highlights that because the computer is more accessible it is much easier to work late,
finishing up work you normally would have to do in the office. This is not good for well­
being as employees need to detach from work. For teleworking to be improved in the
future, the respondent wants to spend more time on listening to employees feedback
regarding well­being and mental health. It is also important to establish ”off­time” where
employees are not allowed to work.
Figure 4.24: Extracted thematic data regarding well­being in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 6
Respondent 7 is not personally effected by teleworking. However, the respondent expe­
rience that employees are less happy with the situation, particularly due to distractions
at home. The respondent also report that some employees feel isolated due to the re­
duced social interactions. With the lockdown there has been a more focus on health and
safety of the employees. This have given a new perspective on how important that is for
the organization and for the business. It is important to listen to the employees needs
during telework as managers does not as easily, as before the lockdown, identify their
challenges. During this period there has been an increased focus on Christmas presents
with a personal letter of recognition to show the appreciation of the employees. Good
performances have been announced in plenum to increase motivation amongst the em­
ployees. Although, the respondent prefers to move back to a normal office setup, there is
a need for a more detailed safety protocol at work to make sure the same thing does not
happen again and to make sure the employees are healthy no matter where they work
from.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.25: Extracted thematic data regarding well­being in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 7
Similar to respondent 1 and 2, respondent 8 reported that it was more fun to work when
everyone was at the same location. The respondent also experience occasionally longer
days as there are a lot of consecutive meetings during the day. Although the manager
sees a reduction in motivation and employee well­being, the respondent is impressed with
how well the employees handles this new way of working. The respondent have not done
anything specific to increase the well­being amongst employees other than preventing
proper office equipment. Creativity and knowledge sharing is reported to be limited be­
cause of the way teleworking limits good discussions. Perfecting good listening skills are
important for managers to successfully work with telework in the future according to the
respondent. Adding that it is important to create a trusted relationship between employ­
ees and managers as it is harder to follow up on progression when employees work from
remote locations.
52
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:61==
Figure 4.26: Extracted thematic data regarding well­being in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 8
This figure below shows the summarized findings from all the interviews, in context with
well­being. The different themes are based on the literature review and represents which
respondent said what and how many times the specific theme was mentioned through the
interviews.
Figure 4.27: Summarized findings from the different respondent regarding well­being in
a virtual setting during the lockdown
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
53
==PAGE:62==
4.1.4
Performance
No changes were applied to the way respondent one measured the performance of the
employees as an effect of teleworking. Virtual communication was reported to create
efficient meetings with minimal time wasting. A useful trick for the respondent was to
schedule meetings at eight o’clock to ensure that the employees woke up and used the day
productively. The employees work on commission from finished project and is therefore
motivated to perform at a high level. At this time, the respondent have not experienced
any reduction in the overall performance of the organization and there has been small
financial savings from teleworking due to travel restrictions. However, there is a need
for spending more time on finding new projects, companies are slightly more reluctant
to expand their business during the current situation because of uncertainties about the
future. Finding new project is also challenged because the employees are not able to meet
potential customers face to face and social connections are harder to build. The managers
identifies two ways of improving employee’s motivation and performance. Firstly, it is
more important to monitor and follow up the employees during teleworking. Making sure
they are doing well and have all the right tools requires extra effort when you do not see
them every day. Secondly, adding a second weekly meeting with the employees gave the
manager more time to discuss and be creative, resulting in improved performance.
54
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.28: Extracted thematic data regarding performance in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 1
Respondent 2 has not changed the way performance is measured during telework. The
respondent said that meetings are more efficient with virtual meetings as there are less
room for discussions and small talk. Adding that virtual meetings does not require partic­
ipants to physically move between meeting rooms and can therefore be scheduled right
after one another. This makes for and efficient schedule that contain more meetings.
However, this often results in longer days as regular work is postponed until after all the
meetings. The respondent sees a connection between long days and lower motivation.
Working remotely requires better document control. This includes improving the the cur­
rent system to make sure information is given where it is needed and that employees log
everything they do to provide a better overview for the managers.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.29: Extracted thematic data regarding performance in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 2
Respondent 3 reports no changes in how performance is measured during teleworking.
However, Microsoft Teams meetings are efficient and a good tool to use for telework­
ing. Using this tool is a good way to ensure efficient information flow in the organization.
The manager has used virtual coffee and beer meetings for socializing and team building
during teleworking, with good results. However, the lack of physical interactions have a
negative effect on employees and managers motivation. It is more challenging to for the
manager to take proactive measures regarding employees problems as the right report­
ing system was not facilitated. Monitoring employees progress and well­being was also
harder as it is harder to get a sense of how they are doing when the manager does not
see them physically. To make teleworking even more efficient, a more structured system
for following up individual performance is needed.
56
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.30: Extracted thematic data regarding performance in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 3
Respondent 4 adapted a more structured monitoring system to follow up employees
progress. The manager sees great advantages with Microsoft Teams as it facilitates effi­
cient meetings and good cooperation between employees at different locations. However,
being creative is harder as you often sit alone and the way Microsoft Teams work. More
detailed plans with specified expectations and tasks would make for a more efficient work­
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
57
==PAGE:66==
flow. Virtual coffee brakes can be used to improve moral among the employees, further
improving motivation among the employees.
Figure 4.31: Extracted thematic data regarding performance in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 4
Respondent 5 made no changes to the performance measuring system, however had
just started a new project and was not at a point where measuring performance had
started. The manager sees benefits from using virtual communication tools, emphasis­
ing that smaller meetings with close engagements are an efficient way to utilize the tools.
Making sure a bigger group of different participants are all on the same page is more chal­
lenging in a remote setting. In the future, small meetings where also others involved can
listen in should be facilitated to make sure everyone get the needed information without
undermining the positives from virtual meetings.
58
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.32: Extracted thematic data regarding performance in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 5
The sixth manager reported no changes regarding performance measurements. The re­
spondent highlighted that the organization had gained a new appreciation for a healthy
work environment. Making sure all the employees are healthy ready to work is crucial
for a performing at a high level. Virtual meeting also facilitates productive meeting. How­
ever, people are tired of not meeting physically and there are a reduction in motivation.
The manager also reported a reduction in demand from this period, but that was more
due to uncertainties about the future, among the customer, than teleworking. In order to
improve the situation, a better plan for how to deal with employees physical and mental
health needs to be established.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.33: Extracted thematic data regarding performance in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 6
Respondent 7 reports no changes in the way the organization measure performance and
emphasise that teleworking have not had an effect on the performance. The respondents
identifies that some tasks needs more time and effort to finish when teleworking.
Figure 4.34: Extracted thematic data regarding performance in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 7
However, other tasks, like meetings, are more efficient than before. The managers says
an increased focus on individual recognition is important during teleworking to motivate
60
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:69==
and make sure employees feel included. A better plan for decision making in similar
situations is needed, to ensure that communities does not get completely shut down for
weeks, in the future.
Respondent 8 has not changed the performance measurement procedure during the lock­
down. Virtual communication is efficient and scheduling them strategically can enhance
increased performance. However, the respondent identifies a reduction in performance
as less people are allowed to be together and therefore have to use virtual tools. The
respondent wants to pay more attention to the employees in the future and therefore plan
to add a second weekly meeting with them to follow up on their well­being and progress,
as well give more time for discussions and creative thinking. The manager also identify
the need for more socializing events, planning to arrange virtual coffee meetings to foster
team building.
Figure 4.35: Extracted thematic data regarding performance in a remote setting from the
speech of respondent 8
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
61
==PAGE:70==
This figure below shows the summarized findings from all the interviews, in context with
performance. The different themes are based on the literature review and represents
which respondent said what and how many times the specific theme was mentioned
through the interviews.
Figure 4.36: Summarized findings per respondent regarding performance in a virtual set­
ting during the lockdown
4.2
Questionnaire results
This chapter presents the results of the questionnaires in which employees of the selected
organizations participated. The order they are presented follows the same structure of
the interviews’ findings as the same teleworking topics were examined. Starting with
the results related to communication, followed by productivity, well­being and finally the
results related to performance. Figure 4.37 shows the average of number of days that the
participants were working remotely for the last year.
Figure 4.37: Number of days per week that the participants work remotely
4.2.1
Communication
As remote working required the implementation or the most active use of new communica­
tion tools and mediums it was critically relevant to check the most common applied prac­
tices during the COVID­19 lockdown. Figure 4.38 shows the most widely used platforms.
It is worth mentioning that the presented results consist of the high ranked communication
tools and is not representing the initial list included in the questionnaire.
62
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:71==
Figure 4.38: Different tools used for communication out
The participants’ preference was then examined based on their experiences from last year
as to whether digital communication is preferable in comparison to physical communica­
tion in the work environment. The bar chart in Figure 4.39 shows the results.
Figure 4.39: Preference ratings regarding communication in a remote setting
In addition, it was deemed appropriate to investigate the extent to which upward com­
munication was affected by a total distance working situation. Employees were asked to
identify the level of difficulty or convenience they encountered in communicating with their
superiors. Figure 4.40 shows the ratings of the participants.
Figure 4.40: Evaluation of upward communication in a remote setting
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
63
==PAGE:72==
By the transition to remote working there was a change in the nature and ways of commu­
nication. Information flow is a critical function of organizational communication. Hence,
consequences of teleworking during the COVID­19 lockdown was asked to be appraised
by the participants. Below, the statistic outcomes are provided in Figure 4.41.
Figure 4.41: Evaluation of information flow for teleworking during the COVID­19 lockdown
A final question regarding communication was targeting to check the scenario whether
teleworking led to more or less interpersonal conflicts between co­workers in the remote
work environment. Figure 4.42 depicts the rankings of the participants.
Figure 4.42: evaluation of level of interpersonal conflicts in a remote setting
4.2.2
Productivity
The second are where the research is focusing is productivity where several influential
factors were tested. At the outset, it was found necessary to evaluate whether employees
felt that the workload had changed when teleworking. Figure 4.43 contains the ranks
according to the participants answers.
64
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:73==
Figure 4.43: Evaluation of the level of workload for teleworking during the COVID­19
lockdown
The examination of the amount of time spent to deliver the same tasks when working
remotely in comparison with before was found to be necessary in order to understand the
escalations in productivity ratings. Figure 4.44 illustrates the findings.
Figure 4.44: Time spent on the delivery of tasks in comparison with before
In addition, employees’ perceptions are reported of whether they experience to be more,
less or same as before productive when working remotely. The results are shown in Figure
4.45 below.
Figure 4.45: Evaluation of productivity level for teleworking
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
65
==PAGE:74==
The next graph shows how the lack of physical interaction with colleagues and team mem­
bers affected employees’ productivity during remote working. The overall ratings of the
participants are depicted in Figure 4.46.
Figure 4.46: Relation of lack of physical interaction due to teleworking on employees’
productivity
At last, it was critical to sum up and categorize the aspects that have have resulted neg­
ative effects on productivity in teleworking conditions. The participants responses are
presented in Figure 4.47.
Figure 4.47: Causes that negatively affected employees’ productivity
4.2.3
Well­Being
High well­being is important for teleworkers as it makes them more acceptable to adver­
sity. Job satisfaction affects the employees’ level of well­being. The figure bellow repre­
sents the employees level of satisfaction after one year of remote work, as an indication
of their well­being.
66
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:75==
Figure 4.48: Employees satisfaction levels with teleworking after one year of remote work.
It was interesting to investigate if the new remote setting had an effect on the mental health
of the employees. The employees were asked to rate whether they had experienced
stress or anxiety due to remote working.
Figure 4.49: Stress or anxiety experience from teleworking.
Similarly to the last figure, this graph represents the feeling of being depressed during
teleworking.
Figure 4.50: Feeling of depression from teleworking.
Self­motivation is a crucial part of autonomy in remote work. Hence, the employees were
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
67
==PAGE:76==
asked to rate their level of self­ motivation during teleworking.
Figure 4.51: Employees self­motivation during teleworking.
A second question was asked to investigate factors that have affected the self­motivations
among the employees.
Figure 4.52: Aspects that was reported to have a negative effect on self­motivation.
In order to understand the impact the managers have on motivation among the employ­
ees, two questions were asked. Firstly, it was necessary to establish what the managers
did to create incentive and promote motivation for the employees.
68
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:77==
Figure 4.53: Managers actions to create incentive and promote high motivation during
teleworking from 2020­21.
Secondly, a question was asked to give the employees an opportunity to express what
actions the manager could take, that would have a positive effect on the employees mo­
tivation and well­being.
Figure 4.54: Employees requests to improve motivation and well­being during telework­
ing.
4.2.4
Performance
Performance is driven by good planning and clear guidelines. A question was asked
to establish if the employees experienced that their managers gave them clear goals to
follow during teleworking.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 4.55: Representation of how well the managers have managed to provide clear
goals for the employees to follow.
The ability to learn from mistakes and adapt new ways of solving problems is important if
the organization is to perform at a high level, especially for teleworkers. A question was
asked to establish how it has been to report issues during remote working.
Figure 4.56: Challenges with reporting issues to the superiors.
Forgetting to recognize the employees and give them feedback on their achievements can
be challenging during teleworking. It can hurt their motivation and reduce their willingness
to perform. Hence, a question was asked to the employees if they feel that their personal
achievements are being recognized by their managers during teleworking.
70
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:79==
Figure 4.57: How well employees feel that their achievements are recognised.
High job satisfaction often leads to higher performance. Therefore, the employees were
asked to identify the most positive aspects of teleworking.
Figure 4.58: Employees biggest benefits of teleworking.
At last, it was critical to sum up and categorize the aspects that have negative effects on
performance in teleworking situation.
Figure 4.59: Negative effect on the employees performance.
Lastly, the employees were asked to give recommendations on how teleworking could
have been made better for them. Below is a list of their answers.
• Create clear goals and follow up.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
71
==PAGE:80==
• If virtual meetings, keep them short. A lot can be done in 15­20 minutes.
• Full office set­up at home / only partly working from home
• High workload leads to efficiency. I find it hard to have little or nothing to do from
home office. More frequent (informal) calls with my leaders would also be preferable.
• Set a plan for catch ups and interactions and set detailed targets/ action plan to
follow
• Ergonomics (many home offices do not having appropriate equipment etc.) and
better ways to teach and guide new people at the workplaces.
• Give clear tasks and schedule weekly meetings to increase information flow, let
the team members exchange ideas and help the new members to be part of the
department easier and smoother.
• Better communication with colleagues, better equipment
• For sure appropriate equipment at home.
• By using Teams or other platforms in the background while working so that asking
about something you are wondering about does not become such a big deal since
you are already working ”together”
• Encourage boundaries in working hours and Organize virtual happy hours
• Just fine as it is now
• The possibility to turn off the digital communication in periods of the day, there are
a lot of distractions in all the digital platforms (chats, meetings, social work media,
emails and phone calls).
• Must be a combination of physical and virtual meetings
• Bigger apartment with office­room. 60/40 office / home split
• Better equipment at home and weekly follow up meetings with manager
• Work from any place the employee wants, short team meetings every day
• Work­life balance ­ because we have access to laptops and we do not have to travel,
should not be an excuse for working more. A virtual team interaction, drink coffee
Beers with your colleagues, play games, etc. Will increase the moral
• more structured Introduction and training for Teams and other communication plat­
forms. A flexible system to handle time registration if you are working at the office
and at home during the same day.
– Finding a good balance, some that you still have good contact to your col­
leagues. Ie. ensuring that you still have days to meet in the office.
– Trust towards the employees, having faith that they are productive, rather than
setting up a control regime ensuring a daily reporting to the manager about
progress and tasks.
• More focus on social activities and team building ­ especially in new teams
• Better office equipment and better VPN connection
• Also meeting at the office
72
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:81==
• I would just like to work 2 days a week from home. More than that enhances the
disadvantages of working from home.
• Yes, there is definitely space for improvement. Perhaps, invest in a more improved
office space (ergonomic chair to give my spine some love and adjustable height desk
for various sitting and standing positions) and attend a yoga class to counteract all
those hours working on a computer.
• Better office equipment (larger office desk, quicker internet, printer)
• More communication, follow up to tasks that are being solved
• Location, flexibility
• I like the flexibility when working from home and not use time for transport
• ”social space/time” to meet colleagues (like coffee breaks)
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
73
==PAGE:82==
74
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:83==
5
Discussion
5.1
Communication
According to the thematic findings derived from the interviews regarding digital communi­
cation during the COVID­19 lockdown, it is debatable whether telecommunication served
in a satisfactory level sufficient information flow, as half of the respondents stated that they
have not identified any noticeable issues regarding information flow. Instead the other
half stated that there were considerable points regarding information flow in a remote set­
ting that need improvement and preventive solutions. It is evident that transmission of
the appropriate information to the employees regarding their tasks, well­organized meet­
ings and efficient knowledge sharing are necessary elements for high performance for
every work environment or framework (Sanchez and Guo 2005). The deviation among
the respondents’ viewpoints might be influenced by internal business aspects. For ex­
ample, respondents 4, 6, and 7 stated that the beginning of new projects, coordination
of meetings, allocation of tasks among teams, was harder now compared with the before
COVID­19 era. Therefore, this might be a reason which reveals weaknesses of the ap­
plied communication practices in relation to information flow for coordination of projects
at the early stages. The aforementioned fact highlights the need for well­defined commu­
nication channels that are ensuring sufficient information flow and are targeting to serve
productivity (Pulse n.d.). On the other hand, respondents 1 and 8 revealed that cases
where more experienced employees which switched to remote working appeared to have
a smoother transition to the “distance” way of working without any significant deviation
from the previous normal way and quality of outcomes.
However, a significant contradiction derives from the employees’ side, showing that 51,6%
of the participants answered that sufficient information flow was slightly more difficult when
working remotely, 12,1% stated that it was more difficult and 32,3% answered that it was
the same as before or even more preferable. It is a point where a misalignment among
the managerial perspective and the employees’ experiences is discovered that points out
potential difficulties on the administrators’ side to keep on track the everyday difficulties
that the employees were facing regarding information flow. It is even more demanding
in teleworking conditions to establish appropriate information flow that promotes team
collaboration and boosts employees to peak performance results (Bucata and Rizescu
2017). Although it was stated that teleconferencing platforms such as Microsoft Teams
and Zoom appeared to replace effectively physical meetings, this is an indication of the
need for innovative information or document sharing platforms that allow easy access to
the appropriate data to the workforce (Wang et al. 2021).
Subsequently, another significant point by the statements of respondents 4,6 and 7 was
regarding reporting of issues on time to their superiors. Reporting of issues has been
negatively affected due to the totality of the remote framework, according to respondents
4,and 6. Also, respondent 7 draw attention on the time consuming process of several
meetings in a raw without proper breaks which resulted to limited time to listen and mon­
itor individual needs. As a total remote work setting had not been implemented before,
it was observed that every single aspect had to be discussed via the teleconferencing
platforms. According to respondent 7, in reality it was quite more time demanding in
comparison with the physical way of communication. This issue is linked with upward
communication difficulties identified when teleworking. Lower­level employees should be
able via the appropriate channels to reach out on their superiors and report issues (Pulse
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
75
==PAGE:84==
n.d.). It is evident that upward communication improves interpersonal relationships within
the organization and benefits employees well­being (Adu­Oppong and Agyin­Birikorang
2014). On the other hand, most of the respondents (5 out of 8) stated that they have
not experienced any difficulties regarding reporting of issues by their employees. Well
organized meetings and clear communication channels create a pleasant work environ­
ment even in a distance setting. The statements of the managers seem to be reflected in
the questionnaire results since the highest percentage of the participants 56.1% believe
that reporting problems was easier or at least the same as before the remote working es­
tablishment, pointing out that this proportion did not experienced any difficulties to report
issues to their superiors due to teleworking, while 42,9% believe that it was slightly more
difficult compared to physical communication in the workplace. It is deemed essential to
highlight that Well organized meetings and clear communication channels strengthen up­
ward communication and create a pleasant work environment even in a distance setting
(Bucata and Rizescu 2017).
More than that, emphasis was given by almost all respondents to the significance of ac­
tive participation of the employees and the importance of enhancing engagement when
operating remotely. Employees engagement is positively affecting motivation and ambi­
tions for personal development (Pulse n.d.). Administrators need to follow up employees
personal needs and the key to understand individual progress is constant and efficient
communication (Ruck and Welch 2012). However, 6 out of 8 respondents highlighted that
it was hard to follow up and understand individual needs via digital meetings. However, it
is critical administrators to give the biggest effort to ensure that the proper messages and
information have arrived and encoded by the employees. Poor communication proved to
be related with lack of employees’ motivation and job dissatisfaction (Bucata and Rizescu
2017). Moreover, leadership should encourage their workforce to express feedback re­
actions in order to follow­up progress and ease review of performance (Sanchez and Guo
2005). An administrator needs to make certain that every important communication has
feedback so that complete understanding and appropriate action result to promote peak
performance. Another idea proposed by 5 respondents was associated with the empow­
erment of social interaction among the employees in a remote framework. Although it is
stated that there was not enough time to build and structure a well organized way to pro­
mote social well­being among the employees there were some cases were online events
took place even some coffee meetings.
There were also observations regarding everyday small discussions in the workplace and
corrections on the way by passing from the employees’ desks. As 3 out of the 8 re­
spondents mentioned it was much harder now with this way of communication to make
corrections on everyday tasks from a computer screen as body language and physical
interaction were lost. Providing support to employees by regular interaction and feed­
back sessions enhances better collaboration among team members and advances per­
formance results (Pulse n.d.). There is space for improvement, though, in this area, by
implementing the suggestion of respondent 5, to conduct short weekly informative meet­
ings that will allow leaders to have a clear overview of the situation. In addition, 5 re­
spondents highlighted that there were difficulties to communicate and explain technical
items remotely. That is an issue that came to the surface as the sender, for example a
manager, posts the right information but lack of proper knowledge or capability does not
allow the receiver to correctly encode the information included in the message (Bucata
and Rizescu 2017). Nevertheless, revision of training practices and efficient knowledge
sharing tools are important aspects to overcome the aforementioned issue.
Another issue reported by 4 out of 8 managerial interviewees, was a considerable delay
76
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:85==
within the first months of the COVID­19 outbreak in several activities of the organiza­
tions due to the need for detailed examination of the pandemic situation, careful deci­
sion making for how to operate remotely. Decision­making is primarily based on commu­
nication, exchange of opinions and dialogue (Adu­Oppong and Agyin­Birikorang 2014).
Furthermore, when an unexpected occasion is happening then detailed decision making
and change management strategies are vital to ensure a viable future for organisations
(Nguyen Hao et al. 2020). However, the time lost could not be avoided in most cases as
they had never tried a complete remote operation model and this was a challenge that
did not allow an immediate reaction. Preventive actions, risk identification and response
plans are important to be supported by several organizational levels that are based on
cross functional cooperation and a clear organisational mission (Wang et al. 2021). To
achieve an immediate implementation of a change management strategy such as a work
culture transition in an unexpected situation, leadership should have already decided and
applied new communication methods as well as publicized on time clear guidelines re­
garding future steps to the overall organizational workforce(Wang et al. 2021).
Although several challenges were identified regarding telecommunication during the COVID­
19 lockdown is quite impressive that 6 out of 8 administrators expressed that overall, this
experiment appeared to be quite effective at the end. An additional positive observation
from the questionnaires showed that 35.2% of the participants experienced less interper­
sonal conflicts during teleworking, 52,7% have not identified any noticeable difference,
while only 12,1% showed to experience slightly more conflicts in comparison with before.
Heightened levels of conflicts or offensive behaviors in the work environment can result in
frustration and stress related incidents that are obstacles to reach high productivity (Brill
1990). Although controlled level of conflicts can promote dialogue and healthy compe­
tition. Thus, team leaders should tackle conflicts by finding the balance that reinforces
beneficial qualities in the work environment (Carnevale 1992).
Regarding the recently implemented communication practices during the Covid­19 era,
all of the respondents expressed their willingness to keep them as legacy activities to
strengthen management functions in a future state. Moreover, stated that teleconferenc­
ing platforms such as Microsoft teams, knowledge sharing software such as Sharepoint,
and internal communication platforms like instant messaging,are going to remain in their
agenda as they replace face­to­face communication in a considerable level. The employ­
ees results revealed that the most widely used ways of communication during teleworking
were emails and Microsoft Teams Environment, followed by phone calls, Instant Messag­
ing and Zoom. As from the side of preference between digital and physical communi­
cation, a proportion of 57,4% showed to prefer digital communication or to not have a
problem with it, while 37.9% prefer to return to normal way of physical communication in
the work environment. Finally, respondents 4,6 and 8 mentioned that digital communica­
tion provided also opportunities such as the ability to hire employees without geographical
limitations, in job positions that were not operating remotely before the pandemic.
5.2
Productivity
The workplace setup is a key aspect that can affect productivity in a positive or negative
way (Chandrasekar 2011). As 4 of the 5 case organizations were operating totally re­
motely more than a year which reveals that the workplace for almost all participants of
the present research were their home office. Increased productivity ratings are observed
in companies where high comforts and appropriate equipment are provided to their work­
force (Bophela and Govender 2015). As stated from 6 out of the 8 interviewees some of
the necessary office equipment was provided such as screens, monitors and computers.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
77
==PAGE:86==
Only respondents 3, and 4 stated that they transferred a monetary amount to their employ­
ees to equip their home office according to their needs. Poor working conditions, and lack
of equipment can lead to a significant reduction of employees’ productivity and well­being
(Ramlall 2004).Despite that the extracted data showed that most cases provided the ba­
sic equipment which is not meeting the standards of a proper home office setup, only 2
of the respondents highlighted issues regarding declined productivity among employees.
Respondents 4 and 6 observed a slight lateness on the delivery of tasks when telework­
ing.However, the employees questionnaire results points out that more than half of the
participants 52,6% felt less productive when working remotely during the pandemic. The
discrepancy between the interview findings and the the questionnaire results indicates
that although the largest percentage of employees may have been consistent to deliver
the tasks within the deadlines, however, high productivity is not reflected in their personal
feeling. Good work environment conditions are fundamental aspects of employees’ well­
being and creativity (Chandranshu 2012).
A matter that was emphasised from a considerable percentage of the respondents (5
out of 8) was that employees experience to spend more time to provide the required
quality to the organizational outcomes. This matter of productivity is influenced by several
factors.That reveals that employees are spending more time until late answering emails
or finishing some tasks according to respondents 5, and 6 but the extra time is not adding
value or quality to the final outcome. So, evaluation of the relation of time as a function
of quality, points out that more time is observed to be spent during teleworking to deliver
the same quality to the outcomes. This is reflected to the results as a large proportion of
employees, 35,3% experience working more and spend more time to deliver the desired
outcomes. Though, 34% states that spends the same time as before and 20,6% that
spend less time in a remote setting.
The theme that was highlighted as important from all respondents was distraction when
working from home that occurs from external factors such as kids, family, pets, or noise.
Noise, absence of proper lighting, lack of space are some crucial aspects of the surround­
ing environment in a workplace that are considered as considerable causes of reduced
productivity (Wang et al. 2021). Furthermore this kind of obstacles stretched the working
schedule and did not allow proper breaks. Absence of clearly defined working schedule
and proper breaks in a remote setting were not defined in most of the case organizations
as 7 out of the 8 respondents mentioned this theme. Respondent 7 stated that there were
cases where employees of a project team had been working in different time slots during
the day and that resulted a decline on the communication efficiency as well as the collab­
oration among team members. Employees that are working morning hours sometimes
need to wait half of the day to get feedback or receive support due to the work schedule
extension. Communication and proper information flow are pillars of high performance in
the work environment (Chandrasekar 2011). Also, concentration is a critical parameter of
productivity for people working remotely(Pandey 2017).
Moving on to the questionnaire results it is shown that social isolation during the COVID­19
lockdown due to restrictions and distancing measures had a negative influence on the pro­
ductivity of a considerable number of the participants. Social interaction with co­workers
is accepted to benefit the creation of a pleasant and friendly work environment that rises
the promptness for high productivity (Chandranshu 2012). According to the findings, a
proportion of 57,7% of the audience agreed on the perspective that their productivity was
negatively affected by the lack of physical interaction with their colleagues. A percentage
of 24,7% seem to not be affected by the social restrictions, while 17,6% seem to prefer
the absence of physical contacts with their co­workers during the COVID­19 lockdown.
78
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:87==
On the positive side, one theme mentioned by all respondents was that teleworking cre­
ates the benefit of travel time savings. That was considered as a benefit from the re­
spondents as mentioned that some employees that used to travel long distance to reach
their workplace prefer the remote work setting as they save more than 2 hours of travel
time per day for their own needs. Another considered advantage of remote working was
flexibility. Every individual is responsible to make his own time and task management
and to structure his work program and breaks during the day. For a relative part of the
participants this is considered as a reason to improve their work­life balance.
5.3
Well­Being
From the interviews regarding well­being, most of the focus on emotional exhaustion is
negative. Six out of the eight respondents report a negative relationship between tele­
work and emotional exhaustion. Most of the attention is related towards longer work
hours. One of the main reasons for the long hours is the accessibility of the computer.
Half of the respondents reported that on multiple occasions, employees and managers
said they opened the computer later in the evening to continue to work or finish tasks
before the next day. Another reasoning behind these long days are challenges with con­
centration and distractions at home, especially for employees with kids that require some
extra attention during the day, reported by seven of the managers. Long working hours
directly relates to the aspect of fatigue at work which is said to have direct negative impact
on emotional exhaustion and job satisfaction(Bakker and Demerouti 2007), (Jan Alexan­
der Häusser, Mojzisch, et al. 2010),(Sardeshmukh, Sharma, and Golden 2012), (Kunze,
Hampel, and Zimmermann 2020). According to the literature, employees often feel pres­
sured to work more to satisfy their superiors during teleworking(Kelliher and D. Anderson
2010). This autonomy paradox harmful for employees with low levels of time manage­
ment and managers should pay close attention to it(Mazmanian, Orlikowski, and Yates
2013), (Putnam, Myers, and Gailliard 2014), (Hoeven and Zoonen 2015). Depersonaliza­
tion towards colleagues can harm the motivation of employees. Five managers reported
not only a reduction in motivation, but reduced engagement from the employees as well.
Although, many of the respondents reported a negative effect on emotional exhaustion,
some respondents reported a positive response to teleworking with respect to emotional
exhaustion. One of the factors was that reduced travel time and office setup offered more
free time before work, which resulted in a positive emotional state. (Kunze, Hampel,
and Zimmermann 2020) research shows similar results, where 21% of their respondents
reported the same results.
As mentioned in the literature, one method to improving the emotional exhaustion dimen­
sion is social support. One way to increase social support is to increase the social interac­
tions between employees. This can be done through virtual events or after work activities.
Support and feedback from the managers is also suggested as it gives the employees a
sense of meaningfulness and comfort (Long 2001),(Sardeshmukh, Sharma, and Golden
2012). Four of the manager respondents recognized this need and reported that they had
introduced a higher focus on acknowledgement and recognition of the employees work
during the lockdown period. However, only 11% of the employees reported that individ­
ual or team achievement recognition was used to promote better self­motivation (figure,
4.53). Furthermore, 35,2% of the employees responded that lack of achievement recog­
nition had a negative effect on their self­motivation, indicating that many of the managers
have not done it enough.
These results of limited recognition and acknowledgement can play an important role in
determining one’s job satisfaction. As mentioned in theory limited recognition and ac­
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
79
==PAGE:88==
knowledgement can have a negative effect on the job satisfaction among teleworkers
(Van Ham et al. 2006), (Bakker and Demerouti 2007), (Jan Alexander Häusser, Mojzisch,
et al. 2010). The results regarding job satisfaction indicate that 24,1% of the employees
who responded are more satisfied with telework compared to regular office work. How­
ever, the majority, 45,1%, are less satisfied with the current telework situation, with 6,6%,
being not at all satisfied (figure, 4.48). These results reflect a reduced job satisfaction, but
does not confirm where the dissatisfaction come from. Furthermore, it was reported by
half of the managers, that a lot of the ”fun” is gone due to the lack of physical interaction.
69,2% of the employees reported that the lack of physical interactions has had a negative
effect on their self­motivation (figure, 4.52).
In the perspective of aspiration and competence at work, the most mentioned topic was
knowledge sharing. Four of the respondents indicated that telework had a negative ef­
fect on education and knowledge sharing between employees. The reason for this was
two folded. First, that due to the limited interactions, knowledge sharing became more
difficult. Teleworking was reported to limit collaboration between employees due to the
way Microsoft Teams works. Teams microphone setting is set to only allow one partic­
ipant to speak at a given time and therefore slightly muting the rest of the participants.
This makes it harder to have open and fluent discussions, giving less room for knowledge
sharing between employees. Knowledge sharing became a process of asking over phone
or email. Another reason was related to strict and efficient meeting culture, according to
all the respondents (figure, 5.4). The strict and efficient meetings left little room for normal
interactions and questions, further limiting the learning process from the meetings.
Another subject that was mentioned in the interview was the importance of good infor­
mation flow. Three managers recognized good information flow as important for the em­
ployee’s motivation as well as their aspiration at work. It helped collaboration between
employees, made them more committed to their job and made them perform better, again
increasing their motivation.
Lack of physical interactions are inevitable in the current situation of a global lockdown and
there are little the managers can do to prevent it. However, both literature and managers
suggest the use of leisure time to socialize and detach from work. Literature suggests
focusing on hobbies or physical activities during work hours to include as many as possi­
ble. It should not take long, half an hour once or twice a week is efficient to activate the
employees (Cropley et al. 2020). Only three of the managers reported to have introduced
virtual coffee/beer or yoga events to increase the social interactions between employ­
ees. From the questionnaire, 58,2 % of the employees reported that virtual coffee/beer
meetings would increase their motivation. Additionally 48,4 % and 50,5 % reported that
virtual networking online social work and virtual team building activities would increase
their motivation, respectively. Indicating a strong desire for more social events amongst
employees.
Health complains in relation to bad ergonomic workspace is an important aspect of pro­
ductivity and well­being at work (Widana, Sumetri, and Ketut Sutapa 2018), seven out of
the eight managers reported that they have provided or at least given the opportunity to
the employees of accepting chairs and office equipment. However, only 30,8 % of the
employees said they got the right equipment. According to these numbers, the managers
have a good opportunity to improve their employee’s well­being by increasing this num­
ber as 52,7% of the employees said that getting the right office equipment would increase
their motivation.
To facilitate better employee well­being in a future, telework setting, the managers came
80
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:89==
up with some suggestions. Countering the reduced knowledge sharing, five of the man­
agers suggests an increased focus on one­to­one meetings to give room for questions and
follow up. The same managers also said that these additional meetings should be used
to follow up on the employee’s well­being on a more personal level. In doing so, man­
agers can identify issues early on and facilitate for better working condition and reduce
the chance of emotional exhaustion. It was also mentioned to create a clear structure of
tasks and expectations to further increase the perceived organizational support (Eisen­
berger et al. 2015). According to two of the managers, building a work relationship of
trust is extremely important for teleworkers and they suggest managers in the future to
focus on that as trust building is not only positive for well­being, but also for employee
performance (Golden 2006). To improve both the affective and professional well­being,
one manager suggested to plan outside of work activities to promote socialization and
work detachment. Furthermore, as long working hours can reduce the sense of job sat­
isfaction (Van Ham et al. 2006), (Bakker and Demerouti 2007), (Jan Alexander Häusser,
Mojzisch, et al. 2010), three managers suggested to make strict rules regarding off time.
They proposed to set specific restriction on for example no work is allowed after 18:00.
5.4
Performance
As high performance depends on the previously mentioned topics, some of the answers
regarding performance could be included elsewhere, however they were given in the con­
text of performance and is therefore included here. With regards to organizational support,
one of the managers answered that proactive actions were not that easy to predict be­
cause reporting got more challenging when teleworking. One of the reasons why reporting
became more challenging was due to meeting being strict and how Microsoft Teams work
providing less time for discussing these issues. Refer to section
Another concern that arose from teleworking was the ability to monitor how employees
were doing on their tasks. Half of the managers said that following up on employee’s
progress required more effort in a remote setting compared to in the office. The same
apprehension was raised by the employees where 39,4% answered that reporting issues
were more difficult, 7,7% said it was much more difficult (see figure 4.56). According to
(Townsend, DeMarie, and Hendrickson 1998), these challenges are common and pert
of the project management and execution competencies needed to perform well during
teleworking.
At the same time, Microsoft Teams had many benefits. Seven of the managers reported
a high satisfaction with Teams. All seven reported that meetings got much more efficient
as meetings became more focused on the subject at hand and less unrelated conversa­
tions. For the same reasons, Microsoft Teams made reporting and discussions problems
more limited. Six of the manages reported that Teams meetings provided little to no room
for this kind of conversations and it was therefore often not discussed as a result. How­
ever, three managers recognized and interesting benefit of using this tool. By scheduling
meetings at specific times, the managers could make sure the employees woke up early
or pushed them to focus on a specific task at a specific time. Teams meetings could also
be scheduled in rapid successions, further improving the efficiency of the employees.
Using Microsoft Teams in this way shows a high level of project management and com­
munication technology competencies, both important traits for managers in teleworking.
Half of the managers mentioned the benefit of flexibility from teleworking. They reported
that the employees were more productive and showed a higher level of well­being. 84,6%
of the employees also saw flexibility as a benefit from teleworking, corresponding with
the theory that confirms a connection between autonomy and job satisfaction. However,
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
81
==PAGE:90==
according to literature (Dimitrova 2003), autonomy can lead to longer working days as
employees priorities their days differently. Only one manager reported this as an issue,
stating that because virtual meetings is the best way of communication, a lot of meetings
were scheduled right after one another, resulting in less time for actual work that had to be
caught up on later in the day. Unfortunately, no data on long working hours were collected
from the employees.
All the respondents saw a benefit of travel saving as part of performance. This included
regular commuting, but also time saved between meetings and traveling to customers.
With teleworking everyone can meet everywhere with the use of a computer. This is a
new way of working for all the respondents and they all would like to implement these
benefits in the future. Due to limited traveling as part of the lockdown, four respondents
reported a cost saving in seminar expenses although those expenses are a small part of
the overall budget.
Knowledge sharing and information management is another important part of running a
high performing organization. Half the managers found weekly virtual team meeting to
be a good way of sharing information in a good and effective manner. Three of the man­
agers recognized the importance of good information flow and focused on delivering more
detailed information to the employees during remote work, compared to before the lock­
down. Although efficiency has been reported to be high among most of the respondents,
two managers reported a reduction in creativity. The same way Microsoft Teams limits
regular discussions, it limits the creative discussions as well. Contradicting the literature
(Naotunna and Zhou 2018), that states that autonomy during telework can improve cre­
ativity. The creative process mentioned in the result focus on the interactions between
multiple participants and depends on inputs and discussion with others.
Team building was reported to be reduced during telework. Five of the managers indi­
cated that due to limited social interactions, team building was more challenging. The
common factor was that virtual meetings does not facilitate small talk and personal con­
versations where employees could learn to know each other. Team building happens in
some level during group work, however, requires more effort than before the lock down.
Three managers said they tried to improve the situation by arranging virtual coffee/beer
meetings, creating room for small talk and non­work­related conversations. These meet­
ings seem to have a positive effect on the employees as 58,2% of them reported that
virtual coffee/beer meetings had a positive effect on their moral.
To increase performance in a future, telework environment, the managers came up with
some suggestions. Two managers suggested to add one additional weekly meeting. Hav­
ing two weekly meetings, rather than one, would give the managers more time to evaluate
the employees progress as well as getting more time to follow up on their well­being. As
high well­being is important for job satisfaction, creativity and performance, it is expected
that these changes will give positive results. One manager suggested to schedule shorter
and more structured meetings for group projects. These meetings should be scheduled
so that those responsible for holding the meeting talks and others involved could listen in
to the meeting. This manager identifies the challenges of having many participants in a
meeting without strict rules regarding responsibilities and interrupting questions. Two of
the respondents emphasized the importance of establishing clear goals and expectations
for the employees. Doing so can increase the connection to work, the perceived organi­
zational support and improve the motivation which ultimately lead to higher performance.
Lastly, and more related to well­being, four managers suggest having more virtual social
activities to promote social interaction and improve team building.
82
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:91==
6
Conclusion
Communication
Examining the results derived from the qualitative methods performed, it was realized that
teleworking led engineering companies to adopt new communication practices during the
COVID­19 lockdown. It is quite impressing that most of the administrators expressed the
willingness to keep several telecommunication tools in a future state. Moving to infor­
mation flow when teleworking, it is debatable from the interview extracts to what extent
it was favoured or worsened during the pandemic. Although, the employees side, gave
a clear tendency that information flow was harder in a remote setting according to their
experiences. It is essential specific focus to be given in that direction to determine the
significance of this issue and the extent that it is influencing negatively the achievement
of peak performance.
Another interesting conclusion can be extracted from the results regarding the signifi­
cance of improving team building and collaboration for teleworking. Adoption of online
learning programs, digital collaboration tools and constant meetings promote team per­
formance. Moving on to that perspective another conclusion could be extracted by the
need to strengthen employees participation in teleworking conditions to keep motivation
in a high level and improve productivity. As shown by the managerial observations it is
difficult to understand individual needs. Though the recommended plan should take into
account the improvement of co­workers interactions and relationships.
Productivity
After the assessment and discussion of the results from leaders and employees in tele­
working conditions, it is discovered that the provision of the appropriate ergonomic equip­
ment and resources to the employees working from home can significantly affect produc­
tivity in a positive extent. Though it is evident that most of the examined organizational
cases did not provide the necessary equipment except the basics. It is considered rele­
vant to be taken into account in a prospective way to provide better understanding for the
remote working environment.
In addition, it was understood that the implementation of incentive systems can create
benefits in both areas of productivity and well­being. However the indication from the
questionnaire results highlighted the need for additional effort in order to find suitable
incentives that will be applicable to the remote conditions. One more aspect that was
pointed out from both methods was the stretching of working hours within the day that
has an impact on the feeling of increased workload and lack of productive mood.
Last, indication from the data that a large percentage of employees were experiencing
concentration issues in distance work due to distraction at home should be taken into
account. In addition, it would be legitimate to try and create a clearly defined work plan with
structured breaks between meetings and work to support productivity and avoid negative
results like emotional exhaustion and tiredness. Finally, an important factor that seems to
have influenced productivity is the absence of social interactions among co­workers that
does not enhance both group productivity and team performance.
Well­Being
Teleworking was found to cause many different challenges for employee’s and manager’s
well­being. Long workdays as a result of easily accessible work and distractions at home
will cause an increased emotional exhaustion, reducing the employees well­being. How­
ever, more follow up from the managers were requested, to understand how different
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
83
==PAGE:92==
employees prefer to work. Some like to work in the morning, others in the evening. If
managers gather an overview of these behaviors, it allows for better work day planning
that will benefit the employees. Furthermore, it was suggested to add clear rules regard­
ing work­time to prevent employees exhaustion from working overtime. Evidence identify
that separation from colleagues and the lack of social support causes the motivation to
drop. Both employees and managers saw the need for more regular interactions to in­
crease mental health and job satisfaction. Teleworking makes it harder for managers to
follow up on how employees are doing. Suggestions from both literature and managers
were made, to include weekly meetings that focus specifically on personal well­being.
Fractions of information can often be overlooked during remote work, facilitating good
knowledge sharing and information flow will help employees feel part of the organization
and improve their sense of purpose, increase job satisfaction and improve performance.
Performance
With regards to performance, teleworking proved to create more challenges for organi­
zational support. Due to how virtual communication tools work, it creates a barrier for
open discussions and feedback during bigger meetings. This structure also effects the
group creative process as it depends on feedback and inputs from multiple participants.
Additional, shorter meetings, with fewer participants were suggested to provide more time
for these discussions. Similar structured meetings should be used for progress follow up
and knowledge sharing. The results highlights a focus on detailed information in order
to make sure the employees knows exactly their expectations. However, virtual meet­
ings are excellent tools for efficient meetings and can also be scheduled strategically to
promote efficiency. Teleworking facilitate a flexible workday, most of the results showed
a positive relationship between flexibility, productivity and well­being. On the other side,
teleworking results in a lot of meetings and in close succession. Consequently, work that
normally would be done between meetings are now push till later in the day, creating
longer work days. As discussed in the well­being section, long work days can result in
emotional exhaustion. Managers need to consider this with regards to employees health
and safety. Emotional exhaustion can become costly for the organization as employees
are less motivated, less productive and potentially gone on sick leave, that easily can
be prevented. However, teleworkers benefits from not having to commute, facilitating an
efficient work life balance.
Teleworking on a organizational level is a new way of working form most of the respon­
dents. The managers expressed that it requires more effort from the them to make ensure
good communication, productivity and well­being. Managers should expect that telework­
ing requires them to spend more time on the employees, compared to regular office work.
Providing more information and more follow up is necessary for the organization to work
together and performer well.
6.1
Recommendations
The COVID­19 outbreak created a public health emergency worldwide. The state of emer­
gency associated with the spread of disease has led governments around the world to
create a number of restrictions, including quarantine and social distance measures, so
the nature of physical contact and the work environment was greatly affected. Thus, sev­
eral organizations implemented a total remote working setup to continue operating. The
immediate transition to a total teleworking model generated uncertainties regarding em­
ployees’ safety, business aspects, social interaction, and other components of the global
economy.
After one year of operating remotely, it is vital for the case organizations and leadership
84
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:93==
to adapt their business continuity plans to the circumstances and consider change man­
agement solutions that will allow agile and flexible reactions and practices that promote
high effectiveness and ensure a viable future for their business.
The aim of this study after identifying weaknesses and key influencing factors that proved
to be inefficient and problematic for a total remote working model is to propose recommen­
dations in a form of a toolbox with specific steps in areas that showed there is space and
need for improvement. In an effort to guide enterprises that are operating remotely and
are planning to continue in this way of working in a future state, a data­driven list of rec­
ommendations are provided on how to strengthen organizational resilience and improve
teleworking performance.
Figure 6.1: Proposed plan to achieve peak performance in a teleworking model
Resilient administration
Guiding and supporting employees remotely during requires and emphasis on under­
standing and respecting the organizational workforce. Therefore, leaders and managers
should adopt a human­centered perspective in order to give employees time and comfort
to accept and assimilate to the demands of teleworking. It is desirable to focus on the
timely resolution of internal factors that may adversely affect the efficiency and mental
state of employees and then to investigate external factors at a later stage. The follow­
ing are the foundations of a new approach to leadership and the main aspects that are
proposed to be adopted:
• Create a crisis­response plan with clear guidelines, and rules on responsibilities,
tasks and operations that can be used in a future state if a similar situation were to
happened.
• Energize business continuity strategic mechanisms, by engaging all relevant stake­
holders on the appropriate actions and measures that need to be taken
• Ensure proper functionality and procurement of IT platforms and provide the appro­
priate equipment (laptops, screens, proper desk and office chair, etc.) to reinforce
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
85
==PAGE:94==
productivity for the employees working remotely
• Re­examine and adapt the performance metrics to fit the remote working environ­
ment and be in accordance with the organizational goals and vision
• Develop a cross functional response group aiming to support the management pro­
cesses and would empower effectiveness on the new teleworking model
Cross functional support group
A central department made up of people with diverse expertise and specialties so that it
can act as an advisory team to support leaders’ decision making and distance manage­
ment. The main areas of expertise that are suggested to be part of the cross­functional
response group are members of the administration, IT, HR, Media and Communication,
Risk Management and Finance.
The recommended tasks of the cross functional department are summarized below:
• Communicate latest developments, updates, and governmental guidelines within
the enterprise ­ to ensure sufficient information flow.
• Coordinate communication channels ­ proper utilization of the teleconferencing and
knowledge sharing tools.
• Strengthen upward communication within the the organization to improve reporting
issues.
• Create proactive risk management protocols.
Build­up effective Communication
Communication is the core of teleworking. Therefore, well­defined communication prac­
tices and tools are of vital importance to an organization that operates remotely. Based
on the results obtained from both managers and employees, some suggestions for im­
provement are summarized below:
• Ensure a comprehensible information flow to all employees who work remotely by
increasing the number of regular weekly meetings ­ at least two meetings per week
with the team leaders or project managers to monitor individual progress and provide
constant organisational support.
• Familiarization of employees with the new telecommunications platforms so that
they do not face difficulties in their use and enjoy the facilities provided by respective
tools.
• Search, Adopt and implement new platforms to enhance knowledge sharing and
enable easy and fast file sharing and data processing.
• Design meetings to have the right number of participants and make everyone feel
involved in the discussion ­ avoid large numbers of participants as they seem to
reduce communication efficiency.
Support active participation and employees’ engagement
Τhe findings showed that it is very important to enhance the active participation of employ­
ees in the operational tasks and organizational goals as it increases personal motivation
and productivity. Therefore, many aspects of enhancing teleworking performance are as­
sociated with employees’ engagement with the organizational vision. Hence, it was con­
sidered legitimate to propose some ways of promoting active participation in teleworking
conditions:
86
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:95==
• All meetings via teleconferencing platforms should take place with cameras open in
order to ensure that everyone is listening and participating.
• Provide motives for extra participation, exchange opinions and views in small meet­
ings (5­10 people), promote creative discussion and brainstorming.
• Individual and team achievement recognition empowers the motivation for increased
effort and lead employees to high performance outcomes.
• Team building activities are essential to take place both during the development and
creation of new teams to enhance the establishment and improvement of interper­
sonal relationships that enhance team performance.
• Create regular surveys to collect real­time date on employees teleworking prefer­
ences.
Prioritization of individual needs and well­being
In order to achieve high performance from teleworking where all staff members work re­
motely, it is necessary for managers to provide the appropriate organisational and social
support to ensure a healthy mental state at the new workplace. It is a key criterion for
the management to focus on empathy and understanding of the employees needs. Be­
low are recommendations for managers on how to improve employees well­being during
teleworking:
• Middle managers and project team leaders are advised to have frequent one­to­one
meetings to allow for more open conversations about the health and well­being of
the employees.
• Priority should be given to the human needs in relation to appropriate office equip­
ment and other personal needs.
• Specific work schedules should be designed to prevent employees from working
long days without undermining the flexibility benefits
• Activate the employees with online social events to promote social interaction and
mental breaks from work. Some examples are coffee, afternoon beer meetings or
30 min physical activities.
• Arrange team building activities in order to achieve the creation of social norms,
team spirit and efficient collaboration through teleworking.
• Facilitating good knowledge sharing and information flow will help employees feel
part of the organization and improve their sense of purpose, increase job satisfaction
and improve performance.
• Implementation of a structured reward system that is well­defined according to the
characteristics of a remote framework. Achievement recognition is rewarding and
can boost self motivation that can result in higher individual performance.
Blended Learning
Training and continuous development are critical for all organizational levels, from leaders
to lower level employees. Gaining knowledge and expertise in new subjects enhances
flexibility of movements and the avoidance of professional stagnation. Especially in a case
of abrupt change where the entire workforce switches to a distance work environment,
training is a key factor for successful transition and high productivity. Blended training is
an innovative term that suggests the parallel training of several hierarchical levels of an or­
ganization in new technologies and professional requirements. Data­driven suggestions
are proposed that can adapt training in a distance management framework.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
87
==PAGE:96==
• Due to the lack of physical interaction with co­workers, embrace learning platforms
that could improve knowledge sharing and provide the appropriate skills to the work­
force
• Support digital on­boarding with well­structured training sessions and guidance to
the newly hired employees
• Opportunities of digitally enabled learning programs that are improving team perfor­
mance. For example collaboration tools, podcasts, simulations, etc.
• Train the workforce to become advanced users of the new digital environment ­
seminars, and constant technical support
• Training of the administrators to empower the agenda of leading virtual teams, dis­
tance management effectiveness, new performance metrics in a remote setting.
Promote teleworking culture
As the last step of the proposed plan for improving remote working in efficiency, promo­
tion and development of a virtual work culture is important in order to be seen from the
employees as the new normal. As the recommendations are focusing to propose solu­
tions to organizations that are planning to have teleworking as a legacy activity, a list of
suggestions on how to achieve it is given:
• Publicize the benefits of the implemented digital tools.
• Emphasize on the provided flexibility, such as absence of travel time to the work­
place, self management of the work­schedule
• Focus on creating trustful relationship between manager and employee
• Leverage innovative virtual learning techniques to upgrade the skills of the personnel
All of the aforementioned steps are strengthening an agile distance management ap­
proach with main focus on the optimization of performance in a teleworking model. Al­
though it is not attempting to create a guide that is applicable in every engineering system
or organization. Though, it would be essential specific characteristics of each work envi­
ronment to be examined individually and then the appropriate strategies to be structured
upon the unique requirements and needs of each workplace.
here
Evaluation and Justification of the Methodological Choices
As mentioned in the methodology section, the interviews conducted used a structured
setup. A structured interview is an interview where all the questions are prepared and
tested in advance to standardize and narrow the scope of the interview. This method
is often used for interviews within the field of mental health and work environment, so it
was believed to be as a good fit (Wethington and McDarby 2015), (Cropley et al. 2020),
(Miller et al. 2001), (Joan E. Van Horn et al. 2004). The advantages of using a structured
setup is that it provides consistent and less bias answers (Miller et al. 2001), (Mueller and
Segal 2015). It was important to collect the most important and relevant information in
a limited amount of time and therefore, a structured and efficient interview was needed.
The structured method allows the interviewers to stay focused on the right questions, even
though the respondents sometimes sidetracked, as the questions were already prepared
and the interviewer knew the pace of the interview. This would not be possible is we had
chosen a unstructured method. The subjects of investigation in this thesis covers a lot
of aspects and it would not be efficient to not narrow the answers of the respondents by
asking more direct questions. Although, the primary objective of this thesis was not to
88
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:97==
compare different answers, the structured interview is suited for this purpose. We wanted
to see if the same challenges arose with the different managers or if they used different
approaches to handle the situation, and this method fulfills that desire.
Alternatively, a multiple choice questionnaire could have been sent to the managers, how­
ever that further limits the answers and interesting information might be overlooked. On
the other hand, an unstructured interview method would allow us to get a more in­depth
understanding of the different subjects as we could ask follow­up questions. This could
be a suitable solution if we were looking at, for example, only well­being and we had time
to cover more in depth. However, since we wanted to look at 4 subjects (communication,
productivity, well­being and performance), there was a need for more structure.
Although, the structured method is not designed for unplanned follow up questions, it was
designed to ask for information about the subjects in an already planned multi stage man­
ner. The questions were fairly open, so it allowed for supplementary in­depth explanation
from the respondents where we saw it necessary. This gave room for the respondents to
reflect on their experiences and prevented us with knowledge not in the literature yet.
For the employees, the only reasonable alternative were a multiple choice and scale ques­
tionnaire. With 97 respondents, there were not enough time and resources to interview
all of them. However, not all questions were suited for multiple choice either. Therefore,
questions that could not be answered with multiple alternatives was given on a 5 point
scale. The goal here was to identify trends among the employees and check if, what the
managers said they did to improve the remote setting, satisfied their employees or not.
One of the biggest limitation to this approach is that the respondents are only allowed
to give certain answers. We tried to eliminate that bias by adding an optional alternative
where the respondents could add their personal answers for each question, but that still
limits their use of deeper explanations. Nevertheless, this approach allows us to reach
a larger audience and still provide access to relevant knowledge regarding the research
questions.
Regarding the design of the methodological tools used for this study, it should be made
clear that the interview findings influenced the structure and the content of the question­
naires to lead to relevant data and allow the comparison on the same topics. Conse­
quently, continuous improvements and background research were carried out in parallel
with the data collection as new aspects were constantly emerging from the interview data.
Both the interview and the questionnaire would have benefited from a deeper understand­
ing of the literature, linking the questions more directly to the theory and what this thesis
tried to capture. For example, no questions from the questionnaire focused specifically
on long workdays. This was a challenge mentioned by the manager at multiple occasions
and in literature. In the thesis, age and gender were not included either. Future research
should include this data as it would be interesting to see how that would affect the spread
of the results. Additionally, rumination was not mentioned to impact well­being by neither
the managers nor the employees. Mentioned in several literature’s, this topic should also
be investigated further to get a better understanding on how it has affected employee’s
emotional exhaustion in Scandinavia.
Because teleworking, where the whole organization works remotely, is a new and ongo­
ing situation which has not yet been fully investigated, limited amount of literature and
previous long­term research exist. Therefore, the present study is based on principles,
literature, and management rules from teleworking where only few employees work re­
motely and does not cover the specific situation on the thesis. This gap in the literature
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
89
==PAGE:98==
caused some inconsistency between our findings and previous research.
All the interviews were conducted on eight managers from five different companies with 97
employees responding to the questionnaire. Therefore, the findings of the present study
are not evidence of how the overall engineering industry responded to the challenges of
a distance management in Denmark and Norway, but rather reactions and practices that
have been adapted in the case organizations. Few participants constrain the reliability of
the research as it runs the risk of only representing a subjective response. Thus, the size
of the sample examined contains a question of subjectivity, as the data of the interviews
collected are to a relative extent influenced by the personal experiences and observa­
tions of the respondents. However, individual statements that were observed not to be
recorded by more than 3 out of 8 respondents were not included in the results as they
were considered to contain a high degree of subjectivity. This was a way of ensuring a
satisfactory level of reliability and credibility in the research’s outcomes. Lastly, it should
be mentioned that structured interviews require some training to get comfortable sticking
to the schedule. Sidetracking during the interview increase the risk of common method
bias (MacKenzie and Podsakoff 2012)
In addition, it is legitimate to comment that the organizations examined operates in spe­
cific professional areas. The areas of expertise in the case organizations are consulting
services, project management, and maintenance management. Hence, emphasis was
placed on a small range of engineering systems and not on the overall engineering in­
dustry spectrum. The aforementioned limitations point out the necessity to avoid any
generalization, falsification or correlation of the results with other areas of expertise of
engineering systems that were not included in the current research. To create an overall
conclusion of the response and reflections for the engineering industry to the challenges
posed by the pandemic, further study of the specific characteristics and elements that
differentiate each area of expertise must be accomplished. Each professional field differs
in the nature of the requirements, in the granted flexibility as well as in the technical spe­
cialties, which directly affects the possibilities of forming a common teleworking model for
every engineering organization. The main focus of the current study is to provide sugges­
tions for improvement that are built on the specific findings and are related to the areas
of expertise of the examined organizations.
Lastly, this thesis focused on four different topics together, limiting the depth of the re­
search. Future research should therefore focus on one of the topics alone to get a better
understanding of the different perspectives. It is also suggested to continue the research
at a later stage as multiple respondents expressed that it was too early to see the complete
effects from remote working.
90
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
Charoenngam, Chotchai et al. (2004). “Re­engineering construction communication in
distance management framework”. eng. In: Business Process Management Journal
10.6, pp. 645–672. ISSN: 17584116, 14637154. DOI: RyXRRy3fR9ejdR8y9Ry8ed3ee.
WHO (2021). Coronavirus Disease (COVID­19) Situation Reports. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrX
r?Q X BMi f 2K2`;2M+B2b f /Bb2b2b f MQp2H @ +Q`QMpB`mb @ kyRN f bBimiBQM @ `2TQ`ib. (accessed:
08.04.2021).
DIMARTINO, V and L WIRTH (1990). “TELEWORK ­ A NEW WAY OF WORKING AND
LIVING”. eng. In: International Labour Review 129.5, pp. 529–554. ISSN: 1564913x,
00207780.
DeSanctis, Gerardine et al. (1996). Infrastructure for telework. eng, pp. 94–102. DOI:
RyXRR98fkj338dXkj33de-RyXRR98fkj338d.
Weekly, Computer (n.d.). Microsoft Teams usage growth surpasses Zoom. URL: ?iiTb,
ffrrrX+QKTmi2`r22FHvX+QKfM2rbfk8k938RyyfJB+`QbQ7i@h2Kb@mb;2@;`Qri?@bm`Tbb2b@
wQQK. (accessed: 08.06.2021).
Abdel Hadi, Sascha, Arnold B. Bakker, and Jan A. Häusser (2021). “The role of leisure
crafting for emotional exhaustion in telework during the COVID­19 pandemic”. eng. In:
Anxiety, Stress and Coping, pp. 1–15. ISSN: 14772205, 10615806. DOI: Ry X Ry3y f
RyeR83yeXkykRXRNyj99d.
Anderson, Amanda J., Seth A. Kaplan, and Ronald P. Vega (2015). “The impact of tele­
work on emotional experience: When, and for whom, does telework improve daily af­
fective well­being?” eng. In: European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology
24.6, pp. 882–897. ISSN: 14640643, 1359432x. DOI: RyXRy3yfRj8N9jksXkyR9XNeey3e.
Keyton, J. (2010). Case studies for organizational communication: Understanding com­
munication processes. eng, pp. 35–70.
Bucata, G. and Marius A. Rizescu (2017). “THE ROLE OF COMMUNICATION IN EN­
HANCING WORK EFFECTIVENESS OF AN ORGANIZATION”. eng. In: Land Forces
Academy Review XXII, pp. 49–57.
Adu­Oppong, Akua A. and E. Agyin­Birikorang (2014). “COMMUNICATION IN THE WORK­
PLACE: GUIDELINES FOR IMPROVING EFFECTIVENESS”. eng. In: GLOBAL JOUR­
NAL OF COMMERCE
MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE 3 (5), pp. 208–213. ISSN:
2319, 7285.
MSG, Management study guide. (n.d.). Communication Basics ­ Communication Theory.
URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrXKM;2K2Mibim/v;mB/2X+QKf+QKKmMB+iBQM@i?2Q`vX?iK. (accessed:
15.03.2021).
Antos, G. (2011). Handbook of interpersonal communication. eng, pp. 42–49.
McShane S., L. and A. Von Glinow M. (2003). Organizational behavior: Emerging realities
for the workplace revolution. eng. 2nd ed. McGraw­Hil.
Keyton, J. (2011). Communication and organizational culture: A key to understanding work
experience. eng.
Gareth Jones, . R. and . M. George Jennifer (2003). Essentials of Contemporary Man­
agement. eng. 6th ed. McGraw­Hil.
Ruck, K. and M. Welch (2012). “Valuing Internal Communication, Management and Em­
ployees Perspectives”. eng. In: International Journal of Business and Management 38,
pp. 294–302.
Sanchez, R. and K. Guo (2005). Workplace Communication. eng. 2nd ed. MA:Pearson.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
91
==PAGE:100==
Nguyen Hao, M. et al. (2020). “Changes in Digital Communication During the COVID­
19 Global Pandemic: Implications for Digital Inequality and Future Research”. eng. In:
SAGE, pp. 1–5.
Ontario Hospital Association, OHA. (n.d.). Effective Communication Strategies for COVID­
19. URL: ?iiTb,ffrrrXQ?X+QKf.Q+mK2Mibf1772+iBp2f*QKKmMB+iBQMf*PoA.@RNXT/7.
(accessed: 04.04.2021).
Pulse, EY Australian Productivity (n.d.). How workforces are responding. URL: ?iiTb,ff
rrrX2vX+QKf2Mnmf+QpB/@RNfH2pBM;@H2p2H@9@@?Qr@rQ`F7Q`+2b@`2@`2bTQM/BM;. (accessed:
07.05.2021).
Bophela, N. R. and P. Govender (2015). “Employee assistance programs (EAPs): tools for
quality of work life”. eng. In: Problems and Perspectives in Management 13.2, pp. 506–
514.
Chandrasekar, K. D. (2011). “Workplace environment and its impact on Organizational
performance in public sector Organizations”. eng. In: International Journal of Enterprise
Computing and Business Systems 1.1, pp. 147–233. ISSN: 2230, 8849.
Pandey, P. (2017). “The impact of work environment on employees’ productivity”. eng. In:
Leadership and Human Resource Management 1, pp. 84–127. ISSN: 9783668647329.
Mathews, R. and K. I. Khann (2013). “Impact of Work Environment on Performance of
Employees in Manufacturing Sector in India”. eng. In: International Journal of Science
and Research 5.4, pp. 852–855. ISSN: 2319, 7064.
Panimalar, S. and K. Kannan (2013). ““ A Study on Employee Perception Towards Effec­
tiveness And Impact Of Environment Management System At Tamil Nadu Cooperative
Textile Processing Mill Ltd., Erode”. eng. In: Journal of Business Management Social
Sciences Research 2.1, pp. 47–53. ISSN: 2319­5614.
Taiwo, A. S. (2009). “The influence of work environment on workers’ productivity: a case
of selected oil and gas industry in Lagos, Nigeria”. eng. In: African Journal of Business
Management 4.1, pp. 193–307.
Dorgan C., E. (1994). The Productivity Link to indoor environment. eng. 3rd ed. Proceed­
ings of Health Buildings.
Carnevale D., G. (1992). Physical Settings of Work. eng. 2nd ed. Public Productivity and
Management Review.
Kuruparensothynathan, P., G. Vimalendran, and V Ganga (2016). “IMPACT OF WORK­
ING ENVIRONMENT ON EMPLOYEES’ PERFORMANCE: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY
OF INSURANCE COMPANIES”. eng. In: Department of Human Resource Manage­
ment 1.1, pp. 7–14. DOI: RyXRjR9yftkXkXRkkj8X898ej.
Brill, M. (1990). “Workspace design and productivity”. eng. In: Journal of Healthcare Forum
5.35, pp. 47–52.
BUSHIRI, C. P. (2014). “THE IMPACT OF WORKING ENVIRONMENT ON EMPLOYEES’
PERFORMANCE: THE CASE OF INSTITUTE OF FINANCE MANAGEMENT IN DAR
ES SALAAM REGION”. eng. In: University of Tanzania, pp. 27–49.
Opperman C., S. (2002). “Tropical business issues”. eng. In: International Business Re­
view 19.3, pp. 55–64.
Ramlall, S. (2004). “A Review of Employee Motivation Theories and their Implications for
Employee Retention within Organizations”. eng. In: The Journal of American Academy
of Business 1.1, pp. 52–63.
Sabir M., S. et al. (2012). “Impact of corporate ethical values on ethical leadership and
employee performance”. eng. In: International Journal of Business and Social Science
3.1, pp. 163–171.
Diseses Control, Center for and Prevention (n.d.[a]). Well­Being Concepts. URL: ?iiTb,
ffrrrX+/+X;Qpf?`[QHfr2HH#2BM;X?iK. (accessed: 19.05.2021).
92
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:101==
Huppert, Felicia A. and Timothy T.C. So (2013). “Flourishing Across Europe: Application
of a New Conceptual Framework for Defining Well­Being”. eng. In: Social Indicators
Research 110.3, pp. 837–861. ISSN: 15730921, 03038300. DOI: RyXRyydfbRRky8@yRR@
NNee@d.
UN (n.d.). Goal 3. URL: ?iiTb,ffb/;bXmMXQ`;f;QHbf;QHj. (accessed: 19.05.2021).
OurWorldInData (n.d.). Policy Responses to the Coronavirus Pandemic. URL: ?iiTb,ff
Qm`rQ`H/BM/iXQ`;fTQHB+v@`2bTQMb2b@+QpB/. (accessed: 20.05.2021).
health, Harvard school of public (n.d.). Health and Well­being during COVID­19. URL:
?iiTb , f f rrr X ?bT? X ?`p`/ X 2/m f pBbrMi?H# f ?2Hi? @ M/ @ r2HH @ #2BM;f. (accessed:
19.05.2021).
Diseses Control, Center for and Prevention (n.d.[b]). Coping with stress. URL: ?iiTb,ff
rrrX+/+X;Qpf+Q`QMpB`mbfkyRN@M+Qpf/BHv@HB72@+QTBM;fKM;BM;@bi`2bb@MtB2ivX?iKH.
(accessed: 19.05.2021).
University of California, San Francisco (n.d.). Emotional Well­Being and Coping During
COVID­19. URL: ?iiTb , f f Tbv+?Bi`v X m+b7 X 2/m f +QTBM;`2bQm`+2b f +QpB/RN. (accessed:
19.05.2021).
Diener, E et al. (1999). “Subjective well­being: Three decades of progress”. eng. In: Psy­
chological Bulletin 125.2, pp. 276–302. ISSN: 19391455, 00332909. DOI: RyXRyjdf
fyyjj@kNyNXRk8XkXkde.
Grant, Adam M., Marlys K. Christianson, and Richard H. Price (2007). “Happiness, health,
or relationships? Managerial practices and employee well­being tradeoffs”. eng. In:
Academy of Management Perspectives 21.3, pp. 51–63. ISSN: 19434529, 15589080.
DOI: RyX89e8fJSXkyydXke9kRkj3.
D. Ryff, Carol (1989). “Happiness is everything, or is it? Explorations on the meaning of
psychological well­being”. eng. In:
Warr, Peter (1994). Work happiness and unhappiness. eng. Taylor and Francis, pp. 1–
548. ISBN: 9780203936856. DOI: RyX9jk9fNd3ykyjNje38e.
Van Horn, Joan E. et al. (2004). “The structure of occupational well­being: A study among
Dutch teachers”. eng. In: Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology 77.3,
pp. 365–375. ISSN: 20448325, 09631798. DOI: RyXRj93fyNejRdNy9Rd8kdR3.
Broadbent, D. E. et al. (1982). “The Cognitive Failures Questionnaire (CFQ) and its corre­
lates”. eng. In: British Journal of Clinical Psychology 21.1, pp. 1–16. ISSN: 20448260,
01446657. DOI: RyXRRRRfDXky99@3keyXRN3kXi#yR9kRXt.
Van Horn, J. E., W. B. Schaufeli, and T. W. Taris (2001). “Lack of reciprocity among Dutch
teachers: Validation of reciprocity indices and their relation to stress and well­being”.
eng. In: Work and Stress 15.3, pp. 191–213. ISSN: 14645335, 02678373. DOI: RyX
Ry3yfyked3jdyRRyyee8dR.
Brief, Arthur P. and Howard M. Weiss (2002). “Organizational behavior: Affect in the work­
place”. eng. In: Annual Review of Psychology 53.1, pp. 279–307. ISSN: 15452085,
00664308. DOI: RyXRR9efMMm`2pXTbv+?X8jXRyyNyRXRj8R8e.
Liu, Yongmei et al. (2003). “The relationship between emotional resources and emo­
tional labor: An exploratory study”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Social Psychology 38.10,
pp. 2410–2439. ISSN: 15591816, 00219029. DOI: RyXRRRRfDXR88N@R3ReXkyy3XyyjN3Xt.
Wright, B. (1997). “Professional burnout: recent developments in theory and research”.
eng. In: Accident and Emergency Nursing 5.1, p. 57. ISSN: 15329267, 09652302. DOI:
RyXRyRefayNe8@kjykUNdVNyydR@y.
Hulst, Monique van der (2003). “Long workhours and health”. eng. In: Scandinavian Jour­
nal of Work, Environment and Health 29.3, pp. 171–188. ISSN: 1795990x, 03553140.
DOI: RyX8kdRfbDr2?Xdky.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
93
==PAGE:102==
Niedl, Klaus (1996). “Mobbing and well­being: Economic and personnel development
implications”. eng. In: European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 5.2,
pp. 239–249. ISSN: 14640643, 1359432x. DOI: RyXRy3yfRj8N9jkNey39R938d.
Zapf, Dieter, Carmen Knorz, and Matthias Kulla (1996). “On the relationship between
mobbing factors, and job content, social work environment, and health outcomes”. eng.
In: European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology 5.2, pp. 215–237. ISSN:
14640643, 1359432x. DOI: RyXRy3yfRj8N9jkNey39R938e.
Maslach, Christina and Michael P. Leiter (2008). “Early Predictors of Job Burnout and En­
gagement”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Psychology 93.3, pp. 498–512. ISSN: 19391854,
00219010. DOI: RyXRyjdfyykR@NyRyXNjXjX9N3.
Taris, Toon W. et al. (2005). “Are there causal relationships between the dimensions of
the Maslach Burnout Inventory? A review and two longitudinal tests”. eng. In: Work and
Stress 19.3, pp. 238–255. ISSN: 14645335, 02678373. DOI: RyXRy3yfyked3jdy8yykdy98j.
Kunze, Florian, Kilian Hampel, and Sophia Zimmermann (2020). Homeoffice in der Corona­
Krise : eine nachhaltige Transformation der Arbeitswelt? Tech. rep. Policy Paper No. 02.
Nolen­Hoeksema, Susan (2008). “The Response Styles Theory”. eng. In: Depressive Ru­
mination: Nature, Theory and Treatment, pp. 105–123. DOI: RyXRyykfNd3y9dydRj38jX
+?e.
Association, American Psychological (n.d.). Communication technology: Implications for
work and well­being report. URL: ?iiT,ffrrrXT2t+2HH2M+2XQ`;fbb2ibf;2M2`HfkyRj@
rQ`F@M/@+QKKmMB+iBQM@i2+?MQHQ;v@bm`p2v@7BMHXWkyT/7. (accessed: 20.05.2021).
Sonnentag, Sabine (2012). “Psychological Detachment From Work During Leisure Time:
The Benefits of Mentally Disengaging From Work”. eng. In: Current Directions in Psy­
chological Science 21.2, pp. 114–118. ISSN: 14678721, 09637214. DOI: Ry X RRdd f
yNejdkR9RR9j9NdN.
Berset, Martial et al. (2011). “Work stressors and impaired sleep: Rumination as a me­
diator”. eng. In: Stress and Health 27.2, e71–e82. ISSN: 15322998, 15323005. DOI:
RyXRyykfbKBXRjjd.
Cropley, Mark et al. (2020). “Exploring the relationship between work­related rumination,
sleep quality and work­related fatigue”. eng. In:
C. W. Peeters, Maria et al. (2015). “Balancing work and home: How job and home de­
mands are related to burnout”. eng. In:
Konradt, Udo, Guido Hertel, and Renate Schmook (2003). “Quality of management by ob­
jectives, task­related stressors, and non­task­related stressors as predictors of stress
and job satisfaction among teleworkers”. eng. In: European Journal of Work and Or­
ganizational Psychology 12.1, pp. 61–79. ISSN: 14640643, 1359432x. DOI: RyXRy3yf
Rj8N9jkyj99yyyyky.
Long, Ann (2001). “Personal relationships: implications for clinical and community psy­
chology”. und. In: Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing 8.6, pp. 551–552.
ISSN: 13652850, 13510126. DOI: RyXRy9efDXRj8R@yRkeXkyyRXyy98jXt-RyXRy9efDXRj8R@
yRkeXkyyRXyy98jXt.
Sardeshmukh, Shruti R., Dheeraj Sharma, and Timothy D. Golden (2012). “Impact of tele­
work on exhaustion and job engagement: A job demands and job resources model”.
eng. In: New Technology, Work and Employment 27.3, pp. 193–207. ISSN: 1468005x,
02681072. DOI: RyXRRRRfDXR9e3@yy8sXkyRkXyyk39Xt.
Janurek, Janina et al. (2018). “The association of the 24 hour distribution of time spent
in physical activity, work, and sleep with emotional exhaustion”. eng. In: International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 15.9, p. 1927. ISSN: 16604601,
16617827. DOI: RyXjjNyfBD2`T?R8yNRNkd.
94
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:103==
Sonnentag, Sabine and Charlotte Fritz (2016). “The recovery experience questionnaire:
Development and validation of a measure for assessing recuperation and unwinding
from work”. eng. In:
Häusser, Jan Alexander and Andreas Mojzisch (2017). “The physical activity­mediated
Demand–Control (pamDC) model: Linking work characteristics, leisure time physical
activity, and well­being”. eng. In: Work and Stress 31.3, pp. 209–232. ISSN: 14645335,
02678373. DOI: RyXRy3yfyked3jdjXkyRdXRjyjd8N.
Fay, Martha J. and Susan L. Kline (2011). “Coworker relationships and informal commu­
nication in high­intensity telecommuting”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Communication
Research 39.2, pp. 144–163. ISSN: 14795752, 00909882. DOI: RyXRy3yfyyNyN33kX
kyRRX88eRje.
Lyubomirsky, Sonja, Laura King, and Ed Diener (2016). “The benefits of frequent positive
affect: Does happiness lead to success?” eng. In:
Golden, Timothy D. (2006). “Avoiding depletion in virtual work: Telework and the inter­
vening impact of work exhaustion on commitment and turnover intentions”. eng. In:
Journal of Vocational Behavior 69.1, pp. 176–187. ISSN: 10959084, 00018791. DOI:
RyXRyRefDXDp#XkyyeXykXyyj.
Kossek, Ellen Ernst, Brenda A. Lautsch, and Susan C. Eaton (2009). ““Good telework­
ing”: Under what conditions does teleworking enhance employees’ well­being?” eng. In:
Technology and Psychological Well­being, pp. 148–173. DOI: RyXRyRdf*"PNd3y8RRej8jdjX
yyd.
Van Ham, Irene et al. (2006). “Job satisfaction among general practitioners: A systematic
literature review”. eng. In: European Journal of General Practice 12.4, pp. 174–180.
ISSN: 17511402, 13814788. DOI: RyXRy3yfRj3R9d3yeyyNN9jde.
Bakker, Arnold B. and Evangelia Demerouti (2007). “The Job Demands­Resources model:
State of the art”. eng. In: Journal of Managerial Psychology 22.3, pp. 309–328. ISSN:
17587778, 02683946. DOI: RyXRRy3fyke3jN9ydRydjjRR8.
Häusser, Jan Alexander, Andreas Mojzisch, et al. (2010). “Ten years on: A review of recent
research on the Job Demand­Control (­Support) model and psychological well­being”.
eng. In: Work and Stress 24.1, pp. 1–35. ISSN: 14645335, 02678373. DOI: RyXRy3yf
yked3jdRyyje3jd9d.
Redman, Tom, Ed Snape, and Colin Ashurst (2009). “Location, location, location: Does
place of work really matter?” eng. In: British Journal of Management 20.1, S171–S181.
ISSN: 14678551, 10453172. DOI: RyXRRRRfDXR9ed@388RXkyy3Xyye9yXt.
Suh, Ayoung and Jumin Lee (2017). “Understanding teleworkers’ technostress and its
influence on job satisfaction”. eng. In: Internet Research 27.1, pp. 140–159. ISSN:
20545657, 10662243. DOI: RyXRRy3fAMi_@ye@kyR8@yR3R.
Gajendran, Ravi S. and David A. Harrison (2007). “The Good, the Bad, and the Un­
known About Telecommuting: Meta­Analysis of Psychological Mediators and Individual
Consequences”. eng. In: Journal of Applied Psychology 92.6, pp. 1524–1541. ISSN:
19391854, 00219010. DOI: RyXRyjdfyykR@NyRyXNkXeXR8k9.
Hornung, Severin and Jürgen Glaser (2009). “Home­based telecommuting and quality
of life: Further evidence on an employee­oriented human resource practice”. eng. In:
Psychological Reports 104.2, pp. 395–402. ISSN: 1558691x, 00332941. DOI: RyXk9eef
S_yXRy9XkXjN8@9yk.
Dimitrova, Dimitrina (2003). “Controlling teleworkers: Supervision and flexibility revisited”.
eng. In: New Technology, Work and Employment 18.3, pp. 181–195. ISSN: 1468005x,
02681072. DOI: RyXRRRRfR9e3@yy8sXyyRky.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
95
==PAGE:104==
Kelliher, Clare and Deirdre Anderson (2010). “Doing more with less? flexible working prac­
tices and the intensification of work”. eng. In: Human Relations 63.1, pp. 83–106. ISSN:
1741282x, 00187267. DOI: RyXRRddfyyR3dkedyNj9NRNN.
Mazmanian, Melissa, Wanda J. Orlikowski, and JoAnne Yates (2013). “The Autonomy
Paradox: The Implications of Mobile Email Devices for Knowledge Professionals”. eng.
In: Organization Science 24.5, pp. 1337–1357. ISSN: 15265455, 10477039. DOI: RyX
Rk3dfQ`b+XRRkyXy3ye.
Putnam, Linda L., Karen K. Myers, and Bernadette M. Gailliard (2014). “Examining the ten­
sions in workplace flexibility and exploring options for new directions”. eng. In: Human
Relations 67.4, pp. 413–440. ISSN: 1741282x, 00187267. DOI: RyXRRddfyyR3dkedRj9N8dy9.
Hoeven, Claartje L. ter and Ward van Zoonen (2015). “Flexible work designs and em­
ployee well­being: Examining the effects of resources and demands”. eng. In: New
Technology, Work and Employment 30.3, pp. 237–255. ISSN: 1468005x, 02681072.
DOI: RyXRRRRfMir2XRky8k.
Baruch, Yehuda (2000). “Teleworking: Benefits and pitfalls as perceived by profession­
als and managers”. eng. In: New Technology, Work and Employment 15.1, pp. 34–49.
ISSN: 1468005x, 02681072. DOI: RyXRRRRfR9e3@yy8sXyyyej.
Richardson, Julia and Steve Mckenna (2014). “Reordering spatial and social relations:
A case study of professional and managerial flexworkers”. eng. In: British Journal of
Management 25.4, pp. 724–736. ISSN: 14678551, 10453172. DOI: Ry X RRRR f R9ed @
388RXRkyRd.
Golden, Timothy D., John F. Veiga, and Richard N. Dino (2008). “The Impact of Profes­
sional Isolation on Teleworker Job Performance and Turnover Intentions: Does Time
Spent Teleworking, Interacting Face­to­Face, or Having Access to Communication­
Enhancing Technology Matter?” eng. In: Journal of Applied Psychology 93.6, pp. 1412–
1421. ISSN: 19391854, 00219010. DOI: RyXRyjdfyyRkdkk.
Morganson, Valerie J. et al. (2010). “Comparing telework locations and traditional work
arrangements: Differences in work­life balance support, job satisfaction, and inclusion”.
eng. In: Journal of Managerial Psychology 25.6, pp. 578–595. ISSN: 17587778, 02683946.
DOI: RyXRRy3fyke3jN9RyRRy8eN9R.
Baker, Paul M.A., Nathan W. Moon, and Andrew C. Ward (2006). “Virtual exclusion and
telework: Barriers and opportunities of technocentric workplace accommodation policy”.
eng. In: Work 27.4, pp. 421–430. ISSN: 18759270, 10519815.
Eisenberger, Robert et al. (2015). “Perceived organizational support, discretionary treat­
ment, and job satisfaction”. eng. In:
O’Driscoll, Michael (1970). “Interface Between Work and Family Responsibilities: The
Mid­Life Family Transactions Project”. und. In: Labour, Employment and Work in New
Zealand. ISSN: 24632600. DOI: RyXkee3efH2rXpyByXRyye.
Bentley, T.A. et al. (2016). “The role of organisational support in teleworker wellbeing:
A socio­technical systems approach”. eng. In: Applied Ergonomics 52, pp. 207–215.
ISSN: 18729126, 00036870. DOI: RyXRyRefDXT2`;QXkyR8XydXyRN.
Lautsch, Brenda A., Ellen Ernst Kossek, and Susan C. Eaton (2009). “Supervisory ap­
proaches and paradoxes in managing telecommuting implementation”. eng. In: Human
Relations 62.6, pp. 795–827. ISSN: 1741282x, 00187267. DOI: RyXRRddfyyR3dkedyNRy989j.
Dahlstrom, Timothy R. (2013). “Telecommuting and leadership style”. eng. In: Public Per­
sonnel Management 42.3, pp. 438–451. ISSN: 19457421, 00910260. DOI: RyXRRddf
yyNRykeyRj9N8djR.
Kowalski, Kellyann Berube and Jennifer Ann Swanson (2005). “Critical success factors
in developing teleworking programs”. eng. In: Benchmarking 12.3, pp. 236–249. ISSN:
17584094, 14635771. DOI: RyXRRy3fR9ej8ddy8Ryeyyj8d.
96
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:105==
Calibo, Taylor K., Justin A. Blanco, and Samara L. Firebaugh (2013). “Cognitive stress
recognition”. eng. In: 2013 Ieee International Instrumentation and Measurement Tech­
nology Conference (i2mtc), pp. 1471–1475. ISSN: 10915281. DOI: RyXRRyNfAkJh*X
kyRjXe888e83.
Vittersø, Joar et al. (2003). “Impacts of Home­Based Telework on Quality of Life for Em­
ployees and Their Partners. Quantitative and Qualitative Results From a European
Survey”. eng. In: Journal of Happiness Studies 4.2, pp. 201–233. ISSN: 15737780,
13894978. DOI: RyXRykjf,Ryk99NyekR893.
Vander Elst, Tinne et al. (2017). “Not Extent of Telecommuting, but Job Characteristics
as Proximal Predictors of Work­Related Well­Being”. eng. In: Journal of Occupational
and Environmental Medicine 59.10, e180–e186. ISSN: 15365948, 10762752. DOI: RyX
RyNdfCPJXyyyyyyyyyyyyRRjk.
Hartig, Terry, Camilla Kylin, and Gunn Johansson (2007). “The Telework Tradeoff: Stress
Mitigation vs. Constrained Restoration”. und. In: Applied Psychology 56.2, pp. 231–253.
ISSN: 14640597, 0269994x. DOI: RyXRRRRfDXR9e9@y8NdXkyyeXyyk8kXt-RyXRRRRfDXR9e9@
y8NdXkyyeXyyk8kXt.
Lapierre, Laurent M. and Tammy D. Allen (2006). “Work­supportive family, family­supportive
supervision, use of organizational benefits, and problem­focused coping: Implications
for work­family conflict and employee well­being”. eng. In: Journal of Occupational
Health Psychology 11.2, pp. 169–181. ISSN: 19391307, 10768998. DOI: RyXRyjdfRyde@
3NN3XRRXkXReN.
Mann, Sandi and Lynn Holdsworth (2003). “The psychological impact of teleworking:
stress, emotions and health”. und. In: New Technology, Work and Employment 18.3,
pp. 196–211. ISSN: 1468005x, 02681072. DOI: RyXRRRRfR9e3@yy8tXyyRkR-RyXRRRRf
R9e3@yy8sXyyRkR.
Montreuil, Sylvie and Katherine Lippel (2003). “Telework and occupational health: A Que­
bec empirical study and regulatory implications”. eng. In: Safety Science 41.4, pp. 339–
358. ISSN: 18791042, 09257535. DOI: RyXRyRefayNk8@d8j8UykVyyy9k@8.
Kirkhorn, Steven R., Giulia Earle­Richardson, and R. J. Banks (2010). “Ergonomic risks
and musculoskeletal disorders in production agriculture: Recommendations for effec­
tive research to practice”. eng. In: Journal of Agromedicine 15.3, pp. 281–299. ISSN:
15450813, 1059924x. DOI: RyXRy3yfRy8NNk9sXkyRyX933eR3.
Widana, I. K., Ni Wayan Sumetri, and I. Ketut Sutapa (2018). “Ergonomic Work Station
Design to Improve Workload Quality and Productivity of the Craffsmen”. eng. In: Journal
of Physics: Conference Series 953.1, p. 012091. ISSN: 17426588, 17426596. DOI:
RyXRy33fRd9k@e8NefN8jfRfyRkyNR.
Neely, Andy, Mike Gregory, and Ken Platts (1995). “Performance measurement system
design: A literature review and research agenda”. und. In: International Journal of Op­
erations and Production Management 15.4, pp. 80–116. ISSN: 17586593, 01443577.
DOI: RyXRRy3fyR99j8dN8Ryy3jekk-RyXRRy3fyR99j8dN8Ryy3jekk.
Herrmann, Jeff and Brian Hodgson (2014). “Competitive Advantage”. eng. In:
Kotler, Philip (1997). Marketing management : analysis, planning, implementation, and
control. eng. Prentice Hall, Getr. Zählung [ca. 810 S.] (unknown). ISBN: 0132435101,
0132613638.
Westerlund, Mary Jane (2008). “Superperformance in a remote global team”. eng. In:
Performance Improvement 47.5, pp. 32–37. ISSN: 19308272, 10908811. DOI: RyXRyykf
T7BXkyN.
Chletsos, Michael and Anna Saiti (2020). “Hospital Efficiency and Performance”. eng. In:
Strategic Management and Economics in Health Care, pp. 233–255. DOI: RyXRyydfNd3@
j@yjy@j8jdy@9nRR.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
97
==PAGE:106==
Houck, M. M. (2013). “Effectiveness”. eng. In: Encyclopedia of Forensic Sciences: Second
Edition, pp. 532–534. DOI: RyXRyRef"Nd3@y@Rk@j3kRe8@kXyykjN@d.
Dyckhoff, Harald and Rainer Souren (2020). “Main Performance Categories: Effective­
ness and Efficiency”. eng. In: Performance Evaluation, pp. 1–18. DOI: RyXRyydfNd3@j@
yjy@j3djk@dnR-RyXRyydfNd3@j@yjy@j3djk@d.
Blinn, CK (1996). “Developing high performance teams”. eng. In: Online 20.6, pp. 56–56.
ISSN: 23249706, 01465422.
Townsend, Anthony M., Samuel M. DeMarie, and Anthony R. Hendrickson (1998). “Virtual
teams: Technology and the workplace of the future”. eng. In: Academy of Management
Executive 12.3, pp. 17–29. ISSN: 21672725, 10795545, 19434529, 15589080. DOI:
RyX89e8fK2XRNN3XRRyNy9d.
Jones, Gareth R. and Jennifer M. George (2017). Essentials of contemporary manage­
ment. eng. McGraw­Hill Education, xxix, 526 s., ill. ISBN: 1260084140, 9781260084146.
Gill, P. et al. (2008). “Methods of data collection in qualitative research: interviews and
focus groups”. eng. In: BRITISH DENTAL JOURNAL 204.6, pp. 291–195. DOI: Ry X
Ryj3f#/DXkyy3XRNk.
Hammarberg, K., M. Kirkman, and S. de Lacey (2015). “Qualitative research methods:
when to use them and how to judge them”. eng. In: European Society of Human Re­
production and Embryology 31.3, pp. 498–501. DOI: ,RyXRyNjf?mK`2Tf/2pjj9.
Palmer, C. and A. Bolderston (2006). “A Brief Introduction to Qualitative Research”. eng.
In: The Canadian Journal of Medical Radiation Technology 1, pp. 16–19. DOI: ,RyXRyRef
ay3ky@8NjyUyNVeyRRk@k.
Business Research Methodology, BRM (n.d.). Research Methods. URL: ?iiTb,ff`2b2`+?@
K2i?Q/QHQ;vXM2if`2b2`+?@K2i?Q/bf. (accessed: 22.03.2021).
Arbejdsmiljøinstituttet. and AMI. (2000). Psykisk arbejdsmiljø : dan. AMI, 10 s.
Wang, B. et al. (2021). “Achieving Effective Remote Working During the COVID­19 Pan­
demic: A Work Design Perspective”. eng. In: APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY: AN INTERNA­
TIONAL REVIEW 70, pp. 16–59.
Chandranshu, S. (2012). “FACTORS AFFECTING QUALITY OF WORK LIFE: Empiri­
cal Evidence From Indian Organizations”. eng. In: Australian Journal of Business and
Management Research 1.11, pp. 31–40. ISSN: 201303.
Schaufeli, Wilmar B. and Toon W. Taris (2014). “A critical review of the job demands­
resources model: Implications for improving work and health”. eng. In: Bridging Occupa­
tional, Organizational and Public Health: a Transdisciplinary Approach 9789400756403,
pp. 43–68. DOI: RyXRyydfNd3@N9@yyd@8e9y@jn9.
Alhojailan M., I. (2012). “THEMATIC ANALYSIS: A CRITICAL REVIEW OF ITS PROCESS
AND EVALUATION”. eng. In: West East Journal of Social Sciences 1.1, pp. 39–47.
Braun, V. and V. Clarke (2012). “THEMATIC ANALYSIS”. eng. In: Research designs:
Quantitative, qualitative, neuropsychological, and biological 2.4, pp. 57–71.
Kiger M., E. and L. Varpio (2020). “Thematic analysis of qualitative data: AMEE Guide No.
131”. eng. In: Medical Teacher 1, pp. 846–854. DOI: ,RyXRy3yfyR9kR8NsXkykyXRd88yjy.
AUCKLAND, The University of (n.d.). Thematic analysis ­ a reflexive approach. URL:
?iiTb , f f rrr X Tbv+? X m+FHM/ X + X Mx f 2M f #Qmi f i?2KiB+ @ MHvbBb X ?iKH. (accessed:
28.03.2021).
Mortensen, D. (n.d.). How to Do a Thematic Analysis of User Interviews. URL: ?iiTb ,
ffrrrXBMi2`+iBQM@/2bB;MXQ`;fHBi2`im`2f`iB+H2f?Qr@iQ@/Q@@i?2KiB+@MHvbBb@Q7@mb2`@
BMi2`pB2rb. (accessed: 02.04.2021).
Naotunna, Naotunna Palliya Guruge and Erhua Zhou (Jan. 2018). “Autonomy and Cre­
ativity of Professional Teleworkers: The Mediating Role of Creative Self Efficacy.” In:
98
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:107==
Wethington, Elaine and Meghan L. McDarby (2015). “Interview Methods (Structured, Semistruc­
tured, Unstructured)”. In: The Encyclopedia of Adulthood and Aging. American Cancer
Society, pp. 1–5. ISBN: 9781118521373. DOI: ?iiTb,ff/QBXQ`;fRyXRyykfNd3RRR38kRjdjX
r#2jR3. URL: ?iiTb , f f QMHBM2HB#``v X rBH2v X +QK f /QB f #b f Ry X Ryyk f Nd3RRR38kRjdj X
r#2jR3.
Miller, Paul R. et al. (2001). “Inpatient diagnostic assessments: 1. Accuracy of structured
vs. Unstructured interviews”. eng. In: Psychiatry Research 105.3, pp. 255–264. ISSN:
18727123, 01651781. DOI: RyXRyRefayRe8@Rd3RUyRVyyjRd@R.
Mueller, Anne E. and Daniel L. Segal (2015). “Structured versus Semistructured ver­
sus Unstructured Interviews”. In: The Encyclopedia of Clinical Psychology. American
Cancer Society, pp. 1–7. ISBN: 9781118625392. DOI: ?iiTb , f f /QB X Q`; f Ry X Ryyk f
Nd3RRR3ek8jNk X r#2+TyeN. URL: ?iiTb , f f QMHBM2HB#``v X rBH2v X +QK f /QB f #b f Ry X Ryyk f
Nd3RRR3ek8jNkXr#2+TyeN.
MacKenzie, Scott B. and Philip M. Podsakoff (2012). “Common Method Bias in Marketing:
Causes, Mechanisms, and Procedural Remedies”. eng. In: Journal of Retailing 88.4,
pp. 542–555. ISSN: 18733271, 00224359. DOI: RyXRyRefDXD`2iBXkyRkXy3XyyR.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
99
==PAGE:108==
100
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:109==
A
Appendices
A.1
Thematic Analysis ­ A practical example
Below an excerpt of the transcript from the interview of respondent 3 is provided as a
practical example of how the steps of the thematic analysis were conducted to end up
with the collection of the relevant information that are addressing in a satisfactory level
the research questions.
The examined question that the present example is using is given below:
Question: “From your experience, What are the pros and cons of communication
in a total remote setting?”
Step 1: Familiarization with data and editing of the transcript
As mentioned, the first phase of a thematic analysis is the re­reading of the interview
material, noting the most relevant parts, and then removing irrelevant information that are
not in accordance with the research’s purpose. The red colour shows the text that was
neglected as not relevant or useful. The text in green highlights important information
found that lead to shaping the codes in the next step. The part below was a part of the
speech of respondent 3 when answering the research question given above:
Figure A.1: Caption
Step 2: Coding of data
This phase indicate the generation of codes within the data set that leads to the definition
of themes. The coding was conducted manually with a hierarchical coding framework
that three different levels of coding were implemented in order to improve accuracy of
the findings and collect the most relevant information. Top­level codes were used as
a screening analysis step to find out the relevant parts that are related to the research
question. This codes were depicting the main area of investigation and the topic that
is examined in this case. As the question was focusing to collect information regarding
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
101
==PAGE:110==
communication in a virtual setting this leads the selection of the top­level codes. Then
after the screening stage mid­level codes where applied for more detailed identification
of concepts and connections among the data set. These type of mid­level codes were
focusing on collecting information regarding specific factors, such as time related aspects
, negative and positive observations, etc. The third­level coding is taking place at the
same time with the next step of searching for themes as it is the more detailed stage
where specific codes where applied within the dataset and the experimental definition of
themes is taking place. Below, the stages of the coding process are provided:
Figure A.2: Caption
Step 3: Searching for themes according to the coding results
As already mentioned after finalising the coding framework the identification of potential
things is important in order to organize the findings into broader concepts that reveals
interesting patterns and findings for the researchers. Below the way that the themes
derived from the coding process is illustrated to understand how this phase of the analysis
was conducted.
102
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:111==
Figure A.3: Caption
Step 4: Reviewing the themes and codes
After the first identification and development of potential themes it is necessary to assess
the relation between the defined themes and the selected codes from the previous steps.
This is the stage where any changes due to reviewing takes place and misalignments
between codes and themes are being reviewed before the finalization of the themes. If
the relations between codes and themes found to be problematic or irrelevant for the re­
search scope, then new codes need to be generated and the process need to be done
from scratch. In the present research, to check the accurate relations of codes and de­
rived themes a specific coding framework was selected , the hierarchical frame. The hier­
archical framework allows the illustration of the several steps of the process and gives an
overview that potential misalignments can be easily observed. A coding frame represents
the organizational structure of the themes in your research. There are two types of coding
frames: flat and hierarchical.
Hierarchical frames help you organize codes based on how they relate to one another.
For example, you can organize the codes based on your customers’ feelings on a certain
topic. It is also a good way to review the identified thing and evaluate potential changes.
It is important also to understand the differentiation between the selected themes and the
generated codes. In this stage it is important to make the final changes within the codes
and themes if there is a need. Below the hierarchical frame of this example is given: In
this example:
1. The top­level codes describe the examined topic (communication, remote setting, man­
agerial challenges, etc.)
2. The mid­level codes specify characteristics and concepts withing the dataset, such as
time related observations or whether the sentiment is positive or negative.
3. The third level reveals details the attribute or specific themes associated with the topic
for investigation.
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
103
==PAGE:112==
Figure A.4: Caption
There is also a possibility for sub­themes as a fourth level in the hierarchy. Hierarchical
framing supports a larger code frame and lets you organize codes based on organizational
structure.
Step 5: Naming themes
After the reviewing step, this is the phase where the finalization of themes is happening.
It is important before the data display and representation. As shown in Figure. *** the
themes are named and assigned with the thematic data and information that are address­
ing the research question of this example.
Step 6: Data display and representation
This is the final step where the reporting of the findings takes place. The flexibility that
a thematic analysis provides, allows the researchers to select among a broad range of
options to present their findings and write their manuscript. The data are going to be
presented in the following section for each of the respondents.
104
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:113==
A.1.1
Interview Questions
Figure A.5: Interview page 1
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
105
==PAGE:114==
Figure A.6: Interview page 2
106
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:115==
A.2
Questionnaire Questions
Figure A.7: Questionnaire purpose
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
107
==PAGE:116==
Figure A.8: Questionnaire: page 1
108
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:117==
Figure A.9: Questionnaire: page 2
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
109
==PAGE:118==
Figure A.10: Questionnaire: page 3
110
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
==PAGE:119==
Distant Management Challenges At the Time of the COVID­19 Pandemic
111
==PAGE:120==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
rrrXKMX/imX/F
