==PAGE:1==
Deep Object-Centric Unsupervised
Representation Learning
Samuele Papa
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Object-centric learning is a research area in the ﬁeld of representation learning
that focuses on obtaining useful representations of the objects present in the input.
One of the theorized advantages is the ability to systematically generalize outside
of the training distribution. However, there is little understanding regarding
these models: which of their properties are fundamental for ﬁnding object
representations that are useful and to what extent can they generalize. This
thesis aims at establishing a rigorous benchmark that evaluates object-centric
models. Here, a model is successful when it correctly discovers the objects present
in the input and represents them in a useful way. Generalization is intended
as both the ability of the model to be invariant to certain transformations of
the input (robustness) and to recombine learned features to represent unknown
objects (compositional generalization).
A set of diverse datasets are used on three object-centric models and two
baselines. A set of metrics is used to evaluate object discovery, while a simple
feature prediction task is used to evaluate the quality of the representations.
Several transformations are applied to the datasets at test time to evaluate
generalization. The architecture of the models and the visual complexity of the
dataset is systematically varied to ﬁnd when and how the models break. The
results showed that object-centric models are capable of systematic generalization
to a certain extent. Models that are very powerful and are left to learn for a
long time tend to fail in discovering objects.
These ﬁndings show that the models should go beyond static images and imple-
ment more explicit biases for object segregation. Importantly, they suggest that
object-centric models are a promising avenue for improving the state-of-the-art in
deep learning research and to achieve compositional generalization when several
objects are present in the input.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁlment of the requirements for
acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The thesis was written under the supervision of Ole Winther and Andrea Dittadi.
The thesis studies the state-of-the-art of object centric models, how they can be
evaluated and improved. The ultimate goal is achieving strong models that can
generalize well under realistic conditions.
Lyngby, 28-June-2021
Samuele Papa
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Ole Winther for this incredible opportunity.
My supervisor Andrea Dittadi for the invaluable help and guidance during the
last few years.
My family and friends for their unwavering support.
My partner Ha Nguyen for always being there and listening during this exciting
journey.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Notation
vii
Glossaries
x
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
4
2.1
Representation Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Object-Centric Representations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
The MultiLayer Perceptron . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
How to Train your Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.2
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.4.3
Recurrent Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.5
Variational AutoEncoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Methods
16
3.1
The Research Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.1
The First Research Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.1.2
The Second Research Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Object-Centric Models and Baselines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Baselines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.2
MONet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.3
GENESIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2.4
Slot Attention
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.1
Downstream Task
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.3.2
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.4
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.4.1
The Original Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4.2
Variants of the datasets. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.4.3
Feature Composition Datasets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
==PAGE:8==
vi
3.4.4
Neural Style Transfer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4
Results
48
4.1
First Research Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.1
Initial Validation of the Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1.2
Evaluation of Robustness and Compositional Generalization 50
4.2
Second Research Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2.1
Reconstruction Bottleneck Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.2.2
Texture Complexity Study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5
Discussion
64
5.1
Robustness and Compositional Generalization . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.2
Model architecture and dataset visual complexity . . . . . . . . .
66
6
Future Work
68
7
Conclusions
69
Bibliography
71
A Experiments and Models
78
A.1 Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
A.2 Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.2.1
Baselines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.2.2
MONet
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.2.3
GENESIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.3 Neural Style Transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
B Datasets
88
B.1
CLEVR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.2
Multi-dSprites
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
B.3
Shapestacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.4
Tetrominoes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
B.5
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
C Results
100
C.1 Reconstructions from the Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
C.2 Robustness
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
C.3 Compositional Generalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
C.4 Representation Bottleneck . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
C.5 Texture Complexity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
==PAGE:9==
Notation
This section provides a concise reference describing notation used throughout
this document.
Numbers and Arrays
a or A
A scalar (integer or real)
a
A vector or a tensor (clear from context).
A
A matrix
I
Identity matrix with dimensionality implied by context
diag(a)
A square, diagonal matrix with diagonal entries given
by a
a
A scalar random variable
a
A vector-valued random variable
A
A matrix-valued random variable
Sets and Graphs
A
A set
R
The set of real numbers
{0, 1}
The set containing 0 and 1
{0, 1, . . . , n}
The set of all integers between 0 and n
[a, b]
The real interval including a and b
(a, b]
The real interval excluding a but including b
A\B
Set subtraction, i.e., the set containing the elements of
A that are not in B
==PAGE:10==
Notation
viii
Indexing
ai
Element i of vector a, with indexing starting at 1
a−i
All elements of vector a except for element i
Ai,j
Element i, j of matrix A
Ai,:
Row i of matrix A
A:,i
Column i of matrix A
ai,j,k
Element (i, j, k) of a 3-D tensor a
a:,:,i
2-D slice of a 3-D tensor
ai
Element i of the random vector a
ai
i-th element of a list of tensors or vectors [a1, a2, . . . ]
ai:j
elements from i to j of the list of tensors or vectors
[a1, a2, . . . ]
Calculus
dy
dx
Derivative of y with respect to x
∂y
∂x
Partial derivative of y with respect to x
∇xy
Gradient of y with respect to x
∇Xy
Matrix derivatives of y with respect to X
∂f
∂x
Jacobian matrix J ∈Rm×n of f : Rn →Rm
Z
f(x)dx
Deﬁnite integral over the entire domain of x
==PAGE:11==
Notation
ix
Probability and Information Theory
P(a)
A probability distribution over a discrete variable
p(a)
A probability distribution over a continuous variable,
or over a variable whose type has not been speciﬁed
a ∼P
Random variable a has distribution P
Ex∼P [f(x)] or Ef(x)
Expectation of f(x) with respect to P(x)
Var(f(x))
Variance of f(x) under P(x)
Cov(f(x), g(x))
Covariance of f(x) and g(x) under P(x)
H(x)
Shannon entropy of the random variable x
DKL(P∥Q)
Kullback-Leibler divergence of P and Q
N(x; µ, Σ)
Gaussian distribution over x with mean µ and covari-
ance Σ
Functions
f : A →B
The function f with domain A and range B
f ◦g
Composition of the functions f and g
f(x; θ)
A function of x parametrized by θ.
log x
Natural logarithm of x
||x||p
Lp norm of x
||x||
L2 norm of x
Sometimes we a function f has scalar arguments but is applied to a vector,
matrix, or tensor: f(x), f(X), or f(x). This denotes the application of f to
the array element-wise. For example, if C = σ(x), then Ci,j,k = σ(xi,j,k) for all
valid values of i, j and k.
Datasets and Distributions
pdata
The data generating distribution
ˆpdata
The empirical distribution deﬁned by the training set
D
A dataset (used also for graphs, clear from context)
x(i)
The i-th example (input) from a dataset (can be some-
thing diﬀerent than a vector)
y(i)
The target associated with x(i) for supervised learning
==PAGE:12==
Acronyms
ARI Adjusted Rand Index. 38, Glossary: ARI
CNN Convolutional Neural Network. 7, 11
GENESIS GENErative Scene Inference and Sampling. 17, 29
MLP MultiLayer Perceptron. 7, 8, 19, 51, Glossary: MLP
MONet Multi-Object Network. 17, 23, 27
MSE Mean Square Error. 37, Glossary: MSE
NST Neural Style Transfer. 47
RNN Recurrent Neural Network. 7, 13
SC Segmentation Cover. 39, Glossary: SC
SGD Stochastic Gradient Descent. 9
VAE Variational AutoEncoder. 14, 18
mSC Mean Segmentation Cover. 40, Glossary: mSC
==PAGE:13==
Glossary
Rand Index The Rand Index is a symmetric measure of the similarity between
two partitions of a set. 37
Slot Attention An object-centric model that uses dot-ptoduct attention to ﬁnd
object representations. 17, 23, 29
ARI The Adjusted Rand Index is the adjusted for randomness version of the
Rand Index, which ﬁnds the similarity between two clusterings. 38
CLEVR Dataset with 3D shapes placed on an environment, used by most
object-centric models. 18, 42
MLP A MultiLayer Perceptron is a type of Artiﬁcial Neural Network used
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine Learning. It is often utilized in
regression or classiﬁcation tasks, but can also be used in an unsupervised
way. 7
MSE The Mean Square Error measures the diﬀerence between a predicted and
a target numerical feature. 37
Multi-dSprites Dataset with 2D shapes placed on a ﬂat background. 18, 42
Objects Room Dataset with 3D shapes placed on an environment. 18, 42
SC Measures how similar two sets of segmentation masks are. When no speciﬁer
is given, SC refers to the weighted version of the Segmentation Cover. 39
Shapestacks Dataset with 3D shapes placed on an environment. 18, 42
Tetrominoes Dataset with texturized tetris pieces placed on a black back-
ground. 42
mSC Un-Weighted version of the Segmentation Cover. 40
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Motivation
Information requires processing in order to be useful. A good representation of
the data is key to solving complex tasks. Evidence for this statement can be
found in many ﬁelds of study. In computer science, a great deal of eﬀort is put
into ﬁnding the best data structures that minimize time or space complexity for
solving speciﬁc problems. In machine learning, feature engineering is used to
get the most out of the data by constructing preprocessing pipelines, with the
objective of extrapolating useful information and encoding it in a simple way to
correctly model the behavior of unseen data.
The idea of obtaining good representations of the input extends to the process-
ing of low-level sensory data, and is a crucial step towards enabling artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI) systems to have an understanding of the mechanisms that make
up the data. The ﬁeld of representation learning has sprung up to address this
problem, from precisely deﬁning what is a good representation, to ﬁnding ways
to achieve it Bengio et al. (2013).
Deep learning methods have been found to be extremely successful and have
become the central focus of representation learning. These methods are built
using a composition of non-linear transformations which allows them to implicitly
abstract the input into useful representations.
However, deep learning is not the ﬁnal answer to the AI problem. State-of-the-art
methods need extensive amount of training data, are not robust to distributional
shift and they tend to learn a specialized representation that cannot be easily
transferred to new datasets. In summary, deep learning methods struggle to
systematically reuse knowledge because they learn surface level statistics instead
of underlying concepts.
==PAGE:15==
2
There are several properties that a representation should have in order to
address the problems mentioned Bengio et al. (2013). One such property is
disentanglement Higgins et al. (2017), Chen et al. (2018), Ridgeway and Mozer
(2018), Kumar et al. (2018), Eastwood and Williams (2018), Locatello et al.
(2019), Watters et al. (2019). Brieﬂy, a disentangled representation r is one that
separates the individual factors of variation present in the data into distinct
dimensions of r. Among the several important consequences of this property,
the relevant one is that it allows for systematic generalization to unseen factor
combinations. A notorious example is a pink elephant Watters et al. (2019). No
example of a pink elephant exists in the world. However, humans can easily come
up with a clear image of a pink elephant. Given that colors and animals are
factors, if the network is capable of encoding the concept of colors separate from
the concept of animals, it is reasonable to think that the model will extrapolate
and correctly encode in r that a pink elephant is present in the input.
Disentanglement is not enough Bengio et al. (2013), Schölkopf et al. (2021). In
the visual, audio, linguistic and decisional domain, it is often useful for models
to split the information into parts that can be processed independently and, at
a later stage, combined into something new. The idea is initially justiﬁed by
cognitive psychology and neuroscience Dehaene (2020), Spelke (1990), Téglás et al.
(2011). Infants quickly learn about objects and gradually come to understand
the fundamental mechanisms such as the fact that objects are not easily split
apart and that they fall due to gravity (Dehaene, 2020, ch. 3). The importance
of object-centric reasoning is also evidenced by the results from reinforcement
learning, visual reasoning and physical modeling, where symbolic inputs are
preferred to raw pixels Battaglia et al. (2016), Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. (2020),
Vinyals et al. (2019), OpenAI et al. (2019).
Object centric representations are successful if they achieve better compositional
generalization and robustness. Compositional generalization refers to the ability
to generalize to situations where the parts of a scene are combined in novel ways.
Robustness is a more generic term which refers to the ability of the models to still
work when irrelevant properties of the scene are changed. The representation
should be robust to changes that do not inﬂuence the appearance of behaviour
of the object.
Several models have been proposed to obtain object representations. A clear
comparison between these models has yet to be drawn systematically. Which
strategy is currently the best for generalization?
There is an overall lack of insights into why these models are working. An
hypothesis is that they work thanks to a representation bottleneck, is this true?
These models have all been tested on very simple datasets where objects are
clearly distinct by the way they look. Do more complex textures require better
architectures to discover the objects present in a scene?
==PAGE:16==
3
Research Questions
The two research objectives have been split into more practical research question.
The research carried out for this thesis wants to answer the following:
A. Can object-centric models achieve compositional generalization and
robustness?
With the following sub-questions:
• Are the results from literature reproducible and extendable to new datasets?
• What factors inﬂuence robustness?
• What factors inﬂuence compositional generalization?
B. Why do object-centric models segregate objects present in the
input?
With the following sub-questions:
• Are all models aﬀected by the representation bottleneck phenomena?
• Can object-centric models still segregate the input when objects have more
complex textures?
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Theory
2.1
Representation Learning
The goal of representation learning is ill-deﬁned and does not lend itself to a
precise theoretical description. Informally, it strives to obtain a representation of
the input possessing properties that are helpful to achieve a task. Many attempts
have been made to scope correctly its aim by describing the properties that make
a good representation, taking inspiration from historical results in the ﬁeld of
machine learning and other ﬁelds, particularly cognitive science (Bengio et al.,
2013, Goodfellow et al., 2016).
The reference for these observations is the seminal work from Yoshua Bengioy,
Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent (Bengio et al., 2013). Here, the authors
propose task-independent priors for representations that should be useful to
solve artiﬁcial intelligence tasks. All priors are related to each other, and cannot
be just considered in isolation when being implemented in a model.
The ﬁrst prior is that the function being learned is smooth s.t. when x ≈y,
then f(x) ≈f(y). This assumption leads to the principle of local generalization
by interpolation of samples that lie close in input space. However, this assumption
is broken by the curse of dimensionality, as the complexity of the input space
grows exponentially with the number of input dimensions. The main tool to
combat this is an increase in the number of parameters available in the model
used to approximate the representation function and the incorporation of other
priors to reduce complexity and still achieve generalization.
The second prior is that the data is generated by several factors that can
explain the variation and that they can be combined together to generalize
to novel situations.
This is the idea behind the success of distributed representations (Goodfellow
et al., 2016). A vector with n coeﬃcients, each with k diﬀerent values can encode
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Object-Centric Representations
5
up to kn distinct concepts. When the dimensions of the vector correspond to
features in the input, generalization to novel concepts made from the combination
of desired features can be obtained by simple linear interpolation.
Similar
concepts will lie close to each other in representation space. The concepts of cat
and dog could be represented by vectors that share many features, such as fur
color, fur length or number of legs.
This also suggests that disentangling the meaningful factors of variation
present in the data is an essential part of the learning process. A disentangled
representation is one where a change in one ground-truth factor of the input only
aﬀects a subset of dimensions in the representation (Bengio et al., 2013, Locatello
et al., 2019). This is the property that ultimately enables generalization through
simple transformation of the representation. The representation for a cat with
brown fur and one with black fur only diﬀers in few, known dimensions.
The third and fourth prior are that factors are organized in a hierarchical way
and are shared between tasks. In the visual domain low level factors such as edges
of corners in the visual domain, being composed to create shapes, and shapes
can be used to create entire objects, and so on. Furthermore, the same factors
can be used to both predict the color and shape of an object and count how
many objects are present in an image. A useful concept, related to abstraction is
the invariance. More abstract concepts, such as color or shape, are invariant to
local changes in the input data. A model can learn to be invariant when several
examples of the same abstract concept is presented to it.
All priors are related to the ﬁrst two. A good representation that can generalize
should discover and disentangle the meaningful factors of variation present in
the data by taking advantage of the structure inherently present in data that
comes from the real world.
2.2
Object-Centric Representations
An object-centric representation is a set of distributed representations where
each element can be used as a basic building block for neural reasoning (Greﬀ
et al., 2020). An element of an object-centric representation is called an object
representation. It is important to note that, although the term object clearly
points to the physical world, this deﬁnition goes beyond the visual domain. An
object representation can be used to encode sentences, spoken words, or any
entity that is worth representing, even abstract ones such as goals or concepts.
A theoretical framework for understanding object-centric representations has
been proposed by Greﬀet al. (2020), who posit that the primary culprit for the
==PAGE:19==
2.2 Object-Centric Representations
6
failure of traditional representations is the binding problem. The problem is
well known in cognitive science, and it refers to the inability to bind together
the information that belongs to the same object but is spread throughout the
network. Object-centric models should alleviate this issue.
The binding problem can be seen as divided into segregation, representation
and composition. Composition refers to the ability to build structures using the
object representations for inference and prediction. Instead, this thesis deals
with segregation and representation.
The segregation problem refers to the separation of the raw sensory input into
meaningful parts. It is the process of creation of the object representations. In the
visual domain, this is strongly related to the problem of instance segmentation,
because the latter also produces a separation of the input into useful entities.
However, segregation goes beyond visual segmentation and considers others
complicated aspects of what makes a part of the input an object, such as the
context and the task being learned.
Representation, instead, is concerned with the properties of the obtained object-
centric representations, that should address the binding problem and make
progress towards solving the problems that aﬄict modern deep learning methods.
Each element of an object representation should capture a single object in the
scene and can act as a modular building block to allow composition without
interference (separation), the representation of each object should disentangle
the underlying factors of variation (disentanglement), and have a common format
to allow transfer of all knowledge between representations (common format).
Finally, object-centric representations should also take in consideration the
temporal dynamics of the system by capturing attributes such as movement and
behavior (temporal dynamics).
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
Instance Slots
Recursive Slots
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the
two representation formats.
The models proposed in the object-centric lit-
erature use diﬀerent approaches to achieve
these properties. A possible way to catego-
rize them is based on the representation
format. The relevant one is the slot-based
representation, which places the representa-
tion of each object present in the scene in a
diﬀerent slot. Each slot is encoded as a vector.
In models that use instance slots, each slot is
used to represent a diﬀerent part of the in-
put (Greﬀet al., 2016, 2017, Van Steenkiste
et al., 2018, Greﬀet al., 2019, Locatello et al.,
2020, Löwe et al., 2020, Huang et al., 2020, Le Roux et al., 2011, Goyal et al.,
2019, van Steenkiste et al., 2020a, Chen et al., 2019, Yang et al., 2020, Kipf et al.,
==PAGE:20==
2.3 Neural Networks
7
2019, Racah and Chandar, 2020). This introduces a routing problem, because all
slots are identical but they cannot all represent the same object, so a mechanism
needs to be introduced to allow slots to communicate with each other.
In models based on sequential slots, the representational slots are computed in a
sequential fashion, which solves the routing problem and allows to dynamically
change the number of slots but introduces possibly unwanted dependencies be-
tween slots (Eslami et al., 2016, Stelzner et al., 2019, Kosiorek et al., 2018, Kossen
et al., 2019, Burgess et al., 2019, Engelcke et al., 2020b, 2021, von Kügelgen
et al., 2020).
An open question is how to obtain such representations. The techniques vary
from generative to self-attention and adversarial, but the exact reason they work
is not known. A recent study focuses on generative models and ﬁnds that having
a representation bottleneck seems to be important because it forces the network
to only reconstruct part of the input from each of the representations, and not
the entire image (Engelcke et al., 2020a).
2.3
Neural Networks
Artiﬁcal Neural Networks (ANN), often called Neural Networks (NN), are a
class of machine learning models that learns a mapping y = fθ(x), with pa-
rameters θ (Goodfellow et al., 2016). Neural Networks are universal function
approximators, and are used in all types of artiﬁcial intelligence and machine
learning tasks. Historically, the neural network model is vaguely inspired by the
biological network of neurons in a brain. A neuron receives signals from other
neurons that it has an inbound connection to. Based on this input, the neuron
will either transmit a signal to the outbound neurons, or stop the information
from ﬂowing. In a ANN, the signal associated with each connection is a real
number. A neuron computes the output signal as a non-linear transformation of
the input signals.
Several classes of neural networks can be described based on their architecture.
The most important ones are the MultiLayer Perceptron (MLP), the Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) and the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). All these
classes share the basic ideas, notation and learning procedure that are more
easily explained for the MLP.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 The MultiLayer Perceptron
8
2.4
The MultiLayer Perceptron
Neuron
Hidden Layer
Input
Output Layer
Weight
Figure 2.2: Illustration
of the elements in a feed-
forward neural network.
An MLP is also called a feedforward neural network
because the signal only ﬂows in one direction, from
the input x to the output y.
The connections between neurons (also called
units) deﬁne the network. Neurons are grouped in
layers that are ordered in a sequence. The number
of layers is the depth of the NN, while the maxi-
mum number of neurons in a layer is called width
of the neural network. The ﬁnal layer is called the
output layer while all others are called hidden
layers. In the most basic version of the MLP, neu-
rons in layer l can only have incoming connections
from neurons in layer l −1 and outgoing connections to neurons in layer l + 1.
Each connection has a weight associated to it (a scalar), which is used to
quantify the strength of the connection between the two neurons.
The mathematics of the feedforward neural network are now described.
The neural network has input vector x ∈RD and output vector o ∈RK.
The output of each neuron is a non-linear transformation of the weighted sum of
the inputs. At the ﬁrst layer:
z(1)
j
=
D
X
i=1
W (1)
j,i · xi + W (1)
j,0
a(1)
j
= h(1) 
z(1)
j

,
where W is the matrix of weights, indexed starting from 0, because the ﬁrst
column is used as the bias term in the calculation. The weighted sum is collected
in the vector z and the non-linear function h is then applied to z element-wise
to obtain the vector of activations a. The superscript (1) is used to indicate that
all of these parameters refer to the ﬁrst layer of the network.
Now, let the number of neurons in layer l be M (l) and let the total number of
layers be L. Using the convention that M (0) = D, M (L) = K and a0 = x, the
computations performed at each layer can be generalized:
z(l)
j
=
M (l−1)
X
i=1
W (l)
j,i · a(l−1)
i
+ W (l)
j,0
a(l)
j
= h(l) 
z(l)
j

.
(2.1)
==PAGE:22==
2.4 The MultiLayer Perceptron
9
The dimensionality of each element can now also be deﬁned: the weight matrix
W (l) ∈RM (l)×M (l−1), the weighted sum vector and the activation vector a, z ∈
RM (l). The activation function is the same for all neurons in the same layer,
but can change between layers. The activations at the last layer are usually the
identity and an additional function is used to transform the ﬁnal activations in
the actual output of the neural network.
The neural network can be represented as a network diagram and the evaluation
of the recursive function deﬁned in equation 2.1 is called forward propagation.
The architecture of a neural network is deﬁned by the number of neurons in each
layer, the number of layers, the types of activation functions and the function
used to obtain the outputs. The weights at each layer are the parameters that
are learned using the inputs and minimizing a function that quantiﬁes the error
that the network is making. A neural network is said to have bigger capacity
if it has more parameters. This can happen if there are more layers or more
neurons in each layer.
2.4.1
How to Train your Neural Network
Given the population distribution D, from which the training set is sampled, and
a neural network NN with weights W , the goal of learning is to ﬁnd the weights
for the neural network that minimize the risk function LD (W ) = Ez∼D [ℓ(z; W )].
The risk function is the expectation of the loss function ℓ(z; α), a function that
given the parameters α of an algorithm and a training sample z, quantiﬁes the
error that the algorithm is making. By minimizing this function, the expected
error of the algorithm on the data is also minimized.
The issue with this
approach is that the true population distribution is unknown, so the risk cannot
be minimized directly. This is addressed with Stochastic Gradient Descent.
Stochastic Gradient Descent.
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) is a
technique that uses gradient descent to minimize the risk in expectation, up
to an arbitrary constant (Shalev-Shwartz and Ben-David, 2014). The gradient
of a function gives the direction of steepest ascent. Following the gradient in
the opposite direction will, therefore, decrease the function the most compared
to any other direction. This can be used to ﬁnd the direction along which the
weights need to be moved in order to decrease the value of the loss function.
This idea cannot be applied directly to the risk function, because the population
distribution is unknown.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 The MultiLayer Perceptron
10
However, in expectation, the gradient of the loss function is equal to the gradient
of the risk function:
Lemma 2.1 Given a sample z ∼D and weights W , let V ′ = ∇ℓ(z, W ′) be the
gradient with respect to the weights at point W ′, then:
E [V ′|W ′] = Ez∼D [∇ℓ(z, W ′)] = ∇Ez∼D [ℓ(z, W ′)] = ∇LD (W )
Proof. The equality follows immediately from the deﬁnition of V ′ and assuming
that it is possible to take the expectation of the integral used to compute the
expectation.
■
Therefore, the direction of steepest descent for the loss function is also, in
expectation, the direction of steepest descent for the risk function. Following
this direction will decrease the risk on average.
The general form of the SGD algorithm can be described as follows:
Algorithm 2.1 Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) for minimizing LD (W )
parameters: scalar η > 0, integer T > 0
initialize: W (0)
for t = 1, 2, . . . , T
sample z ∼D
pick V (t) ∈∂ℓ
 z, W (t)
update W (t+1) = W (t) −ηV (t)
output: W = 1
T
PT
t=1 W (t)
The SGD algorithm and its variants are the tools used to optimize a Neural
Network and the most crucial aspect is computing the gradient of the loss
function. This is done using Backpropagation.
Backpropagation.
Backpropagation is an eﬃcient technique that is used to
compute the gradient of a loss function with respect to the weights of a Neural
Network.
Given a neural network NN with weights W , let the the activation functions be
arbitrary but still derivable, and let the loss function ℓ(z, W ) be also derivable.
Then, the objective of backpropagation is computing
∂ℓ
∂W (l)
j,i
for all weights in the
==PAGE:24==
2.4 The MultiLayer Perceptron
11
network. To simplify notation, this will be described for a generic layer, therefore
the superscript (l) is dropped. The loss depends on the weight Wj,i only thanks
to being used in the input of neuron j, which has activation zj. Therefore, the
chain rule is applied:
∂ℓ
∂Wj,i
= ∂ℓ
∂zj
∂zj
∂Wj,i
.
(2.2)
Now let:
δj := ∂ℓ
∂zj
.
(2.3)
Often, δ is called the error and is the fundamental element that makes back-
propagation work. From equation 2.1 follows that:
∂zj
∂Wj,i
= ai.
(2.4)
Using equation 2.3 and 2.4, equation 2.2 can be simpliﬁed:
∂ℓ
∂Wj,i
= δjai.
(2.5)
What remains is evaluating δ. At the last layer, the value for δ can be computed
directly, using the derivative of the loss function. For all other layers, the chain
rule can be used over the neurons k that the neuron j sends its signal to:
δj = ∂ℓ
∂zj
=
X
k
∂ℓ
∂zk
∂zk
∂zj
.
(2.6)
Using the deﬁnition of δ from 2.3 and equation 2.1, the following can be found:
δj = h′(zj)
X
k
Wk,iδk.
(2.7)
This equation is the core of backpropagation. The errors for layer l can be
computed only after the ones in layer l + 1. This imposes a backward direc-
tion to the calculation of the gradients, which is also what gives the name to
backpropagation.
2.4.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) are a very powerful and successful class
of neural network architectures (Goodfellow et al., 2016). The inspiration for
==PAGE:25==
2.4 The MultiLayer Perceptron
12
Convolutional Neural Networks comes from the study of the visual cortex, where
neurons only respond to local stimuli. These ideas were already implemented in
the ﬁeld of Computer Vision. A ﬁlter is applied to the image, obtaining a useful
transformation that can highlight speciﬁc features present, such as lines or edges.
In a CNN, the ﬁlters are learnable and are stacked in a deep architecture. This
allows for automatic discovery of high-level features.
The structure of a CNN can be seen as a regularized version of an MLP. Reg-
ularization is a term used to identify techniques that help with reducing the
complexity of a learning algorithm to improve its prediction performance. In
CNNs, this regularization is done in the form of shared weights and local con-
nectivity.
h
w
Feature Map
Kernel
m
n
Figure 2.3: Illustration of the elements that are involved in a convolutional
layer. The feature map is the input, while the kernel has the weights that will
be learned.
Convolutional Layer.
A convolutional layer is distinct from an MLP layer
because it uses a convolution instead of a matrix multiplication to ﬁnd the
weighted sum of the input signals. The convolution S in the discrete 2-dimensional
domain is deﬁned on an input I ∈Rh×w with a kernel K ∈Rm×n:
S(i, j) := (I ∗K)(i, j) :=
X
m
X
n
I(i −m, j −n)K(m, n),
(2.8)
where ∗is the symbol for the convolution operation. The input is often called a
feature map, the kernel is usually square with dimension k.
The power of the convolutional layer comes from the inductive bias it brings
==PAGE:26==
2.4 The MultiLayer Perceptron
13
h
h
h
=
h
o0
x0
o1
x1
ot
xt
ot
xt
. . .
Figure 2.4: Illustration of a recurrent neural network. On the left a compact
notation, on the right the unfolded version. The arrows can be full feedforward
neural networks. The input sequence is x0, x1, . . . , xt, the outputs of the RNN
are o0, o1, . . . , ot, while the hidden states are h0, h1, . . . , ht.
for images. The kernel deﬁnes a local region of space where information will be
gathered from. Translational invariance can also come from the application of the
same weights over the entire image. Finally, the number of weights is drastically
reduced,introducing a regularization eﬀect compared to a fully connected neural
network.
2.4.3
Recurrent Neural Networks
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are an immediate extension of the feedforward
neural network (Goodfellow et al., 2016). They are used for processing sequential
data. An extensive description of the mathematics behind recurrent neural
networks would be outside of the scope of this thesis. Recurrent Neural Networks,
like CNNs, use shared weights, now across time, to reduce network complexity.
The key idea is to have as input to the network both the sequence at the current
time step and the hidden state computed by the network at the previous timestep.
The hidden state allows ﬂow of information between timesteps. These models
often struggle with learning long sequences, because the gradient needs to be
propagated across time now, not only along the network.
Several diﬀerent
recurrent architectures have been proposed, that make use of memory cells to
alleviate the gradient propagation issue.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Variational AutoEncoders
14
2.5
Variational AutoEncoders
Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) are a class of neural networks that is used
to perform approximate amortized variational inference (Kingma and Welling,
2014).
The traditional scenario is the following. Given a dataset D = {x1, x2, . . . , xN}
where each sample is generated by a random process, with unknown ground-
truth factors z. The full generative process consists of ﬁrst sampling z from
what is called the prior distribution p(z) and then each value xi is generated
from a conditional distribution p(x|z). Additionally, p(z) and p(x|z) are as-
sumed to come from a family of parameterized distributions pθ(z) and pθ(x|z).
x
z
θ
φ
N
Figure 2.5: Plate notation
for the directed graphical
model used in Variational In-
ference. Solid lines indicate
the generative model pθ(x|z)
and the prior pθ(z), while
dashed lines indicate the ap-
proximate posterior qφ(z|x).
The objective is to ﬁnd the parameters θ that param-
eterize the distributions and the underlying factors
of variation z. From Bayes’ theorem, the posterior
distribution can be found:
p(z|x) = p(x|z)p(z)
p(x)
,
(2.9)
where p(x) is intractable. An approximation to the
posterior is introduced qφ(z|x), parameterized by θ.
The parameters for this distribution are found using
a neural network, which is trained on the entire
data. This step makes this technique amortized.
The approximate posterior, together with Jensen’s
inequality, can be used to deﬁne a lower-bound to
the logarithm of the likelihood of the data, called
the Evidence Lower BOund (ELBO) L:
log pθ(x) = log
 
Ez∼qφ(z|x)
"
pθ(x, z)
qφ(z|x)
#!
≥Ez∼qφ(z|x) [log pθ(x, z) −log qφ(z|x)] =: L(θ, φ; x).
(2.10)
The ELBO can also be written as:
L(θ, φ; x) = −DKL (qθ(z|x)∥pθ(z)) + Ez∼qφ(z|x) [log pθ(x|z)] ,
(2.11)
where DKL(·∥·) is the Kullback-Leibler divergence:
DKL (qφ(z|x)∥pθ(z)) = Ez∼qφ(z|x)
"
log qφ(z|x)
pθ(z)
#
.
(2.12)
==PAGE:28==
2.5 Variational AutoEncoders
15
In practice, two neural networks are used to parameterize the approximate
posterior qφ(z|x) (called the encoder) and the generative model pθ(x|z) (called
the decoder).
Learning is performed by minimization of the ELBO, which
corresponds to minimizing the diﬀerence between the conditional log-likelihood
of the input data and the KL divergence between the prior and the approximate
posterior.
Sampling needs to be performed in order to ﬁnd the values for the latent code.
This would make optimization impossible. However, the reparameterization
trick is used to solve this problem. Assuming that the latent code z is distributed
according to a Gaussian distribution, then z ∼N(µ, σ2) and, with:
z = µ + σ · ϵ,
(2.13)
where ϵ ∼N(0, I), the stochastic aspect of the calculation is removed from the
path of the backpropagation.
==PAGE:29==
Chapter 3
Methods
3.1
The Research Objectives
3.1.1
The First Research Objective
For the ﬁrst research objective, a successful models will be able to achieve the
following desiderata:
• Desideratum 1: Accurately discover objects in a scene.
• Desideratum 2: Obtain useful object representations.
The ﬁrst desideratum can be assessed by measuring to what extent object-centric
models that reconstruct the input are capable of predicting the shape and visual
characteristics of the objects present in the scene.
The second desideratum instead requires the deﬁnition of a task where the
representations can be used. When this task can be solved more easily, then it
must be that the representation was useful. In this thesis, this is done with a
simple feature prediction task that uses, as input, the representations coming
from a trained object-centric model.
The primary interest of the ﬁrst research objective is measuring the compositional
generalization and robustness of object-centric models. Both concepts can be
seen as forms of generalization, as they both refer to the ability of the models to
perform well when presented with unseen samples. Of interest for this study are
those samples that come from outside the training distribution. Such a broad
deﬁnition would not allow for any type of signiﬁcant analysis. Therefore, the
two classes of generalization, compositional generalization and robustness, are
here deﬁned to allow for productive analysis of the results.
==PAGE:30==
3.1 The Research Objectives
17
Robustness.
A model is robust when it is able to obtain useful representations
even after the input has been changed in task-irrelevant ways (Shorten and
Khoshgoftaar, 2019, Greﬀet al., 2020, Bengio et al., 2013). This deﬁnition
implies that the type of change depends on what the model is trying to achieve
using the representation. It is useful to specify two types of robustness: global-
level robustness and object-level robustness.
Global-level robustness refers to the ability of the model to represent the input
even when changes that aﬀect the entire scene are made. These can be typical
data-augmentation changes, such as zooming, cropping or adding an occlusion
to the image (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019). These changes are relevant
for all tasks based on visual inputs. Alternatively, they could also be more
object-centric, such as adding more objects in the scene (Greﬀet al., 2019,
Locatello et al., 2020).
Object-level robustness, instead, refers to the ability of the model to represent
individual objects even when some of them are now diﬀerent from the training
distribution (Greﬀet al., 2020). This is relevant for tasks that use the objects
in the input to make predictions or decisions. When a reinforcement learning
model is trying to learn how to collect boxes with the same color, changing the
color of a box is an important information that the agent needs to use in order
to solve the task. Therefore, if the training set only has boxes, when a ball is
now added to the scene, the agent should just ignore it and still solve the task
correctly (Cobbe et al., 2020).
Compositional Generalization.
Compositional generalization refers to the
ability to recombine fundamental concepts, or parts, in novel ways (Szabó, 2020,
Hupkes et al., 2020, Greﬀet al., 2020, 2019). In this thesis, the focus is on
feature compositionality, the ability to obtain good representations of the input
even when the objects are made of features that have never been combined that
way before (Greﬀet al., 2019, Watters et al., 2019). The popular example is
a pink elephant. Nobody has seen a pink elephant before, but it is easy to
picture. Humans display the ability to decompose the input into fundamental
concepts (the color pink, the animal elephant, etc.) and to recombine them in
novel ways, e.g. a pink elephant. State-of-the-art representation learning models
that focus on disentanglement are capable of achieving feature compositionality
when a single object is present in the input (Esmaeili et al., Watters et al., 2019).
Object-centric models should achieve this even with multiple objects in a scene.
Experimentation
The models chosen for the experiments are MONet, GENESIS and Slot Attention.
The three models have been chosen because they are representative of the slot-
==PAGE:31==
3.1 The Research Objectives
18
Experiment
1. Train model M on dataset D.
2. Evaluate object discovery performance.
3. Evaluate object representations.
Figure 3.1: Structure of the experiments run to address the ﬁrst research
objective.
based approach. MONet and GENESIS are based on recursive slots, while Slot
Attention is based on instance slots. A baseline is also established, using a VAE
with a Broadcast Decoder and one with a Traditional Decoder. Evaluation in the
baseline setting will require particular care, to guarantee that the comparison to
object-centric models is as fair as possible.
The models selected from literature need to be re-implemented to allow training
and evaluation. Parameters from literature are selected when available, otherwise,
a best-eﬀort approach is adopted, as the most important aspect is a comparative
study.
The datasets chosen for the experiments are CLEVR, Multi-dSprites, Shapes-
tacks, Objects Room, and tetrominoes. Every dataset has images and segmen-
tation masks indicating the shape of the objects. Additionally, all datasets
(except Objects Room) have features associated with each object, describing its
characteristics, such as color, shape and position.
Multiple experiments are run with diﬀerent models, datasets, and parame-
ters to answer the research questions. A benchmark library, inspired by the
disentanglement lib (Locatello et al., 2019), was constructed in collaboration
with Michele De Vita and Andrea Dittadi. After a model and a dataset are
chosen, each experiment follows the steps from ﬁgure 3.1.
To train model M on dataset D, a random seed is selected, and the samples from
the training split of D are used to learn object representations in an unsupervised
fashion.
To evaluate object discovery performance, the predicted object shapes and their
reconstructions are evaluated used the validation split of dataset D and eventually
its variants. The metrics used are Adjusted Rand Index and Segmentation Cover
for the shape of the objects and MSE for the reconstructions.
==PAGE:32==
3.1 The Research Objectives
19
To evaluate object representations, downstream models, an MLP and a simple
Linear model are trained and tested using the test split of D and its variants.
Thanks to the object representations the predictions can be permutation invariant.
This property is impossible to obtain with the baselines as their representations
are not object-centric. Therefore, this step will be diﬀerent when the baselines
are being evaluated.
The experiments can be divided in two parts: (1) initial validation of the
models in a traditional object-centric setting and (2) evaluation of robustness
and compositional generalization.
Initial Validation of the Models
Let M = {MONet, GENESIS, Slot Attention} .
Let D = {CLEVR, Multi-dSprites, Shapestacks, Tetronimoes,
Objects Room}.
For every chosen seed do
For every dataset D in D do
Let Dtrain, Dvalid, Dtest be the training, validation
and test splits for D respectively.
For every model M in M do
Train M on Dtrain
Evaluate ARI, SC, MSE of M on Dvalid
Figure 3.2: Detailed description of the initial validation of the models.
(1) Initial validation of the models.
The experiments are run on all models
and all normal versions of the datasets. The details are in ﬁgure 3.2. The third
step of the experiment is skipped, as it is not necessary for this evaluation.
(2) Evaluation of robustness and compositional generalization.
To
evaluate robustness, a similar setup to the one for (1) is used, and the second
and third steps of the Experiment are performed on modiﬁed versions of dataset
D.
Robustness is evaluated by calculating the object discovery metrics and down-
stream task on the dataset used during training and on all the variants. Object-
level robustness is evaluated by changing the color of an object, its texture
==PAGE:33==
3.1 The Research Objectives
20
Downstream Task Robustness Evaluation
Let M be the trained model.
Let D be the test split of the dataset that M was trained on.
Let Dtrain and Dtest be the training split and test splits.
Let V = {Number of Objects, Occlusion, Crop & Zoom, Color,
Shape, Style}
Let F1 be the MLP model and F2 be the Linear model
For every variation Vtrain in V do
Apply variation Vtrain to dataset Dtrain
Train F1 and F2 using representations from M
and samples from Dtrain
For every variation Vtest in V do
Apply variation Vtest to dataset Dtest
Test trained F1 and F2 on Dtest
Figure 3.3: Detailed description of the downstream task for robustness evalua-
tion. The downstream task can be run on any model trained on any dataset.
or by adding a shape never before seen. Global-level robustness is evaluated
using occlusions, cropping and zooming the image, and increasing the number of
objects present in the scene compared to training.
The choice of variants was guided by the objective and the limitations of
the implementation, as explained previously: task-irrelevant changes for the
object-level robustness and data augmentation transformations for global-level
robustness.
For compositional generalization, the ﬁrst step of the experiment is performed
on a subset of the original dataset. Samples containing objects with a speciﬁc
combination of features are removed from the training dataset and put in a
heldout dataset (Greﬀet al., 2019, Watters et al., 2019). A set of features is
selected and values are given for each feature e.g. color=green, shape=circle.
The new training set will consist of samples that don’t have objects with the
selected combination of features e.g. the new training dataset will contain no
sample that has a green circle. The heldout set will be the complementary of
the new training set e.g. all samples have at least one green circle. During the
second and third steps both the new training dataset and the heldout dataset
are used.
When selecting the features and respective values for the tests, the primary factor
is the number of samples available in both the new training set and the heldout
set. The datasets need to be big enough to allow for unsupervised training and
==PAGE:34==
3.1 The Research Objectives
21
for correct downstream evaluation.
Evaluation of Robustness
Let M = {MONet, GENESIS, Slot Attention} .
Let D = {CLEVR, Multi-dSprites, Shapestacks, Tetronimoes,
Objects Room}.
Let V = {Number of Objects, Occlusion, Crop & Zoom,
Change Color, Add Shape, Style Transfer}
For every chosen seed do
For every dataset D in D do
Let Dtrain, Dvalid, Dtest be the training, validation
and test splits for D respectively.
For every model M in M do
Train M on Dtrain
Evaluate ARI, SC, MSE of M on all variants
V of Dvalid
Run Downstream Task Robustness Evaluation
on all variants V of Dtest
Evaluation of Compositional Generalization
Let M = {MONet, GENESIS, Slot Attention} .
For every chosen seed do
For every dataset D in D do
Let Dtrain, Dvalid, Dtest be the training, validation
and test splits for D respectively.
Let Dheldout be the complementary dataset of D
For every model M in M do
Train M on Dtrain
Evaluate ARI, SC, MSE of M on Dvalid
Evaluate ARI, SC, MSE of M on Dheldout
Train and Evaluate downstream tasks on Dtest
and Dheldout
==PAGE:35==
3.1 The Research Objectives
22
3.1.2
The Second Research Objective
The second research objective wants to obtain novel insights into the mechanism
behind segregation (see section 2.2). Speciﬁcally, diﬀerent architectural changes
will be studied, based on the results from the paper by Engelcke et al. (2020a).
For this research objective, a successful model will be able to achieve the following
desideratum:
• Desideratum: Accurately segregate the objects in diﬀerent slots.
This desideratum can be assessed looking at the reconstruction of the visual
appearance and shape of each object present in the scene. When an object is
split into multiple slots, or multiple objects are collapsed into a single slot, the
model will have failed.
The experiments are split in two parts that aim to shed light into two separate
aspects of the same issue. The ﬁrst part is exploration of the (1) reconstruction
bottleneck, while the second one focuses on (2) texture complexity.
The reconstruction bottleneck hypothesis was proposed by Engelcke et al.
(2020a). In their work they explored how GENESIS is aﬀected by latent space
size and diﬀerent decoder architecture. Their ﬁndings lead to the representation
bottleneck hypothesis, which suggests that having more representation capacity in
the model will collapse the object representations into one single slot. Therefore,
architecture and hyper-parameters become essential in enabling segregation. In
this thesis, MONet and Slot Attention are tested, with a bigger decoder and an
increased latent space. The objective is to verify these results on models that
operate diﬀerently and propose future research directions that can address the
problems.
The study on texture complexity focuses instead on the unexplored aspect of
the success of object-centric models: the fact that they are trained on simple,
procedurally generated datasets (Burgess and Kim, 2018). These datasets are
made of visually distinct objects. This introduces a strong inductive bias for the
models to separate these objects as local patches of pixels that are similar to
each other will activate the same neurons in the network and, therefore, reinforce
these activations when training is performed. More complex textures break the
local coherence that can be experienced with object-centric datasets. Here, the
focus is on the ability of the models to correctly identify that an object should
not be split into distinct slots but instead be represented by a single one, even
when it has a complex texture.
==PAGE:36==
3.1 The Research Objectives
23
Experiment
1. Train model M on dataset D.
2. Evaluate object discovery performance.
Figure 3.4: Structure of the experiments run for the second research objective.
Experimentation
The models chosen are MONet and Slot Attention, because GENESIS has
already been investigated. The architecture is changed to increase capacity. The
decoder used has Residual Blocks that speed up training and allow for deeper
architectures. Going from linear latent space to the convolutional stack of layers
is another crucial step for the architecture. Here, both a Broadcast Decoder and
a more traditional MLP approach are tested. The two approaches are inspired
by Engelcke et al. (2020a). Finally, a bigger latent space is also tested for both
models. The number of training steps and all other parameters are not changed
from the ones used in the ﬁrst research objective, to try and reduce complexity
of analysis.
The datasets used are CLEVR and Multi-dSprites, as they are visually diﬀerent
and present diﬀerent levels of feature complexity. For the texture complexity
study, Neural Style Transfer is applied to all the images, to obtain a visually
challenging version of the datasets, while still keeping some of the features such
as shape, size, position and some degree of correlation to the original color.
Each experiment is carried out according to the structure display in ﬁgure 3.4.
The object representations are not evaluated because the focus is on the segrega-
tion step and they would not provide additional insights.
(1) Reconstruction bottleneck study. For the reconstruction bottleneck
study, the models are trained with four diﬀerent architectures. These are meant
to progressively increase the model’s capacity. No special changes need to be
made in order to apply the architectures to the models. The training curves and
object discovery performance are monitored for this study.
(2) Texture complexity study. For the texture complexity study the
datasets are now changed. Neural Style Trasfer (NST) (see section 3.4.4) is used
to change the texture of the entire image.
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Object-Centric Models and Baselines
24
Reconstruction Bottleneck Study
Let M = {MONet, Slot Attention} .
Let D = {CLEVR, Multi-dSprites}.
Let A = {Big Decoder with Broadcast / Big Latent Space,
Big Decoder with MLP / Big Latent Space,
For every chosen seed do
For every dataset D in D do
Let Dtrain, Dvalid be the training and validation
splits for D respectively.
For every architecture A in A do
For every model M in M do
Train M with architecture A on Dtrain
Evaluate ARI, SC, MSE of M on Dvalid
Texture Complexity Study
Let M = {MONet, Slot Attention} .
Let D = {CLEVR with NST, Multi-dSprites with NST}.
Let A = {Normal Decoder, Big Decoder}.
For every chosen seed do
For every dataset D in D do
Let Dtrain, Dvalid be the training and validation
splits for D respectively.
For every architecture A in A do
For every model M in M do
Train M with architecture A on Dtrain
Evaluate ARI, SC, MSE of M on Dvalid
3.2
Object-Centric Models and Baselines
In this section, the structure and details for the object-centric models and the
baselines are described. Many of the theoretical aspects and justiﬁcation for the
choices that the original authors have made can be traced back to the theory
part of this thesis. Each model is ﬁrst described in general terms and then each
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Object-Centric Models and Baselines
25
individual component is described in more detail.
A dataset D is made of scenes sampled from the population distribution.
Each scene has an image x(i) ∈Rh×w×c and a segmentation mask m(i) ∈
{0, 1, . . . , O}h×w×1 indicating which pixel corresponds to which object in the
scene (where o is the maximum number of objects that can be in a scene and
the background is considered one of the objects). Each object in a scene has
f features that can be used as targets for a supervised learning task. These
features describe intrinsic properties (such as shape and color) and extrinsic
properties (such as position).
The image dimensions are abbreviated using D := h × w × c.
Object-centric models used in this thesis share some common properties. The
models spatially decompose the input into objects that are individually repre-
sented with vectors ck ∈RL, k = 1, 2, . . . , K called slots.
3.2.1
Baselines
The baselines used for this study are Variational AutoEncoders with a Tra-
ditional decoder and a Broadcast decoder (Kingma and Welling, 2014,
Watters et al., 2019).
The Variational AutoEncoder has been described in the theory section (see
section 2.5).
The VAE is a proper generative model, with an encoder ENCφ parameterized by
φ and a decoder DECθ parameterized by θ.
Generative Model.
The generative model p is parameterized through θ. The
prior distribution of the latent representation is Gaussian with the identity as
covariance:
pθ(z) = N(z|0, I).
(3.1)
Each channel in each pixel is independent and identically distributed. The
conditional distribution is Gaussian with mean parameterized by the decoder
µ = DECθ(z) and constant variance σ2:
pθ(x|z) =
D
Y
i=1
pθ(xi|z)
pθ(xi|z) = N(xi|µi, σ2).
(3.2)
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Object-Centric Models and Baselines
26
CNN
Component
Decoder
Slot Attention Module
UNET
Attention Module
Component VAE
Component
Decoder
Component
Encoder
Attention Module
Component VAE
Component
Decoder
Component
Encoder
Decoder
Encoder
Slot Attention
MONet
GENESIS
VAE
Figure 3.5: Graphical representation of the models used in this study. The
colored lines indicate the paths followed to process each object. The component
encoder and decoder are shared between objects.
==PAGE:40==
3.2 Object-Centric Models and Baselines
27
The diﬀerence between a traditional VAE and a Broadcast VAE is in how DECθ
is implemented. In a traditional VAE DECθ is a convolutional network which
progressively increases the size of the feature maps until the size of the image
is reached. A Broadcast Decoder, instead, tiles the latent vector across space
to be equal to the size of the original image and concatenates it with spatial
coordinates. The feature maps now have size h × w × L + 2, the decoder does
not need to increase the size of the feature maps and can separate positional
features from non-positional features in latent space more easily (Watters et al.,
2019).
Approximante Posterior.
The approximate posterior q is parameterized
through φ. The encoder ENCφ is a Convolutional Neural Network with residual
blocks, which progressively reduces the size of the feature maps. The parameters
µ and σ2 of the posterior are obtained through an MLP, after ﬂattening of the
feature map.
qφ(z|x) = N
 z|µ, diag(σ2)

(3.3)
Learning.
Learning is done through minimization of the evidence lower bound
of the likelihood:
L = Eqφ(z|x) (log pθ(x|z)) −DKL (qφ(z|z)∥p(z)) .
(3.4)
3.2.2
MONet
The Multi-Object Network (MONet) sequentially computes slot representations
that share a common format (Burgess et al., 2019). Each slot representation
is used to reconstruct individual objects that are the components of a spatial
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) used to generate the image. MONet can be
separated in two parts, an Attention Module that ﬁnds attention masks
for each object (used as mixing probabilities in the GMM) and a Component
Variational AutoEncoder (Component VAE) that encodes and reconstructs
each object and its attention mask.
The Attention Module ATTψ(·) is a non-linear function, parameterized by ψ. It
recursively computes the parameters of the distribution of the attention masks
for each component in the scene. There are K attention masks ˆmk ∈[0, 1]h×w.
The Attention Module is implemented as a U-NET (Ronneberger et al., 2015), a
feedforward NN architecture with skip-connections used for image segmentation.
The U-NET is used as a recurrent neural network, with input the image and
==PAGE:41==
3.2 Object-Centric Models and Baselines
28
a scope, which speciﬁes which pixels have yet to be explained.
The k-th
attention mask gives the probability that a pixel belongs to component k,
ˆmk = p(m = k| ˆm1:k).
Together, the attention masks deﬁne a categorical
distribution qψ( ˆm|x), which speciﬁes the class-belonging probability for each
pixel in the image.
The Component VAE operates analogously to a traditional Variational AutoEn-
coder. It ﬁrst computes the object representation through an encoder, using
the attention mask and the original image. Then, it reconstructs both the
visual appearance and the shape of the object through a decoder, using only its
representation. The encoder ENCφ(·) is parameterized by φ and implemented
as a Convolutional Neural Network with an MLP to map the output of the
CNN to the parameters of the approximate posterior. The decoder DECθ(·) is
parameterized by θ and is implemented as a Broadcast Decoder.
The number of steps that the attention module takes is equal to the number of
representational slots that are required from the user. Although this parameter
is ﬁxed at training time, it can be changed at test time. This allows the model
to adapt to diﬀerent number of objects present in the input.
Learning.
From these, a loss can be deﬁned, which puts together the re-
construction error for the scene components, its mask, and the KL divergence
between the approximate posterior and the prior:
L(x; β, γ) = −log pθ(x|z1:K) + βDKL
 K
Y
k=1
qφ(zk|x, ˆmk)∥p(z)
!
+
+ γDKL (qψ( ˆm|x)∥pθ(m|z1:K)) ,
(3.5)
where β is the hyperparameter to tune how close the approximate posterior
should be to the prior, γ is another hyperparameter that speciﬁes how well the
component VAE should be able to reconstruct the attention mask. The original
image is x, the attention masks ˆm1:K, the reconstructed masks m1:K, and the
slots z1:K.
This learning objective uses the masks coming from the attention module to
reconstruct the image. Therefore, the attention module and the component VAE
tend to learn at diﬀerent rates. To successfully train the model, the parameters
β and γ need to be tuned correctly.
==PAGE:42==
3.2 Object-Centric Models and Baselines
29
3.2.3
GENESIS
The GENErative Scene Inference and Sampling (GENESIS) model takes strong
inspiration from MONet (Section 3.2.2) (Engelcke et al., 2020b). The image is
decomposed into K objects which are then put together according to a spatial
GMM. GENESIS has again an Attention Module and a Component VAE, but,
unlike MONet, GENESIS is a proper generative model.
Each object reconstructed by the Component VAE is a component of the GMM
and the attention masks from the Attention Module are used as mixing proba-
bilities.
The attention module mimics the structure of an autoregressive autoencoder.
The encoder MASKENCφ(·) is a Recurrent Neural Network to obtain the parameters
of the latent repesentation zm
k ∈RLm of the attention mask. Then, the decoder
MASKDECθ(·) generates the parameters for the masks.
This structure allows
GENESIS to be a proper generative model. The parameters for the masks are
used to determine the input for the next step of the recurrence, similarly to what
is done in MONet.
The Component VAE has the same structure as the one from MONet. The
encoder ENCφ(·) is parametrized by φ and obtains a latent representation of
the attention mask and input. The decoder DECθ(·) reconstructs the visual
appearance and the shape of the object. Again, the output mask is not used for
reconstruction of the ﬁnal image. Instead, the ones from the attention module
are used.
Learning.
From this description, the loss used to train the model can be
deﬁned as the ELBO on the marginal log-likelihood pθ(x):
L = Eqφ(c,zm|x) [log pθ (x|c, zm)] −DKL (qφ (c, zm|x) ∥pθ (c, zm))
(3.6)
In GENESIS, this is learned through the Generalised ELBO with Constrained
Optimization (GECO).
3.2.4
Slot Attention
Slot Attention diﬀers from both MONet and GENESIS (Locatello et al., 2020).
The model works with a variety of tasks. The one relevant for this thesis is
the object discovery task, where the input images are reconstructed together
with the masks for each object in the scene. Slot Attention initially ﬁnds vector
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Object-Centric Models and Baselines
30
embeddings of the image. These are used by the Slot Attention module, which
through an iterative reﬁnement process ﬁnds the slot representations. Finally,
these are used by a decoder to reconstruct the objects and their masks.
In the original paper, the name Slot Attention is used for what here is called
the Slot Attention Module. The choice for the diﬀerent use of the name is to
maintain consistency with the other models.
Vector Embeddings.
A Convolutional Neural Network outputs a set of
features maps. A positional embedding is added to each feature map, because
when they are ﬂattened the spatial information would be otherwise lost. When
ﬂattened, the feature maps become vectors. An MLP is then applied to ﬁnd the
vector embeddings vn ∈RDv of the image.
Slot Attention Module.
The Slot Attention Module is based on dot-product
attention, takes as input N vectors and, after a few iteration of reﬁnement,
outputs K slot representations, each bound to a diﬀerent set of input vectors.
The slots are initialized using a Gaussian distribution with learned mean and
variance µ, σ2:
p(ck) = N
 ck|µ, σ2
,
where the parameters are shared across slots, to allow for changes in the number
of slots at test time.
At each iteration, the slots compete to explain part of the input. This is the
only place of communication between slots. Learnable linear mappings k, q, v are
used to map the vector embeddings and the slot representations to a common
dimension Da.
To simplify notation, the N vector embeddings are used as columns for the
matrix V ∈RN×Dv and the slots will also be in matrix format C ∈RK×L.
What follows is the description of an iteration of the Slot Attention module.
First, dot-product attention normalized across slots is applied:
Ai,j :=
eMi,j
P
l eMi,l
(3.7)
M :=
1
√
D
k(V ) · q(C)T ,
(3.8)
(3.9)
==PAGE:44==
3.2 Object-Centric Models and Baselines
31
where M ∈RN×K. Equation 3.8 is the dot product between all projections
of the vector embeddings and slot representations. This ﬁnds the similarity in
the projected space between each pair of vectors vk and ck. The multiplicative
factor
1
√
D
is used as a temperature for the Softmax operation performed in
Equation 3.7, which prevents the attention mechanism from ignoring parts of
the input.
The vector embeddings are then aggregated to the slot that the attention process
has assigned them. This is done using a weighted mean:
Wi,j :=
Ai,j
P
l Al,j
(3.10)
U := W T · v(V ),
(3.11)
where each row of U ∈RK×D has the values used to update the slots.
The updates are performed by a Recurrent Neural Network applied to each slot
and that uses the slot representation as hidden unit.
The iteration is now complete and repeats for a ﬁxed number of times.
Decoder.
After the slot representations have been computed, a decoder, im-
plemented as a Broadcast Decoder, is used to reconstruct each object and its
mask. The masks are normalized across objects using the Softmax operation
and are used to mix the reconstruction obtain from each slot:
ˆx =
K
X
k=1
mkxk
(3.12)
Learning.
The loss used to train the model is the MSE between the original
image x and the reconstructed image ˆx.
3.2.4.1
Comparison between models
MONet and GENESIS are very similar. In both models, an attention module is
used to ﬁnd the segmentation mask for each object present in the input recursively.
The only direct point of communication between the attention module and the
component VAE is the reconstruction of the attention masks, which tries to
force the component VAE to encode information regarding the attention mask.
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Evaluation
32
The only diﬀerence between the two is that GENESIS introduces a proper
autoregressive prior to allow for sample generation without using given attention
masks. This can introduce problems, because it forces stronger dependencies
between objects.
Instead, Slot Attention ﬁnds instance slots, inspired by other models in the
literature, such as IODINE (Greﬀet al., 2019). It computes the attention masks
only at the output, and they are also used for reconstruction. The model does
not have a stochastic latent space and is entirely deterministic. This could be
undesirable if sampling is needed. Additionally, Slot Attention uses a proper
attention mechanism to ﬁnd which features are similar to each other, instead of
using an instance segmentation network. This has the advantage of making the
model more computationally eﬃcient.
3.3
Evaluation
3.3.1
Downstream Task
The evaluation of the quality of object representations is done using a feature
prediction task. This task is ﬁrst deﬁned for the object-centric case, and then is
adapted for the baselines. The choice of task is inﬂuenced by the literature (Greﬀ
et al., 2019, Locatello et al., 2020).
The features of the objects present in
the scene are predicted using a simple model.
The same architecture and
learning hyperparameters are used for all experiments. Higher performance in
the prediction corresponds to more informative representations.
Object Centric Downstream Model
In the case of object-centric representations, a single model PREDψ(·), parame-
terized by ψ, is applied to the object representation and is used to predict all
features of one object. The models used are a simple Linear model (implemented
as a single layer of a neural network with no activation function) and an MLP
with one hidden layer. The model, in both cases, predicts both categorical and
numerical features for the object. The loss function for the categorical outputs
is the Cross Entropy and for the numerical outputs is the Mean Square Error,
as in Greﬀet al. (2019).
Given a trained model M, let the n-th object representation obtained with M
from input x be rn(x). Then, let ym be the ground-truth feature vector for
==PAGE:46==
3.3 Evaluation
33
object m, A the set of categorical features, B the set of numerical features, and
the number of features be f = |A| + |B|. Let also I be the partition of a feature
vector y into the features of the object:
I = {{1, . . . , i1} , {i1 + 1, . . . , i2} , . . . , {ik + 1, . . . , ik}}
(3.13)
An example is the following. From 1 to 3 is the color, a numerical feature of
dimensionaliy 3, from 4 to 6 is the shape, a categorical feature with 3 categories
that has been one-hot encoded. Notice how this partitioning is the same for all
objects, so no object-index is required in the notation. From this, the loss for
each object can be described:
ˆyn = PRED (rn(x)) .
(3.14)
L((ˆyn)Ik, (ym)Ik) =
(
Cross-Entropy ((ˆyn)Ik, (ym)Ik)
if k ∈A
MSE ((ˆyn)Ik, yIk)
if k ∈B
(3.15)
L(obj)
m,n =
f
X
k=1
L(ˆyIk, (ym)Ik)
(3.16)
This loss is computed between a generic object m and a generic representation
n. Matching the correct object to the correct representation is an issue.
Matching.
Matching is performed by measuring the distance between the
characteristics of the object representation and those of the ground-truth object.
Then, an assignment problem is solved, pairing up object representations and
objects such that the total distance is minimized, see 3.6 (Kuhn, 1955).
There are diﬀerent ways to measure the similarity. When only the representations
are available, the loss L(obj)
m,n can be used. This introduces some issues when the
downstream model is not performing well. The loss-based matching will result in
an over-estimation of the actual performance. This, in turn, causes issues during
the initial phases of training. The downstream model is guessing features, from
the given representation and many of the target values will be incorrect. This
will eﬀectively make the dataset very noisy, and not allow the stochastic gradient
descent algorithm to update the weights correctly. Let the situation be the one
shown in ﬁgure 3.6. If the downstream model predicts "red, square" for the
ﬁrst slot, "blue, triangle" for the second, "green circle" for the third, and
"red, circle" for the remaining slots, the loss-based matching will push the
model to learn that the background is actualy a "red, square", the circle is a
"blue, triangle", and so on. When enough samples are available, the model
will eventually learn the correct predictions, but the noise introduced might be
too much for the number of samples available.
When the model also predicts object masks and the ground-truth masks are
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Evaluation
34
Foreground
Masks
Reconstructed
Masks
Distance
Matrix
Figure 3.6: Example of matching in a ﬁctitious dataset. The image has three
foreground objects, the model has reconstructed the shape of all the objects
(background included). A distance matrix is found between all pairs of masks.
The assignment problem is solved by ﬁnding the three non-overlapping pairs
that minimize the sum of the distances.
available, these can be used to achieve better results. The complementary of the
distance between the two is used as similarity. This allows for more consistent
matching, and can run into problems only if the model does not predict object
masks correctly.
Learning.
After the matching has been performed, the loss can be computed
by averaging over the foreground objects. Given a set of representations R and
a set of foreground objects O, a matching can be deﬁned as the set of pairs
M = {(i1, j1), . . . , (ik, jk)}, where k = min{|R|, |O|}. Then, the loss will be:
L = 1
k
k
X
p=1
L(obj)
ip,jp
where (i1, j1), . . . , (ik, jk) ∈M
(3.17)
==PAGE:48==
3.3 Evaluation
35
Figure 3.7: Image of samples from an hypothetical dataset. The column on the
left are the samples, on the right the slots where each object present in the scene
is placed. The sorting follows the shape (square, circle, triangle) followed
by the color (red, green, blue).
Baseline Downstream Model
The downstream model used for the baselines follows the same structure as the
one used for the object-centric models. However, a big issue is that object-centric
representations are not available, instead, a single vector z is used to represent
the entire content of the input image.
To solve this problem, the approach from (Greﬀet al., 2019) is used. The objects
are sorted according to their feature values. Then, their feature vectors are
concatenated to form a new target vector y. The downstream model predicts,
from the representation, the concatenated feature vector.
This approach introduces some problems in the interpretation of the performance
measured. Providing the objects in a order according the their feature values
adds structure to the input that was not previously present. This structure
can be exploited by predicting the same value for the ﬁrst few slots, because
objects with this value are more likely to be placed in those slots. As an example,
ﬁgure 3.7 shows an hypothetical dataset made of squares, circles and triangles
that can be blue, red or green. The slots are sorted by shape, then color and
then all the other features. When the scenes are generated, the features of each
object are sampled at random, therefore with a probability of 1/3, the shape is
a square and with a probability of 1/3 the object is red. If the objects were to
be placed randomly in slots, the recorded probability distribution of the object
==PAGE:49==
3.3 Evaluation
36
features would be the same in every slot. However, if the objects are sorted
according to shape (square, then circle, then rectangle) and then the ties
are broken using the color (red, then green, then blue), the likelihood of the
ﬁrst slot having a square is bigger than 1/3.
Eﬀectively, this means that an educated guess that does not use the representa-
tions in any way could still achieve a better performance than a random guess
even if a single vector is used for all predictions. This can be shown empirically.
An initial random guess y is made and then optimized through stochastic gradi-
ent descent to minimize the loss with the samples from the dataset. This method
does not use any information coming from the scene, only the object features
present in the input and the deterministic ordering used.
Using this method, the accuracy of the educated guess increases substantially
(results in table 3.1).
Feature
Educated
Guess
Random
Guess
Feature Type
Multi-dSprites
shape
0.678
0.330
Categorical
x
0.092
0.000
Numerical
y
0.000
0.000
Numerical
color
0.000
0.000
Numerical
scale
0.000
0.000
Numerical
CLEVR 6
size
0.787
0.500
Categorical
material
0.635
0.500
Categorical
shape
0.398
0.330
Categorical
x
0.003
0.000
Numerical
y
0.000
0.000
Numerical
color
0.130
0.125
Categorical
Shapestacks
size
0.227
0.000
Numerical
shape
0.677
0.550
Categorical
color
0.189
0.167
Categorical
Tetrominoes
shape
0.143
0.052
Categorical
x
0.002
0.000
Numerical
y
0.002
0.000
Numerical
color
0.170
0.167
Categorical
Table 3.1: Results for the performance that can be achieved by an educated
guess based solely on the fact that the slots are sorted according to feature
values. In bold the values that are signiﬁcantly better than a random guess.
Bold signiﬁcantly better results.
==PAGE:50==
3.3 Evaluation
37
3.3.2
Evaluation Metrics
Mean Square Error
The choice of using the Mean Square Error (MSE) comes from theory of machine
learning and statistics. It is equivalent to assuming that each channel of every
pixel is distributed according to a Gaussian distribution and then computing the
Maximum Likelihood. Furthermore, the use of the MSE allows for comparison
across models that are using diﬀerent losses.
Deﬁnition 3.1 (MSE) Given a list of images X =

xk ∈RD, k = 1, . . . , N
	
and the reconstructions ˆX =
ˆxk ∈RD, k = 1, . . . , N
	
, the MSE between X and
ˆX is computed as follows:
MSE(X, ˆX) = 1
N
N
X
k=1
 
1
D
D
X
i=1
(xi −ˆxi)2
!
.
(3.18)
Adjusted Rand Index
The Rand Index is a symmetric measure of the similarity between two partitions
of a set (Hubert and Arabie, 1985, Wagner and Wagner, 2007). It is inspired by
the traditional classiﬁcation metrics, where the number of elements that have
been correctly classiﬁed is compared to the number of elements that have been
incorrectly classiﬁed. Deﬁning the metric will help clarify this sentence.
Deﬁnition 3.2 (Rand Index) Given a set of n elements S = {s1, s2, . . . , sn},
two partitions A = {A1, A2, . . . , Ak} and B = {B1, B2, . . . , Br} of S, further-
more, let:
• m11 = number of pairs of elements that are in the same cluster in both A
and B.
• m00 = number of pairs of elements that are in diﬀerent clusters in both A
and B.
• m10 = number of pairs of elements that are in the same cluster in A and
in diﬀerent clusters in B.
• m01 = number of pairs of elements that are in diﬀerent clusters in A and
in the same cluster in B
The Rand Index is given by:
R(A, B) =
m11 + m00
m11 + m00 + m10 + m01
= 2(m11 + m00)
n(n −1)
.
(3.19)
==PAGE:51==
3.3 Evaluation
38
Intuitively, it quantiﬁes the number of elements that have been correctly classiﬁed
over the total number of elements. The results are strongly dependent on the
number of clusters and on the number of elements in each cluster. If k and r
is kept ﬁxed and the proportion of elements in each set of the two partitions is
kept the same, when n is increased, the Rand Index will tend to increase.
S
S
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
A1
A2
A3
B1
B2
B3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 3.8: Illustration used to exemplify the Rand Index and Adjusted Rand
Index. (Left): Initial partition of the data shown with colored points. (Right):
Predicted partition shown with shaded regions, overlapping the initial one.
Example. In the example in ﬁgure 3.8, let S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7} with n = 7. The
partitions are A = {{3, 5}, {6, 7}, {1, 2, 4}} for the ground-truth partition and
B = {{1, 3, 5}, {6}, {2, 4, 7}} for the predicted partition. The metric is symmetric,
so this distinction is only relevant for practical purposes of interpretation. Then
the pairs can be found and counted using a table for example. This will result in
m11 = 2, m00 = 12, m10 = 3, m01 = 4. And, ﬁnally, R = 2+12
21
= 14
21 = 2
3 = 0.66.
This number may seem high because the metric goes from 0 to 1 but the two
clusterings are actually quite diﬀerent.
The Rand Index has a maximum of 1 and a minimum of 0.
However, its
expectation does not have a constant value (Wagner and Wagner, 2007).
The Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) is deﬁned based on a null hypothesis that speciﬁes
a purely random clustering by deﬁning a number of partitions and the ﬁnding
how many diﬀerent clusterings are possible by suﬄing the elements between
partitions. The Rand Index is normalized and its bias is corrected accordingly
to have expected value 0 and maximum value 1. With random clusterings (i.e.
under null hypothesis), the metric will now be 0. The same issues related to the
the number of clusters and the number of elements in each cluster are inherited
from the Rand Index.
Deﬁnition 3.3 (Adjusted Rand Index) Given the same conditions as in def-
inition 3.2, let ni,j be the number of elements in Ai that are also in Bj. Let
==PAGE:52==
3.3 Evaluation
39
ai = |Ai| and bi = |Bi|. The Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) is:
ARI(A, B) =
P
i,j
 ni,j
2

−
P
i
 ai
2
 P
j
 bj
2

 n
2

1
2
hP
i
 ai
2

+ P
j
 bj
2
i
−
P
i
 ai
2
 P
j
 bj
2

 n
2

(3.20)
In the context of object discovery, the Adjusted Rand Index is used to evaluate
how well the model can segment the image by comparing the predicted set of
regions to the ground-truth.
Example. Going back to the example in ﬁgure 3.8 and using the deﬁnition 3.3,
the ARI results in 0.14, which better reﬂects that the two clusterings are quite
diﬀerent.
Segmentation Cover
The Segmentation Cover (SC) is a metric originally deﬁned to measure how
well a predicted segmentation of an image matches the ground truth segmenta-
tion(Engelcke et al., 2020b, Arbeláez et al., 2011). The metric is based on the
Intersection Over Union (IOU), used to evaluate pixel-wise classiﬁcation tasks.
Deﬁnition 3.4 (Intersection Over Union) Given an image x ∈Rh×w×3,
the segmentation of the image will produce the set of regions R = {R1, R2, . . . , Rk}
where Ri = {(x, y)|pixel (x, y) is placed in the i-th region}. In general the set
R does not need to be a partition. Given two regions R, R′:
IOU(R, R′) = |R ∩R′|
|R ∪R′|
(3.21)
From this, the SC can be deﬁned.
Deﬁnition 3.5 (Segmentation Cover) Given two sets of segmentation re-
gions S, S′, where S is considered the ground truth and S′ is the set that is to
be evaluated.
SC(S′ →S) =
1
P
R∈S |R|
X
R∈S
|R| max
R′∈S′ IOU(R, R′)
(3.22)
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Datasets
40
From the deﬁnition, for each region in the ground-truth segmentation, SC ﬁnds
the predicted region that best matches according to the IOU. Then, the weigthed
average of the intersection of unions is the segmentation cover. Bigger regions will
account for more of the ﬁnal score. This can be undesirable when, in the same
scene, there are big objects and small objects but they should all be correctly
segmented by the model. This is why the Mean Segmentation Cover (mSC) is
deﬁned.
Deﬁnition 3.6 (Mean Segmentation Cover) Given two sets of segmenta-
tion regions S, S′, where S is considered the ground truth and S′ is the set that
is to be evaluated.
mSC(S′ →S) = 1
|S|
X
R∈S
max
R′∈S′ IOU(R, R′)
(3.23)
The mean Segmentation Cover gives equal importance to big regions and small
regions.
Comparison between ARI and SC
Some of the problems of the ARI
score have already been mentioned. It is strongly dependent on the number of
clusterings and the number of elements present in each cluster. Furthermore, in
the image segmentation setting, this translates to giving higher scores to models
that are over-segmenting the objects. When lots of pixels are available, splitting
them evenly in two clusters will not lead to a big penalty. Instead, segmentation
cover, does not suﬀer from this issue (Engelcke et al., 2020b).
3.4
Datasets
In this section, the datasets and their variants used in the robustness and
compositional generalization studies are detailed. First the datasets in their
original form are described, with the features available for each object and the
distribution of their values. Then, the variants used in the robustness study are
explained and exempliﬁed. Follow the feature composition datasets used in the
compositional generalization study. Finally, the datasets used in the texture
study are shown, and details on the choice of parameters are provided.
==PAGE:54==
3.4 Datasets
41
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 3.9: Examples of images from the datasets used in the study. Left-most
column is the original image, the other columns are all the objects in the scene.
From the top, 2 samples for every dataset: CLEVR 6, Multi-dSprites Colored
on Grayscale, Shapestacks, Tetrominoes, and Objects Room.
3.4.1
The Original Datasets
The datasets used in the study have been chosen from the literature (Burgess
et al., 2019, Greﬀet al., 2019, 2017, Locatello et al., 2020, Engelcke et al.,
2020b, von Kügelgen et al., 2020). They allow for analysis with diﬀerent input
complexity.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Datasets
42
1
2
3
Value
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
Count (samples)
Shape
Cube
Cylinder
Sphere
1
2
3
4
5
6
Value
0
50000
100000
150000
Count (samples)
Color
Blue
Green
Cyan
Red
Purple
Yellow
0.4
0.6
Value
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
Count (samples)
Size dimension 1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Value
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
Count (samples)
Size dimension 2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Value
0
50000
100000
150000
Count (samples)
Size dimension 3
Distribution of features in Shapestacks, no
background, visible
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Value
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Count (samples)
Color
Red
Cyan
Green
Blue
Brown
Gray
Purple
Yellow
1
2
3
Value
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
Count (samples)
Shape
Sphere
Cylinder
Cube
1
2
Value
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
Count (samples)
Material
Rubber
Metal
0
100
200
300
Value
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Count (samples)
Rotation
1
2
Value
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
Count (samples)
Size
Large
Small
Distribution of features in CLEVR 6, no
background, visible
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Value
0
50000
100000
150000
Count (samples)
Hue
1
2
3
Value
0
200000
400000
600000
Count (samples)
Shape
Square
Ellipse
Heart
0.6
0.8
1.0
Value
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
Count (samples)
Scale
0
2
4
6
Value
0
200000
400000
600000
800000
Count (samples)
Orientation
Distribution of features in Multi-dSprites Colored
on Grayscale, no background, visible
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10111213141516171819
Value
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
Count (samples)
Shape
1
2
3
4
5
6
Value
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
Count (samples)
Color
Blue
Green
Cyan
Red
Purple
Yellow
Distribution of features in Tetrominoes, no
background, visible
Figure 3.10: Distribution of the features in all datasets. The histograms show
the number of samples that have at least one object with the given value for
that feature.
The datasets CLEVR, Multi-dSprites, Tetrominoes, and Objects Room have
been taken from (Kabra et al., 2019), while Shapestacks from (Groth et al., 2018)
with segmentation masks from (Engelcke et al., 2020b).
CLEVR
This dataset consists of 128 × 128 images of 3D scenes with up to 10 objects,
possibly occluding each other. Objects can have diﬀerent colors (8 in total),
materials (rubber or metal), shapes (sphere, cylinder, cube), sizes (small or
large), x and y positions, and rotation. The dataset has been cropped and
==PAGE:56==
3.4 Datasets
43
resized according to the procedure detailed originally by MONet (Burgess et al.,
2019). The CLEVR 6 variant, which contains at most 6 objects, is used for
the object-centric representations, following the trend from the object-centric
literature. There are 100 000 samples in the dataset. In the CLEVR 6 variant
there are 53 483 samples.
Multi-dSprites
The dataset has been originally generated using the dSprites dataset (Matthey
et al., 2017). The background is uniformly colored while the objects can be
ellipses, squares or hearts in diﬀerent sizes, orientations and colors (and will
occlude each other). Three variants are available with diﬀerent number of objects,
color of the objects and the background. The variant with 2−5 randomly colored
HSV sprites on a randomly sampled grayscale background is used for this stufy,
following previous work. Images have size 64 × 64 × 3. There are 1 000 000
samples in the dataset.
Shapestacks
This dataset was ﬁrst used in the context of object-centric models by (Engelcke
et al., 2020b). The dataset consists of 64 × 64 images of 3D scenes where objects
are stacked to form a tower. Each scene is available under diﬀerent camera views.
Object can have diﬀerent shapes (cube, cylinder, sphere), colors (6 possible
values), sizes (numerical) and ordinal position in the stack. There are 311 200
samples in the dataset.
Of notice is that the shape is not a uniformly distributed feature because of the
data generating process used for this dataset. This detail will inﬂuence some
choices and results down the line.
Tetrominoes
This dataset consists of 32 × 32 images (cropped from the original 35 × 35 for
simplicity in the model implementation) of 3D-textured tetris pieces placed on
a black background. It was originally introduced by Greﬀet al. (2019). There
are always 3 objects in a scene, and no occlusions. Objects can have diﬀerent
shapes (19 in total), colors (6 fully saturated colors), x and y position. There
are 1 000 000 samples in the dataset.
==PAGE:57==
3.4 Datasets
44
Objects Room
This dataset consists of 64 × 64 images of 3D scenes with up to three objects.
It is based on the MuJoCo environment used by Eslami et al. (2018) and is a
multi-object extension of the 3d-shapes dataset (Burgess and Kim, 2018).
As object properties are not labeled, but masks are available, this dataset is only
used to evaluate segmentation performance. There are 1 000 000 samples in the
dataset.
3.4.2
Variants of the datasets.
In this section, the variants and the reason why they were chosen are described
in more detail (see ﬁgure 3.11 for examples).
The choice of variants.
Changing the color or the texture of a single object or adding an object with
a previously unseen shape to the scene are changes to the input that are task-
irrelevant when predicting the features of the other objects present in the scene.
Occlusions occur naturally in most datasets because objects overlap each other.
Adding a new occlusion to the scene allows to measure whether the models have
correctly learned this invariance or if it only happens when known obejcts are
occluding the scene. The number of objects is a generalization that has been
studied in many object-centric models and comes naturally from the require-
ments of an object-centric model (Greﬀet al., 2017, 2020, Locatello et al., 2020,
Engelcke et al., 2020b, Burgess et al., 2019). Finally, zooming and cropping the
image is a classical data augmentation transformation that keeps the content
the same but changes many of the properties of the objects compared to the
training distribution.
Description of the variants
Occlusion. A rectangular shape of gray color is placed on top of the scene.
The position is determined by picking 5 locations uniformly at random and
selecting the one that occludes less of the objects in the foreground. Occluded
objects have their mask and visibility updated to reﬂect the new rectangle added
==PAGE:58==
3.4 Datasets
45
Original
Color
Style Transfer
Occlusion
New Shape
Zoom & Crop
Object Number
CLEVR
Multi-dSprites
Objects Room
Shapestacks
Tetrominoes
Figure 3.11: Variants applied to the diﬀerent datasets to test compositional
generalization and robustness.
on top of them. The color of the rectangle is [0.2,0.2,0.2] for CLEVR and
[0.5,0.5,0.5] for all other datasets.
New Color. This transform is not performed on multi-dSprites, as it would
never get a color out of the distribution. An object is selected uniformly at
random from those in the foreground and their color is changed by performing a
color jittering which changes brightness, contrast, saturation and hue values at
random. The selected object will be marked as modified and its color property
will be used in the learning process.
Crop. The image is zoomed in, keeping the same center and cropped. The
interpolation for the zoom of image is bilinear, while for the mask nearest
neighbour is used. The objects that have been aﬀected by the cropping have
their mask and visibility updated.
Style Transfer. The style transfer of the images is computed using the technique
from (Gatys et al., 2016) and starting from the Pytorch tutorial implementa-
tion (Jacq and Herring, 2021). Each of the ﬁrst 100k samples in all datasets are
converted using, as style image, "The Great Wave oﬀKanagawa" from Hokusai’s
series Thirty-six Views of Mount Fuji. The style is applied to one foreground
object by cropping the stylized image using the object masks. The color and
==PAGE:59==
3.4 Datasets
46
material properties (when relevant) are not used in the training.
New Shape. For the multi-dSprites dataset, a triangle is placed on the scene
with properties sampled according to the same distributions deﬁned by the multi-
dSprites dataset. This is performed only on the colored on grayscale variant, on
the samples where at most 4 objects are present. The position of the triangle is
selected uniformly at random between 1 and 5. All objects from the selected
position and upwards are moved up by one position to place the triangle under
them. The mask and visibility properties are adjusted accordingly for both
the added shape and the objects below it.
3.4.3
Feature Composition Datasets
The feature composition datasets are used to evaluate the compositional gen-
eralization of the object-centric models.
The core idea is to isolate sam-
ples that have objects with certain feature values.
Given a dataset D, let
F be the set of features available, e.g.
for Multi-dSprites it would be F =
{color, shape, scale, orientation, x, y}. Then, let H be the set of rules on
the features that describes the heldout dataset. Each rule is a condition that
is applied to the objects present in the samples and all rules must be satis-
ﬁed. This allows to deﬁne complex heldout datasets. An example could be
H = {"color is green", "shape is circle"}, which is a set or rules that
selects all samples that have at least one green circle. The more features are
used in the set of rules, the less samples will satisfy the conditions because of
the extreme speciﬁcity. Therefore, a good balance needs to be found, to allow
for both the unsupervised training and the downstream task to have enough
samples to correctly evaluate the research objectives.
Various feature combinations have been tested, informed by the data from
ﬁgure 3.10. The datasets chosen are Shapestacks with no Green Cylinders, Multi-
dSprites with no Green Squares, and Tetrominoes with no Green Z and S pieces.
The choice of color and shape was arbitrary for most datasets because the classes
are balanced. For Shapestacks, the cylinders had to be chosen because there are
too many cubes and too little spheres. Finally, the new training datasets have
the distribution show in ﬁgure B.5. From Tetrominoes, two shape types are used
because they are the mirror image of the other, so it would make evaluation
unfair. The heldout datasets will be the complementary of these new training
datasets.
The rules that describe the heldout datasets are the following:
==PAGE:60==
3.4 Datasets
47
1. Shapestacks with no Green Cylinders:
H = {"color is green", "shape is cylinder"}. The heldout dataset
contains samples that have at least one green cylinder. The new training
dataset contains samples that have no green cylinders.
2. Multi-dSprites with no Green Squares:
H = {"color is green", "shape is square"}. The heldout dataset con-
tains samples that have at least one green square. The new training dataset
contains samples that have no green squares.
3. Tetrominoes with no Green Z and S pieces:
H = {"color is green", "shape is Z or S piece"}. The heldout dataset
contains samples that have at least one green Z or S piece. The new training
dataset contains samples that have no green Z or S pieces.
3.4.4
Neural Style Transfer
Neural Style Transfer (NST) (Gatys et al., 2016) is a technique used to artiﬁcially
create artistic images based on a given style. It is based on Convolutional
Neural Networks and their ability to learn a representation of the input that is
progressively more abstract the deeper the network is. The later layers of the
architecture will focus more on the proper content of the image, and disregard
the low-level pixel details. The activations coming from the deeper layers is
called the content representation. Then, the style of the image is derived from
its texture. To do this, the correlation between the ﬁlter activations is computed
over the entire image. Reconstructing the image using this information at lower
layers provides local, high-frequency textures, while more global structures are
reconstructed from the deeper layers. The result of the correlations at diﬀerent
layers is called the style representation.
Now, Neural Style Transfer consists in ﬁnding an image that matches the content
and the style of diﬀerent images at the same time.
This is done through
minimization of a loss function that combines style and content from diﬀerent
layers in the network. By changing the weight of the representations at diﬀerent
layers the eﬀect obtained can change signiﬁcantly. The lower layers will give
more details, while the upper layer will give more general characteristics.
In this thesis, the interest is obtaining a texturized version of the original datasets.
The objects should still be interpretable but their texture should now be much
more complex, with changes in color and a more organic look.
Details on the mathematics behind Neural Style Transfer are in the Appendix.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 4
Results
The results are shown based on the research question that they answer. The
essential results are displayed here, while additional graphs and useful visualiza-
tions can be found in the Appendix. Section 4.1 is dedicated to the ﬁrst research
objective, while section 4.2 is focused on the second research objective.
In section 4.1, the ﬁrst part is dedicated to the validation of the models, com-
paring them in a traditional setting. The second part is, instead, dedicated to
measuring the robustness and compositional generalization of the models.
In section 4.2, the ﬁrst part shows the results for the representation bottleneck
study, while the second part looks into the eﬀects of texture complexity on the
model’s object-discovery performance.
4.1
First Research Objective
In this section, the results to the experiments for the ﬁrst research objective are
shown. Special attention is given to the comparison between models, datasets
and variants, to highlight the factors that cause the measured behavior. First
the models and metrics used are compared to each other. Then, robustness and
compositional generalization is evaluated in all models.
4.1.1
Initial Validation of the Models
From ﬁgure 4.1, the performance of the models across all datasets and metrics
can be evaluated.
GENESIS has the lowest overall performance on CLEVR, Multi-dSprites and
Tetrominoes. These are datasets that were not included in the original pape
from Engelcke et al. (2020b).
Slot Attention and MONet achieve comparable results. However, MONet has
==PAGE:62==
4.1 First Research Objective
49
CLEVR
Multi-dSprites Objects Room Shapestacks Tetrominoes
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ARI
CLEVR
Multi-dSprites Objects Room Shapestacks Tetrominoes
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
mSC
CLEVR
Multi-dSprites Objects Room Shapestacks Tetrominoes
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
SC
CLEVR
Multi-dSprites Objects Room Shapestacks Tetrominoes
10
3
10
2
MSE
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
Figure 4.1: Metrics of the models evaluated on the original datasets. The plots
show the median and the 95% conﬁdence interval with 10 random seeds. (ARI
↑, mSC ↑, SC ↑, MSE ↓)
more consistency across metrics compared to Slot Attention. Speciﬁcally, the
mSC and SC are lower for Slot Attention. This is a pattern, across datasets and
seeds that cannot be overlooked. Because of this inconsistency in the evaluation,
caused by how the segmentation cover measures how well a model is segmenting
the input, the metric loses some of its usefulness in the context of this study (see
Discussion in Chapter 5).
Overall, the results from literature have been achieved and the models have been
correctly implemented (see Appendix). GENESIS has the lowest performance
while MONet and Slot Attention are comparable, with MONet more consistent
across metrics.
Computing the correlation between metrics (ﬁgure 4.2) over all datasets and
models highlights that MSE and ARI are strongly correlated, while MSE and
the two SC ﬂavors are weakly correlated.
These results cannot stand on their own, otherwise further interpretation would
be impossible. Instead, the correlations computed for each model separately
==PAGE:63==
4.1 First Research Objective
50
ARI
mSC
SC
MSE
ARI
mSC
SC
MSE
28
25 -78
28
97 -19
25
97
-13
-78 -19 -13
(a) Overall
ARI
mSC
SC
MSE
ARI
mSC
SC
MSE
-2
10 -84
-2
96
26
10
96
19
-84 26
19
(b) Slot Attention
ARI
mSC
SC
MSE
ARI
mSC
SC
MSE
73
76
-11
73
91
-8
76
91
-2
-11
-8
-2
(c) GENESIS
ARI
mSC
SC
MSE
ARI
mSC
SC
MSE
77
82 -69
77
97 -68
82
97
-73
-69 -68 -73
(d) MONet
Figure 4.2: Correlation between metrics used for object discovery evaluation.
From the left: computed on all datasets and models, on Slot Attention, on
GENESIS, and on MONet.
show that Slot Attention and GENESIS have conﬂicting trends compared to
MONet. In Slot Attention MSE and ARI are strongly correlated, while the other
metrics are weakly correlated. In GENESIS, segmentation cover and ARI are
correlated, but MSE is weakly correlated with all other metrics. Finally, MONet
is a combination of the other two models, with all metrics strongly correlated
between each other. The cause of this behavior is related to how the models are
constructed and will be discussed later (see Discussion in Chapter 5).
Overall, these results highlight that visual complexity of the dataset does not
correlate with object discovery performance. Instead, hyper-parameter search
seems necessary to obtain acceptable results from object-centric models. Further-
more, the segmentation cover cannot be used consistently to evaluate models,
instead, ARI and MSE are more reliable metrics.
4.1.2
Evaluation of Robustness and Compositional Gener-
alization
Robustness
The robustness can be ﬁrst evaluated by observing how the ARI and the MSE
change when the models are tested on the variant datasets. From ﬁgure 4.3, all
models maintain similar performances under most variations, which indicates
that the models are robustly reconstructing the visual appearance and shape of
the objects.
In the global-level robustness case, the performance suﬀers most when the
Crop&Zoom variation is applied.
==PAGE:64==
4.1 First Research Objective
51
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ARI
CLEVR
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Multi-dSprites
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Shapestacks
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Tetrominoes
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
10
3
10
2
log10 MSE
CLEVR
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
10
3
10
2
Multi-dSprites
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
10
2
Shapestacks
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
10
3
10
2
Tetrominoes
Original
Num. Objects
Style Transfer
Change Color
Occlusion
Crop&Zoom
Add Shape
Figure 4.3: ARI and MSE performance of the models when variants are applied
to the datasets. The plots show the median and the 95% conﬁdence interval
with 10 random seeds. (ARI ↑, MSE ↓)
Comparatively, increasing the number of objects in CLEVR does not aﬀect the
ability to reconstruct the objects as much. The performance when more objects
are present in the scene is aﬀected by the mechanism used by the models to
adapt to a change in number of slots at test time and the number of objects
that were already present during training. In this scenario, MONet manages to
achieve better MSE but worse ARI compared to Slot Attention.
The Occlusion aﬀects Tetrominoes more compared to the other datasets, likely
due to the tetris pieces being more easily mistaken for others when occluded
and the dataset not having occlusions in the training data (see Discussion and
Appendix).
In the object-level robustness case, the Style Transfer variation has the
strongest eﬀect. The smaller decrease in performance compared to the global-
level robustness is to be attributed, at least in part, to the smaller footprint of
the object-level changes, resulting in fewer pixels that can inﬂuence the ARI
measure.
Overall, all models’ ability to discover objects is fairly robust to both global-level
variations and object-level variations. There is no clear trend indicating that
models are more robust against object-level variations.
From ﬁgure 4.4, the overall performance of the downstream model can be
evaluated.
Downstream performance helps to understand the eﬀects of the variations on
the object representations. The results shown here are from the MLP model only,
==PAGE:65==
4.1 First Research Objective
52
size
material
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
accuracy/R2
CLEVR
shape
x
y
color
scale
0.0
0.5
1.0
Multi-dSprites
size
shape
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Shapestacks
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Tetrominoes
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
VAE
VAE (broadcast)
size
material
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
accuracy/R2
CLEVR
shape
x
y
color
scale
0.0
0.5
1.0
Multi-dSprites
size
shape
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Shapestacks
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Tetrominoes
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
VAE
VAE (broadcast)
size
material
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
accuracy/R2
CLEVR
shape
x
y
color
scale
0.0
0.5
1.0
Multi-dSprites
size
shape
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Shapestacks
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Tetrominoes
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
VAE
VAE (broadcast)
Figure 4.4: Downstream performance of the MLP trained using representations
from object-centric models and baselines, for each feature of the objects in the
dataset. R2 for numerical features, Accuracy for categorical. From top: trained
and tested on the original dataset, trained on the original dataset and tested on
all variants, trained and tested on the same dataset. The plots show the median
and the 95% conﬁdence interval with 10 random seeds. (R2 ↑, Accuracy ↑)
as the Linear model performs very similarly overall (see Appendix).
When the MLP is trained and tested on the original dataset (ﬁrst row of
ﬁgure 4.4), the representations obtained from Slot Attention and MONet achieve
the best results on all datasets and features, with the exception of Shapestacks.
GENESIS, instead, achieves worse performance, often not better than a random
guess (see table 3.1).
==PAGE:66==
4.1 First Research Objective
53
0.0
0.5
1.0
In-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
0.0
0.5
1.0
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
Modified
Un-Modified
0.0
0.5
1.0
In-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
0.0
0.5
1.0
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
Modified
Un-Modified
0.0
0.5
1.0
In-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
0.0
0.5
1.0
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.0
0.5
1.0
In-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
0.0
0.5
1.0
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
Figure 4.5: Scatter plots of the overall downstream performance for the MLP
with out-of-distribution score being the score on the variant datasets, while in-
distribution score the score on the original dataset. For object-level robustness,
the color highlights the score for the objects that have been modiﬁed. (Left):
downstream model trained on the original dataset and evaluated on all variants.
(Right): downstream model trained and tested on the same variant of the
dataset. (Top): object-level robustness. (Bottom): global-level robustness. (R2
↑, Accuracy ↑)
The baselines’ performance shows a trend consistent to the ordering of the objects
(see table 3.1). The feature priority is the one seen on the x-axis: size, then
material, shape, position, color, etc.. When this trend seems to be broken is in
Tetrominoes, where the color has higher accuracy than shape. However, this is
again consistent with the results from table 3.1. This dataset also shows that the
baselines are capable of achieving signiﬁcantly better performance compared to
the educated guess, at least in some cases. However, this is still not enough to be
able to draw a deﬁnitive conclusion regarding the quality of the representations
obtained from the baselines.
When the MLP is trained on the original dataset and tested on the variants
(second row of ﬁgure 4.4), the performance is reduced overall and falls signiﬁcantly
for the baselines and GENESIS (see ﬁgure 4.5). When retrained on the variant
dataset (third row of ﬁgure 4.4) the performance improves, suggesting that the
==PAGE:67==
4.1 First Research Objective
54
(a) MONet
(b) Slot Attention
(c) GENESIS
Figure 4.6: Performance on the original dataset. For each pair of columns, on
the left the original and on the right the output from the model. The pairs of
columns alternate to show the image and the segmentation mask.
representations are not being strongly aﬀected by the variations and can still
encode the required information. Once the downstream model trains on the
representations it can learn to predict the features correctly.
A crucial result for the object-level robustness is that the features of un-modiﬁed
objects are being predicted in the variant datasets with the same Accuracy
and R2 as the features of the objects from the original dataset (see ﬁgure 4.5).
Feature prediction on objects seen during the training of the object-centric model
are not aﬀected by foreign objects being included in the scene at test time.
It was shown that object-centric models are measurably robust to object-level
changes. Furthermore, robustness to global-level variations is primarily dependent
on the type of transformation being applied to the image, suggesting that the
model cannot automatically learn to be invariant to such changes, instead, they
should be included in the training dataset.
Qualitative Evaluation.
Some samples from the best and worst performing
models are shown to get a more intuitive understanding of the performance. The
dataset CLEVR is chosen, as it provides good examples for the observations
made from the numerical results.
From ﬁgure 4.6, the performance of the three models on the original dataset
can be appreciated. Slot Attention has more soft masks, that bleed into the
background. Instead, MONet and GENESIS have dedicated networks to generate
the masks, and this results in more sharp edges. It could be desirable to have
more sharp edges if the objective is visual object segmentation, however, this is
not a requirement for object representations. Furthermore, GENESIS collapses
==PAGE:68==
4.1 First Research Objective
55
(a) MONet
(b) Slot Attention
(c) GENESIS
Figure 4.7: Reconstruction performance when the dataset has more objects.
all the objects in one single slot, segregation is not achieved, and object-centric
representations are, therefore, impossible. It is important to note that hyper-
parameters for this dataset were not highly optimized. More discussion on the
slots collapsing in chapter 4.2.
Another interesting qualitative evaluation is in the number of objects. In ﬁgure 4.7
it is possible to appreciate how the models adapt to the challenge of both having
more slots in the architecture compared to training time and having a diﬀerent
distribution in the test set compared to the training set. GENESIS fails to
generalize because it cannot separate the objects in diﬀerent slots, so it is unable
to reconstruct more objects.
MONet and Slot Attention display the trend
seen from the ARI and MSE: the visual appearance of the objects is better
reconstructed by MONet, while the shape by Slot Attention. Some objects are
also completely ignored, showing that the models can in-paint the background.
(a) MONet
(b) Slot Attention
(c) GENESIS
Figure 4.8: Reconstruction performance when one object has a diﬀerent texture.
Finally, for the object-level robustness, it is interesting to look at the style
transfer, in ﬁgure 4.8. GENESIS suﬀers from the same problems because of the
==PAGE:69==
4.1 First Research Objective
56
performance obtained during training. For Slot Attention and MONet, the ﬁrst
thing to notice is that the object shape is mostly being reconstructed correctly
even for those objects that have had their texture changed. All other objects
do not suﬀer from the new texture. This shows how the models are capable of
segregating each object independently of small changes that would otherwise
move the samples outside the training distribution. These results reﬂect what
was seen in the ARI, MSE and also downstream performance evaluation.
Models are particularly robust to changes they have a bias to be invariant to.
Compositional Generalization
GENESIS
MONet
Slot Attention
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
ARI
Training
GENESIS
MONet
Slot Attention
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Heldout
GENESIS
MONet
Slot Attention
10
3
log10 MSE
Training
GENESIS
MONet
Slot Attention
10
3
Heldout
Shapestacks No Green Cylinders
Multi-dSprites No Green Squares
Tetrominoes No Green Z or S pieces
Figure 4.9: ARI and MSE performance of the models when variants are applied
to the datasets. The plots show the median and the 95% conﬁdence interval
with 10 random seeds. (ARI ↑, MSE ↓)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Training score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Heldout score
ARI
10
4
10
3
10
2
Training score
10
4
10
3
10
2
MSE
Shapestacks No Green Cylinders
Multi-dSprites No Green Squares
Tetrominoes No Green Z or S pieces
Figure 4.10: Comparative ARI and MSE performance between training dataset
and heldout dataset. (ARI ↑, MSE ↓)
In this section, the compositional generalization performance will be evaluated.
This part will focus on a comparison between the performance of the object-centric
==PAGE:70==
4.1 First Research Objective
57
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Training score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Heldout score
Accuracy
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Training score
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
R2
Shapestacks No Green Cylinders
Multi-dSprites No Green Squares
Tetrominoes No Green Z or S pieces
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Training score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Heldout score
Accuracy
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Training score
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
R2
Shapestacks No Green Cylinders
Multi-dSprites No Green Squares
Tetrominoes No Green Z or S pieces
Figure 4.11: Comparative performance of the downstream model between
training dataset and its complementary. (Left): Trained on the training dataset,
tested on the heldout dataset. (Right): Trained and tested on the same dataset.
models on the datasets used for training and their respective complementary. This
allows for direct evaluation of the performance in the compositional generalization
setting because the heldout version of the datasets will contain objects that have
features never seen together in the training.
Object Discovery. From ﬁgure 4.9, the overall performance of the models on
the training dataset and the complementary heldout dataset can be measured.
The trend is similar to the one seen with the original datasets, with the models
obtaining low performance for the datasets for which hyper-parameters were not
available and comparable performance to literature for the other datasets.
From ﬁgure 4.10, it can be observed that, across models and datasets, the
performance is consistent between training and heldout datasets, suggesting that
the models are equally as capable to discover and reconstruct the objects present
in the scene in the two datasets.
Representations. The analysis of the object representations reveals that the
models are capable of correctly capturing all the required information from
the scene. Speciﬁcally, ﬁgure 4.11 shows the performance of the downstream
model when it has been trained on the training datasets and tested on the
heldout datasets. All models achieve good performance with most datasets. This
is particularly important, because the downstream model has never seen that
speciﬁc feature combination, e.g. green squares in Multi-dSprites, but it can still
achieve the same feature prediction performance even when objects with the
unseen feature combination are shown.
The performance suﬀers signiﬁcantly for Shapestacks No Green Cylinders, specif-
ically when the size and the shape are predicted (see ﬁgure C.19 in Appendix for
==PAGE:71==
4.1 First Research Objective
58
detail). This behavior is consistent across models. Crucially, the color, which is
one of the features that is used to deﬁne the heldout dataset, is not aﬀected. This
shows that the feature was correctly generalized from the other shapes to the
cylinders, which were never seen in the color green. To better understand why
this is happening, the performance is also evaluated when the downstream model
is trained and tested on the same datasets. Now, the performance improves,
highlighting that the object-centric models are correctly capturing the features
even in the Shapestacks dataset but the downstream model does not manage to
generalize correctly.
Overall, feature compositionality is achieved by all object-centric models in all
datasets.
(a) MONet
(b) Slot Attention
(c) GENESIS
Figure 4.12: Reconstruction performance in the heldout datasets for Shapes-
tacks. For each pair of columns, on the left the original and on the right the
output from the model. The pairs of columns alternate to show the image and
the segmentation mask.
Qualitive Evaluation. In the qualitative evaluation of compositional general-
ization it is possible to appreciate how the models are easily reconstructing the
visual appearance and the shape of the object whose feature combination was
not shown during training. Although overall performance is low on Shapestacks,
the reconstructions are not aﬀected by the new color that has been given to the
cylinder.
Summary.
Overall, the models are capable to discover objects both in the
traditional datasets and the ones where variants have been applied. ARI and
MSE are the most consistent metrics across models. GENESIS struggles the
most because it cannot segregate objects. Compositional generalization and
robustness are both achieved by the object-centric models to varying degrees
of success, showing that they are capable of generalizing outside of the training
distribution.
==PAGE:72==
4.2 Second Research Objective
59
4.2
Second Research Objective
In this section, the results for the second research objective are presented. The
analysis starts with the exploration of diﬀerent architectures, to gain insights
into why the models segregate the input. Then, the analysis focuses on the role
of texture complexity. In both cases, ﬁrst the metrics measured and then the
reconstructions computed by the models are shown and commented, to better
understand the behavior of those models that succeed and those that fail.
4.2.1
Reconstruction Bottleneck Study
The study on the reconstruction bottlenecks starts from measuring the ability of
the models to reconstruct the visual appearance and the shape of the objects
present in the scene. Of particular interest is their ability to still separate
the objects in diﬀerent slots. This can be measured primarily using ARI or
SC. Instead, the MSE can only be used to make sure that the models are still
reconstructing the image correctly.
When experimenting with diﬀerent architectures, a big factor is the ability of
the model to properly carry out the learning process. Deep learning models are
trained with backpropagation, and if some of the gradients could explode and
cause the model to stop learning, because further updates to the loss are not
possible. This is what happened with Slot Attention, for some of the architectures
with bigger latent space.
In ﬁgure 4.13, the ARI and MSE computed on the validation set during training
is calculated. The ARI is consistently high for Slot Attention, when the training
has succeeded. Instead, for MONet, there is a consistent trend. For CLEVR
6, the more visually complex model, having a big latent space, or having the
MLP architecture, causes the model to suﬀer from slot collapse. The ARI is
signiﬁcantly lower compared to the traditional architecture. Two facts should be
noted: (1) the ARI for the broadcast architecture in MONet with the normal
latent space size suddenly drops after 800 000 steps, (2) the MSE increases when
the ARI goes down. Although the model is still minimizing the loss (see ﬁgure
C.20 and ﬁgure C.21 in Appendix), both metrics used to measure how well the
model is discovering the objects present in the scene show that the model is
beginning to fail.
The other factor that inﬂuences the performance is the dataset. Models are con-
sistently capable of segregating objects from Multi-dSprites across architectures.
This suggests that there is a stronger inductive bias coming from Multi-dSprites,
==PAGE:73==
4.2 Second Research Objective
60
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
ARI
Broadcast
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
MLP
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
ARI
Broadcast
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
MSE
Broadcast
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
MLP
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
MSE
Broadcast
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ARI
Broadcast
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
MLP
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ARI
Broadcast
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
MSE
Broadcast
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
MLP
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
MSE
Broadcast
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
Figure 4.13: ARI and MSE measured on the validation set during training.
(Top): MONet. (Bottom): Slot Attention. The columns show the diﬀerent
decoder architectures (broadcast or MLP), while the colors are diﬀerent latent
space size. Bigger ARI is better. Smaller MSE is better.(ARI ↑, MSE ↓)
compared to CLEVR that leads to the objects being segregated in diﬀerent slots.
Overall, the models collapse the slot representations when they are overly
powerful. This can happen when they have a big decoder and a big latent space,
and is worsened if they have enough time to learn. Qualitative Evaluation.
Now the reconstructions are visualized, to qualitatively evaluate whether the
models are behaving as expected by the metrics discussed in the previous
paragraph. From ﬁgure 4.14, the model that fails collapses the reconstructions in
one single slot, while the other keeps the objects separate. This is the expected
==PAGE:74==
4.2 Second Research Objective
61
behavior from the ARI.
(a) MONet, Broadcast, Big Latent
(b) Slot Attention, Broadcast, Big Latent
Figure 4.14: Reconstruction of the visual appearance (top) and shape (bottom)
for a model that fails and one that succeeds. Each column is a slot. Linear
combination of the visual appearance, weighted with the masks is used to
reconstruct the original image.
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Step
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ARI
CLEVR 6
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Step
Multi-dSprites
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Step
1e6
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ARI
CLEVR 6
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Step
1e6
Multi-dSprites
Slot Attention
Monet
Normal
Big Decoder
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Step
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
MSE
CLEVR 6
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Step
Multi-dSprites
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Step
1e6
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
MSE
CLEVR 6
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Step
1e6
Multi-dSprites
Slot Attention
Monet
Normal
Big Decoder
Figure 4.15: ARI and MSE measured on the validation set during training.
(Top): Slot Attention. (Bottom): MONet. The columns show the diﬀerent
decoder datasets, while the colors are diﬀerent decoder architectures. (ARI ↑,
MSE ↓)
==PAGE:75==
4.2 Second Research Objective
62
4.2.2
Texture Complexity Study
In this section the results of the texture complexity study are shown and analyzed.
In this part of the study, Neural Style Transfer is applied to every sample in the
dataset and the eﬀects of diﬀerent models architecture is analyzed.
From the ARI and MSE, seen in ﬁgure 4.15, Slot Attention manages to achieve
better ARI performance in both datasets, when neural style transfer is applied.
However, the best ARI corresponds to the worst MSE, suggesting that there is
a trade-oﬀbetween visual reconstruction and object segregation. MONet has
the smallest ARI in both datasets, but achieves the best performance in MSE.
Finally, there is no clear diﬀerence between architectures.
These results indicate that Multi-dSprites with neural style transfer is a more
challenging dataset for object segregation. The two models behave diﬀerently,
thanks to the fundamental diﬀerence in their architectures: Slot Attention man-
ages to correctly segregate the objects by trading oﬀprecise visual reconstruction.
(a) MONet, Normal
(b) Slot Attention, Normal
Figure 4.16: From the left, each row is a diﬀerent sample. For the columns,
from the left: the original image, the full reconstructed image, the reconstructed
visual appearances of the 7 objects, and reconstructed shape of the 7 objects.
Qualitative Analysis.
When looking at the reconstructions from Slot At-
tention and MONet in CLEVR 6 (seen in ﬁgure 4.16), it becomes more clear
==PAGE:76==
4.2 Second Research Objective
63
what a successful model does when learning to represent objects with complex
textures, compared to one that fails. MONet tends to segment the image along
every small line formed by the neural style transfer. This results in an extreme
over-segmentation, but also very good overall reconstruction performance. The
component VAE is reconstructing vague colors that are then selected by the
attention module. Instead, Slot Attention is sacriﬁcing precision in the recon-
struction of every curve and line in the input, focusing instead on bigger features.
This allows it to correctly segregate the objects in diﬀerent slots.
Precise reconstruction of the image results in over-segmentation and failure to
segregate. Instead, the model that focused more on broad features managed
to correctly represent each object in a distinct slot, albeit sacriﬁcing the visual
reconstruction performance.
Summary.
Overall, model architecture and hyper-parameters are fundamental
factors in determining whether a model can segregate successfully. Models with
more capacity and those that have been given more time to learn tend to fail
segregation. Increased texture complexity is more problematic for MONet than
Slot Attention and the architecture is less relevant.
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 5
Discussion
In this chapter, the results will be discussed in depth. The diﬀerent studies
carried out in each research objective will be related to each other and to theory.
Overall observations and useful conclusions will be drawn. The discussion will
be divided in the two research questions.
5.1
Robustness and Compositional Generaliza-
tion
Can object-centric models achieve good robustness and compositional generaliza-
tion performance? Performance has been measured using ARI, MSE, SC, mSC,
and the performance of a downstream feature prediction task. The ﬁrst four
metrics are used to ﬁnd if the model can discover objects, while the last one
measures the quality of the obtained object representations.
The results found in section 4.1.1 suggest that SC and mSC cannot be used
reliably to evaluate object-discovery, because they do not account for
the way that some models (Slot Attention) segment the input. Slot Attention
generates soft segmentation masks that bleed over the background, making the
intersection over union used by SC and mSC much lower than otherwise expected.
Together with the fact that the ARI in GENESIS is strongly correlated to both
SC and mSC makes ARI a more consistent way to evaluate object discovery.
Together with the results on the downstream performance of the three models,
these results suggest that using the ground-truth segmentation masks and
static images alone for evaluation is not enough. Object-centric models do not
necessarily need to segment the input perfectly in order to discover and represent
its objects correctly. Accounting for such imperfections should be done through
==PAGE:78==
5.1 Robustness and Compositional Generalization
65
higher-level contextual clues. If temporal dynamics are included, this context
could come from behavior or interaction.
The performance measured from the baselines is not entirely to be attributed to
the sorting of the objects. It could be said, using the results from Tetrominoes
(the accuracy of the color), that some information is being encoded in the latent
space of the VAE that can be used to predict the properties of the objects
present in the scene. However, this result is not strong enough to be able to
draw deﬁnitive statements and conclusions when the variants are applied. This
issue could be addressed in future work.
In the global-level robustness part of the study, the models perform well for those
variations they learned to be invariant to thanks to the training dataset. This is
evidenced by the occlusion and the Crop&Zoom variants.
In Tetrominoes, the object discovery performance is much lower across all models
when the occlusion is applied at test time. This is caused by two factors. The ﬁrst
is that the tetris pieces are multi-stable when they are slightly occluded: they are
equally likely to be many diﬀerent tetris pieces. The other is that occlusions are
absent during training. Both indicate that the nature of the dataset is inﬂuencing
the ability of the models to be robust under this transformation.
Additionally, the models were never trained to be invariant to the drastic changes
in the sizes of the objects experienced with the crop&zoom variant, which results
in poor performance. This argument is less strong, because there is no dataset
that shows a counter-trend and can only be compared to the other variants.
For the number of objects variant, comparing the metrics with the qualitative
results helps draw some interesting conclusions regarding the diﬀerent models.
GENESIS struggles the most, with a sharp decrease in ARI caused by the
inability to correctly segregate the objects. Instead, MONet achieves better
MSE but worse ARI than Slot Attention. One hypothesis is that MONet tries
to use all the slots available and ends up over-segmenting the objects, instead
Slot Attention has more of a hard time adapting to the increased number of
slots because it is based on instance slots. This pushes Slot Attention to try
and use the same number of slots used during training, which worsens the visual
reconstruction. This shows that the representation format is also playing an
important role in the segregation and reconstruction of the objects.
The object-level robustness is particularly important, because it shows how the
models are not being aﬀected by small changes to the input, instead, they
correctly reconstruct and represent the objects that come from the training
distribution. This result is particularly strong when the color has changed or the
texture of the object is diﬀerent. Together with the compositional generalization
results, it shows that the shape is being processed separately from the texture and
color of the object, because it can still be reconstructed when these properties
==PAGE:79==
5.2 Model architecture and dataset visual complexity
66
are changed.
In the compositional generalization study it has been shown that even when the
object-centric models are trained on a dataset where a feature combination is
never seen (e.g. green squares), and the downstream model is trained on the
same dataset (e.g. it never sees samples with green squares), both the shape and
color prediction performance do not suﬀer signiﬁcantly when being tested. The
model is capable of correctly generalizing.
The poor performance achieved when Shapestacks with No Green Cylinders
is being tested can be explained. Eliminating the green cylinders reduces the
number of samples with cylinders in the training set, to the point where the
class imbalance stops the downstream model from correctly learning how to
predict its features. This is evidenced by the fact that the color does not suﬀer
signiﬁcantly, while the other properties do. The color is the only property that
can be learned from any object shape, while shape and size and strongly tied to
the shape of the object.
The results from the compositional generalization study show that the common
format property is working as intended. The model has never seen a green
square, but it has seen green circles and red squares. If each object in the image
had a separate format, it would not be possible to generalize properties from
one class of objects to another. Each slot would specialize in the encoding of a
single object class and could never learn from the others. The common format
property of object-centric models reveals to be essential to guarantee feature
compositionality, as expected from the literature.
The ﬁrst research objective is reached. The models are robust to object-level
variations, while global-level robustness is dependent on the variant
being applied. The models are capable of compositional generalization, thanks
to the common and distributed format of the slots.
5.2
Model architecture and dataset visual com-
plexity
Can the model segregate objects correctly when their architecture is changed
or when the visual complexity of the datasets is changed? The object-discovery
performance of the models is measured across several datasets and with diﬀerent
architectures, meant to simulate a gradual increase in complexity.
From the results, the conclusions from the reconstruction bottleneck paper can
==PAGE:80==
5.2 Model architecture and dataset visual complexity
67
be corroborated (Engelcke et al., 2020a). The model architecture, together with
the visual complexity of the dataset, is fundamental in determining the success
of the segregation of the objects.
Datasets with more well-deﬁned objects make it easy for the models to segregate
the objects.
A bigger capacity of the model is correlated with a quicker collapse of the slots.
This is consistent with the results: the broadcast decoder and a smaller latent
space are less likely to make the model experience slot collapse. Seeing how the
performance becomes worse the more the model trains, shows that the learning
objective is not suited for segregation of the objects.
Additionally,
datasets provide a strong inductive bias for segregation. This is evidence to
support the idea that when the architecture of the training parameters slows
down learning, the objects tend to be segregated into diﬀerent slots. A learning
objective that accounts for segregation
The texture complexity study shows that when the texture introduces many small
details, object segregation is only achieved if the model can ignore the details
and focus on large features. These results corroborate the ones found in the
reconstruction bottleneck study. The objective function is not providing any
explicit bias for the model to segregate the objects correctly and instead, it is
the dataset and the architecture itself that determines segregation.
Both research objectives point to the current object-centric models being able to
achieve the results expected from the literature only to a certain extent. The
learning objectives used lead to models that are not resilient to hyper-parameter
changes or complex datasets.
One conclusion is that visual reconstruction might not be the only inductive bias
that should be used to learn good object representations. The task should be
changed. One approach could be making the training completely or partially
supervised, to push segregation more explicitly. Alternatives are using contrastive
learning or temporal dynamics to abstract from the visual details of the scene
and focus on the relevant concepts that deﬁne an object.
The object-centric approach reveals to be successful in achieving
generalization outside of the training distribution, particularly when
changes involve single objects present in the input.
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 6
Future Work
From the ﬁrst research objective, it is apparent that novel methods to more
fairly compare traditional representation learning models and object-centric
models need to be developed. When feature prediction is still a meaningful
task, deterministic matching cannot be used. Instead, the feature prediction
task should be permutation invariant, and be applied without any changes to
both object-centric and traditional representations. Such a model could be a set
prediction network, that takes as input the full representation of the image and
predicts the features for each object (Zhang et al., 2019, Kosiorek et al., 2020,
Huang et al., 2020). Beyond feature prediction tasks, the object representations
should be evaluated with abstract visual reasoning (van Steenkiste et al., 2020b),
reinforcement learning or relational tasks (Kipf et al., 2018).
New forms of compositionality that involve entire objects and not only the feature
that they are made of should be tested, as object-centric models are particularly
suited for this type of generalization.
From the second research objective, the model architecture and hyper-parameters
could be tuned for each dataset, however, a more deﬁnitive solution would be
to change the learning objective, going beyond static images and including the
segregation of the objects explicitily. This can be done by including temporal
dynamics, to go beyond texture for object discovery. In practice, this can be
done by extending the models to video sequences, and reinforcement learning
tasks (Kipf et al., 2019, Ha and Schmidhuber, 2018).
==PAGE:82==
Chapter 7
Conclusions
This thesis set out to achieve two objectives. Measure to what extent object-
centric models can generalize outside of the training distribution and shed light
on the fundamental mechanisms that make these models work in the ﬁrst place.
To answer the ﬁrst research objective, a systematic and rigorous way to measure
the ability of the models to discover and represent objects has been deﬁned.
The downstream task has been shown to be capable of comparing object-centric
models in their ability to represent the input.
Limitations to the metrics
introduced have been discovered and clear practical suggestions have been made
to address them in future work.
The object-centric models have been found to be capable of generalization. The
representations of the objects seen during training are not strongly aﬀected by
the introduction of new shapes or the changing of the color and texture of some
of the objects present in the scene. When the changes aﬀect the entire input,
the models are robust to transformations that are included in the training set.
Additionally, the models extend the feature compositionality to multiple-object
datasets, not only by reconstructing the images, but also correctly representing
unseen feature combinations.
The ﬁndings show that object segregation and common format in the repre-
sentations are key ingredients to the success of generalization in object-centric
models.
The mechanisms behind segregation are explored in the second research objective.
Model architecture, learning hyper-parameters, and the visual appearance of the
images in the dataset strongly inﬂuence the ability of the models to segregate.
Architectures with bigger capacity, training models for longer, and having datasets
with complex textures are all factors linked to the loss of the ability to segregate
objects.
==PAGE:83==
70
This work has gathered experimental and theoretical evidence to establish
rigorous methods for evaluation of object representations and generalization.
Key insights into the design of object-centric models have been discovered.
The success of object-centric models shows a promising direction of future
research that will make deep learning models deployable in the real world.
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen,
Craig Citro, Greg S Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeﬀrey Dean, Matthieu Devin,
et al. Tensorﬂow: Large-scale machine learning on heterogeneous distributed
systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.04467, 2016.
Pablo Arbeláez, Michael Maire, Charless Fowlkes, and Jitendra Malik. Contour
Detection and Hierarchical Image Segmentation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 33(5):898–916, May 2011. ISSN 1939-3539.
doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2010.161.
Peter Battaglia, Razvan Pascanu, Matthew Lai, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and ko-
ray kavukcuoglu. Interaction Networks for Learning about Objects, Relations
and Physics. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon, and R. Gar-
nett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2016.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation Learning:
A Review and New Perspectives. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 35(8):1798–1828, August 2013. ISSN 1939-3539. doi:
10.1109/TPAMI.2013.50.
Chris Burgess and Hyunjik Kim. 3D shapes dataset, 2018.
Christopher P Burgess, Loic Matthey, Nicholas Watters, Rishabh Kabra, Irina
Higgins, Matt Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Monet: Unsupervised scene
decomposition and representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.11390, 2019.
Mickaël Chen, Thierry Artières, and Ludovic Denoyer. Unsupervised object
segmentation by redrawing. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
F. dAlché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
Tian Qi Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger Grosse, and David Duvenaud. Isolating
Sources of Disentanglement in Variational Autoencoders. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Karl Cobbe, Chris Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging Pro-
cedural Generation to Benchmark Reinforcement Learning. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2048–2056. PMLR, November 2020.
==PAGE:85==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
72
Stanislas Dehaene. How We Learn: Why Brains Learn Better than Any Machine
... for Now. Viking, New York, 2020.
Cian Eastwood and Christopher KI Williams. A framework for the quantitative
evaluation of disentangled representations. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2018.
Martin Engelcke, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Reconstruction bottle-
necks in object-centric generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.06245,
2020a.
Martin Engelcke, Adam R. Kosiorek, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner.
GENESIS: Generative Scene Inference and Sampling with Object-Centric
Latent Representations. In ICLR 2020, 2020b.
Martin Engelcke, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. GENESIS-V2: Inferring
unordered object representations without iterative reﬁnement. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.09958, 2021.
SM Ali Eslami, Nicolas Heess, Theophane Weber, Yuval Tassa, David Szepesvari,
Geoﬀrey E Hinton, et al. Attend, infer, repeat: Fast scene understanding with
generative models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
pages 3225–3233, 2016.
SM Ali Eslami, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Frederic Besse, Fabio Viola, Ari S
Morcos, Marta Garnelo, Avraham Ruderman, Andrei A Rusu, Ivo Danihelka,
Karol Gregor, et al. Neural scene representation and rendering. Science, 360
(6394):1204–1210, 2018.
Babak Esmaeili, Hao Wu, Sarthak Jain, Alican Bozkurt, N Siddharth, Brooks
Paige, and Dana H Brooks. Structured Disentangled Representations. page 10.
Leon Gatys, Alexander Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. A Neural Algorithm of
Artistic Style. Journal of Vision, 16(12):326–326, August 2016. ISSN 1534-7362.
doi: 10.1167/16.12.326.
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. MIT
Press, 2016.
Anirudh Goyal, Alex Lamb, Jordan Hoﬀmann, Shagun Sodhani, Sergey Levine,
Yoshua Bengio, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Recurrent independent mechanisms.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.10893, 2019.
Klaus Greﬀ, Antti Rasmus, Mathias Berglund, Tele Hao, Harri Valpola, and Jür-
gen Schmidhuber. Tagger: Deep Unsupervised Perceptual Grouping. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
==PAGE:86==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
73
Klaus Greﬀ, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Neural expectation
maximization. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, pages 6694–6704, 2017.
Klaus Greﬀ, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Rishabh Kabra, Nick Watters, Christo-
pher Burgess, Daniel Zoran, Loic Matthey, Matthew Botvinick, and Alexander
Lerchner. Multi-object representation learning with iterative variational in-
ference. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2424–2433.
PMLR, 2019.
Klaus Greﬀ, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. On the binding
problem in artiﬁcial neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.05208, 2020.
Oliver Groth, Fabian B. Fuchs, Ingmar Posner, and Andrea Vedaldi. ShapeStacks:
Learning Vision-Based Physical Intuition for Generalised Object Stacking.
In Vittorio Ferrari, Martial Hebert, Cristian Sminchisescu, and Yair Weiss,
editors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2018, volume 11205, pages 724–739. Springer
International Publishing, Cham, 2018.
David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World Models. arXiv:1803.10122 [cs, stat],
March 2018. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.1207631.
Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot,
Matthew Botvinick, Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. Beta-VAE:
Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational framework. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Qian Huang, Horace He, Abhay Singh, Yan Zhang, Ser Nam Lim, and Austin R.
Benson. Better Set Representations For Relational Reasoning. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:895–905, 2020.
Lawrence Hubert and Phipps Arabie. Comparing partitions. Journal of Classiﬁca-
tion, 2(1):193–218, December 1985. ISSN 1432-1343. doi: 10.1007/BF01908075.
Dieuwke Hupkes, Verna Dankers, Mathijs Mul, and Elia Bruni. Compositionality
Decomposed: How do Neural Networks Generalise? (Extended Abstract).
In Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
volume 5, pages 5065–5069, July 2020. doi: 10.24963/ijcai.2020/708.
Alexis Jacq and Winston Herring. Neural Transfer Using PyTorch, 2021.
Rishabh Kabra, Chris Burgess, Loic Matthey, Raphael Lopez Kaufman, Klaus
Greﬀ, Malcolm Reynolds, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-Object Datasets.
2019.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational Bayes. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
==PAGE:87==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
74
Thomas Kipf, Ethan Fetaya, Kuan-Chieh Wang, Max Welling, and Richard
Zemel. Neural relational inference for interacting systems. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2688–2697. PMLR, 2018.
Thomas Kipf, Elise van der Pol, and Max Welling. Contrastive learning of
structured world models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.12247, 2019.
Adam R Kosiorek, Hyunjik Kim, Ingmar Posner, and Yee Whye Teh. Sequential
attend, infer, repeat: Generative modelling of moving objects. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1806.01794, 2018.
Adam R. Kosiorek, Hyunjik Kim, and Danilo J. Rezende. Conditional Set
Generation with Transformers. arXiv:2006.16841 [cs], July 2020.
Jannik Kossen, Karl Stelzner, Marcel Hussing, Claas Voelcker, and Kristian
Kersting. Structured object-aware physics prediction for video modeling and
planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.02425, 2019.
H. W. Kuhn. The Hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval Research
Logistics Quarterly, 2(1-2):83–97, 1955. ISSN 1931-9193. doi: 10.1002/nav.
3800020109.
Abhishek Kumar, Prasanna Sattigeri, and Avinash Balakrishnan. Variational
inference of disentangled latent concepts from unlabeled observations. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Nicolas Le Roux, Nicolas Heess, Jamie Shotton, and John Winn. Learning
a generative model of images by factoring appearance and shape. Neural
Computation, 23(3):593–650, 2011.
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard
Schölkopf, and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the
unsupervised learning of disentangled representations. In International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahen-
dran, Georg Heigold, Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf.
Object-centric learning with slot attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.15055,
2020.
Sindy Löwe, Klaus Greﬀ, Rico Jonschkowski, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas
Kipf. Learning object-centric video models by contrasting sets. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.10287, 2020.
Loic Matthey, Irina Higgins, Demis Hassabis, and Alexander Lerchner. dSprites:
Disentanglement Testing Sprites Dataset. 2017.
==PAGE:88==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
OpenAI, Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung,
Przemysław Dębiak, Christy Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq
Hashme, Chris Hesse, Rafal Józefowicz, Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub
Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique P. d O. Pinto, Jonathan Raiman, Tim
Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever,
Jie Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with Large Scale Deep
Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1912.06680 [cs, stat], December 2019.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury,
Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca
Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning
library. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01703, 2019.
Evan Racah and Sarath Chandar. Slot contrastive networks: A contrastive
approach for representing objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.09294, 2020.
Karl Ridgeway and Michael C Mozer. Learning Deep Disentangled Embeddings
with the F-Statistic Loss. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2018.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-Net: Convolutional
Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation. In Nassir Navab, Joachim
Hornegger, William M. Wells, and Alejandro F. Frangi, editors, Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2015, volume
9351, pages 234–241. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2015. ISBN
978-3-319-24573-7 978-3-319-24574-4. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4_28.
Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Jonathan Godwin, Tobias Pfaﬀ, Rex Ying, Jure
Leskovec, and Peter Battaglia. Learning to Simulate Complex Physics with
Graph Networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
8459–8468. PMLR, November 2020.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal
Kalchbrenner, Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representa-
tion learning. Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(5):612–634, 2021.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding Machine Learning:
From Theory to Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2014.
ISBN 978-1-107-29801-9. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781107298019.
Connor Shorten and Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar. A survey on Image Data Aug-
mentation for Deep Learning. Journal of Big Data, 6(1):60, July 2019. ISSN
2196-1115. doi: 10.1186/s40537-019-0197-0.
Karen Simonyan. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image
Recognition. 2015.
==PAGE:89==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
76
Elizabeth S. Spelke. Principles of Object Perception. Cognitive Science, 14:
29–56, 1990. ISSN 0364-0213. doi: 10.1016/0364-0213(90)90025-R.
Karl Stelzner, Robert Peharz, and Kristian Kersting. Faster Attend-Infer-Repeat
with Tractable Probabilistic Models. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan
Salakhudinov, editors, Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on
Machine Learning, volume 97, pages 5966–5975. PMLR, June 2019.
Zoltán Gendler Szabó. Compositionality. In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University, fall 2020 edition, 2020.
Ernő Téglás, Edward Vul, Vittorio Girotto, Michel Gonzalez, Joshua B. Tenen-
baum, and Luca L. Bonatti. Pure Reasoning in 12-Month-Old Infants as
Probabilistic Inference. Science, 332(6033):1054–1059, May 2011. ISSN 0036-
8075, 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.1196404.
Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Michael Chang, Klaus Greﬀ, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
Relational neural expectation maximization: Unsupervised discovery of objects
and their interactions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.10353, 2018.
Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Jürgen Schmidhuber, and Sylvain Gelly.
Investigating object compositionality in generative adversarial networks. Neural
Networks, 130:309–325, 2020a.
Sjoerd van Steenkiste, Francesco Locatello, Jürgen Schmidhuber, and Olivier
Bachem. Are Disentangled Representations Helpful for Abstract Visual Rea-
soning? arXiv:1905.12506 [cs, stat], January 2020b.
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, An-
drew Dudzik, Junyoung Chung, David H. Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds,
Petko Georgiev, Junhyuk Oh, Dan Horgan, Manuel Kroiss, Ivo Danihelka, Aja
Huang, Laurent Sifre, Trevor Cai, John P. Agapiou, Max Jaderberg, Alexan-
der S. Vezhnevets, Rémi Leblond, Tobias Pohlen, Valentin Dalibard, David
Budden, Yury Sulsky, James Molloy, Tom L. Paine, Caglar Gulcehre, Ziyu
Wang, Tobias Pfaﬀ, Yuhuai Wu, Roman Ring, Dani Yogatama, Dario Wün-
sch, Katrina McKinney, Oliver Smith, Tom Schaul, Timothy Lillicrap, Koray
Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, Chris Apps, and David Silver. Grandmaster
Level in StarCraft II Using Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning. Nature, 575:
350–354, November 2019. ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1724-z.
Julius von Kügelgen, Ivan Ustyuzhaninov, Peter Gehler, Matthias Bethge, and
Bernhard Schölkopf. Towards causal generative scene models via competition
of experts. In ICLR 2020 Workshops, 2020.
Silke Wagner and Dorothea Wagner. Comparing Clusterings: An Overview.
Universität Karlsruhe, Fakultät für Informatik Karlsruhe, 2007.
==PAGE:90==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
77
Nicholas Watters, Loic Matthey, Christopher P Burgess, and Alexander Lerchner.
Spatial broadcast decoder: A simple architecture for learning disentangled
representations in vaes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.07017, 2019.
Yanchao Yang, Yutong Chen, and Stefano Soatto. Learning to manipulate
individual objects in an image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6558–6567, 2020.
Yan Zhang, Jonathon Hare, and Adam Prugel-Bennett. Deep set prediction
networks. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. dAlché-Buc, E. Fox,
and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
==PAGE:91==
Appendix A
Experiments and Models
A.1
Experiments
Follows some additional details on the experiments.
All code is written in Python and uses Pytorch, primarily, for automatic gradient
calculation Paszke et al. (2019). The Slot Attention autoencoder has been re-
implemented based on the oﬃcial TensorFlow Abadi et al. (2016) implementation
and the paper Locatello et al. (2020), and GENESIS based on the oﬃcial
PyTorch implementation. The same hyperparameters as deﬁned in the respective
publications are used for this thesis. MONet is implemented following the details
from the paper Burgess et al. (2019). However, a hyperparameter sweep on β and
the decoder’s σ parameters was necessary to make this model work satisfactorily
on Shapestacks and Tetrominoes—the two datasets where MONet was not
originally tested. For GENESIS on Objects Room, the same hyperparameters
are used, as described in the paper for Multi-dSprites and Shapestacks, which
have the same resolution. On CLEVR, which has 128 × 128 images, a stride of 2
is used in the convolutional layer at the middle of both encoder and decoder (the
output padding in the decoder is adjusted accordingly). On Tetrominoes, the
opposite is done, i.e., ﬁrst stride in the encoder and the last stride in the decoder
are changed from 2 to 1. For Slot Attention on Objects Room and Shapestacks,
the same parameters used in the original publication for Multi-dSprites are used,
which has the same resolution. For all models, a batch size of 64 is used as in the
original publications. On CLEVR, the batch size is halved and the learning rate.
All models are trained in an unsupervised fashion on the original datasets, and
only later they are tested on all variants.
The random seeds aﬀect the sampling of the data from the datasets, and the
random samplings that are performed in the models, for both initialization
and training. The seeds used for this study are [0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]. The
==PAGE:92==
Models
79
Dataset
Monet
Genesis
Slot Attention
Multidsprites
0.904
0.5*
0.913
CLEVR 6
0.962
0.988
Objects Room
0.82
Tetrominoes
0.995**
ShapeStacks
0.63***
0.57ˆ
* Obtained from running oﬃcial code on github.
** 1 outlier removed (out of 5 runs).
*** From GENESIS paper.
ˆ As reported on original GitHub repository, in the paper it is 0.73.
Table A.1: The original results for ARI from the literature. Cells that are
missing are due to the dataset not being tested in the original paper.
training stops after a ﬁxed number of steps. One step is counted every time that
a backpropagation is performed, updating the weights. Each step is run on a
batch of given size. The number of steps that the models are trained for is based
on the literature and on the training curves, to try and minimize training time
while still allowing the models to train until convergence.
The downstream model is trained on a ﬁxed split of the test dataset, when
enough samples are available. Here, only one seed is used, because the control
for randomness was already introduced previously and would now increase
computation time excessively.
With 10 seeds, 5 models and 5 datasets, the total number of experiments run
was 250. The models were trained on a computing cluster, for a total of 1 year
of GPU compute time on NVIDIA V100.
For the feature combination study, 10 seeds used on 3 models and 3 datasets,
for a total of 90 experiments. Multiple combinations of features were tested,
also a complete generalization of a feature, such as removing all squares from
Multi-dSprites. This, however, creates many issues because not a lot of samples
are available, and true feature compositionality cannot be expected anymore.
A.2
Models
In table A.2, the dataset splits, number of foreground and background objects,
and number of slots used when training object-centric models.
==PAGE:93==
Models
80
Dataset Name
Train
Validation
Test
Background
Foreground
Slots
Size
Size
Size
Objects
Objects
Multi-dSprites
60000
15000
15000
1
2–5
6
Objects Room
60000
15000
15000
4
1–3
7
Tetrominoes
60000
15000
15000
1
3
4
CLEVR6
40000
7000
6483
1
3–6
7
Shapestacks
60000
15000
15000
1
2–6
7
Table A.2: Dataset splits, number of foreground and background objects, and
number of slots used when training object-centric models.
Encoder
Type
Size/Ch.
Notes
Input: x
3
Conv 5 × 5
Stride 2, Padding 2
Leaky ReLU
Residual Block
64
2 Conv layers
Residual Block
64
2 Conv layers
Conv 1 × 1
128
Avg Pool 2D
Kernel size 2, Stride 2
Residual Block
128
2 Conv layers
Residual Block
128
2 Conv layers
Avg Pool 2D
Kernel size 2, Stride 2
Residual Block
128
2 Conv layers
Residual Block
128
2 Conv layers
Conv 1 × 1
256
Residual Block
256
2 Conv layers
Residual Block
256
2 Conv layers
Flatten
Leaky ReLU
Linear
512
Leaky ReLU
Layer Norm
Table A.3: Structure of the encoder for both the vanilla and broadcast VAE,
excluding the ﬁnal linear layer that parameterizes µ and log σ2 of the approximate
posterior.
==PAGE:94==
Models
81
Vanilla Decoder
Type
Size/Ch.
Notes
Input: z
64× num. slots
Leaky ReLU
Linear
512
Leaky ReLU
Unﬂatten
Residual Block
256
2 Conv layers
Residual Block
256
2 Conv layers
Conv 1 × 1
128
Interpolation
Scale 2
Residual Block
128
2 Conv layers
Residual Block
128
2 Conv layers
Interpolation
Scale 2
Residual Block
128
2 Conv layers
Residual Block
128
2 Conv layers
Conv 1 × 1
64
Interpolation
Scale 2
Residual Block
64
2 Conv layers
Residual Block
64
2 Conv layers
Interpolation
Scale 2
Leaky ReLU
Conv 5 × 5
Image channels
Stride 1, Padding 2
Table A.4: Structure of the decoder for the vanilla VAE.
==PAGE:95==
Models
82
Broadcast Decoder
Type
Size/Ch.
Notes
Input: z
64× num. slots
Broadcast
64× num. slots +2
Broadcast dim. 8
Residual Block
256
2 Conv layers
Residual Block
256
2 Conv layers
Conv 1 × 1
128
Residual Block
128
2 Conv layers
Residual Block
128
2 Conv layers
Interpolation
Scale 2
Residual Block
128
2 Conv layers
Residual Block
128
2 Conv layers
Conv 1 × 1
64
Interpolation
Scale 2
Residual Block
64
2 Conv layers
Residual Block
64
2 Conv layers
Leaky ReLU
Conv 5 × 5
Image channels
Stride 1, Padding 2
Table A.5:
Structure of the decoder for the broadcast VAE. One less
Interpolation is required, because the ﬁnal image size for this architecture is
64 and the broadcasting is to a feature map of size 8.
==PAGE:96==
Models
83
A.2.1
Baselines
The architecture details for the baseline VAE are described in tables A.3,A.4,
and A.5. These are used for the Shapestacks, Multi-dSprites and Objects Room
datasets. For CLEVR, an additional ResBlock with 64 channels and a Avg
Pool 2D layer is added at the end of the stack of ResBlocks, to downsample the
image one more time. This is mirrored in the decoder, where a ResBlock with
256 channels and a (bilinear) Interpolation layer is added at the beginning of
the stack of ResBlocks. The same happens in the broadcast decoder case. For
Tetrominoes, the number of layers is the same, but the last Avg Pool 2D layer
is removed from the encoder and the ﬁrst Interpolation layer is removed from
the decoder, to have one less downsampling and upsampling, respectively. With
these modiﬁcations, the number of parameters is comparable across datasets
that have images of diﬀerent sizes. The latent space size is chosen to be 64× the
number of slots that would be used when training an object-centric model on
the same dataset. Note that the number of slots varies depending on the dataset,
as shown in A.2.
A.2.2
MONet
Some of the mathematical details are now given. Although MONet does not
deﬁne a true generative model, one can still be described, to better understand
how it works.
Generative Model.
The generative model pθ is a GMM of the scene com-
ponents (better known as objects), which uses the attention masks ˆmk as
mixing probabilities. Each channel of every pixels is independent and identically
distributed:
pθ(x|z1:K) =
D
Y
i=1
pθ(xi|z1:K)
=
D
Y
i=1
K
X
k=1
ˆmk,i pθ(xk,i|zk).
(A.1)
The decoder is used to ﬁnd both the mean of the reconstructed object and the
mask probabilities µθk, mk = DECθ(zk), with µθk ∈Rh×w×c and mk ∈[0, 1]h×w.
The mean µθk is used to parameterize the conditional distribution of each scene
component, together with a ﬁxed scalar variance σ2:
pθ(xk,i|z1:K) = N
 xk,i|µθk,i, σ2
,
==PAGE:97==
Models
84
while the reconstructed mask probabilities mk are used to deﬁne a categorical
distribution:
pθ(m|z1:K) =
D
Y
i=1
pθ(mk,i|z1:K)
pθ(mk,i|z1:K) = Categorical (mk,i|m1:k) .
(A.2)
The reconstructed masks mk are not used in the spatial GMM to reconstruct
the input, instead, the attention masks ˆmk are used.
The purpose of the
reconstructed mask is to get the component VAE to encode information about
the shape of the object in the slots.
Attention Module.
The attention masks produced by the attention module
are used in both the pseudo generative and pseudo inference model. This is
because they are the mixing probabilities in the spatial GMM but also used as
input of the encoder in the Component VAE.
The attention module is deﬁned as an autoregressive process with a state, called
the scope sk.
Deﬁnition A.1 (Scope) The scope sk ∈[0, 1]h×w×1 is the proportion of each
pixel that is yet to be explained at the beginning of iteration k, given the previous
attention masks ˆm1:k−1. The scope can be deﬁned recursively as:
s1 := 1,
sk := sk−1 ⊙(1 −ˆmk−1) ,
k = 2, . . . K.
(A.3)
The autoregressive process allows for interactions between scene components
through the scope. The attention masks are then given by what is called a
Stick-Breaking Process (SBP):
ˆmk := sk ⊙ATTψ(x, sk−1),
k = 1, 2, . . . K −1
ˆmK := sK.
(A.4)
The last mask is set to be equal to the ﬁnal scope, this guarantees that
PK
k=1 ˆ
mk = 1. Attention mask k is the probability that a pixel belongs to
component k, ˆmk = p(m = k| ˆm1:k). Together, the attention masks deﬁne a
categorical distribution qψ( ˆm|x), which speciﬁes the class-belonging probability
for each pixel in the image. Although the output of the attention module is
interpreted as a probability distribution, all the calculations are deterministic,
as no sampling is performed.
==PAGE:98==
Models
85
Approximate Posterior.
The approximate posterior distribution qφ of the
latent space can be decomposed into the single slots. Each slot represents a
scene component and is conditionally independent from the other:
qφ(z1:K|x, ˆm1:K) =
K
Y
k=1
qφ(zk|x, ˆmk)
(A.5)
The encoder takes as input the image x, the k-th attention mask ˆmk and
outputs the parameters of the approximate posterior distribution of slot k,
µφk, σ2
φk = ENCφ(x, ˆmk):
qφ(zk|x, ˆmk) = N(zk|µφk, diag
 σ2
φk

)
A.2.3
GENESIS
Generative Model.
The generative model p is parametrized through θ. The
dependencies between components are modeled in the attention module by
formulating an autoregressive prior distribution over the latent variables zm
1:K
used to represent the attention masks:
pθ (zm
1:K) =
K
Y
k=1
pθ
 zm
k |zm
1:k−1

,
(A.6)
where each component follows a Gaussian distribution, parameterized by a
Recurrent Neural Network to correctly model the dependency.
The slots are assumed to be conditionally independent given the attention masks’
latent representations. Their prior distribution is Gaussian, parameterized by
an MLP, and factorizes in the following manner:
pθ (c1:K|zm
1:K) =
K
Y
k=1
pθ (ck|zm
k ) .
(A.7)
In GENESIS, the attention masks are computed using a Stick-Breaking Process
(SBP):
ˆmk = sk ⊙MASKDECθ (zm
k )
k = 1, 2, . . . , K −1
ˆmK = sK.
(A.8)
==PAGE:99==
Neural Style Transfer
86
Then, the image likelihood is given by the GMM:
p(x|zm
1:K, c1:K) =
D
Y
i=1
p(xi|zm
1:K, ck)
=
D
Y
i=1
K
X
k=1
p(xk;i|ck) ˆmk,i,
(A.9)
where the mean for each channel in each pixel is parameterized by DECθ and the
variance is constant:
µθk = DECθ (ck)
(A.10)
p(xk;i|ck) = N
 µθk;i, σ2
(A.11)
Approximate Posterior.
The approximate posterior distribution q has pa-
rameters φ. The distribution factorizes as follows:
qφ (c1:K, zm
1:K|x) = qφ (zm
1:K|x) qφ (c1:K|x, zm
1:K) ,
(A.12)
where the latent codes for the masks are obtained through a Recurrent Neural
Network and are distribution according to a Gaussian distribution:
qφ (zm
1:K|x) =
K
Y
k=1
qφ
 zm
k |x, zm
1:k−1

(A.13)
ˆµφk, ˆσ2
φk = MASK-ENCφ (x, zk)
(A.14)
qφ
 zm
k |x, zm
1:k−1

= N
 zm
k |ˆµφk, diag
 ˆσ2
φk

,
(A.15)
and the parameters for the slots are obtained through ENCφ and are distributed
according to a Gaussian distribution:
qφ (c1:K|zm
1:K, x) =
K
Y
k=1
qφ (ck|zm
1:k, x)
(A.16)
µφk, σ2
φk = ENCφ (x, mk)
(A.17)
qφ (ck|zm
1:k, x) = N
 ck|µφk, diag
 σ2
φk

.
(A.18)
A.3
Neural Style Transfer
To achieve Neural Style Transfer, a pretrained VGG 19-layer network N is
used (Simonyan, 2015). The network N will have Nl distinct ﬁlters at layer
==PAGE:100==
Neural Style Transfer
87
l, which result in Nl diﬀerent feature maps of size Ml := Hl × Wl. Now, the
activations of layer l can be put in a matrix F l ∈RN)l×Ml, where F l
i,j is the
activation in position j (this position can be then converted to 2D coordinates)
of the i-th feature map in layer l.
Now, let p be the content image, x be the generated image and P l and F l be
their respective feature representations at layer l. From this, the content loss can
be deﬁned by computing the mean squared error between the two representations:
Ll
content = 1
2
X
i,j
 F l
i,j −P l
i,j
2
(A.19)
Lcontent =
X
l
Ll
content.
(A.20)
Then, the texture transformation is computed at each layer using the Gram
matrix, which gives the feature correlations between the response of the ﬁlters.
Let Gl ∈RNl×Ml be the Gram matrix, where Gl
ij is the inner product between
the ﬂattened feature maps F l
i and F l
j at layer l. The style loss can now be
deﬁend as the mean-squared distance between the entries of the Gram matrices
Al and Gl for the style image a and the generated imagex, respectively:
Ll
style =
1
4N 2
l M 2
l
X
i,j
 Gl
i,j −Al
i,j
2
(A.21)
Lstyle =
X
l
wlLl
style,
(A.22)
where wl is a hyperparameter used to tune how much the low-level of high-level
features are used in the style generation.
Finally, the loss function can be deﬁned:
L = αLl
style + βLl
content,
(A.23)
where α and β tune how much the style should be important over the content.
When the style is much more important, then the resulting image will be a
texturized version of the content image, which is the desired behavior in this
study.
==PAGE:101==
Appendix B
Datasets
B.1
CLEVR
Each object has the following features:
• color: 8 diﬀerent colors. Categorical feature.
• material: the material of the object, rubber or metal. Categorical feature.
• shape: the shape of the object, sphere, cylinder or cube. Categorical
feature.
• size: the size of the object, small or large. Categorical feature.
• rotation: the rotation of the object, from 0 to 2π. Numerical feature.
• pixel coords: the pixel coordinates of the object in the image. Categorical
feature.
• x: the x coordinate in 3D space. Numerical feature.
• y: the y coordinate in 3D space. Numerical feature.
• z: the z coordinate in 3D space. Numerical feature.
B.2
Multi-dSprites
• color: 3 dimensional RGB color vector for the colored variants. Numerical
feature.
• orientation: the orientation of the object in radians. Numerical feature.
==PAGE:102==
Shapestacks
89
• scale: scaling of the object between 0.5 and 1. Numerical feature.
• shape: the shape type of the object (ellipse, heart, square). Categorical
feature.
• x: horizontal position between 0 and 1. Numerical feature.
• y: vertical position between 0 and 1. Numerical feature.
B.3
Shapestacks
Each object has the following features:
• shape: shape of the object, cylinder, sphere or cube. Categorical feature.
• color: 6 diﬀerent colors. Categorical feature.
• size: the size in each direction for the object. Numerical feature.
• coordinates: the coordinates in the Euclidean space. Numerical feature.
• level: level of the object in the stack. Categorical feature.
B.4
Tetrominoes
Available features for each object are:
• shape: the shape of the object (19 of them in total). Categorical feature.
• color: 6 diﬀerent colors. Categorical feature.
• x: horizontal positioning of the object (between 0 and 30). Numerical
feature.
• y: vertical positioning of the object (between 0 and 30). Numerical feature.
==PAGE:103==
Tetrominoes
90
Images in dataset: CLEVR 6
Figure B.1: Samples from CLEVR 6. Column on the left is the image. The
other columns have one object in each column. Although only 9 boxes are
displayed, the maximum number of boxes for CLEVR-6 should actually 11, this
discrepancy is due to how these plots are generated. Number of boxes refers to
the categorical values that the objects can have, because CLEVR 6 comes from
CLEVR 10, which can have 11 objects (including the background).
==PAGE:104==
Tetrominoes
91
Images in dataset: Multi-dSprites Colored on
Grayscale
Figure B.2: Samples from Multi-dSprites Colored on Grayscale. Column on
the left is the image. The other columns have one object in each column.
==PAGE:105==
Tetrominoes
92
Images in dataset: Shapestacks
Figure B.3: Samples from Shapestacks. Column on the left is the image. The
other columns have one object in each column.
==PAGE:106==
Tetrominoes
93
Images in dataset: Tetrominoes
Figure B.4: Samples from Tetrominoes. Column on the left is the image. The
other columns have one object in each column.
==PAGE:107==
Tetrominoes
94
1
2
3
Value
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
Count (samples)
Shape
Cube
Cylinder
Sphere
1
2
3
4
5
6
Value
0
25000
50000
75000
100000
125000
150000
Count (samples)
Color
Blue
Green
Cyan
Red
Purple
Yellow
0.4
0.6
Value
0
50000
100000
150000
Count (samples)
Size dimension 1
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Value
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
Count (samples)
Size dimension 2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Value
0
25000
50000
75000
100000
125000
150000
Count (samples)
Size dimension 3
Distribution of features in Shapestacks with no
Green Cylinders, no background, visible
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Value
0
25000
50000
75000
100000
125000
Count (samples)
Hue
1
2
3
Value
0
200000
400000
600000
Count (samples)
Shape
Square
Ellipse
Heart
0.6
0.8
1.0
Value
0
100000
200000
300000
Count (samples)
Scale
0
2
4
6
Value
0
200000
400000
600000
Count (samples)
Orientation
Distribution of features in Multi-dSprites Colored
on Grayscale with no Green Squares, no background,
visible
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10111213141516171819
Value
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
Count (samples)
Shape
1
2
3
4
5
6
Value
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
Count (samples)
Color
Blue
Green
Cyan
Red
Purple
Yellow
Distribution of features in Tetrominoes with no
Green Z or S pieces, no background, visible
Figure B.5: Distribution of the features in all feature compositionality training
datasets.
==PAGE:108==
Tetrominoes
95
Figure B.6: Samples from CLEVR 6 Neural Style Transfer dataset. Used in
both the robustness study and the texture complexity study.
==PAGE:109==
Tetrominoes
96
Figure B.7: Samples from Multi-dSprites Colored on Grayscale Neural Style
Transfer dataset. Used in both the robustness study and the texture complexity
study.
==PAGE:110==
Tetrominoes
97
Figure B.8: Samples from Shapestacks Neural Style Transfer dataset. Used in
both the robustness study and the texture complexity study.
==PAGE:111==
Tetrominoes
98
Figure B.9: Samples from Tetrominoes Neural Style Transfer dataset. Used in
both the robustness study and the texture complexity study.
==PAGE:112==
Results
99
B.5
Results
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
linear
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
MLP
r2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
linear
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
MLP
accuracy
Figure B.10: Scatter plot of the performance of the Linear model against the
MLP model for downstream evaluation, on all datasets and all variants, both
training and testing. The two models are strongly correlated, with the MLP
outperforming the Linear model in the categorical features, where non-linearities
help. (R2 ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:113==
Appendix C
Results
C.1
Reconstructions from the Models
==PAGE:114==
Reconstructions from the Models
101
Figure C.1: Segmentation and reconstruction of 3 random images from
CLEVR6. Top to bottom: MONet, Slot Attention, GENESIS. Left to right:
input, reconstruction, ground-truth masks, predicted (soft) masks, slot-wise
reconstructions (masked with the predicted masks).
==PAGE:115==
Reconstructions from the Models
102
Figure C.2: Segmentation and reconstruction of 3 random images from
Multi-dSprites. Top to bottom: MONet, Slot Attention, GENESIS. Left
to right: input, reconstruction, ground-truth masks, predicted (soft) masks,
slot-wise reconstructions (masked with the predicted masks).
==PAGE:116==
Reconstructions from the Models
103
Figure C.3: Segmentation and reconstruction of 3 random images from
Objects Room. Top to bottom: MONet, Slot Attention, GENESIS. Left
to right: input, reconstruction, ground-truth masks, predicted (soft) masks,
slot-wise reconstructions (masked with the predicted masks).
==PAGE:117==
Reconstructions from the Models
104
Figure C.4: Segmentation and reconstruction of 3 random images from
Shapestacks. Top to bottom: MONet, Slot Attention, GENESIS. Left to right:
input, reconstruction, ground-truth masks, predicted (soft) masks, slot-wise
reconstructions (masked with the predicted masks).
==PAGE:118==
Reconstructions from the Models
105
Figure C.5: Segmentation and reconstruction of 3 random images from
Tetrominoes. Top to bottom: MONet, Slot Attention, GENESIS. Left to right:
input, reconstruction, ground-truth masks, predicted (soft) masks, slot-wise
reconstructions (masked with the predicted masks).
==PAGE:119==
Robustness
106
C.2
Robustness
size - linear
material - linear
shape - linear
x - linear
y - linear
color - linear
size - MLP
material - MLP
shape - MLP
x - MLP
y - MLP
color - MLP
ARI
mSC
SC
MSE
93
89
73
92
93
55
95
93
90
94
92
96
52
54
72
51
50
91
56
54
61
53
49
54
-23
-21
12
-27
-30
47
-24
-24
-12
-27
-32
-25
-92
-91
-70
-91
-91
-55
-95
-93
-88
-92
-90
-92
CLEVR
shape - linear
x - linear
y - linear
color - linear
scale - linear
shape - MLP
x - MLP
y - MLP
color - MLP
scale - MLP
ARI
mSC
SC
MSE
76
86
86
71
84
60
86
86
91
89
-18
-45
-46
-5
-46
28
-45
-42
-39
-42
-19
-46
-47
-6
-46
27
-46
-43
-40
-42
-56
-42
-42
-70
-42
-79
-43
-41
-50
-44
Multi-dSprites
size - linear
shape - linear
color - linear
size - MLP
shape - MLP
color - MLP
ARI
mSC
SC
MSE
78
40
85
91
84
87
22
-4
27
39
31
23
22
-4
26
39
31
23
-64
3
-62
-69
-63
-72
Shapestacks
shape - linear
x - linear
y - linear
color - linear
shape - MLP
x - MLP
y - MLP
color - MLP
ARI
mSC
SC
MSE
83
91
82
68
90
92
83
89
-12
-7
-23
-32
-3
-3
-15
-6
-12
-7
-23
-32
-3
-3
-15
-6
-92
-91
-93
-61
-95
-93
-92
-83
Tetrominoes
Figure C.6: Correlation between the object discovery metrics and the down-
stream task performance for each feature in each dataset. Here, the performance
is the out of distribution performance, where the training dataset is the original
dataset, while the test dataset are all variants of this dataset. This provides
additional evidence to support the fact that ARI is more suited for evaluation
than mSC and SC.
==PAGE:120==
Robustness
107
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ARI
CLEVR
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Multi-dSprites
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Shapestacks
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Tetrominoes
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
mSC
CLEVR
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Multi-dSprites
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Shapestacks
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Tetrominoes
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SC
CLEVR
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Multi-dSprites
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Shapestacks
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Tetrominoes
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
10
3
10
2
log10 MSE
CLEVR
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
10
3
10
2
Multi-dSprites
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
10
2
Shapestacks
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
10
3
10
2
Tetrominoes
Original
Num. Objects
Style Transfer
Change Color
Occlusion
Crop&Zoom
Add Shape
Figure C.7: ARI, SC, mSC and MSE computed on all datasets and variants
and models. Each bar is the median with 10 seeds. The error line shows the
95% conﬁdence interval. (R2 ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:121==
Robustness
108
size
material
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Accuracy/R2
CLEVR
size
material
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
CLEVR
shape
x
y
color
scale
0.0
0.5
1.0
Accuracy/R2
Multi-dSprites
shape
x
y
color
scale
0.0
0.5
1.0
Multi-dSprites
size
shape
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Accuracy/R2
Shapestacks
size
shape
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Shapestacks
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Accuracy/R2
Tetrominoes
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Tetrominoes
Linear
MLP
Linear
MLP
Linear
MLP
Linear
MLP
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
VAE
VAE (broadcast)
Figure C.8: Downstream performance for all features in the dataset when the
training and test dataset for the downstream model are the original dataset
with no variant applied. This establishes the best performance that it is
possible to achieve when using the variants. Both the MLP and Linear model
are shown. Each bar is the median with 10 seeds. The error line shows the 95%
conﬁdence interval. (R2 ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:122==
Robustness
109
size
material
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Accuracy/R2
CLEVR
size
material
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
CLEVR
shape
x
y
color
scale
0.0
0.5
1.0
Accuracy/R2
Multi-dSprites
shape
x
y
color
scale
0.0
0.5
1.0
Multi-dSprites
size
shape
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Accuracy/R2
Shapestacks
size
shape
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Shapestacks
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Accuracy/R2
Tetrominoes
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Tetrominoes
Linear
MLP
Linear
MLP
Linear
MLP
Linear
MLP
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
VAE
VAE (broadcast)
Figure C.9: Downstream performance for all features in the dataset when the
training dataset is the original dataset while the test dataset is any variant.
All variants are cumulated on the same bar, so there are several times 10 seed for
each bar. The median is shown, with 95% conﬁdence error bars. (R2 ↑, Accuracy
↑)
==PAGE:123==
Robustness
110
size
material
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Accuracy/R2
CLEVR
size
material
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
CLEVR
shape
x
y
color
scale
0.0
0.5
1.0
Accuracy/R2
Multi-dSprites
shape
x
y
color
scale
0.0
0.5
1.0
Multi-dSprites
size
shape
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Accuracy/R2
Shapestacks
size
shape
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Shapestacks
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Accuracy/R2
Tetrominoes
shape
x
y
color
0.0
0.5
1.0
Tetrominoes
Linear
MLP
Linear
MLP
Linear
MLP
Linear
MLP
MONet
Slot Attention
GENESIS
VAE
VAE (broadcast)
Figure C.10: Downstream performance for all features in the dataset when the
training dataset and the test dataset are the same. This shows the performance
when the downstream model is retrained on the variant that it will be tested on.
Each bar is the median with 10 seeds. The error line shows the 95% conﬁdence
interval. (R2 ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:124==
Robustness
111
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
modified
unmodified
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
clevr
tetrominoes
multidsprites
shapestacks
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
style-transfer
color
shape
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
MONet
GENESIS
Slot Attention
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
Figure C.11: Downstream performance for both Linear and MLP model on
object-level variants, with out-of-distribution score being the score on the variant
datasets, while in-distribution score the score on the original dataset. For object-
level robustness, the color highlights the score for the objects that have been
modiﬁed. (R2 ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:125==
Robustness
112
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
clevr
tetrominoes
multidsprites
shapestacks
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
occlusion
crop
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
MONet
GENESIS
Slot Attention
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
Figure C.12: Downstream performance for both Linear and MLP model on
global-level variants, with out-of-distribution score being the score on the variant
datasets, while in-distribution score the score on the original dataset. For object-
level robustness, the color highlights the score for the objects that have been
modiﬁed. (R2 ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:126==
Robustness
113
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
modified
unmodified
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
clevr
tetrominoes
multidsprites
shapestacks
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
style-transfer
color
shape
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
MONet
GENESIS
Slot Attention
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
Figure C.13: Downstream performance for both Linear and MLP model when
they are trained and tested on the same dataset. Here, it is important to
point out that the out-of-distribution score refers to the score the model gets after
being retrained on that speciﬁc variant, while the in-distribution score is when
it was trained and tested on the original dataset. For object-level robustness,
the color highlights the score for the objects that have been modiﬁed. (Left):
downstream model trained on the original dataset and evaluated on all variants.
(R2 ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:127==
Robustness
114
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
clevr
tetrominoes
multidsprites
shapestacks
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
occlusion
crop
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
MONet
GENESIS
Slot Attention
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
Figure C.14: Downstream performance for both Linear and MLP model when
they are trained and tested on the same dataset. Here, it is important to
point out that the out-of-distribution score refers to the score the model gets after
being retrained on that speciﬁc variant, while the in-distribution score is when
it was trained and tested on the original dataset. For object-level robustness,
the color highlights the score for the objects that have been modiﬁed. (Left):
downstream model trained on the original dataset and evaluated on all variants.
(R2 ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:128==
Robustness
115
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
object-centric
distributed
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
object-centric
distributed
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
R2
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
In-distribution score
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
Linear
MLP
Figure C.15: (Left): Comparison between downstream performance of object-
centric and traditional distributed representations on object-level variants, with
out-of-distribution score being the score on the variant datasets, while in-
distribution score the score on the original dataset. (Right): Here, instead,
global-level variants are used. There is no clear trend that shows that object-
centric representations or traditional distributed representations are better. (R2
↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:129==
Robustness
116
Figure C.16: Segmentation and reconstruction of 3 random images from
Tetrominoes with the Occlusion variant applied. Top to bottom: MONet,
Slot Attention, GENESIS. Left to right: input, reconstruction, ground-truth
masks, predicted (soft) masks, slot-wise reconstructions (top, masked with the
predicted masks) and slot-wise reconstructions (bottom, without the mask).
Notice how the occluded shape is being reconstructed as something diﬀerent in
Slot Attention. MONet and GENESIS fail to segregate objects entirely.
==PAGE:130==
Robustness
117
Figure C.17: Segmentation and reconstruction of 3 random images from
CLEVR6 with the Occlusion variant applied. Top to bottom: MONet, Slot
Attention, GENESIS. Left to right: input, reconstruction, ground-truth masks,
predicted (soft) masks, slot-wise reconstructions (top, masked with the predicted
masks) and slot-wise reconstructions (bottom, without the mask). Notice how
occluded objects are correctly in-painted. Here there is less ambiguity as to what
the object could be.
==PAGE:131==
Compositional Generalization
118
C.3
Compositional Generalization
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
In-distribution score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Out-of-distribution score
Accuracy
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
In-distribution score
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
R2
GENESIS
MONet
Slot Attention
Figure C.18: Scatter plot of the downstream performance in the feature com-
positionality study with models highlighted. The performance for Shapestacks is
consistent across models, suggesting that the problem is due to the dataset itself
and not the models. (R2 ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:132==
Compositional Generalization
119
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Training score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Heldout score
Accuracy
shape
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Training score
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
R2
x
y
color
scale
(a) Multi-dSprites No Green Squares
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Training score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Heldout score
Accuracy
shape
color
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Training score
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
R2
size
(b) Shapestacks No Green Cylinders
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Training score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Heldout score
Accuracy
shape
color
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Training score
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
R2
x
y
(c) Tetrominoes No Z or S Pieces
Figure C.19: Scatter plots of the downstream performance for each feature in
each dataset. (R2 ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:133==
Representation Bottleneck
120
C.4
Representation Bottleneck
Number of
Parameters
Model
Architecture
Latent Size
Dataset
5435055
Monet
Broadcast
Normal
CLEVR 6
5545679
Monet
Broadcast
Big
CLEVR 6
13733295
Monet
MLP
Normal
CLEVR 6
13749711
Monet
MLP
Big
CLEVR 6
4678062
Monet
Broadcast
Normal
Multi-dSprites
4788686
Monet
Broadcast
Big
Multi-dSprites
6672558
Monet
MLP
Normal
Multi-dSprites
6688974
Monet
MLP
Big
Multi-dSprites
4608141
Slot Attention
Broadcast
Normal
CLEVR 6
5129165
Slot Attention
Broadcast
Big
CLEVR 6
12623757
Slot Attention
MLP
Normal
CLEVR 6
4290764
Slot Attention
Broadcast
Normal
Multi-dSprites
4807692
Slot Attention
Broadcast
Big
Multi-dSprites
6002636
Slot Attention
MLP
Normal
Multi-dSprites
6002636
Slot Attention
MLP
Normal
Multi-dSprites
Table C.1: Number of parameters for the models used in this study.
==PAGE:134==
Representation Bottleneck
121
0
200000
400000
step
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
Loss
Broadcast
0
200000
400000
step
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
MLP
0
200000
400000
step
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
Loss
Broadcast
0
200000
400000
step
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ARI
Broadcast
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
MLP
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ARI
Broadcast
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
MSE
Broadcast
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
MLP
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
0.0005
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
MSE
Broadcast
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
SC
Broadcast
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
MLP
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
SC
Broadcast
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
mSC
Broadcast
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
MLP
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
mSC
Broadcast
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
step
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
Figure C.20: Loss (the value of the training objective), ARI, MSE, mSC, and
SC for all datasets and architectures for Slot Attention in the bottleneck study.
(Loss ↓,ARI ↑, MSE ↓,mSC ↑, SC ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:135==
Representation Bottleneck
122
0.0
0.5
1.0
step
1e6
90000
87500
85000
82500
80000
77500
Loss
Broadcast
0.0
0.5
1.0
step
1e6
90000
87500
85000
82500
80000
77500
MLP
0.0
0.5
1.0
step
1e6
22000
21000
20000
19000
Loss
Broadcast
0.0
0.5
1.0
step
1e6
80000
60000
40000
20000
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
ARI
Broadcast
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
MLP
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
ARI
Broadcast
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
MSE
Broadcast
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
MLP
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
MSE
Broadcast
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
0.4
0.6
0.8
SC
Broadcast
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
MLP
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
0.4
0.6
0.8
SC
Broadcast
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
mSC
Broadcast
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
MLP
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
mSC
Broadcast
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
step
1e6
MLP
CLEVR 6
Multi-dSprites
Normal
Big
Figure C.21: Loss (the value of the training objective), ARI, MSE, mSC, and
SC for all datasets and architectures for Monet in the bottleneck study. (Loss
↓,ARI ↑, MSE ↓,mSC ↑, SC ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:136==
Texture Complexity
123
C.5
Texture Complexity
Number of
Parameters
Model
Architecture
Latent Size
Dataset
1579622
Monet
Normal
Normal
CLEVR 6
5545679
Monet
Big Decoder
Big
CLEVR 6
890308
Slot Attention
Normal
Normal
CLEVR 6
4608141
Slot Attention
Big Decoder
Big
CLEVR 6
896486
Monet
Normal
Normal
Multi-dSprites
4788686
Monet
Big Decoder
Big
Multi-dSprites
235812
Slot Attention
Normal
Normal
Multi-dSprites
4290764
Slot Attention
Big Decoder
Big
Multi-dSprites
Table C.2: Number of parameters for the models used in this study.
==PAGE:137==
Texture Complexity
124
0
200000
400000
Step
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.10
Loss
CLEVR 6
0
200000
400000
Step
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Multi-dSprites
0.0
0.5
1.0
Step
1e6
60000
55000
50000
45000
40000
Loss
CLEVR 6
0.0
0.5
1.0
Step
1e6
17000
16000
15000
14000
13000
12000
11000
Multi-dSprites
Slot Attention
Monet
Normal
Big Decoder
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Step
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ARI
CLEVR 6
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Step
Multi-dSprites
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Step
1e6
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ARI
CLEVR 6
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Step
1e6
Multi-dSprites
Slot Attention
Monet
Normal
Big Decoder
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Step
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
MSE
CLEVR 6
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Step
Multi-dSprites
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Step
1e6
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.010
0.012
0.014
MSE
CLEVR 6
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Step
1e6
Multi-dSprites
Slot Attention
Monet
Normal
Big Decoder
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Step
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
SC
CLEVR 6
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Step
Multi-dSprites
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Step
1e6
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
SC
CLEVR 6
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Step
1e6
Multi-dSprites
Slot Attention
Monet
Normal
Big Decoder
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Step
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
mSC
CLEVR 6
100000 200000 300000 400000 500000
Step
Multi-dSprites
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Step
1e6
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
mSC
CLEVR 6
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Step
1e6
Multi-dSprites
Slot Attention
Monet
Normal
Big Decoder
Figure C.22: Loss (the value of the training objective), ARI, MSE, mSC, and
SC for all datasets and architectures for Monet and Slot Attention in the
Texture Complexity study. (Loss ↓,ARI ↑, MSE ↓,mSC ↑, SC ↑, Accuracy ↑)
==PAGE:138==
Texture Complexity
125
Figure C.23:
Segmentation and reconstruction of 3 random images
from Multi-dSprites Colored on Grayscale with Neural Style Transfer
applied to the entire image. Top to bottom: Slot Attention, MONet. Left
to right: input, reconstruction, ground-truth masks, predicted (soft) masks,
slot-wise reconstructions (top, masked with the predicted masks) and slot-wise
reconstructions (bottom, without the mask).
