==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Absolute Localization using Visual Inertial
Odometry and Point Cloud Feature Match-
ing
Fjodor Svenning Borgbjerg (s163903)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Autonomous Systems
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 348
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3800
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The main objective of the thesis was to implement a new camera based localization algorithm
on a drone for the Inspectrone project. This is important since the localization is an essential
part of all autonomous mobile robots. Without localization, robots would not be able to do
path planning, trajectory planning, mapping etc. Therefore the topic and implementation is of
great importance. Furthermore the solution was implemented on an ARM based co-processor.
Implementing it on an ARM based architecture meant that compiling and/or modifying the
source code was necessary for using frameworks like Pytorch, Open3d, FCGF etc.
The implementation performed within the given constraints on the ARM based platform.
The solution was tested on two different cameras, both to test the robustness of the algorithm
and to test if the new camera can be used for the next iteration of the drone. The actual
implementation was focused on speed and modularity. The end results was an implementation
that is easily extendable for further use and improvements.
The localization works by using two different methods for pose estimation. One uses point
cloud matching for estimating the camera pose relative to a given map point cloud, which is
the slow estimate. The other method uses feature tracking in images to get a relative pose
estimate relative to the initial position, which is the fast estimate. The idea was to use graph
optimization to improve both measurements and gain the fast update rate from the relative
pose and a pose estimate that is linked to the map frame from the point cloud matching.
It was found that the point cloud matching using FCGF, TEASER++ and Faiss increased
the update rate drastically compared to the initial attempt using FCGF and RANSAC. How-
ever, the accuracy was initially subpar but was improved after retraining FCGF. Using the first
combination of methods resulted in an algorithm that satisfied the requirements for absolute
pose estimation, while RANSAC did not. Then by using the absolute poses from the first
combination and the relative poses from the external system together with graph optimization
an improved localization was estimated that was close to the given ground truth.
The actual development of the system happened on my personal desktop, but the solutions
were tested on the actual co-processor. When the final system was tested on the co-processor
the implementation performed within the requirements for one of the cameras. However, the
other camera was found to have too much noise for both training the feature descriptor model
and for running a feature descriptor model trained without noise.
In conclusion the proposed solution, with an addition of a simple motion filter in the graph
optimization step, would satisfy all the requirements. Furthermore it was found that the new
camera was not suitable with the proposed solution.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared in a collaboration with the inspectrone project. The project
is a collaboration between Force technology and the autonomous systems department at the
Technical University of Denmark. To fulfill the requirements for acquiring a Master’s of Science
degree in Autonomous Systems the thesis will represent a workload of 30 ECTS in the period
spanning from Feburary. 2021 to July. 2021
Kongens Lyngby, July 11, 2021
Fjodor Svenning Borgbjerg (s163903)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
There are several people that have been involved with this project, whom i would like to thank
for their help. I would like to thank Prof. Evangelos Boukas and Rune Yding Brogaard, for
their project idea, their guidance throughout the project and giving me the hardware i needed
for developing my solutions.
In addition i would like to thank Marcin Zajaczkowski for helping me setting up the relative
pose estimation system for the current inspectrone drone on my desktop and for giving me
inputs when i had practical problems with the systems.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The Inspectrone Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Glossary
5
3
Related Work
7
3.1
Frameworks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Registration and Refinement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
SLAM and localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
Methodology
9
4.1
Point Set Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.2
Quaternion Averaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
System
18
5.1
Chosen Methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.2
Dataset Generation and Usage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6
Results and Discussion
42
6.1
Point Cloud Alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2
Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.3
Localization Using Best Model on Jetson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.4
Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.5
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
Conclusion
62
A
Appendix
64
A.1 Full FCGF Dataset Generation Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
A.2 Full Localization Pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
Bibliography
75
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter will introduce the Inspectrone project, the specific task at hand, its objectives,
the motivation behind this thesis and a short description on how it would work. At the end
of this chapter there will be an outline containing a small description of what each chapter
contains.
1.1
The Inspectrone Project
The Inspectrone project is a project that aims to develop unmanned drones for inspecting the
confined spaces of marine vessels autonomously. This thesis will focus on the inspection of
water ballast tanks of marine vessels. The goal is to detect at least 99% of the potential faults
when going through the inspection. These faults can be corrosion, damage etc. The Inspec-
trone project has multiple sub-projects that are being developed. My specific contribution
to this project is improved localization, but other sub-projects are also being worked on, e.g.
autonomous exploration, and fault detection.
The reason why improving the localization is beneficial is that almost any autonomous
system depends on the localization. Without proper localization it is impossible to do path-
planning, trajectory-planning, mapping, exploration etc.
All these fields require some sort
of localization to work and if the pose was to drift slowly, it could have consequence where
the drone could collide with walls or structural elements when inspecting the ballast tanks.
Another consequence could be warping of the map, which would cause the location of faults to
be incorrect. There are more reasons to improve localization but these are the main reasons.
The Inspectrone project is a collaboration between DTU and FORCE Technology. Keep
in mind that the inspection part will not be part of the thesis since the focus is on localization,
but the localization quality will indirectly affect the inspection. Furthermore the main focus
is on feature extraction from point clouds.
1.1.1
The Absolute Localization Task
The absolute localization approach used in this thesis consists of three key points, namely:
Absolute pose estimation, relative odometry estimation and graph optimization to improve
the estimates from the absolute pose and relative odometry.
The first point, which is the main task of this thesis is to explore the possibilities of
improving localization by using features extracted from scan point clouds to match with a
map / static point cloud and thereby gain a absolute pose estimate, meaning a pose that is
relative to a world fixed frame. However, due to the heavy computational load of point cloud
matching, this would result in a slow update rate. Furthermore if no correct matches were to be
found, then there would not be any information about where the drone actually is, which could
==PAGE:9==
1.1 The Inspectrone Project
2
cause collision. The considered method for feature extraction is a deep learning based feature
descriptor, since according to many papers [CPK19] and benchmarks [KMM], machine learning
approaches are superior in accuracy and speed. However, due to the heavy computation of the
neural networks they are still slow compared to other absolute pose estimation methods like
GPS, but since it is a confined space with a lot of metal the GPS is not a valid option.
To solve this slow update rate and the potential dangers of it, another more light weight
method is used for getting a relative pose estimate. The relative pose means a pose estimate
that is relative to the initial pose, which brings us to the second point: Using relative poses to
increase the absolute localizations update rate. The relative pose method used is a VIO method,
visual inertial odometry, meaning it uses a combination of images and IMU data to estimate
its odometry, which contains the pose. The method in mind keeps track of landmarks derived
from multiple pictures and IMU data measurements. These landmarks will help estimate the
odometry. However this method in it self is not very useful if no knowledge about the absolute
pose is known. To get a good localization a combination of the slow absolute pose and the fast
relative pose is required.
To get the absolute localization both the absolute pose and relative odometry needs to be
used, which brings us to the third point: Using multiple data sources to improve localization.
This can usually be done with a kalman filter. However due to the large delay from processing
the absolute pose, this is not the preferred approach, since kalman filters are not suitable for
handling time delayed data. To solve this a SLAM, Simultaneous localization and mapping,
approach could be implemented, but this would be out of the scope of this project, therefore
a compromise was made to only implement the localization part of SLAM. However, the
implemented localization would not have loop closures and could therefore be improved further
if needed. The graph optimization method, as used in many SLAM implementations [OLT06],
will be used to get an improved absolute localization that is not sensitive to processing delay.
1.1.2
Objectives
The objective of this thesis is to implement the localization method mentioned above on an
ARM computer with gpu acceleration, namely a Nvidia Jetson Xavier NX. The Jetson is a
small size computer with gpu acceleration to handle parallel calculations like graphics, matrices
etc, which is ideal for point cloud and image processing.
Currently data for two depth cameras is used. One is the Kinect which will be used to
train the feature descriptor and the other is the Mynteye which is a smaller camera but more
noisy. The size is the reason why the Mynteye camera was chosen for the next iteration of the
actual drone. One of the objectives is to find out if the Mynteye camera can be used for this
task.
The key objectives in bullet point form can be seen after these paragraphs, which will
describe the key objectives.
The first objective is to implement point cloud matching, this includes use of deep-learning
techniques for feature extraction. This should be implemented for ros and should be used for
estimate a absolute pose, which is a pose relative to the map. The solution for this objective
should have a specific accuracy and update rate.
The second objective is using the absolute pose from the first objective together with a
relative pose estimate to improve localization. This localization should have a specific tolerance
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Outline
3
with respect to a given ground truth estimate. This is set fairly high, since the ground truth
is not perfect and can vary with 0.25m in random periods.
The third objective is to visualize the different methods, specifically pose estimates, point
cloud alignments, ground truth path and optimization.
The last objective is to test the software this includes tests with different cameras, namely
the good but large Kinect and the small but noisy Mynteye. At the end the whole system
should run and be tested on the embedded Nvidia Jetson.
1. Point cloud matching
a) Use deep-learning techniques for feature extraction.
b) Develop software solutions for aligning point clouds and estimating absolute poses
in ROS.
c) Median fitness/accuracy of 90%
d) Average update rate of at least 0.5Hz
2. Localization
a) Use optimization to improve relative and absolute pose estimates
b) Have a tolerance of 0.4m
3. Visualization
a) Pre and post optimization.
b) Point cloud alignment
c) Pose estimates
d) Ground truth path
4. Test the software speed and robustness.
a) On Jetson Xavier NX
b) With Kinect camera
c) With Mynteye camera
1.2
Outline
Chapter 1 - Introduction:
This chapter will mainly deal with the objectives of the project
and give a introduction about the project and what is inside this thesis.
Chapter 2 - Glossary:
This chapter will have a glossary for words and abbreviations used
in this thesis.
Chapter 3 - Related Work:
This chapter will discuss related work.
Chapter 4 - Methodology:
This chapter will describe the theory uses in the thesis.
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Outline
4
Chapter 5 - System:
This chapter will describe the system that has been implemented and
why different choices were made.
Chapter 6 - Results and Discussion:
This chapter will summarize the results found using
different parameters and methods. It will also discuss the potential improvements and causes
for given results.
Chapter 7 - Conclusion:
This chapter will summarize the key points taken from the thesis
and if objectives were solved
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Glossary
This section will explain most of the uncommon words used in this thesis. They can be seen
in Table 2.1 and Table 2.2
Name
Description/Explanation
Point cloud
A point cloud can be explained like a 3D ”Image”,
where each point in the cloud has a x, y, z coordinate
and in some scenarios each point might also have a
color. Keep in mind that point clouds only specify
points where it has measurements, so most of the
point-cloud is empty
Voxel & point
A voxel is the volumetric space a point takes up in
the point cloud. The point is just 1 dot, but it has a
space associated to it. These spaces are usually cubic
or spheric volumes
pcd
short for point clouds
Scan (Point Cloud)
Scan will be referred to as the point cloud that is not
fixed nor static, aka the point cloud that the camera
has generated.
Static (Point Cloud)
Static point cloud will be referred to as the point
cloud that is fixed in place and will not be moved. In
this thesis the map and ballast tank is a static point
cloud
Map or Ballast tank
Map and Ballast tank will be used interchangeably,
since the ballast tank in the scope of this thesis is
the map.
Source
Will often be interchangeably with scan point cloud
Target
Will often be interchangeably with map- or ballast
tank point clouds
Pose
A pose contains positional and orientational
information.
Odom
Short for odometry,
IMU
Inertial Measurement Unit, provides orientation,
linear accelerations and angular velocities
Table 2.1: This table left column shows the words used in this thesis and the right column
describes what it is
==PAGE:13==
2 Glossary
6
Name
Description/Explanation
Orthotope
Also called hyperrectangle and is the equivalent of a
rectangle, but in 3D. So a hyperrectangle is of size
[x, y, z] where x, y, z are independent, while a cube of
size [x, y, z] and has to satisfy x = y = z
Epoch
A cycle of training and validating a model
Training, validation, and test sets
The training set is used for training, validation is
used for testing how well the training went in each
epoch and the test set is used to test the final model.
Teaser
is short for Teaser++
FCGF pose or FCGF+Teaser pose
This is what i call the pose calculated with FCGF,
Teaser++ and faiss
Fiducial
Markers that looks like QR-codes, used for
localization in Tagslam
Tight and rough (alignment)
Tight alignment is an alignment where one point
cloud is so close to the other point cloud as possible,
while a rough alignment is a alignment where the
aligned point cloud is close but not on top of the the
other point cloud
Positional space
The 3D space often defined with a x, y, and z axis.
This is needed to more easily define 3D and feature
spaces.
Alignment and registration
The difference is small, but in short the registration
is only finding the transform, while the alignment
also applying the transform
ROS
Robot Operating System is the robot frame work
used in this thesis.
Subscriber
A ros-node that reads data from a rostopic
Publisher
A ros-node that pushes data to a rostopic
rostopic
A topic or name that a publisher or subscriber
connects to
(ros)message
Messages are data types that are sent to and from
rostopics, they are usually defined in .msg files.
Table 2.2: This table left column shows the words used in this thesis and the right column
describes what it is
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 3
Related Work
This section will mention related works in the field of localization and registration methods.
3.1
Frameworks
There exists plenty of frameworks when it comes to point cloud processing, two commonly
known frameworks are PCL and the more modern Open3d. Both methods have roughly the
same functionalities, but differ in computational speed [ZFA18]. Furthermore since PCL is
rather old they do not support python oﬀicially, which makes it a inferior choice considering
that the project requires python and specifically pytorch for machine learning.
3.2
Registration and Refinement
Registration is one of the most important aspect of point cloud alignment and pose estimation
when it comes to point cloud processing. ICP is a classic example for aligning such point
clouds, however ICP is not suitable for global alignment but is very useful for aligning point
clouds that are close to the correct alignment[YSC20], meaning a combination of positional
and orientational information for the initial guess for ICP could result in decent performance
[TT21], but since the registration method should work independently this is not an choice.
Another approach is RANSAC, but due to the randomness and its sensitivity to noise[YSC20]
it is not a preferable choice.
3.2.0.1
Feature Descriptors
Feature descriptors are essential when it comes to global registration using correspondence
methods. TEASER++ is one of the methods used for registration in this thesis, originally it
used Smooth-net [Goj+19], which is a machine learning method that does feature description.
However this feature registration was outperformed by FCGF [KMM] for registration of indoor
rooms, which is a confined space. Therefore the other feature descriptor was used.
3.3
SLAM and localization
A lot of work has gone into localization and mapping, one of the community known open source
framework is the so called RTAB-Map, this is a framework that does everything from SLAM
with lidar, cameras, gps etc. and has plenty of methods to pick from, [LM19]. However, it is
mainly used for 2D odometry estimation and mapping. The framework has some 3D odometry
estimations and mapping methods, but those 3D registration methods include ICP which is not
==PAGE:15==
3.3 SLAM and localization
8
useful for global registration and other than that they use the PCL library which is inferior to
Open3d when it comes to computational speed of e.g ICP [ZFA18]. Furthermore the methods
in this framework are often outdated and are not known to have a good processing speed.
A state of the art implementation of SLAM, which has ROS support, is the so called HDL
slam, which can do real-time 6 degrees of freedom slam using 3d LIDAR data. It estimates
6 degrees of freedom and uses 3D point clouds[KMM19].
It supports multiple constraints
from e.g GPS and IMU, but this framework again requires PCL, which as mentioned before
is inferior when it comes to processing. Furthermore it is not guaranteed to work with depth
cameras since the algorithm is made for LIDARs, which usually has superior high resolution
and accuracy.
Furthermore it includes the whole localization and mapping process, which
would require more processing and is not needed.
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
In this chapter the general methodology used in this thesis will be described.
4.1
Point Set Alignment
Registration is simply put the process of finding the correct alignment from one point cloud
to another. It is used to estimate the transform needed to align one point cloud with another
point cloud and is thereby essential for estimating the pose of the camera. The registration
problem can be defined with two point clouds: {M, S}, where M is a point cloud containing
m 3D points and S is the static point cloud containing n 3D points [JV11]. The registration
should then find a transform from the source, M, to the target S, that minimizes the point
wise difference between M and S.
When talking about registration two types are commonly used, namely global and local
registration [QK16]. Global registration, see Section 4.1.3, is usually used to find a rough
transform estimate and do not require a initial guess.
Local registration or local refinement, see Section 4.1.4, is usually applied to get a tight
alignment, but usually requires some sort of initial guess. This guess can be a rough transform
estimation from the global registration or a sensor, e.g. IMU data. Assuming that the point
clouds are not close to each other initially, then without the rough estimation as an initial
guess the local refinement methods would most likely give a false result.
4.1.1
Fitness and Overlap
Fitness and overlap are two different measures that will be used in this thesis for estimating
alignment quality and for generating data. They will vaguely be described in this section.
Fitness
Alignment fitness is often used as a measure to estimate how well a source point
cloud fits a target point cloud. The fitness is usually scaled to go from 0 to 1, representing
a percentage of points in the source that is matched on the target.
The fitness is simply
calculated by checking the distance from each point cloud in the source to the closest points
in the target. If it is within a certain threshold it is counted as a matched point. The fitness
is then calculated by dividing the matched points with the total number of closest points.
Overlap
Point cloud overlap is slightly different from fitness. Overlap is an estimate on point
cloud similarity e.g. how many of the points are in both the source and the target assuming
same voxel size. This overlap can also be defined as the area where the target and source cloud
both have points. The overlap is usually scaled to go from 0 to 1, representing a percentage of
points that overlap.
==PAGE:17==
4.1 Point Set Alignment
10
The overlap can be estimated by first defining some point clouds, the source PS, the target
PT and the merged point cloud PM. Then define some variables that represents the point
count of the merged point cloud SM, and the point count of the rest of point cloud SR. At
last the overlap percentage OP is defined. Then the following calculations can be made:
PM = resmaple(PS + PT )
(4.1)
SM = point_count(PM)
(4.2)
SR = point_count(PS) + point_count(PT ) −SM
(4.3)
OP = SR/SM
(4.4)
It works by first creating the merged point cloud PM. This is achieved by re-sampling the
concatenated PS + PT point cloud, which results in a point cloud where any additional points
sharing a voxel are removed. Then the point count of PM is found. Afterwards the point
count of the the rest of the points are found SR, which is the points that got removed in the
re-sampling process. At last the overlap percentage OP can be calculated by simply dividing
the SR with SM, which is the equivalent to dividing the overlapping region with the whole
region. This is also the implemented version. This calculation requires the source and target
point cloud to be aligned.
4.1.2
Convolutional Neural networks
Convolutional neural networks, CNN for short, is a technique often used for image classification,
feature extraction and labeling. The reason for using these is their computational scalability
compared to other neural networks. Each of these convolutional layers use a kernel of a given
size that will make a new internal representation of the data that the kernel was applied on.
This convolutional way of doing it means that there is less parameters to tune while still
keeping a high complexity. An example could be if there was 10 kernels of size 5x5 and 10
biases, this would result in 5 · 5 · 10 + 10 = 260 parameters to tune. However, a simple one
layered neural network with 250 neurons and an image size of 500 pixels, would have at least
250 ∗500 = 12500 parameters and that is considered a small image, while also neglecting the
biases parameters. This gets even worse in higher dimensions. Another important factor is
that the one layered neural network would only work on an image of that size, while the CNN
would work on any image, it would just effect the output image size.
The above paragraph only discussed some of the advantages, but the main advantage is
how CNN’s work. One of the key reasons for using CNN is that they by default are translation
invariant, since the kernel is applied to a section of the point cloud. This means the resulting
points will always be relative to where the kernels were applied and therefore it does not matter
where the points are in the point cloud. As a matter of fact this also implies that it is a good
method for feature description, since the resulting points always have information about the
initial points neighbors. This is true since the kernels are applied to a region and therefore
takes all points in that region into account and not just a single point. Furthermore some of
these networks use simple ResNET blocks, which in simple terms are small convolutional neural
networks, but with a skip connection, meaning it uses a combination of the input and output
of the small convolutional neural network.
This has been shown to improve accuracy and
reducing the impact of vanishing gradients when training [He+15]. This is the main reasons
for using CNN and ResNET for feature descriptors and also what is used in this thesis.
==PAGE:18==
4.1 Point Set Alignment
11
4.1.3
Global Registration
Global registration is a good way to get a rough transform estimate on how two point clouds
could be aligned and is generally useful e.g. when there is no prior information about rota-
tion and translation. Global registration is commonly performed using correspondence-based
methods. Those methods, from a high-level perspective, consists of 3 steps.
1. Feature descriptors/extractors. Section 4.1.3.1
2. Correspondence search. Section 4.1.3.2
3. Transform estimation. Section 4.1.3.3
4.1.3.1
Feature Descriptors
Feature description is an essential part of the correspondence-based methods.
This is the
process of describing e.g.
voxels or pixels with multiple parameters.
These parameters or
features can than be represented in a higher dimensional space where each feature has its own
axis. These features usually include information about neighboring pixels or voxels in their
descriptions.
Looking at the context of this section all these methods do the same thing namely describe
the points relative to its surroundings. However, the way they do it might differ. An example
of a method using machine learning based features is FCGF [CPK19], see Section 5.1.2, while
another method using more traditional means is FPFH [RBB09], Which uses features like
point normals. In general the traditional features usually describe points using some kind of
geometric features like angular deviation, point distribution, point normals and volumetric
distance functions, which are easier to comprehend. However,those more traditional ways to
do feature description tend to be outperformed by machine learned methods [CPK19].
Another important factor for a good and general feature descriptor is that it is invariant
for translation, rotation and sometimes scaling. Being invariant in translation, rotation and/or
scaling means that the description of every point should be the same no matter where the set
of points are, how they are rotated, and how they are scaled respectively, which adds another
complexity layer. This increased complexity is usually why feature descriptor methods based
on machine learning like FCGF is favoured and faster.
To give a short overview on how a feature descriptor could work, a paragraph in this
section is dedicated to a 2D example with a 2D feature descriptor. Remember that this is just
an example used for explaining what features could be in simple terms. Therefore it might not
be the best feature descriptor.
2D feature descriptor example:
Lets chose two features descriptions, the first feature
description is the point count within a given radius r1 from the point being described. The
second feature description is the orientation of a line that minimized the normal distance
from every point to the line, given another radius r2. With four simple examples as shown in
Figure 4.1, where teal is the point count within r1 and orange is the orientation of the line
within r2. With this information the points can be plotted in the feature space. Then by
checking the distance between the points in Figure 4.3, it can be seen that the black and green
patterns are similar, and the red and blue patterns are similar according to the feature space.
However, when looking back at Figure 4.1 it can be seen that the blue and red point clouds are
==PAGE:19==
4.1 Point Set Alignment
12
not similar. This is a good indication on why good features and feature descriptors are essential
for good performance, especially when doing correspondence search. A bad feature descriptor
like the one in the example would result in a lot of transformations errors. Furthermore this
feature descriptor is only translation invariant and would break on rotation or scaling as seen
in Figure 4.2. In that figure the middle plot is the original, the left one is scaled and the right
one is rotated. All 3 would give different results in the feature space as seen in Figure 4.3, but
in theory they would all be aligned perfectly with a good registration method.
6
5
2
1.0
1.0
-0.5
-0.3
2
Figure 4.1: This figure shows 4 different patterns, namely black, green, red and blue, with
pink being the point that is being described.
The points are described with two features
constrained by a radius. The features are point count (teal) and orientation (orange). The
colored numbers represents the value for the feature.
5
-0.3
0
-0.3
5
1.0
Figure 4.2: This figure shows the same pattern as the green one from Figure 4.1, however the
left most pattern is scaled and the right most pattern is rotated. This shows that the feature
descriptor from the example is not rotation and scale invariant.
4.1.3.2
Correspondence Search
Correspondence search is the stage where the most similar points between two point clouds
are found, which is usually done by looking at the distance in the feature space and find the
KNN. This is essential for most registration methods, since they need the correspondences
for estimating the transform. The correspondence search can be computational heavy, since
the run-time of calculating the distances of each point-set is polynomial time in worst case.
Therefore the speed is heavily affected by the the size of the point cloud, which is why methods
like FAISS can be used for more intelligent and fast correspondence search, see Section 5.1.3.
The correspondences can be calculated, by finding the distances in the feature space from
every point in the source to every point in the target and vice versa. The correspondences are
simply the KNN, or the K shortest distances, for each point. After the correspondences are
==PAGE:20==
4.1 Point Set Alignment
13
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
Point Count
Orientation [rad]
Pattern 1
Pattern 2
Pattern 3
Pattern 4
Pattern 2 scaled
Pattern 2 rotated
Figure 4.3: This figure shows the 2D feature space for the four patterns in Figure 4.1 where
the color on the dots represents the pattern and the color on the outlined dots represents the
scaled and rotated versions from Figure 4.2.
found it makes sense to apply a mutual filter to decrease the number of bad correspondences,
and thereby increase the speed for transform estimation [Lei18]. A mutual filter would simply
remove the correspondences that are not bidirectional, meaning that only the correspondences
that are the same from source to target and target to source will be kept. The correspondence
search requires a decent feature descriptor, since the search is happening directly in the feature
space. This means that a bad feature space results in bad correspondences and therefore bad
transform estimations.
2D corresopndences search example:
Using the information from the the previous sec-
tion where it is assumed that the marks with green border in Figure 4.3 are the sources and the
other ones are the targets. Then by selecting the smallest euclidean distances between source
and target and vice versa the following table can be generated as shown in Table 4.1, the arrows
corresponds to the correspondences with the smallest distance. Afterwards a mutual filter is
applied and the non bidirectional correspondences are removed as seen in Table 4.1, where red
is the removed correspondences. This means there are 2 bidirectional correspondence that can
be used for transform estimation.
Source
→
Nearest Target
Target
→
Nearest Source
Yellow
→
Blue
Blue
→
Yellow
Pink
→
Black
Red
→
Yellow
Green
→
Black
Black
→
Green
Table 4.1: This table shows what the 1-nearest neighbor in the feature space of Figure 4.3
would look like between the sources(yellow, pink, green) and targets(black, red blue). The red
line shows what correspondences gets removed after a mutual filter is applied
4.1.3.3
Transform estimation
The transform estimation is where the actual registration happens. It works by using the found
correspondences and deriving a transform in the positional space that minimizes the positional
distance between the correspondences. The way the methods estimate the transform might
==PAGE:21==
4.2 Quaternion Averaging
14
differ. Furthermore depending on the registration type different transforms exists, but in this
thesis the focus will be in homogenous transforms, meaning that it only accounts for rotation
and translation.
A popular method for registration is RANSAC [CZK15].
In essence this
method simply picks n random points in the correspondence set, estimates a transform and
checks if it has a fitness above a certain threshold. If the transform was incorrect, it would try
again until it either had a decent transform or it used m attempts. RANSAC is usually used
on heavily down-sampled point clouds to speed up the process and thus it generally results in
a more rough transformation estimate. This down-sampling is especially important if there is
a large quantity of points in the point clouds. Other methods like TEASER++ [YSC20] exists
and is used and described in this thesis, Section 5.1.4.
4.1.4
Local Refinement
Local Refinement is simply the tightening of a transform estimate. A popular approach for
doing so is the point to point ICP [RL01], which in its essence iteratively minimizes the distance
between point pairs between the source and target point cloud.
ICP works by first creating correspondences based on the distance in the positional space.
This distance is from each point in the source point cloud P to the closest point in the target
point cloud Q. Then if a point in Q has multiple correspondences associated to it, only the
correspondence with the shortest distance is kept. A simple example using this method can be
seen in Table 4.2, where the red columns are the removed correspondences. The same result
can be retrieved using a mutual filter like described in Section 4.1.3.2.
After the shortest correspondences are found, then the center of mass of all points with
correspondences can be calculated. This is done for the source points and target points. Af-
terwards these center of masses will be used to move the point clouds so the center of masses
overlap. At last the rotation and translation can be computed using SVD. This is repeated
until convergence or a certain amount of iterations has been calculated.
Source
→
Nearest Target
Dist
P1
→
Q1
1.0
P2
→
Q1
1.2
P3
→
Q2
2.0
P4
→
Q4
0.8
P5
→
Q4
1.0
Table 4.2: This table shows an example of how the correspondences for ICP works. The
arrow shows the correspondence. The red ones are the removed correspondences
4.2
Quaternion Averaging
Quaternion Averaging is a method for calculating the average between two orientations, which
is useful in cases where two different estimates of poses is presented, e.g.
as described in
Section 5.2.1. This section will shortly describe quaternions and why quaternion averaging is
used.
==PAGE:22==
4.2 Quaternion Averaging
15
Quaternions
Quaternions are often used for representing orientation. The reasons for using
quaternions is that they are more robust compared to euler angles. The typical reason for
using quaternions is that they uniquely describe an orientation. Meaning that there only is
one way to achieve a specific orientation.
This is not the case for euler angles where one
orientation can be achieved with multiple rotation sequences, which will be described later.
Another important disadvantage is that the rotational matrix can enter a state where rotation
around a specific axis does not change the rotational matrix, which is known as gimbal lock
[MR65]. This means the information is lost until the gimbal lock is resolved.
4.2.1
Angles Averaging
In general quaternion averaging is easier and more robust when working with 3D orientation
averaging. Euler angles are simply not robust, straight out impossible and in most cases non
trivial. The reason why it is non trivial and why quaternion averaging is preferable will be
described in this section.
When working with 2D rotation there is only one axis and therefore one can easily find the
averages by simply calculating it with:
ravg, 1 = r1 −r2
2
+ r2
(4.5)
ravg, 2 = ravg, 1 + 180◦
(4.6)
Where r1, r2 are the angles to average. There are two averages, usually one close to the initial
angles and one further away, but they could also have the same distance. e.g. when averaging
r1 = 0◦and r2 = 180◦, which would give ravg, 1 = 90◦and ravg, 2 = 270◦∪−90◦, depending
on the angle wrapping.
Using 2D it seems rather simple. However, when working with 3D, there is suddenly 3
axis, and thus 3 rotations. The naive approach would be to use the same equation but for
all 3 axis independently, which would work in some simple cases. But even if it worked it
would increase the complexity and would need additional methods for putting together the
independent averages. However, this is not the only reason. The real reason for not using
it is the fact that euler angles are not properly invariant [Moa02], if they were, the euler
approach could be used. This non invariance means that an orientation with euler angles can
be represented with multiple combinations of euler angles.
Lets take a simple example. The desired orientation in degrees is [45◦, 0◦, 0◦], this orien-
tation can also be represented with this rotation sequence [−135◦, 180◦, 180◦] and thus using
the first representation would give a different result than using the latter representation, if
the simple euler angle approach described in this section was used. To show that lets define
[0◦, 0◦, 0◦] as the reference. The first representation using only the first euler angles would give
r1, avg = 22.5◦and r2, avg = 202.5◦while the second representation would give r1, avg = −67.5◦
and r2, avg = 112.5◦. None of these angles agree and shows why this non invariance makes it a
non-trivial to solve. However, quaternion averaging would have no problem getting the correct
solution, which is why quaternion averaging is more desirable.
4.2.2
Weighted Quaternions Averaging
Quaternions averaging, specifically the method from [Che+07], is a method from the aerospace
industry. This method is said to be robust, accurate, and simple and was thus chosen for the
==PAGE:23==
4.2 Quaternion Averaging
16
task of averaging poses and/or orientations. The theory described in [Che+07] is a collection
of summarized methods. The parts used in this thesis will be elaborated, together with some
of the math behind it, but the in depth theory is out of the scope of this thesis. The method
for only averaging two quaternions was not implemented since the method with N quaternion
averaging was more general, only with a slight increase in complexity. Here N is the number
of quaternions to average.
The method can be summarized in fairly simple terms by first defining some standard
notation. First of all wi is the i’th weight, qj is the j’th element in the quaternion, λk is the
k’th eigenvalue, and vk is the k’th eigenvector. The rest can be defined as follows:
Quaternion:
q,
where
{
q = [q1, q2, ..., q4] | q ∈R4×1}
(4.7)
Weight vector:
w,
where
{
w = [w1, w2, ..., wN] | w ∈RN ∧
N
∑
i=1
wi = 1 ∧wi ≥0∀i
}
(4.8)
Quaternion set:
Q,
where
{
Q = [q1, q2, ..., qN] | Q ∈R4×N}
(4.9)
Attitude matrix:
A,
where
{
A ∈R4×4}
(4.10)
Eigenvalue set:
λ,
where
{
λ = [λ1, λ2, ..., λ4] | λ ∈R4×1}
(4.11)
Eigenvector:
v,
where
{
v = [v1, v2, ..., v4] | v ∈R4×1}
(4.12)
Eigenvector set:
V,
where
{
V = [v1, v2, ..., v4] | V ∈R4×4}
(4.13)
The first step for calculating the weighted average quaternion is to compute the weighted
average attitude. The weighted attitude matrix can be calculated as:
A =
N
∑
i=1
wiqiq⊺
i
(4.14)
This calculation results in a 4 × 4 matrix where all the attitudes are multiplied with their
corresponding weight and then summed. This matrix has some important properties.
Property 1:
The first property is that the complex conjugate operation can be performed
without changing the values, (4.15). This is true since all quaternions in Q and all values
in w only contain real parts, which in turn means that A must be real since all operations
performed to find A was multiplications.
Property 2:
The second property is that A is a positive semi-definite symmetric matrix
and can therefore be transposed without any changes to the matrix, (4.16). This property is
true since a matrix calculated from the same vector, qq⊺, is always a diagonal matrix and
multiplying it was a constant will not change that. Furthermore the A matrix cannot contain
negative values since w and Q do not contain any imaginary part, as mentioned in Property
1. The absence of imaginary parts means that the squared vector elements will always be
positive and since the weights cannot be negative, the A matrix is also positive semi-definite.
A = A
(4.15)
A = A⊺
(4.16)
==PAGE:24==
4.2 Quaternion Averaging
17
Property 3:
The third property is that A is self-adjoint if the adjoint of A is A.
The
adjoint is defined as the transposed conjugated matrix as shown in (4.17) [Hal13] [Lay88] and
since (4.15) and (4.16) holds, then (4.17) is also true. This property is key for this quaternion
averaging method. Due to the fact that A is self-adjoint, all the eigenvalues will always be real
[Con07] and therefore the eigenvectors will also be real. Since the eigenvectors are guaranteed
to be real and that the average quaternion is the eigenvector corresponding to the largest
eigenvalue [Che+07], then the average quaternion can be found by simply finding the largest
eigenvalue and the corresponding eigenvector.
A = A∗= A⊺= A⊺
(4.17)
Now that it has been shown that (4.17) always holds the eigenvalues λ and eigenvectors V can
be found. To simplify the process it is assumed that a function for finding these exists, namely
eigen(), which calculates eigenvalues and eigenvectors from a matrix:
λ, V = eigen(A)
(4.18)
Now the average quaternion can be found by finding the i where λi is the largest and then
simply get the eigenvector with the corresponding i index in V:
λ(i) = λi
(4.19)
imax = argmax
i
(
λ(i)
)
(4.20)
qavg = vimax = V(imax)
(4.21)
This method is according to the paper a robust and fast method for weighted averaging between
quaternions. Furthermore since the algorithm runs in linear time, only depending on how many
quaternions were given, it is a good choice for quaternion averaging. The theory behind why
this works is outside the scope of this thesis, but it can be found in the paper [Che+07].
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 5
System
This chapter will describe how the whole system is put together and the workings of each
sub-system. This includes a description of the chosen methods, how training data is generated,
the workings of the pose estimates, the graph optimization, training and visualization.
5.1
Chosen Methods
This section will describe the chosen methods and how they work. This includes the develop-
ment framework, feature descriptor, correspondence search, registration, optimization and a
small description of how the ground truth is obtained.
5.1.1
Robot Operating System
Robot Operating System, ROS for short, is a framework for developing robotics solutions. It
makes developing easier since it has a great community and a lot of tools for e.g. visualization,
communicate, point cloud processing, navigation, logging etc. The visualization, communica-
tion and logging parts will mainly be used. The cloud processing parts will not be used since
PCL, which is the default library, is slow compared to the modern Open3d [ZFA18].
The ROS communication works by having multiple nodes that subscribe or publish to
specific topics. These topics can also be used for other things like actions, but in this thesis
only the subscription and publishing part was used for communication. Publishers are nodes
that sends messages to a chosen topic, but only if there is a subscriber, otherwise it does
nothing. This is a feature to minimize unnecessary processing. Subscribers are nodes that
subscribe to a certain topic and retrieves the messages if new ones were published.
This way of sending information between systems makes it easy to develop independent
sub-systems that can communicate between different machines on the network. This makes
it easy to e.g. run the system on one computer and visualize what is happening on another
computer. However, it has its downsides.One is that sending a lot of information, like a pure
point cloud without down-sampling, will take a lot of processing power. This is true since it
needs to convert the point cloud to a ROS friendly format and publish it to the topic. The
subscriber then needs to receive it and convert it back to an algorithm friendly format. In this
case it goes from Open3D format to PCL to Open3d format. One could argument for just
making a custom message type, but then it would not work with the visualization, which is also
an essential part of the system and is therefore not worth the effort. The ROS communication
will mainly happen between the different localization nodes, e.g FCGF pose, ROVIO pose,
RViz and Graph optimization, but also the visualization.
==PAGE:26==
5.1 Chosen Methods
19
The default ROS visualization tool is RViz, which is a gui where the topics to visualization
are selected and then shown when something is published to the topics. The exact visualizations
will be discussed later.
The logging tools of ROS are very useful. The specific logging tool in mind is rosbags,
which are files containing all the messages that has been sent to the specified topics. These
rosbags are handy since they can be used to simulate an artificial time and make the system
think it is running it in real time. Other than that there are options to slow down or speed
up the publishing rate and even start at a specified time or pause the publishing. These files
are used to test and develop the system on and has stored topics like IMU data, point clouds,
images, frame transforms, the ground truth etc. A downside of using these rosbags is that they
can take up a lot of space if the topic itself was not compressed, especially when working with
point clouds or images with high update rate.
5.1.2
FCGF – Feature Descriptor
When working with correspondence-based point cloud matching, it is essential to have good
feature descriptors. This is important since the correspondences are created from the feature
space and registration uses the correspondences to estimate the transform. The chosen method
for feature description is FCGF [CPK19]. This method comes with pre-trained models for 16
and 32 dimensional feature spaces and it can be trained to have a larger feature space. These
features can be anything, but traditionally they depended on comprehensive geometric features
like angular deviation, point distribution, volumetric distance functions, etc. However, these
features could also be completely trained, which would remove the comprehensive aspect of
the features, thus make it harder to understand how they work. But the accuracy gained from
using machine learned features outweighs the comprehensiveness of the features [CPK19].
Furthermore, it is important to note that FCGF is rotation and translation invariant, which
is critical for the feature descriptor. Without those invariants, rotation and translation would
affect how the points would be described. The latter invariance is guaranteed since it is a
convolutional based method.
The rotation invariance was trained using different rotations
during the data augmentation phase and thus cannot be guaranteed in the same way, but the
model mostly likely understands the concept of rotation.
5.1.3
FAISS – Correspondence Search
When working with large point clouds where each point has a feature vector it can quickly
become a slow search.
Especially if simple methods without compression or indexing are
used. Those methods would have a worst case run-time in polynomial time, as mentioned in
Chapter 4. Therefore methods like Faiss [JDJ17] exists, which uses indexing to store a set of
vectors and provides smart ways to estimate which set is the most likely to contain the best
correspondence. There exists multiple structures for doing these indexings, each come with
their own tradeoffs in either speed, quality or memory usage. In this thesis a flat indexing was
used, which encodes each feature vector into different indices. Then when searching for the best
correspondence, the feature vector of the chosen point would be encoded and then compared
to every vector in the set. This greatly increases the speed, but at the cost of less accuracy.
However, the gain in speed is worth more than the loss in accuracy, especially considering that
==PAGE:27==
5.1 Chosen Methods
20
the feature descriptor is nowhere perfect. The speed could be increased even more if another
indexing method was used, but flat indexing was fast enough and was therefore used.
5.1.4
TEASER++ – Transform Estimation
Estimating a transform is not trivial, even with fairly good correspondences there can still
exist a lof of outliers. The way RANSAC estimates the transform is simply by trying random
points over and over until a good enough transform is found. If a lot of outliers are present it
will naturally take longer or would result in a worse transform. Using RANSAC can take up
a lot of computational power, since it usually requires a lot of iterations to get a good result.
This is where TEASER++ comes into play. It is a registration method that can solve the rigid
body transformation problem between two 3D point clouds, even with outliers [YSC20]. The
reason TEASER++ stands out is because it decouples scale, rotation and translation.
This decoupling makes it possible to use different methods for different tasks. The key
point here is to use invariant measurements for decoupling. An invariant measurement could
be relative position and distance.
An example of a translation and rotational dependent measurement could be absolute
position. In contrary a relative position, or a vector, between two points in the same point
cloud is translation invariant, since a translation would not change the value of the relative
position, but a rotation would. Similarly a relative distance between two points in the same
point cloud is translation and rotation invariant.
By using these invariant measurements the problem can be decoupled. The scale can be
estimated using relative distances, since it is invariant to rotation and translation. Then the
rotation can be estimated using the fact that relative positions are translation invariant and
that the scale is estimated. At last the translation can be calculated using the absolute points
and the calculated rotation and scale. This allows to implement fast ways to solve each of the
decoupled problems, starting with scale, then rotation, and then translation. This is a vague
description but it explains the main idea of how it works. The full process can be read in the
TEASER++ paper [YSC20].
5.1.5
g2o – Graph optimization
One of the advantages of using graph optimization over a Kalman filter is its robustness when
it comes to handling time delayed measurements. It is not a trivial task to incorporate time
delayed measurements into a Kalman filter [Lar+99] and since the FCGF solution can take
up to a second to process, it means the measurement is also a second delayed. This delay
would have a great impact on the performance of the Kalman filter and is therefore not used.
However, this is where graph optimization can be used. The graph optimization library chosen
was g2o. This library has functions for vertices, which is used for poses, and edges, which is
used for movements. The latter has an option for uncertainty. The implementation will be
discussed more in depth later in this chapter. The reason for using graph optimization is that
it is insensitive to time delay, since the graph is time independent and only uses positional and
orientational information. The timestamp is only used when inserting new vertices to ensure
that they are inserted at the correct location taking the delay into account. Then afterwards
the graph can be optimized to minimize the accumulated relative pose error. This would result
in an improved localization, in this case fixed to the map. This also means that new relative
==PAGE:28==
5.2 Dataset Generation and Usage
21
poses would be more true to the absolute pose, since they now are relative to the optimized
graph and not the initial pose.
5.1.6
Tagslam – Localization Ground Truth
When working with localization it can be a good idea to have a ground truth to test the accuracy
against the other localization methods. Tagslam was used as the ground truth [PD19]. It works
by tracking the movement of fiducial markers in images and thereby estimates the current pose
using triangulation. This is by no means a perfect ground truth but it is certainly a step in the
right direction and it is definitely easier to track tags than features in an environment where
similar features are repeat in every compartment.
5.2
Dataset Generation and Usage
The models initially performed poorly on the given dataset, which meant that transfer learning
had to be applied to improve the models performance. This meant that a new dataset had
to be generated, since it did not make sense to use the dataset that the model was already
trained on. However, this required some pre-processing steps, since the data needed a certain
structure to be useful.
The data used for dataset generation was the Kinect data. This was done since it is hard to
tightly align point clouds that are very noisy, which was the case for the Mynteye camera, see
Figure 5.1. However, the Kinect data would later be augmented with noise that was similar
to the noise in the Mynteye camera. This was done to emulate the Mynteye data without
using the actual data. However, initially the data was generated without noise, just to see how
FCGF performed after retraining and to get a tight alignment on the dataset before adding
noise.
Furthermore it is important to mention that the data from both cameras were from the
same ballast tank model, but with two different runs and therefore not identical.
(a): Kinect point cloud
(b): Mynteye point cloud
Figure 5.1: These figures show the noise of each camera. It can be see that Figure 5.1(b)
has more noise and is less dense than Figure 5.1(a).
The flowchart of this dataset generation process will be discussed in this section and a
high-level representation of this dataset generation and training can be seen in Figure 5.2. A
more in depth representation of can be seen in Figure A.1. The latter will be broken down into
smaller pieces and will be described in sub-sections within this section. The bold words in the
graphs are variables and bold words with parenthesis are definitions of these variables. The
==PAGE:29==
5.2 Dataset Generation and Usage
22
data generation algorithm in short consists of 2-3 stages, where the most important stages are
the alignment and overlap stage. The noise stage is optional. At last there is a retraining stage,
where the data gets loaded and the retraining happens. Furthermore when implementing these
methods, speed is not a main concern, since generating the data and training is not a time
critical operation for the actual implementation. These operations could happen over night or
in off hours. Therefore some slow methods might be used for aligning or storing the data etc.
Align all point clouds
Data Alignment
This stage is responsible for
aligning all point clouds
according to the reference
frame
Yes
No
Generate Noise 
Data?
Train on training and
validation data with
given overlap %
Calculate overlap
between sources and
targets
Generate noise on
source clouds
Filter source target
combinations with
given overlap %
Overlap Calculation
This stage is responsible for
generating overlap files for
every combination of source
and target point clouds and
later sort them according to
overlap percentage
Noise Generation
This stage is responsible for
generating noisy source
clouds. Every source will get X
copies with different noise
origins. The noise depends on
the distance to the noise origin
Retraining
This stage is responsible for
retraining on the newly created
data
Figure 5.2: This figure shows a very high level flow chart of the data generation and usage.
There are in total 4 stages, where it starts with data alignment, goes to overlap calculation,
then the optional noise generation stage can be used, and at last the retraining is done
5.2.1
Point Cloud Alignment
The point cloud alignment stage is necessary to ensure that the correct solution is known prior
to the training and validation steps. Without this step the data is basically useless since there
would not be any correct solutions and just a tiny offset and the training could result in a bad
model. Thus an algorithm for aligning these point clouds prior to training was implemented.
The pipeline for point cloud alignment can be seen in Figure 5.3 and the steps are described in
this section. Some of the steps in the flowchart might be skipped since they only make sense
in terms of the flowchart itself.
==PAGE:30==
5.2 Dataset Generation and Usage
23
Get reference frame
point cloud (REF)
* Get next point cloud
(PC)
** Get ICP transform (T2) from
PC to REF using T1 and
multiple thresholds
Yes
No
Fitness > 0.75?
Save T2
transformed PC
*** Prompt user with
PC on REF
Yes
No
Is fine?
Interup program
Yes
No
More point clouds?
Data Alignment
~   
~~ 
*   
**  
*** 
~~ Get Identity matrix
(T1)
~ Calculate initial
transform (T1) 
from PC to REF
using IMU
Get orientation (IMU)
with closest time stamp
to REF
Scan
Map
(Ballast 
tank)
point cloud type?
* G t
t X
Overlap Calculation
The calculation is based upon a
weighted average of the
previous transform and IMU
It is assumed that A1 and R1     
frames are close to each other
for ballast tank point clouds, and
thus the identity matrix is used
as T1
Ballast tank can also get
cropped to create more data
with high overlap %. 
It uses 3 iterations with different
thresholds
User has to interrupt the
program manually and fix the
algorithm
Figure 5.3: Pipeline for point cloud alignment. The blocks in the light green area is the steps
required for cropping and data alignment. The dashed line is where the algorithm goes to if it
has more to process. The pipeline continues to overlap generation at Figure 5.4 if all has been
processed. The full figure can be seen in Figure A.1
1. Reference Frame:
First the reference point cloud is chosen/specified, this is usually one
of the point clouds containing the map, in this case the 2 compartment ballast tank.
2. Point Cloud Retrival:
Afterwards the point clouds are loaded one by one, if it is a map
point cloud, which is specified in the script, the user can choose to also crop and generate x
randomly cropped versions of the point cloud. This is done to ensure that there is a certain
overlap percentage, see Section 5.2.1.1.
3.
Point cloud aligning:
These point clouds can soon start the actual aligning process.
However prior to that, an initial guess of the transform, from the source to the target needs to
be found. The initial transform guess is derived differently depending on the point cloud type
and will be described in: 3a. and 3b..
3a. Map Initial Transform:
The initial transform guess is set to be identity matrix for
the ballast tank point clouds, since it is assumed that the ballast tanks are roughly in the same
reference frame, in this case in map frame.
==PAGE:31==
5.2 Dataset Generation and Usage
24
3b. Scan Initial Transform:
The initial transform guess for scans are different from the
map initial transform guess. This is due to the fact that the point clouds did not have any pose
in the map frame. They only had an origin of the point cloud and that origin was relative to
where the scan was taken, aka the camera pose, which had no transform relating to the map.
Initially the idea was to use the camera orientation, from the IMU. However that was
simply not reliable enough and therefore could not be used as an initial transform guess. This
was due to the fact that the orientation received had unreliable IMU data e.g. biased, offset,
time delayed, or simply because the point cloud and IMU samples were not synced.
This was solved by using an weighted average for the initial transform guess based on the
previous transform and the IMU sample closest in time to the timestamp of the point cloud.
The ratios for the transform averaging was 80% and 20% respectively. This averaging however
was not a trivial task, since orientation averaging is not strait forward, especially not using
euler angles. Therefore a method for weighted quaternion averaging was applied, as explained
in Section 4.2.
4. Local Alignment
When the initial guess was found the local refinement could be per-
formed to do the actual alignment. In this case ICP was used. To increase the accuracy of
this method, ICP was used with different threshold prior to evaluating the final alignment.
By first running ICP with a large threshold and then with some smaller thresholds, e.g.
1m, 0.1m, and a threshold equal to the voxel size, a tighter alignment, compared to only using
one refinement, was obtained.
5. Evaluation
The evaluation would simply calculate the fitness, Section 4.1.1, of the scan
on the ballast tank with a threshold equal to the voxel size of the point cloud. By having such
a low threshold the fitness would only take points that are within each others voxel, aka on
top of each other as a correct aligned point. If the scan point cloud had a final fitness below
75%, the user would be prompted with a visualization of the alignment and had to verify that
it was a correct match otherwise the program should be interrupted. The reason for having
chosen a relatively low fitness is that a lot of the time, the scans either had voxels outside of
the map or the map was not completely filled out, which in turn decreases the fitness even
though the scans and ballast tank are perfectly aligned.
6. Point Cloud Saving
If the point cloud had a good enough fitness it was stored in a
file containing the x,y,z data and color of each point. The algorithm would then either go
back to get a new point cloud and start over or proceed into the next block, which is overlap
calculation, see Section 5.2.2
5.2.1.1
Cropping
This section will explain how the cropping in the point cloud alignment step works.
Cropping the map is essential for getting a good dataset. The reason for this is that FCGF
assumes that the aligned point clouds are roughly the same size when aligned, which is a
consequence of how overlap works. However, these same size point clouds are not present in
the Inspectrone project. In the Inspectrone project the scans, which has a small quantity of
points, are matched with the ballast tank, which has a large quantity of points. Therefore if
a map had four times more points than the scan, then the overlap would never exceed 25%,
==PAGE:32==
5.2 Dataset Generation and Usage
25
even if they were perfectly aligned and the fitness was 100%. These crops are simply there to
increase the likelihood that scans of different sizes has a greater potential for higher overlap
percentage. A consequence of this method is that a lot of data is unused, since most point
cloud combinations has close to 0% match. However, in the end more good matches were found
and could be used for training.
The cropping is based on a seeded random bounding box and everything outside of the
bounding box will be removed. Furthermore each bounding box is calculated in such a way
that it would always be inside the ballast tank point cloud, meaning the only parameter to
worry about is the size of the bounding box, which has multiple requirements.
The first requirement for cubic cropping, the current method used, is that the bounding
box can not be smaller than 1.5×1.5×1.5m and larger than 3×3×3m. For orthotope cropping
the minimum side length of each side is 1m and the minimum combined side length is 6m and
the the maximum size is the point cloud size, not the point quantity, but tha actual size in
meters. The ballast tank point cloud is in very rough estimates 3×3×6m. These requirements
are there to minimize the attempts needed to get good data. If these requirements were not
there any sized point cloud would be accepted. In theory this meant that a point cloud with
1 point could be accepted in the dataset, which is useless for matching point clouds.
Secondly the crop is neglected if the number of points in the crop is below a certain threshold
TH. The first N crops satisfying these requirements would be used, where TH = 3000 and
N = 100. This is important, since a crop could be in a region without or with few points,
e.g. a bounding box inside the ballast tank walls, where no points exists. This would lead to
unusable data and is thus neglected.
5.2.2
Calculating Overlap
The point of this stage is to define what matches are good and what matches are bad. This
stage has to have aligned point clouds available, otherwise it would not make sense to calculate
the overlap. The overlap calculation is necessary to ensure that the training algorithm does
not waste time on training on point clouds that have little to no similarities. The point of the
training is to use these similarities to find, learn and use the common features that are present
in the matched point clouds. Thus a higher overlap percentage is desired, since they would
have more similarities, but at the same time enough data should be available. A match with
low overlap percentage would in general give a worse training, since the training would try to
find features in matches that might not have any common features, thus making the features
found worse. Therefore it is important to discard the matches with low overlap.
The pipeline for overlap calculation can be seen in Figure 5.4 and the steps are described
in this section. Some of the steps in the flowchart might be skipped since they only make sense
in terms of the flowchart itself.
1. Get sources:
The next X aligned scan point clouds gets extracted, where X should be a
positive integer between 1 and a number no larger than neither the count of ballast tank point
clouds nor the count of scan point clouds.
2. Get targets:
Now the next X aligned (cropped) ballast tank point clouds gets extracted,
where X is the same positive integer from 1..
==PAGE:33==
5.2 Dataset Generation and Usage
26
No
* Get next X sources
(PC1)  
Overlap Calculation
*   
** 
***
~
X is a chosen value in the config
for how many source and target
point clouds to use. 
Every source in (PC1) gets
compared with every target in
(PC1) and then the overlap is
calculated
The format for every line is:
<Source Target Overlap>
The new file contains the Y
overlap % in the filename just
before the file extension
* Get next X targets
(PC2)
Start at target cloud
index 0
** Calculate Overlap
between PC1 and
PC2
*** Save new .txt file
with PC1 and PC2
overlaps
Yes
No
More targets?
Yes
No
More sources?
Yes
No
Generate Noise 
Data?
Retraining
* The different sets are specified
  in 3 different txt files and needs
  to be specified in the config
Get overlap
percentage
thresholds (Y)
~ For every Y add
every line in F with
overlap > Y to new
file
Read next .txt (F)
Yes
No
More .txt files?
* Specify training-,
validation-, and test-
sets
FCGF retrainer loads
in all point clouds,
settings and starts
training
Figure 5.4: Pipeline for generating overlap files between point clouds and retraining. The
blocks in the red area are the steps required for generating overlap files and the blue area is
for retraining. The dashed lines are where the algorithm would go to if it had more to process.
The pipeline continues either directly to retraining or noise generation at Figure 5.5. The full
figure can be seen in Figure A.1
3. Overlap calculation
After the point cloud sets PC1 and PC2 have been loaded, the
actual overlap can be calculated. Every source in PC1 gets matched with every target in PC1
and the overlap is calculated as described in Section 4.1.1. Each of these overlaps and the
corresponding source and target gets written in a file. This process is repeated until all scan
and ballast tank point clouds have been matched.
==PAGE:34==
5.2 Dataset Generation and Usage
27
4. Filter overlap percentages
The filtering of the data occurs after the overlap calculation
has been performed. However, if the user choses to generate noisy data from these matched
point clouds, the algorithm would run the noise generation stage, Section 5.2.3 prior to filtering.
The goal of this step is to categorize the source and target combinations into different overlap
groups. e.g. groups containing point cloud combinations with overlaps greater than 30%, 50%
and/or 70%. This is required by the FCGF trainer. These filtered combinations are then
stored in a file with the same name as the unfiltered file, but ending with the minimum overlap
percentage. This is done to make it easier to distinguish between them. The data is now ready
for training, see Section 5.2.4.
5.2.3
Noise Generation
The noise generation is an optional stage when generating the dataset. The purpose of this
stage was to emulate the Mynteye camera, that was supposed to be used on the actual drone.
From the depth data retrieved from the camera, it was found that the noise was dependent on
the distance from the origin to the individual cloud points. The further away the larger the
noise was. This stage was simply created to emulate this noise behavior and add noise to the
already existing dataset.
This stage was made in such a way that it functions like an extension, so instead of being
integrated deep into the dataset algorithm, it simply takes the current aligned scan point clouds
and adds different noise to X copies of the scan point cloud. Where X is the number of noise
origins chosen by the user. The noise is only added to the scans, since the target/map point
cloud is known prior to running the algorithm. The noise on the map is practically nonexisting.
The pipeline for the noise generation can be seen in Figure 5.5 and the steps will be
described in this section. Some of the steps in the flowchart might be skipped since they only
make sense in terms of the flowchart itself.
1. Point cloud loading
The first step is to load the next txt file containing the matches
and their overlaps. Then it reads every line one by one and starts processing the source as
described in the next steps. Each line contains the aligned source, target and overlap between
them.
2. Outlier removal and noise origins
This step creates the noise origins, which in simple
terms are a points in the point cloud where a noise source is defined. This noise sources are
simply where the origin of the camera is emulated to be.
The reason for emulating these
noise origins is that the actual origin of the point cloud and therefore the camera is unknown.
This is true since these aligned point clouds do not have any information about their camera
origins. This could be retrieved but would take up a lot of effort and is not worth the time. An
advantage of emulating these is that it could contribute to a more general model, mainly due
to the fact that the dataset would be more diverse, since multiple noise sources with different
perspectives were added and not just the correct one.
These noise origins were places on the outlining bounding box of the point cloud. Therefore
it was essential to pre-process the point cloud to remove outliers, otherwise the outliers could
contribute to noise that would be unusable large for training. This is especially important
since the data used for training had a lot of outliers. An outlier roughly 10 meters away could
contribute to the whole scan, with emulated noise, becoming useless. It would be useless since
==PAGE:35==
5.2 Dataset Generation and Usage
28
fig
et
Yes
Noise Generation
*   
**
***
~
X is a chosen value in the config
and is how many noise origins
to use. These are place on the
bounding box and are evenly
spaced out.
The noise is uniformly
distributed and scaled
depending on the distance to
NO
The format for every line is:
<Source Target Overlap>
The overlap and target is the
same as the one without noise
Ignoring appended point clouds
Read next .txt (F)
Get next line in F
and load the
corresponding source
point cloud (PC)
Remove outliers and
get bounding box
(BB) of PC
** Add noise to every
point in PC2 and save
new PC2
* Place X noise
origins on the BB
Get next noise origin
(NO) and clone PC as
(PC2)
No
Yes
More noise
origins?
*** Append new point
clouds to F
No
Yes
More .txt files?
No
Yes
~ More lines in F?
Figure 5.5: Pipeline for noise generation. The blocks in the purple area is the steps needed
for adding noisy data to the dataset. The dashed lines are where the algorithm would go to
if it had more to process. The pipeline continues to overlap files generation and afterwards
retraining Figure 5.4. The full figure can be seen in Figure A.1
the noise on the scans could end up being larger than the distance between the compartments.
Therefore the outliers were removed. An example can be seen in Figure 5.6. This of course
depends on the noise scaling factor defined by the user. The outlier removal method used is
a radius based method. It simply removes points if it has less than Y points within a given
radius.
After the outlier removal the bounding box could be calculated and the noise origins on
the bounding box could be estimated. Each of the X origins, where X is the number of origins
chosen by the user, will then be placed along the bounding box with a distance of L/X between
each other, where L is the circumference of the bounding box.
3. Adding noise
With the noise origins found, the actual noise can be added. This is done
by cloning the source point cloud from step 1. and use one of the origins from the previous step.
==PAGE:36==
5.2 Dataset Generation and Usage
29
Figure 5.6: This figure shows 2 potential cases of the noise origins with and without outlier.
To the left there is an origin on the bounding box without outliers and to the right there is
an origin on the bounding box with one outlier. The blue box is the bounding box, the black
circles are the points, the green circle with a red outline is the origin, and the red lines are the
potential locations of the points after adding noise in only one direction. Keep in mind that
this is just to illustrate the scenario. Furthermore the blue box would normally go through
the points and the noise would be in x, y, and z
For every point the distance from the origin to the point in x, y, and z are calculated. Each of
these points are then multiplied with an uniformly distributed random value between [−N; N],
where N is an user chosen noise per distance parameter and the corresponding distance. This
process was repeated until all origins had a noisy version of the cloned point cloud.
4. Storing noisy point clouds
At last the noisy point clouds are simply stored by adding
a new point cloud file for each origin and appending the new source, target, and overlap data
to the existing overlap files. These steps were repeated until all sources had noisy copies and
once that was true, the algorithm would return to the filtering step in Section 5.2.2, step 3.
5.2.4
Training
This is the stage where the actual FCGF training happens. Firstly the training and validation
set is defined, which uses 2/3 of the dataset. The rest is used as the test set. The rest is just
defining the location of the current model, features in the model, batch size etc.
The pipeline can be seen in Figure 5.4 in the bottom. There are not many steps, since
most of it is just default pytorch training using their specific model.
However, there is a
lot of parameter tuning and user choices that will have a great impact on the final models
performance, which will be introduced in this section.
5.2.4.1
Important Paramters for Training
There exists quite some parameters for training, however a lot of these are just output or input
directories which was changed to the system at hand and only a few of the other parameters
for the specific training were changed. Some of the important ones were voxel size, dataset,
hit ratio etc. All these changes will be described in this section:
==PAGE:37==
5.2 Dataset Generation and Usage
30
Custom data
The most important change was the custom data. By default it uses the
3D-match dataset, but with their own data format. Their format is simple, which consists of
numpy files (npz) for each point cloud, text files describing which npz files are matched, and
three other text files describing which matching files to use for training, validation and testing.
Each of the lines in the matching file contains a source, a target and the overlap percentage
between them. So in instead of defining a transform between the two point clouds they simply
align them from the start and describe the overlap.
Voxel size
Initially the voxel size was changed by down-sampling the point cloud after
aligning them and changing the training parameter to that same voxel size. However, for some
reason this resulted in memory leaks while training and would crash the training program
randomly due to not enough memory. Later only the voxel size parameter for FCGF training
was changed, without prior down-sampling and the memory leaks stopped. This seemed odd,
but it resulted in a decent model without any training problems. The reason why the voxel size
was changed was to increase the speed. A larger voxel size means fewer points and therefore a
faster feature description. For the given task the voxel size 0.04m was chosen, simply because
0.025m was too slow and it did not improve performance over 0.04m, which can be seen in
Chapter 6.
Hit ratio and feature matching
The trainer would save two weights when training. One
at the last epoch and one at the first epoch where the feature match ratio is the highest.
Meaning if the feature match ratio hits 1 in the first epoch, the weights of that epoch would
be stored, even though the hit ratio would still increase and the loss would decrease during
the training.
How this works is not documented, but from reading the code of the FCGF trainer, it can
be found that the hit ratio, hit_ratio, is simply the mean of a boolean matrix. The elements
in the boolean matrix are found by checked whenever the distance from the aligned points to
the correct points is larger than the user specified threshold, hit_ratio_thresh. After the
boolean elements are calculated, they get converted to a float and the mean is calculated. This
results in the hit_ratio for that aligned point cloud being a single float value between 0-1.
After that the feature match ratio, feature_match_ratio, can be calculated. This is simply
done by checking if hit_ratio>0.05, which returns a boolean value. This means that if only
1
20’th of the points were correctly aligned the feature_match_ratio would be 1.
Now this calculation is done for every point cloud in the training batch. Then the average
of every aligned point clouds feature_match_ratio would be printed and used for estimating
the best model. The effects and a comparison of the the last and best epoch will be presented
in Chapter 6. However, this also means that if the hit_ratio was 5% for all point clouds it
would result in an average feature_match_ratio of 1, meaning the trainer thinks this is the
best model and that it cannot improve. The purpose of this average feature_match_ratio
is most likely to ensure that the model is not overfit to the training data. Additionally it was
found that a larger hit ratio threshold meant that a less tight alignment is accepted by the
model, resulting in a slightly worse pose estimation but helps with convergence of the model.
likewise a smaller hit ratio threshold results in a tighter alignment, but slower convergence or
perhaps divergence. A hit ratio threshold of 0.075m was chosen, since it was a good compromise
between convergence and tightness of the transform. This threshold meant that a 0.04m voxel
==PAGE:38==
5.3 Localization
31
size would accept an aligned point cloud that could vary with roughly 2 voxels distance from
the ground truth and with 3 voxels distance for the 0.025m voxel size case.
5.3
Localization
The localization consists of multiple systems, which can be seen in Figure 5.7, the full graph
can be seen in Figure A.2 and will be broken into smaller pieces in the following sections. The
bold words in the graphs are variables and bold words with parenthesis are definitions of these
variables. The blue and green fields represent the communication, where blue are the fields
that publish to a rostopic and the green fields subscribe to a rostopic. Some of the steps in
the flowchart might be skipped since they only make sense in terms of the flowchart itself.
The first system (FCGF pose) is the pose estimation based on point cloud matching. This
system is important, since it gives an estimate on the pose relative to the map frame.
The second system (ROVIO pose) is an odometry estimate based on key point tracking.
The difference between the first and second system is that the second system has a high update
rate, but does not have a reference frame that is directly linked with the map, and is therefore
relative to the initial pose. These relative poses tend to drift over time. This is where the third
system comes into play.
The third systems role is to fuse the two estimates to make a better estimate. It uses the
relative pose estimate from ROVIO to get a high update rate, but fixes the relative pose to
the absolute pose when a new FCGF pose is found. This is done by building a graph using all
the pose and movement measurements. The graph is then optimized to get a more accurate
pose relative to the map. At last everything is visualized, so the user can keep an eye on what
happens. Each of the follow subsections will explain these systems in more depth.
5.3.1
Absolute Pose Estimation Using Point Cloud Alignment
There are two methods for pose estimation in this system and both are used. In this section the
first method will be described. This method uses point cloud registration for estimating the
pose. This pose will be an absolute pose estimation, since it is relative to the map point cloud,
which is fixed to the map frame. This absolute pose will be used in the graph optimization
stage to fix the relative pose, which has a higher update rate than FCGF. The pipeline can be
seen in Figure 5.8 and will be described in a stepwise manner in this section.
1. Initialization and method choice
Firstly the parameters and specified methods are
loaded. Currently there is only one option for feature descriptors namely FCGF Section 5.1.2.
However, this method can be used with different models.
The next choice is the correspondence method. Here there currently exists two methods
either traditional KNN search or FAISS, see Section 5.1.3. Faiss has a slight disadvantage
when it comes to accuracy, but it is vastly faster, which outweighs the potential disadvantage.
The last option is the transform estimation method where either TEASER++ or RANSAC
can be used. Even so they both perform similarly with the chosen parameters, but TEASER++
is more robust against noise and vastly faster in the implementation see Chapter 6.
It is
important to mention that the method using RANSAC has its own correspondence search
method which can not be changed. Furthermore RANSAC will mostly be used as a baseline.
==PAGE:39==
5.3 Localization
32
Estimate Absolute Pose
based on point cloud
matching
Scan Transform and Pose
This stage is responsible for
estimating poses and transforms
using point cloud matching from
scans to the map
Add Poses to Graph
(And optimize)
Graph Optimization
This stage is responsible for
building a graph and optimizing
to get a more faithful estimate
on the pose and transforms
found from point cloud
matching and visual inertial
interntial
Visual Inertial Odometry
This stage is responsible for
estimating poses and
transforms relative to the initial
pose. It has a higher update
rate than point cloud matching.
Visualization
This stage is responsible for
visualizing everything relevant
Calculate Relative Pose
based on key-point
tracking and IMU
Visualize Poses, Point
Clouds, Localization etc.
Figure 5.7: This figure shows a very high level flow chart of the localization. There are in
total four stages. The green stage is pose estimation using point cloud alignment. The purple
stage is visual inertial odometry. The red stage is the graph optimization. The blue stage is
the visualization. The lines that cross between stages are ros topic messages
2. Load, down-sample and extract features from static map
If a map is stored locally
it will be loaded when the program is initially started, otherwise it will go directly to step 3..
If a map was found locally it will be down-sampled and the features will be extracted. This
down-sampled map will then get published, so RVIZ can visualize it. In this step there is no
need for alignment, since the map is the target and not the source.
3. Wait for new point clouds and extract new features
This step has multiple func-
tionalities. Firstly the program will idle for a short time, then check if a new scan has been
received. If no scan was received it goes back to the idle state. However, when a new scan is
received it will check if the map has been updated too. If a new map was received it will be
down-sampled and the features will be extracted from it. Otherwise the algorithm will just
load the previous down-sampled map and previously calculated features from the previous map
cloud.
After the map features has been updated, the point cloud for the scan can be down-sampled
and the features can be extracted. This process is usually faster for the scan, since it is a smaller
point cloud compared to the map.
4. Correspondence search
As the features of both the scan and the map has been ex-
tracted the correspondence search can be started. The search can be either done with tradi-
tional KNN or Faiss. The latter is used in the final implementation since it is faster and only
slightly less accurate. The first nearest neighbor is found and then a mutual filter is applied
==PAGE:40==
5.3 Localization
33
Scan Transform and Pose
*
**
***
~
~~
The down-sampling and feature
extraction is performed by FCGF
The correspondences can be found
using traditional KNN or Faiss
The transform can be found with either
Teaser or RANSAC. However
RANSAC finds its own
correspondences.
X is a rosparam and is by default 85%
It has the name: '/fcgf/fitness_thr'
Pose has covariance associated, which
is currently fitness based.
Get parameters and
Initialize methods
publish down-sampled
map cloud (MD)
Idle until new scan
(SC)
* Extract down-sampled
cloud (MD) and
features (MF) for MC
Yes
No
New Map?
(MC)
Load previously
extracted MD, MF, and
MC
* Extract down-sampled
cloud (SD) and features
(SF) for SC
** Find
Correspondences
between SD and MD
using SF and MF
Yes
No
~    Fitness > X ?
Publish transform (FT), 
~~ pose (FP), transformed
downsampled scan (FD)
and MD
Load point cloud
(MC)
*** Estimate alignment
transform
*Extract down-sampled
cloud (MD) and
features (MF) for MC
No
Yes local map cloud?
Figure 5.8: Pipeline for estimating pose and aligning scans to map. The graph shows all the
main steps required to estimate the pose of the drone. The blue fields are published information
and the green fields are subscribed information. The dashed lines are where the algorithm goes
back to in different scenarios. The full figure can be seen in Figure A.2.
to only select the correspondences that are bidirectional which guarantees that each point in
the map and the scan at most has one correspondence. These correspondences will always be
the shortest correspondence, see Section 4.1.4. Furthermore a mutual filter vastly decreases
the number of correspondences making the transform estimation step faster.
An important thing to mention is that due to the improvements of the retrained model
it was found that there were too many correspondences. This resulted in a subpar speed of
TEASER++, but was fixed by limiting the maximum amount of correspondences. There were
2 methods for correspondence limiting, one based on the N ”best” correspondences and one
with N random correspondences. Both methods are explained in Section 5.3.1.1. The increase
in speed using correspondence limiting will be described in Chapter 6.
5. Transform estimation
This step uses the correspondences to find a transformation esti-
mate from the scan to map. It can either be TEASER++ or RANSAC. However, TEASER++
has a superior speed and is more robust against a noisy feature space. Furthermore RANSAC
==PAGE:41==
5.3 Localization
34
will find its own correspondences and does not benefit from faiss correspondence search, this
is not a problem since the bottleneck for RANSAC is the estimation part of the algorithm and
not the correspondence search. On another note since RANSAC is random a high iteration
count has to be selected to get a robust and consistent solution. This is needed since, as the
name suggests, it is a random based method and thus a correct solution is not always found.
Where as TEASER++ uses most of the correspondence information to estimate a transform.
The workings of TEASER++ is described in Section 5.1.4.
6. Transform validility and pose estimation
The last step is to check if the transform
is correct. This is a fairly challenging task since it either needs to rely on some knowledge
about what is correct. This could be anything from previous poses, overlap or fitness. In the
current solution, fitness is the measurement chosen and will be the estimate of the correctness
of the match. Fitness was chosen since it is fairly easy to implement and it would still work
as a standalone correctness estimation method, without depending on past data. Currently a
fitness above 85% would be accepted as a correct match, this could be increased by changing
the ros parameter to increase robustness, but to test the other systems it was specifically
chosen to accept some wrong matches. The reason why it is around the 85% region is that
even a scan with a perfect alignment, could still have points outside of the compartment and
therefore would not contribute to a good fitness. This is common since the data was made in
the lab where the drone could see walls outside of the compartment.
A disadvantage of fitness is that there is no knowledge about how much positional error
there is in the aligned point cloud and in what direction. The error in consideration is the
offset error, meaning if it matched the wrong compartment, which could have a fitness of 100%.
This is currently not a big problem, since a two compartment map is used, but a solution for
this might be needed later.
If the point cloud alignment was estimated to be correct, the actual pose can be estimated.
Afterwards the pose, aligned scan, transform and map would be published. The pose would
simply be derived from the transform and then the covariance would be estimated. This is
where this stage gets challenging, it is usually preferred to have a covariance that precisely
describes the uncertainty in each position and orientation. This is not trivial for alignments
and it would require some sort of estimation. A lot of these methods depend on ICP and are
therefore not used e.g [Pra+15]. This is also why the covariance estimate based on the fitness
was developed. This estimate was simply (1 −fitness) · CK, where C and K were constants
that needed to be fine tuned. It works, but it contains no information about what in the
alignment was incorrect, it simply assumes that all degrees of freedom are the same amount
of incorrect.
5.3.1.1
Correspondence Limiting
Correspondence limiting was essential to increase the speed of the transform estimation. Prior
to limiting the point cloud the estimation could take up to 2 minutes for a single scan, of
course depending on the size of the cloud. However it was quickly found that a limit of max N
points, where N = 1000, was performing with great speed while retaining the accuracy. This
was true for both methods implemented.
The first method was based on selecting N completely random samples from the mutual
correspondences set. However, this randomness could lead to a bad result simply because it
in the worst case would select all outliers in the correspondence set and then try to find a
==PAGE:42==
5.3 Localization
35
transform from that, which would result in an incorrect transform. However, this method
is faster than the other method and it is unlikely that the method will only pick outliers.
Therefore this method is used in the current solution.
The second method was based on the best correspondences, it worked by simply calculat-
ing the distance in the feature space for each correspondence and then select the ones with
the closest correspondence. In theory this could worker better, since it will always select the
correspondences that are the closest. However, this could lead to scenarios where the corre-
spondences in one area always would be selected. These areas perhaps had enough information
already. While in other areas where fewer and perhaps slightly worse correspondences would
be neglected, even if they had useful information. From Chapter 6 it was found to perform
slightly worse than the random based method.
5.3.2
Odometry Estimation Using Tracking and IMU
This system is responsible for estimating relative odom, which is done with ROVIO, a Visual
Inertial Odometry system. This means in contrary to the FCGF pose that the odometry is
estimated relative to the initial position, meaning its first position and orientation is always
(0,0,0) in the given reference frame. The idea behind using ROVIO is to get a faster update
rate, since the FCGF pose is fairly slow. Then use graph optimization to make the relative
pose related to the absolute FCGF poses. The whole pipeline for this stage can be seen in
Figure 5.9 and will be described in a stepwise manner in this section, but not too much in
depth since it is not the focus of this thesis and mainly works as a source of additional pose
data. Keep in mind that this figure is not exactly how it works, but an estimate based on the
paper [Blo15]. Most of the processing is done in chunks, since it needs a lot of prior data.
1a. Feature detection and tracking
If images are received the algorithm will look for
features to track, and store the features and the image it was found in. This is done to later
estimate the 3D position of the features using tracking methods. These features in the images
will be used in 2.. Furthermore the camera extrinsics will be estimated in 4., which in its
essence is the movement of the camera.
1b. Velocity and orientation estimation
If IMU measurements are received the algo-
rithm starts by estimating the linear velocities and orientations. This is done using integrals,
filters and gravity information to get a more robust estimate. These velocities and orientations
will be used in 2.. However, due to the biases in the imu, the integrals will start to drift, which
is why 4. will use a combination of image and IMU data to estimate these biases.
2. Bundle adjustment and landmarks
Now the 3D landmarks can be estimated using
using bundle adjustment on the the IMU movements and image features. These 3D landmarks
can be estimated by using multiple images with the same features and use the features pixel
coordinates in each image together with the camera extrinsics estimated using the EKF and
IMU movements. Then these pixel coordinates in the images are projected into a 3D space.
The ones with the lowest re-projection error becomes 3D landmarks, only storing the best
landmarks for tracking. Bundle adjustment will during the execution of the program continue
to be used to refine these landmarks and find new ones on the go.
==PAGE:43==
5.3 Localization
36
3. Extended kalman filter, update paramters and publish odometry
The Kalman
filter will estimate the error in the IMU biases and camera extrinsics by keeping track of the
landmarks that was found and by using the IMU movements. If the landmarks would start
to change that means the bias estimate or camera extrinsics were incorrect and needs to be
refined. These biases and camera extrinsics are states in the EKF. The EKF is also where the
robot odometry is estimated for position, velocity and orientation. These biases and camera
extrinsics are constantly updated and refined until the error state goes to zero in the EKF.
Visual Inertial Odometry
This is a very vague
representation of ROVIO and
should be taken with a grain of
salt, since it is not the focus of
this thesis, but just a tool used.
Window Bundle
adjustment
EKF (error based)
Yes
Feature detection and
tracking
3D Landmark 
Velocity and
orientation estimation
Publish Odometry
(RO)
No
IMU data?
Yes
No
image data?
Update estimated
IMU bias and camera
extrinsics
Wait for new data
Figure 5.9:
Estimated pipeline for ROVIO odometry estimation.
The graph shows the
main steps required to estimate the odometry using image and imu data. The blue fields are
published information and the green fields are subscribed information. The dashed lines are
where the algorithm goes back. This is derived from the paper and might differ slightly in the
real implementation. The full figure can be seen in Figure A.2.
5.3.3
Graph Optimization
This is another important stage in the system, since it is responsible for improving the lo-
calization. The idea behind it is to build a graph using poses as vertices and the movement
as the edges. Additionally each edge has an information matrix which is the inverse of the
covariance matrix and responsible for specifying how certain the system is about the given
movement between vertices. By using these edges certainties correctly one can build a graph
where vertices from one system is more likely to be moved than vertices from the other system.
==PAGE:44==
5.3 Localization
37
This will be used to improve the localization by using the ”slow” FCGF & TEASER++ pose
as an absolute pose and the ”fast” ROVIO odometry as a relative pose when optimizing the
graph. This is needed since ROVIO tends to drift. IMU and tracking in general tends to drift
since the error accumulates over time. To fix this drift the absolute pose will be used and
thereby resetting the accumulated error and fixing the relative poses. One could argument for
just using absolute pose all the time, but this can not be done since the update rate is too
slow and therefore the relative information from ROVIO is needed. The whole pipeline for this
stage can be seen in Figure 5.10 and will be described in a stepwise manner in this section.
Graph Optimization
*   
** 
~
The edge has an information matrix
which is the inverse of the covariance
matrix. The information matrix is
calculated based on the the largest
covariance of the previous and current
FP or RP vertices
This is important, since FP in rare
cases can be seconds delayed
compared to the newest RP.
This step did not work due to the fact
that the post optimization and online
optimization did not work the same way
and the live visualization of the graph is
not yet built for live optimization.
Initialize Graph (GO) for
optimization
No
Yes
New ROVIO odom?
(RO)
Yes
No
New FCGF pose?
(FP)
Add vertex with same
pose as RO to GO
Save NGO
and wait 
No
Yes
FP covariance > 0.1?
No
Yes
FP fitness < 99%?
Add vertex with same
pose as FP to GO
Fix next FP in GO
* Add edge from previous
FP to current FP with
largest covariance (LC)
* Add edge from previous
RO to current RO with
largest covariance (LC)
Publish graph, with new
poses and edges (NGO)
Publish graph, with new
poses and edges (NGO)
** Find RO vertex closest in
time of FP vertex (ROFP)
Add edge from FP to
ROFP with covariance LC
~ Live optimization and
publishing 
Optimize (OG),
publish and save
OG
No
Yes
Terminated?
Figure 5.10: Pipeline for graph optimization. The graph shows all the main steps required to
improve the pose of the drone. The blue fields are published information and the green fields
are subscribed information. The red field is what is missing in the current implementation.
The dashed lines are where the algorithm goes back to in different scenarios. The full figure
can be seen in Figure A.2.
1. Initializing the graph and graph methods
The graph is initialized with a linear 3D
solver for graph optimization, since the poses are in 3D. Three methods are initialized, one for
adding vertices, one for adding edges and one for optimization step.
The vertex method adds a so called VertexSE3 object to the graph. These objects contains
a 7 element vector representing a 3D pose, using quaternions for orientation. It also contains
==PAGE:45==
5.3 Localization
38
an ID and a option to fix the vertex. The ID will always be derived from the the time stamp
and will either end on 1 or 0 depending on if it is a FCGF or ROVIO pose.
The edge method adds a so called EdgeSE3 object to the graph. These objects contains a 7
element vector representing a 3D movement, using quaternions for orientation. It also contains
a method to set the IDs of the vertices where the edge should go from and to. This object also
has a 6 × 6 information matrix, which is the inverse of the covariance matrix and is used to
specify the uncertainty in the movement.
The optimization method is run at the end and is simply specified to do an initial guess
and then start optimization. This step can be called in every iteration, but the visualization
and methods are currently only made for post optimization and not live optimization.
2. Adding ROVIO pose
The second stage is the adding of relative pose measurements to
the graph. For every pose a vertex is added. Every vertex has an ID that will end on a 0. The
ending zero is to make sure that vertices from ROVIO and FCGF can be distinguish in the
graph.
If a ROVIO vertex already exists in the graph an edge will be added from the previous
ROVIO vertex to the current ROVIO vertex. This edge would have a movement and uncer-
tainty as described in Section 5.3.3.1.
2a Publish pose
Every time a new ROVIO vertex and/or edge was added to the graph the
RVIZ friendly graph with ROVIO and FCGF would be published anew.
3. Adding FCGF pose
The third stage is similar to 2. but it has additional steps. This is
needed since the update rate for FCGF poses is smaller than the update rate for the ROVIO
poses. To ensure that it only does additional steps when both measurements are new, the
slowest pose estimate was chosen as the trigger.
3a. Fixing FCGF pose
The first sub step is to fix some poses, since they need some sort of
reference. Currently the FCGF poses are fixed if the poses are very certain, meaning a fitness
in the 99-100% region. It does not make sense to fix all points, since at times some of them are
incorrect and if an incorrect point were to be fixed it would ruin the optimization completely.
The reason why multiple points are fixed is due to the fact that fixing 1 point would lead to
the later ROVIO and FCGF poses would converge towards each other instead of ROVIO poses
converging towards FCGF poses and not the other way around.
When the FCGF pose has been added with or without fixing it and a previous FCGF vertex
exists, the edge from the previous to the current FCGF vertex will be added with a movement
and uncertainty as described in Section 5.3.3.1.
3b. Connecting FCGF and ROVIO poses
After the FCGF vertex and edge has been
added to the graph, a relation between FCGF and ROVIO vertices is needed, otherwise there
is nothing to optimize since all movements are derived from change in poses. This means that
every time there is a new FCGF vertex the ROVIO vertex with the closes time stamp (ID)
will be selected and the measurement between them will be an identity matrix. The reason
why it is an identity matrix is due to the fact that the poses should be on top of each other as
they were taken at the same time. However, the uncertainty will still be equal to the largest
uncertainty of the nearby edges, since an incorrect FCGF pose when optimizing would force
==PAGE:46==
5.3 Localization
39
an assumably correct ROVIO pose to be incorrect, and the same is true for the neighboring
ROVIO poses.
This was improved by increasing the certainty of the ROVIO pose, which
improved the performance but it was still not perfect.
3c Publish pose
Every time a new FCGF vertex and/or edge was added to the graph the
RVIZ friendly graph with ROVIO and FCGF would be published anew.
3d. Live optimize and publish
Live optimization was supposed to go here. However, the
RVIZ representation did not support online optimization yet, therefore it would not work out
of the box. But the procedure would be the same as in 5.. The only difference would be that
the optimized graph would be published every time a correct FCGF pose was received and not
just on termination of the node.
4.
Save and wait for new pose
After the processing for FCGF and/or ROVIO was
complete the un-optimized graph would be saved and the algorithm would wait until a new
pose was received.
5. Post-optimize and publish
Currently the graph can be optimized and published by
requesting a terminate for the graph optimization node, which can be done by pressing the
signal interrupt hotkey in a linux terminal: Ctrl + c. By doing so once will result in the
graph optimization node executing the optimization of the currently generated graph and stop
adding new poses to the graph. Furthermore the optimized graph will be published until the
program is completely terminated or the roscore/rosbag is shut down. This means that it is
currently an one time call and should only be called once the program is almost done. Keep in
mind that it should be called before the rosbag stops, otherwise it cannot publish the optimized
graph since no rostime is running. Requesting the interrupt hotkey again will shut down the
program.
5.3.3.1
Edge Movement and Information
All these vertices and edges in the backend are stored as a transformation matrix structure,
this means that even though a quaternion is initially given it is still stored as a transformation
matrix. This means that the inverse easily can be calculated and the movement can thus be
found as
Tmovement = T −1
previousTcurrent
(5.1)
The covariance for this movement was selected as the largest covariance of the previous and
current pose. Afterwards the information matrix was found as the inverse of the covariance
matrix. This information matrix would then be assigned to the edge as a movement uncertainty.
The reason why the largest covariance of the poses were used, was that there is no direct
movement covariance, thus the movement itself did not have a covariance and had to be
estimated. To ensure that an incorrect pose did not influence the previous or next pose to
much, the largest covariance was selected as the movement uncertainty to and from that pose.
==PAGE:47==
5.3 Localization
40
5.3.4
Visualization
The visualization is probably the most important parts for the users. This is where it can
seen how well the algorithms currently perform and if something is off.
Currently all the
visualization subscribed to, can be seen in Figure 5.12. This pipeline will be described shortly
in this section and each visualization type can be seen in Figure 5.11. The reference frame in
the visualization is map, which is the frame the map point cloud is referenced to.
1.
Scan and map point cloud
These topics are mainly here to check if the scans are
properly aligned to the map cloud. This can be seen in Figure 5.11(a), where the aligned scan
is the red point cloud which is on top of the map, which is the white point cloud. The map
point cloud uses the map frame as reference.
2. ROVIO pose and FCGF pose
These topics are used to see the current position and
orientation of the robot. Both systems use different approaches to do so. These visualizations
are simply an axis somewhere in the point cloud as seen in Figure 5.11(b) and Figure 5.11(c).
They are not easily distinguishable, but a rule of thump is that the ROVIO pose will usually be
further down than the FCGF pose or to be more safe it is the axis that started in (0,0,0). This
is due to the fact that ROVIO is an estimate relative to the initial position and not relative to
the map frame. However, this is not the case after optimization, where the update frequency
can be used instead to figure out which one is the ROVIO pose.
3. Tagslam path
This topic is mainly subscribed for benchmarking. It is a good indicator
on how well the actual localization algorithm performs. Tagslam is used to do SLAM, Simulta-
neous Localization and Mapping, using tags that are placed in the environment. It estimates
the pose, camera extrinsic, etc using these tags. The purpose of tagslam is to have a ground
truth to compare the different localization methods against. Keep in mind that the tagslam
method can only be used in environments where tags have been placed and is essentially useless
in unknown environments. In the visualization it is simply a green line, which can be seen in
Figure 5.11(f).
4. (optimized) graph
This topic is used to visualize the graph that is being built using
ROVIO and FCGF. This graph can be seen in Figure 5.11(d) and Figure 5.11(e), where the
first is the un-optimized graph being visualized in real-time and the latter is the optimized
graph. The teal dots are the FCGF vertices and the pink dots are the ROVIO vertices. The
yellow lines are the edges from FCGF to ROVIO. The red lines are the edges between FCGF
poses and the green lines are the edges between ROVIO poses. However the latter might not
be relevant since the green lines cannot be seen due to the fast update rate of ROVIO.
==PAGE:48==
5.3 Localization
41
(a): Red is scan, white is
map
(b): Axis is FCGF pose.
(c): Axis is ROVIO odom,
starts at ground plane.
(d):
ROVIO: pink dots,
green edges.
FCGF: teal dots, red edges.
Between: Yellow edges.
(e): Optimized graph.
ROVIO: pink dots.
FCGF: teal dots
(f): Tagslam path
Figure 5.11: These figures show the different visualizations. All of them shows the map point
cloud for reference. FCGF pose shows the the scan it is derived from.
Visualization
This is not how the flow chart is,
But by making it sequential it is
easier to describe in the section.
It simply subscribes to the topics
corresponding the correct
information and then shows
them in RVIZ
* For benchmarking only
Map point cloud MD
Scan aligned point
cloud FD
FCGF Pose
FP
ROVIO odometry
RO
Graph NGO or
optimized graph GO
Wait for new data
* Tagslam Path
Figure 5.12: The figure shows the main topics that will be visualization. Keep in mind that
this is not the exact pipeline, but is set up serially to make it easier to describe. The green
fields are subscribed information. The dashed line is where the algorithm goes back to. The
full figure can be seen in Figure A.2.
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 6
Results and Discussion
In this chapter the results and performance of the whole system will be discussed, but also the
individual parts and different solutions for these.
6.1
Point Cloud Alignment
The first part is the point cloud alignment, which is necessary to get the absolute pose. As
mentioned before the current method uses FCGF, TEASER++ and Faiss, where Faiss is used
for sped up correspondence search. FCGF and TEASER++ without Faiss gave roughly the
same results, but was vastly slower than with Faiss.
This section will discuss the performance of the pose estimation using point cloud matching
with different parameters and models. Keep in mind that the timings may vary slightly from
run to run, therefore small difference will not be enough to verify that one method is better
than the other. These slight changes can occur due to background processes or that one of the
random methods spend more time due to having some bad random samples. All that would
contribute to slight changes in timings.
6.1.1
Notable Comments
In this section some notable comments will be describes. This is to give a short overview about
things that might seem weird when explaining the results.
6.1.1.1
Recieving Point Clouds is Slow
When gathering the timings from each run, the total time from receiving to publishing can vary
a lot depending on the point cloud size. E.g. the Kinect point cloud takes roughly 1-2 seconds
to receive from the ros topic, in the mean time the downsampled Mynteye point clouds take
less than 0.2 seconds to receive. This is mainly due to the fact that sending all these points
through the ros communication takes a lot of time as seen in Figure 6.1. This slow receiving
speed, biases the whole systems timings and since the bag data is predefined, the kinect bag
will always publish this large point cloud. Therefore the receiving time was removed from the
total timing graphs, since it basically would be a random time bias. Furthermore it does not
make sense to include this timing, since the point cloud receiving time is not part of the real
system anyways. In the real system it would retrieve the point cloud directly from the camera
and not ros.
==PAGE:50==
6.1 Point Cloud Alignment
43
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.0
0.5
1.0
Getting Scan [s]
Kinect
Mynteye
Kinect
Mynteye
0.0
0.5
1.0
Getting Scan [s]
Figure 6.1: The figure to the left shows the time it takes to receive each scan, running the
algorithm in real time. The figure to the right shows a box plot of the data. The legends on
the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is the camera data used.
6.1.1.2
Alignment Types
For this section it is important to mention that there are three types if matches, namely correct
matches Figure 6.2, offset matches Figure 6.3, and wrong matches Figure 6.4. These matches
are often distinguishable by looking at the fitness of the aligned scan. However, an offset and
correct match can be hard to distinguish at times, especially if the scan had a small point
count.
A correct match is usually between 85% and 100%, where the 15% buffer is because points
often are detected outside of the current compartment, and thus physically does not have a
match on the map. Fitness of 50% to 85% is often a offset match, but at rare occasions a
small scan can also have a fitness in the correct fitness region. Everything below 50% fitness
is considered an incorrect match.
The fitness is currently used to estimate the covariance, like described in Section 5.3. This
means that the covariance is directly related to the fitness, which can be bad and good. The
good aspect is that it is computation light, but at the same time an offset match might have
a low covariance due to the rare occasions described above. However, these offset matches
can easily be filtered out using motion filters and are therefore not a problem. Furthermore it
always estimates a huge covariance when a wrong match is presented, since the fitness is low
in those cases, which can be seen in Figure 6.5. In that figure, the purple sphere is the position
covariance and the yellow ”circles” are the rotational covariance. The rotational covariance is
so large that it cannot be shown without zooming far out, which indicates a small fitness.
It is also important to mention that this 85% fitness threshold can be set as a ROS param-
eter and it should probably be something larger to be completely certain that it is a correct
match in the real system. However, for the purpose of the thesis some slightly offset samples
will be used to check the robustness of the localization method.
==PAGE:51==
6.1 Point Cloud Alignment
44
Figure 6.2: A correct match of the scan (red point cloud) on the map (white point cloud).
Top Axis is the estimated FCGF pose from the match.
Figure 6.3: A offset match of the scan (red point cloud) on the map (white point cloud). Top
Axis is the estimated FCGF pose from the match.
Figure 6.4: A incorrect match of the scan (red point cloud) on the map (white point cloud.
Top Axis is the estimated FCGF pose from the match, covariance was hidden for the purpose
of visualizing the estimated pose.
==PAGE:52==
6.1 Point Cloud Alignment
45
Figure 6.5: A incorrect match of the scan (red point cloud) on the map (white point cloud.
Top Axis is the estimated FCGF pose from the match with covariance.
6.1.2
Initial Performance Using Pre-trained FCGF Model
Initially the performance of FCGF was subpar, it would only get a few correct matches if any
at all. The fitness can be seen in Figure 6.6. There it is clear that the pre-trained models
do not perform well enough to be used in the real system.
However, by looking at these
initial models it seems like the 16 features model drastically outperformed the model with 32
features. This seems rather odd since the model with 32 features should have the potential to
be better, due to the fact that it has more ways to describe the point relations. This is a sign
that the neurals are not properly trained for this kind of environments. Furthermore the 16
feature model was retrained and the result was worse than the pre-trained 16 features model.
Therefore the retrained 16 features model was not used going forward. However, the retrained
32 feature model was vastly improved as seen in Section 6.1.3. This shows that the 32 feature
model indeed had a greater potential. The rest of the pre-trained evaluations can be seen in
Figure A.3.
6.1.3
Retrained Model
After retraining the model, the correspondences method found vastly more correspondences,
in some cases too many for TEASER++ to solve in any useful time. It now took TEASER++
more than 2 minutes for processing most point clouds. This was a consequence of the model
improving and thus finding more good correspondences in between the point cloud points.
To test if the feature descriptor model indeed improved another registration method than
TEASER++ was applied, since TEASER++ would spend too much time on find a transform.
In this case RANSAC was used.
This method indeed found good matches and within
a consistent speed of 3sec with the chosen settings of 4 million guessing iterations and 500
validation iterations. This high iteration count settings were chosen to be as robust as possible
without taking forever. The reason for doing so many iteration was to get a kind of ”ground
truth” for estimating the transform. If RANSAC could find a good solution using the feature
descriptions, then other methods should also be able to estimate the transform. Therefore
==PAGE:53==
6.1 Point Cloud Alignment
46
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
16D
32D
16D
32D
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
Figure 6.6: The figure to the left shows the fitness of the aligned scan on the map, running
the algorithm in real time. The figure to the right shows a box plot of the data. The legends
on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is the dimension of the feature space of the
model, each with voxel size 0.025m.
RANSAC was mainly used to verify that a transformation could be found, but it would use
more time than TEASER++.
After running the new model with different matchers it was found that the feature descriptor
model indeed had been improved, but TEASER++ had too many correspondences to take
into account. The different methods performance will be described later in this chapter. Now
instead of having between a few hundred to a thousand correspondences as it did in the initial
model, it now had a few thousands. This amount of correspondences was almost impossible for
TEASER to calculate in time, since the run-time grows in polynomial time with the number
of points in the point cloud [YSC20]. Thus some sort of correspondence limiting was needed,
which the next section will describe.
6.1.3.1
Correspondence limiting
Two methods for correspondence limiting were implemented. X Best feature space correspon-
dences and X random correspondences. However, as it turned out from testing the accuracy,
the random based method was either slightly better or just as good for both 0.025m and 0.040m
voxel size, see Figure 6.7(a).
The speed of the 2 methods were basically the same and if there was any difference it
would be in the processing time where the random based method would be slightly faster,
see Figure 6.7(b). However, this speed could vary from run to run, but from the figures it
seems like the random method was faster and more accurate. The reason why it would not
have a significant difference in terms of speed is that the distance calculation is a rather simple
operation compared to the feature descriptor, correspondence search and transform estimation.
Anyways, the random based method was chosen for further development mainly due to the
fact that it was slightly better in terms of fitness. The rest of the evaluations can be seen in
Figure A.4
==PAGE:54==
6.1 Point Cloud Alignment
47
(a): These figures shows the fitness from four different models:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the processing time from four different models:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Processing time [s]
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Processing time [s]
Figure 6.7: The two figures to the left show the fitness and processing time of the aligned
scan on the map respectively, running the algorithm in real time. The figures to the right
shows a box plot of the data. The legends on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is
the voxel size and if the correspondences are distance (dist) or random (ran) based.
6.1.3.2
Best Epoch vs Last Epoch
As mentioned in Section 5.2.4.1, there exists two weights when a training is complete. One that
is based on the best epoch using feature match ratio as a parameter and one that is simply the
last epoch. At first it seems like the smartest choice to use the model at the best epoch rather
than the last epoch, since it would be more true to the initial model and training philosophy
from the author of the model. However, from running both models the weights from the last
epoch seems to perform better and is less random, see Figure 6.8, where the best epoch is at
7 and the last epoch is at 100. From the graph it can be seen that the ”best” model seems
to be more random. It has more single spikes at random locations, while the last model is
more consistent, but has more poor fitness in specific regions of the ballast tank. At first one
would think this was due to the last model being overfit to the training data and therefore
==PAGE:55==
6.1 Point Cloud Alignment
48
performs poorly on the test-set region.However, this was not the case, since first of all the test-
set consists of 1
3 of the whole dataset and it was randomly picked, meaning the spikes would be
more random and not in a region if over-fitting was the cause of the poor performance in that
region. The second point is that even after 300 epochs of retraining, the loss on the validation
set is still going downwards and the hit ratio goes upwards as seen in Figure 6.10(b), meaning
that the training is still learning general features that are both present in the training and
validation set. However, the 300 epoch retrained model in Figure 6.9 seems to be closer to a
overfit model, since the random spikes occur, but at the same time a new large region with
poor performance is found, pcd 300-400. Which again means it most like is not an overfit
problem. Especially considering that both models used the same training, validation and test
set, but still found different poor performance regions. The rest of the models evaluations can
be seen in Figure A.5.
These regions where the performance is subpar could just be regions that are hard to
describe with the current method and perhaps needed more or better data to train on. When
looking at the box-plot in Figure 6.8 it is also clear that the model using the last epoch is
better, having the third quartile at around 80% while the best epoch has the third quartile at
around 30%. This was true for all the tests that ran and therefore the best epoch does not
seem like the best option for this task. However, by reducing the hit ratio threshold, the best
epoch would be found later, but it often resulted in weights that at times diverged and thus
became useless. Therefore the model based on the last epoch is used and to ensure that it is
not overfit a reasonable epoch is chosen.
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
0.040m last
0.040m best
0.040m last
0.040m best
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
Figure 6.8: The figure to the left shows the fitness of the aligned scan on the map, running
the algorithm in real time. The figure to the right shows a box plot of the data. The legends
on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is the voxel size and if it is the ”best” epoch
or the last epoch
6.1.3.3
Retraining vs Training from scratch
All the new models were trained using transfer learning, but the models could also be trained
from scratch. However, those turned out to perform worse as seen in Figure 6.9. This is after
300 epochs for both cases. It seems the training from scratch gets stuck in a local minimum
and never gets a somewhat general idea of how point clouds can relate, where as the retrained
==PAGE:56==
6.1 Point Cloud Alignment
49
model performed decently, not as good as the previous model, but still better. This belief
is enhanced when looking at the training loss in Figure 6.10, where it can be seen that the
model trained from scratch is not making any useful progress. However, it could also mean
that a lot more training epochs would be needed to gain a somewhat decent result. Especially
considering that the tendencies in hit ratio and loss seems to mainly improve after epoch 50.
No matter what it would not be worth the time, since 300 epochs already took a day to train
and that was with a fairly small dataset. The better approach is to use the pre-trained model,
which has already learned a general concept of how points are related and thus getting a decent
model using retraining would be easier.
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
retraining
scratch
retraining
scratch
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
Figure 6.9: The figure to the left shows the fitness of the aligned scan on the map, running
the algorithm in real time. The figure to the right shows a box plot of the data. The legends
on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is the model from retraining or scratch.
0
100
200
300
epoch
0.0000
0.0705
0.1410
0.2115
0.2820
0.3525
0.4230
0.4935
0.5640
hit_ratio
retrained
scratch
(a): Hit ratio
0
100
200
300
epoch
0.0000
0.1149
0.2298
0.3446
0.4595
0.5744
0.6893
0.8041
0.9190
loss
retrained
scratch
(b): Loss
0
100
200
300
epoch
0.000
0.125
0.250
0.375
0.500
0.625
0.750
0.875
1.000
match_ratio
retrained
scratch
(c): Feature Match Ratio
Figure 6.10: These figures show each metric for every epoch. It can be seen that the retraining
finds a better minimum and becomes a better model according to the hit ratio, loss and feat
match ratio after 300 epochs.
==PAGE:57==
6.1 Point Cloud Alignment
50
6.1.4
Evaluating the Best Model
This section will present the results using the best 32 feature 0.04m voxel size model, both for
running in realtime and frame by frame. Real time in this case means that the scans would not
be queued by more than one and if a new scan were to be queued it would simply be skipped
until the algorithm is done processing the point cloud. The correspondences was limited to
a 1000 and used the random based method. The results for frame by frame can be seen in
Section 6.1.4.1 and the results for realtime can be seen in Section 6.1.4.2.
6.1.4.1
Best model Frame By Frame
The frame by frame analysis is a good way to check if the transform algorithms actually
perform similarly, since they all get to work on every cloud with as much time as needed.
However, it is not a realistic case for the actual system since the update rate of the point
clouds is faster than the process rate in the real system. In Figure 6.11 it can be seen that
the fitness of the methods are relatively close, but TEASER++ seems to be slightly inferior
to RANSAC. However TEASER++ with and without Faiss seems to perform quite similarly,
slightly favouring TEASER++ without faiss.
However, this is easily out-weighted by the
fact that the transformation estimation time for TEASER+Faiss is close to a magnitude faster
than RANSAC and TEASER++ without faiss. By having this increased speed it could process
more clouds, which in turn would give more data to the optimization graph and thereby better
accuracy. The rest of the metrics can be seen in Figure A.6
6.1.4.2
Best Model in Realtime
The realtime test is the most important test since this is how the algorithm would be exposed
to the data in real life. However, the realtime test does not change the speed of the algorithm, it
just exposes the algorithm to fewer point clouds, since it skips most of them due to processing
times.
The results can be seen Figure 6.12.
From the first plot it can be seen that the
fitness is seemingly good for all transform methods. However, the main difference comes in
the second plot where the transform time is shown. Here it is clear that TEASER with Faiss
is vastly faster than the two other methods, when comparing the transform estimation time.
The processing time and publishing time should be roughly the same since the same model
for feature extraction was used for all three tests. This is why the TEASER+Faiss method is
chosen as the final solution. the rest of the metrics can be seen in Figure A.7.
6.1.5
Evaluating the Best Model With Mynteye Data
The idea was to add artificial noise on the Kinect data to emulate the Mynteye data. However,
the training ended up diverging, resulting in a model that had a large loss and close to 0%
hit ratio. Therefore the noisy model was not used. Furthermore, the current best model was
tested on the Mynteye data, but it performed poorly, see Figure 6.13(a). This makes sense
since the Mynteye has vastly more noise, which the model has never been trained for. The
reasons for this will be discussed later. The rest of the evaluations can be seen in Figure A.9.
==PAGE:58==
6.2 Localization
51
(a): These figures shows the fitness of three different methods:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the transformation estimation time of three dif-
ferent methods:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
2
4
6
8
10
Transform time [s]
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
0
2
4
6
8
10
Transform time [s]
Figure 6.11: The figures to the left show the fitness and transformation estimation time
respectively, running the algorithm frame by frame. The figures to the right shows a box plot
of the data. The legends on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is the method used.
6.2
Localization
This section will describe the results of the localization using graph optimization. The methods
used for pose estimation were FCGF+TEASER+faiss and ROVIO. Using these methods a
promising result was found, see Figure 6.14. In the graph it can be seen that the offset FCGF
poses fit quite well with tagslam, with the exception of the x position at around 10 seconds.
At 10 seconds a pose derived from an offset match was inserted into the graph. If that point
was neglected the FCGF pose performed perfectly within the objectives requirements. This
point could easily be removed if a motion filter was applied, which will be discussed later.
However, due to this offset the optimized graph has a short period from roughly 9-15 seconds
where it does not fulfill the tolerance of 0.4m, but by implementing the motion filter that spike
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Localization
52
(a): These figures shows the fitness of three different methods:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the transformation estimation time of three dif-
ferent methods:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
2
4
6
8
Transform time [s]
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
0
2
4
6
8
Transform time [s]
Figure 6.12: The figures to the left show the fitness and transformation estimation time
respectively, running the algorithm in real time. The figures to the right shows a box plot of
the data. The legends on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is the method used.
would not have been accepted. This would mean that the optimization would be within the
tolerances and therefore be an acceptable optimization algorithm.
It is also important to note that the z position started and ended roughly 0.1m above the
actual position, and thus an offset version was plotted too. The offset might have been caused
by a missing transform from camera to body-rig. However, looking at the whole picture the
optimization seems to mostly agree with the tendencies of tagslam. Furthermore it is also
important to note that tagslam is not perfect and could also vary from the ground truth, as
can be seen between 0-10 sec in the z-pos plot, where it oscillates with up to 0.5m from sample
to sample, which the drone did not do.
Now looking at the actual pose estimate in 3D, before and after optimization, see Fig-
ure 6.15, it can be seen that the optimization indeed corrects and improves the ROVIO pose.
==PAGE:60==
6.2 Localization
53
(a): These figures shows the fitness of two different rosbags:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
Kinect
Mynteye
Kinect
Mynteye
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the total time of two different rosbags:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Total time [s]
Kinect
Mynteye
Kinect
Mynteye
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Total time [s]
Figure 6.13: The figures to the left show the fitness and total time respectively, running the
algorithm in real time. The figures to the right shows a box plot of the data. The legends on
the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is camera data used
However, it is also clear that it by no means is a perfect representation of tagslam. From (c) to
(d) it can be seen that the spacing from the pink dots changes drastically at times, specifically
the top part of (d). This is caused by the offset pose from the incorrect match.
6.2.0.1
Localization Video
In this section the results from the full run will be described using a video. A paragraph will
be added for every key timestamp and with a short description of what happens. Keep in
mind that the optimization step is currently performed after the graph optimization algorithm
is terminated and that FCGF is offset in z, since tagslam and the camera were in two different
frames. The video can be found on YouTube1 with the link in the footnote . All the visualiza-
1https://youtu.be/YoyqNdiqgkQ
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Localization
54
tions are the same as in Figure 5.11, with the addition of the gui and the camera view down
in the left corner.
0:14
The incorrect match occurs, but as seen by the red point cloud, it is a perfectly aligned
point cloud.
There is no way for TEASER++ to distinguish this match from the correct
one. This is the reason why the spike in Figure 6.14 for x-pos happened. This offset occurs
simply because there is no positional awareness in the feature descriptor. It fits perfectly on
the white point cloud in two places and this time it was the incorrect place it was aligned to.
It can also be seen that the covariance is low, since there is no purple sphere around it. As
mentioned before this pose would have to be discarded, since it moved too far in the x direction.
Furthermore tagslam, the green line, can be seen to jump once in a while.
1:19-1:29
A lot of incorrect matches occur, but are neglected due to their low fitness. These
are not visualized, but it can be seen since the FCGF pose does not change. This is the same
region where the last epoch model in Figure 6.8 had poor accuracy. However, this is not a
problem, since the relative pose at this point would be relative to the FCGF poses, if the live
optimization was implemented. Furthermore the effects of the post optimization can be seen
in Figure 6.14 at 80 sec, where the optimized graph still estimates the pose quite well even
without any FCGF poses in the 10 second duration.
1:33-1:44
The same case as 1:19-1:29 just time shifted.
1:51-1:53
The rosbag is paused and the graph optimization node is interrupted to start the
optimization, then the rosbag is resumed. The reason the rosbag is paused is because nothing
can be published to ROS once the rosbag is terminated, which it does automatically when it
is done. This means that the post-optimization will happen, but it will not be published and
therefore not be visualized. However, this is not a problem in the real system, since there is
no rostime depending on the rosbag.
1:56
The optimization is published and the unnecessary displays are disabled and the graph
visualization is re-enabled to clear the graph lines. The re-enabling is needed since the algo-
rithm currently does not publish new lines and therefore the old ones persist.
2:16-End
Only tagslam and optimized ROVIO+FCGF pose is shown. The relative ROVIO
pose is closer to tagslam after the optimization. This is the result that is shown in Figure 6.14.
The optimized graph and tagslam has a lot of the same tendencies, but are not perfectly
aligned. This can be improved by adding the constant offset of 0.1m. Further improvements
are discussed in Section 6.4.
==PAGE:62==
6.3 Localization Using Best Model on Jetson
55
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
x-pos [m]
tagslam
FCGF+ROVIO
FCGF+ROVIO offset
FCGF offset
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.5
1.0
1.5
y-pos [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
time [s]
0.75
1.00
1.25
z-pos [m]
Figure 6.14: This figure shows the x, y, and z positions of tagslam, the optimized graph and
the optimized graph but with an offset in z to match the initial position, this offset was 0.1m.
Note the spike at 10 sec in x-pos, which was caused by an incorrect match. Apart from that
spike and a few smaller spikes exists, mainly in tagslam. However, they seem to share the same
tendencies
6.3
Localization Using Best Model on Jetson
The goal was to get the system to run on the jetson, therefore this section is dedicated to the
performance results of the whole system on the jetson. First with a baseline only using the
FCGF pose, then the whole system and at last the whole system but with the Mynteye camera
data instead. All the resulting graphs on the jetson can be found in Figure A.10, but the main
ones will be discussed in this section.
6.3.1
Important Notes
Due to fact that the jetson had limited CPU power the rosbag had to run on a desktop
computer, otherwise it would throttle the CPU power due to over-current. This was caused
by the fact that it had three computational heavy steps, which are not present when running
the system in the real world. The three steps where: loading of the point clouds, publishing
the point clouds and subscribing to the point clouds. The first step is the only step needed
in the real world which it would get directly from the camera onboard. The other two steps
are especially computational heavy for the Kinect dataset, since it has the non down-sampled
point clouds stored and used for communication, which in the end caused huge subscribing
delay on the jetson. Apart from that the system was true to how it would work in the real
world. Running the rosbag on the desktop also had consequences on the latency but it was
vastly improved compared to running it on the jetson.
==PAGE:63==
6.3 Localization Using Best Model on Jetson
56
(a): Top view prior optimization:
(b): Top view after optimization:
(c): Front view prior optimization:
(d): Front view after optimization:
Figure 6.15: These figures show the graph before and after optimization from different views.
The teal dots are FCGF poses, the pink dots are ROVIO pose estimates and the lines between
these dots are edges used for optimization. The green line is tagslam used for reference.
6.3.2
Jetson Results
Initially Figure 6.16 did not look too promising. When looking at Figure 6.16(a), it can be seen
that the Kinect dataset had a good fitness. However, when running the Kinect rosbag there
was less than 10 point clouds processed when 800 were published. The Mynteye had plenty
of processed point clouds but the fitness was unacceptable. the slow point cloud processing
on the Kinect data can be explained by looking at Figure 6.16(b), here it is clear that the
bottleneck is in the subscribing phase of the system. The receiving time for the Mynteye data
was a magnitude faster than the Kinect data. This was due to the facts stated in Section 6.3.1.
However, this receiving time is not a problem as it is caused by a step in the processing that
is not part of the real system, but it still affected the results.
When neglecting the receiving time, a more meaningful result can be presented as seen in
Figure 6.16(c). Here it can be seen that, apart from the first point cloud, the total processing
time is less than 2 seconds for all 3 tests, which is satisfies the objective of a update rate of
0.5Hz. The accuracy objective can not be satisfied with only the 10 samples, since it is too
little information. However, using the previous results e.g. Figure A.9, it can still be said that
the accuracy is more than 90%, since it is the same methods and therefore would perform the
same just slower. This means that the accuracy would be the same on the jetson. Therefore
the only real obstacle is the receiving speed, but as mentioned previously the real system would
not have this problem. However, for further development it still makes sense to have the rosbag
available, but the current one is not usable for this purpose. A solution to this would be to
down-sample the Kinect data prior to storing it in the rosbag and then it would only have a
small penalty on the total processing time, which in turn meant it could run on the Jetson.
==PAGE:64==
6.4 Key Findings
57
Using these arguments it can be said with great certainty that down-sampling the kinect
data prior to processing would give result comparable to the algorithm run on the desktop.
This is true since the same tendencies exists in Figure 6.16 as in previous results. Furthermore
it would not throttle the system, since less data would had to be communicated. Doing so
would make it possible to retrieve useful localization results. However this was not tested due
to time limitations. Furthermore it can be seen that running the whole system does not have
a large effect on the speed of the FCGF pose estimate as seen in Figure 6.16(c).
6.4
Key Findings
In this section the key findings will be discussed.
Noise Generation and Training
As described in Section 5.2.3 a method for generating
noise was implemented, this was implemented to emulate the Mynteye camera, which was
smaller but had more noise. However, during the training the model diverged and ended up
having more loss than the initial model, simultaneously the hit ratio went to 0%. A reason for
this could be the simplicity of FCGF, since it is rather fast and simple compared to alternative
methods [ZFA18] [CPK19]. This simplicity could mean that it had a hard time finding suitable
weights that would be both noise invariant and have good descriptors. Similarly it was found
that the 16 feature model could not be trained to work on the Kinect dataset, while the 32
feature model worked well after retraining. Therefore the small 32 feature space could be the
reason why the training had a hard time converging.
Furthermore the authors of FCGF did not mention anything about noise [CPK19], possibly
due to the limitations of having such a low feature space and fast model. They did mention
what dataset they used for training, and that dataset did not contain noise. This is most likely
the reason why the model trained without noise performed poorly on data with noise, and that
the retraining with noisy data diverged. This means that the Mynteye camera either has too
much noise and should therefore not be used, or that FCGF does not have enough complexity
to handle noise, which means another method should be used for feature description. Either
way one of them had to be changed.
FCGF+Teaser
The absolute pose results can be seen in Figure 6.14 and Section 6.1.4.1.
Overall it performed up to expectations with most of the matches being correct and most of
the incorrect matches were neglected before publishing them. However, sometimes an incorrect
match was pass through. Those were offset matches that had a perfect fitness, but were simply
in the wrong compartment. Those matches are something that TEASER++ by no means
would be able to detect.
However, these offset poses could easily be detected by using a
motion filter, but due to time limitations this was not done.
Apart from the models good performance with the Kinect data, it had subpar performance
with the Mynteye data. This makes sense since the Mynteye camera had vastly more noise
than the Kinect data, see Figure 5.1, and therefore the trained feature descriptor would have a
hard time as mentioned above. Another reason for why the problem is in the feature descriptor,
is because TEASER++ is robust when it comes to outliers in the correspondence set [YSC20],
meaning a decent feature descriptor with some errors in the feature space would still give a
reasonable result with TEASER++.
==PAGE:65==
6.4 Key Findings
58
(a): These figures shows the fitness of different rosbags and methods:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the getting scan time of two rosbags and methods:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
Getting Scan [s]
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
Getting Scan [s]
(c): These figures shows the total time of different rosbags and methods:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
1
2
3
4
Total time [s]
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
1
2
3
4
Total time [s]
Figure 6.16: The figures to the left show the fitness, getting time and total time respectively,
running the algorithm in real time on the jetson. The figures to the right shows a box plot of
the data. The legends on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is the rosbag and if
FCGF or the whole system was used
==PAGE:66==
6.5 Future Work
59
The point cloud matching objectives are satisfied as mentioned previously.
From Sec-
tion 6.1.5 it can be seen that the total time is less than 1.2 seconds for all occurrences, actually
closer to 1 second for the Kinect and 0.4 seconds for the Mynteye. The initial processing is not
accounted since it spends some time initializing on the first point cloud. The fitness median
is also above 90% for the Kinect, but just barely. However, the Mynteye has subpar fitness,
as mentioned before. But overall the Kinect data satisfies the objectives and requirements for
running it on the desktop.
Optimized Localization
The localization results were described in Section 6.2. Here it was
found that tagslam and the optimized localization with an offset was fairly close to each other.
However, with the current information there is no way to confirm which one is the correct
one. Especially considering that almost all of the aligned scan point clouds from the video in
Section 6.2.0.1 fit perfectly with the map and only one of them were incorrect. However, small
errors in the alignment might have cause a visible change in the pose, but at the same time
tagslam had a lot of data spikes, which were definitely not there in the real data. Therefore
it is hard to say which is more correct, but it can be said that they agreed most of the time.
Furthermore it satisfies the objective of visualization of the poses, the (un)optimized graphs
and the tagslam path. It also satisfies the objective of an tolerance of 0.4m Section 6.2.
Jetson and Missing Results
The main objective was to implement the system on the
Jetson. This was partially done, since all systems could run on the Jetson but as described in
Section 6.3 it was not possible to test the systems localization capabilities due to throttling
when too much data was communicated. However, the parts that were tested were still enough
to say that it would work, since the only difference was the extreme delay, which can be fixed
by running it directly with the camera or by down-sampling the data before storing it in the
rosbag. Furthermore the algorithm was slightly slower on the jetson, but not by a huge amount
as seen in Figure 6.16(c).
Using this knowledge it can be said that the solution using the Kinect data still satisfied the
objectives, but just barely. All samples had an update rate of at most 0.5Hz when removing
the subscribing time and initialization time for the first point cloud, both with and without
the whole system. It can also be seen that the Mynteye camera had a slightly faster update
rate, but as mentioned before the fitness is not good enough. Furthermore the few samples
that actually got processed had a fitness close to 90%, but this alone is not enough information.
However, since the system is the same, the fitness median found from Figure 6.13 should also
be true for the Jetson. Therefore the Kinect data satisfied the objectives also when running
the whole system on the Jetson.
6.5
Future Work
There is a lot of work that can be done to improve the system, which will be discussed in
this section.
The improvements will be separated into essential improvements and useful
improvements.
==PAGE:67==
6.5 Future Work
60
6.5.1
Essential Improvements
This section will discuss the essential improvements that should be priorities for further devel-
opment.
Submaps map cropping
One of the improvements is the usage of submaps or cropping.
This is the process of taking parts of the map and only look for features in that part of the
map or even better, find all features in the map prior to running the system and then take out
the part of the map with the features already found.
These submaps are essential since the transform registration method does not have aware-
ness of previous poses. Without submaps problems would occur since the actual ballast tank
has multiple compartments that look alike, the transform estimation would have no way of
knowing the correct compartment. Therefore, to improve speed and accuracy of the point
cloud matcher, submaps are proposed. The reason why it speeds up the algorithm is because
it reduces the point cloud size drastically and furthermore the offset matches will also be
reduces since the other compartments would not be shown.
The way it could work is by using the current location of the drone and only load the current
and neighboring compartments. Other approaches could include some sort of orientational
awareness and only load parts of the map that is in front of the drone. This can be achieved
by using the orientation from e.g. the IMU or ROVIO.
Optimization Improvements
Optimization is the least developed part of this project. It
lives up to expectations if outliers are not present, but it could use a lot of improvements like
better covariance estimation for ROVIO edges and FCGF edges in the graph. Meaning better
fine tuning of the covariances of edges so that both ROVIO and FCGF have something to say
in the graph optimization, and not just the FCGF poses.
Currently the FCGF edges depend on the movements of the FCGF, which would result in
an edge that is always ”correct”. This could be solved by introducing the movements from the
ROVIO edges to the FCGF edge and thereby force the FCGF movement to be more accurate,
since the relative poses from ROVIO is a better estimate than an incorrect FCGF match. The
FCGF edges would still keep their covariances, but the movement would depend on a collection
of ROVIO movements instead, which would help with reducing the effects of the FCGF offset
poses when optimizing.
Another solution instead of fiddling with the covariance and edges would be to implement
a motion filter, such that any large jump in space would trigger a drastically higher covariance
for the edges to and from that point. The larger covariance would then unfix the FCGF pose.
This would solve the offset problem as long as the covariance of the FCGF movement was
vastly larger than the ROVIO movements and that the FCGF pose is unfixed, even if it had a
high fitness.
A completely different approach would be to implement loop closures. This would fix most
of the accumulated errors during the run, once a loop closure is detected. However, this would
require an implementation of loop closures that is not purely positional based, otherwise the
loop closure could happen on an outlier point. It could also be implemented on the ROVIO
poses, then it would not be affected by the outliers. Anyways, this would most likely be the
hardest of the mentioned solutions to implement and would add elements of mapping to the
system, which might not be desired.
==PAGE:68==
6.5 Future Work
61
Live Optimization
Currently only post optimization exists. This is usually not enough for
the real system, since it needs the localization initially. Therefore live optimization should be
implemented, meaning it could optimize e.g. when a new FCGF pose is published. This is
crucial for the actual localization, but due to time limitations it was not implemented. However,
the current optimization is a good reference point of how it could work.
Model trained with noise
As described multiple times the model diverged during training
with noise augmented data. There is no certainty to why it diverged, but a possible cause could
be the simplicity of the model. If that was the case, it would make sense to try and train a
FCGF model with more features. This could work, but it would require training the algorithm
from scratch. Increasing the feature space would result in slower computational speeds, since
the model would be larger and more complex. Furthermore The correspondence search would
also be slower since the feature space to search would be larger. If an increased feature space
does not solve the problem, it might be best to either try a new feature descriptor or get a
less noisy camera than the Mynteye camera. It is also important to mention that the training
would need a lot of epochs, since the model is trained from scratch and would have even more
features than the current models.
Another approach would be to use the Mynteye data directly, but that would require some
additional measurements for generating the dataset. This is not a trivial task since it is hard
to evaluate if a noisy cloud has a tight alignment. Therefore it was easier to simply align the
kinect data and then add noise to the dataset. But if a tight alignment with noisy point clouds
can be achieved then using the Mynteye data is certainly a possibility.
6.5.2
Useful Improvements
This section will discuss some nice to have improvements that could be implemented.
Larger sample size
From the data in Figure 6.7 it can be seen that the step from 0.025 til
0.04 in voxel size did not really affect the fitness, but it actually improved the speed. Therefore
it would make sense to lower the voxel size even more, train a new model and test it to see if
it would have a comparable accuracy as the two other methods.
Covariance estimation
The covariance estimation can be improved by using covariance in
x, y, and z. Currently all axis are estimated to be the same, but that is necessarily not the case.
One way to estimate the covariance could be by using the previous poses, so if a movement
from a previous pose is only in z, then the covariance in that direction would increase and
the larger the movement the greater the covariance. This would just use the pose and not the
fitness of the point cloud.
Another approach would be to look at what scan points are outside of the map and in what
direction e.g. if 10 points are outside the map in the z direction, then that would equivalent
to a certain covariance. However, this method requires good submaps otherwise it would not
work.
A third approach would be to use the difference in movement from ROVIO and FCGF to
estimate the covariance. This approach is not desireable since it would take away independence
of FCGF+teaser, but if independence is not desired then that would be a good method to
estimate the covariance.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The main objective of the thesis was to implement a camera based localization system that
would satisfy specified requirements, while also running on an embedded ARM based platform,
specifically a Jetson Xavier NX.
The first objectives was with respect to point cloud matching. The methods for doing point
cloud matching, should use deep-learning techniques for feature extraction and use registration
methods for estimating an absolute pose, all running in a ROS framework. Furthermore they
should be satisfying a specified update rate and accuracy. All of those objectives has been
fulfilled and implemented. The deep-learning feature descriptor, FCGF was implemented and
retrained to describe features more accurately. These features were used with TEASER++ to
estimate a pose and transform. Using those methods an accuracy above 90% was achieved.
Furthermore by using Faiss and correspondence limiting the update rate improved by more
than a tenfold. At the end it resulted in a point cloud alignment method that both had an
accuracy above 90% and a update rate of at least 0.5Hz.
The second objective was with respect to localization. The method for doing optimization
was g2o, which is a graph optimization framework. The usage of graph optimization improved
the overall localization accuracy by building a graph of ROVIO and FCGF+TEASER+Faiss
estimates and then optimize it. Furthermore the optimized graph kept its estimates less than
0.4 meters away from the tagslam estimates, with the exception of the region where an offset
match occurred. However, applying a motion filter would remove the incorrect sample. With-
out that sample the graph would not have that spike and therefore it would satisfy the 0.4m
tolerance required throughout the whole run.
The third objective was visualization. All the visualization was done in RViz. It visualized
the pre and post optimization, aligned scan point clouds, the map point cloud, pose estimates
and the ground truth path. All these except the optimization was live visualizations.
The last objective was to test the whole system. The whole system was able to run on the
jetson, but due to cpu throttling when handling non down-sampled point clouds the receiving
time was quite huge, sometimes in the 10 seconds region.
However, if the receiving was
removed from the total time, the point cloud matching requirements of an accuracy of 90%
and an update rate of 0.5Hz was fulfilled on the jetson. However, due to the huge delay, the
graph optimization could not be tested, but since the accuracy of the point cloud matching
was as good as on the desktop, then the localization tolerance of 0.4m would also be fulfilled
on the jetson. It is important to note that removing the receiving time is a valid action, simply
because the receiving stage is not part of the system if it was running in the real world.
The test on the Kinect camera was performed and it satisfied all requirements as mentioned
before. However, this was not the case for the Mynteye camera. The Mynteye camera was
faster, but almost no scans were aligned correctly. This was a consequence of either using a
model that could not handle the Mynteye noise, or retraining a model that diverged due to
noise augmentation. Therefore the Mynteye camera should not be used with the final solution.
==PAGE:70==
7 Conclusion
63
To summarize the project was a success. A system satisfying the objectives was imple-
mented using deep learned feature descriptors, indexed correspondence search methods, ab-
solute pose estimation using point cloud registration, relative pose estimates using feature
tracking, improved localization using graph optimization, and improving the feature descrip-
tor using custom generated data and transfer learning.
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
==PAGE:72==
A.1 Full FCGF Dataset Generation Pipeline
65
A.1
Full FCGF Dataset Generation Pipeline
Get reference frame
point cloud (REF)
* Get next point cloud
(PC)
** Get ICP transform (T2) from
PC to REF using T1 and
multiple thresholds
Yes
No
Fitness > 0.75?
Save T2
transformed PC
*** Prompt user with
PC on REF
Yes
No
Is fine?
Interup program
Yes
No
More point clouds?
Data Alignment
~   
~~ 
*   
**  
*** 
~~ Get Identity matrix
(T1)
~ Calculate initial
transform (T1) 
from PC to REF
using IMU
Get orientation (IMU)
with closest time stamp
to REF
Scan
Map
(Ballast 
tank)
point cloud type?
* Get next X sources
(PC1)  
Overlap Calculation
*   
** 
***
~
X is a chosen value in the config
for how many source and target
point clouds to use. 
Every source in (PC1) gets
compared with every target in
(PC1) and then the overlap is
calculated
The format for every line is:
<Source Target Overlap>
The new file contains the Y
overlap % in the filename just
before the file extension
* Get next X targets
(PC2)
Start at target cloud
index 0
The calculation is based upon a
weighted average of the
previous transform and IMU
It is assumed that A1 and R1     
frames are close to each other
for ballast tank point clouds, and
thus the identity matrix is used
as T1
Ballast tank can also get
cropped to create more data
with high overlap %. 
It uses 3 iterations with different
thresholds
User has to interrupt the
program manually and fix the
algorithm
** Calculate Overlap
between PC1 and
PC2
*** Save new .txt file
with PC1 and PC2
overlaps
Yes
No
More targets?
Yes
No
More sources?
Yes
No
Generate Noise 
Data?
Noise Generation
*   
**
***
~
X is a chosen value in the config
and is how many noise origins
to use. These are place on the
bounding box and are evenly
spaced out.
The noise is uniformly
distributed and scaled
depending on the distance to
NO
The format for every line is:
<Source Target Overlap>
The overlap and target is the
same as the one without noise
Ignoring appended point clouds
Read next .txt (F)
Retraining
* The different sets are specified
  in 3 different txt files and needs
  to be specified in the config
Get overlap
percentage
thresholds (Y)
~ For every Y add
every line in F with
overlap > Y to new
file
Read next .txt (F)
Yes
No
More .txt files?
Get next line in F
and load the
corresponding source
point cloud (PC)
Remove outliers and
get bounding box
(BB) of PC
** Add noise to every
point in PC2 and save
new PC2
* Place X noise
origins on the BB
Get next noise origin
(NO) and clone PC as
(PC2)
No
Yes
More noise
origins?
*** Append new point
clouds to F
No
Yes
More .txt files?
No
Yes
~ More lines in F?
* Specify training-,
validation-, and test-
sets
FCGF retrainer loads
in all point clouds,
settings and starts
training
Figure A.1: This figure shows the full data generation pipeline. Every colored area is respon-
sible for a part of the dataset generation or training
==PAGE:73==
A.2 Full Localization Pipeline
66
A.2
Full Localization Pipeline
Scan Transform and Pose
*
**
***
~
~~
Graph Optimization
*   
** 
~
The edge has an information matrix
which is the inverse of the covariance
matrix. The information matrix is
calculated based on the the largest
covariance of the previous and current
FP or RP vertices
This is important, since FP in rare
cases can be seconds delayed
compared to the newest RP.
This step did not work due to the fact
that the post optimization and online
optimization did not work the same way
and the live visualization of the graph is
not yet built for live optimization.
The down-sampling and feature
extraction is performed by FCGF
The correspondences can be found
using traditional KNN or Faiss
The transform can be found with either
Teaser or RANSAC. However
RANSAC finds its own
correspondences.
X is a rosparam and is by default 85%
It has the name: '/fcgf/fitness_thr'
Pose has covariance associated, which
is currently fitness based.
Get parameters and
Initialize methods
publish down-sampled
map cloud (MD)
Idle until new scan
(SC)
* Extract down-sampled
cloud (MD) and
features (MF) for MC
Yes
No
New Map?
(MC)
Load previously
extracted MD, MF, and
MC
* Extract down-sampled
cloud (SD) and features
(SF) for SC
** Find
Correspondences
between SD and MD
using SF and MF
Yes
No
~    Fitness > X ?
Publish transform (FT), 
~~ pose (FP), transformed
downsampled scan (FD)
and MD
Load point cloud
(MC)
*** Estimate alignment
transform
Initialize Graph (GO) for
optimization
Visual Inertial Odometry
This is a very vague
representation of ROVIO and
should be taken with a grain of
salt, since it is not the focus of
this thesis, but just a tool used.
No
Yes
New ROVIO odom?
(RO)
Yes
No
New FCGF pose?
(FP)
Add vertex with same
pose as RO to GO
Save NGO
and wait 
No
Yes
FP covariance > 0.1?
No
Yes
FP fitness < 99%?
Add vertex with same
pose as FP to GO
Fix next FP in GO
* Add edge from previous
FP to current FP with
largest covariance (LC)
* Add edge from previous
RO to current RO with
largest covariance (LC)
Publish graph, with new
poses and edges (NGO)
Publish graph, with new
poses and edges (NGO)
** Find RO vertex closest in
time of FP vertex (ROFP)
Add edge from FP to
ROFP with covariance LC
~ Live optimization and
publishing 
Visualization
This is not how the flow chart is,
But by making it sequential it is
easier to describe in the section.
It simply subscribes to the topics
corresponding the correct
information and then shows
them in RVIZ
* For benchmarking only
Optimize (OG),
publish and save
OG
No
Yes
Terminated?
Window Bundle
adjustment
EKF (error based)
Yes
Feature detection and
tracking
3D Landmark 
Velocity and
orientation estimation
Publish Odometry
(RO)
No
IMU data?
Yes
No
image data?
Update estimated
IMU bias and camera
extrinsics
Map point cloud MD
Scan aligned point
cloud FD
FCGF Pose
FP
ROVIO odometry
RO
Graph NGO or
optimized graph GO
Wait for new data
Wait for new data
* Tagslam Path
*Extract down-sampled
cloud (MD) and
features (MF) for MC
No
Yes local map cloud?
Figure A.2: This figure shows the full localization pipeline. Every colored area is responsible
for a part of the localization or visualization. The green fields are nodes that subscribe to a
ros-topic and receive data. The blue field are nodes that publish to a ros-topic. The red fields
should be prioritized for future work
==PAGE:74==
A.2 Full Localization Pipeline
67
A.2.1
Initial Performance Using Pre-trained FCGF Model
This section shows all the fitness and timings of the Initial Performance Using Pre-trained
FCGF Model chapter.
(a): These figures shows the fitness:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
16D
32D
16D
32D
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the total time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Total time [s]
16D
32D
16D
32D
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Total time [s]
(c): These figures shows the processing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Processing time [s]
16D
32D
16D
32D
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
Processing time [s]
(d): These figures shows the transform time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Transform time [s]
16D
32D
16D
32D
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Transform time [s]
(e): These figures shows the publishing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
Publish pose time [s]
16D
32D
16D
32D
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
Publish pose time [s]
(f): These figures shows the receiving scan
time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Getting Scan [s]
16D
32D
16D
32D
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Getting Scan [s]
Figure A.3: The two figures to the left show the fitness and processing time of the aligned
scan on the map respectively, running the algorithm in real time. The figures to the right
shows a box plot of the data. The legends on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is
the voxel size and if the correspondences are distance (dist) or random (ran) based.
==PAGE:75==
A.2 Full Localization Pipeline
68
A.2.2
Correspondence limiting
This section shows all the fitness and timings of the Correspondence limiting chapter.
(a): These figures shows the fitness:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the total time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.5
1.0
1.5
Total time [s]
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.5
1.0
1.5
Total time [s]
(c): These figures shows the processing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Processing time [s]
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Processing time [s]
(d): These figures shows the transform time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Transform time [s]
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Transform time [s]
(e): These figures shows the publishing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Publish pose time [s]
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Publish pose time [s]
(f): These figures shows the receiving scan
time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Getting Scan [s]
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.025m dist
0.040m dist
0.025m ran
0.040m ran
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Getting Scan [s]
Figure A.4: The two figures to the left show the fitness and processing time of the aligned
scan on the map respectively, running the algorithm in real time. The figures to the right
shows a box plot of the data. The legends on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is
the voxel size and if the correspondences are distance (dist) or random (ran) based.
==PAGE:76==
A.2 Full Localization Pipeline
69
A.2.3
Best Epoch vs Last Epoch
This section shows all the fitness and timings of the Best Epoch vs Last Epoch chapter.
(a): These figures shows the fitness:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
0.040m last
0.040m best
0.040m last
0.040m best
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the total time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
Total time [s]
0.040m last
0.040m best
0.040m last
0.040m best
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
Total time [s]
(c): These figures shows the processing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Processing time [s]
0.040m last
0.040m best
0.040m last
0.040m best
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Processing time [s]
(d): These figures shows the transform time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Transform time [s]
0.040m last
0.040m best
0.040m last
0.040m best
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Transform time [s]
(e): These figures shows the publishing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Publish pose time [s]
0.040m last
0.040m best
0.040m last
0.040m best
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Publish pose time [s]
(f): These figures shows the receiving scan
time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Getting Scan [s]
0.040m last
0.040m best
0.040m last
0.040m best
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Getting Scan [s]
Figure A.5: The two figures to the left show the fitness and processing time of the aligned
scan on the map respectively, running the algorithm in real time. The figures to the right
shows a box plot of the data. The legends on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is
the voxel size and if the correspondences are distance (dist) or random (ran) based.
==PAGE:77==
A.2 Full Localization Pipeline
70
A.2.4
Best model Frame By Frame
This section shows all the fitness and timings of the Best model Frame By Frame chapter.
(a): These figures shows the fitness:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the total time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
2
4
6
8
10
Total time [s]
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
0
2
4
6
8
10
Total time [s]
(c): These figures shows the processing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
Processing time [s]
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
Processing time [s]
(d): These figures shows the transform time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
2
4
6
8
10
Transform time [s]
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
0
2
4
6
8
10
Transform time [s]
(e): These figures shows the publishing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
Publish pose time [s]
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
Publish pose time [s]
(f): These figures shows the receiving scan
time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Getting Scan [s]
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANSAC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Getting Scan [s]
Figure A.6: The two figures to the left show the fitness and processing time of the aligned
scan on the map respectively, running the algorithm in real time. The figures to the right
shows a box plot of the data. The legends on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is
the voxel size and if the correspondences are distance (dist) or random (ran) based.
==PAGE:78==
A.2 Full Localization Pipeline
71
A.2.5
best Model in Realtime
This section shows all the fitness and timings of the best Model in Realtime chapter.
(a): These figures shows the fitness:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the total time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
2
4
6
8
Total time [s]
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
0
2
4
6
8
Total time [s]
(c): These figures shows the processing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Processing time [s]
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
Processing time [s]
(d): These figures shows the transform time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
2
4
6
8
Transform time [s]
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
0
2
4
6
8
Transform time [s]
(e): These figures shows the publishing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.10
0.12
0.14
Publish pose time [s]
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
0.10
0.12
0.14
Publish pose time [s]
(f): These figures shows the receiving scan
time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Getting Scan [s]
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
RANASC
Teaser
Teaser+Faiss
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Getting Scan [s]
Figure A.7: The two figures to the left show the fitness and processing time of the aligned
scan on the map respectively, running the algorithm in real time. The figures to the right
shows a box plot of the data. The legends on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is
the voxel size and if the correspondences are distance (dist) or random (ran) based.
==PAGE:79==
A.2 Full Localization Pipeline
72
A.2.6
Evaluating best 0.025 and 0.04 models
This section shows all the fitness and timings of the Evaluating best 0.025 and 0.04 models
chapter.
(a): These figures shows the fitness:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
0.025m
0.040m
0.025m
0.040m
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the total time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
Total time [s]
0.025m
0.040m
0.025m
0.040m
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
Total time [s]
(c): These figures shows the processing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
Processing time [s]
0.025m
0.040m
0.025m
0.040m
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
Processing time [s]
(d): These figures shows the transform time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Transform time [s]
0.025m
0.040m
0.025m
0.040m
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Transform time [s]
(e): These figures shows the publishing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
Publish pose time [s]
0.025m
0.040m
0.025m
0.040m
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
Publish pose time [s]
(f): These figures shows the receiving scan
time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Getting Scan [s]
0.025m
0.040m
0.025m
0.040m
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Getting Scan [s]
Figure A.8: The two figures to the left show the fitness and processing time of the aligned
scan on the map respectively, running the algorithm in real time. The figures to the right
shows a box plot of the data. The legends on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is
the voxel size and if the correspondences are distance (dist) or random (ran) based.
==PAGE:80==
A.2 Full Localization Pipeline
73
A.2.7
Evaluating Best Model on Mynteye
This section shows all the fitness and timings of the Evaluating Best Model on Mynteye chapter.
(a): These figures shows the fitness:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
Kinect
Mynteye
Kinect
Mynteye
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the total time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Total time [s]
Kinect
Mynteye
Kinect
Mynteye
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Total time [s]
(c): These figures shows the processing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Processing time [s]
Kinect
Mynteye
Kinect
Mynteye
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
Processing time [s]
(d): These figures shows the transform time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Transform time [s]
Kinect
Mynteye
Kinect
Mynteye
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Transform time [s]
(e): These figures shows the publishing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
Publish pose time [s]
Kinect
Mynteye
Kinect
Mynteye
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
Publish pose time [s]
(f): These figures shows the receiving scan
time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.0
0.5
1.0
Getting Scan [s]
Kinect
Mynteye
Kinect
Mynteye
0.0
0.5
1.0
Getting Scan [s]
Figure A.9: The two figures to the left show the fitness and processing time of the aligned
scan on the map respectively, running the algorithm in real time. The figures to the right
shows a box plot of the data. The legends on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is
the voxel size and if the correspondences are distance (dist) or random (ran) based.
==PAGE:81==
A.2 Full Localization Pipeline
74
A.2.8
Localization Using Best Model on Jetson
This section shows all the fitness and timings of the Localization Using Best Model on Jetson
chapter.
(a): These figures shows the fitness:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
20
40
60
80
100
Fitness [%]
(b): These figures shows the total time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
1
2
3
4
Total time [s]
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
1
2
3
4
Total time [s]
(c): These figures shows the processing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Processing time [s]
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Processing time [s]
(d): These figures shows the transform time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Transform time [s]
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Transform time [s]
(e): These figures shows the publishing time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.10
0.15
0.20
Publish pose time [s]
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
0.10
0.15
0.20
Publish pose time [s]
(f): These figures shows the receiving scan
time:
0
200
400
600
800
pcd id
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
Getting Scan [s]
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
Kinect+FCGF
Kinect+sys
Mynteye+sys
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
Getting Scan [s]
Figure A.10: The two figures to the left show the fitness and processing time of the aligned
scan on the map respectively, running the algorithm in real time. The figures to the right
shows a box plot of the data. The legends on the left plot and x-axis label on the right plot is
the voxel size and if the correspondences are distance (dist) or random (ran) based.
==PAGE:82==
Bibliography
[Blo15]
Hutter Marcocc Bloesch Michael Omari Sammy. “Robust Visual Inertial Odometry
Using a Direct EKF-Based Approach.” In: 2015. doi: 10.3929/ethz-a-010566547.
[Che+07]
Y. Cheng et al. “AAS 07-213 AVERAGING QUATERNIONS.” In: 2007.
[Con07]
J.B. Conway. “A Course in Functional Analysis.” In: Springer, 2007. Chapter 2.
isbn: 978-1-4757-4383-8. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-4383-
8.
[CPK19]
Christopher Choy, Jaesik Park, and Vladlen Koltun. “Fully Convolutional Geomet-
ric Features.” In: ICCV. 2019.
[CZK15]
Sungjoon Choi, Qian-Yi Zhou, and Vladlen Koltun. “Robust reconstruction of
indoor scenes.” In: 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition (CVPR). 2015, pages 5556–5565. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7299195.
[Goj+19]
Zan Gojcic et al. “The Perfect Match: 3D Point Cloud Matching with Smoothed
Densities.” In: International conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
(CVPR). 2019.
[Hal13]
Brian C. Hall. “Quantum Theory for Mathematicians.” In: Springer, 2013. Chap-
ter 3, pages 55–58. isbn: 978-1-4614-7116-5. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4614-7116-5.
[He+15]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2015. arXiv:
1512.03385 [cs.CV].
[JDJ17]
Jeff Johnson, Matthijs Douze, and Hervé Jégou. “Billion-scale similarity search
with GPUs.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08734 (2017).
[JV11]
Bing Jian and Baba C. Vemuri. “Robust Point Set Registration Using Gaussian
Mixture Models.” In: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence 33.8 (2011), pages 1633–1645. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2010.223.
[KMM]
Kenji Koide, Jun Miura, and Emanuele Menegatti. Point Cloud Registration on
3DMatch Benchmark. https : / / paperswithcode . com / sota / point - cloud -
registration-on-3dmatch-benchmark. Accessed: 2020-6-1.
[KMM19]
Kenji Koide, Jun Miura, and Emanuele Menegatti. “A portable three-dimensional
LIDAR-based system for long-term and wide-area people behavior measurement.”
In: International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems 16 (February 2019). doi:
10.1177/1729881419841532.
[Lar+99]
T.D. Larsen et al. “Incorporation of time delayed measurements in a discrete-time
Kalman filter.” In: volume 4. January 1999, 3972–3977 vol.4. isbn: 0-7803-4394-8.
doi: 10.1109/CDC.1998.761918.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
76
[Lay88]
David C. Lay. “Linear Algebra and Its Applications.” In: Pearson, 1988, page 221.
isbn: 978-0201709704.
[Lei18]
Zixin Luo Lei Zhou Siyu Zhu. “Learning and Matching Multi-View Descriptors for
Registration of Point Clouds.” In: 2018. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01267-0_31.
[LM19]
Mathieu Labbé and François Michaud. “RTAB-Map as an open-source lidar and
visual simultaneous localization and mapping library for large-scale and long-term
online operation.” In: Journal of Field Robotics 36.2 (2019), pages 416–446. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/rob.21831. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1002/rob.21831. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/rob.21831.
[Moa02]
Maher Moakher. “Means and Averaging in the Group of Rotations.” In: SIAM Jour-
nal on Matrix Analysis and Applications (2002). doi: 10.1137/S0895479801383877.
[MR65]
E.E.L. Mitchell and A.E. Rogers. “Quaternion Parameters in the Simulation of a
Spinning Rigid Body.” In: SIMULATION 4.6 (1965), pages 390–396. doi: 10.1177/
003754976500400610. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1177/003754976500400610.
url: https://doi.org/10.1177/003754976500400610.
[OLT06]
Edwin Olson, John Leonard, and Seth Teller. “Fast Iterative Optimization of Pose
Graphs with Poor Initial Estimates.” In: 2006, pages 2262–2269.
[PD19]
Bernd Pfrommer and Kostas Daniilidis. TagSLAM: Robust SLAM with Fiducial
Markers. October 2019.
[Pra+15]
S.M. Prakhya et al. “A closed-form estimate of 3D ICP covariance.” In: Machine
Vision Applications (MVA), 2015 14th IAPR International Conference on. May
2015, pages 526–529. doi: 10.1109/MVA.2015.7153246.
[QK16]
Jaesik Park Qian-Yi Zhou and Vladlen Koltun. “Fast Global Registration.” In:
London; New York: Springer, 2016. isbn: 978-3-319-46475-6. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-319-46475-6_47. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-84882-935-0.
[RBB09]
Radu Bogdan Rusu, Nico Blodow, and Michael Beetz. “Fast Point Feature His-
tograms (FPFH) for 3D registration.” In: 2009 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation. 2009, pages 3212–3217. doi: 10.1109/ROBOT.2009.
5152473.
[RL01]
S. Rusinkiewicz and M. Levoy. “Eﬀicient variants of the ICP algorithm.” In: Pro-
ceedings Third International Conference on 3-D Digital Imaging and Modeling.
2001, pages 145–152. doi: 10.1109/IM.2001.924423.
[TT21]
Keigo Tsuda and Shogo Tokai. “Pre-adjustment of positions of point-clouds for
the ICP algorithm using IMU and parallel projection.” In: International Workshop
on Advanced Imaging Technology (IWAIT) 2021. Edited by Masayuki Nakajima
et al. Volume 11766. International Society for Optics and Photonics. SPIE, 2021,
pages 498–503. url: https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2590825.
[YSC20]
H. Yang, J. Shi, and L. Carlone. “TEASER: Fast and Certifiable Point Cloud
Registration.” In: IEEE Trans. Robotics (2020).
[ZFA18]
Konstantinos Zampogiannis, Cornelia Fermüller, and Yiannis Aloimonos. “cilantro:
A Lean, Versatile, and Eﬀicient Library for Point Cloud Data Processing.” In:
October 2018, pages 1364–1367. doi: 10.1145/3240508.3243655.
==PAGE:84==
