==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Application of modern image analysis tech-
niques for automated fertility assessment
in a rat model
Ida Engholm Villumsen
==PAGE:2==
DTU Food
The National Food Institute
Technical University of Denmark
Kemitorvet
Building 202
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 3588 7000
food@food.dtu.dk
www.food.dtu.dk
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Ovarian follicle quantification is a method applied in toxicological tests to assess the
influence of endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) on the female reproductive sys-
tem. A rat model is often used in these studies and the counts are performed manually
on sections of the ovary, which is both a time consuming process and prone to errors.
In this study, we present three automatic ovarian follicle quantification models, which
distinguish between the first developmental stage of primordial follicles and the follow-
ing stage of growing follicles. The models respectively complies with small data sets
of immunohistochemical (IHC)-stained images, multiphoton micoscopy images, and
H&E-stained images. The follicle specific IHC-staining enables segmentation with a
thresholding pipeline, and the follicles are subsequently classified with respect to the
developmental stages by their area. The gray-scale multiphoton microscopy images
are segmented with the InSegt algorithm and the growing and primordial follicles
are classified with a linear SVM. Furthermore, the highly structural H&E images
are processed with the deep learning framework Faster R-CNN to directly detect the
primordial and growing follicles. The highest F1-score = 0.87 and is attained with
thresholding of the IHC images. However, the quality of the annotations, which the
supervised models are based on, is sub-optimal due to the limited annotation experi-
ence of the undersigned. Based on a discussion of the results, we find that in order to
improve the models it is important to establish a more consistent ground truth with
annotations performed by trained staff members and moreover deploy larger data
sets. Finally, a data set of paired IHC and H&E images permits a comparison of the
two types of quantification schemes with a manual count. Analysis per animal on the
final data set shows a good correlation between model predictions and the manual
count. However, it also illustrates the need for acquisition of additional training data
to improve the models. For use in toxicological tests at the current stage, there is a
need for hand-held quality control to avoid images with features or stains that are
not suﬀiciently represented in the limited training data.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Resumé
I toksikologiske tests kvantificeres antallet af follikler i æggestokken for at under-
søge, hvorledes hormonforstyrrende stoffer påvirker den kvindelige forplantningsevne.
Rottemodeller benyttes ofte i denne slags studier, hvor folliklerne tælles manuelt på
histologiske snit af æggestokkene. Denne arbejdsgang er imidlertid tidskrævende og
fejlfuld. I dette studie præsenterer vi derfor tre forskellige modeller til automatisk
tælling af follikler i forhold til deres modningsgrad, som her inddeles i primordiale
og voksende follikler. Modellerne er baseret på mindre datasæt af henholdsvis im-
munohistokemisk (IHC)-farvet billeder, multifoton mikroskopi billeder og H&E-farvet
billeder. På IHC-billederne er det ved hjælp af blandt andet en tærskelværdi på pix-
elintensiteten muligt at adskille folliklerne fra andre strukturer, hvorefter de voksende
follikler identificeres på baggrund af en minimumstørrelse. På multifoton billederne
detekteres folliklerne ved brug af InSegt-segmenteringsalgoritmen og opdeles derefter
i primordiale og voksende follikler. Derudover er tællingen på de H&E-farvet billeder
baseret på dyb læring, hvor netop metoden Faster R-CNN benyttes til direkte at
identificere primordiale og voksende follikler. Den bedste tælling opnås ved processer-
ing af IHC-billederne med en F1-værdi = 0.87. Den for modellerne tilgrundliggende
manuelle markering af follikler er imidlertid fejlbehæftet, da den er udført af en
utrænet studerende. Vi vurderer således, at en forbedring af modellerne kræver en
mere konsistent udført bagvedliggende manuel markering af follikler og desuden et
større datagrundlag. Et datasæt bestående af parret IHC- og H&E billeder mulig-
gør slutteligt en sammenligning af de udviklet metoder med en manuel tælling, hvor
der ses en god korrelation målt per dyr. Denne sammenligning tydeliggør imidlertid
også behovet for yderligere billeder for at forbedre modellerne og behovet for kvalitet-
skontrol for at undgå processering af billeder, som ikke i tilstrækkelig udstrækning er
forklaret af modellerne.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This thesis is completed in agreement with the requirements for acquiring a Mas-
ter of Science degree in Engineering within the field of Mathematical Modelling and
Computation at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). It is made at the Na-
tional Food Institute, DTU Food, in collaboration with the Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science, DTU Compute.
Supervisors
Senior Researcher, Julie Boberg∗
Associate Professor, Anders Nymark†
Professor MSO, Anders Bjorholm Dahl†
Researcher, Hanna Katarina Lilith Johansson∗
∗DTU Food, National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark
†DTU Compute, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Tech-
nical University of Denmark
Vangede, June 30, 2021
Ida Engholm Villumsen (s154412)
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
For their knowledge, help, and positive attitudes, I would like to express my gratitude
to all of my supervisors. Being a challenging time to meet and work together, I am
thankful for all your help and contributions.
Especially, I would like to thank my main supervisor Julie Boberg for her dedica-
tion, encouragement, and availability throughout the project. Your support has been
crucial and I am grateful for the all the comments and helpful feedback you have
provided along the way.
Furthermore, I would like acknowledge the guidance from Anders Nymark and An-
ders Bjorholm Dahl. I am thankful for your ideas and suggestions as well as your
understanding for the process.
Also thank you to the other students from the mini-symposiums and the Friday
morning supervision for your smiles and interest. And a final appreciation of the
patience from my home oﬀice colleague; thank you.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Abstract
i
Resumé
iii
Preface
v
Acknowledgements
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis Statement and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Follicle Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Toxicological Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Histological Examination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Multiphoton Microscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theory
9
3.1
Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Thresholding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.2
Watershed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.3
InSegt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.1
Support Vector Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Object Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.1
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3.2
Convolutional Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3.3
Faster R-CNN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.4
Performance Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Materials & Method
23
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
4.1
Description of Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.1
Annotation of Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.2
Selecting appropriate methods for follicle quantification
. . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Thresholding the IHC Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
InSegt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4.1
Multiphoton Microscopy Images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.4.2
H&E Images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5
Faster R-CNN on the H&E Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Results
43
5.1
Thresholding the IHC Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
InSegt on the Multiphoton Microscopy Images
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Faster R-CNN on the H&E images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Predictions on the Final Data Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6
Discussion
53
6.1
Summary of Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.2
Thresholding the IHC Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.3
InSegt on the Multiphoton and H&E Images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.4
Faster R-CNN on the H&E Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.5
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.6
Perspective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
7
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
63
A
Appendix A
67
B
Appendix B
69
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The ability to reproduce is essential for the survival of any species. For humans, this
implies that male and female reproductive health is of great importance not just for
the individual, but also for the surrounding society. Increasing evidence suggests that
fetal and early life exposure to exogenous endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) can
affect the female reproductive health later in life [1]. In the study and assessment of
the developmental impact of different EDCs, toxicological tests on animals are used
[2]. To obtain a quantitative characterization of the influence of a given EDC, one
typically counts the number of follicles in histological sections of the animal ovaries
[3]. Moreover, each follicle is classified into a range of development stages, in order
to better understand and assess the specific toxicity of the given EDC.
Ovarian follicle counts are traditionally performed manually by light microscopy on
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained sections of ovaries to estimate the follicle pop-
ulation [3]. This procedure is prone to human error and in order to reduce ambiguity,
one may instead apply a YBX2 specific immunohistochemical (IHC)-stain, which is
more cumbersome to use, but results in improved visibility of follicles. However, the
required sectioning for both techniques renders later assessment of the intact ovary im-
possible, why in vivo deep imaging at a subcellular level with multiphoton microscopy
[4] presents new opportunities. The three approaches consequently all present the
possibility of quantifying follicles, but acquiring suﬀicient statistics by performing a
manual count and classification is an exceedingly time consuming and tedious process.
This motivates the development of automatic quantification techniques targeted ovar-
ian follicles in order to decrease the labor and cost of toxicological tests [3] and to
standardize the counting procedure so that the quantification becomes independent
of person and mood.
1.2
Thesis Statement and Objectives
The aim of this project is to develop automated counting and classification techniques
for ovarian follicles, using histological H&E and IHC images as well as multiphoton
microscopy images of ovaries from 6 days old rats. Examples of such images can be
found in Figure 1.1. The follicles will be classified according to their developmental
stage in order to determine the number of primordial and primary/secondary follicles
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
Figure 1.1 – Sections of ovaries from 6 days old rats.
From the left: H&E-stain,
IHC-stain, and a multiphoton microscopy image.
separately.
The following hypotheses will be examined.
• Histological H&E and IHC images as well as multiphoton microscopy images
permits automated identification and quantification of ovarian follicles.
• Histological H&E and IHC images as well as multiphoton microscopy images
permits automated distinction and classification of primordial and primary/sec-
ondary ovarian follicles.
The hypotheses will be addressed by the following objectives.
• We improve the scheme for quantification of follicles in toxicological studies
with regards to time and standardization.
• We explore the possibilities of automatic detection of follicles in three different
types of images and determine suited appertaining methods.
• We apply different segmentation methods to detect primordial and primary/sec-
ondary ovarian follicles.
• We identify a relevant deep learning framework and apply it in order to quantify
primordial and primary/secondary ovarian follicles.
• We compare the different quantification schemes with manual counts to deter-
mine the applicability in toxicological studies.
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Thesis Overview
3
1.3
Thesis Overview
The project work is presented during the course of the following six chapters. First,
the development of ovarian follicles in rats and the requirements for toxicological
testing are described in the Background, Chapter 2. The background chapter also
includes a brief presentation of the fundamental principles behind each of the three
image types addressed in this study. In the subsequent theory chapter (Chapter 3),
we present a range of relevant methods for automatic quantification of follicles, mo-
tivate our specific choice of methods, before elaborating on the mathematical theory
behind the chosen methods. In Materials & Method (Chapter 4), we go into detail
with the actual images (the data) used for the study and a suited quantification
pipeline is determined for each image type. Furthermore, the models are fine-tuned
for quantification and classification of ovarian follicles using a range of training and
validation images. In Results (Chapter 5), the performance of the models on the test
images is assessed, both in terms of performance metrics and illustrative image exam-
ples showcasing successful and failed predictions of the models. The results chapter
concludes with a comparison of the models through their performance on a data set
of paired images. Finally, the quantitative and qualitative results are discussed and
put into perspective in the discussion chapter (Chapter 6) and a conclusion to the
thesis is given in in Chapter 7.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background
In this chapter we introduce the biology of follicle development in a rat ovary, as well
as how this process can be influenced by endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs). Fur-
thermore, the fundamental aspects of toxicological testing for the purpose of studying
and discovering potential EDCs are described. Finally, the genesis of multiphoton
microscopy images is described, as this modality along with the more traditional
histological images is applied prospectively in this study.
2.1
Follicle Development
The two ovaries are part of the female reproductive system, with responsibility for
development of oocytes, the female gametes or sex cells [5]. In mammalian female
embryos, the primordial germ cells, precursors of the gametes, migrate to the ovary
and subsequently divide by mitosis. The germ cells are now called oogonia, and they
organize in clusters, known as oocyte nests [6]. As the subsequently development
differs between species [7], only the rat ovary is considered prospectively.
After birth, the oogonia are subjected to a wave of apoptosis, where the majority of
them are lost. The remaining oogonia enter prophase of the first meiotic division and
thereby become primary oocytes. They assemble into primordial follicles, where one
oocyte is surrounded by a single layer of flattened pre-granulosa cells [8]. This is illus-
trated in Figure 2.1, which shows the follicular development. The primordial follicles
are arrested in this state until the primordial to primary follicle transition, which is
an nonreversible process. It is characterized by the development from flattened to
cuboidal granulosa cells and an increment in oocyte diameter. Moreover, precursor
theca cells, which originate from the stromal tissue surrounding the primordial follicle,
are recruited to the follicles [7].
The secondary follicle emerges as the granulosa cells proliferate, such that the oocyte
is surrounded by multiple layers of them. At subsequent formation of an antrum, a
fluid filled space, the follicle is denoted a tertiary or antral follicle. The final devel-
opmental stage is the Graafian or ovulatory follicle, which is the large and late stage
antral follicle [8].
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Background
Figure 2.1 – Sequential representation of the follicle development [9]
The period immediately after birth is characterized as the neonatal period and spans
from birth to postnatal day (PND) 7 in the rat. Primordial follicles are prominent
in this period, but primary and secondary follicles are apparent in the medulla of
the ovary as well. Early antral follicles arise during the early infantile period (PND
8-14), and the number of secondary follicles increases such that primordial follicles
are limited to the peripheral cortex. The late infantile period (PND 15-20) features
proceeding antral follicle development and by entry to the juventile period (PND 21-
32), large antral follicles are present in the medulla. This period is also characterized
by apoptosis of medullary secondary and small antral follicles and development of
medium-sized antral follicles in the cortex. During the peripubertal period (PND
33-37), ovulatory follicles appear in the cortex and the apoptotic remnants in the
medulla are gone. Finally puberty arrives (PND 38-46), which means ovulation of
ovulatory follicles and subsequently appearance of the hormone secreting corpa lutea
[8].
2.2
Toxicological Tests
Disruption of fetal gonadal development due to e.g. generic mutations or disrupted
signaling pathways can affect the reproductive function later on. Research suggests
that early exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) can likewise affect the
development. EDCs is a general term for exogenous substances that disturb the en-
docrine system and thereby affect the health of both humans and animals [1].
Toxicological tests are conducted to characterize the impact of potential EDCs on
the reproductive system. Animal models are used to enable experiments that are
otherwise infeasible, impractical or ethically prohibited to carry out with humans.
As a reproduction study is recommended to include at least two generations, the
animal must be chosen with care due to expenses and time length. The rat is often
preferred owing to its small size, gestation length, and high fertility rate. In these
multigeneration studies, the test substance is administered to the parental male and
female both prior and during mating and gestation, and through weaning of the
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Histological Examination
7
offspring. The test substance can furthermore be administered to selected offsprings
to lengthen the study [10].
Clinical observations are made throughout the study [10] and qualitative ovarian
assessment as well as ovarian follicle counts are employed at the end of the study to
characterize the test substance and understand the site of action [3]. The primordial
follicles should be quantified and qualitative depletion of the population detected. In
addition, the presence or absence of growing follicles and corpa lutea should be stated.
Finally, the test and control group are compared by statistical analysis to understand
the findings [10].
2.3
Histological Examination
In traditional histological examination, the test animals are put down and subjected
to necropsy, in order to be studied through a microscopy. However, the ovary must
undergo a tissue preparation process, consisting of collection, fixation, embedding,
sectioning, and staining before that. During collection, the ovary is removed from
the animal, whereupon fixation is performed to prevent decay. The ovary is then
embedded to enable sectioning and the slices are finally stained to add contrast [11].
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-staining is traditionally applied on sections used for
follicle counting [3]. It highlights non-specific structural features and the staining is
quick and easy to use. However, staining techniques that enhance specific cell and
tissue components are available as well. One such is immunohistochemisty (IHC),
where specific antigens are located by staining with corresponding antibodies, that
are labeled with a visual marker such as fluorescent dye or a chromogenic enzyme
[11]. In ovary sections, this technique can enhance the visibility of primordial and
primary follicles and thereby improve the detection [3].
2.4
Multiphoton Microscopy
Multiphoton microscopy is a non-invasive technique, that permits imaging tissue in
vivo [12]. The images reveal morphological information similar to that of H&E-stained
sections and can in addition provide functional information. The modality exploits
autofluorescence, which is the natural emission of light from endogenous fluorophores
in the tissue [13]. In a single-photon excitation, see Figure 2.2, an orbital electron of
a fluorophore is excited by absorption of one high energy photon. The fluorophore
subsequently emits a photon of a different wavelength, in order to return to its ground
state, which is the process of fluorescence. With single-photon excitations, light is
absorbed throughout the sample, why a pinhole in front of the detector is needed
to reject fluorescent light emitted from outside of the region in focus. However, this
entails that photons in-focus, that subsequently scatter, are rejected as well. A high
laser power is therefore needed, which results in photo damage and a limited imaging
depth [14].
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Background
By means of quasi-simultaneous absorption of two lower energy photons, the same
excitation of an electron can be achieved. The first photon excites the electron to
a virtual intermediate state, whereupon the second photon completes the excitation,
see Figure 2.2.
Two-photon excitation is under most circumstances very unlikely,
since the photons must arrive within an attosecond (10−18s) of each other. The large
photon flux of high power lasers makes such an event probable, but thus makes it
incomparable with biologic tissue. Ultra-short pulsed-laser systems solve the issue by
emitting light in brief and intense pulses, at which tissue damage is avoided due to the
low average power. By focusing the beam, the probability of a two-photon excitation
is further increased. The excitation is thereby limited to a single spot, why no pinhole
is needed and scattered light can be collected as well, which is important when imaging
thick tissue. Consequently, by translating the focus across a tissue sample at multiple
depths, a three-dimensional (3D) mosaic image composed of multiple optical sections
can be produced [12].
Figure 2.2 – Single- and two-photon fluorescence excitation by electron absorption of
one or two photons. [12]
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 3
Theory
Quantification of objects requires distinction between the objects of interest and the
background. This can be achieved by either image segmentation or object detection,
which are both shown in Figure 3.1. Image segmentation is the process of dividing an
image into different regions that represent different types of information. In Figure
3.1, the ovary section undergoes binary segmentation into background and foreground
segments, which can be specified further by subsequent classification. In object detec-
tion, specific types of objects are identified and outlined in the image by a bounding
box with the corresponding class. The objects may be quite complex, why object
detection usually relies on deep learning and Convolutionl Neural Networks (CNNs).
Figure 3.1 – Follicles in an ovary section image (middle) are distinguished from the
background by means of segmentation (right) and located with bounding boxes by
means of object detection (left).
3.1
Segmentation
A segmented image can be obtained with a wide variety of different methods. Thresh-
olding is one of the simplest, as it solely relies on pixel intensities to distinguish objects
from the background. In the case of overlapping objects, thresholding is however in-
adequate, whereas for instance the watershed algorithm is particularly well suited.
These two techniques in combination thus present a simple technique to detect and
detach follicles in images with extensive pixel intensity information. Another widely
==PAGE:22==
10
3 Theory
used method is the Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM), where the probability of a pixel
belonging to a segmentation class is estimated by means of the pixel intensity and
a mixture of Gaussian distributions, that each represents a segmentation class [15].
The more advanced segmentation techniques can beside pixel intensity include image
features as edges, orientation, or texture and thus have more trainable parameters
and computational steps. Both the learning-based Ilastik [16] and the trainable Weka
segmentation [17] apply image features in combination with user inputs to perform
pixelwise classification. The user can according to a given segmentation make further
markings, whereupon the parameters of the classifier are relearned. This somewhat
expensive step is circumvented in the similar InSegt algorithm [18], which expectedly
allows for better strategic user-labeling. The source code of the InSegt algorithm
is moreover available, which permits circumventing the GUI in order to make rele-
vant modifications. The InSegt algorithm is thus chosen over the Ilastik and Weka
segmentation to enable a textural based segmentation with user input.
3.1.1
Thresholding
Thresholding is a simple segmentation method, which is both intuitive and compu-
tational inexpensive. The transform of a gray scale image, I(x, y), to a segmented
binary image, S(x, y), is given by
S(x, y) =
{ 1
I(x, y) ≥T
0
otherwise
,
(3.1)
such that pixels with an intensity greater or equal to the threshold, T, are appointed
as foreground, and all other pixels as background [11]. For the case of a color image,
a threshold for each color channel must be defined, and pixels must meet all three
conditions to be appointed as foreground.
3.1.2
Watershed
An image can be visualized as a topographical map, where the pixel intensities are
decisive for contours. The watershed segmentation is based on the concept of filling
the landscape with water, such that low-lying areas areas are flooded first. When the
water rises and two basins meet, a dam or watershed is build to keep the basins from
merging. The process stops when the water has reached the highest peak, and the
regions are partitioned according to the watersheds. The algorithm can in addition to
the image itself be applied to a gradient magnitude image or a distance transformed
binary image. In the latter case, the pixel values are given by the inverse distance
to the nearest background pixel, such that the innermost pixels of an object defines
the valley floor of the topographical map [11]. This is especially useful in order to
effectively separate objects in close proximity to one another in an already segmented
image obtained with for instance thresholding. In Figure 3.2 the watershed algorithm
is applied in such a case in order to separate three binary objects.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Segmentation
11
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.2 – The watershed algorithm on a binary image using inverse distance. (a)
Three connected objects in a binary image. (b) The inverse distance transform of the
binary image. (c) Segmentation of the three objects based on the watershed algorithm
applied to image (b).
3.1.3
InSegt
InSegt [18] is an image segmentation method based on probabilistic classification of
pixels. It is especially fit for separating a collection of similar objects from the back-
ground, as it detects patterns in the image. The method combines unsupervised and
supervised learning by generating a content based model of the image based on par-
tial user labeling. The resulting segmented image is provided as real-time feedback
for the user, which allows the user to make additional strategic markings. Figure
3.3 shows the overall concepts of both the unsupervised and supervised parts of the
InSegt algorithm that are described below.
In the unsupervised part, patches of size M × M are extracted from an X × Y image,
I. Each patch has a center pixel, as M is an odd number, chosen such that the a
patch reflects the size of the distinctive image structure. The patches are vectorized
and subsequently grouped into K clusters, by a clustering method such as K-means.
Afterwards, the cluster centers represent the image content. Corresponding pixels
in patches assigned to the same cluster are said to comprise a clique and are likely
to resemble one another and to represent similar image features such as object edge,
object center, background etc. As the image patches overlap, each non-boundary pixel
belongs to M 2 different cliques of pixels and there exists a total of M 2K different
cliques.
The collection of all K clusters form an intensity dictionary, with each
cluster center denoted as a dictionary patch. Moreover, a X × Y assignment image,
A, describes exactly the dictionary patch which each patch center pixel is assigned
to, with border pixels defined as A(x, y) = 0.
The user markings are represented in a X × Y × C label image, L, where C is the
total number of segmentation classes. In the label image, L(x, y, c) = 1 if a pixel,
(x, y), is marked as belonging to class c, and 0 otherwise. By means of the assignment
image, patches assigned to each dictionary patch are identified in the labeling image.
A pixelwise average is computed for each c layer of the identified patches from the
labeling image. Thereby, each M×M dictionary patch has a corresponding M×M×C
labeling representation. This labeling representation features the pixelwise dictionary
==PAGE:24==
12
3 Theory
probability of belonging to each class, and thus the C layers sum to one when the
image is fully labeled. The dictionary probabilities are finally translated back to the
X ×Y image grid and averaged in all pixels to produce a C layered probability image,
P.
K-means
Input image
Intensity dictionary
Patches
Vector patches
Assignment image
Probability image
Label image
Unsupervised
Supervised
Patches belonging
to kth cluster
Related labeling
patches
Pixelwise average
of related patches
for each c layer
Average dictionary
probability for each
c layer
Average label
patches
Figure 3.3 – Conceptual overview of the unsupervised and supervised parts of the
InSegt algorithm for processing of a X × Y image. The patch size is M × M, s =
(M −1)/2, K is the number of dictionary patches, and C is the number of classes.
To produce a probability image, the unsupervised patch-to-dictionary relationship is
first encoded in a n × m biadjacency matrix, B, where n = XY and m = M 2K.
A linear image pixel index, i, and a linear dictionary pixel index, j, is created, in
order to translate information between the biadjacency matrix and the image and
intensity dictionary. Assignment of an image patch to a dictionary patch give rise to
a relationship between the M 2 image pixels and the M 2 dictionary pixels. Denoting
this ”∼”, the biadjacency matrix represents this relationship
bij =
{ 1
i ∼j
0
otherwise
.
(3.2)
A total of (X −2s)(Y −2s)M 2 relations exists for s = (M −1)/2, as boundary pixels
are assigned to less than M 2 dictionary pixels.
Translating user markings to the dictionary is as previously explained achieved by
averaging across related labeling patches. By means of the biadjacency matrix, the
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Classification
13
summation of the related labeling pixels can be achieved by BTL, where L is the
labeling image, L, arranged in a n×C matrix. Moreover, division by the total number
of related pixels can be achieved by multiplying with diag(BT1n×1)−1, where 1 is a
column vector of ones and diag(·) is a diagonal matrix of the argument. Combining
these expressions results in the desired average, why a n × m transformation matrix
that maps from the image to the dictionary is constructed as
T1 = diag(BT1n×1)−1BT.
(3.3)
In addition, a similar m × n transformation matrix, that maps from the dictionary
to the image is defined as
T2 = diag(B1m×1)−1B.
(3.4)
This entails that propagation of user markings to a resulting n×C probability matrix,
P, is obtained by
P = T2T1L,
(3.5)
which subsequently can be rearranged to a X × Y × C probability image. Following
this operation, an equally sized binary segmentation image is produced, S, as pixels
with probability greater than 1/C belong to class c. Moreover, the dictionary and
associated dictionary probabilities can be reused in order to process a new image,
ˆI. By extracting M × M patches and assigning them to the existing dictionary, a
new dictionary-to-image transformation matrix, ˆT2 is constructed and the probability
matrix, ˆP, is thus given by
ˆP = ˆT2T1L,
(3.6)
which can be rearranged to the new probability image, ˆP.
3.2
Classification
In images with multiple foreground classes of interest, one needs to consider whether
it is optimal to make a full segmentation at once, or divide the process into a segmen-
tation step and a subsequent classification step. In a two-step process, segmentation
is used to distinguish objects of interest from the background class, whereupon the
detected objects can be classified according to their actual classes. This classification
can for instance be based on criteria such as the object area, perimeter, shape, color,
or brightness. In the course of this study, we apply two types of object classification
on the foreground segments: An area based classification, which assigns a class to
a given object based on its area, and a Support Vector Machine, which is described
below.
3.2.1
Support Vector Machine
A Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a classifier, where a so-called decision function, f,
maximizes the margin between classes. Consider the two-class segmentation problem
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Theory
of observations S = {(x1, y1) , (x2, y2) , . . . , (xN, yN)}, where xi is a p-dimensional
observation with class label yi ∈{−1, 1}. The separating hyperplane with parameters
β and β0, is then defined by
f(x) = xT β + β0 = 0,
(3.7)
with ∥β∥= 1. For two perfectly separated classes, all observations are located on
either side of the hyperplane according to their respective class and classification is
simply given by sign[xT β + β0], which is shown on Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4 – SVM for two perfectly separated classes. The decision function is given
by the full line and the margin, M, is the distance between the full line and a dotted
line, yielding 2M between the two dotted lines.
The decision function is then chosen to maximize the margin, M, between the obser-
vations of class 1 and -1:
max
β,β0,||β||=1 M
(3.8a)
s.t.
yi(xT
i β + β0) ≥M,
i = 1, ..., N.
(3.8b)
This is converted into a minimization problem for ∥β∥by dropping the ∥β∥= 1
constraint and instead scaling β and β0 such that M = 1/∥β∥. In the case of overlap-
ping classes, the problem can moreover be reformulated such that some observations
are allowed to be on the wrong side of the margin. These observations are known
as slack variables, ξ = (ξ1, ξ2, ..., ξN), and for a misclassification given as ξi > 1, the
constraint of Equation 3.8b is modified such that the minimization problem takes the
following form:
min
β,β0 ∥β∥
s.t.
{
yi
(
xT
i β + β0
)
≥1 −ξi∀i
ξi ≥0, ∑
i ξi ≤K.
(3.9)
The lower line describes the constraints on the slack variable ξi, where K bounds the
allowed total number of training misclassifications. With this introduction of slack
variables, the classification problem becomes a convex optimization problem with
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Object Detection
15
two constraints [19]. Additionally, a non-linear decision boundary can be obtained
by means of the so-called kernel trick, where the observations are transformed to a
higher dimensional space in which a linear separation is possible [11].
3.3
Object Detection
In object detection, instances of objects are identified by a combination of object lo-
calization and classification [20], e.g. using deep learning image processing techniques.
Object detection is typically supervised and utilizes bounding boxes to indicate lo-
cation, scale, and class of all objects of interest. The frameworks can in general be
categorized as either single or two-stage detectors. The single-stage detectors treat
the object detection as a regression problem, whereas the two-stage detectors com-
bine a region proposal task with subsequent classification and regression to learn class
probabilities and bounding boxes. Popular single-stage frameworks include detectors
as YOLO (You Only Look Once) and SSD (Single Shot MultiBox Detector) opposite
to the two-stage framework Faster R-CNN (Region-based Convolutional Neural Net-
work). The single-stage detectors are in general faster, whereas two-stage detectors
reach a higher accuracy [21] and since the current manual follicle quantification is al-
ready time-consuming, accuracy is deemed more important than speed in this study,
why a two-stage detector is suitable.
Within the family of two-stage frameworks,
Faster R-CNN is chosen due to its good performance [21]. Previous studies employ-
ing object detection for follicle quantification have moreover with success made use
of Faster R-CNN or similar methods [22, 23, 24]. It is finally deemed unnecessary
to perform subsequent instance segmentation with for instance the Mask R-CNN
framework, since the construction of pixelwise masks is unnecessary for the given
task.
For the remaining part of this section, some of the general concepts of deep learning
for image processing are covered and the details of the Faster R-CNN network are
presented, as we apply this framework prospectively.
3.3.1
Deep Learning
Deep learning is a computational technique that imitates the human behavior of
learning by example. Deep learning is data-driven and makes use of extensive fea-
ture extraction in order to perform classification or detection. Feature extraction is
achieved in a forward stage by processing the input data through several layers of non-
linear transformations in a neural network, where the feature representation becomes
more abstract for each layer [25]. An essential aspect of this process is the automatic
extraction of relevant features by means of a general-purpose learning procedure, why
domain specific feature engineering is limited [26].
Supervised learning is the most common type of deep learning and requires large
amounts of labelled data [26]. A loss function is used to compute the error between
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Theory
the predicted output and the ground truth, and the loss function is minimized by
updating the internal parameters of the network, the weights and biases. The de-
sired update is determined by means of backpropagation, where the gradient of the
loss function with respect to each parameter is computed by propagating gradients
backwards from the output to the input layer by application of the chain rule [26].
Combined, the forward and backward stage constitute the network training and learn-
ing of a given task [25]. However, as the training is confined to learning on the basis
of a specific data set, there is a chance of overfitting the network towards this data.
To avoid overfitting, a validation data set is applied to determine the point at which
the model no longer generalizes, which can be identified based on the validation loss.
Terminating the training at this point is known as early stopping.
When the labelled data for a target task is limited, it is possible to exploit features
from an existing network trained on a large non-specific data set, in a technique
called transfer learning. In Figure 3.5 a schematic overview is shown, illustrating
the concepts of deep learning and transfer learning. In transfer learning, the learned
features of a source task are used for the target task, which usually includes a much
smaller labelled data set. In this way, the combined network consists of a pre-trained
source model and a target model, which can be trained by one of three strategies: Full
training of all network layers, fine-tuning of some layers of the pre-trained network,
or freezing of the features of the pre-trained network [27].
Figure 3.5 – Deep learning and transfer learning.
3.3.2
Convolutional Neural Networks
Image processing in deep learning typically makes use of Convolutional Neural Net-
works (CNNs), as they are designed to process data in arrays such as images [26]. An
input image is transformed through a number of filters to produce intermediate fea-
ture maps. The simplest CNN architecture includes filters such as convolution layers,
ReLU layers, pooling layers, and finally a fully connected layer [25]. An example of
a simple CNN is shown in Figure 3.6.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Object Detection
17
Figure 3.6 – Simple CNN consisting of an input layer (input image), two convolutional
blocks of convolution, ReLU, and pooling, followed by a fully connected layer, and
output layer.
In the convolution layer, an image or intermediate feature map is transformed by
means of a convolutional filter to produce a new feature map. The number of applied
filters controls the depth of the output volume and padding on the border of the
input volume can be applied to control the height and width of the output volume.
The so-called stride controls the number of pixels a filter is translated between each
application and thereby the overlap and size of the output volume [25]. Figure 3.7
shows the use of convolution on a 4 × 4 image array with zero-padding and a stride
of one.
Figure 3.7 – Convolution of a zero-padded 4×4 image with a 3×3 filter using a stride
of 1 pixel. The resulting image is of similar size due to the chosen parameters.
An activation function is used to compute the weighted sum of the input and to intro-
duce non-linearity. The default is the piecewise linear ReLU (Rectified Linear Units)
function, f(z) = max(0, z), which typically learns fast in networks with many layers
[26] and moreover not suffer from the vanishing gradient problem when updating the
weights during backpropagation. Alternatively, one can apply the softmax function
f(z) =
exp zi
∑K
j=1 exp zj
,
(3.10)
which is typically done in cases where a probability distribution output is desired [28].
The pooling layer reduces the spatial dimensions of the feature maps by applying a
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Theory
filter with stride of the filter side length. For application of the popular max pooling,
the largest value of the input volume is outputted for each subregion [25]. Finally, the
fully connected layer connects the flattened output of the final convolution or pooling
layer to all the output units, which for a classification task represents the number of
categories [25].
During training of a CNN, all training images are passed through the network multiple
times and the weights and biases, wk and bl, are updated according to the loss, L.
This is usually done by means of stochastic gradient descent (SGD), where the true
gradient of the loss, ∂L, is estimated by the average gradient of a random batch of
training inputs X1, X2, ..., Xm [28]. The update is given by:
wk →w′
k = wk −η
m
∑
j
∂LXj
∂wk
bl →b′
l = bl −η
m
∑
j
∂LXj
∂bl
.
(3.11)
The batch size, m, gives the number of training images presented to the network at
a time and an epoch describes a single passing of the entire training set through the
network. Furthermore, η determines the learning rate as it controls the extent to
which weights are updated and thereby how fast the network adapts to the problem
[29].
3.3.3
Faster R-CNN
The Region-based CNN (R-CNN) comprises the foundation for the Faster R-CNN
and is characterized by its use of a selective search algorithm to generate 2000 region
proposal bounding boxes for each image. All region proposals are warped and the
corresponding feature maps are computed with a CNN, which enables classification
of all regions and final adjustment of the scored regions with bounding box regression.
However, this multi-stage pipeline results in expensive training especially due to the
selective search algorithm [20].
Following the development of the R-CNN, more advanced network architectures have
emerged, providing a multitude of improvements. One such architecture is the Fast
R-CNN [30], where feature extraction is performed on the entire image by means of
multiple convolution and pooling layers. Each region proposal is considered a Region
of Interest (RoI) of arbitrary spacial size, h×w, which is to be converted to a smaller
fixed-size feature map, H × W. A RoI pooling layer divides each h × w RoI into
h/H ×w/W sub-windows, on which max pooling is performed to produce exactly the
fixed size feature map of the region. Each feature vector is fed to a number of fully
connected layers, which eventually branches out into two output layers. A softmax
classification layer, cls, produces a discrete probability distribution, p = p0, ..., pC,
with a score for each RoI in all C object classes as well as for the background ”class”.
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Object Detection
19
Furthermore, a bounding box regression layer, loc, determines the bounding box
offsets, tc =
(
tc
x, tc
y, tc
w, tc
h
)
for each class, where x, y, w, h denote the two coordinates
of the box center, the width, and height of the box, respectively.
Each training
RoI is labeled with a ground-truth class, u = 0, ..., C, where the background class
is labeled u = 0 by convention, and the ground-truth bounding box is given by
v = (vx, vy, vw, vh). Lastly, the Fast R-CNN defines a multi-task loss function, L, for
the network to minimize
L (p, u, tu, v) = Lcls(p, u) + λ[u ≥1]Lloc (tu, v) ,
(3.12)
where Lcls(p, u) = −log pu is the log loss. As no ground-truth exists for the back-
ground class, the Iverson bracket indicator function, [u ≥1], is 1 for u ≥1 and
0 otherwise to exclude any contribution to Lloc.
The hyper-parameter λ controls
the balance between the two losses and a smooth L1 is employed for bounding box
regression
Lloc (tu, v) =
∑
i∈x,y,w,h
smoothL1 (tu
i −vi) ,
(3.13)
where
smoothL1(x) =
{ 0.5x2
if |x| < 1
|x| −0.5
otherwise
.
(3.14)
Even with the advances of Fast R-CNN, generation of region proposals still restricts
the computational eﬀiciency. However, the Faster R-CNN [31] solves this problem
by introducing a Region Proposal Network (RPN), which is nearly cost-free as it
shares its computations with the Fast R-CNN object detection network, known as
the backbone. When an image is passed to the network, feature maps are produced
as shown on Figure 3.8. By sliding a small network over the last convolution feature
map, bounding box proposals with varying scale and aspect ratio, known as anchors,
are placed at each location. These anchors are fed to two sibling fully connected
layers of the RPN for classification and bounding box regression respectively. Binary
classification is applied to distinguish objects from the background, and a positive
label is given to the anchor/anchors with highest Intersection over Union (IoU) or
IoU> 0.7, when compared to a ground-truth bounding box.
IoU = Area of Intersection
Area of Union
.
(3.15)
Moreover, an anchor with IoU< 0.3 for all ground-truth boxes is assigned a negative
label, whereas anchors with an IoU in-between are overlooked. The loss function for
the RPN is then defined as
L(pi, ti) =
1
Ncls
∑
i
Lcls (pi, p∗
i ) + λ
1
Nreg
∑
i
p∗
i Lreg (ti, t∗
i ) ,
(3.16)
where pi is the predicted probability score of anchor i being an object and the ground-
truth label, p∗
i , is 1 if the anchor is positive and 0 otherwise. The four coordinates
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Theory
of the anchor are given in ti, whereas t∗
i is the ground-truth box associated with the
positive anchor. Lcls is a binary log loss and Lloc is a smooth L1 loss corresponding
to Equation 3.13. The loss function are normalized according to the batch size Ncls
and the number of anchor locations Nreg respectively.
Figure 3.8 – Faster R-CNN [31].
The backbone CNN (conv layers on the figure)
extracts feature maps of an input image. The RPN makes bounding box proposals
and RoI pooling is performed as of Fast R-CNN, which is employed before the final
classification and regression.
Faster R-CNN is trained end-to-end with backpropagation and SGD and optimized
according to the four losses: RPN classification, RPN regression, Fast R-CNN clas-
sification, and Fast R-CNN regression [31]. To avoid highly overlapping bounding
box predictions, non-maximum suppression (NMS) is applied per class to remove
low scoring predictions, that has an IoU above a given threshold with higher scoring
predictions [32].
3.4
Performance Evaluation
The performance of a model is evaluated by comparing the predicted outcome to the
ground truth. Each prediction is classified as one of the following four categories:
true positive (TP), false positive (FP), false negative (FN), and true negative (TN).
The total number of predictions in each category is typically presented in a confusion
matrix, which is a table layout for model performance inspection. The four metrics are
visualized in Figure 3.9 and provide the basis for computing the recall and precision.
==PAGE:33==
3.4 Performance Evaluation
21
The recall
Recall =
TP
TP + FN ,
(3.17)
is the fraction of correctly classified positive instances out of the total number of
positive instances, whereas the precision
Precision =
TP
TP + FP ,
(3.18)
represents the fraction of correctly classified positive instances out of the total number
of classified positive instances.
Figure 3.9 – Visualization of the TP, FP, FN, and TN predictions as well as how
the recall and precision are calculated. Observations in the left part of the square are
actually positive, whereas observations in the circle are predicted positive.
In a case with multiple classes, recall and precision are either averaged across the
classes, which is denoted the macro-average, or computed as sums without regard for
the specific classes, which is denoted the micro-average [33]. Recall and precision are
considered complementary, why combining them in a single metric is desirable. The
F1-score comprises the harmonic mean of the metrics and is low if either the recall
and precision is low [34]:
F1-score = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall.
(3.19)
In object detection, each prediction is assigned a probability score of belonging to
a given class. Only predictions with a score above a given threshold are considered
positive, and the recall and precision can be computed for varying probability score
thresholds. A precision-recall curve can be made by ranking the metrics according to
decreasing probability score thresholds. The area under the smooth curve is known
as the average precision (AP) and the mean average precision (mAP) is the mean
of the AP, taken over all classes.
The recall and precision are also influenced by
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Theory
the IoU threshold, which specifies the minimum overlap between a TP prediction
and a ground-truth bounding box. The mAP is consequently a function of the IoU
threshold, which have given rise to a number of different mAP evaluation metrics.
One such example is the Microsoft Common Objects in Context (MS COCO) mAP,
which is defined as the average mAP of 10 IoU threshold, t = [0.5, 0.55, ..., 0.95] and
is used for reporting results on the MS COCO data set [35].
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 4
Materials & Method
In this chapter, we start by describing the ovary image data made available for this
study. We show how primordial and primary/secondary follicles can be identified
visually in the images and discuss how manual annotations are performed in order
to establish the reference, on which the automatic quantification is trained and later
compared. We then go on to explain what quantification models we apply to which
types of images and why. Once this has been established, the model training process
with tuning of model parameters is described for each of the image types, which
includes the use of separate training and validation sets.
4.1
Description of Data
In this study, ovaries are depicted by means of two types of histological staining
methods, H&E- and IHC-stain, as well as by multiphoton microscopy. With these
techniques, it is possible to visualize structures as small as primordial follicles which
are approximately 20 −25 µm in diameter, in comparison to the intact PND6 ovary
which is approximately 0.5−1 mm. At exactly this age, the primordial follicle reserve
is established and both primary and secondary follicles are expected in the ovary as
well. Prospectively, the follicles of the latter two developmental stages are referred to
as a single developmental stage of growing follicles, which is a desirable simplification
for this initial study. Examples of both primordial and growing follicles are pointed
out in all three types of images in Figure 4.1, which shows selected regions of PND6
ovary sections. Examples of the whole section images are presented in Appendix A.
The H&E-stained ovary sections are each 5 µm thick and digitized by a histology slide
scanner to produce RGB color images. The blue-purple-pink colors of the H&E-stain
are thereby apparent, but color variations exist between the images as a result of dif-
ference in slide preparation, the equipment used, or the applied stain [36]. Moreover,
shadows, tissue remnants, damages, or folds of tissue might influence the image as
well. Finally, the size of the images varies, since the histology slide scanner auto-
matically determines the size of each section and produces a correspondingly sized
image.
The IHC-stained images are sectioned and digitized in the same manner as the H&E
sections and are thus represented by differently sized RGB color images. A hema-
toxylin stain is applied to visualize the non-specific structures of the tissue in a blue-
==PAGE:36==
24
4 Materials & Method
Figure 4.1 – From left: H&E-stain, IHC-stain and multiphoton microscopy image.
Examples of primordial follicles (arrow) and growing follicles (arrowhead) are pointed
out in the ovary crops.
purple color. Moreover, YBX2 specific antibodies, that are labelled with chromogenic
DAB enzymes, stain the cytoplasm of the oocyte in a yellow-brown color. As for the
color intensity, variations between the images exists due to the amount and quality
of the stain.
The multiphoton microscopy images are gray-scale and all of size 1448 × 1688 pix-
els. Each of them depicts a certain imaging depth and is a mosaic of smaller images.
Before acquisition, the intensity of the images is reversed and the contrast of each
combined mosaic image is adjusted using the Normalize Local Contrast plug-in of
the Integral Image Filters [37] in Fiji of ImageJ2 [38, 39]. Thereby, the contrast is
adjusted locally in different regions to smoothen the mosaic images. The imaging
depth is limited to approximately 200 −250 µm due to absorption of light in the tis-
sue, but noisy areas already starts appearing within the ovary images at an imaging
depth of approximately 100 µm. The follicles are distinct by means of the structural
information as no specific contrast is applied. On top of the inherent noise due to the
scattering of light, the background also exhibits stripy noise features, stemming from
the power supply.
Due to challenges with acquisition of multiphoton microscopy images, only 21 images
of a single ovary are available from this modality. These are successive sections with
an increasing depth of 10 µm per section, to a maximum depth of approximately
200 µm. Only 17 of these images feature follicles as the remaining four depicts the
exterior of the ovary. An initial data set is comprised of these images along with 14
H&E- and 14 IHC-stained images, both depicting the same two ovaries. This initial
data set is used for training and testing of relevant models for the quantification of
==PAGE:37==
4.1 Description of Data
25
follicles. A final data set of 71 H&E- and 71 IHC-stained images is used to compare
the predictions on these two types of images.
This is achievable since the H&E
and IHC sections are paired, with each section of the pair separated by 10 µm in
the intact ovary. As a result, the paired H&E and IHC sections often depict the
same growing follicles and are expected to feature a somewhat correlated number of
primordial follicles as well. Moreover, a manual follicle count, performed by a staff
member at the Research Group for Molecular and Reproductive Toxicology, National
Food Institute at Technical University of Denmark (DTU), is available for the IHC
images. It is noted that a quality control has been conducted to facilitate accurate
comparisons, why the number of sections per animal vary from one to eight. Table
4.1 shows the number of images and animals for each type of image modality in both
the initial and final data set.
Table 4.1 – Overview of the number of images and animals for the initial and final
data set (rows) of the different image modalities (columns).
H&E
IHC
Multiphoton
Initial
data set
# images
14
14
21 (17)
# animals
2
2
1
Final
data set
# images
71
71
-
# animals
23
23
-
4.1.1
Annotation of Data
In order to assess and optimize the performance of the follicle quantification in a su-
pervised manner, the images are labeled. However, the annotation is no simple matter
as it requires knowledge about the ovary, the structure of a follicle, and the character-
istics of the different developmental stages. Even so, quantification is relative rather
than absolute, as the follicles cannot be identified and classified unambiguously. This
is among other reasons due to the variation in shape, size and texture between individ-
ual follicles. Another source of ambiguity is the fact that follicles are not necessarily
centered in the given sectioning plane, meaning that only some part of the follicles
will be visible. However, as the overall purpose of quantification is to understand
the impact of potential EDCs, the variation between differently exposed groups is of
greater interest than the absolute follicle counts. It is therefore of primary concern
that the counts are comparable and consistent, and annotation guidelines should be
designed accordingly.
==PAGE:38==
26
4 Materials & Method
The annotation guidelines have been outlined by the undersigned under supervision of
Julie Boberg, senior researcher at the Research Group for Molecular and Reproductive
Toxicology, National Food Institute at DTU. Table 4.2 shows the requirements a
structure must fulfill to be labeled a primordial or a growing follicle respectively.
Since the multiphoton microscopy and H&E-stained images resemble each other with
respect to representation of follicles, the same annotation guidelines are used for these
images, whereas other guidelines are needed for the IHC-stained images.
Table 4.2 – Guidelines for annotation of follicles.
H&E and multiphoton
IHC
Primordial
follicles
Visible oocyte nuclei, that is ap-
proximately round.
Brown stain of the oocyte cyto-
plasm.
One layer of surrounding flat-
tened granulosa cells.
One layer of surrounding flat-
tened granulosa cells.
Visible oocyte cytoplasm.
Distinct transition between nu-
clei and cytoplasm.
Growing
follicles
Visible oocyte nuclei, that is ap-
proximately round.
Brown stain of the oocyte cyto-
plasm.
Larger than the average follicle.
Larger than the average follicle.
Minimum one layer of surround-
ing cuboidal granulosa cells.
Minimum one layer of surround-
ing cuboidal granulosa cells.
Granulosa cells compose a dis-
tinct ring structure.
Granulosa cells compose a dis-
tinct ring structure.
Visible oocyte cytoplasm.
Distinct transition between nu-
clei and cytoplasm.
All annotations on the initial data set are made in accordance with the outlined guide-
lines and performed by the undersigned. The annotations are made in Microsoft Paint
3D, where a color-coded dot is placed in the middle of the oocyte nucleus. However,
the entire oocyte is marked on the IHC images in order to make the annotation corre-
spond to the entire cytoplasm staining. Examples of annotations on the three image
types can be found in Appendix A. Since annotation is a time-consuming activity,
only the initial data set has been labeled, and only the initial data set is used to train
the relevant models.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Selecting appropriate methods for follicle quantification
27
4.2
Selecting appropriate methods for follicle
quantification
In this study, three different follicle quantification methods are utilized: Thresholding
and InSegt segmentation and object detection based on the Faster R-CNN framework.
For each image type, one of the two image segmentation techniques has been applied,
and object detection is used only in the case of inadequacy of the given segmentation
method.
The IHC images differ from the H&E and multiphoton images by their specificity,
as only a small intensity overlap is present between the oocyte cytoplasm and other
structures in the images. It is therefore assessed that segmentation can be achieved
by simply thresholding the color channels in relation to the color of the DAB stain
and detaching any fused follicles by means of the watershed algorithm. Subsequent
detection of growing follicles is based on the size of the segmented structures, as this
criteria seems to distinguish them from the primordial follicles.
This approach is
moreover considered a good starting point for the IHC images thanks to its simplicity
and computational ease.
The multiphoton and H&E images are both structurally repetitive, as similar appear-
ing follicles recur multiple times in each image. Moreover, the oocyte nucleus is the
most distinct structure of the follicle in both image types and it therefore provides a
suitable basis for quantification. However, there is a great intensity overlap between
the nucleus and other structures, why thresholding is unfit. In order to distinguish
between the follicles and the background, it is assessed that user-inputs are needed,
such that the texture of a follicle is emphasized. The InSegt algorithm presents such
possibilities, which makes it an appropriate starting point for follicle segmentation in
the multiphoton and H&E images.
As the InSegt algorithm employs an intensity dictionary and operates according to
user-inputs, the approach shares some similarities with neural networks [18]. How-
ever, as the intensity dictionary is made in a pre-processing step, the InSegt method
is less adaptive than neural networks and in cases of inadequacy of the applied image
segmentation techniques, the more robust Faster R-CNN will be applied in its place.
An overview of the methods applied on each type of images is given in Table 4.3
along with the distribution of images into training, validation, and test sets, as a cross
validation framework is applied to avoid severe overfitting. In the results chapter, the
best model for each type of image will be applied on the unseen test set of the initial
data set as well as on the final data set for subsequent comparison of the methods. In
the following sections of the current chapter, the details of each of the three follicle
quantification methods will be presented.
==PAGE:40==
28
4 Materials & Method
Table 4.3 – Overview of quantification methods (rows) used in case of each of the
three types of images (columns). Additionally, also the number of training, validation,
and test images in the initial data set for each model and image type is given.
H&E
IHC
Multiphoton
# training
# validation
# test
# training
# validation
# test
# training
# validation
# test
Thresholding
7
-
7
InSegt
1
7
7
1
10
10
Faster R-CNN
8
3
3
4.3
Thresholding the IHC Images
The IHC images are first divided into a training and test set of seven images each,
such that the performance of the trained model can be tested on an unknown test
set. A histogram of each RGB channel for all training images is made in Matlab,
and a threshold for each channel is chosen by analysis of the histogram shape and
consultation of the training images. However, even the best RGB-based thresholds
in the investigated search space results in an unsatisfactory degree of distinction
between follicles and other structures in the IHC images. To improve performance,
the thresholding technique is instead applied in a different color space, namely the
CIELAB color space, also known as L∗a∗b∗. The CIELAB color space provides a much
better initial segmentation, especially in areas with shadow. Figure 4.2 shows two
perspectives on the three-dimensional (3D) representation of the CIELAB intensities
of one image of the initial data set. It is evident that the third channel, b∗, is particular
suitable for segmenting the brown stain, which corresponds well with the fact that
the b∗axis represents blue towards negative values and yellow towards positive values
[40].
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Thresholding the IHC Images
29
Figure 4.2 – Three-dimensional representation of the CIELAB intensities of one IHC
image from the initial data set. Shown from two different perspectives.
As a consequence of the preceding analysis, an optimum threshold is solely deter-
mined according to the b∗channel of the CIELAB color space. After the threshold
segmentation, the segmented binary image undergoes additional processing. First,
there might exist a number of holes (stemming from the nuclei) within the segmented
objects. These background pixels are filled and a morphological opening is performed
to remove minor detected objects and close the gaps between pixels that are desired
connected. These steps are shown in the flow diagram in Figure 4.3 along with the
succeeding processing steps.
Input image
Thresholding
Watershed
Size constraint
Final segmentation
Fill holes &
opening
Figure 4.3 – Flow diagram of the thresholding pipeline for segmentation of the IHC
images. The input image is segmented into foreground (green) and background (gray)
before applying a size constraint to classify each objects as primordial (red) or growing
follicle (blue).
==PAGE:42==
30
4 Materials & Method
The pixel area and perimeter of each detected object is then determined in order to
estimate the inverse circularity
Circularityinverse = 2
√
πArea of object
Perimeter of object,
(4.1)
of each object.
This is a measure of circularity in the range [0, 1], where 1 is a
perfect circle and 0 is a line [41].
All objects with Circularityinverse < 0.85 and
1200 < Area < 10000 are subjected to watershed segmentation to further segment
objects that represent fused follicles and are thus expected to be imperfect circles.
Employing the size constraint limits the number of objects which are subjected to
further processing by excluding the growing follicles and small partially segmented
primordial follicles which are imperfect circles as well. In order to facilitate the water-
shed segmentation, the binary segmented image is transformed with the chessboard
distance metric, as it was found to be superior to the other distance metrics available
in Matlab.
Finally, very small and very large detected objects are removed from the segmenta-
tion in order to exclude inconclusively stained areas as well as detected shadows. The
optimum lower bound for object area is determined alongside the intensity threshold
in a two-dimensional grid search, where the segmented training images are compared
with the corresponding annotated training images to determine whether the detected
objects overlap with annotated follicles. The number of overlapping follicles is estab-
lished by connected-component labeling, where 8-connectivity of pixels with the same
index represents an object. The number of TP, FP, and FN follicles are determined
as follows:
TP = Number of overlapping follicles
FP = Number of detected follicles −Number of overlapping follicles
FN = Number of annotated follicles −Number of overlapping follicles
It is imposed that only one detected follicle can overlap with one annotated follicle
and since the background is not quantified, no TN predictions exists. Recall and
precision are calculated across all images in order to weight the detection of each
follicle equally and the F1-score is subsequently determined. The grid search across
all training images is shown in Figure 4.4, displaying an optimum F1-score = 0.90,
corresponding to an intensity threshold of b∗= 3 and a removal of detected objects
with Area < 400 pixels.
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Thresholding the IHC Images
31
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Lower bound area (pixels)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Intensity threshold
0.74
0.76
0.78
0.8
0.82
0.84
0.86
0.88
F1-score
Figure 4.4 – Grid search for the thresholding method parameters maximizing the
F1-score of the IHC training images (color scale). The intensity threshold and lower
bound pixel area method parameters are shown on the y and x-axis respectively. The
optimum is given at an intensity threshold of 3 and Area = 400 pixels.
Subsequently, a grid search is performed to determine the lower bound area for clas-
sification of the growing follicles. This is the only parameter to be optimized for the
classification step, and a similar approach for calculating the F1-score as described
above is applied. Figure 4.5 shows the outcome of the grid search, yielding a lower
bound area of 1650 pixels as providing the best detection scheme for the growing
follicles with a F1-score = 0.73.
==PAGE:44==
32
4 Materials & Method
Figure 4.5 – Grid search for the optimal lower bound pixel area (x-axis) for detection
of growing follicles in IHC training images. The F1-score (y-axis) is maximized and the
optimum is identified at Area = 1650 pixels.
4.4
InSegt
A Matlab implementation of InSegt is provided alongside the original paper [18] and
it is used to perform the segmentation. The initial multiphoton and H&E data sets
are applied to both train, validate, and test the models, before the models are finally
used on the final data sets. The training set includes only one image on which the
interactive segmentation will be performed, and the validation set is used for a pa-
rameter grid search. We assess that a large validation set is needed due to significant
variations in noise, apparent structure, and contrast between the images, why the
images are divided approximately fifty-fifty into validation and test sets. Moreover,
as oocyte nuclei of primordial and growing follicles tend to resemble one another,
especially with respect to the nuclei texture, we chose to create one model that seg-
ments all nuclei regardless of underlying follicle class. Afterwards, a model that only
identifies growing follicles among the detected follicles is developed, given that the
initial segmentation is satisfactory.
The intensity dictionary is constructed using hierarchical K-means clustering, which
enables eﬀicient computation of the dictionary [18], and is moreover already imple-
mented in InSegt. A dictionary size of branching factor b = 5 and t = 5 layers is
chosen initially because of the limited impact on the resulting segmentation. Conse-
==PAGE:45==
4.4 InSegt
33
quently, the intensity dictionary consists of
K = bt+1 −b
b −1
= 55+1 −5
5 −1
= 3905
(4.2)
dictionary patches. In the current InSegt implementation, the K-means clustering
is based on either Euclidean distance or normalized cross-correlation between the
image patches. This means that the grid search includes two different K-means met-
rics as well as the patch size, which is the parameter with greatest impact on the
segmentation, since it must reflect the size of the structure of interest.
4.4.1
Multiphoton Microscopy Images
The two-photon microscopy images are resized by a factor of 0.5, which seems to be a
suitable trade-off between maintaining the image resolution and easing the computa-
tion. We choose image 17 as the training image, as this image features both the follicle
reserve of primordial follicles as well as a number of growing follicles. Moreover, it
includes a noisy area in the interior of the ovary, reflecting the depth-depending light
scattering noise. Due to these reasons, image 17 represents the collected images well,
thus comprising a suitable exponent. The training image is cropped such that no
background is included, which further eases the computation and limits the detection
of follicles within the background. The training image is partially labeled using the
GUI provided within the InSegt module and two classes are labeled: oocyte nuclei
and background.
Figure 4.6 shows the partial labeling of the training image (left) as well as the resulting
real-time provided segmentation (right) for detection of all follicles. The partially
labeled training image comprise the basis for all multiphoton InSegt segmentations
performed later on.
The segemented training image in Figure 4.6 uses Euclidean
distance K-means clustering and a patch size of 15 pixels, which is the approximated
size of an average oocyte nuclei. The partial labeling was carried out by first labeling
a larger background area and subsequently labeling all nuclei in the given area. By
repeating this procedure a couple of times, most of the nuclei are segmented and
missing nuclei can be labeled one-by-one.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Materials & Method
Figure 4.6 – Left: Partial labeling with InSegt of the cropped multiphoton training
image to detect all follicles. Right: The resulting real-time segmentation. Oocyte nuclei
are marked in magenta and the background is marked in cyan.
The partially labelled training image is used to process the images of the validation
set and perform a grid search.
That is, a dictionary is constructed by means of
the partially labelled training image for each set of parameters and all validation
images are processed for each dictionary to determine the suited parameters.
A
morphological opening is applied on the binary segmented images to exclude small
objects from the foreground and the number of overlapping follicles is determined as
described in Section 4.3. Figure 4.7 shows the grid search on patch size and distance
metric to detect all follicles. The largest F1-score = 0.82 and was obtained with a
patch size of 9 pixels and the Euclidean distance for the K-means clustering.
==PAGE:47==
4.4 InSegt
35
Figure 4.7 – InSegt grid search maximizing the F1-score (y-axis) of the multiphoton
validation images to determine patch size (x-axis) and distance metric (see legend) for
detection of all follicles. Using a patch size of 9 pixels and the Euclidean distance metric
seems optimal for performance.
The segmentation provides the basis for identification of growing follicles with a binary
classification. Image patches around all detected follicles are extracted with a patch
size of 24 × 24 pixels. Each patch is vectorized and classification is performed by a
linear SVM, which perfectly separates the growing follicles from the other predictions
in the validation set.
4.4.2
H&E Images
Applying the pixel-based InSegt algorithm on the H&E images quickly proves to be
diﬀicult due to staining variations, why a color transformation is applied to template
images, T , in order to obtain a color scheme similar to that of a reference image, R.
The Reinhard color transformation is chosen, since it relies heavily on the reference
image [36], which is chosen based on the contrast. Here, the images are transformed
to the lαβ color space, which is based on human perception [42], and color correction
is performed according to the reference image for each channel. The color correction
is given by
T ∗= µR + (T −µT )σR
σT
,
(4.3)
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Materials & Method
where T ∗is the color corrected template image and µ and σ denote the mean and
the standard deviation, respectively. The transformation is implemented in Matlab
and Figure 4.8 shows the transformation of three images.
Figure 4.8 – Reinhard transformation of three H&E images of the initial data set. Top
row: Reference image (far left) and raw images. Bottom row: Reinhard transform of
the raw image in the panel directly above.
The color normalized H&E images are resized by a factor of 0.25 to ease the compu-
tation. A training image that features both primordial and growing follicles is then
chosen and cropped in accordance with the present structures. Figure 4.9 shows the
partial labeling of the training image with InSegt (left) and the resulting segmenta-
tion provided in real-time (right) for detection of all follicles. The parameter settings
and approach described in Section 4.4.1 are applied also to the partial labeling of the
H&E training image.
==PAGE:49==
4.4 InSegt
37
Figure 4.9 – Left: Partial labeling with InSegt of the cropped H&E training image
to detect all follicles. Right: The resulting real-time segmentation. Oocyte nuclei are
marked in magenta and the background is marked in cyan.
The segmented and manually annotated follicles are compared to determine the perfor-
mance of the segmentation. However, remaining color variation among the validation
images seems to be decisive for the segmentation, why we convert the images to gray-
scale as well. A grid search on patch size and distance metric is thus performed on
both the color normalized and the gray-scale color normalized images, as illustrated
in Figure 4.10. The best segmentation of all follicles is obtained with a patch size of
9 pixels and normalized cross-correlation on the gray-scale color normalized images
with a F1-score = 0.56. This corresponds to identifying approximately the same num-
ber of TP, FP, and FN follicles, why we choose not to pursue classification of growing
follicles as the follicle quantification scheme already has been proved deficient. Due to
the inadequacy of the InSegt algorithm for follicle segmentation of the H&E images,
we move on to apply Faster R-CNN object detection in this case.
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Materials & Method
Figure 4.10 – InSegt grid search on the H&E validation images, determining the
optimal patch size (x-axis), distance metric and color normalization (legend) for the
detection of all follicles. The gray-scale color normalized images comprise the optimum
along with a patch size of 9 pixels and the normalized cross-correlation distance metric,
maximizing the F1-score (y-axis).
4.5
Faster R-CNN on the H&E Images
The pipeline for the Faster R-CNN object detection is implemented using Pytorch
[43], a python library.
In order to support object detection, the initial H&E an-
notations are manually converted to bounding boxes using MyVision.ai [44] in the
format [xmin, ymin, xmax, ymax, ]. Subsequently, the initial H&E data set is divided
into deep learning suited training, validation, and test sets, where the first includes
eight images and the latter two include three images each. Even though three images
is rather limited for validation and testing, we assess that the number of training
images should be maximized. To enable local transformations, all images are tiled to
produce overlapping patches. In the approximately 5000 × 5000 sized images, each
patch is 1024 × 1024 pixels, except for remaining boundary patches, and overlaps
with the neighbouring patches by 512 pixels both vertically and horizontally. Each
non-boundary region is thus included in four patches, given that it features labeled
bounding boxes since patches without annotations are discarded. Annotations on the
boundary are also discarded if their visibility is below 70%.
In order to simulate a larger data set, data augmentation is applied to the patches
during training. Since the model should be invariant with respect to vertical flips,
==PAGE:51==
4.5 Faster R-CNN on the H&E Images
39
horizontal flips, and transpositions of a given image, a pipeline is used, where these
transformations are employed with a 50% probability for each individual patch. This
is implemented using Albumentations [45], which is a Python library for image aug-
mentation supporting bounding box transformations.
Multiple different backbone models exist and choosing one is a trade-off between ac-
curacy and computational cost, where deep models tend to have a high accuracy but
run slower. For the present application, the ResNet-50 [46] network forms a good
compromise and is chosen as backbone. It is characterized by its 50 layers and use
of ”shortcut connections”, where a couple of layers are skipped. The output of the
”shortcut connections” is added to the output of the stacked layers, why the ResNet
can be trained end-to-end and prevent vanishing gradients. A visual description of
ResNet50 is given in Appendix B. To adjust the backbone for this task, the output
layer is removed and a RPN and Fast R-CNN predictor is added instead. A Fea-
ture Pyramid Network (FPN) is moreover added on top of the ResNet to combine
the bottom-up approach of the CNN with a top-down pathway that reconstructs
the higher resolution layers by upsampling the feature maps to include semantically
strong features [20]. The feature maps and reconstructions are combined through
lateral connections and in the case of a Faster R-CNN, RoI features are extracted at
different levels of the pyramid [47].
The image patches are resized by a factor of 0.5 and the network is trained with a
batch size of four in 20 epochs. An initial learning rate of 0.005 is used in association
with a scheduler, that halves the learning rate every fifth epoch. Furthermore, a SGD
optimizer with momentum of 0.9 and weight decay of 0.0005 is applied. Momentum
in general leads to faster convergence by taking previous gradients into account and
weight decay adds L2 regularization to the loss, thus helping to avoid overfitting
[28]. A NMS threshold of IoU = 0.5 is applied for both post-processing of the RPN
proposals and for prediction outside of training. Moreover, only predictions with a
classification score above 0.5 are chosen to be returned outside of training.
Due to the limited amount of annotated images, training a model from scratch might
be challenging, why the possibility of using a pre-trained backbone model is exploited.
The ResNet-50 consists of five stages with convolution blocks, and it has to be de-
cided whether to freeze all, some, or none layers of the five stages. For fine-tuning
and freezing of the backbone, the ResNet-50-FPN is pre-trained on the MS COCO
train2017 data set [48, 49], which consists of 118.287 natural scene training images
with a broad range of scales and small objects [20]. Figure 4.11 shows the validation
sum of losses for 0-5 trainable layers, where five trainable layers corresponds to learn-
ing the model from scratch. It is evident that fine-tuning the backbone is beneficial
in order to minimize the loss and training the entire ResNet-50-FPN network yields
the lowest validation loss and is consequently used prospectively.
==PAGE:52==
40
4 Materials & Method
Figure 4.11 – Sum of validation losses as a function of epoch for 0-5 trainable layers
with Faster R-CNN. A low loss is desired and the lowest is obtained with 5 trainable
layers, which corresponds to training the entire ResNet-50-FPN backbone.
The training loss of the model is consulted to ensure that learning is maintained
throughout all epochs. The two losses of both the RPN and predictor as well as the
sum of all four losses are given in the left of Figure 4.12. In order to chose the best
model and avoid overfitting, early stopping of the training is applied. As the Faster R-
CNN network is optimized according to the loss and subsequently explored by means
of mAP, both the sum of validation losses and mAP are taken into account for the
choice of the final model. As the MS COCO data set was initially used, we evaluate
the model according to the MS COCO mAP. The right panel of Figure 4.12 shows
both measures and it is clear that learning stagnates after approximately four epochs.
The validation mAP however increases a bit and finds a plateau after 11 epochs, why
the model at the 11th epoch is chosen as the final model with a validation loss of 0.16
and validation MS COCO mAP = 0.57.
==PAGE:53==
4.5 Faster R-CNN on the H&E Images
41
Figure 4.12 – Left: The four training losses and the sum of losses as a function of
epoch for the Faster R-CNN. Right: Validation COCO mAP (left y-axis) and validation
sum of losses (right y-axis) as a function of epoch for the Faster R-CNN. The model at
the 11th epoch is chosen with early stopping.
As the model is specific with regards to the input image size, the test predictions are
performed on similarly sized patches. The bounding box predictions are subsequently
translated to match the full sized image and NMS is applied to remove overlapping
predictions with an IoU = 0.3 threshold. Subsequently, an IoU = 0.7 threshold is
applied for the classification of predictions as TP, FP, and FN respectively.
==PAGE:54==
42
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 5
Results
Based on the methodology presented in the previous chapter, the follicles in the three
types of images are quantified. First, the IHC, H&E, and multiphoton test images of
the initial data set are processed and the performance is tracked by comparison to
the manual annotations. Subsequently, follicles in the paired IHC and H&E images
of the final data set are quantified and the counts are compared to a corresponding
manual IHC count.
5.1
Thresholding the IHC Images
Using the optimized thresholding pipeline, the seven IHC test images are processed.
The predictions are compared with the manual annotations in a confusion matrix pre-
sented in Table 5.1. The diagonal of the confusion matrix presents the TP predictions
and the off-diagonal characterizes the type of errors committed. Most predictions are
TP and the total number of predictions corresponds well with the total number of
manually annotated follicles, with only a small underestimation. Furthermore, it is
evident that the largest source of error is the misclassification of 62 out of 170 growing
follicles, which corresponds to 36% of the annotated growing follicles. We compute
the F1-score by means of both a micro, m, and macro, M, average, and as the two
measures F1-scoreM = 0.87 and F1-scorem = 0.86 are practically equal, the overall
prediction corresponds to the per class average prediction.
Table 5.1 – Confusion matrix for the IHC test images processed with a thresholding
pipeline. The columns represent the predicted class and the rows represent the manually
annotated class.
Predicted
Primordial
Growing
Not detected
Sum
Actual
Primordial
973
26
191
1190
Growing
62
107
1
170
Background
85
1
-
-
Sum
1120
134
-
-
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Results
Next, we evaluate the number of predictions and annotations per image in Figure
5.1 to identify any additional trends.
The figure shows that in five of the seven
images, the number of predicted and annotated primordial follicles (denoted PMF on
the figure) are practically identical. The slight overall underestimation of primordial
follicles thus originates from the remaining two images, number 4 and 5 on the figure.
These images also feature the largest underestimation of growing follicles.
Figure 5.1 – Number of annotations and thresholding pipeline predictions of growing
(left y-axis) and primordial follicles (right y-axis, PMF in the legend) on the IHC test
images.
To examplify the underestimated counts, Table 5.2 is presented, displaying selected
regions of the annotation (top) and prediction (bottom) on image 4 (left) and 5
(right). Especially the selected region of Image 4 shows how growing follicles with a
small stained area are easily misclassified as primordial. The top left area of Image 5
on the other hand shows how primordial follicles are not detected if the YBX2 specific
staining is weak.
5.2
InSegt on the Multiphoton Microscopy Images
The InSegt algorithm is in combination with a linear SVM applied to predict the
number of follicles in the multiphoton test images. By consulting the confusion ma-
trix given in Table 5.3, it is evident that the number of primordial follicles is slightly
overestimated, as the number of FP background predictions exceeds the number of
==PAGE:57==
5.2 InSegt on the Multiphoton Microscopy Images
45
Image 4
Image 5
Annotations
Predictions
Table 5.2 – Top row: Selected regions of annotated Image 4 (left) and Image 5 (right)
of the IHC test set. Bottom row: Predictions on the same selected regions of image 4
(left) and image 5 (right). A red marking indicates a primordial follicle, whereas a blue
marking indicates a growing follicle. The arrows point out major misclassifications.
FNs. 28% of the predicted primordial follicles are actually in fact FP background
predictions. The number of growing follicles is by contrast underestimated and only
approximately half of the growing follicle predictions are TPs. Additionally, a sub-
stantial amount of growing follicles are misclassified as primordial follicles, which is
reflected in the test F1-scores, where F1-scoreM = 0.69 and F1-scorem = 0.76 suggests
a worse performance on the smallest of the classes - i.e. the growing follicles.
Next, the number of predictions and annotations in each multiphoton test image is
reviewed by Figure 5.2. As the images are presented with decreasing scanning depth,
the number of follicles increases alongside the image number and growing follicles
are only detected in the final three images. However, from this point the number of
annotated primordial follicles also starts decreasing and the correspondence between
the prediction and annotation drops.
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Results
Table 5.3 – Confusion matrix for the multiphoton microscopy test images processed
with InSegt and a linear SVM. The columns represent the predicted class and the rows
represent the manually annotated class.
Predicted
Primordial
Growing
Not detected
Sum
Actual
Primordial
807
4
189
1000
Growing
9
7
3
19
Background
311
2
-
-
Sum
1127
13
-
-
Figure 5.2 – Number of annotations and InSegt+linear SVM pipeline predictions
of growing (left y-axis) and primordial follicles (right y-axis, PMF in legend) on the
multiphoton test images.
To identify the cause of the decrease in performance, the prediction of follicles in
selected regions of test Images 7 and 9 are shown in Figure 5.3. Bounding boxes
reveals the extracted patches for the SVM classification and the color reflects the
predicted class, with red indicating a primordial follicle and blue indicating a growing
follicle. The prediction of primordial follicles is quite good in Image 7 (left) and only
few follicles are not detected (see e.g. the examples highlighted with arrows). In Image
9 (right), growing follicles are predicted owing to the deeper scanning depth, which
==PAGE:59==
5.3 Faster R-CNN on the H&E images
47
causes a decrease in the signal-to-noise ratio. This is evident in especially the top right
area, where fewer predictions are made as a result. In addition, a number of growing
follicles are falsely not detected (top arrow) and two FP primordial predictions are
located on the edge between the ovary and background at locations of great curvature
(bottom arrow).
Figure 5.3 – Predictions in selected regions of image 7 (left) and image 9 (right) of the
multiphoton test set. A red bounding box corresponds to a prediction of a primordial
follicle and a blue bounding box corresponds to a prediction of a growing follicle. The
arrows point out major misclassifications.
5.3
Faster R-CNN on the H&E images
The H&E test images are processed by the selected Faster R-CNN model and the
predictions are summarized in the confusion matrix in Table 5.4. The total number
of follicles is low compared with the previous two confusion matrices, since only three
images are included in this test set. That said, the total number of primordial follicles
is almost identical with regards to prediction and annotation. As for the growing
follicles, 10 out of 36 annotations are completely overlooked. This corresponds to
36% and explains why the total number of growing follicles is slightly underestimated.
The performance on the two classes is nevertheless similar, as the average across the
classes F1-scoreM = 0.77 and the total average F1-scorem = 0.76 are equal.
The number of predictions and annotations in each of the three images is then showed
in Figure 5.4 and it is clear that under- as well as overestimation occurs in both of
the classes. Consequently, it is diﬀicult to identify any specific areas of weakness or
general trends in the predictions.
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Results
Table 5.4 – Confusion matrix for H&E test images processed with Faster R-CNN. The
columns represent the predicted class and the rows represent the manually annotated
class.
Predicted
Primordial
Growing
Not detected
Sum
Actual
Primordial
205
1
57
263
Growing
1
25
10
36
Background
75
3
-
-
Sum
281
29
-
-
Figure 5.4 – Number of annotations and Faster R-CNN predictions of growing (left
y-axis) and primordial follicles (right y-axis, PMF in legend) on the H&E test images.
Table 5.5 shows selected areas of test Images 1 (left) and 2 (right) with annotated
(top) and predicted (bottom) bounding boxes. The figure reflects the fact that most
predictions agree with the annotations, with only few deviations.
The upper left
area of image 1 shows three primordial follicles (marked by an arrow) that are falsely
predicted as a single follicle. On the other hand, more predictions than annotations
are made in Image 2 (left arrow), with the exception of two not detected growing
follicles (right arrow). The predictions are however in general not wrong and most
FP predictions seem to represent follicles, that are somewhat visible.
==PAGE:61==
5.4 Predictions on the Final Data Set
49
Image 1
Image 2
Annotations
Predictions
Table 5.5 – Top row: Selected regions of annotated Image 1 (left) and Image 2 (right)
of the H&E test set. Bottom row: Predictions on the same selected regions of Image 1
(left) and Image 2 (right). A red bounding box indicates a primordial follicle and a blue
bounding box indicates a growing follicle. The arrows point out major misclassifications.
5.4
Predictions on the Final Data Set
The final data set of paired H&E and IHC sections is processed with the respective
models to quantify the primordial and growing follicles in each image. Subsequently,
the automatic counts are compared with the manual IHC counts per animal, such
that the variation between adjacent sections is minimized. Owing to the difference in
the number of sections for each animal, the number of counted follicles vary greatly
between the animals.
First, the primordial follicle counts are examined in Figure 5.5a. The bar chart (left)
shows the automatic follicle counts in the H&E and IHC images for all 23 animals.
The counts are sorted according to the manual IHC count, which is also depicted.
Each animal is identified by a unique ID, which is the letter given above each bar.
The automatic H&E and IHC counts are moreover plotted as a function of the manual
count (right). A linear fit with intersection at the point of origin is made for each
type of stain with good correspondence between the observations and fit. This is
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Results
also evident from Pearson’s correlation, r, which is calculated for each stain. It is
particular high for the automatic IHC counts, which is also expected as these manual
and automatic counts are performed on the same images. Finally, both plots show
that substantial fewer primordial follicles are counted in the H&E images compared to
the IHC images, where the automatic and manual counts agrees more or less perfectly
on average with the slope a = 1.00.
A similar analysis is carried out for the growing follicles and Figure 5.5b shows the
resulting bar chart (left) and scatter plot (right). The bar chart shows that the auto-
matic IHC count exceeds both the manual IHC count and the automatic H&E count.
As a result, the overall correspondence between automatic and manual IHC counts
is much worse compared to quantification of primordial follicles (a is significantly
larger than 1). The increased fluctuations in the automatic IHC counts are moreover
reflected in the Pearson’s correlation. However, the agreement between the manual
IHC count and the automatic H&E count has increased for both Pearson’s correlation
and the slope on the growing follicles compared to the primordial ones.
Lastly, the automatic counts of all follicles in the H&E and IHC images are compared
with the manual IHC count per animal. Figure 5.5c shows that in general more fol-
licles are counted by means of the automatic IHC count than by the manual count
(a > 1). The opposite applies to the automatic H&E count, where both the primor-
dial and growing follicles are under-counted (a < 1). However, both the automatic
H&E and IHC counts are highly correlated with the manual counts and shows poten-
tial for future application as a result.
Finally, we examine some of the outlier predictions from the above analysis. Table
5.5 shows the original IHC images as well as the automatic IHC counts of animal
’h’ and ’r’. The selected image region of animal ’h’ includes only a few primordial
follicle predictions (bottom left). However, the associated original image (top left)
displays quite a lot of additional follicles, that are not predicted due to the YBX2
specific staining being very weak. On the other hand, the YBX2 specific staining
in the selected image region of animal ’r’ (top right) is very strong, which results in
diﬀiculty distinguishing follicles from each other and an overestimation of growing
follicles as a result (bottom right).
Moreover, selected image regions of the automatic H&E count on animals ’v’ and ’u’
are shown in Figure 5.6. The automatic count on the entire animal ’v’ features many
more primordial and growing follicles as compared to the manual count, whereas the
total count for animal ’u’ features only a few primordial follicles compared to the
manual count.
The selected image region of animal ’v’ (left) reflects this fact by
featuring an abundance of primordial and growing follicle predictions. That said, all
the predictions seem reasonable and we find no areas with signs of overestimation.
The low number of detected primordial follicles in animal ’u’ however seems to be
explained by the selected region (right), as the lower right area of the region is out of
focus and the tissue is slightly damaged.
==PAGE:63==
5.4 Predictions on the Final Data Set
51
(a) Primordial follicles.
(b) Growing follicles.
(c) All follicles.
Figure 5.5 – Left: Bar charts of automatic follicle counts per animal in the final data
set of H&E and IHC images. The bars are sorted according to the manual IHC count,
which is depicted as a line. A unique letter ID represents each animal and is given
above the bars. Right: Scatter plot of the automatic follicle counts per animal in the
H&E and IHC images as a function of the manual IHC follicle count. A linear fit with
slope a is shown for each type of stain as well as the Pearson’s correlation, r.
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Results
Animal ’h’
Animal ’r’
Original image region
Predictions
Table 5.6 – Top row: Selected image regions of animal ’h’ (left) and animal ’r’ (right)
of final IHC data set. Bottom row: Predictions on the same selected regions of animal
’h’ (left) and animal ’r’ (right). A red marking indicates a primordial follicle, whereas
a blue marking indicates a growing follicle.
Figure 5.6 – Predictions on the selected regions of animal ’v’ (left) and animal ’u’
(right) of final H&E data set. A red marking indicates a primordial follicle, whereas a
blue marking indicates a growing follicle
==PAGE:65==
CHAPTER 6
Discussion
The presented results establish the potential of automatic follicle quantification in
H&E, IHC, and multiphoton images. That is, the three appertaining models all make
relevant predictions of primordial and growing follicles, providing a basis for further
development and possibly for application within toxicological studies. In this chapter,
we discuss the potential of the individual automatic quantification schemes in detail,
starting with a summary of the general outcomes from the results and a discussion
of the need for both qualitative and quantitative performance assessments. Then,
the applicability of each of the developed models is discussed individually before a
comparative discussion is made, based on the IHC and H&E predictions on the final
data set. Lastly, we look at the bigger picture of both acquisition of images, the direct
applicability of the models to toxicological studies, and future perspectives.
6.1
Summary of Results
Each of the models pose a standardized counting approach, which is based on the
given feature extraction and the applied constraints. However, the three developed
pipelines are associated with different biases and degrees of uncertainty, all of which
are summarized in Table 6.1. The highest F1-score is obtained by thresholding the
IHC images, for which there is a particularly good agreement between the number of
manually annotated and the number of predicted primordial follicles. The area based
classification is however unable to identify growing follicles with a small stained area
and the method relies on a uniform staining quality. Detection of follicles in the mul-
tiphoton images is quite sensitive to the scanning depth, and a good correspondence
between the manually annotated and the predicted number follicles is restricted to the
exterior sections. Moreover, application of Faster R-CNN on the H&E images yields a
good agreement for the primordial counts, as there is approximately the same number
of FP and FN predictions. Furthermore, a visual inspection of the predictions identi-
fies no obvious areas of weaknesses for the model as most predictions appear logical.
Thus, it is surprising that the Faster R-CNN on H&E pipeline yields a significantly
lower F1-score compared to the Thresholding on IHC pipeline due to a substantial
amount of FP and FN predictions. This emphasizes the necessity of both a quanti-
tative and qualitative assessment of the predictions to assess the performance. The
performance metrics computed from a comparison to manual annotations are only as
useful as the manual annotations themselves. Consequently, each individual perfor-
==PAGE:66==
54
6 Discussion
mance metric might suffer from the ambiguity associated to the annotation process,
and the metrics will most likely include an irreducible error. Moreover, as the degree
of uncertainty differs between the image types, the performance metrics may not be
directly comparable as a result.
Fundamentally, it is not possible to design a bullet-proof manual labeling process, as
no ground-truth exists with regards to the distinction of a follicle from the surrounding
tissue.
Consequently, a manual annotation process will always rely on individual
judgment and it is not realistic to aim for complete consistency.
Practically, the
labeling is complicated by the image resolution and focus as well as damages or folds
of the tissue. Moreover, distinction between the two different developmental stages
requires both knowledge and practice, since the actual maturation of follicles is a
continuum. The annotation conducted during this project has been time-consuming
and challenging and must however be considered as imperfect, since it is performed by
the untrained undersigned. We have attempted using different labeling schemes such
as including an intermediate class and a class of unsure follicles. Neither strategies
however resulted in an improved performance and we have therefore chosen to include
only a primordial and growing follicle class.
To limit the time spent labeling, we moreover chose to only annotate a small initial
set of each type of images. This of course affects the possibility of making robust
models, that are suitable for a wide range of image qualities with regards to staining
and imaging dept. For future works, we asses that a skilled laboratory technician or
a similar member of staff is needed for labeling. Preferable at least two, in order to
facilitate discussion of the actual annotations and the used protocol. Thereby, a larger
data set of higher annotation quality would be at hand to facilitate the development
of improved models.
6.2
Thresholding the IHC Images
Thresholding an image is the simplest and most intuitive form of segmentation. By
combining it with the watershed algorithm and a number of morphological operations,
a satisfying result is obtained for the IHC images. However, the area based distinc-
tion between primordial and growing follicles is at times insuﬀicient, as described in
Table 6.1. That is, the stained area of growing follicles, that are not exactly centered
in the given sectioning plane, is at times quite small, why the detected follicles are
sometimes misclassified as being primordial. This is reflected in the underestimation
of growing follicles given in the confusion matrix in Table 5.1 and the presented image
regions in Table 5.2. We assess, that applying a more advanced classification method,
such as the patch-based SVM used on the multiphoton images, could possibly permit
a more accurate detection of the growing follicles. Moreover, the varying staining
quality described in the table can entail a general underestimation of follicles or a
screwed distribution of primordial and growing follicles. Weakly stained follicles are
namely easily overseen or disregarded due to the chosen intensity threshold or the
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Thresholding the IHC Images
55
Table 6.1 – Summary of previously identified advantages and disadvantages of each
method and type of image.
Advantages
Disadvantages
Thresholding
on IHC
Highest attained F1-score.
Segmentation influenced by
both strong and weak stain-
ing quality.
Good agreement between pri-
mordial counts
Underestimation of growing
follicles.
Fast and intuitive segmenta-
tion.
Unable to identify growing
follicles with small cytoplasm
stain.
The staining yields a clear dis-
tinction of the follicles
Laborious staining procedure.
InSegt on
multiphoton
Good detection of primordial
follicles in exterior sections
(with a constant underestima-
tion).
Scanning depth strongly influ-
ences the number of primor-
dial predictions.
No classification of growing
follicles in exterior sections
(as desired).
Both detection and classifi-
cation of growing follicles is
challenged in deeper sections.
Permits scanning of the intact
ovary.
Image acquisition is slow and
somewhat unavailable.
Faster R-CNN
on H&E
Good agreement between pri-
mordial counts.
Substantial
amount
of
FP
and FN primordial predic-
tions.
Reliable classification of grow-
ing follicles.
Underestimation of growing
follicles due to FNs.
Predictions highly based on
follicle texture.
Prediction criteria are not
transparent and weaknesses
are diﬀicult to identify.
Robust model.
Slowest computation.
==PAGE:68==
56
6 Discussion
size of the segmented object. Overall, we assess that the approach is best suited for
images with a fairly similar staining quality. In data sets with a significant spread
in staining quality, one might have to adjust the threshold manually on a per image
basis.
Although this implies additional manual labor, a semi-automatic approach
might still save time compared to a full manual annotation.
Another general issue is leaking, where the segmented objects leak into the back-
ground, which can lead to detection of larger objects. In some cases this entail fusion
of primordial follicles, which is attempted solved this by means of watershed segmen-
tation. We apply multiple constraints to target these follicles, which is a diﬀicult task
with varying results. However, it is worth noticing that extensive leaking as shown in
Table 5.6 mostly seems to be an issue in the final data set. This could suggest that the
intensity distribution in this data set is not represented suﬀiciently in the training set.
A larger training set would consequently be prudent. Regardless, avoiding leaking and
still detecting most objects is a balance, why choosing the intensity threshold by a
grid search presents the best overall compromise for a fully automatic quantification
pipeline. However, we expect that color normalization in a pre-processing step could
optimize this compromise. The Reinhard transformation is thus attempted included
in the pipeline subsequently. This helped to overcome leaking but simultaneously
resulted in a greater intensity overlap between oocyte cytoplasm and the shadows
and hence an unaffected overall performance. Exactly the detection of follicles in
areas with shadow is optimized by converting the images to the CIELAB color space.
We assess that combining color normalization with another thresholding color space
could entail a slight increase in overall performance.
6.3
InSegt on the Multiphoton and H&E Images
The InSegt algorithm is a strong candidate for more complex segmentation tasks, and
in combination with a linear SVM, it provides decent quantification of the multipho-
ton images. This is especially due to the good detection of primordial follicles in the
outer sections, which is given in Table 6.1 and evident from Figure 5.2. However, the
scanning depth and correlated signal-to-noise ratio clearly influence the performance,
which consequently makes the detection more unsure with increasing depth and for
the growing follicles.
The InSegt algorithm makes use of patches, which somewhat resembles the anchors
of Faster R-CNN as they describe a given area of interest. The patches are however
limited to a fixed patch size, which makes characterization of objects with varying
sizes diﬀicult. As the selected patch size is 9 pixels, growing follicles are evidently
not characterized well as shown in Figure 5.3, where multiple growing follicles are
not detected. Making two different models for detection of primordial and growing
follicles is consequently attempted. For the multiphoton images this is problematic,
since the number of growing follicles encompassed in the images is very sparse. This
==PAGE:69==
6.4 Faster R-CNN on the H&E Images
57
makes learning the unique features of the growing follicles almost impossible, even
by means of different marking schemes, thus complicating the distinction between
the two types of follicles. The limited number of growing follicles can of course be a
reflection of that exact ovary, for which reason a greater training set including scans
of multiple ovaries is desired. However, InSegt is still confined to constructing the
intensity dictionary on the basis of only one image. For the sake of fast computation,
this makes sense, but it restricts the method to very pattern based images.
The subsequent SVM classification of patches in the multiphoton images allows for a
flexible decision boundary between primordial and growing follicles. However, where
the chosen linear SVM perfectly separates the primordial and growing follicles of the
validation set, it is deficient for the test set. We expect this to be a result of the poor
segmentation of the growing follicles, at which the decision boundary is based on very
few observations. In principle, the SVM could be exploited to classify FP predictions,
calling for an InSegt overestimation of follicle detections to decrease the number of
FN predictions.
The distinction between follicles and other structures is however
not always very clear, why it is unclear whether such a strategy would increase the
performance.
Another course of action includes a more thorough feature extraction, as the chosen
procedure relies solely on pixel intensities. This is especially unstable in the case of
color variations, which is exactly an issue in the H&E images (even after color nor-
malization), as conversion to a gray-scale is seen to increase the F1-score. Techniques
such as SIFT features and PCA with associated derivatives presents alternative pos-
sibilities for feature extraction. The latter was attempted for the multiphoton and
H&E images and resulted in a decreased performance in both cases. We consequently
deem InSegt unsuited for the H&E images, which is probably due to the extensive
amount of information available in the images, and proceed with a more adaptable
approach. That said, we assess that InSegt is well suited for detection of at least
primordial follicles in the multiphoton images.
6.4
Faster R-CNN on the H&E Images
Faster R-CNN presents the possibility of generating a complex model, that automati-
cally extracts relevant features for detection of follicles. This means that the resulting
model is more robust, for instance with regards to color variation, why the raw images
can be employed as input to the model with success. The confusion matrix in Table
5.4 shows an overall good performance, which is moreover supported by the predic-
tions in each image, as shown in Figure 5.4. It is noted, that among the primordial
follicles, approximately the same amount of follicles are falsely detected and falsely
not detected. This seems to reflect the fact, that the trained model uses a slightly
different distinction of follicles, than the one applied during manual annotation. The
selected regions in Table 5.5 illustrate this fact, as the annotations and predictions
are somewhat equally good and makes one question the performed annotation in
some cases. This reflects the non-existent ground truth, the diﬀiculty of making good
==PAGE:70==
58
6 Discussion
annotations, as well as the need of a skilled laboratory technician to perform the
annotations.
With regards to the growing follicles, Table 5.5 shows an overall good correspondence
between prediction and annotation, which is however challenged in some of the bor-
derline cases. These are the growing follicles, where the oocyte nuclei is dim due to
the sectioning plane or in cases where the follicle is not exactly round. We expect
that changing the annotation guidelines, such that a distinct oocyte nuclei in grow-
ing follicles is not a requirement, might yield a better performance. This would also
entail quantification of more growing follicles, which is not a goal in itself, but is
acceptable when it improves consistency. However, with only three test images, the
results might not reflect the actual overall tendency. The small annotated data set is
in addition a limitation for training and validation and a larger data set is thus a top
priority in order to train a more robust model. This could also improve predictions
on outliers and especially for the detection of growing follicles, one can expect an im-
provement, as outlier data in this class is especially scarce within the current data set.
We finally note, that the learning stagnates quickly when training the network. This
can be owing to the limited training data, the overlap of the tiles, or simply the task
itself. Using a pre-trained network is moreover not beneficial, which might be due
to the large difference between the H&E and natural scene images. Pre-training the
network on other histological images with similar textures and characteristics might
however benefit the model. That said, the resulting network easily detects the general
structure of a follicle, why the gain from pre-training is probably limited.
6.5
Comparison
When comparing the performance on the IHC and H&E images, it is first of all clear
that three times as many follicles are detected in the IHC images than in the H&E
images, see Figure 5.5.
Since this is a general tendency, it is acceptable and not
influential on the overall quantification on each image type. We believe it probable
to be a result of staining differences, as a IHC-stained follicle is apparent even when
the sectioning plane does not include the oocyte nuclei, which for the H&E images
only applies in limited extent to growing follicles. It is worth noticing that the larger
number of predictions in the IHC images is an advantage for the acquisition of suf-
ficient statistics, which means that fewer sections are needed in order to conduct a
toxicological test.
The figure furthermore shows that the overall automatic IHC count is greater than
the manual. We expect this to be due to an overestimation of both primordial and
growing follicles and reflect that the automatic count is primarily driven by the color
of the YBX2 specific stain rather than the surrounding follicle texture, as it is the
case in the manual count. In this sense, the overestimation of growing follicles is likely
due to differences in the applied annotation guidelines used for the initial and final
final data sets, annotations which were independently carried out by the undersigned
==PAGE:71==
6.6 Perspective
59
and a laboratory technician respectively. Lastly, the outlier predictions exemplified
in Table 5.6 and Figure 5.6 confirms many of the previously described challenges for
follicle quantification in the IHC and H&E images. They however also show the need
for a thorough quality control of the images, as the automatic follicle quantification
is insuﬀicient in areas with folds and damages.
6.6
Perspective
Each of the three image types presents their own advantages and disadvantages with
respect to the detection and distinction of follicles.
First of all, the histological
examination requires tissue preparation, which is an irreversible process at the risk
of damaging the tissue. That said, the method permits high quality images of good
resolution, where the tissue structure is clear. Applying a H&E-stain is the traditional
choice for the task, where the non-specificity makes labeling challenging as only the
structural information is available. The IHC-stain by contrast features a laborious and
challenging staining procedure, but results in follicle specific images. Other types of
IHC-stains can moreover be used to highlight other specific components of the follicle
or the ovary.
That said, we consider the YBX2 specific stain applied here to be
well suited for performing reliable automatic quantification of follicles in PND 6 rat
ovaries.
On the contrary, multiphoton microscopy leaves the ovary intact at the cost of a lower
resolution, limited imaging depth, and a decreasing signal-to-noise ratio.
Among
other consequences, this entails indistinct granulosa cells and affects the distinction
of growing follicles, which are often located in the interior of the ovary. This can of
course be regarded as a constant error, but however makes the detection of growing
follicles quite unsure. Therefore, the developed quantification pipeline for multipho-
ton microscopy could be useful for toxicological studies of primordial follicles, but not
for studies of primary and secondary follicles. In practice however, the unavailability
of the scanner makes the automatic quantification in multiphoton images irrelevant.
In case of greater availability, the modality presents new possibilities and might in
time enable scanning of the ovary while located in the rat. Within a more reasonable
time frame, we consider it more probable to aim for a 3D representation of extracted
ovaries. It would then be possible to quantify the total population of follicles and con-
sequently present a more accurate comparison of the animals during a toxicological
test.
Other imaging modalities such as ultra sound, magnetic resonance imaging, and com-
puted tomography are also available for deep imaging and are in fact used for follicle
quantification. However, the image quality and resolution of these techniques can
only visualize larger follicles, that are not present in PND 6 ovaries and they are thus
not suited for this task. However, they do permit making a 3D assessment of the
ovary and are in that sense more accurate.
==PAGE:72==
60
6 Discussion
Since thresholding the IHC images yields the highest F1-score, it is reasonable to
believe it to be a superior model to the others. However, since no ground truth anno-
tation exists, and the conducted labeling is performed by the untrained undersigned,
the mathematical measure can not account for a complete picture of the performance.
The actual predictions on the images must thus be assessed also qualitatively to fully
appreciate the performance. When doing so, it is evident that the Thresholding on
IHC pipeline is limited to the averagely stained image, whereas the Faster R-CNN on
H&E pipeline is more robust with decidedly sensible predictions, that however reflect
a slightly different protocol than used for the manual annotation.
The actual choice between the H&E and IHC stain moreover includes the choice be-
tween fast tissue preparation or fast automatic quantification. With both automatic
quantification schemes being faster and much less laborious than manual quantifica-
tion, the primary workload consists of tissue preparation. Consequently, we assess
that applying the Faster R-CNN on H&E-stained images entails the easiest and fastest
total work process. Moreover, since it is diﬀicult to ensure a constant staining even
with color normalization, the robust deep learning model is considered to have more
applications. These can in future works be extended to include a more specific classi-
fication of the follicles with regards to developmental stages. Sections of ovaries from
different ages could furthermore be included in a future data set, in order to present
a follicle quantification model for wider use.
==PAGE:73==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this project, we have explored the opportunity and applicability of automatic
follicle quantification for toxicological tests of the impact of EDCs on female fertility
in rats. This includes the development of suitable models for detection of primordial
and growing follicles in H&E, IHC, and multiphoton microscopy images and three
different methods are presented in accordance with the specific characteristics of each
type of image. The models are to a great extent applicable to the average type of
image without large damages, folds, staining deviations, or small signal-to-noise ratios.
Moreover, the presented models feature varying degrees of complexity to attain the
needed robustness for the given type of image.
A simple thresholding pipeline is applied with success to detect follicles in the IHC-
stained images, which is specific with regards to staining of the oocyte cytoplasm.
The method is particularly well suited for the averagely stained image, but is chal-
lenged with regards to distinction between borderline cases of primordial and growing
follicles. The pixelwise classification method InSegt is applicable for detection of pat-
terns and is successfully applied to detect oocyte nuclei in the multiphoton images.
Primordial follicles are well detected in the outer sections of the the ovary, but the
decreasing signal-to-noise ratio in deeper scans complicates detection and yields more
uncertain predictions for the interior. Moreover, it proves diﬀicult to detect the grow-
ing follicles because of their small quantity and placement in the noisy interior. The
H&E-stained images are finally processed in the deep learning framework Faster R-
CNN, since their great extent of structural information requires a complex model to
identify follicles. The predictions are sensible and based on the texture of the follicles,
but do not necessarily correspond to the manual annotations. This difference arises
in part from the fact that it is impossible to make unique ground-truth labels.
The developed methods provide a solid basis for performing automatic follicle quan-
tification in the final stage of a toxicological test, where the control and exposed
animals are compared in order to study the potential influence of an EDC. Even
though the models are not chosen according to computational time, they are signifi-
cantly faster than the manual process and moreover free a staff member to perform
other tasks. However, the staining procedure is laborious as well, why the combined
work process should be assessed when choosing a suitable approach. Moreover, there
is still a need for manual quality control of the images in order to identify unsuited
images for automatic quantification due to e.g. under/over-staining.
==PAGE:74==
62
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Johansson, H. et al. “Environmental influences on ovarian dysgenesis - devel-
opmental windows sensitive to chemical exposures.” In: Nature Reviews En-
docrinology 13 (April 2017), pp. 400–414. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2017.36.
[2]
Sifakis, S. et al. “Human exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals: effects on
the male and female reproductive systems.” In: Environmental Toxicology and
Pharmacology 51 (March 2017), pp. 56–70. doi: 10.1016/j.etap.2017.02.
024.
[3]
Picut, C. et al. “Ovarian Follicle Counts Using Proliferating Cell Nuclear Anti-
gen (PCNA) and Semi-Automated Image Analysis in Rats.” In: Toxicologic
pathology 36 (May 2008), pp. 674–9. doi: 10.1177/0192623308317428.
[4]
Rogart, J et al. “Multiphoton Imaging Can Be Used for Microscopic Examina-
tion of Intact Human Gastrointestinal Mucosa Ex Vivo.” In: Clinical gastroen-
terology and hepatology : the oﬀicial clinical practice journal of the American
Gastroenterological Association 6 (January 2008), pp. 95–101. doi: 10.1016/j.
cgh.2007.10.008.
[5]
VanPutte, C., Regan, J., and Russo, A. Seeley’s Essentials of Anatomy & Phys-
iology. McGraw-Hill Education, 2016, pp. 541–545, 62.
[6]
Pepling, M. E. “From primordial germ cell to primordial follicle: mammalian fe-
male germ cell development.” In: genesis 44.12 (2006), pp. 622–632. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/dvg.20258.
[7]
Skinner, M. K. “Regulation of primordial follicle assembly and development.”
In: Human Reproduction Update 11.5 (July 2005), pp. 461–471. issn: 1355-4786.
doi: 10.1093/humupd/dmi020.
[8]
Picut, C. et al. “Postnatal Ovary Development in the Rat.” In: Toxicologic
pathology 43 (August 2014), pp. 343–353. doi: 10.1177/0192623314544380.
[9]
Araújo, V. et al. “In vitro culture of bovine preantral follicles: a review.” In:
Reproductive biology and endocrinology : RB&E 12 (August 2014), p. 78. doi:
10.1186/1477-7827-12-78.
[10]
Administration, U.S Food & Drug. Redbook 2000: IV.C.9.a. Guidelines for Re-
production Studies. url: https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/
search - fda - guidance - documents / redbook - 2000 - ivc9a - guidelines -
reproduction-studies. (accessed: 08.02.2021).
==PAGE:76==
64
Bibliography
[11]
Kårnäs, A. Image Analysis Methods and Tools for Digital Histopathology Ap-
plications Relevant to Breast Cancer Diagnosis. Acta Universitatis Upsaliensis
Uppsala, 2014.
[12]
Dunn, K. and Young, P. “Principles of Multiphoton Microscopy.” In: Nephron.
Experimental nephrology 103 (February 2006), e33–e40. doi: 10.1159/000090614.
[13]
Meyer, B.-O. et al. “Selecting optimal spectral bands for improved detection of
autofluorescent biomarkers in multiphoton microscopy.” In: Journal of Biomed-
ical Optics 25 (July 2020), p. 1. doi: 10.1117/1.JBO.25.7.071206.
[14]
Mostany, R. et al. “Two-Photon Excitation Microscopy and Its Applications in
Neuroscience.” In: Methods in molecular biology (Clifton, N.J.) 1251 (October
2015), pp. 25–42. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2080-8_2.
[15]
Leemput, K. van and Larsen, R. 22525 Course Note Medical Image Analysis.
University Course Notes. 2020.
[16]
Sommer, C. et al. “Ilastik: Interactive learning and segmentation toolkit.” In:
2011 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to
Macro. 2011, pp. 230–233. doi: 10.1109/ISBI.2011.5872394.
[17]
Arganda-Carreras, I. et al. “Trainable Weka Segmentation: A machine learning
tool for microscopy pixel classification.” In: Bioinformatics (Oxford, England)
33 (March 2017). doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btx180.
[18]
Dahl, V. et al. “Content-based Propagation of User Markings for Interactive
Segmentation of Patterned Images.” In: June 2020, pp. 4280–4288. doi: 10.
1109/CVPRW50498.2020.00505.
[19]
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., and Friedman, J. The Elements of Statistical Learn-
ing. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer, 2009, pp. 132–133, 417–419. doi:
10.1007/b94608.
[20]
Zhao, Z.-Q. et al. “Object Detection With Deep Learning: A Review.” In: IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems (January 2019), pp. 1–
21. doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2018.2876865.
[21]
Soviany, P. and Ionescu, R. T. “Optimizing the Trade-Off between Single-Stage
and Two-Stage Deep Object Detectors using Image Diﬀiculty Prediction.” In:
2018 20th International Symposium on Symbolic and Numeric Algorithms for
Scientific Computing (SYNASC) (2018). September 2018, pp. 209–214. doi:
10.1109/SYNASC.2018.00041.
[22]
Carboni, E. et al. “A Workflow for the Performance of the Differential Ovarian
Follicle Count Using Deep Neuronal Networks.” In: Toxicologic Pathology 49.4
(2021), pp. 843–850. doi: 10.1177/0192623320969130.
[23]
Sonigo, C. et al. “High-throughput ovarian follicle counting by an innovative
deep learning approach.” In: Scientific Reports 8 (September 2018), p. 13499.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-31883-8.
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
65
[24]
İnik, Ö. et al. “A new method for automatic counting of ovarian follicles on
whole slide histological images based on convolutional neural network.” In:
Computers in Biology and Medicine 112 (2019), p. 103350. doi: 10 . 1016 /
j.compbiomed.2019.103350.
[25]
Traore, B. B., Kamsu-Foguem, B., and Tangara, F. “Deep convolution neural
network for image recognition.” In: Ecological Informatics 48 (2018), pp. 257–
268. issn: 1574-9541. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoinf.2018.10.002.
[26]
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., and Hinton, G. “Deep Learning.” In: Nature 521 (May
2015), pp. 436–44. doi: 10.1038/nature14539.
[27]
Bayramoglu, N. and Heikkilä, J. “Transfer Learning for Cell Nuclei Classifica-
tion in Histopathology Images.” In: November 2016, pp. 532–539. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-49409-8_46.
[28]
Nielsen, M. A. Neural Networks and Deep Learning. Determination Press, 2015.
[29]
Bengio, Y. “Practical recommendations for gradient-based training of deep ar-
chitectures.” In: Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade. Springer, 2012, pp. 437–
478. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-35289-8_26.
[30]
Girshick, R. “Fast R-CNN.” In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ICCV). 2015, pp. 1440–1448. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2015.169.
[31]
Ren, S. et al. “Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Region
Proposal Networks.” In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Vol. 28. 2015, pp. 91–99. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2016.2577031.
[32]
Girshick, R. et al. “Rich Feature Hierarchies for Accurate Object Detection and
Semantic Segmentation.” In: 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. 2014, pp. 580–587. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2014.81.
[33]
Sokolova, M. and Lapalme, G. “A systematic analysis of performance measures
for classification tasks.” In: Information Processing & Management 45 (July
2009), pp. 427–437. doi: 10.1016/j.ipm.2009.03.002.
[34]
Guns, R., Lioma, C., and Larsen, B. “The tipping point: F-score as a function
of the number of retrieved items.” In: Information Processing & Management
48 (November 2012), pp. 1171–1180. doi: 10.1016/j.ipm.2012.02.009.
[35]
Padilla, R. et al. “A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a
Companion Open-Source Toolkit.” In: Electronics 10 (January 2021), pp. 279–
306. doi: 10.3390/electronics10030279.
[36]
Roy, Santanu et al. “A Study about Color Normalization Methods for Histopathol-
ogy Images.” In: Micron 114 (August 2018), pp. 42–61. doi: 10.1016/j.micron.
2018.07.005.
[37]
Saalfeld, S. Integral Image Filters. url: https://imagej.net/Integral_
Image_Filters. (accessed: 16.03.2021).
==PAGE:78==
66
Bibliography
[38]
Rueden, C. et al. “ImageJ2: ImageJ for the next generation of scientific image
data.” In: BMC Bioinformatics 18 (November 2017), p. 529. doi: 10.1186/
s12859-017-1934-z.
[39]
Schindelin, J. et al. “Fiji: An Open-Source Platform for Biological-Image Analy-
sis.” In: Nature methods 9 (June 2012), pp. 676–82. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.2019.
[40]
Wang, X. et al. “Comparison of different Color Spaces for Image Segmentation
using Graph-Cut.” In: vol. 1. 2014, pp. 301–308.
[41]
Paulsen, R. R. and Moeslund, T. B. Introduction to Medical Image Analysis.
Springer, 2020, p. 94.
[42]
Reinhard, E., Ashikhmin, M., and Shirley, P. “Color Transfer between Images.”
In: IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 21 (October 2001), pp. 34–41.
doi: 10.1109/38.946629.
[43]
Paszke, A. et al. “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learn-
ing Library.” In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32. Ed.
by H. Wallach et al. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019, pp. 8024–8035. url: http:
//papers.neurips.cc/paper/9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-
performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
[44]
Parsiunas, Ovidijus. MyVision. https://github.com/OvidijusParsiunas/
myvision. 2019.
[45]
Buslaev, A. et al. “Albumentations: Fast and Flexible Image Augmentations.”
In: Information 11.2 (2020). doi: 10.3390/info11020125. url: https://www.
mdpi.com/2078-2489/11/2/125.
[46]
He, K. et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition.” In: 2016 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2016, pp. 770–
778. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
[47]
He, K. et al. “Mask R-CNN.” In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ICCV). 2017, pp. 2980–2988. doi: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.322.
[48]
Common Objects in Context. url: https : / / cocodataset . org / #explore.
(accessed: 09.06.2021).
[49]
Lin, T.-Y. et al. “Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context.” In: Computer
Vision – ECCV 2014. Springer International Publishing, 2014, pp. 740–755.
==PAGE:79==
APPENDIX A
Appendix A
Figure A.1 – Left: H&E-stained section of a rat ovary. Right: Corresponding image
with manual annotations. A red marking indicates a primordial follicle, a blue marking
indicates a growing follicle, and a gray marking indicates an erased marking.
==PAGE:80==
68
A Appendix A
Figure A.2 – Left: IHC-stained section of a rat ovary. Right: Corresponding image
with manual annotations.
A red marking indicates a primordial follicle and a blue
marking indicates a growing follicle.
Figure A.3 – Left: Multiphon microscopy section of a rat ovary. Right: Corresponding
image with manual annotations. A red marking indicates a primordial follicle, a blue
marking indicates a growing follicle, and a gray marking indicates an erased marking.
==PAGE:81==
APPENDIX B
Appendix B
==PAGE:82==
70
B Appendix B
Figure B.1 – ResNet-50 architecture. An input image is transformed through 5 stages
of convolution with a total of 50 layers to produce a 1000 output units by means of
a fully connected (FC) layer.
In the first layer is convolution applied with a 7 × 7
filter and a stride of 2 to produce a 64 deep output volume.
Batch normalization
and a ReLU activation function is applied subsequently before max pooling. All other
layers are described similarly and batch normalization is applied between all convolution
layers, whereas ReLU activation is applied after each block of three convolution layers.
The curved lines represent the ”shortcut connections”, where a full line is an identity
mapping and a dotted line is a projection shortcut for increasing dimensions.
==PAGE:83==
==PAGE:84==
