==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK 
 
 
 
Impact of gas transfer models on 
the prediction of N2O emissions 
from wastewater treatment 
 
Master of Science in Engineering (MSc) Thesis 
30 ECTS 
July 2021 
 
 
Chrysochoidis Vasileios 
s192441 
 
Supervised by: 
Borja Valverde Pérez, Assistant Professor, DTU Environment 
Barth F. Smets, Professor, DTU Environment 
 
==PAGE:2==
Abstract 
In this work, the prediction of nitrous oxide emissions from wastewater 
treatment plants was tested by three different mass transfer models. The first model 
combined two-film and penetration theory, while the second and third model accounted 
for aeration as well. All three models were able to capture the effect of varying DO 
concentration in aerobic tanks. The biggest differences between the model predictions 
were observed at DO = 0.6 g/m3, where also the peak of N2O emissions was reached. 
At that point the difference between the first two model in predicted CO2eq reached 
around 6.5% of their total carbon footprint contribution, while the difference between 
the first and third model reached around 17.5% of their total contribution. Further 
scenario analysis was performed at DO = 0.6 g/m3. The impact of tank depth on the 
emissions was also investigated. The last two models which accounted for the type of 
aeration and the geometry of aerobic tanks exhibited a different trend than the first 
model, which predictions were not affected by the increasing depth after 3m. However, 
each model has been validated based on different depth range. The effect of aeration 
type and wastewater characteristics was also studied by varying the correction factor 
for oxygen transfer and oxygen concentration of saturation. The differences between 
the last two model and the first one increased as the aeration became more efficient, but 
remained unchanged despite the changes in the correction factor for oxygen saturation. 
Under these conditions for DO, the models which account for aeration type exhibited 
higher sensitivity towards the correction factor related to aeration while the predictions 
from the first model remained unchanged. Lastly for the single variable scenario 
analysis, variations on ammonia influent concentration and SRT did not affect the 
differences between the models with all three of them exhibiting similar sensitivity 
towards these parameters. A two variable scenario analysis on correction factor for 
oxygen transfer validated the impact of this parameter as described previously. Finally, 
the sensitivity analysis showed that choice between the mass transfer models, does not 
affect the impact that the biochemical parameters have on nitrous oxide emissions. 
==PAGE:3==
Table of Contents 
1. Introduction ................................................................................................................ 4 
2. Materials and methods ............................................................................................... 9 
2.1 Benchmark simulation model 1 (BSM1) ......................................................................... 9 
2.2 Biological model ........................................................................................................... 10 
2.3 Mass transfer models ..................................................................................................... 11 
2.2.1 Mass transfer model 1 (the two-film theory) .......................................................... 12 
2.2.2 Mass transfer model 2 ............................................................................................ 13 
2.2.3 Mass transfer model 3 ............................................................................................ 14 
2.2.4 Overall mass transfer coefficient of oxygen for aeration ....................................... 15 
2.4 Scenario analysis ........................................................................................................... 18 
2.4.1 Emissions from nitrous oxide production pathways ............................................... 19 
2.5 Global sensitivity analysis ............................................................................................. 19 
3. Results and discussion ............................................................................................. 21 
3.1 Scenario analysis ........................................................................................................... 21 
3.1.1 Impact of DO .......................................................................................................... 21 
3.1.2 Impact of tank depth ............................................................................................... 23 
3.1.3 Impact of the oxygen transfer rate correction coefficient (alpha) .......................... 25 
3.1.4 Impact of the oxygen solubility correction coefficient (beta) ................................ 28 
3.1.5 Impact of ammonia overload .................................................................................. 29 
3.1.6 Impact of the SRT .................................................................................................. 31 
3.2 Two variable scenario analysis (DO and N-loading rate) ............................................. 34 
3.3 Sensitivity analysis ........................................................................................................ 37 
4. Conclusion ............................................................................................................... 39 
References .................................................................................................................... 41 
 
==PAGE:4==
1. Introduction 
Over the last two decades there is a significant concern regarding the 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Started from the establishment of the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 1994 and followed by the 
Kyoto Protocol, all the countries have raised their concern and focus on limiting and 
reducing the emissions of GHG by setting collective as well as individual goals. One 
of the main obligations of the participated countries is the promulgation of annual 
statements and reports on gases emitted from four specific sectors, which are 
responsible for the vast majority of the GHG production. This group of sectors consist 
of the field of energy, the industrial processes, the agriculture, forestry and other land 
use and the waste handling (Foley et al., 2010). Wastewater treatment is a sector of 
waste handling in which the main sources of GHG produced and emitted are nitrous 
oxide (N2O), methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2). Among them, nitrous oxide and 
methane have a significantly higher negative impact compared to CO2 (Ramírez-
Melgarejo et al., 2019).  
Nitrous oxide is a gas that causes ozone depletion when present in high 
concentrations in the atmosphere and it is estimated to have a global warming potential 
(ω) of 265 per weight unit (IPCC, 2014; Myhre, G. et al., 2015). The field of wastewater 
treatment is responsible for the production of approximately 4-5% of the whole 
anthropogenic N2O production based on older reports, while in later publications 
scientist claim that this number is and will be, in the future, even higher (Tumendelger 
et al., 2019). As a result, since the carbon footprint of this field is highly depended on 
the nitrous oxide emission, there is an urgent need for significant reduction in order to 
move towards the full implementation of carbon neutral wastewater treatment plants 
(WWTPs) (Ramírez-Melgarejo et al., 2019).  
The main process responsible for the nitrous oxide emissions in wastewater 
treatment is biological nutrient removal (BNR) and especially nitrogen removal. 
Nitrogen enters in a wastewater treatment plant mainly in the form of organic bounded 
nitrogen and ammonia. The most common processes responsible for the nitrogen load 
reduction are nitrification and denitrification. Nitrification is accomplished under 
aerobic conditions. The wastewater is being pumped into one or a series of reactors or 
tanks which are aerated. There are different configurations from which an engineer can 
choose in order to pump oxygen into the reactor, but bottom aeration and surface 
==PAGE:5==
aeration prevail in the majority of the cases.  During nitrification, a number of different 
autotrophic bacteria grow, with the help of oxygen, and convert nitrogen from ammonia 
into nitrate. The first category of bacteria is called ammonia oxidizing bacteria (AOB). 
AOB possess key enzymes to accomplish the initial reactions for nitrification, including 
the oxidation of ammonia and hydroxylamine. These enzymes are the ammonia 
monooxygenase and hydroxylamine oxidoreductase, respectively. The bacteria mainly 
found in soil and freshwater belong in the genera Nitrosomonas and Nitrospira, while 
the genus Nitrosococcus is only found in marine water. Nitrosomonas are the main 
bacteria carrying out nitrification of wastewater (Siripong & Rittmann, 2007). They are 
gram-negative bacteria, which use ammonia, at first, as an energy source and carbon 
dioxide as carbon source, in the presence of oxygen, and convert, with the help of the 
ammonia monooxygenase, ammonia into hydroxylamine. Then, by using the 
hydroxylamine oxidoreductase, they convert hydroxylamine into nitrite. Afterwards, 
the final step of nitrification includes the growth of nitrite oxidizing bacteria (NOB). 
They are chemolithoautotrophic bacteria that gain energy from the oxidation of nitrite 
to nitrate. They are abundant in a variety of terrestrial, marine and freshwater 
ecosystems and operate strictly under aerobic conditions. Nitrobacter, Nitrococcus, 
Nitrospira and Nitrospina are the main spices of bacteria in this category, while the 
enzyme which is responsible for this catabolic process is the nitrite oxidoreductase 
(NXR). While Nitrobacter is considered to be the most abundant genera for NOB 
bacteria, other publications mention Nitrospira as the dominant ones (Barbarroja et al., 
2017; Burrell et al., 1999; Daims et al., 2000). 
During nitrification, the operating conditions of the reactors play a very 
important role. Whenever an alteration of these conditions occurs, the previously 
described pathway can be affected. As a result, undesired byproducts like nitrous oxide 
can be produced. For instance, when the aerobic reactor operated under high dissolved 
oxygen and ammonia concentrations, a side reaction can occur with incomplete 
oxidation of hydroxylamine. In this reaction the ammonia oxidizing bacteria by using 
the hydroxylamine oxidoreductase can incompletely oxidize hydroxylamine to azanone 
(HNO), which after release from the active site, could then dimerize and dehydrate to 
form nitrous oxide and water. This pathway is called nitrifier nitrification (NN) (Castro-
Barros et al., 2015; Ma et al., 2017). Moreover, when the aerobic tank operates under 
low dissolved oxygen conditions and/or high nitrite accumulation, nitrous oxide can be 
produced in a reaction called nitrifier denitrification (ND). When oxygen is present in 
==PAGE:6==
very low concentrations in the aerobic tank, the AOBs tend to use nitrite as the electron 
acceptor. As a result, nitrite is converted into nitric oxide and then into nitrous oxide 
which is released into the atmosphere (Guo et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2017). Later 
publications reveal also the important role of the temperature in these pathways. (Kim 
et al., 2008) has reported that the ammonia oxidation rate increases by a factor of 3 as 
temperature increases in a range from 5 – 30oC, while nitrite oxidation increases by a 
factor of 2.6. Similar observations have been reported by (Bae et al., 2001), with an 
increase of 3.7 and 1.5 respectively for the two range with a temperature increase from 
10 to 30oC. This effect leads to nitrite accumulation which stimulates the side reaction 
of nitrifier denitrification, and enhances the nitrous oxide production (Kampschreur et 
al., 2009; Tallec et al., 2006). Overall, as mentioned previously, DO is an important 
parameter in nitrification. (Lotito et al., 2012) has reported that the first aerobic tank 
has to operate a levels above 2 g-O2/m3 to avoid N2O emissions while the rest of the 
aerobic tanks have to perform at DO between 1.4 – 2.3 g-O2/m3 (Åmand & Carlsson, 
2013). At the same time HRT has to be longer than 5 hours and an alkalinity greater 
than 150 mg CaCO3/L. Finally, as any normal WWTP, during the whole process, a pH 
value has to be maintained between the range of 7 – 9 and a SRT between the range of 
10 to 30 days (Giraldo, 2012; Kampschreur et al., 2009; Tallec et al., 2006).  
Denitrification is the second step of nitrogen removal. This process occurs under 
anoxic conditions where oxygen is present is different forms than free oxygen. In this 
case, wastewater is pumped into anoxic tanks where the only source of oxygen available 
is the one bounded on molecules, like nitrate. Denitrification itself is a four-step process 
in which heterotrophic bacteria utilize the carbon as energy source and electron donor 
while having nitrogen oxides, mainly nitrate, as terminal electron acceptors. During this 
process the three intermediates produced before nitrogen gas are formed, including 
nitrite, nitric oxide and nitrous oxide. There is a great diversity of denitrifying bacteria 
and (Ni et al., 2017) has categorized more than 20 species present in activated sludge. 
Moreover, there are different kinds of enzymes that are responsible for the 
accomplishment of each stage in denitrification. The enzymes that catalyze the 
denitrification reactions are the nitrate reductase (NAR), the nitrite reductase (NIR), the 
nitric oxide reductase (NOR) and the nitrous oxide reductase (NOS) with narG, 
nirS/nirK, norB and nosZ being the respective genes in each case (Kopf & De los Reyes, 
2012). The first enzyme is bounded on plasma membrane, while the rest are located in 
==PAGE:7==
the periplasm. The nitrogen gas formed in the anoxic tanks after denitrification is 
stripped off when wastewater is fed into an aerobic tank. 
In denitrification, several conditions can lead to the production of nitrous oxide 
which can be stripped if fed to the aeration tank. Under typical denitrifying conditions 
nitric oxide and nitrous oxide reductases have significantly higher maximum nitrogen 
turnover than the nitrate and nitrite reductases. However, under instability in 
environmental conditions the activity of nitrous oxide reductase can be inhibited, 
leading to nitrous oxide accumulation. One of the causes of nitrous oxide production as 
end product of denitrification is the dissolved oxygen concentration. Oxygen inhibits 
both the synthesis and the activity of the denitrifying enzymes and mainly the nitrous 
oxide reductase. Moreover, pH plays a crucial role in denitrifying environments. First 
and foremost, there is a high sensitivity of nitrous oxide reductase in low pH values (< 
6.5) which leads to its inhibition (Ghosh et al., 2007). Secondly, in pH levels lower than 
7, there is a high probability for nitrous acid production (HNO2) rather than nitrite (NO2-
), which also reduces the activity of nitrous oxide reductase (Law et al., 2012). Finally, 
limited carbon sources can also prevent the reduction of nitrous oxide into nitrogen gas 
since the nitrous oxide reductase has significantly lower affinity for electrons than the 
nitrate and nitrite reductases. This leads to its lower activity and its insufficient nitrous 
oxide consumption (Law et al., 2012). Normally a carbon to nitrogen ratio greater than 
4 is needed, but this also depends on the nature of the carbon source itself (Ni et al., 
2017). 
It is obvious that the enhancement of the activity and efficiency of the BNR 
process can play a vital role for the reduction of the production of undesirable species 
like nitrous oxide. To do so, scientists and engineers have built a wide range of 
mathematical models able to predict with high reliability the transformation of these 
species into different forms during the treatment process in liquid wastewater (Ni & 
Yuan, 2015). These models coupled with advanced simulation softwares like WEST – 
MIKE Powered by DHI® can provide opportunities for optimizations applied in reality 
(Guldbrand, 2006).  
The model family called activated sludge models (ASMs) consists of a sequence 
of numeral equations and procedures that describe the biochemical removal of organic 
carbon, nitrogen and phosphorous (Flores-Alsina et al., 2012). Given the importance of 
nitrous oxide, several models have been proposed to model its production and 
consumption at WWTPs, such as the NDHA model which includes all relevant 
==PAGE:8==
production and consumption processes (NN, ND and HD). This model is developed as 
an extension to the regular activated sludge models which describe nitrogen removal 
and is being used in combination with them to predict the nitrogen fate in wastewater 
treatment processes. 
The ASMs are used in Benchmark Simulation Models, which are widely used 
in industry for comparison and validation of control strategies (Flores-Alsina et al., 
2012). The first benchmark model (BSM1) is relatively simple and it is used in a broad 
range of applications to study the water line of WWTPs. The model consists of two 
anoxic tanks followed by three aerobic ones. This is a configuration that is commonly 
used in WWTPs for complete nitrification and denitrification. Finally, these five 
compartments are followed by a secondary settler (Guldbrand, 2006).  
Furthermore, along with the biological models, a wide range of mass transfer 
equations are used to predict the emissions of compounds, like nitrous oxide, from the 
liquid phase into the atmosphere, as a gas, through stripping. The stripping is often 
coupled with absorption since some of these gasses are already present in the 
atmosphere and can potentially be transferred into the liquid wastewater. These mass 
transfer models refer to the physicochemical processes that occur in wastewater 
treatment and they have received very little attention compared to the previously 
described biological models. The fundamental mass transfer models were built on 
oxygen gas since it plays a key role in the realization of several reactions taking place 
in wastewater. However, the emerging interest on other gases, like nitrous oxide, led to 
the extension of existing models to account also for them.  
Over the years different models have been developed by using different 
assumptions. Each model uses a different approach on how design and operational 
parameters such as overall mass transfer coefficients affect the emission rates of nitrous 
oxide. Parameters like the depth and surface of aerobic tanks, the aerator type and the 
aeration rate have reported by (Baeten et al., 2020; Foley et al., 2010; Schulthess & 
Gujer, 1996) to affect the prediction of emissions by underpredicting their values 
compared to older approaches like the two-film theory introduced by (Skelland, 1974). 
Three of these models for nitrous oxide emissions were introduced and investigated for 
the purpose of this study. It is of great interest to identify whether there are differences 
in the prediction of N2O emissions between the proposed models and understand which 
parameters could be responsible for the deviations and why. Finally, an effort will be 
==PAGE:9==
made to define which model can describe the emissions more accurately and which is 
its acceptance range based on operating conditions. 
The objectives of this study are: (i) the introduction of different gas – liquid 
mass transfer models within ASM2d – NDHA model in WEST, (ii) the comparison of 
these mass transfer models using BSM1 focusing on the nitrous oxide emissions, (iii) 
analyzing the impact of the different mass-transfer model structures on the calibration 
of the biological model via sensitivity analysis.  
2. Materials and methods 
2.1 Benchmark simulation model 1 (BSM1) 
For the purpose of this project the model which will be used for evaluation, as 
mentioned before, will be the benchmark simulation model no. 1 as proposed by 
(Flores-Alsina et al., 2012). This model is presented in Figure 1 and consists 7 different 
tanks, two anaerobic, followed by two anoxic and then three aerobic in the end. A 
secondary clarifier is connected to the last aerobic tank and two recirculation flows, one 
external for sludge recycling and one internal for nitrification – denitrification, 
complete the configuration. By using this model, complete biological nutrient removal 
is being accomplished as nitrogen and phosphorous are removed simultaneously. 
Figure 1. Benchmark WWTP configuration 
The initial design parameters chosen for the purpose of this study are presented on 
Table 2. 
Table 1. Design parameters for aerobic tanks and operating conditions 
Design parameter 
Value 
Unit 
Volume 
1333 
m3 
Area 
266.6 
m3 
Depth 
5 
m 
==PAGE:10==
Submergence of 
aerator 
5 
m 
SRT 
14.5 
d 
C/N ratio 
10 
- 
  
2.2 Biological model 
The biological processes occurring in the BSM1 configuration are described by 
the Activated Sludge Model no.2d, which is an extension of the Activated Sludge 
Model no. 2 proposed by (M. Henze et al., 2015). This improved approach for the 
biological processes modeling includes a model for biological phosphorous removal 
with simultaneous nitrification-denitrification in the system. 
As in can be seen from Gujer Matrix in Table S1 and S2, nitrogen removal is 
modeled by the inclusion of nitrification and denitrification pathway along with the side 
pathways of Nitrifier Nitrification (NN) and Nitrifier Denitrification (ND). Nitrification 
is being described by ammonia oxidation to hydroxylamine and further oxidation to 
nitrite and nitrate (process 26, 28 and 32 respectively). Denitrification is modeled with 
a step-by-step reduction from nitrate to nitrite, nitric oxide, nitrous oxide and finally 
nitrogen gas by separate consumption of SF and SA carbon sources (processes 8+12, 
9+13, 10+14 and 11+15 respectively). The pathway of NN is described by process 27, 
which accounts for incomplete hydroxylamine oxidation, and ND pathways are 
described by a two-step process 29, 30, where nitrite is denitrified by autotrophic 
bacteria first into nitric oxide and the nitrous oxide. Bacteria lysis and carbon source 
hydrolysis are also included in the processes. This model is called NDHA and it was 
also previously implemented by (Domingo-Félez et al., 2017). However, in that model 
the role of alkalinity was not modeled. 
A further extension in the NDHA model can include phosphorous removal by 
coupling it with ASM2d as described by (Mogens Henze et al., 2018). Phosphorous 
removal is accomplished by EBPR process under anaerobic and aerobic conditions. 
Under anaerobic conditions, polyphosphate accumulating organisms (PAOs) take up 
carbon source in form of VFAs and store them as PHAs. The energy required for storage 
of PHA is obtained from intracellular reserves of polyphosphate (PP). Then, under 
aerobic conditions PAOs oxidize the PHAs, grow and store polyphosphate by up-taking 
the phosphorous sources from bulk liquid. All these procedures are summed in 
processes 18 – 22. ASM2d model is preferred from ASM2, because it include two 
==PAGE:11==
additional processes to account for the ability of PAOs to use cell internal storage 
products for denitrification which enables them to grow also under these conditions, 
while ASM2 assumes that PAOs grow only under aerobic conditions. Lysis of PAOs, 
PHA and PP are also included, processes 23 - 25. 
Finally, aeration and stripping of NO and N2O are introduced in the processes 
36 – 38 to enable the monitoring of mass transfer of these compounds between the bulk 
liquid and the gas phase. 
The processes and the stoichiometric matrix used in this study are presented in 
Tables S2, S3, S4. The biochemical parameters were calibrated based on the study from 
(Domingo-Félez et al., 2017) and presented in Table S5 along with the state variables 
which are presented in Table S6. All parameters have been implemented by a 
temperature correction factor to account for variations of temperature in wastewater. 
2.3 Mass transfer models 
As mentioned in the introduction, the main focus of this project is on the 
emissions of nitrous oxide from the wastewater treatment plants. The nitrous oxide 
produced through the three pathways strips to the atmosphere primarily from the 
aerobic tanks with the aid of aeration. Several models have been developed and 
proposed to estimate the flux of N2O from the aerobic tanks. In this report 3 of them 
will be evaluated and these are the two-film theory (Skelland, 1974), the fine bubbling 
model (Matter-Müller et al., 1981) and an alternative model proposed by (Baeten et al., 
2020). The parameters used in the formulation the mass transfer models are presented 
on Table 3. 
Table 3. Parameter list used in mass transfer models 
Parameter 
Symbol 
Unit 
N2O emission rate 
RaerN2O 
mg m-3 d-1 
N2O overall mass transfer 
coefficient 
KLaaerobicN2O 
d-1 
N2O concentration in bulk 
SN2O 
mg m-3 
N2O concentration in 
equilibrium with the gas 
phase concentration 
SeqN2O 
mg m-3 
Henry’s law constant 
hN2O 
- 
Volume of the aerated 
part 
VR 
m3 
==PAGE:12==
Total airflow in the 
reactor 
QA 
m3 d-1 
Depth of field reactor 
dR 
m 
Depth of lab stripping 
column 
(= 0.815 m) 
dL 
m 
Area of the aeration in the 
tank 
A 
m2 
Gas velocity of the aerator 
(𝒘𝒉𝒆𝒓𝒆 𝑸𝑨/𝑨𝒕𝒂𝒏𝒌= 𝒗𝒈) 
vg 
m s-1 
Height of the reactor 
H 
m 
Atmospheric pressure 
pGatm 
bar 
Density of water 
ρ 
g m-3 
Gravitational acceleration 
g 
m s-2 
Molar mass of nitrous 
oxide 
MN2O 
g mol-1 
Gas inlet mole fraction of 
nitrous oxide 
xGinN2O 
- 
Submergence of the 
aerator 
hsub 
m 
Width of the aerator 
Baerator 
m 
Width of the tank 
Btank 
m 
Length of the tank 
L 
m 
Intensity of aeration 
I 
m3 m-2 d-1 
 
2.2.1 Mass transfer model 1 (the two-film theory) 
The two-film theory for gas transfer has been developed under the assumption 
that the mass transfer rate of a substance from liquid to gas can be expressed by the 
means of an overall mass transfer coefficient and the concentration difference between 
the equilibrium and the bulk concentration of a substance (Matter-Müller et al., 1981). 
The equation which governs this theory for nitrous oxide is presented in Equation 1: 
                                           RN2O
aer = KLaN2O
aerobic (SN2O −SN2Oeq) 
 
Equation 1 
There are several assumptions which have taken into consideration when 
developing the two-film theory model. These are (i) the mass transfer is controlled by 
two thin stagnant films at the liquid-gas interface, (ii) the molecular diffusion is the 
driving force for the mass transfer from the one film to the other, (iii) the bulk volumes 
of both gas and liquid phases are homogeneous. The mass transfer in this case is 
==PAGE:13==
modeled with a negative stoichiometry in order to estimate the stripping of nitrous oxide 
from the aerobic tanks. Therefore, whenever the bulk concentration of nitrous oxide is 
higher than its equilibrium concentration, mass transfer rate becomes positive 
indicating that N2O is emitted. Alternatively, when the bulk concentration is lower than 
the equilibrium, the mass transfer rate becomes negative, indicating absorption of N2O 
from the atmosphere into the aerobic tank (Domingo-Félez & Smets, 2018).  
The overall mass transfer coefficient of volatile compounds during aeration can 
be estimated by the penetration theory as expressed by Higbie as reported by (De 
Heyder et al., 1997; Matter-Müller et al., 1981). Based on this expression, the overall 
mass transfer coefficient of nitrous oxide can be calculated as a function of overall mass 
transfer coefficient of oxygen with the help of diffusion their coefficients. (Wan et al., 
2019) has also coupled the two-film theory with the penetration theory for estimating 
of nitrous oxide emissions. The formulation of penetration theory is presented in 
Equation 2. 
KLaN2O = KLaO2 (
DN2O
DO2 )
0.5
  
             Equation 2 
where DN2O and DO2 express the molecular diffusivity of each substance in (m2 s-1). 
 
As it has been also reported by (Myers, 2019), this mass transfer model is 
applied in cases where both gases have similar, low solubilities in water and their 
diffusion coefficients have been measured under the same conditions 
2.2.2 Mass transfer model 2 
 
In cases where the modeled gas is significantly more soluble than oxygen, with 
a Henry coefficient of 20 times greater, stripping is the dominant mass transfer process 
occurring. Furthermore, systems like a wastewater treatment plant, where aeration is 
part of the procedure for the treatment, liquid to gas transfer is influenced by the several 
parameters concerning the aeration approach, the aerator itself and the aerobic tank 
characteristics. As a result, there is a need for including these effects in the model 
describing the stripping of a substance from the water tank to the atmosphere. 
Therefore, by assuming a homogeneous liquid volume and by neglecting the pressure 
and the volume of the air bubbles (Matter-Müller et al., 1981) proposed a mass transfer 
model for volatile compounds like nitrous oxide, which focuses on the mass transfer 
across a single bubble. This proposed model included the surface area and the volume 
of gas of a single bubble and it was developed to account for the complete aeration 
==PAGE:14==
procedure including the airflow rate and the volume of bulk liquid in aerobic tank as 
shown in Equation 3. This model was later used and verified by (Schulthess & Gujer, 
1996) to describe the release of nitrous oxide during nitrification. Similarly, to Equation 
1, Equation 3 has been modeled to account for stripping of nitrous oxide with positive 
values obtained when nitrous oxide in aerobic tank becomes larger than the its 
saturation concentration. As a result, a negative stoichiometry is applied in Gujer 
matrix.  
    RN2O
aer = hN2O ∗SN2O (1 −e
KLaN2O
aerobic∗VR
hN2O∗QA
) ∗(
QA
VR)  
Equation 3 
In addition to the Equation 3, an alternative formula can be developed to take 
into consideration also, the potential contribution of the ambient concentration of 
nitrous oxide at 330 ppb (NOAA, 2019) in the mass transfer rate, Equation 4. In case 
an estimation validates that this contribution is negligible, then modeling of nitrous 
oxide can be accomplished for simplification by Equation 3 (Myers, 2019). 
  RN2O = CN2Oin ∗e
KLaN2O∗VR
hN2O∗QA ∗(
QA
VR) + hN2O ∗CN2O (1 −e
KLaN2O∗VR
hN2O∗QA ) ∗(
QA
VR)     Equation 4 
where CN2Oin is the ambient concentration of N2O. 
For the purpose of this model, the overall mass transfer coefficient of nitrous 
oxide will be estimated based on an empirical formulation proposed by (Foley et al., 
2010). This expression is presented in Equation 5, and is independent from the mass 
transfer coefficient of oxygen. As it can be seen, a depth and airflow rate correction has 
been implemented to account for the effect of airflow and design characteristics of the 
tank and be in accordance with the mass transfer rate expressed in Equation 3. Finally, 
a temperature correction factor is also included to account for variations of temperature 
in wastewater. 
                    KLaN2O
aerobic = (
dR
dL)
−0.49
∗34,500 ∗(
QA
A )
0.86
∗1.024Tproc−20  Equation 5 
2.2.3 Mass transfer model 3 
There are several factors that can affect the mass transfer rate in aeration 
systems apart from airflow rate and aerobic tank design characteristics. Three 
==PAGE:15==
significant parameters that could alter this rate are the pressure gradient inside the 
aerobic tank, the molar composition of air bubbles during the aeration process and the 
liquid to gas phase transport. The bubbles produced by the aerators can undergo 
changes during their rise to the top of a reactor, which can affect the equilibrium 
solubility of a substance. The pressure gradient refers to the hydrostatic pressure 
difference along the height of the reactor, due to the weight of the water column, while 
the mole fraction in the gas phase refers to the transfer of substances in and out of the 
bubbles as they rise. (Baeten et al., 2020) have developed and tested an alternative mass 
transfer rate formulation which includes the effect that these parameters could have on 
the emissions several volatile compounds. The modeling of nitrous oxide emissions has 
been described by Equation 6. This expression takes into account a mean value for the 
hydrostatic pressure inside the aerobic tank, a mean molar composition inside the air 
bubbles and a liquid to gas phase transport between two well mixed phases. These 
assumptions come in contract with the ones used by (Matter-Müller et al., 1981; 
Schulthess & Gujer, 1996), who assumed a uniform pressure value taken from the top 
of the tank, a gradient molar composition for air bubbles and a plug flow gas phase 
transport. Moreover, as it is the case with Equation 1 and Equation 3, Equation 6 is 
modeled to account for stripping of nitrous oxide from the aerobic tank and a negative 
stoichiometry is applied in Gujer matrix.  
RN2O
aer = KLaN2O
aerobicAH [
SN2O−
hN2O(patm
G
+ρgH
2 )MN2O
RT
xin,N2O
G
1+
KLaN2O
aerobicAHhN2O(patm
G
+ρgH
2 )
2patm
G
QA
]           Equation 6 
This mass transfer model for nitrous oxide was validated by (Baeten et al., 2020) 
using the Higbie’s penetration theory for the estimation of the overall mass transfer 
coefficient of N2O. 
2.2.4 Overall mass transfer coefficient of oxygen for aeration 
As mentioned earlier, one of the key three parameters for the estimation of the 
nitrous oxide flux from the aerobic tanks is the overall mass transfer coefficient of 
oxygen, KLaO2. The reason why this parameter can influence the stripping procedure 
is the fact that aeration increases the oxygen content in the liquid which ultimately not 
only affects stripping itself, but also stimulates biological processes which affects 
nitrous oxide concentration in the bulk phase. Therefore, the determination of the most 
==PAGE:16==
representative expression for the overall mass transfer coefficient of oxygen when 
aeration takes place is highly important for the validity of the simulation. For the 
purpose of this project 3 different expressions for KLa of oxygen are proposed and the 
choice for the more appropriate to interpretate the data has to be made. The first 
formulation was proposed by (Khudenko & Shpirt, 1985), and presented in Equation 7, 
which assumes dependency on the geometry of the tank and the aeration type and 
position. An alpha factor (α) is also included here to take account of the possible effects 
on the aerated water associated with admixtures. Finally, the γ factor is a temperature 
correction factor. 
             KLaO2 = Aαγ (
hsub
db )
0.67
(
Baerator
Btank )
0.18
(
I
H)  
             Equation 7 
where I = QA/Atank and A is an empirical constant parameter which ranges between 
0.041 – 0.046 for fine bubbles and between 0.037 – 0.041 for coarse bubbles during 
aeration. 
The second proposed formulation for the mass transfer coefficient of oxygen 
was proposed by (K. Al-Ahmady, 2011), Equation 8. Similarly, in this case the KLaO2 
is dependent on the geometric and the dynamic parameters of the system. As a result, 
an empirical formulation has been developed.  
   KLaO2 =
0.03254
L2
Re1.4647Fr−0.4857 (
db
hsub)
−0.7261
(
H
L)
−1.7685
(
Aaerator
Atank )
0.2368
         Equation 8 
In this case, the Reynolds number represents the ratio of the internal forces 
caused by the rising of the air bubbles to friction forces developed by the viscosity of 
water. The Froude number relates the specific kinetic energy related to the rising of the 
moving aerated volume of water to the specific potential energy of water column of the 
same depth as the aerated volume. Both these formulas are presented in Equation 9 and 
10. The (db/hsub) parameter takes into account the depth of the aerator in the tank, the 
(H/L) represents the effect of the design characteristics of the tank, while the 
(Aaerator/Atank) is the area ratio between the aerator and the tank.  
   Re =
QA∗ρ
L∗μ  
 
 
 
          Equation 9 
                           Fr =
QA
(L5∗g)0.5 
  
 
          Equation 10 
==PAGE:17==
Lastly, the third formulation for the KLa of oxygen was proposed by (van der Lans, 
2000) and is presented in Equation 11. 
KLaO2 =
QA∗alpha∗patm
G
A∗(patm
G
+ρgH
2 )  
 
           Equation 11 
The dependance of the mass transfer coefficient and the airflow in the tank is 
highly influenced by the type of the aerator and the composition of the liquid phase. 
One of the main parameters included in this equation, which play an important role in 
the determination of oxygen mass transfer in the bulk liquid and as a consequence in 
nitrous oxide emissions predictions, is the correction coefficient for oxygen transfer in 
aerobic tanks, alpha (α). The main influence of this correction coefficient is on the KLa 
of oxygen and its value can be estimated by the Equation 8 (Rosso & Stenstrom, 2014; 
von Sperling, 2007). 
                                  α = KLa(wastewater)/KLa(clean water)           Equation 12                    
This correction factor can generally obtain values between around 0.3 and 1.2 
(von Sperling, 2007). For the purpose of this study a standard value of 0.6 as calibrated 
by (van der Lans, 2000) will be used in the conducted simulations. 
All these three proposed model have been tested and validated for nitrous oxide 
emissions using the formulation of (van der Lans, 2000) for the estimation of the overall 
mass transfer coefficient of oxygen. Therefore, for consistency purposes, this 
expression will be also used in the following simulations of this study.  
Another important parameter which can affect the oxygen transfer rate in 
aerobic tanks is the correction factor for oxygen solubility (β). The beta factor depends 
on the concentration of salts and particulates in the bulk liquid. These constituents lead 
to a reduced oxygen solubility which can have an effect on the dissolved oxygen in the 
wastewater or on the aerator performance. The beta factor is shown in Equation 13. 
              β = Csw(wastewater)/Cs(clean water)             Equation 13 
 
Based on these formulations, three different models (Table 4) were selected for 
evaluation in this study. 
==PAGE:18==
Table 4. Model combination used in this study for aerobic tanks 
Model name 
Emission rate of N2O 
KLaN2O 
KLaO2 
Model 003 
Equation 1 
Equation 2 
Equation 11 
Model 113 
Equation 3 
Equation 5 
Equation 11 
Model 303 
Equation 6 
Equation 2 
Equation 11 
2.4 Scenario analysis 
For the purpose of this study the scenario analysis was performed by combining 
WEST software with MATLAB. This was accomplished through the tornado shell in 
WEST which made it possible for the simulation to run through MATLAB. Therefore, 
a MATLAB script was responsible for obtaining the desired simulation conditions, run 
the simulation and read the results through the output file of WEST simulation. At the 
same time another MATLAB script was responsible for creating a file containing the 
influent data which were chosen for each simulation. The first of these two scripts were 
used for varying the operational and design parameters of WWTP, while the second 
script was used for varying the influent concentrations. 
In all three previously introduced models, aeration plays a significant role in the 
prediction of nitrous oxide emissions. A scenario analysis was conducted to evaluate 
the effect of parameters that affect the aeration on the three models and the potential 
differences that occur between them. The first scenario analysis accounted for varying 
the DO concentration in the aerobic tanks by introducing a controller which adjusted 
the airflow rate. A second scenario analysis was conducted for varying depths of 
aerobic tanks. The depth varied by adjusting the surface area of the aerobic tank and by 
keeping the same volume. The volume was kept constant in order to have a better 
comparison between the different cases by having the same amount of wastewater in 
the tank. Moreover, the two correction factors alpha and beta were also varied to 
identify the impact of wastewater quality and aeration type on the prediction of nitrous 
oxide emissions by the proposed models. Finally, the effect of nitrogen overload, by 
varying the ammonia loading rate in the WWTP, and SRT, by varying the amount of 
sludge ending up in wastes, was investigated. The aim of this scenario analysis was to 
understand the behavior of the simulated system when using each of the three proposed 
models under varying conditions and define their differences in the predicted nitrous 
oxide emissions. These differences were estimated based on percentage and potential 
contribution to the carbon footprint of the wastewater treatment plant. The carbon 
==PAGE:19==
footprint of nitrous oxide was estimated in CO2 equivalents using its global warming 
potential value of 265 for the 100 year time horizon (IPCC, 2014; Myhre, G. et al., 
2015). 
2.4.1 Emissions from nitrous oxide production pathways 
As previously described, nitrous oxide is being produced and emitted through 
three main pathways during nitrification and denitrification in WWTPs. These 
pathways are Nitrifier Nitrification, Nitrifier Denitrification and Denitrification. As a 
result, there is a need of modeling each pathway’s contribution individually except from 
the overall nitrous oxide emissions, in order to understand the mechanism that takes 
place in each case. For the purpose of this study this has been achieved by calculating 
the overall and the individual contribution of each pathway in nitrous oxide 
concentration measured out from the last anoxic tank, for denitrification, and in the first 
aerobic tank for NN and ND. The first aerobic tank was chosen as a reference point, 
because there is where the higher emissions as well as the effect of denitrification is 
observed. Then the factional contribution from each pathway was estimated and this 
ratio was used for estimating the individual emissions from the total N2O emissions of 
the first aerobic tank. 
2.5 Global sensitivity analysis 
 
For the purpose of this study the global sensitivity analysis was performed using 
the Morris screening method. This method is a specialized randomized one-at-a-time 
(OAT) method that is considered to be a global sensitivity analysis method. Morris 
screening obtains a range of possible values for each of the analyzed parameter and 
creates a sampling matrix where only one parameter values is changed every time. After 
choosing a parameter set from this matrix, the simulation is performed and the 
sensitivity measures of model parameters is estimated. The main estimation of this 
method is the distribution of the Elementary Effects (EE) of each parameter on the 
output variable at randomly selected points in the input parameter range. (Campolongo 
et al., 2007) has suggested the comparison of the mean absolute values of EE 
distributors for each modeled parameter (μ*). Furthermore, the average of EE values 
(μ) can provide a better understanding on the impact of each parameter on the targeted 
variable. When μ is negative, it means that the increase of the parameter value, results 
in decrease of the value of the targeted variable, while positive μ means increase. In 
==PAGE:20==
case μ* and μ have similar absolute values for one parameter, then its impact on the 
targeted variable is independent of any other variable. When μ has lower value than the 
μ*, then it means that this parameter has different directions on its impact due to its 
interaction with other parameters. At any case, only parameters with μ* values larger 
than 0.1 are plotted (Franczyk, 2019; Valverde-Pérez et al., 2015). 
 
The Morris screening method in this study was implemented, similarly to 
scenario analysis, in MATLAB. A series for scripts were used for providing the value 
range for each parameter, the sampling of value sets and the calculation of EE, μ* and 
μ. Finally, the results were plotted for μ > 0.1 values. 
For the purpose of this study, a global sensitivity analysis on the biochemical 
parameters was conducted to assess their positive or negative impact on the predicted 
nitrous oxide emissions from aerobic tanks. Four different uncertainty classes were 
introduced and presented in Table 5 along with the parameters that fall under each 
category. The impact ranking for all the parameters was presented in absolute values in 
the end of sensitivity analysis. 
Table 5. Uncertainty classes for biochemical parameters 
Biochemical Parameters 
Classes 
iNBM
a
, iTSSBM
a
, iTSSXI
a
, iTSSXS
a
, YAUT
a
, YPAO
a
, YPHA
a
, YPO
a  
 1 (± 5%) 
YAOB
b
, YH
b, YNOB
b
, fXI
b  
2 (± 10%) 
iNSF
a
, iNSI
a
, iNXI
a
, iNXS
a
, iPBM
a
, muAOBAMO
b
, muAOBHAO
b
, muAUT
a
, muH
b , muPAO
a
, 
muHBNAR
b
, muHBNIR
b
, muHBNOR
b
, muHBNOS
b
, muNOB
b
, KALK
a
, KALKAUT
a
, 
KMAX
a
, bAOB
b
, bAUT
a
, bH
b, bNOB
b
, nHD
a , nNOAUTd
a
, nNOHet
a
, nNOHetd
a
, 
nNOHyd
a
, nNOPAO
a
, nNOPd
a
, nfe
a  
3 (± 25%) 
iPSF
a
, iPXI
a , iPXS
a
, KA
b, KANAR
b
, KANIR
b
, KANOR
b
, KANOS
b
, KF
b, 
KFNAR
b
, KFNIR
b
, KFNOR
b
, KFNOS
b
, KHNO2
b
, KN2O
b
, KNH
b , KNHAUT
b
, KNO
b , 
KNO3
b
, KNOiNIR
b
, KNOiNOR
b
, KNOiNOS
b
, KNOd
a
, KO
b, KOAUT
b
, KOiNAR
b
, 
KOiNIR
b
, KOiNOR
b
, KOiNOS
b
, KX
a, Kfe
a , QPHA
a
, QPP
a , Qfe
a , kPRE
a
, kRED
a
, 
kh
a, KAOBiHNO2
b
, KAOBiNH
b
, KHNO2AOB
b
, KNH2OHAOB
b
, KNH2OHAOBND
b
, 
4 (± 50%) 
==PAGE:21==
KNHAOB
b
, KNOAOB
b
, KOAOBAMO
b
, KOAOBHAO
b
, KOIAOB
b
, KALKNOB
a
, 
KFAiNOB
b
, KHNO2NOB
b
, KNOBiHNNO2
b
, KIPP
a
, KP
a, KPHA
a
, KPP
a , KPS
a , 
bPAO
a
, bPHA
a
, bPP
a , epsHAO
b
, nAOBNIR
b
, nAOBNOR
b
 
Reference a: (Brun et al., 2002) 
Reference b: (Domingo-Félez et al., 2017) 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1 Scenario analysis 
3.1.1 Impact of DO 
The dissolved oxygen concentration plays a significant role in nitrification-
denitrification procedure. Especially in aerobic tanks can dictate the level of nitrous 
oxide emissions that are going to be released into the atmosphere. Therefore, the 
emissions of nitrous oxide are plotted against different DO concentrations for the three 
proposed models. As it can be seen from the Figure 1, a peak in the total emissions of 
nitrous oxide can be observed at DO concentration of around 0.6 g/m3 in all three 
models. Model 003 seems to overpredict the emissions compared to model 113 by 
8.40% difference and to model 303 by 15.70% difference. Furthermore, this percentage 
difference leads to difference in carbon footprint contribution from model 003 by 
+397.5 CO2eq compared to model 113 and a +1060 CO2eq compared to model 303. 
The overall predicted carbon footprint contribution from model 003, 113 and 303 was 
calculated at 6492 CO2eq, 5830 CO2eq and 5432 CO2eq respectively. Therefore, the 
difference observed between the models is significant particularly in mode 003 and 303 
where it is in the same order of magnitude. At the same time a study by (Unisense, 
2020) has estimated the carbon footprint contribution by N2O in WWTPs at 2824 
CO2eq under typical DO concentrations (> 1g-O2/m3) in WWTPs. As the dissolved 
oxygen concentration increases to values higher than 1 g/m3, the total emissions 
decrease, as also does the difference between the models. At DO of around 4 – 5 g3 the 
difference reaches values lower than 0.5% and, as a consequence, negligible differences 
in the potential carbon footprint contribution. Finally, as DO gets values higher than 
2.5 g/m3, a slight increase in the emissions can be observed, which is attributed to 
further accumulation of N2O. 
==PAGE:22==
 
Figure 1. Total emissions of N2O from aerobic tanks under different DO 
concentrations 
Based on previous studies, it can be validated that the higher nitrous oxide 
emissions are observed in DO levels of lower than 1 g/m3, while the emissions drop 
when dissolved oxygen gets higher values. This effect can be attributed to the 
insufficient oxygen concentration for full nitrification and oxidation of nitrite to nitrate. 
Therefore, ammonia oxidizers use nitrite as the terminal electron acceptor due to the 
lack of oxygen after the oxidation of ammonia to hydroxylamine (Kampschreur et al., 
2009). As a result, nitrite is being accumulated and then reduced through the nitrifier 
denitrification pathway into nitrous oxide, which is emitted into the atmosphere. As 
more DO is being available, oxidation rate of nitrite to nitrate increases and no nitrite 
is accumulated. However, at very high dissolved oxygen concentration values, the 
incomplete oxidation of hydroxylamine takes place, favoring the nitrifier nitrification 
pathway for nitrous oxide formation, which becomes dominant contributor to the 
nitrous oxide emissions (Giraldo, 2012; Law et al., 2012; Tallec et al., 2006). These 
assertions can also be validating by the simulated model when plotting the individual 
nitrous oxide fluxes from each of the three pathways on Figure 2.  
==PAGE:23==
 
Figure 2. Flux of N2O pathways from aerobic tank 1 under different DO 
concentrations 
All three proposed models capture the same trends on the impact of varying 
dissolved oxygen concentrations on the overall nitrous oxide emissions and emission 
pathways. Moreover, the differences in N2O fluxes predicted by each of the three 
models can be attributed to several design and operational parameters and vary as these 
parameter values increase or decrease This effect will be investigated in the following 
scenario analysis at DO concentration of 0.6 g/m3, where the peak of nitrous oxide 
emissions is observed and the differences between the models are the largest. Typically 
the DO in aerobic tanks varies between 1 – 3 g-O2/m3 (Du et al., 2018), but reduced 
aeration during the day or a system malfunction can lead to lower concentrations where 
nitrous oxide emissions are significantly more favorable.  
3.1.2 Impact of tank depth 
A parameter that plays a crucial role in mass transfer models of compounds 
from bulk liquids to the atmosphere, where bottom aeration is used, is the depth of 
aerobic tanks. This is because the rising bubbles created by the aerator, undergo several 
changes until the reach the top of the reactor. As reported from (Al-Ahmady, 2006), the 
major effect that tank depth has is on oxygenation capacity. The deeper the tank the 
higher its capacity for oxygen. The reason for that is the longer residence time of air 
bubbles in water, when considering a constant ascension speed, and consecutively 
longer contact time between the bubbles and the water (Lee, 2018). Therefore, the air 
bubbles have more time to reach equilibrium. The effect of tank depth on nitrous oxide 
==PAGE:24==
emissions was investigated in this study for the three proposed models by varying the 
aerobic tank depth in a range from 1 to 10 m while keeping the total volume constant 
at 1333 m3.   
As it can be seen on Figure 3, all three models exhibited similar profile trends 
with increasing depth. Model 003 overpredicts the emissions compared to the other two 
models, while model 303 underpredicts them, particularly with increased tank depth. 
Between depth of 1 to 3 meters, nitrous oxide predicted emissions increased for all three 
models. In the range between 3 to 5 meters, model 003 predicted increase in emissions, 
while model 113 and 303 predicted decrease. Furthermore, the predicted emissions in 
model 003, do not change with increasing depth from 5 to 11m, while the other two 
models predict lower levels in this depth range. 
 
Figure 3. Flux of N2O from aerobic tanks under different depths at DO = 0.6 g/m3 
To understand the reason why each model predicts the specific profile trend, 
plots for airflow rate, overall mass transfer coefficient of oxygen and nitrous oxide were 
created for the first aerobic tank, where the highest nitrous oxide content is met, and 
presented in SI. Figure S1 and S2 present a decrease in airflow rate and no difference 
in airflow values and KLaO2 between the models. That is because higher depth provided 
higher capacity for oxygen and the DO was kept constant for the three-model analysis. 
However, Figure S3, presents a significant difference in KLaN2O. Models 003 and 303, 
exhibited the same behavior similar to KLaO2 trend where a plateau was reached. On 
the other hand, model 113, showed a decrease in KLaN2O in increasing tank depth.  
Despite the results from the full range investigation for the tank depth, not all 
three models have been validated for a full range aerobic tank. The two-film theory 
==PAGE:25==
emission rate model along with the penetration theory for the estimation of the KLaN2O, 
in model 003, has been examined and validated by (Wan et al., 2019) for a depth range 
up to 11 m. On the other hand, (Schulthess & Gujer, 1996), have not identified a depth 
range which limits the use of the emissions rate formulation used in model 113. 
However (Foley et al., 2010), has experimentally validated and calibrated the formula 
used in this model for the nitrous oxide mass transfer coefficient within a range from 0 
to 6 m tank depth. A study from (Baresel et al., 2016), has also validated the approach 
of model 113 for a full scale wastewater treatment plant. However, further investigation 
has to be conducted for model validation in tanks deeper than 6 meters. Moreover, the 
model proposed by (Baeten et al., 2020) has been validated for aerobic tanks with depth 
up to 10m. 
The difference between model 003 and the other two models can be attributed 
to the impact that design parameters for aerobic tanks have on nitrous oxide emissions. 
Model 113 takes account of design parameters both in the estimation of overall mass 
transfer coefficient of nitrous oxide and emission rate, while model 303 does it only in 
emission rate. This comes in contrast with the formulation for model 003 for KLaN2O 
and emission rate, where design parameters are excluded. 
The differences observed between model 303 and model 113 could be attributed 
to the assumptions used by (Baeten et al., 2020) for a mean molar fraction inside the air 
bubbles as they rise to the tank surface and a mixed liquid to gas phase transport. 
Comparatively, model 113 uses the assumption of a gradient mole fraction and a plug 
flow gas phase transport. 
As it has been shown by other authors (Gillot et al., 2005; Lee, 2018), the mass 
transfer coefficient of volatile compounds depends on aerobic tank geometry. Therefore 
the approach proposed by (Foley et al., 2010) and simulated in model 113, can be more 
accurate to measured values made in full-scale WWTPs. 
 
3.1.3 Impact of the oxygen transfer rate correction coefficient (alpha) 
 A scenario analysis has been conducted on difference values of the alpha correction 
coefficient in a typical range from 0.4 to 1.2 (von Sperling, 2007) and its effect on the 
differences in the predicted N2O emissions from the proposed models has been 
investigated. On Figure 4, three different plots have been made by using three different 
values for the alpha coefficient (0.6, 0.8 and 1.2). On Table 5, the differences on the 
==PAGE:26==
peak nitrous oxide emissions at DO = 0.6 g/m3 between the models for the three 
different “alpha” values are presented.      
 
Table 5. Model comparison for different alpha factor values at DO = 0.6 g/m3 and 
influent NH4 = 30 g/m3 in WWTP 
alpha = 0.4 
Model 
comparison 
003 to 113 
003 to 303 
113 to 303 
Difference 
+2.08%  
(+132 CO2eq) 
+10.42%  
(+662 CO2eq) 
+8.51%  
(+530 CO2eq) 
alpha = 0.6 
Model 
comparison 
003 to 113 
003 to 303 
113 to 303 
Difference 
+8.33%  
(+530 CO2eq) 
+14.58%  
(+927 CO2eq) 
+6.82%  
(+397 CO2eq) 
alpha = 1.2 
Model 
comparison 
003 to 113 
003 to 303 
113 to 303 
Difference 
+22.92%  
(+1457 CO2eq) 
+25.00%  
(+1590 CO2eq) 
+2.70%  
(+132 CO2eq) 
Figure 4. Total N2O emissions under varying DO concentration for alpha = 0.4 (A), 
alpha = 0.6 (B), and alpha = 1.2 (C) 
A. 
B. 
C. 
==PAGE:27==
 As it can be seen from the peak difference between the models, the higher the 
alpha coefficient, the greater is the difference between model 003 and the two other 
proposed models. At the same time the difference between model 113 and 303 is being 
reduced. This effect also reflects on the potential contribution of N2O emissions on the 
carbon footprint of the wastewater treatment plant under these specific operating 
conditions. The main parameter responsible for these observations is the airflow rate. 
Based on Figure 5, when a specific DO concentration is targeted, by keeping the overall 
mass transfer coefficient of oxygen (KLaO2) constant, the airflow rate is adjusted based 
on the aeration efficiency (i.e., alpha factor). Therefore, the higher the alpha factor, 
meaning the oxygen transport to the bulk liquid is more efficient, the lower airflow rate 
is needed from the aerator, leading to less N2O stripping. Moreover, as it can be seen 
in S11, the emissions of nitrous oxide in models 113 and 303 are influenced by the 
changes on the alpha factor while model 003 is not. Overall, model 113 is the most 
sensitive model to the alpha factor, with 29.79% reduction in nitrous oxide emissions 
from alpha factor 0.4 to 1.2, while model 003 is not sensitive at all. This is because, 
when the simulation is performed for a specific DO concentration, the emission rate 
and KLaN2O formulations are the main responsible for the differences in nitrous oxide 
predictions. Model 113 is sensitive to airflow rate changes in the estimation of both of 
these values, model 303 is sensitive only in emission rate estimation, while model 003 
does not account for airflow in neither of these formulations. 
 
Figure 5. Total airflow in aerobic tanks under different alpha factors at DO = 0.6 g/m3 
==PAGE:28==
As a result, lower nitrous oxide emissions are observed in higher alpha factors 
due to lower airflow rates in models 113 and 303, while in model 003 the emissions 
remain unchanged irrespective of the correction coefficient value. Therefore, the alpha 
factor plays a significant role in determining the differences in nitrous oxide emissions 
predicted by the three proposed models. In conclusion, models 113 and 303 can capture 
the effect aeration efficiency on the N2O emissions while model 003 is not. Therefore, 
these models can predict more accurately the nitrous oxide emissions in different types 
of aerators. 
3.1.4 Impact of the oxygen solubility correction coefficient (beta) 
A scenario analysis has been performed on a typical range for the beta correction 
factor, between 0.8 and 1 (von Sperling, 2007), and its impact on N2O emissions. 
Figure 6 presents the effect of the beta factor on the total flux of nitrous oxide from the 
aerobic tanks for each of the models. 
 
Figure 6. Flux of N2O from aerobic tanks under different beta factor values at DO = 
0.6 g/m3 
As it can be seen the nitrous oxide emissions in all three models decline slightly 
as the beta factor increases from 0.8 to 1. That slight decline can mainly be attributed 
to the effect that beta factor has on overall mass transfer coefficient of oxygen. This 
occurs because a larger value for the beta factor indicates a greater capability of aeration 
device to transfer oxygen in aerobic tank (Stenstrom & Gilbert, 1981). Consecutively, 
this reduces the airflow rate which needed from the aerator. These two alterations lead 
==PAGE:29==
to lower nitrous oxide emissions. Despite that, the degree of decrease in emissions in 
the beta factor range from 0.8 to 1 for model 003, 113 and 303 are 1.63%, 2.00% and 
2.86% respectively. As a result, this reduction in emissions predicted by each model 
can be considered negligible. Furthermore, on Table 6, are presented the percentage 
differences in emissions and carbon footprint contribution between the three models 
under beta values of 0.8, 0.9 and 1.  
Table 6. Model comparison for different beta factor values at DO = 0.6 g/m3 and 
influent NH4 = 30 g/m3 in WWTP 
beta = 0.8 
Model 
comparison 
003 to 113 
003 to 303 
113 to 303 
Difference 
+8.16%  
(+530 CO2eq) 
+14.29%  
(+927 CO2eq) 
+6.67%  
(+397 CO2eq) 
beta = 0.9 
Model 
comparison 
003 to 113 
003 to 303 
113 to 303 
Difference 
+7.82%  
(+503 CO2eq) 
+14.00%  
(+901 CO2eq) 
+6.70%  
(+398 CO2eq) 
beta = 1 
Model 
comparison 
003 to 113 
003 to 303 
113 to 303 
Difference 
+10.20%  
(+662 CO2eq) 
+18.37%  
(+1192 CO2eq) 
+9.09%  
(+530 CO2eq) 
The decrease in beta factor leads to a slight decrease in the percentage difference 
between the three models, which can be considered negligible particularly considering 
the similar levels of potential carbon footprint contribution. It can be therefore 
concluded that the matrix of the liquid or the type of wastewater in general, do not have 
a significant impact on the differences observed in the emissions of nitrous oxide 
predicted between the models.    
3.1.5 Impact of ammonia overload 
The influence of ammonia overload was studied for the three proposed models 
by varying the influent ammonia concentration from 20 to 100 g/m3. This led to a 
==PAGE:30==
nitrogen loading range from (0.8 - 2.6) ·106 g/d. As it can be seen from Figure 7, all 
three models exhibited the same behavior with the increase of nitrogen loading rate 
value. At lower values the observed flux of nitrous oxide was at the lowest level and it 
increased as the influent ammonia concentration in the treatment plant increased. 
 
Figure 7. Flux of N2O from aerobic tanks under different nitrogen loading rates at DO 
= 0.6 g/m3 
This trend observed by the three models, comes in agreement with the literature 
reported influence of ammonia overload on the flux of nitrous oxide (Chandran et al., 
2011; Domingo-Félez & Smets, 2019). The reason why this behavior is observed, as 
these authors describe, is that the increase in NH3 loading rate leads to higher oxidation 
rate to hydroxylamine and to nitrite. However, due to insufficient oxygen concentration 
for full nitrification, higher accumulation of nitrite triggers increased nitrous oxide 
concentrations through the ND pathway and consecutively, higher emissions. This 
effect can be seen on Figures S4, S5 and S6 for aerobic tank 1, where the increase in 
nitrogen loading rates leads to higher predicted emissions by the ND pathway for all 
three models. Additionally, Figure S7, shows the increase in nitrous oxide 
concentration. At the same time the emissions values due to the NN and HD pathways 
remain on similar levels despite the increase in nitrogen loading rate. 
Table 7. Model comparison for different ammonia influent concentrations at DO = 0.6 
g/m3 in WWTP 
NH3 = 20 g/m3 
==PAGE:31==
Model 
comparison 
003/113 
003/303 
113/303 
Difference 
+10.34%  
(+318 CO2eq)  
+16.38%  
(+503 CO2eq) 
+6.73%  
(+185.5 CO2eq) 
NH3 = 50 g/m3 
Model 
comparison 
003/113 
003/303 
113/303 
Difference 
+7.96%  
(+609 CO2eq) 
+14.53%  
(+1113 CO2eq) 
+7.14%  
(+503 CO2eq) 
NH3 = 100 g/m3 
Model 
comparison 
003/113 
003/303 
113/303 
Difference 
+7.07%  
(+689 CO2eq) 
+12.77%  
(+1245 CO2eq) 
+6.14%  
(+556 CO2eq) 
On Table 7, a comparison between the predicted fluxes from each model at the 
different nitrogen loading rates is presented. As it can be seen by the potential carbon 
footprint contribution predicted by each model, at lower ammonia influent 
concentration there is small difference between them. This can be attributed to the low 
nitrous oxide concentrations in that range. As the nitrous oxide concentration increases, 
with increased NH3 influent, the difference between model 003 and the other two 
models in carbon footprint increases by around 100%. At the same time the difference 
in CO2eq between models 113 and 303 remain in similar levels in elevated nitrogen 
loading rates (above 50 g/m3). All three models are sensitive to the increase in nitrogen 
loading rates and this is mainly attributed to the respective increase in nitrous oxide 
concentration. However, as it can be seen on Figure S8, there is also a respective 
increase in the airflow rate which leads models 113 and 303 to be even more sensitive 
than model 003. Models 113 and 303 predict a 230% increase in their nitrous oxide 
emissions from ammonia influent concentration of 20 to 100, while model 003 predicts 
an 215% increase. 
3.1.6 Impact of the SRT 
The solids retention time (SRT) is another parameter that could have an effect 
on the difference between the nitrous oxide emissions from the three proposed models. 
By varying the sludge wastage, a range of SRT from 8 to 21 days was achieved. On 
Figure 8, the emissions of nitrous oxide were plotted against the SRT for each model. 
==PAGE:32==
 
Figure 8. Flux of N2O from aerobic tanks under different SRT values at DO = 0.6 
g/m3 
All three models exhibited the same behavior with the increase in SRT value. 
As the solid retention time increased, higher nitrous oxide emissions were reported, 
until a peak is reached at 17.5 days. For SRT longer than 17.5 days a decrease in 
predicted nitrous oxide emissions is observed. This impact by SRT can be mainly 
attributed to nitrite accumulation since the operating condition are at DO = 0.6 g/m3, 
where this phenomenon is favored. As a study by (Wu et al., 2011) mentioned, nitrite 
accumulation is strongly connected with the SRT of WWTP. When the SRT is very 
short, then the system becomes unstable due to the quick rate of AOB and NOB bacteria 
disposal. In this case even ammonia to hydroxylamine oxidation rate is inhibited. When 
SRT becomes longer the reaction rate of ammonia and hydroxylamine increases leading 
to higher nitrous oxide emissions by the ND pathway. Further increase in SRT than 
17.5 days leads to decreased emissions, which can be attributed to increase in NOB 
concentration. This increase in NOB concentration leads to higher oxidation rate of 
nitrite to nitrate. Additionally, (Zhou et al., 2019) have reported that this further increase 
can result in higher system resistance in ammonia overload and aeration failure shock. 
Despite the fact that all three models have the same trend with the increase of 
SRT, the differences in the predicted emissions can still lead to differences in the carbon 
footprint potential. On Table 8, these differences are estimated for three representative 
SRT values. 
==PAGE:33==
Table 8. Model comparison for different SRT values at DO = 0.6 g/m3 and influent 
NH4 = 30 g/m3 in WWTP 
SRT = 15 days 
Model 
comparison 
003/113 
003/303 
113/303 
Difference 
+10.91%  
(+477 CO2eq)  
+18.18%  
(+795 CO2eq) 
+8.16%  
(+318 CO2eq) 
SRT = 17.5 days 
Model 
comparison 
003/113 
003/303 
113/303 
Difference 
+10.20%  
(+662 CO2eq) 
+16.33%  
(+1060 CO2eq) 
+6.82%  
(+397 CO2eq) 
SRT = 21 days 
Model 
comparison 
003/113 
003/303 
113/303 
Difference 
+11.96%  
(+583 CO2eq) 
+19.02%  
(+927 CO2eq) 
+8.02%  
(+345 CO2eq) 
As it can be seen from percentage difference between the models, remains on 
similar levels with the increase in SRT. Model 003 continues to overpredict the total 
emissions of nitrous oxide while model 303 underpredicts compared to the other two 
models. Furthermore, the difference in potential carbon footprint contribution by the 
WWTP remains also similar. As it can be seen on Figure S9, the increase in SRT leads 
to need for higher airflow rate to maintain the DO at 0.6 g/m3, mainly due to the 
increased number of bacteria concentrations in activated sludge, as mentioned before. 
Despite the fact that model 113 and 303 are more sensitive to airflow rate changes, the 
variation in nitrous oxide concentration in bulk liquid of each aerobic tank, Figure S10, 
has a more dominant effect on the emission profile predicted by each model. 
It can be concluded that the sludge retention time has a strong effect on the 
prediction of nitrous oxide emissions by each of the mass transfer models. However, it 
does not have an effect on the observed differences between them, since they remain 
similar. 
==PAGE:34==
3.2 Two variable scenario analysis (DO and N-loading rate) 
A more detailed investigation on the effect of dissolved oxygen concentration 
and total nitrogen loaded has been conducted for the three proposed models for two 
potential cases of correction factor for oxygen mass transfer coefficient (alpha = 0.6 
and alpha = 1.2).  
 
On Figures 9 and 10 the nitrous oxide emission factor was estimated and plotted 
for each case. As it was previously mentioned, the lower the alpha factor, the smaller 
are the differences between the predicted emissions by the three models. Additionally, 
there is a range of operating conditions between 0.4 - 0.8 g/m3 DO, where the emission 
factor ranges between 2 - 4% of the total nitrogen loading with the higher percentages 
observed in higher N-loading rates. This is because of the limited amount of DO for 
full nitrification, which triggers the N2O accumulation from the nitrifier denitrification 
pathway. As the DO increases further all three models predict an emissions factor 
around 0.5% which is similar to values reported also by other authors (Valkova et al., 
2020). Therefore, the investigation will be performed in DO range 0.4 - 0.8 g/m3. 
 
Figure 9. Effect of DO and N-loading rate on N2O emissions factor (EFN2O % of TN) for model 003 (A), 
model 113 (B) and mode 303 (C) at alpha = 0.6 
A. 
B. 
C. 
==PAGE:35==
 
C. 
A. 
B. 
Figure 10. Effect of DO and N-loading rate on N2O emissions factor (EFN2O % of TN) for model 003 (A), model 
113 (B) and mode 303 (C) at alpha = 1.2 
Figure 11. Effect of DO and N-loading rate on N2O flux from aerobic tanks for model 003 (A), model 113 (B) and 
mode 303 (C) at alpha = 0.6 
A. 
B. 
C. 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
Figures 9 – 12 validate the observation made also by previous authors 
(Kampschreur et al., 2009; Peng, 2015; Tallec et al., 2006) who studied the effect of 
DO concentration and nitrogen loading rate on the emission factor and flux of nitrous 
oxide. As (Osada et al., 2017; Peng, 2015) have reported a typical range for the emission 
factor of nitrous oxide from aerobic tanks is between 2 – 3% of the total influent 
nitrogen. This range was validated by this study by all three models. However, under 
very high nitrogen loading rate and in a DO range between 0.5 to 0.65 g/m3 the 
predicted emission factor exceeds the typical range by 1 or 2% depending on the 
specific conditions. Despite the effect of DO and N-loading rate, this study validates 
also the effect of mass transfer model and aeration type on the prediction of EFN2O. In 
case of low aeration efficiency as presented on Figure 9, all three models predict similar 
emission factor values. However, in case of efficient aeration, Figure 10, model 113 
and 303 predict significantly lower emission factors especially in the area of DO = 0.5 
- 0.65 g/m3 and N-loading rate 2.3 – 2.6 tones-N. This difference can be quantified at 
around 0.5% of total N-load in this area. From Figure 12, it can be calculated that this 
percentage difference can lead to overprediction of nitrous oxide carbon footprint 
Figure 12. Effect of DO and N-loading rate on N2O flux from aerobic tanks for model 003 (A), model 113 (B) 
and mode 303 (C) at alpha = 1.2 
A. 
B. 
C. 
==PAGE:37==
contribution by 2200 to 2700 CO2eq from model 003 compared to models 113 and 303. 
This value becomes important when considering that it is between 10 to 17% of the 
total predicted carbon footprint contribution individually by the three models.  
In conclusion, these observations support the assertions made in section 3.1.3, 
about the important of taking account of aeration in mass transfer models for nitrous 
oxide for calculating its emission from the WWTP.   
3.3 Sensitivity analysis 
A sensitivity analysis was performed at conditions where the highest emissions 
of nitrous oxide are observed, (DO = 0.6 g/m3 and NH3 = 100 g/m3). The parameters 
that showed to influence the N2O emissions by a μ larger than 0.1, were plotted on 
Figure 13 for the three different proposed models. 
 
 
As it can be seen from Figure 13, most of the parameters of the biochemical 
model which affect the nitrous oxide emissions are related to the partial nitrification 
process to nitrite and more specifically the nitrifier denitrification pathway. μAOBAMO 
has the strongest positive impact on the emissions in all three models. This parameter, 
Figure 13. Sensitivity analysis for biochemical parameters on N2O emissions for model 003 (A), model 113 (B) 
and mode 303 (C) at DO = 0.6 g/m3 and NH = 100 g/m3 
A. 
B. 
C. 
==PAGE:38==
along with the parameter for the decay of AOBs (bAOB), are involved in the process of 
ammonia oxidation to hydroxylamine, which is directly oxidized to nitrite. Therefore, 
the higher the process rate of this reaction, the higher accumulation of nitrite is 
observed, which yields to nitrifier denitrification. The second most impactful parameter 
is the yield for heterotrophic bacteria, YH. Despite the fact that very limited amount of 
nitrite is oxidized to nitrate in order to initiate the denitrification reaction, this parameter 
is involved in all denitrification processes which increases its impact even under these 
conditions. When YH increases more efficient denitrification is accomplished leading 
to reduction of nitrous oxide accumulated in the last anoxic tank. As a result, less nitrous 
oxide is being transferred to the first aerobic tank where it accounts for the reduction in 
emissions from HD pathway. Other parameters are related to oxygen affinity constant, 
such as KO(AOBAMO), KO(AOBHAO), KO(NOB). The first two parameters are involved in NH3 
oxidation to NH2OH and to NO-2 as described previously. In case KO(AOBAMO) increases, 
then the process rate of ammonia oxidation decreases, which in this case reduces also 
the accumulation of NO-2 and N2O emissions. Furthermore, the increase of KO(AOBHAO), 
decreases the process rate of hydroxylamine oxidation to nitrite. Therefore, the 
production rate of hydroxylamine becomes higher than its consumption rate leading to 
hydroxylamine accumulation. As previous authors have mentioned (Law et al., 2012; 
Soler-Jofra et al., 2021; White & Lehnert, 2016), this accumulation can increase the 
amount of hydroxylamine which is oxidized to NO and further to N2O from NN 
pathway. On the other hand, an interesting outcome can be obtained from KO(NOB) 
sensitivity analysis. On Figure 13 in all three model, the increase in this parameter leads 
to an increase in nitrous oxide flux. As it can be seen on Figure S13 and S14, the 
increase of KO(NOB) in the range of [0.6 – 1], leads to a decrease in the growth rate of 
NOB, which also leads to nitrite accumulation. The accumulation of nitrite triggers an 
increase in nitrous oxide emissions, Figure S12. However, under further increase of 
KO(NOB) in the range of [1 – 1.8], the growth rate of NOB does not decrease further, 
because it has already obtained values close to zero and NOB are washed out from the 
WWTP. Therefore, nitrite concentration has reached a plateau, where a balance 
between its production rate by hydroxylamine oxidation and its reduction only through 
the ND pathway has been achieved. As a result, nitrous oxide emissions are not affected 
and remain at similar levels as well. The nAOB(NIR) parameter, is also related with the 
emissions from the ND pathway. It is involved in the autotrophic reduction of nitrite to 
nitric oxide which is later reduced to nitrous oxide. Therefore, whenever this parameter 
==PAGE:39==
increases, the ND pathway is even more favored and higher amount of nitrite are 
converted into N2O, since no NO accumulation is observed. Finally, phosphorous 
accumulating organisms can potentially influence the nitrous oxide emissions. It has 
been reported by (Jia et al., 2013) that the growth of PAOs affect the emissions of 
nitrous oxide produced by the heterotrophic denitrification pathway. Some PAOs have 
the ability to use nitrate or nitrite as electron acceptors and contribute to denitrification 
using PHB. However, in this case, where denitrification ability is so low, PAOs mainly 
affect the nitrous oxide emissions through ammonia oxidation. During the growth of 
PAOs, they have the ability to consume ammonia. As a result, the increase in PAOs 
growth rate leads to increased consumption of ammonia. Therefore, less ammonia is 
available to be oxidized by AOBs and the contribution of ND pathway in nitrous oxide 
emissions decreases, leading to overall N2O emissions decrease. 
A study from (Massara et al., 2018) has showed that under limited DO 
concentrations in aerobic tanks the sensitivity of the parameters related to AOBs 
increased, since very limited NOB growth is observed. Although, in that study the 
lowest tested point of DO was 1 g/m3 the same trend is anticipated at even lower DO 
concentrations. Therefore, the observations of this study at DO = 0.6 g/m3, are validated 
by this assertion, since parameters related to AOBs and ND pathway showed the highest 
sensitivity towards nitrous oxide emissions followed by the parameters related to PAOs. 
Finally, as it can be seen on Figure 13 and Tables S7, S8 and S9, the same 
biochemical parameters showed the highest sensitivity towards nitrous oxide emissions 
for all three models. Therefore, it can be concluded, that the selection of mass transfer 
model does not influence the impact of biochemical parameters on nitrous oxide 
emissions. The complete rankings of biochemical parameters for each of the three 
proposed models are presented on Table S7, S8 and S9.   
4. Conclusion 
Nitrous oxide is a gas that is produced in wastewater treatment plants during the 
biological nutrient removal procedure of nitrogen. It has a significant contribution on 
the carbon footprint potential of each WWTP and therefore it needs to be controlled. 
Modeling is a very helpful tool for engineers who by considering the biological and 
operational conditions of each plant can predict and identify the root of different issues 
regarding the operation of WWTP such as the nitrous oxide emissions. For the purpose 
==PAGE:40==
of this study the modeling of nitrous oxide emissions was based on the plant 
configuration as described by the benchmark simulation model 1, with an extension to 
account also for phosphorus removal. The modeling of biological conditions was based 
on the ASM2d model, combined with the NDHA to account for all three pathways of 
nitrous oxide production. The liquid to gas mass transfer was modeled by three mass 
transfer models which have been proposed by different authors. The aim of this study 
was to identify the differences between these three models and to which parameters 
each model is sensitive to and under which conditions it may describe the emissions 
more accurately. For that reason, a scenario and sensitivity analysis were performed 
and the differences between the models were estimated based on potential carbon 
footprint contribution. All the scenario analysis was performed at DO concentration of 
0.6 g/m3, where the largest differences in emissions prediction between the model were 
observed. The differences in carbon footprint contribution at that point was 6.5% and 
17.5% for model 003 and 113 and model 003 and 303 respectively. Under these 
conditions, depth for the aerobic tank affects the predictions, since the last two models 
are sensitive to aeration and tank configuration, while model 003 is not. However, each 
model has to be used in the depth range where it has been validated. The correction 
factor for oxygen transfer (alpha) had also an impact of nitrous oxide emissions by the 
three models, while the correction factor for oxygen solubility (beta) had not. Only, 
models 113 and 303 were sensitive to changes in alpha, mainly due to reduced need for 
aeration in higher aerator efficiency. As a result, the greater the alpha factor, the larger 
were the differences between model 113 and 303 with model 003, which was not 
affected at all. Lastly for the scenario analysis, all three models exhibited similar 
sensitivities to ammonia overload and SRT changes. Nitrous oxide emissions increased 
with ammonia overload due to increased accumulation of nitrite, which favors the ND 
pathway. Additionally, by increase of SRT, a peak of emissions was observed for all 
models at the point where system became stable, followed by decreased emissions due 
to increase in NOB concentration which leads to nitrite oxidation to nitrate. The 
sensitivity analysis performed in the end of this study revealed that the biochemical 
parameters which are related to ND pathway and the growth of PAOs, had the highest 
influence in nitrous oxide emissions by all three models. However, the differences in 
the prediction between the models, was not impacted. As a result, the operational 
conditions and configuration of WWTP play the most important role in this case, rather 
than the biochemical model. 
==PAGE:41==
References 
Al-Ahmady, K. K. (2006). Analysis of oxygen transfer performance on sub-surface 
aeration systems. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 3(3), 301–308. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph2006030037 
Åmand, L., & Carlsson, B. (2013). The optimal dissolved oxygen profile in a nitrifying 
activated sludge process - Comparisons with ammonium feedback control. Water 
Science and Technology, 68(3), 641–649. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2013.287 
Bae, W., Baek, S., Chung, J., & Lee, Y. (2001). Optimal operational factors for nitrite 
accumulation in batch reactors. Biodegradation. https://doi.org/10.1023/A 
Baeten, J. E., van Loosdrecht, M. C. M., & Volcke, E. I. P. (2020). When and why do 
gradients of the gas phase composition and pressure affect liquid-gas transfer? 
Water Research, 178, 115844. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2020.115844 
Barbarroja, P., Alonso, J. L., Zornoza, A., Borrás, L., Aguado, D., Ingeniería, U. De, & 
València, U. P. De. (2017). Environmental ordination of nitrifying bacterial 
community dynamics in wastewater treatment plants. Poster, October. 
Baresel, C., Andersson, S., Yang, J., & Andersen, M. H. (2016). Comparison of nitrous 
oxide (N2O) emissions calculations at a Swedish wastewater treatment plant based 
on water concentrations versus off-gas concentrations. Advances in Climate 
Change Research, 7(3), 185–191. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accre.2016.09.001 
Brun, R., Kühni, M., Siegrist, H., Gujer, W., & Reichert, P. (2002). Practical 
identifiability of ASM2d parameters - Systematic selection and tuning of 
parameter 
subsets. 
Water 
Research, 
36(16), 
4113–4127. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1354(02)00104-5 
Burrell, P., Keller, J., & Blackall, L. L. (1999). Characterisation of the bacterial 
consortium involved in nitrite oxidation in activated sludge. Water Science and 
Technology, 39(6), 45–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0273-1223(99)00121-3 
==PAGE:42==
Campolongo, F., Cariboni, J., & Saltelli, A. (2007). An effective screening design for 
sensitivity analysis of large models. Environmental Modelling and Software, 
22(10), 1509–1518. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2006.10.004 
Castro-Barros, C. M., Daelman, M. R. J., Mampaey, K. E., van Loosdrecht, M. C. M., 
& Volcke, E. I. P. (2015). Effect of aeration regime on N2O emission from partial 
nitritation-anammox in a full-scale granular sludge reactor. Water Research, 68, 
793–803. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2014.10.056 
Chandran, K., Stein, L. Y., Klotz, M. G., & Van Loosdrecht, M. C. M. (2011). Nitrous 
oxide production by lithotrophic ammonia-oxidizing bacteria and implications for 
engineered nitrogen-removal systems. Biochemical Society Transactions, 39(6), 
1832–1837. https://doi.org/10.1042/BST20110717 
Daims, H., Nielsen, P. H., Nielsen, J. L., Juretschko, S., & Wagner, M. (2000). Novel 
Nitrospira-like bacteria as dominant nitrite-oxidizers in biofilms from wastewater 
treatment plants: Diversity and in situ physiology. Water Science and Technology, 
41(4–5), 85–90. https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2000.0430 
De Heyder, B., Vanrolleghem, P., Van Langenhove, H., & Verstraete, W. (1997). 
Kinetic characterization of mass transfer limited biodegradation of a low water 
soluble gas in batch experiments -Necessity for multiresponse fitting. 
Biotechnology 
and 
Bioengineering, 
55(3), 
511–519. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0290(19970805)55:3<511::AID-
BIT7>3.0.CO;2-F 
Domingo-Félez, C., Calderó-Pascual, M., Plósz, B. G., Smets, B. F., & Sin, G. (2017). 
Calibration of the comprehensive NDHA-N2O dynamics model for nitrifier-
enriched biomass using targeted respirometric assays. Water Research, 126, 29–
39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.09.013 
Domingo-Félez, C., & Smets, B. F. (2018). Modelling N2O dynamics of activated 
sludge biomass under nitrifying and denitrifying conditions: pathway 
contributions and uncertainty analysis. http://arxiv.org/abs/1811.00004 
==PAGE:43==
Domingo-Félez, C., & Smets, B. F. (2019). Regulation of key N 2 O production 
mechanisms during biological water treatment. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 
57, 119–126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2019.03.006 
Du, X., Wang, J., Jegatheesan, V., & Shi, G. (2018). Dissolved oxygen control in 
activated sludge process using a neural network-based adaptive PID algorithm. 
Applied Sciences (Switzerland), 8(2). https://doi.org/10.3390/app8020261 
Flores-Alsina, X., Gernaey, K. V., & Jeppsson, U. (2012). Benchmarking biological 
nutrient removal in wastewater treatment plants: Influence of mathematical model 
assumptions. 
Water 
Science 
and 
Technology, 
65(8), 
1496–1505. 
https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2012.039 
Foley, J., de Haas, D., Yuan, Z., & Lant, P. (2010). Nitrous oxide generation in full-
scale biological nutrient removal wastewater treatment plants. Water Research, 
44(3), 831–844. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2009.10.033 
Franczyk, A. (2019). Using the Morris sensitivity analysis method to assess the 
importance of input variables on time-reversal imaging of seismic sources. Acta 
Geophysica, 67(6), 1525–1533. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11600-019-00356-5 
Ghosh, S., Gorelsky, S. I., George, S. D. B., Chan, J. M., Cabrito, I., Dooley, D. M., 
Moura, J. J. G., Moura, I., & Solomon, E. I. (2007). Spectroscopic, computational, 
and kinetic studies of the μ4-sulfide-bridged tetranuclear CuZ cluster in N 2O 
reductase: pH effect on the edge ligand and its contribution to reactivity. Journal 
of 
the 
American 
Chemical 
Society, 
129(13), 
3955–3965. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/ja068059e 
Gillot, S., Capela-Marsal, S., Roustan, M., & Héduit, A. (2005). Predicting oxygen 
transfer of fine bubble diffused aeration systems - Model issued from dimensional 
analysis. 
Water 
Research, 
39(7), 
1379–1387. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2005.01.008 
Giraldo, E. (2012). Nitrous Oxide Emissions from Wastewater Treatment Plants. A 
==PAGE:44==
Balancing Act. Proceedings of the Water Environment Federation, 2009(4), 357–
376. https://doi.org/10.2175/193864709793901419 
Guldbrand, A. (2006). Industrial Electrical Engineering and Automation System 
earthing. 1(1), 14. 
Guo, G., Wang, Y., Hao, T., Wu, D., & Chen, G. H. (2018). Enzymatic nitrous oxide 
emissions from wastewater treatment. Frontiers of Environmental Science and 
Engineering, 12(1). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11783-018-1021-3 
Henze, M., Gujer, W., Mino, T., & van Loosedrecht, M. (2015). Activated Sludge 
Models ASM1, ASM2, ASM2d and ASM3. In Water Intelligence Online (Vol. 5, 
Issue 0). https://doi.org/10.2166/9781780402369 
Henze, Mogens, Gujer, W., Mino, T., Matsuo, T., Wentzel, M. C., Marais, G. v. R., & 
Van Loosdrecht, M. C. M. (2018). Activated sludge model No.2D, ASM2D. 
Journal 
of 
Materials 
Processing 
Technology, 
1(1), 
1–8. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0273-1223(98)00829-4 
IPCC. (2014). Topotactical growth of indium sulfide by evaporation of metal onto 
molybdenite. 
In 
Journal 
of 
Crystal 
Growth 
(Vol. 
218, 
Issue 
2). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-0248(00)00575-3 
Jia, W., Liang, S., Ngo, H. H., Guo, W., Zhang, J., Wang, R., & Zou, Y. (2013). Effect 
of phosphorus load on nutrients removal and N2O emission during low-oxygen 
simultaneous nitrification and denitrification process. Bioresource Technology, 
141, 123–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.02.095 
K. Al-Ahmady, K. (2011). Mathematical Model for Calculating Oxygen Mass Transfer 
Coefficient in Diffused Air Systems. AL-Rafdain Engineering Journal (AREJ), 
19(4), 43–54. https://doi.org/10.33899/rengj.2011.26795 
Kampschreur, M. J., Temmink, H., Kleerebezem, R., Jetten, M. S. M., & van 
Loosdrecht, M. C. M. (2009). Nitrous oxide emission during wastewater 
treatment. 
Water 
Research, 
43(17), 
4093–4103. 
==PAGE:45==
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2009.03.001 
Khudenko, B. M., & Shpirt, E. (1985). HYDRODYNAMIC PARAMETERS OF 
DIFFUSED AIR SYSTEMS. 20(7), 905–915. 
Kim, J. H., Guo, X., & Park, H. S. (2008). Comparison study of the effects of 
temperature and free ammonia concentration on nitrification and nitrite 
accumulation. 
Process 
Biochemistry, 
43(2), 
154–160. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procbio.2007.11.005 
Kopf, K. N., & De los Reyes, F. L. (2012). Quantification of the denitrification gene 
NOSZ in a full scale wastewater treatment plant using qPCR. WEFTEC 2012 - 
85th Annual Technical Exhibition and Conference, 6(January 2012), 3772–3778. 
https://doi.org/10.2175/193864712811708266 
Law, Y., Ye, L., Pan, Y., & Yuan, Z. (2012). Nitrous oxide emissions from wastewater 
treatment processes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological 
Sciences, 
367(1593), 
1265–1277. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2011.0317 
Lee, J. (2018). Development of a Model to Determine the Baseline Mass Transfer 
Coefficient in Bioreactors (Aeration Tanks). Water Environment Research, 
90(12), 2126–2140. https://doi.org/10.2175/106143017x15131012187999 
Lotito, A. M., Wunderlin, P., Joss, A., Kipf, M., & Siegrist, H. (2012). Nitrous oxide 
emissions from the oxidation tank of a pilot activated sludge plant. Water 
Research, 46(11), 3563–3573. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2012.03.067 
Ma, C., Jensen, M. M., Smets, B. F., & Thamdrup, B. (2017). Pathways and Controls 
of N2O Production in Nitritation-Anammox Biomass. Environmental Science and 
Technology, 51(16), 8981–8991. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b01225 
Massara, T. M., Solís, B., Guisasola, A., Katsou, E., & Baeza, J. A. (2018). 
Development of an ASM2d-N2O model to describe nitrous oxide emissions in 
municipal WWTPs under dynamic conditions. Chemical Engineering Journal, 
==PAGE:46==
335(August 2017), 185–196. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2017.10.119 
Matter-Müller, C., Gujer, W., & Giger, W. (1981). Transfer of volatile substances from 
water 
to 
the 
atmosphere. 
Water 
Research, 
15(11), 
1271–1279. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0043-1354(81)90104-4 
Myers, S. (2019). Nitrous Oxide and Gas Transfer in Full-Scale Activated Sludge 
Basins. 
Myhre, G., D., Shindell, F. ‐M., Bréon, W., Collins, J., Fuglestvedt, J., Huang, D., 
Koch, J. ‐F., Lamarque, D., Lee, B., Mendoza, T., Nakajima, A., Robock, G., 
Stephens, T., Takemura, & Zhang, H. (2015). Global Warming Potential Values. 
Greenhouse Gas Protocol, 2014(1995), 2–5. 
Ni, B. J., Pan, Y., Guo, J., Virdis, B., Hu, S., Chen, X., & Yuan, Z. (2017). CHAPTER 
16: Denitrification Processes for Wastewater Treatment. In RSC Metallobiology 
(Vols. 
2017-Janua, 
Issue 
9). 
The 
Royal 
Society 
of 
Chemistry. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/9781782623762-00368 
Ni, B. J., & Yuan, Z. (2015). Recent advances in mathematical modeling of nitrous 
oxides emissions from wastewater treatment processes. Water Research, 87, 336–
346. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2015.09.049 
Osada, T., Shiraishi, M., Hasegawa, T., & Kawahara, H. (2017). Methane, nitrous oxide 
and ammonia generation in full-scale swine wastewater purification facilities. 
Frontiers 
of 
Environmental 
Science 
and 
Engineering, 
11(3). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11783-017-0933-7 
Peng, L. (2015). Understanding nitrous oxide production by ammonia oxidizing 
bacteria in an enriched nitrifying sludge. 
Ramírez-Melgarejo, M., Gassó-Domingo, S., & Güereca, L. P. (2019). Evaluation of N 
2 O Emissions in Wastewater Treatment Systems: a Comparative Analysis of 
Emission Between Case Studies of Developed and Developing Countries. Water, 
Air, and Soil Pollution, 230(2). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-019-4086-0 
==PAGE:47==
Rosso, D., & Stenstrom, M. K. (2014). Alpha Factors in Full-Scale Wastewater 
Aeration Systems. Proceedings of the Water Environment Federation, 2006(7), 
4853–4863. https://doi.org/10.2175/193864706783762940 
Schulthess, R. v., & Gujer, W. (1996). Release of nitrous oxide (N2O) from denitrifying 
activated sludge: Verification and application of a mathematical model. Water 
Research (1996) 30(3) 521-530. https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0043-1354(95)00204-
9 
Siripong, S., & Rittmann, B. E. (2007). Diversity study of nitrifying bacteria in full-
scale municipal wastewater treatment plants. Water Research, 41(5), 1110–1120. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2006.11.050 
Skelland, A. H. P. (1974). Diffusional mass transfer. In New York : Wiley (Vol. 4). 
Wiley. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/aic.690210337 
Soler-Jofra, A., Pérez, J., & van Loosdrecht, M. C. M. (2021). Hydroxylamine and the 
nitrogen 
cycle: 
A 
review. 
Water 
Research, 
190, 
116723. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2020.116723 
Stenstrom, M. K., & Gilbert, R. G. (1981). Effects of alpha, beta and theta factor upon 
the design, specification and operation of aeration systems. Water Research, 15(6), 
643–654. https://doi.org/10.1016/0043-1354(81)90156-1 
Tallec, G., Garnier, J., Billen, G., & Gousailles, M. (2006). Nitrous oxide emissions 
from secondary activated sludge in nitrifying conditions of urban wastewater 
treatment plants: Effect of oxygenation level. Water Research, 40(15), 2972–
2980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2006.05.037 
Tumendelger, A., Alshboul, Z., & Lorke, A. (2019). Methane and nitrous oxide 
emission from different treatment units of municipal wastewater treatment plants 
in 
Southwest 
Germany. 
PLoS 
ONE, 
14(1), 
1–17. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0209763 
Unisense. (2020). Climate impact from nitrous oxide emission - a Danish case. 2–3. 
==PAGE:48==
Valkova, T., Parravicini, V., Saracevic, E., Tauber, J., Svardal, K., & Krampe, J. (2020). 
A method to estimate the direct nitrous oxide emissions of municipal wastewater 
treatment plants based on the degree of nitrogen removal. Journal of 
Environmental 
Management, 
279(April 
2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.111563 
Valverde-Pérez, B., Ramin, E., Smets, B. F., & Plósz, B. G. (2015). EBP2R - An 
innovative enhanced biological nutrient recovery activated sludge system to 
produce growth medium for green microalgae cultivation. Water Research, 68, 
821–830. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2014.09.027 
van der Lans, R. (2000). Gas-liquid interphase transport. Advanced Course on 
Environmental Biotechnology, 2000, 16–17. 
von Sperling, M. (2007). Basic principles of wastewater treatment. In Biological 
wastewater treatment series (Vol. 2). 
Wan, X., Baeten, J. E., & Volcke, E. I. P. (2019). Effect of operating conditions on 
N2O emissions from one-stage partial nitritation-anammox reactors. Biochemical 
Engineering 
Journal, 
143(December 
2018), 
24–33. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2018.12.004 
White, C. J., & Lehnert, N. (2016). Is there a pathway for N2O production from 
hydroxylamine oxidoreductase in ammonia-oxidizing bacteria? Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113(51), 
14474–14476. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1617953114 
Wu, C., Peng, Y., Wang, S., Li, X., & Wang, R. (2011). Effect of sludge retention time 
on nitrite accumulation in real-time control biological nitrogen removal 
sequencing batch reactor. Chinese Journal of Chemical Engineering, 19(3), 512–
517. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1004-9541(11)60014-1 
Zhou, N., Dang, C., Zhao, Z., He, S., Zheng, M., Liu, W., & Wang, X. (2019). Role of 
sludge retention time in mitigation of nitrous oxide emission from a pilot-scale 
==PAGE:49==
oxidation 
ditch. 
Bioresource 
Technology, 
292(August), 
121961. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2019.121961 
 
