==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Modelling Changes to EEG Microstates
Induced by Schizophrenia
Fabian Martin Mager (s190212)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
b
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Schizophrenia is a chronic mental disorder characterized by distortions in thinking,
perception, emotion, language, sense of self, and behaviour. Treatment tries to mit-
igate psychotic symptoms, as the etiology of schizophrenia is not well understood.
A better understanding of the etiology will improve both diagnostics and treatment
of the disease. Aberrant brain electrical activity in patients with schizophrenia has
been previously reported. Electroencephalography (EEG) is a direct and instanta-
neous measure of brain electrical activity over time, and can be used as a tool to
identify global functional states.
The EEG signal can be parsed into successive,
recurrent, short-time periods of semi-stable topographies. These semi-stable EEG
topographies, called microstates, last around 100 ms before rapidly transitioning in
a non-continuous manner. I analyse four minutes resting-state EEG of 72 healthy
controls and 33 antipsychotic-naïve patients with schizophrenia, and investigate mi-
crostate dynamics such as duration, occurrence, coverage and Global Explained Vari-
ance. I apply nine different variations of the commonly used microstate analysis. I
find that seven distinct spatial patterns are needed to optimally describe the given
EEG data. Group averaged microstate topographies reveal high similarity between
schizophrenia patients and controls. Patients with schizophrenia show a significantly
decreased duration of microstate D, as well as a decreased duration and coverage of
microstate A. No difference was observed in microstate C duration, as opposed to
previously-reported findings in medicated patients. My results confirm a shortening
of microstate D duration, raise new questions regarding the influence of medication
on microstate dynamics, and can be used for cognitive research in schizophrenia.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for
acquiring a M. Sc. degree in Biomedical Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, July 1, 2021
Fabian Martin Mager (s190212)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Lars Kai Hansen, Karen Marie Sandø Andersen and Bjørn
Ebdrup for their outstanding guidance throughout this thesis. I am truly grateful for
the trust, time and effort you expressed from the very beginning to the very end of
this project. The professional constellation and dynamic of this group work enabled
me to learn and develop continuously throughout the project. The weekly meetings
have been extremely helpful and served as solid basis for my personal process. I hope
to continue working with all of you in the near future. Thank you!
I would also like to thank all the good hearted people around me for their constant
care and support in these times of diminished social contact.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Schizophrenia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Why this Research is Relevant
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
State of the Art Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Conceptual Framework
11
2.1
Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Electroencephalography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Microstate Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.4
Hypothesis Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3
Methods
29
3.1
Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.2
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.3
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.4
Microstate Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3.5
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4
Results
47
4.1
Preprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.3
Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.4
Backfitting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
4.5
Statistical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5
Discussion
65
6
Conclusion
71
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
A Preprocessing Pipelines
73
B Correlation Tables
75
B.1
K = 4, Literature Sorting, Competitive Fit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
B.2
K = 4, Literature Sorting, Overall Fit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
B.3
K = 4, Global Sorting, Competitive Fit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
B.4
K = 4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
B.5
K = 7, Global Sorting, Competitive Fit
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
B.6
K = 7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
C Summary Statistics
89
C.1 Lit. Approach, K = 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
C.2 Global Approach, K=4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
C.3 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Compet. Fit . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
C.4 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Overall Fit
. . . . . . . . . . . .
93
C.5 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit . . . . . . . . . .
94
C.6 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit . . . . . . . . . . .
95
C.7 Global Approach, K=7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
C.8 Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Comp. Fit . . . . . . . . . . .
98
C.9 Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit . . . . . . . . . . . 100
D ANOVA Results
103
D.1 Lit. Approach, K = 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
D.2 Global Approach, K=4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
D.3 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Compet. Fit . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
D.4 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Overall Fit
. . . . . . . . . . . . 110
D.5 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit . . . . . . . . . . 112
D.6 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit . . . . . . . . . . . 114
D.7 Global Approach, K=7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
D.8 Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Comp. Fit . . . . . . . . . . . 118
D.9 Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit . . . . . . . . . . . 120
E Post-Hoc Comparison - Tables
123
E.1
Lit. Approach, K = 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
E.2
Global Approach, K=4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
E.3
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Compet. Fit . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
E.4
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Overall Fit
. . . . . . . . . . . . 126
E.5
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit . . . . . . . . . . 127
E.6
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit . . . . . . . . . . . 128
E.7
Global Approach, K=7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
E.8
Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Comp. Fit . . . . . . . . . . . 130
E.9
Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit . . . . . . . . . . . 131
F Post-Hoc Comparisons - Figures
133
==PAGE:11==
Contents
ix
F.1
Lit. Approach, K = 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
F.2
Global Approach, K=4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
F.3
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Compet. Fit . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
F.4
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Overall Fit
. . . . . . . . . . . . 140
F.5
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit . . . . . . . . . . 142
F.6
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit . . . . . . . . . . . 144
F.7
Global Approach, K=7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
F.8
Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit . . . . . . . . . . 148
F.9
Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit . . . . . . . . . . . 150
Bibliography
153
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Schizophrenia has been described for the first time over a hundred years ago, but
remains one of the least understood mental disorders today. Over the years, science
developed a vague understanding of environmental and genetic risk factors, but its
exact etiology and pathophysiology causes remain unknown. Schizophrenia continues
to be a highly misunderstood and stigmatised mental disorder. This thesis attempts
to contribute to our understanding of schizophrenia using a discrete, global brain state
model, called microstates. The microstate model parses the Electroencephalographic
(EEG) signal into a sequence of quasi-stable state of scalp maps.
The temporal
dynamics of these scalp maps are used for as pathological features.
This chapter
gives an introduction to schizophrenia followed by a introduction and state of the art
literature summary of the research approach taken in this work.
1.1
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a chronic, severe mental disorder characterized by distortions in
thinking, perception, emotions, language, sense of self and behaviour [1]. Persistent
delusions and hallucinations, thought disorder, and experiences of influence, passiv-
ity, or control, are the most prevalent symptoms [2]. Schizophrenia affects around 20
million people world wide [1] and around 29.000 people in Denmark (2019) [3]. Of
the latter, approximately half are treated in psychiatric clinics [3]. Schizophrenia-like
symptoms were reported for the first time in the early 19’th century. Cases might
have existed before, but remained unrecognised or hidden within other mental ill-
nesses [4]. The term schizophrenia (from the Greek schizein, ”to split”, and phren,
”mind”) was first introduced by Eugen Bleuler in 1911 [5]. Even today, 100 years
later, people suffering from schizophrenia are often exposed to stigma, discrimina-
tion, violation of human rights [1], and become more frequently homeless [6]. People
with schizophrenia are 2-3 times more likely to die early, due to physical illness and
the long term effect of antipsychotic treatment [1], as well as higher suicidal rates [6].
Symptoms of schizophrenia stretch along three behavioural dimensions. The positive
dimension, or positive symptoms, refers to gained behavioural states, such as halluci-
nations, delusion, disorganized thought and speech, and bizarre behaviour. Negative
symptoms refer to decreased or lost behavioural states, such as emotional expres-
sion, reduced facial expression, anhedonia, or inability to feel pleasure, and alogia, or
inability to speak, social withdrawal and diminished ability to begin or sustain activi-
ties. Last but not least, cognitive symptoms include memory and attention problems,
reduced decision-making capacity, poor social cognition, and abnormal movement
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
patterns [6]. These symptoms do not occur as a result of other health conditions
or mental disorders, such as brain tumours, mood disorders, delirium, drug abuse
etc. [2]. The onset occurs in late adolescence and the early-twenties for men, and
late-twenties or early-thirties for women [7]. The reason for a delayed onset of women
compared to men is unknown.
The etiology of schizophrenia has yet to be discovered, but several risk factors have
been identified. Firstly, certain genes have been found to increase the risk of develop-
ing schizophrenia. People more closely related to an affected person are more likely
to develop schizophrenia [8]. Multiple genotypes have been linked with higher risk
of developing schizophrenia [9, 10]. The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is a genetic syn-
drome associated with a 30-fold increased risk to develop schizophrenia [11]. Genes
alone however, do not fully explain the development of schizophrenia. There are en-
vironmental and physiological risk factors that accompany an inherited susceptibility
[7]. Antipsychotic drugs, which block dopamine receptors in the brain, were found to
alleviate symptoms of schizophrenia. This led to the assumption that affected people
experience either excessive dopamine release or an increase in dopamine receptors [12].
Furthermore, the effect of repeated use of amphetamine, which promote dopamine
release, resembles the symptoms of schizophrenia. This hypothesis, known as the
dopamine hypothesis, does not generalize, as not all schizophrenia patients respond
to antipsychotic treatment [6].
As the etiology of schizophrenia is not well understood, medication and treatment
tries to mitigate the symptoms. A group of drugs called antipsychotics have shown
to decrease intensity and frequency of psychotic symptoms [7]. Most antipsychotics
act on dopamine D2 receptors, some act on other receptors such as serotonergic
5HT2, α1-adrenoceptor, H1-histamine and muscarinic receptors. So called first gener-
ation or typical antipsychotics (FGAs) decrease the aﬀinity of dopamine D2 receptors.
Amongst others, FGAs cause adverse extrapyramidal effects, such as muscle spams
in eyes, face and neck [6, 13]. So-called second generation or atypical antipsychotics
(SGAs) show less aﬀinity to dopamine D2 receptors [6]. They have less adverse ex-
trapyramidal effects, but are more likely to cause metabolic syndrome, including obe-
sity, hypertension and diabetes mellitus [13]. The optimal choice of medication isn’t
always clear, as different patients respond to different types, and even combination
of types have been suggested [14]. Other treatment possibilities include psychosocial
treatment, which consists of cognitive behavioural therapy, behavioural skill training,
supported employment, and cognitive remediation interventions [7].
Full recovery from schizophrenia is rare. Treatment focuses on the control of psychotic
symptoms. Full recovery however implies social and vocational functionality, as well
as freedom of psycho-pathological symptoms [15]. Only one of seven patients with
schizophrenia fully recovers, and despite different treatment options, this proportion
has not increased over the last years[16].
==PAGE:15==
1.2 Why this Research is Relevant
3
1.2
Why this Research is Relevant
A deeper understanding of the pathophysiology of schizophrenia will improve both di-
agnostics and treatment of the disease. Current diagnosis of schizophrenia is based on
ratings of symptoms as described in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM) [17] by the American Psychiatry Association (APA) or the Interna-
tional Classification of Diseases (ICD) [2] by the World Health Organization (WHO).
The rating of symptoms is subjective and implies homogeneity among patients. Diag-
nostics should include neural systems, as well as cellular and molecular levels, which
resemble pathophysiological and etiologic processes [18]. Therefore, there is intensive
search for biological markers in psychiatry in current research. Reliable test however
remain elusive [19].
Biomarkers make diagnostics less subjective and might shed light into the etiology of
schizophrenia. The Biomarkers Definitions Working Group defines a biomarker as a
”characteristic, that is objectively measured and evaluated as an indicator of normal
biological processes, pathogenic processes, or pharmacologic responses to a therapeu-
tic intervention” [20]. Biomarkers can be used for the diagnosis, but might not be
directly embedded in the causal chain of a disease [21]. Further, so called phenotypes
(from the Greek phainein; ”to show”; typos, ”type”) are directly measurable charac-
teristics of morphology or functions [18]. Phenotypes are influenced by the underlying
genotype, environmental factors and interactions between the two [22]. Phenotypes
might therefore not be ideal for the classification of psychiatric diseases with complex
genetic relations. Correspondingly, Gottesman and Gould defined the term endophe-
notype, an ”internal” phenotype as a means to identify ”downstream” phenotypical
and ”upstream” genetic traits [23]. Schizophrenia has a strong and complex genetic
component, thus defining endophenotypes for schizophrenia might yield substantial
information about the etiology of the disease.
Electroencephalography (EEG) can contribute to the search for biomarkers in psychi-
atric diseases. EEG is a direct and instantaneous measure of brain electrical activity
over time [24]. To record EEG, electrodes are placed on the scalp. These electrodes
pick up electromagnetic signals produced by cortical neurons. EEG is cheap, non-
invasive, has reasonable spatial and good temporal resolution [25].
Many studies
have reported differences in EEG frequency bands across multiple psychiatric disor-
ders, including schizophrenia (e.g. [26]). Other studies suggested certain event-related
potentials (ERP) as a biomarker for schizophrenia (e.g. [27]). This study will pursue
the concept of EEG microstates as a means to find biomarkers for schizophrenia.
1.3
State of the Art Literature
In 1987, Lehmann et al. were the first to model multichannel resting-state EEG
recordings as a limited number of quasi stable states - also called ”microstates” [28].
Microstates might be defined as successive, short-time periods of semi-stable topogra-
phies, each lasting around 100 ms before transitioning in a non-continuous manner
==PAGE:16==
4
1 Introduction
[29]. EEG signals can be parsed into a sequence of microstates. The characteris-
tics of microstates and their sequences have shown to vary across behavioural states
(e.g. [30]), personality types (e.g [31]) and psychiatric disorders [32]. The reader is
referred to Chapter 2.3.1 for a detailed introduction to the conceptual framework of
microstates.
I performed a systematic literature search using the library service Findit of the
Technical University of Denmark. The first search term includes ”title:schizophrenia
AND title:microstate”, which yielded 30 search results for articles. Including ”resting-
state” reduced the number to 18 papers (1st March 2021). Most paper have been
published after the turn of the millennium. Other relevant papers were identified
using cross-referencing.
Number of Microstates
Most studies suggest a model using four microstates. The four microstates are labelled
A, B, C, and D, where each has a distinct topographic map (Figure 1.1). The four
maps show right-frontal to left-posterior (A), left-frontal to right-posterior (B), mid-
line to frontal-occipital (C), and midline to frontal distribution (D)[33]. As far as four
microstates are used, this thesis uses the same syntax as suggested by literature. This
choice of four microstates is somewhat arbitrary, but reasonable considering that only
four microstates explain around 70% of total topographic variance [33]. This leaves
around 30% of the data unexplained. Including more microstates improves the fit, but
as many studies report only four microstates, the result comparison becomes more
diﬀicult. Michel and Koenig [29] gathered microstate topographies of various studies,
and argue that topographies have overall high similarity when four microstates are
being used. They also highlight the certain differences, especially among microstate
classes C and D. Due to similar topographies, assignment between the two classes
becomes more diﬀicult. Increasing the number of clusters might eliminate cross-talk
between microstates C and D. Custo et al. [34] for example propose a split of mi-
crostate C into two topographies. The correct number of microstates might depend
on the data itself and the measure of fit that is being used (see Chapter 2.3.2). Custo
et al. [34] argue for a meta-criterion consisting of 11 individual optimization crite-
ria. Summing up, the optimal number of microstates should be identified for each
individual data-set, but as comparing between studies is much easier using the four
microstates, this number is often chosen prior to the analysis.
The comprehensive reviews by Khanna et al. [33] from 2015 and Michel and Koenig
[29] from 2018 provide a good overview of methodical background, behavioural states
and disorders related to microstate characteristics in resting-state. These studies have
been used as a guideline for the following sections.
Microstates and Discrete Epochs of Cognition
Microstates originate from the observations by Lehmann and colleagues, namely that
EEG scalp topographies follow certain patterns. Since, microstates have been sug-
==PAGE:17==
1.3 State of the Art Literature
5
Figure 1.1: State of the Art modelling and labelling of microstates.
Most stud-
ies choose to extract four microstates from resting state EEG data.
The four maps show right-frontal to left-posterior (A), left-frontal to
right-posterior (B), posterior to anterior (C), and a posterior to central-
anterior distribution (D). The scalp is shown from above, and the noise
is pointing upwards. Obtained from [33] (edited).
gested as correlates for certain cognitive models. In the 1990s, Lehmann et al. formu-
lated the ”atoms of thought” hypothesis, stating that microstates might represent cer-
tain building blocks, steps or contents during information processing [28, 36, 37].This
perception of microstates aligns well with the view of a temporal discontinuous cog-
nition, or ”pulses of consciousness”, as formulated by James [38] in 1891. Microstates
might be seen as elementary psychophysiological units of cognition and emotions
[35]. Changeux and Michel argue that microstates are correlates of spontaneous co-
activations of workspace neurons [39]. The neuronal workspace hypothesis combines
the idea of parallel, non-conscious processing, with global integration in a conscious
workspace. The hypothesis defines two computational spaces. Firstly, a network of
parallel and functionally different processors. Secondly, a global workspace, whose
task it is to physically integrate and interconnect distant areas. The workspace neu-
rons become spontaneously co-activated, forming discrete patterns of activity. These
global representations might be recorded by EEG microstates. The theory of discrete
epochs of cognition raises the question how transitions between states occur. The the-
ory of metastable coordination dynamics assumes that components of the metastable
brain differ and couple at the same time. They differ enough to neglect each other’s
behaviour through phase locking, but still influence each other enough to exhibit
temporally structured behaviour [40]. Another interesting observation that fits to
the temporal dynamics of microstates and the theory of discrete epochs of cognition
is the fact that information processing is parcelled in blocks of around 100 ms, similar
to the microstate timescale (see e.g. [41]).
Microstates and Neuropsychiatric Disorders
Many studies have investigated differences in topographic and temporal microstate pa-
rameters. These studies look at the number of microstates, duration, occurrence and
coverage as well as syntax, i.e. transition rules from one microstate to another (see
section 2.3.2). A number of neuropsychiatric disorders have been linked with changes
in microstates characteristics. Disorders such as dementia, depression or panic disor-
==PAGE:18==
6
1 Introduction
ders have frequently been investigated using EEG microstates in resting-state. The
comprehensive review by Khanna et al. from 2015 provides a good overview of the
topic [33]. Most of the studies use microstate parameter such as duration, frequency
of occurrence and coverage (as introduced in Chapter 2.3.2). Khanna et al. include
mainly two neuropsychiatric diseases in her study, namely schizophrenia and demen-
tia. The most recent study on frontotemporal dementia shows decreased lifespan of
microstate C. Earlier studies showed shorter microstate duration, and even correla-
tions between the degree of shortening and clinical symptoms [42]. Other authors,
though very few, report abnormalities of microstate parameters in patients with Tour-
rette syndrome [43] and panic disorder [44].
Schizophrenia remains the most prominently studied disorder. A large part of re-
searchers found abnormal microstates characteristics in populations with schizophre-
nia compared to healthy controls (e.g. [45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 32]). Table 1.1 provides an
overview of studies investigating temporal features using four microstates in affected
people and healthy controls.
Even though the comparison between studies seems
diﬀicult due to small sample sizes and effect of medication, findings on temporal mi-
crostate parameters converge. From Table 1.1 it can bee seen that there is general
consensus on the shortening of microstate D duration in people with schizophrenia
compared to healthy controls (e.g. [45, 46, 49, 47, 48, 32, 50, 51]). Furthermore,
Koenig et al. [45] found a positive correlation between the shortening of microstate
D and paranoid symptom severity. Microstate D shows decreased coverage and oc-
currence in patients with schizophrenia (e.g. [48, 32, 52, 51]). Microstate B seems to
behave similarly to microstate D, showing decreased duration and coverage (e.g. [45,
46, 47, 32, 50]). Evidence however is not as clear for microstate B as for microstate
D. In contrast, microstate C shows increased duration, occurrence and coverage in
schizophrenia patients (e.g. [48, 32, 50, 51]). Similar behaviour has been observed for
microstate A, which shows an increase in coverage and occurrence (e.g. [45, 46, 50,
52]). Summing up, this evidence suggests that microstate D and eventually B are less
prominent, whereas microstate C, and in some cases A, are more prominent in pa-
tients with schizophrenia compared to healthy subjects. Note that not all studies find
the same spatial configurations of the four microstate maps (e.g. [53]), or choose a dif-
ferent number of microstate to start with [54]. These studies are excluded from direct
comparison, but show similar trends regarding shortening of microstate duration in
people with schizophrenia. It is important to consider differences in patient samples
in the studies mentioned above. Some patients are medication-naïve at the time of
recording (indicated with //), others are not (indicated with \), and some consider
high-risk patients (indicated with \\\). Mackintosh et al. investigated differences of
microstate dynamics of medicated vs. medication-naïve first episode schizophrenia pa-
tients using four microstates. The authors found significant decreases of microstate A
and significant increases of microstate B in medicated compared to medication-naïve
patients.
==PAGE:19==
1.3 State of the Art Literature
7
Microstates and Resting State Networks
The idea of microstate aberrations in neuropsychiatric disorders is particularly inter-
esting considering the connection to resting-state networks. Previously, the cognitive
functioning of the brain has been seen as a localized, feed-forward process. The devel-
opment of modern neuroimaging techniques has challenged that view. The anatomi-
cal structure as well as spatio-temporal patterns during cognitive tasks revealed large
scale network organizations in the human brain. Brain networks resemble the idea
of parallel processing distributed over various regions. Furthermore, the brain is now
considered to be driven by endogenous or intrinsic demand, as opposed to the pre-
viously assumed stimulus-response paradigm [56]. Meehan and Bressler [57] define
intrinsic functional networks as collections of brain regions showing statistically inter-
dependent activity patterns at rest. These so-called Resting State Networks (RSNs)
are functionally connected brain networks, that are active in task-negative states [33].
The Default Mode Network for example, one of the first networks that has been found,
shows patterns of deactivation during goal directed behaviour, and heightened activ-
ity during self-referential behaviour.
Functional connectivity Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fcMRI) revealed more intrinsic functional networks, whereby brain activ-
ity, e.g. of hemodynamic kind, is correlated with specific seed regions. Figure 1.2
shows such correlated regions of hemodynamic activity. Both EEG and fcMRI can
be used to identify RSNs. A few studies identified a connection between RSNs and
EEG microstate series. Britz et al. [58] convoluted the goodness of fit measure for
series of four microstates with the blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal.
They found significant correlations for the four microstates with RSNs associated
with phonological processing (microstate A), the visual (microstate B) and saliency
(microstate C) network, as well as attention network (microstate D) [58]. Other stud-
ies find similar correlations with BOLD signals, their results however are diﬀicult to
compare due to different methodologies. Another approach uses source localization to
identify underlying brain networks that generate microstate topographies. Custo et
al. [34] applied a method called topographic electrophysiological state source-imaging
(TESS) [59]. TESS fits a general linear model to the EEG data based on a set of
estimated microstates. In a second step, the resulting time-course of model coeﬀi-
cients is fitted to the inverse solution of the EEG data, resulting in a set of voxels
for each microstate map. Using this method in a follow up study, Custo et al. found
a set of regions prominent in all microstates, which align with what has been found
in other studies regarding brain networks.
In addition to these hubs, they found
distinct regions for each microstate, similar to the findings by Britz et al. [58]. Van
De Ville et al. investigate fractal properties of microstate dynamics. Microstate have
previously been shown be short-term dependent [46]. Using a wavelet-based fractal
analysis, Van De Ville et al. showed that microstates are scale-free over six dyadic
scales, ranging from 256 ms to 16 s. These properties maintain when locally shuffling
microstates, but diminishes when fixing microstate duration. The findings by Val-
lianatou suggest memory-like behaviour of microstate dynamics, and might explain
rapid reorganization and adaptation of functional networks [13].
==PAGE:20==
8
1 Introduction
Figure 1.2: Brain networks, shown with their seeds (blue dot) and networks with
intrinsically correlated hemodynamic activity. Obtained from [57].
1.4
Research Question
In this work, I perform a microstate analysis on a group of antipsychotic-naïve patients
with schizophrenia and paired healthy controls of young individuals. The aim is to
find similarities and dissimilarities in the microstate model between the two groups.
The research question asked is as follows:
Does the microstate model of resting-state EEG data result in different
temporal parameters for patients with schizophrenia compared to healthy
controls?
I hypothesize that the two groups show differences in microstate duration, occur-
rence and coverage. I furthermore hypothesize a decreased appearance of microstate
D, as well as an increased appearance of microstate C in schizophrenia patients com-
pared with healthy controls. I validate the model by comparing the results to the
ones found in literature.
==PAGE:21==
1.4 Research Question
9
Table 1.1: Literature review of EEG microstates and schizophrenia. Comparison
between microstate features of medication naïve schizophrenia patients
(\), medicated schizophrenia patients (//) and high-risk patients (\\\)
compared to healthy controls.
Duration
Occurrence
Coverage
Reference
Year
Patients
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
Koenig et al.
1999
\
·
▼
·
▼
▲
·
▲
▼
▲
▼
▲
▼
Lehmann et al.
2005
\
·
▼
·
▼
▲
·
▲
·
▲
▼
·
·
Kikuchi et al.
2007
\
▼
·
·
▼
▲
▲
▲
·
·
·
▲
▼
Nishida et al.
2013
\
▼
▼
·
▼
▲
·
▲
·
−
−
−
−
Andreou et al.
2014
//
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
▼
Andreou et al.
2014
// \\\
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
Tomescu et al.
2015
//
·
·
▲
▼
·
·
▲
▼
·
·
▲
▼
Cruz et al.
2020
//
·
▼
▲
▼
·
·
▲
▼
·
·
▲
▼
Baradits et al.
2020
//
·
▼
▲
▼
▲
▼
·
▲
▲
▼
·
▲
Bock et al.
2020
\
·
·
·
·
▲
·
·
·
▲
·
·
·
Bock et al.
2020
\ \\\
·
·
·
·
▲
·
·
▼
·
·
·
▲
Wang et al.
2021
//
·
·
▲
·
▼
▼
·
▼
▲
·
▲
·
Legend:
\ medication-naïve patients, // non-medication-naïve patients, \\\ high-risk patients
▲Increase (p ≦0.05),
▲Increase (0.05 ≤p ≦0.1),
· No change,
▼Decrease (0.05 ≤p ≦0.1),
▼Decrease (p ≦0.05),
−Missing
==PAGE:22==
10
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 2
Conceptual Framework
The analytical tools used in this work depend on a view fundamental clinical, method-
ological and mathematical frameworks. This chapter provides an overview of basic
concepts and terms. Note that vectors are denoted by lower-case bold letters and ma-
trices in upper-case bold letters (see Chapter 2.3.1, Table 2.2 for a detailed description
on notation).
2.1
Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders
Schizophrenia is a a mental disorder characterized by ”fundamental and characteristic
distortions of thinking and perception” (World Health Organization), and has been
introduced in Chapter 1. Schizophrenia includes a range of symptoms:
> Hallucinations, delusion, disorganized thought, speech, and bizarre behaviour
> Lack of emotional expression, reduced facial expression, anhedonia, alogia
> Social withdrawal and diminished ability to begin or sustain activities
> Memory and attention problems, reduced decision-making capacity, poor social
cognition, abnormal movement patterns
These symptoms vary from individual to individual, and are experienced in differ-
ent ways. The International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health
Problems (ICD) provides a global standard for diagnostic classifications. The current
version, ICD-11, was published in June 2018, succeeding is predecessor ICD-10. One
of the major changes from ICD-10 to ICD-11 is the coding system of diseases. As for
the data set used in this project, subjects were classified according to ICD-10. Table
2.1 provides an overview of mental and behavioural disorder classification according
to ICD-10 [62].
2.2
Electroencephalography
This section provides a physiological and technical understanding of underlying mech-
anisms in Electroencephalography (EEG). I will mention commonly used analytical
tools in the field, before moving on to the analytical tools used in this work.
EEG measures instantaneous brain electrical activity over time. Almost a century
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Conceptual Framework
Table 2.1: Classification of schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders ac-
cording to ICD-10 [62].
Disorder
Code
Schizophrenia
F20
Paranoid schizophrenia
F20.0
Hebephrenic schizophrenia
F20.1
Catatonic
F20.2
Undifferentiated schizophrenia
F20.3
Post-schizophrenia depression
F20.4
Residual schizophrenia
F20.5
Simple schizophrenia
F20.6
Other schizophrenia
F20.7
Schizophrenia unspecified
F20.8
Schizotypal disorder
F21
Persistent delusional disorder
F22
Delusional disorder
F22.0
Other persistent delusional disorder
F22.8
Unspecified persistent delusional disorder
F22.9
Acute and transient psychotic disorders
F23
Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder w/o symptoms of schizophrenia
F23.0
Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder w/ symptoms of schizophrenia
F23.1
Acute polymorphic psychotic disorder w/ symptoms of schizophrenia
F23.2
Other acute predominantly delusional psychotic disorders
F23.3
Other acute and transient psychotic disorders
F23.8
Acute and transient psychotic disorder, unspecified
F23.9
Induced delusional disorder
F24
Schizoaffective disorders
F25
Schizoaffective disorder, manic type
F25.0
Schizoaffective disorder, depressive type
F25.1
Schizoaffective disorder, mixed type
F25.2
Other schizoaffective disorders
F25.8
Schizoaffective disorder, unspecified
F25.9
Other nonorganic psychotic disorders
F28
Unspecified nonorganic psychosis
F29
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Electroencephalography
13
ago, Hans Berger measured voltage changes as a result of human brain activity by
placing electrodes on the human scalp. At the time, most research focused on fre-
quency analysis of EEG signals. Around 35 years later, the P3 component in EEG
signals was found. The P3 is an event-related change of potential elicited by decision
making. It is one of the most studied components in EEG research. Today, EEG is
an acknowledged method used in neuroscientific research and by clinicians.
2.2.1
Brain Anatomy and Function
Anatomically, the brain can be divided into three major sections - hindbrain, mid-
brain and forebrain.
The hindbrain consists of the medulla oblongata, pons and
cerebellum. The superior and inferior collicoli make up the midbrain, which is in its
structure similar to the spinal cord. The forebrain is divided into two hemispheres of
cerebral cortex and contains central masses of grey matter, basal ganglia, rostral end
of the neural tube, diencephalon, thalamus and hypothalamus. As a rule of thumb,
the more rostral the brain region the lower the functional level, such that survival
ensuring functions are at the very centre of the brain [63].
The rich potential of EEG related to neurological disorders and abnormalities emerges
from the central role of the cerebral cortex in movement initiation, conscious aware-
ness of sensation, complex analysis, and expression of emotions and behaviour [64].
The cerebral cortex is the outermost layer of the forebrain. It consists mostly of the
six-layered neocortex, and many ridges (or gyrus) and grooves (or sulcus) and is arbi-
trarily divided into different lobes: the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes
(Fig. 2.1). The cortex contains mostly pyramidal cells, named after their shape, and
fewer non-pyramidal cells. It is the electromagnetic characteristics of those cells that
are measured by EEG. The overall structure of the cerebral cortex is consistent.
Figure 2.1: Different lobes of the cerebral cortex: frontal (yellow), parietal (red),
temporal (green), and occipital lobe (blue) [65].
==PAGE:26==
14
2 Conceptual Framework
2.2.2
Physiological Mechanism
The physiological mechanism behind EEG signals is based on electromagnetic charac-
teristics of cortical neural communication. The measured electrical signal originates
from postsynaptic potentials of neurons in the human cortex. Postsynaptic signals
arise after an action potential, when neurotransmitter are released into the synaptic
cleft and bind to postsynaptic receptors, either inhibiting or exciting the postsynaptic
neurons. These potentials tend to be synchronous for specific regions [24]. Correlated
synaptic transmissions cause parallel dipoles. These dipoles can be measured by an
electrode placed on the scalp, orthogonally to the neuron itself. The obtained signal
is called EEG. The amplitude increases as the number of local population of syn-
chronous ”firing” neurons increases [66]. It is further dependent on size, location and
orientation of the cortical region, as well as on the amount of signal damping and
spatial smearing, e.g. by the scalp, skull, brain liquid and other tissue [67].
2.2.3
Recording EEG
When recording EEG, scientists have to follow certain procedures, dependent on envi-
ronment, equipment and aim of the study. Electrodes are placed on specific positions
on the scalp. The number of electrodes placed on the scalp varies. Most often, 32, 64,
128 or 256 electrodes are used. By increasing the number of electrodes, one increases
spatial information, which comes with the cost of larger data size and complexity.
Ideally, the placement of electrodes should be the same between all subjects. It is
common to place the electrodes on the scalp according to the international recognized
10-20 system. The name refers to the fact that distances between neighbouring elec-
trodes are either 10 or 20% of front to back (nasion to inion) or right to left (auricular)
distances. The labelling of electrodes is based on the brain region above which they
are located (O for occipital, T for temporal, C for central, F for frontal, P for parietal)
as well as on the lateral distance from the midline (odd numbers indicate left, even
numbers indicate right side - see Fig. 2.2).
2.2.4
Common EEG Analyses
Traditionally, EEG analysis includes frequency content and Event Related Potential
(ERP). Frequencies in the human brain are below 100 Hz. The frequency spectrum
is divided into a number of frequency bands: δ (<4 Hz), θ (4–7 Hz), α (8–13 Hz), β
(14–30 Hz), and γ (>35 Hz). Each frequency band has been associated with certain
physical states or activities. Attention and inhibitory control, for example, is inversely
related to α-band activity.
ERPs are systematic changes of electrical potential. These changes in potential are
time locked to sensory, motor or cognitive events.
They allow for rapid, implicit
and unsolicited cognitive assessment. ERPs occur when a large number of similar
oriented neurons fire in synchrony, and are described by latency after stimulus and
amplitude. The P300 (or P3) was discovered almost 60 years, and has been of major
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Electroencephalography
15
Figure 2.2: The 10-20 system of EEG electrode positioning. The labelling of elec-
trodes is based on the brain region above which they are located.
Nomenclature: O for occipital, T for temporal, C for central, F for
frontal, P for parietal. Odd numbers indicate left, even numbers in-
dicate right side lateral distance from midline.
Obtained from [68]
(edited).
interest since.
It has a positive amplitude and a latency range of about 250-400
ms. The P300 is often examined in the so called ”odball paradigm”, where repetitive
stimulus is presented with deviant stimuli. P300 latency is thought to resemble speed
of cognitive classification, where shorter latency shows less cognitive effort.
2.2.5
Independent Component Analysis
Each electrode placed on the scalp records a mixture of signals from various sources.
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) can be used to identify signal sources. De-
lorme [69] explains
”In the original scalp channel data, each row of the data recording ma-
==PAGE:28==
16
2 Conceptual Framework
trix represents the time course of summed in voltage differences between
source projections to one data channel and one or more reference channels
(thus itself constituting a linear spatial filter). After ICA decomposition,
each row of the data activation matrix gives the time course of the ac-
tivity of one component process spatially filtered from the channel data.”
(Delorme)
Unwanted sources can be removed from the source signal, and the original scalp
signal can then be reconstructed from the reduced source matrix without removing
sample portions. ICA, in mathematical terms, is a matrix factorization, in which the
original signal matrix X is transformed into the product of the mixing matrix A and
the source matrix S. Consider xn to be n’th time sample vector of the signal X with
M elements, the noiseless generative model with K sources can then be written as
xn =
K
X
k
am,ksk,n
(2.1)
= Asn.
(2.2)
Equation 2.2 is in itself not deterministic. The source signal is found by defining
a cost function, which forces S to be as non-Gaussian as possible. The IC model is
similar to the microstate model (see Equation 2.4). The important difference is the
mixing matrix A and activation matrix Z - components in the activation matrix of
the microstate model are not independent.
2.3
Microstate Analysis
In contrast to the common frequency approach described above, this thesis inves-
tigates resting-state EEG signals using microstates.
This chapter introduces the
conceptual and mathematical basis of microstates.
2.3.1
Introduction to Microstates
Microstate analysis is yet another EEG method to retrieve spatio-temporal dynamics
of the human brain. Yet it differs from more traditional frequency- or connectivity
analyses. Microstate analysis examines the EEG signal as series of maps of potential
distributions over the scalp.
Scalp map representations consider the signal of all
electrodes, thereby creating a global map of functional states [33].
Instantaneous
scalp maps are also called topographies. At first sight, these topographies seem to
change randomly. In the ’80s and ’90s however, Dietrich Lehmann and colleagues
observed that scalp maps in ongoing EEG incorporate only a few, archetypal, quasi-
stable topographies (see Figure 2.3) [70][28]. They found that these scalp topographies
change in non-continuous matter, remaining stable for about 100 ms before rapidly
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Microstate Analysis
17
transitioning into another topography. These distinct and quasi-stable topographic
templates are called microstates. Microstates might be defined as ”successive, short-
time periods during which the potential scalp distribution remains semi-stable” [29],
transitioning in a non-continuous manner from one to another. It is the characteristics
of those that are investigated in microstate analysis. Microstate characteristics have
since been associated with various behavioural states [30], personality types [31],
psychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia [45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 32] and resting state
networks [58, 33, 34].
Figure 2.3: EEG time series and quasi-stable scalp map topographies. A: 12 second
resting state EEG recording. B: 2 second close up during alpha burst. C:
Successive scalp map topographies at Global-Field-Power peaks. As can
be seen from C, the topography configurations are stable for a certain
period of time, before rapidly transitioning into another configuration.
Note that sequence of maps displayed here is not continuous. Maps
are only shown at GFP maxima, as they have the highest signal to
noise ratio and as stable scalp maps are more diﬀicult to display in a
continuous map series. Obtained from [29].
==PAGE:30==
18
2 Conceptual Framework
2.3.2
Methodology and Mathematical Concepts
Microstate analysis consists of two steps: Clustering and backfitting. Clustering is
an unsupervised machine learning approach, used for exploratory data analysis. Ele-
ments are grouped or clustered in a way that within-group elements are more similar
to each other than across-group elements. During microstate analysis, similar scalp
topographies are clustered together.
We want to cluster scalp topographies, such
that within cluster topographies have higher similarity than those across different
clusters. In this context, the centre or mean of a specific cluster represents a specific
microstate.
During backfitting, all time points of the original EEG time series are labelled accord-
ing to their most similar microstate. This results in a series of labels, mapping each
time point to a microstate. Smoothing reduces the chance of random labelling in the
series. One can extract temporal features from the series of microstate labels, as well
as spatial features from the microstate topographies. There are different methodolo-
gies on how to implement these steps, the overarching objective however remains the
same, and will be explained in more detail below. I refer to the work of Poulsen
et al. [71], who developed the Microstate toolbox as a extension to EEGlab [72], a
free, open-source EEG toolbox by Delorme and Makeig and to Figure 2.4 as a general
guideline for the following sections.
To ease readability and transparency with the Microstate toolbox, I use the same
notation as Poulsen et al. (see Table 2.2). Vectors will be denoted by lower-case, bold
Roman letters, e.g. x, y, matrices by upper-case, bold Roman letters, e.g. X, Y .
Otherwise, variables can be assumed to be scalars, e.g. a, b, N.
Table 2.2: Definition of notation applied in this section and the rest of the thesis.
Vectors are denoted by lower-case, bold Roman letters and matrices by
upper-case, bold Roman letters..
Notation
Definition
Dimensions
C
Number of EEG channels
N
N
Number of time samples
N
n
the n’th time samples
N
K
Number of microstate classes
N
X
EEG data
RC×N
xn
The n’th time sample of X
RC×K
A
Prototypical maps for K microstate clusters
RC
ak
Prototypical map of the k’th cluster
RC
ln
Microstate label of the n’th EEG sample
N ∈[1; K]
zn
Microstate activation of the n’th EEG sample
RK
As mentioned above, the microstate approach aims to parse the EEG time-sequence
into a discrete sequence of quasi stable topographies. Using the notations from table
2.2, the microstate model with K microstates for average reference EEG data X at
==PAGE:31==
2.3 Microstate Analysis
19
Figure 2.4: The method of microstate clustering. First, the GFP curve is calculated.
Topographies at maximum GFP points are then extracted and used
for clustering. The clustering groups topographic maps into a smaller
set of maps based on at similarity metric.
Most studies of resting-
state EEG microstates choose to define four clusters, corresponding
to four microstates (labelled A–D). In the final step, the microstates
are backfitted to the original maps at maximum GFP, which are then
labelled according to the most similar microstate. The final result is a
sequence of microstates. Obtained from [33].
==PAGE:32==
20
2 Conceptual Framework
each sample n can be expressed as
xn =
K
X
k
zn,kak + ϵn
(2.3)
= zn,lnaln + ϵn,
(2.4)
where xn as well as ak are both vectors of length C, and zn is a vector of length K,
holding all zeros except in position ln. The ln’th element of zn is a scalar, representing
the activation of the ln’th microstate. Finally, ϵn serves as the error term at sample
n.
Equation 2.4 manifests an important a priori of the microstate model.
The
microstate model does not allow for overlap between microstates. There must be one,
and only one active microstate at each point in time. This restriction builds on the
idea of sequential functional microstates. The zero-elements of zn ensure that only
one microstate can be active at each sample n.
Global Field Power Peak Extraction
Global Field Power (GFP) is an indicator of global brain activity. It is calculated as
the root of the mean squared potential differences over all electrodes at time n
GFPn =
v
u
u
t
PC
i (xn,i −xn)2
C
.
(2.5)
Peaks of GFP represent high electric field strength, and have therefore high signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR). Furthermore, it has been shown that topographies are stable
around peaks of GFP, changing topography or polarity rather at minima of GFP [25].
In principle, topographies at each point in time could be used for the cluster analysis.
More often, only topographies of GFP-peaks are used for the cluster analysis, as they
have higher SNR
Clustering
Clustering aims to find subsets in data structures by grouping data together. Data
points are divided into non-overlapping clusters, such that elements within clusters
are more ”similar” than across clusters. Independent from the dimensionality of the
data, we can define distance metrics between two data points. The smaller the dis-
tance between two data points, the more similar they are. A distance measure such
as the euclidean distance or the cosine similarity could be chosen. Clustering algo-
rithms work in an iterative way, maximizing within class similarity and minimizing
across class similarity. The most commonly used clustering methods for microstate
analysis include: K-means, modified K-means, and Topographic Atomize and Agglom-
erate Hierarchical Clustering (TAAHC and AAHC). K-means approaches identifies
==PAGE:33==
2.3 Microstate Analysis
21
K clusters, hierarchical clustering is a nested approach [73].
Microstate clustering of resting-state EEG data has a few adaptions compared to
traditional clustering methods. Successive topographies often show similar configura-
tions, but with inverse polarity, due to the reciprocal interaction of excitatory and
inhibitory neural circuits [25]. Since polarity oscillation are considered the same to-
pography, the polarity of a given topography should not be considered during the
cluster assignment. This is effectively achieved by adapting the distance measure
between topographies.
There are two main groups of clustering algorithms, partitioning and hierarchical
clustering methods. Both, K-means and modified K-means belong to the partition-
ing clustering methods, whereas TAAHC and AAHC belong to hierarchical clustering
methods. The most important difference is that partitioning methods require a pre-
defined number of clusters, opposed to hierarchical clustering methods.
K-means is one of the most basic clustering methods. It starts by choosing K random
samples and defines them as the K cluster centres (or prototypes). K-means iterates
to the following two steps: (1) Assigning each sample to the most similar prototype
and (2) calculating the new prototypes according to the newly assigned samples (e.g.
by averaging). These steps are repeated until a convergence criterion is reached, such
as a fixed number of maximum iterations or constant prototype assignments. In case
of EEG topographies, this is illustrated in Figure 2.5. Each original topography is
assigned to a class using squared correlation as distance metric. Each microstate map
is then updated by calculating the first spatial principle component of all assigned
maps. The first principal component lies along the direction of highest variance in
scalp map. This leads to polarity invariant averaging of cluster maps. Assignment
and map update are than repeated until convergence. The algorithm can be modified
by changing initialization criterion and similarity measures.
==PAGE:34==
22
2 Conceptual Framework
Figure 2.5: Example of microstate clustering of two topographies using a K-means
algorithm.
The top row shows extracted topographies at local GFP
maxima, from which two samples are randomly selected as initial pro-
totypes (here indicated as A and B). In the first run, each original
topography is assigned to a class using squared correlation as distance
metric. Similarity is indicated by the small yellow and green dots, and
class assignment with big circles labelled A and B. Each microstate map
is then updated by calculating the first spatial principle component of
all assigned maps, as shown to the right of the assignment. Assignment
and map update are then repeated (step 2 and 3), until convergence.
Obtained from [25].
==PAGE:35==
2.3 Microstate Analysis
23
Modified K-means clustering builds on the same principle as K-means, but has
two adaptations. Firstly, the topographical maps are polarity invariant. This means
opposite topographical maps are considered the same (ak = −ak). Secondly, the
modified K-means model includes the microstate activation strength. The generative
model for the modified K-means algorithm is the same as general microstates model
introduced in Equation 2.4. The loss function is defined as
E =
N
X
n=1
∥xn −
K
X
k=1
akzk,n∥2,
(2.6)
subject to
zk,nzk′,n = 0
if k ̸= k′
(2.7)
∥ak∥2 = 1.
(2.8)
The first constrain ensures that only one microstate is active at a specific point in
time. The second constrain ensures definiteness of scaling between microstate vector
ak and activation zk. The loss function in Equation 2.6 does not have a close form
solution. Pascual-Marci et al. [74] proposed an iterative scheme to find a. Each data
point n is assigned a label ln. In a first step, the loss function is minimized w.r.t zn,
such that
ˆzln,n = arg min
z
∥xn −alnz∥2= aT
lnxn.
(2.9)
Substituting Equation 2.9 into Equation 2.6 yields
E =
N
X
n=1
∥xn −aln
 aT
lnxn

∥2 =
N
X
n=1
∥xn∥2 −
 aT
lnxn
2 ,
(2.10)
which is can be minimized w.r.t ak, considering the constraints in 2.8. The al-
gorithm proposed by Poulsen et al. [71] iterates these steps in the opposite order,
keeping assignment ln and activation zn,k fixed, optimise for ak and then solve for
zn,k and ln.
As mentioned above, TAAHC and AAHC do not require a pre-defined number of clus-
ters. Agglomerative Hierarchical clustering methods start off by assigning a prototype
to each measurement. It then merges the two most similar clusters stepwise together,
until there is only one cluster left (also called bottom-up approach, as opposed to top-
down approach). This approach has the tendency to inflate a few clusters, and ignore
smaller ones. In that way, short periods of stable topographies might be ignored. To
counteract this effect, AAHC eliminates the cluster which contributes least to the
Global Explained Variance (GEV), and reassigns each of its members. The GEV of
the cluster k is defined as
==PAGE:36==
24
2 Conceptual Framework
GEV(k) =
N
X
n
GEVn,
(2.11)
where the GEV is the squared correlation between EEG sample xn and it’s mi-
crostate prototype aln weighted with its GFP contribution
GEVn = Corr2(xn, aln) ·
GFP2
n
PN
n′ GFP2
n′
.
(2.12)
TAAHC, on the other hand, uses the sum of squared correlation between the
sample and the cluster prototype to assess clusters quality
CorrSum(k) =
N
X
n
Corr(ak, xn).
(2.13)
Using the absolute value of the correlation makes the TAAHC polarity invariant,
but it does not account for topography strength, as opposed to modified K-means.
Once the clusters have been calculated, the optimal number of clusters has to be
identified. Selecting the number of clusters is equivalent to selecting the number of
microstates. This is done by defining a measure of fit, which quantifies how well a
given microstate segmentation fits the data. We want to find the lowest number of
microstates that explain as much as possible of the data. Note that for partitioning
methods such as K-means, clustering is first performed using a range of clusters, and
the optimal number of cluster is assessed subsequently.
The first measure of fit is GEV, which has already been defined in Equation 2.11
and 2.12. GEV alone does not yield any information about the optimal number of
microstates. GEV is a monotonic function, which increases with the number of mi-
crostates included in the model. It measures the similarity between EEG sample and
microstate prototype and has a value between zero and one.
The Cross-Validation (CV) criterion introduced by Pascual-Marci et al. [74] is a mea-
sure of the residual noise, and a lower CV value is therefore desirable. As can be
seen below, the CV criterion is dependent on the number of EEG channels C. The
optimal number of microstates is chosen such that
CV = ˆσ2 ·

C −1
C −K −1
2
(2.14)
is minimized, where ˆσ2 estimates the residual noise variance
ˆσ2 =
PN
n xT
nxn −(alnxn)2
N (C −1)
.
(2.15)
For the optimal number of microstates, the residual noise variance estimator σ is
lowest.
==PAGE:37==
2.3 Microstate Analysis
25
Backfitting
After the optimal number of microstates has been selected, these microstates can be
fitted to each EEG time-sample. This process is called backfitting. EEG samples are
assigned to their most similar microstate. Again, a measure of similarity has to be
chosen. The Global Map Dissimilarity (GMD) is a difference measure of potentials
at each electrode, invariant to signal strength
GMD =

xn
GFPn
−
xn′
GFPn′

√
C
.
(2.16)
Spatial correlation between microstates can be expressed as a function of GMD,
such that
Corr = 1 −GMD2
2
.
(2.17)
Note that GFP is defined in Eq.
2.5.
A low GMD value means topographic
homogeneity and a high GMD value means topographic inversion. For K microstates
and a given EEG signal of length N, the calculation above results in a K × N fitting
matrix. Each point in time is then labelled as the microstate class exhibiting the
highest correlation with the topography at that point. This results in a 1 × N vector
l of elements N ∈[1; K].
Smoothing
Smoothing ensures that microstates do not change randomly from one sample to an-
other. The definition of microstates proposes that one microstate should be active
for a certain period of time, and that transitions between microstates happen instan-
taneously. Consider the label vector l, which maps each sample n to one microstate.
Ideally, we want the labels to be repeated multiple times, before another label takes
over. In practise however, labels at low GFP express a lower amount of continuity, as
a lower SNR ratio prevents accurate labelling. Thus, l has high variance in samples
of low GFP. Smoothing ensures a certain degree of continuity. Pascual-Marci et al.
[74] provide an algorithm based on common smoothing techniques applied in image
analysis. The algorithm minimizes the following function taking the parameters b
and λ, which resemble a trade-off between goodness-of-fit and smoothness of labels
g =
N
X
n
x′
nxn −(akxn)2 −λNbκn.
(2.18)
In Equation ??, κ is the current estimated label ln, and Nbκn is the number of
labels equal to κ in the time interval (n −b) to (n + b), excluding sample n. Thus,
hyper-parameter b determines the size of the neighbourhood, and hyper-parameter λ
provides a non-smoothness penalty term. In theory, λ and b could be estimated using
==PAGE:38==
26
2 Conceptual Framework
cross validation. Due to its high computation demand, this method is impractical
[75]. Therefore, values from previous studies are adapted using trial and error.
Feature Extraction
Microstate features might be divided into three categories: Activation strength, spa-
tial configuration, temporal attributes and transition probabilities [71]. Temporal at-
tributes are most common in microstate literature, and include occurrences, duration
and coverage of a specific microstate k. Duration of a specific microstate is the aver-
age time-span in ms, occurrence the number of appearances per second and coverage
is the total time spent in that microstate relative to the total recording time. Strength
of activation of microstate k can be calculated as the average GFP of all EEG samples
n assigned to k. How well a given microstate explains the EEG samples it has been
assigned to, is expressed by the average GEV and average spatial correlation
GFPk = 1
Nk
N
X
n
GFPn,
for
ln = k,
(2.19)
GEVk = 1
Nk
N
X
n
GEPn,
for
ln = k,
(2.20)
Corrk = 1
Nk
N
X
n
Corr (ak, xn) ,
for
ln = k
(2.21)
= CorrSum(k)
Nk
.
(2.22)
Transition probabilities express how often a certain microstate class is followed
by another [46]. The probability matrix Pi, j gives the probability of microstate j
following microstate i, or P(j|i). Each row i must sum to one, as the total probability
of any state occurring is one. This can be written as
P =


P1,1
P1,2
. . .
P1,K
P2,1
P2,2
. . .
P1,K
...
...
...
PK,1
. . .
PK,K

,
where
K
X
j=1
Pi,j = 1.
(2.23)
Spatial and temporal features, as well as features originating from the sequence
of microstates are extracted for each subject. This allows for statistical testing, ex-
amining differences between groups of subjects.
==PAGE:39==
2.4 Hypothesis Testing
27
2.4
Hypothesis Testing
Hypothesis testing tries to statistically reject or not reject an assumptions regarding a
population parameter. The statistical analysis performed in this work aims to identify
differences between two populations. We can use a classic t-test to test the hypothesis
whether two means µ1 and µ2 are significantly different
H0 : µ1 = µ2
H1 : µ1 ̸= µ2.
(2.24)
Equation 2.24 resembles a two-tailed test, where differences of means is tested in
both directions. Hypothesis testing can have four different outcomes. We can (1)
correctly reject the null-hypothesis or (2) correctly accept the null-hypothesis. There
is also a chance for (3) falsely rejecting or (4) falsely accepting the null-hypothesis.
The latter are called Type-I and Type-II error, respectively. The probability of a
Type-I error is α and for a Type-II error 1 −β, where alpha is the chosen threshold
for rejecting H0 and 1 −β is the power of the performed test.
2.4.1
Independent t-test
For a between-subject experiment, where the means of two different groups are com-
pared, a independent t-test can be chosen if the two samples are normally distributed
with equal variance. The test statistic t is calculated as
t =
¯x1 −¯x2
s
(n1 −1) s2
1 + (n2 −1) s2
2
n1 + n2 −2
s
1
n1
+ 1
n2
,
(2.25)
where ¯x1, ¯x2, s1 and s2 are the means and standard deviations of the samples, n1
and n2 that number of observations in each sample. The p value is calculated using
the t statistic and the Student’s t distribution. Assuming H0 is true, the p value is the
probability of obtaining a result equal to or more extreme than the observed result.
We therefore tend to reject H0 if we observe a very small p value. For threshold α we
reject H0 if p < α and fail to reject H0 if p ≥α [76].
2.4.2
Alternative testing methods
The t test has high power for normal distributed variables with similar variance
and sample sizes. If this is not the case, other test statistics should be considered.
The Welch’s t-test is more robust to unequal variance and sample size.
In case
there are more than two groups, Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) can be used to find
differences in means.
The t-test is a univariate test.
Multivariate statistical test
can be used if the dependent variable is modelled with more than one independent
variable simultaneously. Such models are called multiple regression models.
==PAGE:40==
28
2 Conceptual Framework
2.4.3
Multiple Testing
Multiple testing increases the chance of Type-I error. The more hypotheses are tested,
the higher the chance of finding a low p value by chance. The chance of falsely rejecting
at least one hypothesis is called the Family Wise Error Rate (FWER). Choosing a
lower value of α decreases the risk of falsely rejecting the hypothesis. Several methods
exist to adjust the FWER. The Bonferroni correction downscales the significance level,
such that the i’th hypothesis is rejected only if
pi < α
m,
(2.26)
where m is the number of performed tests, such that FWER < α. The Bonferroni
correction is a conservative method, as it adjusts every p-value, independent from its
ranking. Another way to adjust for multiple testing is to control the False Discovery
Rate (FDR). This method controls the probability of a false-positive finding among
all significant findings. The Benjamini-Hochberg method [77] is one such an example,
and is less conservative compared to the Bonferroni method.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3
Methods
This chapter introduces the methodology used in this study. I will first introduce the
sample of subjects and the data acquisition, then proceed with preprocessing of the
data, microstate analysis, and finally the statistical analysis. The methodology of
this work is inspired by Cruz et al. [32]. Cruz et al. calculated microstate parameters
duration, occurrence and coverage, for medicated schizophrenia patients, unaffected
relatives, and a healthy control group. The authors published striking results, find-
ing highly significant differences between healthy and schizophrenia subjects. Sam-
ple demographics differ slightly. Cruz et al.’s patients are on average around eight
years older than the patients in this study. Patients in [32] are medicated, whereas
patients in this study are antipsychotic-naïve. This should not pose a problem consid-
ering methodology, which is analogous to the common microstate approach explain
in Chapter 2.3.1. All calculations were performed in Matlab using EEGlab [72] and
the microstate plug-in by Poulsen et al. [71]. Statistical analysis was performed using
R. The code can be found in [78].
3.1
Subjects
Data was collected in two time periods. The first cohort was collected between 2008
and 2014, and the second cohort between 2014 and 2019. Data has been previously
published in [79, 80, 81, 82].
The available data-set consists of 156 subjects, 51
of which have a F2x.xx diagnosis (see Table 2.1 for classification of schizophrenia
disorders).
All subject in the disease group are antipsychotic-naïve, first-episode
patients. The other 105 subjects are all healthy controls. The control group matches
the disease group in age, sex, and parental socio-economic status.
Subjects were
recruited from psychiatric centres in the capital region of Copenhagen. Exclusion
criteria from the study are as follows:
> Organic brain damage or disease
> Diseases or processes contraindicated with amisulpride treatment (i.e. allergy,
prolactin-producing tumour, etc.)
> Previous impact-related unconsciousness
> Intellectual disability (IQ<70)
> Involuntary treatment or under judicial ruling
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Methods
In the resulting data set with 156 participants, three subjects were found to meet
one of the exclusion criteria mentioned above. Two data splits were considered to
improve the homogeneity of the data. The full data set includes the full spectrum of
schizophrenia disorders (see Table 2.1). As a first split, I considered including F20.xx
patients only. Some of the subjects reported nicotine or caffeine intake less than one
hour before the data acquisition or intake of Benzodiazepines during the night before
acquisition. These factors are known to influence EEG data. Therefore, a second
split was considered, excluding these subjects. The procedure is visualized in Figure
3.1. The Figure shows a total of four different analyses, each with a unique sample
of subjects.
In addition, some consideration were made regarding the age of participants. The
full data set with 156 subjects, the age range spans from 18 years to 42 years, with
just over one third being under 22 years old.
EEG microstates parameters have
been shown to be influenced by ageing. Koenig et al. [83] showed that microstate
C has increased in duration and occurrence in late adolescence (16-21 years of age),
whereas microstate D dropped in duration and occurrence. At adulthood, this was
partially reversed, but microstate C still is the dominant microstate. Special care has
to be taken regarding age homogeneity between health controls and schizophrenia
patients. After careful consideration, all age groups are included, as the cost of data
loss (around 30%) was considered too high.
==PAGE:43==
3.2 Data Collection
31
Figure 3.1: Overview of data splits prior to the microstate analysis. From the origi-
nal dataset of 156 patients, subjects meeting the exclusion criteria men-
tioned in 3.1 were removed. One subject in the disease group was iden-
tified as non-F2x.xx type. Two more splits have been considered. The
first split excludes subject without an F20.xx diagnosis. The second
split excludes subjects which reported nicotine or caffeine intake less
than one hour before the data acquisition or intake of Benzodiazepines
during the night before acquisition. All in all, four different analyses
are considered.
3.2
Data Collection
Ten minutes of continuous resting-state EEG recordings were performed using the
BioSemi ActiveTwo system (BioSemi B. V., Amsterdam, The Netherlands) with a
==PAGE:44==
32
3 Methods
sampling frequency of 2048 Hz. 64 electrodes were placed on the scalp according to
the 10-20 system (see fig. 2.2, 8 electrodes were placed around the face. From the
eight facial electrodes, one electrode was placed on the tip of the nose and one on each
earlobe, serving as reference electrodes. Two electrodes were placed lateral to each
eye. One electrode was placed superior to the pupil, one inferior to the pupil, and
one slightly lateral to the previous. Electrodes around the eyes track eye movement
and blinks. During acquisition, all participants sat in a sound insulated room (40
dB) and were instructed to sit still, relax, and keep their eyes closed. Participants
were required to withhold from caffeine on the test day and nicotine intake one hour
prior to assessment. A urine sample was performed for cannabis, cocaine, opiates,
and amphetamines screening (Syva® RapidTest d.a.u® 4).
3.3
Preprocessing
EEG preprocessing is necessary to remove noise and artefacts from the data. It usually
consists of filtering, re-sampling, re-referencing and artefact rejection. I implemented
three different preprocessing pipelines. First, I will introduce the overall concept of
preprocessing, and then explain the differences between the three pipelines in detail.
Filtering is needed to eliminate drifts, power-line noise and other sort of noise. The
filter range depends on the frequency of the signal of interest. Brain signals lie below
100 Hz. In the case of microstates, the signal of interest lies in the lower frequency
ranges. One can find two ranges in the microstate literature. Studies use a bandpass
filter of 1 to 40 Hz (e.g. [32, 48, 60] or 2 to 20 Hz (e.g. [83, 46]. Considering the
duration of microstates, around 60 to 120 ms, the signal of interest is captured even
for the more narrow range of 2 to 20 Hz. According to the Nyquist’s theorem, re-
sampling to 128 or 256 Hz should be suﬀicient in both cases. A lower sampling rate
has the benefit of lower computational cost.
Re-referencing of EEG is advocated by many researchers [84]. The most common re-
referencing method used in EEG analysis is average referencing. Average referencing
enforces positive and negative potentials across the entire head to sum to zero [84].
Average reference is computed at each sample n such that
C
X
i=1
xi,n = 0,
(3.1)
where i is the electrode index ranging from 1 to C. For the Biosemi system, it
is recommended to reference the data to one of the reference electrodes Ny (nasal)
or M1/M2 (mastoid). Here, we used the mean of mastoid electrodes M1 and M2 as
reference. According to Biosemi, not choosing a reference electrode will result in a
signal to noise ratio reduction of 40 dB [85]. After artefact rejection, as a final step,
the data was re-referenced to average referencing, as average reference is required for
some of the microstate algorithms.
EEG signals can be contaminated with artefacts. Artefacts originate from for example
==PAGE:45==
3.3 Preprocessing
33
eye-blinks, muscle-movement, defect electrodes or a loose connection. These artefacts
will influence the results in a non-foreseeable way. There are different ways to handle
artefacts and noisy signals. The EEGlab toolbox contains several functions which
perform automated noise and artefact rejection.
They use statistical measures to
identify outliers in the data.
Artefact rejection can be conservative or aggressive.
Certain function parameters determine for example whether no data, part of the
data, or whole channels are removed. Removed channels might be interpolated based
on neighbouring channels. Nevertheless, interpolation results in a loss of independent
information. The goal is therefore to remove as little data as necessary.
ICA decomposition can identify signal sources with high noise or unwanted origin (see
section 2.2.5 for ICA background). ICA does not remove data portions, instead, the
signal is simply reconstructed without artefact sources. Again, we desire to remove
as little contaminated sources as necessary.
Processing Pipelines
The raw data consists of around 10 minute resting state EEG recordings. Each ap-
proach uses a maximum of 4 minutes, as this is considered suﬀicient for microstate
analysis [32]. The first two approaches takes a range from 30 seconds to 4 minutes
and 30 seconds. The last approach takes a range from 30 seconds to 6 minutes and
30 seconds, and is reduced to a total of 4 minute of recording during the cleaning
process.
The first approach was a pipeline used for a connectivity study on the same data
set. The pipeline makes use of EEGlab functions cleanartefacts() and ICA decom-
position. The data was not parsed into epochs. Artefacts could therefore only be
corrected. Rejection of artefacts would lead to gaps in the time-series, and thereby
falsify the microstate sequence. The pipeline makes use of ICA decomposition using
the runica implementation in EEGlab. Independent components are labelled using
ICLabel, which is a neural network trained on EEG data. The function labels all
independent components with a probability belonging to one of the following classes:
> Brain
> Eye
> Muscle
> Heart
> Line noise
> Channel noise
> Other
All components which aren’t most likely to originate from ”Brain” are removed.
A more detailed flow chart of pipeline one is shown in Appendix A.
The second pipeline is equivalent to the one used by Cruz et al. [32] and published in
[86]. The pipeline uses a biweight estimate of the mean to calculate average reference
and robust statistics, as well as ICA decomposition to find artefacts and noise. The
pipeline makes use of the sobi algorithm for IC decomposition. According to [87],
==PAGE:46==
34
3 Methods
the algorithms perform similar. The pipeline does not use ICLabel for component
identification. Eye blink artefacts are detected using correlation of IC components
and electrooculogram channels (vertical and horizontal). Components with generic
discontinuity were identified by comparing neighbouring electrodes. Finally, compo-
nents with low autocorrelation are removed, as they are typically caused by muscle
artefacts. One major difference between the first and the second approach is that
the pipeline by Cruz et al. splits the data into epochs of 4 seconds. Subsequently,
artefact contaminated epochs can be identified and removed entirely, instead of re-
constructing the signal at the artefacts. Microstate dynamics must then be calculated
for each epoch separately. Considering the amount of data needed (4 minutes out of
10 minutes recording), removing epochs does not pose a problem. See Appendix A
for a flowchart of pipeline two.
The third approach combines approaches one and two.
The architecture of the
pipeline was taken from Cruz et al. [32], but the methods for artefact detection were
implemented from EEGlab. This approach removes epochs more aggressively than
the pipeline two. Therefore, 6 minutes (30 seconds to 6 minutes and 30 seconds) of
the total 10 minutes EEG recording are loaded and preprocessed. After removing bad
epochs, the 60 cleanest epochs were selected for further analysis, corresponding to 4
minutes of data. Figure 3.2 shows the individual steps and all parameters. Processing
step are divided into three sections: Resampling and re-referencing (blue), artefact
removal (green) and ICA decomposition (red).
==PAGE:47==
3.3 Preprocessing
35
Figure 3.2: Preprocessing of raw data, third approach.
For readability, the pre-
processing steps are divided into three section: Filtering, resampling
and rerefencing (blue), artifact removal (green) and ICA decomposi-
tion (red). This approach has a similar architecture to [32], but imple-
ments algorithms from [72]. The approach was performed for a 1-40 Hz
bandpass-filter with a sampling rate of 256 and a bandpass-filter of 2-20
Hz with a sampling rate of 128.
==PAGE:48==
36
3 Methods
Validating the Pipelines
All three pipelines were implemented and the results were inspected. Due to the large
amount of data, visual inspection of EEG data and channel spectra was only possible
for a few subjects. The number of removed channels and epoch were counted to keep
track of the amount of removed data per subject. I furthermore performed microstate
clustering on all pipelines, and compared all microstate topographies. In summary,
validation criteria are:
> Visual inspection of EEG time-series
> Visual inspection of channel spectra
> Number of removed channels
> Inspection of scalp maps and microstate topographies
3.4
Microstate Analysis
Microstate analysis was performed in Matlab using the microstate toolbox by Poulsen
et al. [71], a plugin for EEGlab [72]. Some functions had to be adapted for the given
purpose. If so, this will be indicated. For a detailed description of fitting parameter,
see chapter 2.3.2.
The general concept is equivalent to the method explained in
chapter 2.3. Figure 3.3 gives a condensed overview over the different analysis steps.
The following approaches are all variations of the illustrated microstate analysis.
Literature, Global and Individual Approach
I chose to perform microstate analysis using three different approaches, here referred
to as literature, global and individual approach (Figure 3.4). Each approach yields
different sets of microstates. In the literature approach, microstate prototypes are
directly taken from Cruz et al. [32]. The two studies use the same number of elec-
trodes.
The four microstates found by Cruz et al. (K⋆= 4), labelled A-D, were
published in the supplementary material on the publishers website [88].
For the
global approach, I aggregated random GFP peaks across all subjects and performed
microstate clustering. Thus, the global approach yields microstates representing all
subjects. Microstates resulting from aggregated clustering can be directly backfitted
to each individual’s EEG. In the individual approach, cluster analysis is performed for
each individual, resulting in N ×K microstates. Microstates resulting from individual
clustering are backfitted to the corresponding individual’s EEG.
Choosing the number of microstates K
In the approaches mentioned above, the number of microstates is not taken into
account. Regarding the literature approach, the number of microstates Ktar = 4 is
==PAGE:49==
3.4 Microstate Analysis
37
Figure 3.3: Basic steps of microstate analysis, including preprocessing (green), clus-
tering (blue) and backfitting (red). During preprocessing, the raw EEG
data is filtered, cleaned from artefacts and noise of other origin. Mi-
crostate template maps are then found using GFP-peaks of the clean
data. The chosen microstates are backfitted to each point in time of
the original clean EEG data, and each point is assigned one of the mi-
crostates. Smoothing is applied to the sequence of labels and eliminates
by-chance labelling in low signal to noise areas. Finally, temporal pa-
rameters can be calculated and statistics can be performed on different
groups or conditions.
==PAGE:50==
38
3 Methods
Figure 3.4: Overview over the three clustering approaches. The literature approach
makes use of the microstates found by [32]. The individual approach
defines microstates for each subject, whereas the global approach across
all subjects.
Each individual microstate is then sorted according to
some template. Two sorting procedures have been defined, indicated
as ”Competitive” and ”Overall-best” fit. Note that microstates of the
global approach also have to be sorted.
defined by the authors. For the global and individual approach, I choose to run the
analysis for two number of microstates. First, the number was preset to K = 4, as
this eases comparison to literature findings. Second, I estimated the optimal number
of microstates for a range of 4 to 8 microstates, using GEV and the CV criterion as
goodness-of-fit measure.
==PAGE:51==
3.4 Microstate Analysis
39
Clustering Procedure
Figure 3.5: Detailed clustering approach. The clustering procedure shown here in-
cludes two steps. (1) GFP peak extraction and (2)clustering of topogra-
phies at GFP peaks. Step (1) can be performed in two different ways.
Topographies of GFP peaks can be clustered for each individual subject,
or aggregated across subjects before clustering. This results in different
microstate set, indicated ans ”Individual” and ”Global”, respectively..
Figure 3.5 shows the clustering procedure for the individual and global approach.
Both approaches calculated GFP as shown in equation 2.5. For the individual ap-
proach, all topographies at GFP peaks are passed on for clustering. For the global
approach, 500 random GFP-peaks of each subject are aggregated, and the resulting
500 × N topographies are then passed on. All approaches use the modified Kmeans
algorithm implemented in the microstate toolbox [71].
The modified Kmeans al-
gorithm does not account for topography polarity (see chapter 2.3.2 for details on
==PAGE:52==
40
3 Methods
polarity). All topographies are normalized before clustering. Two predefined number
of microstates were used (as discussed above).
Sorting of Microstates
The resulting N × K microstates of each individual are randomly ordered. In order
to compare microstate dynamics across subjects, they need to be matched and la-
belled accordingly. There are different ways to achieve this. The toolbox used for
this study does not provide a way to label microstates across subjects. Koenig et al.
[45] describes a sorting method based on random permutation. Here, clustering is
first performed on the individual level, and K maps are randomly selected as initial
prototypes. For each subject, the best fit for all possible permutations of its K maps
was computed, and the initial maps were than updated according to the mean of the
assigned maps. This is repeated until assignments do no longer change. Cruz et al.
[32] performs Kmeans clustering for each individual, and subsequently clusters all in-
dividual maps for each group. Mean topographies were calculated for healthy controls
and patients. Microstates were then manually labelled according their similarity to
literature microstates listed by Michel [89]. Spatial correlation of microstates across
groups was calculated to ensure high similarity between patients and controls.
In this work, the microstates of each individual is compared a set of template mi-
crostates.
Template microstates can either be taken from the literature or global
approach. Global microstates also have to be sorted before they can be backfitted
or used as templates for the individual approach. Global microstates are sorted ac-
cording to the literature microstates obtained from [32]. If K ̸= 4, for example where
K was chosen as the optimal number of microstates, the four best matching global
microstates were labelled together, and the others were left in random order.
Individual microstates are matched to template microstates using two different fit-
ting methods. The first approach is a competitive fitting method. The procedure is
illustrated in algorithm 1. In a first step, the pair of microstate and template with
the highest correlation coeﬀicient are identified. Then, the microstate is labelled ac-
cording to its paired template. The microstate and its paired template are marked as
”unavailable” for future assignments. This is repeated K times. The second method
finds the overall-best match between microstates and templates. This method tries
each combination of microstate and template, calculates the sum of spatial correla-
tion coeﬀicients and chooses the combination which yields the highest summed spatial
correlation. After microstates have been sorted, topography polarity is matched with
their template. Due to high similarity between global microstates and template mi-
crostates, it does not matter whether a competitive or overall-best fitting approach
is used.
Backfitting
Backfitting describes the process of labelling all subjects of the EEG time-series ac-
cording to its closest microstate. For a specific set of K microstates and for each
==PAGE:53==
3.4 Microstate Analysis
41
Algorithm 1 Competitive Fitting Algorithm. The algorithm calculates the spatial
correlation coeﬀicient between each microstate and its template. It maps the first
best fitting microstates together, then the second best fitting microstates, etc. The
procedure is repeated K times
1: Let K be the number of microstates
2: Let Xi be the i’th microstate, and Aj be the j’th template
3: Calculate spatial correlation Di,j = f (Xi, Aj)
4: for each microstate Xi do
5:
Define [i⋆, j⋆] as argmin
i,j
(Di,j)
6:
Assign label of Aj to Xi
7:
Set Di⋆,j⋆to NaN
8: end for
Algorithm 2 Overall-Best Fitting Algorithm. The algorithm calculates the spatial
correlation coeﬀicient between each microstate and its template. It then computes
the summed correlation for all combination of possible matches between microstate
and templates. The overall-best fit is then chosen across all combinations
1: Let K be the number of microstates
2: Let Xi be the i’th microstate, and Aj be the j’th template
3: Calculate spatial correlation Di,j (Xi, Aj)
4: Define Vm,i as all permutations of N ∈[1; K]
5: for each each row m in V do
6:
Define vi as the i’th element in Vm,i
7:
Calculate sm = PK
i Dvi,j
8: end for
9: Define m⋆as argmax
m
(sm)
10: for each microstate Xi do
11:
Assign label of Aj to XVm⋆,i
12: end for
individuals EEG, scalp maps at each point in time are compared with all microstates
using spatial correlation. This results in a K × N matrix, where N is the number
of subjects in the individuals EEG data. Subsequently, each time subject is labelled
according to the microstate yielding maximum spatial correlation with the scalp map,
using a winner takes all strategy. This results in a 1 × N labelling vector l. In case
of epoched data, there is one label vector l per epoch.
Smoothing of labels prevent random changes of states (see Chapter 2.3.2).
The
smoothing parameter are chosen based on trial and error runs.
Cruz et al. [32]
use a smoothing parameters b = 5 and λ = 10. Pascual-Marci et al. [74] suggest a
smoothing parameter of b = 3, λ = 5, it is however not clear for which sampling
frequency. I applied a larger range of smoothing parameters b and λ before limiting
==PAGE:54==
42
3 Methods
the choice to three combinations:
> b = 3, λ = 10
> b = 4, λ = 10
> b = 5, λ = 10
Microstate singletons are single occurrences of microstates. Even after smooth-
ing, microstate singletons might be found in the sequence. Singletons are not taken
into account when calculating microstate dynamics, as this is the commonly chosen
approach in literature (e.g. in [32]). A trial run revealed that microstate singletons
correspond to around 1-2% of all microstates occurrences. Thus, whether microstate
singletons are removed or not does not pose a problem on the validity of the results.
As described in chapter 3.3, continuous EEG data has been truncated into 4 second
epochs. Thus the duration of the first and last microstate in each epoch is arbitrary.
Furthermore, the order of epochs is affected by the removal of epochs with artefacts.
Therefore, the first and last microstate sequences of each epoch are removed. Both,
removal of singletons as well as removal of the first and last sequence in each epoch,
are not implemented in the microstate toolbox. I applied a length-encoding function
to identify the duration of the first and last epoch as well as singletons. First and last
epochs are entirely removed from the sequence. Singletons were not removed, but
instead not taken into account when calculating duration, occurrence and coverage.
The statistical analysis function by [71] was modified for that purpose. Statistics of
microstate dynamics were calculated for each epoch, and the means over all epochs
were reported.
==PAGE:55==
3.4 Microstate Analysis
43
Figure 3.6: Backfitting procedure illustrated for one specific set of microstates.
Each time-point of each individuals EEG is labelled according to its
closest microstate, using spatial correlation as distance metric.
The
resulting labelling vector l is then smoothed to eliminate random la-
belling. Three different smoothing parameters have been chosen. From
here, temporal features can be extracted.
==PAGE:56==
44
3 Methods
3.5
Statistical Analysis
I performed a statistical analysis to compare the means of duration, occurrence, cov-
erage and GEV between healthy controls and schizophrenia patients. The three differ-
ent microstate approach, different number of microstates, template sets and sorting
methods lead to a total of 9 different set of results. A flow chart of the approaches is
shown in Figure 3.7.
For each path, statistical hypothesis testing investigates whether there is a differ-
ence between healthy controls and schizophrenia patients. The null-hypothesis and
alternative-hypothesis are formulated for each microstate, such that
H0 : µCON,k = µSCZ,k
H1 : µCON,k ̸= µSCZ,k.
(3.2)
For each microstate parameter duration, occurrence, coverage and GEV, I per-
formed a repeated measure ANOVA, where each microstate (A-D for four microstates,
A-G for seven microstates) is taken as within-subject repeated measure.
Group
(control or schizophrenia), cohort (1 or 2) and gender (male or female) are consid-
ered between-subject variable and age is taken as covariate. The repeated-measure
ANOVA assesses whether there is any significant interaction effect between the above
mentioned variables and the continuous outcome variable. The ”time”-effect, or the
effect across microstates, is not of interest.
If there are no significant interaction effects, the post-hoc analysis includes a un-
paired Welch’s t test for each microstate using a Bonferroni adjusted significance
level of α = 5%. The statistical analysis was performed in RStudio. The analysis
follows the example in [90].
==PAGE:57==
3.5 Statistical Analysis
45
Figure 3.7: Overview over method splits using two different number of microstates
and one literature approach, two different clustering approaches, two
different template maps for sorting and two different fitting methods.
Note that for the global approach, global microstates are backfitted to
the individuals data, whereas for the individual approach, individual mi-
crostates are backfitted to the individuals data. This results 9 different
set of results. For each way, statistical hypothesis testing on differences
in means between healthy controls and schizophrenia patients is per-
formed.
==PAGE:58==
46
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 4
Results
4.1
Preprocessing
From preprocessing pipelines one to three, pipeline three shows the best performance.
Evaluation criteria included visual inspection of EEG and channel spectra, amount
of removed data, and EEG scalp maps, including microstate topographies. Results
from pipeline three are presented in the following. Figure 4.1 shows eight seconds
of the EEG time series prior to and after artefact removal (top and bottom, respec-
tively). The EEG recording has 64 channels, of which 42 are shown here. In the top
figure, three of the channels are flat-line channels (10, 33 and 36), which carry the
signal of the reference electrode. There are two bursts in the beginning of the second
epoch (around 300 and 800 ms). In the bottom figure, channels 10, 33, and 36 are
interpolated using neighbouring electrodes and artefacts are corrected. The top part
of 4.2 shows one epoch of EEG signal and corresponding scalp maps prior (left) and
after preprocessing (right). The bottom row shows the EEG power spectrum. Bad
channels can be spotted from the scalp maps. The power spectrum shows a clear peak
in the α-range (around 9 Hz). Additionally, the processed EEG shows less power in
the low frequency range (below 5 Hz). Figure 4.3 shows the microstates of a single
subject for all three preprocessing pipelines. All pipelines use a bandpass filter of 2-20
Hz. Even after preprocessing, there are two channels in the fronto-central region that
can be considered outliers. Interestingly, the pipelines results in different microstate
prototypes.
Table 4.1 shows the amount of removed data across all participants. The pipeline
checks for bad channels, bad epochs, bad channels in each epoch, and heart-, muscle-
, eye- and noise-related independent components. A total of 40 subjects have more
than 6 interpolated channels. The amount of data loss for these subjects is considered
too big, and they are therefore removed from the subject pool. The total amount of
data for each subject is around 4 minutes, divided into 60 epochs of 4 seconds each.
4.2
Subjects
After preprocessing, 40 out of 157 subjects were excluded. Two more subjects were
found to meet the exclusion criteria stated in 3.1. The final set consists of 115 subjects,
of which 77 are healthy controls and 38 are schizophrenia patients of type F2x.xx.
Subject demographics are illustrated in Table 4.2. The full sample of 38 schizophrenia
patients is reduced by two subject for Analysis 2, five subject for Analysis 3, and seven
subjects for Analysis 4. Excluding subject results in a more homogenous sample, but
==PAGE:60==
48
4 Results
Time [ms]
Channel
Time [ms]
Channel
Figure 4.1: EEG artefact rejection. The upper EEG time-series shows 2 epochs,
each 4 seconds of raw data, bandpass-filtered with 2-20 Hz and a notch-
filtered to remove power-line noise. The recording has 64 channels, of
which 42 are displayed. There are furthermore three flat-line channels
(10, 33 and 36). The lower EEG time series shows the fully preprocessed
data. Here, flat-line channels were interpolated and artefacts around
300 and 800 ms in the seconds epoch are corrected.
==PAGE:61==
4.2 Subjects
49
Sample
Sample
Figure 4.2: Comparison of the bandpass- and notch-filtered raw EEG data (left) and
fully preprocessed data (right). The top row shows EEG time-series and
scalp maps for three random time points. As can be seen from the scalp
maps, there are three outlier channels. In the preprocessed data, the
three channels were removed an interpolated. The bottom row shows
power spectral densities. Both figures show a clear power drop at 20 Hz
and a clear alpha-peak around 9 Hz. The raw data shows higher power
in the low-frequency ranges (2-5 Hz) compared to the processed EEG
data.
==PAGE:62==
50
4 Results
Table 4.1: Table of channels and epochs removed during preprocessing pipeline
three. The pipeline checks for bad channels, bad epochs, bad channels in
each epoch, and heart-, muscle-, eye- and noise-related independent com-
ponents. The number of subject with more than 6 interpolated channels
are removed from the subject pool.
Number of Epochs
Number of Channels
Total
Removed
Flat
Bad
Flat & Bad
Per epoch
Bad IC
Min.
53.0
6.0
0.0
1.0
1.0
7.0
0.0
1st Qu.
60.0
19.0
0.0
2.0
2.0
49.3
4.0
Median
60.0
22.0
0.0
4.0
5.0
90.0
7.0
Mean
59.9
21.7
1.6
5.1
6.6
93.0
7.0
3rd Qu.
60.0
25.0
1.0
6.0
7.0
123.5
9.0
Max.
60.0
37.0
57.0
33.0
58.0
287.0
21.0
Pipeline 1
Pipeline 2
Pipeline 3
Figure 4.3: Microstate topographies of a single subject for the three different
pipelines.
Microstates are not sorted.
The three pipelines result in
different topographies.
comes with the cost of a smaller sample size. Here, I choose to run analysis 3 (type
F20.xx only, including substances such as tobacco and caffeine - see Fig. 3.1). In total,
five subjects reported intake of either Benzodiazepines or caffeine on the test day, or
nicotine intake one hour prior to assessment Summary statistics in Table 4.2 show
subjects included in Analysis 3. Figure 4.10 and 4.11 shows microstate parameters of
subjects with reported intake of substances (indicated with blue circles). From here,
these subjects can not be assumed outliers.
==PAGE:63==
4.2 Subjects
51
Table 4.2: Demographic table over healthy controls and subjects with schizophre-
nia. Summary statistics are provided for subjects included in Analysis
3 (F20.xx type only, incl. substances - see Fig. 3.1). Analysis 3 is the
chosen analysis for this report.
Healthy Controls
Schizophrenia
Cohort (1/2)
32/40
16/17
Gender(f/m)
34/38
15/18
Age (mean (sd))
23.0 (5.1)
23 (5.25)
Group
72
33
Dgn. (20.0/20.1/20.3/20.6/20.9)
-
22/1/5/1/4
Analysis (1/2/3/4)
72/72/72/72
38/36/33/31
Tobacco (0/1/2/3)
38/21/11/1/0
17/3/13/0
Cannabis (0/1/2/3/4)
30/38/4/0/0
11/20/5/2/0
Benz (0/1/2)
1/70/1/0
18/12/1
Opioids (0/1)
69/3
27/6
Stimulants (0/1/2)
61/11/0
27/5/1
Hallusinogenes (0/1)
69/3
28/4
Other Drugs (0/1)
0/71/1
31/1
Parental SES (A/B/C)
15/38/13
9/17/5
EDYR (mean (sd))
13 (3.43)
13.2 (2.95)
CGI severity (mean (sd))
-
3.91 (9.914)
GAF symptom (mean (sd))
-
36.8 (10.8)
GAF function (mean (sd))
-
43.4 (14.4)
PANSS positive (mean (sd))
-
2.36 (0.77)
PANSS negative (mean (sd))
-
2.51 (1.06)
PANSS general (mean (sd))
-
2.11 (0.67)
Dgn.: ICD Diagnosis; SES: Parental socio-economic status;
EDYR: Years of education;
PANSS : Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale;
GAF : Global Assessment of Function;
CGI : Clinical Global Impression Scale
==PAGE:64==
52
4 Results
4.3
Clustering
The different approaches lead to three different set of global microstates. The first
approach makes use of K⋆= 4 microstates found by [32], which are shown in the
top row of Figure 4.6. The second clustering approach uses K = 4 microstates. Ad-
ditionally, I determine the optimal number of microstates using the CV-criterion as
measure of fit. Figure 4.5 shows the CV-criterion (top) and GEV for a range of 4 to
8 microstates. It can be seen that the CV-criterion is smallest for K = 7 microstates.
The optimal number of K = 7 microstates explains around 68% of the data, com-
pared to 62.5% when using K = 4 microstates. Microstate topographies from K = 4
to K = 8 are shown in Figure 4.4.
Global microstates show high spatial correlation with literature microstates. Figure
4.6 shows microstate topographies when using using K = 4 and K = 7 microstates
and their spatial correlation with literature microstates. A clustering approach us-
ing K = 4 microstates yields a spatial correlation of 0.96, 0.98, 0.85 and 0.88 for
microstate A, B, C, and D. The four most similar microstates from the clustering
approach using K = 7 microstates show spatial correlations of 0.9, 0.99, 0.98 and
0.99 with microstate A, B, C, and D, respectively. Compared to four microstates,
seven microstates result in higher spatial correlation for microstate B, C, and D, and
slightly lower spatial correlation for microstate A. Appendix B shows heat-maps of
spatial correlation, where correlations have been calculated between individual maps
and global template maps. The heat-maps show generally higher correlations when
using seven microstates, and lower correlations when using literature microstates.
4.4
Backfitting
Microstates resulting from the literature, global and individual approach are all
backfitted to the individual’s EEG using spatial correlation as similarity measure.
Smoothing is applied to prevent random transitions between microstates. I applied
a windowed smoothing method, based on equation 2.18. The effect of smoothing is
illustrated in Figure 4.9. The top row shows the GFP, and the second row shows the
corresponding label vector without smoothing. Microstates assignments are unsta-
ble, changing state during values of low GFP. The third row illustrates labels after
smoothing with b = 3 and λ = 10. After smoothing, microstates appear more stable,
have longer duration and viewer occurrences. From Figure 4.9, it becomes clear that
even after smoothing, the sequence includes microstates of length n = 1, which are
referred to as microstate singletons. The choice of smoothing parameter was based on
comparison to literature values and variance of microstate features. Figure 4.10 shows
the results for microstate duration, occurrence, and coverage using b = 3, λ = 10 as
well as mean values reported by [32]. Microstates singletons are not considered for
temporal parameter calculations. The illustrated results stem from the literature ap-
proach. Other approaches behave equivalently. Note that the comparison between
patient groups is diﬀicult, due to different age, medication status etc. Cruz et al. [32]
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Backfitting
53
Number of Microstates
Figure 4.4: Microstate topographies, resulting from a global clustering approach
using a range of 4 to 8 microstates. Microstates are not sorted. The four
microstates shown in the bottom row are similar to the ones found in
literature. Microstate three and four show right-frontal to left-posterior
(→A) and left-frontal to right-posterior (→B) distributions. Microstate
2 shows a posterior-anterior distribution, with a posterior-central to
frontal tendency (→C), and microstate 1 shows a posterior to frontal-
central distribution (→D). The optimal number of microstates is seven.
Four of the seven microstates have similar distributions.
The three
additional microstates show a left and right lateral distribution, as well
as a posterior-central to frontal distribution.
report a smoothing width of b = 5, smoothing strength λ = 10, as well as removal of
microstates singletons. From the healthy controls one can see that microstate dura-
tion and coverage is similar to the ones found by Cruz et al., microstate occurrence
however is higher. Increasing the smoothing width b increases microstate duration
and decreases occurrences. Figure 4.11 shows the same results when b = 4 and λ = 10.
Microstate durations are longer and occurrences are still higher compared to [32]. Mi-
crostate coverage is similar in both attempts. Standard error of the mean is slightly
lower for b = 3. From Figure 4.10 and 4.11, I argue for a smoothing width of b = 3
and smoothing strength of λ = 10, excluding microstate singletons. Summary statis-
tics of the resulting microstate durations, occurrences, coverages and GEVs for each
approach are shown in Appendix C.
==PAGE:66==
54
4 Results
Figure 4.5: CV-criterion (top) and GEV (bottom) for each number of microstates.
The CV-criterion indicates the optimal number of microstates at K = 7,
which has a GEV of around 68%. The CV-criterion increases for K > 7.
K = 4 microstates yield a GEV of 62.5%.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Backfitting
55
K⋆= 4
K = 4
K = 7
Figure 4.6: Spatial correlations between the template microstates A-D by Cruz et
al. [32] (top row) and global microstates found in this work. The middle
row shows the global microstate for K = 4 and the spatial correlation
with each template microstate. The bottom row shows the four most
correlated global microstates of the K = 7 clustering approach. The
four most correlated microstates when K = 7 leads to a higher spatial
correlation than when using K = 4 microstates.
Figure 4.7: Spatial correlations of mean topographies for patients and controls using
four microstates. An individual clustering and backfitting approach was
applied. Microstates were sorted using a global template and competi-
tive fitting method. Mean microstates were calculated for each group,
from which pairwise spatial correlation was calculated. All microstates
show spatial correlations > 0.99.
==PAGE:68==
56
4 Results
Figure 4.8: Spatial correlations of mean topographies for patients and controls using
seven microstates. An individual clustering and backfitting approach
was applied.
Microstates were sorted using a global template and a
competitive fitting method. Mean microstates were calculated for each
group, from which pairwise spatial correlation was calculated. All mi-
crostates show spatial correlations > 0.99.
Figure 4.9: Smoothing of labels, using four microstates. The Figure shows 200 sam-
ples of a single subject (sampling rate 128 Hz). GFP power (top) and la-
bels resulting from backfitting using spatial correlation (mid). The bot-
tom graph shows the labels after windowed smoothing (b = 3, λ = 10).
A few microstate singletons (e.g. at n = 70) exist after smoothing.
==PAGE:69==
4.4 Backfitting
57
Figure 4.10: Comparison of results for backfitting parameter b = 3 and λ = 10 using the literature approach. Mi-
crostates from Cruz et al. [32] are directly backfitted to the data, and microstate duration, occurrence and
coverage were calculated. Healthy controls are indicated in blue, patients are indicated in red. Black dia-
monds show group means and standard error of the mean. Green stars indicate the corresponding results
by Cruz et al. [32]. Subjects in blue circles highlight subjects with tobacco, caffeine or Benzodiazepines
intake prior to recording.
==PAGE:70==
58
4 Results
Figure 4.11: Comparison of results for backfitting parameter b = 4 and λ = 10 using the literature approach. Mi-
crostates from Cruz et al. [32] are directly backfitted to the data, and microstate duration, occurrence and
coverage were calculated. Healthy controls are indicated in blue, patients are indicated in red. Black dia-
monds show group means and standard error of the mean. Green stars indicate the corresponding results
by Cruz et al. [32]. Subjects in blue circles highlight subjects with tobacco, caffeine or Benzodiazepines
intake prior to recording.
==PAGE:71==
4.5 Statistical Analysis
59
4.5
Statistical Analysis
ANOVA
I performed a repeated measure ANOVA (rm-ANOVA), where each microstate (A-D
for four microstates, A-G for seven microstates) is taken as within-subject repeated
measure. Group (healthy controls or schizophrenia patients), cohort (1 or 2) and
gender (male or female) are considered between-subject variable and age is taken
as covariate. The rm-ANOVA revealed a significant interaction effect of group and
microstate for patients vs. controls. There are no significant interactions between
microstate, group, session and gender. This indicates that group differences of pa-
rameter means depend on microstate classes.
Table 4.3 shows the results of the
rm-ANOVA using K = 7 microstates and a global approach. Rm-Anova results for
other approaches can be found in Appendix D.
Post-Hoc Pairwise Comparison
A pairwise comparison of microstate parameter duration, occurrence, coverage and
GEV revealed significant differences between means of schizophrenia patients and
healthy controls. Significant differences between patients and controls are illustrated
in Table 4.5. P-values have been corrected using the Bonferroni method. In case
of four microstates, p-values were corrected for 16 test, in case of seven microstates,
p-values were corrected for 28 tests. Microstate D is decreased in the individual ap-
proach using four microstates, a global template with a competitive sorting method,
as well as a global approach using seven microstates (both p ≤0.01). The individual
approach with four microstates, a global template and a competitive sorting method
shows furthermore a significant decrease in microstate D occurrence (p ≤0.05). Mi-
crostate A shows a significantly decreased duration (p ≤0.05), coverage (p ≤0.05)
and GEV (p ≤0.01) in patients with schizophrenia for an individual approach, using
the literature microstates by Cruz et al. [32] as templates and an overall-best sorting
method. P-values have also been adjusted using Benjamini-Hochberg method, which
resulted in the same significant findings. All post-hoc pairwise comparison are shown
in Appendix E, and plotted in Appendix F.
==PAGE:72==
60
4 Results
Table 4.3: ANOVA results, K = 7 microstates, global approach.
The analysis
yielded significant age and microstate effects for mean duration, which
indicates that age and microstate class have an effect on microstate dura-
tion. Furthermore, group and microstate show a significant interaction
effect. This indicates that group differences of microstate duration de-
pend on microstate class. The analysis shows a non-significant group,
gender, session, microstate interaction.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
Age
1.00
101.00
5.65
0.02
*
0.02
Group
1.00
101.00
4.59
0.03
*
0.02
Gender
1.00
101.00
0.73
0.40
<0.01
Session
1.00
101.00
0.35
0.55
<0.01
Microstate
3.75
378.57
3.95
<0.01
*
0.02
Group:Gender
1.00
101.00
0.01
0.93
<0.01
Group:Session
1.00
101.00
<0.01
0.97
<0.01
Gender:Session
1.00
101.00
1.99
0.16
0.01
Age:Microstate
3.75
378.57
0.40
0.80
<0.01
Group:Microstate
3.75
378.57
2.67
0.04
*
0.02
Gender:Microstate
3.75
378.57
0.81
0.51
<0.01
Session:Microstate
3.75
378.57
0.92
0.45
0
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
101.00
0.78
0.38
<0.01
Group:Gender:Microstate
3.75
378.57
0.38
0.81
<0.01
Group:Session:Microstate
3.75
378.57
1.44
0.22
0.01
Gender:Session:Microstate
3.75
378.57
1.76
0.14
0.01
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
3.75
378.57
0.42
0.78
<0.01
Table 4.4: Pairwise comparison, K = 7 microstates, global approach.
Pairwise
comparison between the two group on microstate mean duration. The
pairwise comparison shows a significant difference between microstate D.
P-values have been adjusted using the Bonferroni method, correcting for
a total of 28 tests. Microstate E shows to be significant before correcting
for multiple tests.
Micro.
y
group1
group2
n1
n2
stat.
df
p
p.adj
sign
A
Dur
CON
SCZ
77
33
1.17
67.53
0.25
1.00
ns
B
Dur
CON
SCZ
77
33
-0.98
46.63
0.34
1.00
ns
C
Dur
CON
SCZ
77
33
0.32
81.09
0.75
1.00
ns
D
Dur
CON
SCZ
77
33
3.83
102.38
<0.01
0.01
**
E
Dur
CON
SCZ
77
33
3.00
79.70
<0.01
0.11
ns
F
Dur
CON
SCZ
77
33
1.08
70.36
0.28
1.00
ns
G
Dur
CON
SCZ
77
33
1.62
94.35
0.11
1.00
ns
==PAGE:73==
4.5 Statistical Analysis
61
Figure 4.12: Microstate durations and occurrences for healthy controls (red) and
schizophrenia patients (blue) using a microstate model with K = 7
microstates.
Pairwise comparison shows a significant reduction in
mean duration of microstate D, with a Bonferroni adjusted p-value
of p < 0.01.
==PAGE:74==
62
4 Results
Figure 4.13: Microstate
coverage
and
GEV
for
healthy
controls
(red)
and
schizophrenia patients (blue) using a microstate model with K = 7
microstates. Pairwise comparison shows no significant differences.
==PAGE:75==
4.5 Statistical Analysis
63
Table 4.5: Summary of statistical comparisons between schizophrenia patients and healthy controls. Approaches are
split according to set of microstates used for the clustering and backfitting approach, sorting template and
sorting method (see Fig. 3.7). Arrows indicate significant differences of mean parameters between the two
groups. The most prominent finding indicates a decreased duration of microstate D in schizophrenia patients
compared to healthy controls. Microstate A shows a significant decreased duration, coverage and GEV in
patients with schizophrenia. Results for each approach are shown in Appendix E and plotted in F. A link to
the corresponding section in the appendix is provided in the last column.
Microstate Analysis
Result
Num Micro
Appr
Temp
Sort Fit
Duration
Occurrence
Coverage
GEV
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
A
B
C
D
App.
K⋆= 4
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
F.1
K = 4
Global
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
F.2
Individ
Literat
Compet
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
F.3
Overall
▼
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
▼
·
·
·
▼
·
·
·
F.4
Global
Compet
·
·
·
▼
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
▼
·
·
·
·
F.5
Overall
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
F.6
K = 7
Global
·
·
·
▼
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
F.7
Individ
Global
Compet
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
F.8
Overall
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
·
F.9
Legend: ▲Sign. increase (p ≦0.05),
▲Sign. increase (p ≦0.01),
· No change,
▼Sign. decrease (p ≦0.01),
▼Sign. decrease (p ≦0.05)
==PAGE:76==
64
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
I analyse microstate dynamics of antipsychotic-naïve patients with schizophrenia and
healthy controls. I apply several, slightly different variations of the commonly used
microstate analysis. I found that:
1. Microstate analysis is sensitive to noise. Several preprocessing approaches were
needed to reduce the influence of noise on the clustering and backfitting process.
2. Seven microstates are needed to optimally describe our data. Among the seven
microstates, four are very similar to frequently found microstates in literature,
commonly labelled A-D. Similarities to microstates reported by Cruz et al. [32]
are higher when using seven microstates than when using four microstates.
3. Regardless the number of microstates used in the analysis, group averaged mi-
crostates show high correlations between healthy controls and schizophrenia
patients (> 0.99).
4. Different approaches during the clustering and backfitting process result in dif-
ferent microstate dynamics. Combined with the finding in 3, my results suggest
that a global set of microstates exist, which are indifferent in schizophrenia pa-
tients and healthy controls. Abnormalities of microstate dynamics can be found
in schizophrenia patients using these global microstates.
5. The most prominent difference of microstate dynamics between healthy controls
and schizophrenia patients revealed a decrease in microstate D duration. The
hypothesized increase of microstate C shown in [32] could not be reproduced.
A meta-analysis of microstate dynamics revealed that increase in microstate C
has only been reported for medicated patients.
The microstate analysis is sensitive to the selected preprocessing method. EEG
preprocessing included downsampling, bandpass-filtering, artefact removal including
ICA decomposition and re-referencing. Three different preprocessing pipelines were
implemented, of which only one achieved the desired effect. The selected preprocess-
ing pipeline showed to be aggressive. Several precautions were taken, to minimize the
amount of removed data. A bandpass-filter of 2-20 Hz was applied before artefact
removal, which decreased the number of artefacts. A reliability study of microstate
features by Khanna et al. [91] showed a high test-reliability of microstate features us-
ing global microstates, no differences in clustering algorithms modified Kmeans and
TAAHC, as well as reliable results for as little as 8 electrodes. No study has yet in-
vestigated the role of noise in the microstate model. Similar to the findings reported
==PAGE:78==
66
5 Discussion
in Khanna et al., global microstates are consistent for all preprocessing pipelines, and
showed high correlations with microstate found by [32]. Backfitting however always
involves the individual EEG time series. Smoothing relies on the fact that most time
samples, or at least those with high SNR, are assigned to the correct microstate. In
case of noisy EEG signals, microstate assignments will carry a high degree of random-
ness, and smoothing won’t have the desired effect. Temporal dynamics of microstate
features are therefore affected by the backfitting process to noisy EEG data.
Microstate clustering reveals that the optimal number of microstate for the given
data set is seven, opposed to the four microstates commonly used in literature. Seven
microstate explained around 68% of the global variance in the data (compared to
62% when using four microstates). According to the literature reviews by Khanna
et al. [33] and Michel [89], four microstate explain commonly 70% of the data. Thus,
the GEV variance found in this study is slightly lower than the average GEV found
in literature. This might also explain why the optimal number of microstates was
found to be higher. However, most studies do not analyse the optimal number of
microstates, but instead predefine the number of microstates to be four, which eases
comparison across studies. Similar to our findings, Custo et al. [34] identified seven
microstates as the optimal number. The authors proposed a meta-criterion including
11 independent optimization criteria [34]. The optimal number of microstates in our
study was found using a global clustering approach and the CV-criterion [74] as a
measure of fit. Custo et al. report that the four microstates A, B, C, and D found
in literature achieve around 60% GEV, whereas the additional three clustering add
25% GEV, which leads to a total of 85% GEV using seven microstates. The seven
microstates found by [34] are shown Figure 5.1. Microstates by Custo et al. [34] are
not accessible, spatial correlations can therefore not be calculated. Judging visually
however, six of the seven microstates by Custo et al. show high similarity with our
findings. These include the first four microstates A to D, as well microstates F and
G by Custo et al. (Figure 5.1), which correspond to microstates E and F found in
our study (Figure 4.6). Microstate E from Custo et al. [34] shows a clear lateral
distribution and can not be found in our study.
Microstate topographies show high similarities across groups. Mean group-wise mi-
crostate topographies show high correlations between schizophrenia patients and
healthy controls (> 0.99).
This indicates that there are no topographical differ-
ences between patients and controls. A topographical ANOVA (TANOVA) [92] could
be used to test whether topographical variance is significantly different between the
groups. TANOVA calculates the GMD as a measure of difference between two to-
pographies and applies a randomization test to estimate the probability of the ob-
served difference. A few studies found statistical differences between microstate to-
pographies (e.g. [46, 45, 53]), results however differ. Topographical differences, or
in this case similarities, are diﬀicult to interpret. The microstate analysis builds on
the idea of discrete brain states, which express themselves over temporal dynamics
rather than spatial configurations. However, if microstates represent coherent activa-
tions of brain networks, one can argue that identical microstate topographies indicate
intact brain networks of schizophrenia patients on a anatomical and functional level.
==PAGE:79==
5 Discussion
67
Instead, abnormalities in the temporal domain indicate that hyper-coupling between
networks is altered in patients with schizophrenia [93].
A decreased appearance of microstate D in patients with schizophrenia points towards
alterations in engagement of the attention network. A shortening of microstate D
(p ≤0.01) is observed using two different approaches. The first approach defines four
microstates for each individual subject, sorted according to four global microstates.
This approach shows furthermore a significantly reduced coverage of microstate D
in patients with schizophrenia (p ≤0.05). It is the same approach as was used by
Cruz et al. [32]. Several studies reported similar findings [45, 47, 48, 32]. The second
approach defines seven microstates across all subjects, and is discussed further below.
Microstate D has previously been shown to be a neurophysiological correlate with the
attention network [58, 34]. Attention as a cognitive construct is ”the ability to filter
information both externally and internally” (Sheﬀield and Barch 10). Misallocation
of attentional resources might allocate saliency to unimportant objects, which causes
self-explanatory thoughts and finally delusions in affected persons [95]. Connectivity
studies show associations of cognitive measures and network alterations [94]. The
connectivity study by Anhøj et al. [93] analyses the same sample as was done in this
study, and shows results similar to ours. The authors find evidence for altered engage-
ment of the ventral attention network. They conclude that problems of disengaging
several central control networks, including the ventral attention network, lead to the
diverse clinical characteristics in early schizophrenia [93].
A global approach with seven microstate showed a significant decrease in microstate D
duration (p ≤0.01), but no significant differences of GEV between the schizophrenia
patients and healthy controls. This suggests that a set of seven global microstates
exists, indifferent in schizophrenia patients and healthy controls. In this case, the
decrease of microstate D duration shows that differences between subject groups do
not arise from differences in spatial topographies or the quality of fit. The approach
applies the same microstates to each subject, which fit equally well to schizophrenia
patients and controls.
If the true microstate topographies were different between
groups, applying the same set of microstates would yield differences in the goodness
of fit.
Once again, this supports the idea of an intact anatomical and functional
brain in patients with schizophrenia. Consequently, the significantly decreased mi-
crostate D duration implies that the subtle alterations of brain activity in patients
with schizophrenia stem from dynamic, global brain processes rather than specific
anatomical or functional units.
Using an individual clustering and backfitting approach, sorting the microstate ac-
cording to microstates found in [32] with an overall-best fitting method results in a
significantly decreased duration (p ≤0.05), coverage (p ≤0.05) and GEV (p ≤0.01)
of microstate A in patients with schizophrenia. A decrease of microstate A has been
reported by [49, 47]. A decreased coverage of microstate A however has not been
reported. In contrast, microstate C coverage has been shown to be increased [45, 46,
50, 52, 51]. Unfortunately, GEV is not reported in these studies. As GEV is signifi-
cantly decreased in schizophrenia patients, the significant decreases in duration and
occurrence might result from a worse fit of microstate A in schizophrenia patients.
==PAGE:80==
68
5 Discussion
Why this is only the case for an overall-best fit and not for a competitive fit is not
entirely clear. Microstate A has been associated with the phonological network [58].
Anhøj et al. [93], who analysed the same sample, found altered connectivity between
the default mode network and the auditory network. Anhøj et al. however report
inconsistency of findings in connectivity studies regarding the auditory network.
We do not find any significant increases in microstate C duration, as reported by
[48, 32, 50, 51]. This might be due to demographic differences between the stud-
ies. Schizophrenia patients were older in [48, 32] compared to patients in this study.
Another reason might be the chosen hyperparameters in our analysis. A range of
smoothing values were applied, but I was unable to reproduce similar duration and
occurrence values for healthy subjects compared to Cruz et al. [32]. When looking
closely at the results by Cruz et al. [32], one notices that the product of mean du-
ration and mean occurrence for all microstates does not add up. The sum of mean
durations of 72, 71, 90 and 82 ms multiplied with mean occurrences of 1.8, 1.9, 2.5
and 2.3 1
s result in a total of 0.68 seconds. This leaves around one third of the sig-
nal unassigned. It seems unlikely that unassigned samples originate from microstate
singletons only, as these correspond to around 1-2% of occurrences in our analysis.
Another explanation might be that Cruz et al. does not assign noisy samples which
show low correlation with any microstate. When using seven microstates, microstates
E to F cover around 30% percent of the total analysis time. These microstates might
capture noise in the EEG signal.
This observation aligns well with the fact that
microstate A to D are more similar to microstates A to D found by Cruz et al. [32].
Personal communication with the author did not solve the issue of ”missing seconds”
[96].
Interestingly, only studies on medicated schizophrenia patients observed increased
appearances of microstate C (see Tab. 1.1). The effect of medication on schizophre-
nia patients is not entirely understood. Kikuchi et al. [49] compared healthy controls
and unmedicated schizophrenia patients and a follow-up group, split into subgroups of
responding and non-responding patients. The authors found shortened microstate oc-
currences, in particular a decrease in microstate D duration. Furthermore, they found
that only patients in the subgroup of treatment responders resulted in a significant
change of microstate dynamics, and the same subgroup showed a reversed effect of
microstate parameters after treatment. The subgroup of non-responders did not show
significantly different microstate dynamics, neither before nor after treatment. Our
own findings, combined with the meta-analysis presented in table 1.1, suggests that
medication results in an increased appearance of microstate C. The current dataset
includes a follow-up resting state EEG recording of schizophrenia patients, and could
be used to investigate this hypothesis. Several considerations should be taken into
account. First and most important, preprocessing of the data has been a challenging.
The pipeline used in this study shows to be very aggressive. The pipeline reduced the
total sample size by around one fourth. Still, examining all subjects still revealed a
few cases with noisy microstates. The effect of preprocessing on microstate dynamics
is not entirely understood. Second, there are several hyper-parameters that influ-
ence microstate dynamics. This work extensively investigated smoothing parameters.
==PAGE:81==
5 Discussion
69
Other parameters such as the number of maps entered into the clustering algorithm
should be examined. A larger number of maps entered into the clustering algorithm
results in more accurate microstates, but also increases computational cost. Third,
the effect of different clustering algorithms, such as AAHC and TAAHC, should be
investigated. Again, this increases computational cost.
==PAGE:82==
70
5 Discussion
Figure 5.1: The seven microstate found by Custo et al. [34] and the resulting source
activations.
==PAGE:83==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
In conclusion, three approaches showed altered microstate dynamics in schizophrenia
patients. I found that seven microstates describe our data best. Using seven mi-
crostates and a global clustering and backfitting approach, patients with schizophre-
nia showed a significantly decreased duration of microstate D, which confirms pre-
vious findings.
The global approach however, has to my knowledge not yet been
published. Similar results were observed using the more commonly used individual
clustering and backfitting approach. No increase of microstate C has been observed.
A meta-analysis revealed that increases in microstate C has only been observed in
non-medication-naïve patients. Considerations should be made regarding preprocess-
ing and noise in the data.
Our results open avenues for further research. The current study includes follow up
EEG recordings of non-medication-naïve schizophrenia patients. One could test the
hypothesis that medication alters microstate C dynamics.
Patients in early stage
psychosis have a high risk of developing schizophrenia.
Analysing microstates of
high-risk patients together with medication-naïve and non-medication-naïve patients
could add valuable information about the disease’s development. This study does
not investigate microstate sequences, which have been shown to be altered in pa-
tients with schizophrenia [46]. Microstates are not only short-range dependent [46],
but also long-range dependent [60]. Therefore, the sequence of microstate occurrences
might capture information about cognitive processes. Further work is needed to un-
derstand the connection between microstates and cognition. Microstate dynamics
could be correlated with various cognitive variables. Microstates might then be used
not only as pathological markers, but also as psychological markers. These combined
efforts will contribute to a better understanding of the etiology of schizophrenia, and
subsequently lead to improved patient monitoring and more effective treatment.
==PAGE:84==
72
==PAGE:85==
APPENDIX A
Preprocessing Pipelines
==PAGE:86==
74
A Preprocessing Pipelines
==PAGE:87==
APPENDIX B
Correlation Tables
Heat-maps of spatial correlation, where correlations have been calculated between
individual maps and global template maps. Each row corresponds to a single subject,
each column to a microstate. Tables are shown for schizophrenia patients and healthy
controls separately.
==PAGE:88==
76
B Correlation Tables
B.1
K = 4, Literature Sorting, Competitive Fit
B.1.1
Healthy Controls
==PAGE:89==
B.1 K = 4, Literature Sorting, Competitive Fit
77
B.1.2
Schizophrenia Patients
==PAGE:90==
78
B Correlation Tables
B.2
K = 4, Literature Sorting, Overall Fit
B.2.1
Schizophrenia Patients
==PAGE:91==
B.2 K = 4, Literature Sorting, Overall Fit
79
B.2.2
Healthy Controls
==PAGE:92==
80
B Correlation Tables
B.3
K = 4, Global Sorting, Competitive Fit
B.3.1
Schizophrenia Patients
==PAGE:93==
B.3 K = 4, Global Sorting, Competitive Fit
81
B.3.2
Healthy Controls
==PAGE:94==
82
B Correlation Tables
B.4
K = 4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
B.4.1
Schizophrenia Patients
==PAGE:95==
B.4 K = 4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
83
B.4.2
Healthy Controls
==PAGE:96==
84
B Correlation Tables
B.5
K = 7, Global Sorting, Competitive Fit
B.5.1
Schizophrenia Patients
==PAGE:97==
B.5 K = 7, Global Sorting, Competitive Fit
85
B.5.2
Healthy Controls
==PAGE:98==
86
B Correlation Tables
B.6
K = 7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
B.6.1
Schizophrenia Patients
==PAGE:99==
B.6 K = 7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
87
B.6.2
Healthy Controls
==PAGE:100==
88
==PAGE:101==
APPENDIX C
Summary Statistics
Summary statistics of microstate duration, occurrence, coverage and GEV for each
approach. Tables are grouped into patients with schizophrenia and healthy controls.
==PAGE:102==
90
C Summary Statistics
C.1
Lit. Approach, K = 4
Group
variable
n
mean
sd
1
CON
CovA
77.00
0.20
0.04
2
CON
CovB
77.00
0.19
0.04
3
CON
CovC
77.00
0.41
0.07
4
CON
CovD
77.00
0.19
0.05
5
CON
DurA
77.00
73.29
7.87
6
CON
DurB
77.00
71.53
8.03
7
CON
DurC
77.00
110.05
26.72
8
CON
DurD
77.00
71.06
9.96
9
CON
GevA
77.00
0.09
0.02
10
CON
GevB
77.00
0.09
0.02
11
CON
GevC
77.00
0.28
0.07
12
CON
GevD
77.00
0.08
0.03
13
CON
OccA
77.00
2.83
0.47
14
CON
OccB
77.00
2.70
0.41
15
CON
OccC
77.00
3.90
0.41
16
CON
OccD
77.00
2.69
0.49
17
SCZ
CovA
33.00
0.20
0.04
18
SCZ
CovB
33.00
0.20
0.04
19
SCZ
CovC
33.00
0.41
0.06
20
SCZ
CovD
33.00
0.18
0.06
21
SCZ
DurA
33.00
70.75
7.83
22
SCZ
DurB
33.00
72.11
11.07
23
SCZ
DurC
33.00
108.95
23.57
24
SCZ
DurD
33.00
66.58
5.97
25
SCZ
GevA
33.00
0.08
0.02
26
SCZ
GevB
33.00
0.09
0.03
27
SCZ
GevC
33.00
0.28
0.06
28
SCZ
GevD
33.00
0.07
0.03
29
SCZ
OccA
33.00
2.83
0.45
30
SCZ
OccB
33.00
2.84
0.34
31
SCZ
OccC
33.00
4.00
0.29
32
SCZ
OccD
33.00
2.64
0.65
==PAGE:103==
C.2 Global Approach, K=4
91
C.2
Global Approach, K=4
Group
variable
n
mean
sd
1
CON
CovA
77.00
0.22
0.04
2
CON
CovB
77.00
0.21
0.04
3
CON
CovC
77.00
0.26
0.06
4
CON
CovD
77.00
0.31
0.06
5
CON
DurA
77.00
75.16
7.51
6
CON
DurB
77.00
73.80
8.99
7
CON
DurC
77.00
80.83
14.35
8
CON
DurD
77.00
91.27
18.29
9
CON
GevA
77.00
0.10
0.03
10
CON
GevB
77.00
0.10
0.03
11
CON
GevC
77.00
0.14
0.04
12
CON
GevD
77.00
0.21
0.06
13
CON
OccA
77.00
2.95
0.50
14
CON
OccB
77.00
2.87
0.46
15
CON
OccC
77.00
3.21
0.46
16
CON
OccD
77.00
3.47
0.38
17
SCZ
CovA
33.00
0.21
0.04
18
SCZ
CovB
33.00
0.21
0.04
19
SCZ
CovC
33.00
0.26
0.05
20
SCZ
CovD
33.00
0.30
0.05
21
SCZ
DurA
33.00
72.43
7.20
22
SCZ
DurB
33.00
73.77
9.70
23
SCZ
DurC
33.00
80.39
13.64
24
SCZ
DurD
33.00
87.19
9.44
25
SCZ
GevA
33.00
0.10
0.03
26
SCZ
GevB
33.00
0.10
0.03
27
SCZ
GevC
33.00
0.14
0.04
28
SCZ
GevD
33.00
0.20
0.05
29
SCZ
OccA
33.00
2.99
0.46
30
SCZ
OccB
33.00
2.97
0.34
31
SCZ
OccC
33.00
3.27
0.36
32
SCZ
OccD
33.00
3.53
0.43
==PAGE:104==
92
C Summary Statistics
C.3
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Compet. Fit
Group
variable
n
mean
sd
1
CON
CovA
77.00
0.21
0.04
2
CON
CovB
77.00
0.23
0.04
3
CON
CovC
77.00
0.30
0.03
4
CON
CovD
77.00
0.25
0.04
5
CON
DurA
77.00
75.87
9.92
6
CON
DurB
77.00
76.99
9.85
7
CON
DurC
77.00
88.80
12.49
8
CON
DurD
77.00
80.60
12.30
9
CON
GevA
77.00
0.10
0.03
10
CON
GevB
77.00
0.12
0.04
11
CON
GevC
77.00
0.20
0.04
12
CON
GevD
77.00
0.14
0.05
13
CON
OccA
77.00
2.91
0.43
14
CON
OccB
77.00
3.01
0.46
15
CON
OccC
77.00
3.46
0.38
16
CON
OccD
77.00
3.16
0.40
17
SCZ
CovA
33.00
0.21
0.04
18
SCZ
CovB
33.00
0.23
0.04
19
SCZ
CovC
33.00
0.30
0.03
20
SCZ
CovD
33.00
0.25
0.03
21
SCZ
DurA
33.00
73.18
8.51
22
SCZ
DurB
33.00
76.30
8.58
23
SCZ
DurC
33.00
86.84
10.90
24
SCZ
DurD
33.00
77.63
7.56
25
SCZ
GevA
33.00
0.10
0.04
26
SCZ
GevB
33.00
0.12
0.04
27
SCZ
GevC
33.00
0.20
0.04
28
SCZ
GevD
33.00
0.14
0.04
29
SCZ
OccA
33.00
2.90
0.42
30
SCZ
OccB
33.00
3.12
0.35
31
SCZ
OccC
33.00
3.57
0.31
32
SCZ
OccD
33.00
3.22
0.37
==PAGE:105==
C.4 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Overall Fit
93
C.4
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Overall Fit
Group
variable
n
mean
sd
1
CON
CovA
77.00
0.23
0.04
2
CON
CovB
77.00
0.22
0.04
3
CON
CovC
77.00
0.28
0.04
4
CON
CovD
77.00
0.26
0.05
5
CON
DurA
77.00
77.77
9.79
6
CON
DurB
77.00
76.23
10.84
7
CON
DurC
77.00
86.62
11.56
8
CON
DurD
77.00
82.74
14.34
9
CON
GevA
77.00
0.12
0.04
10
CON
GevB
77.00
0.11
0.04
11
CON
GevC
77.00
0.18
0.05
12
CON
GevD
77.00
0.15
0.06
13
CON
OccA
77.00
3.02
0.48
14
CON
OccB
77.00
2.92
0.39
15
CON
OccC
77.00
3.36
0.42
16
CON
OccD
77.00
3.19
0.45
17
SCZ
CovA
33.00
0.20
0.03
18
SCZ
CovB
33.00
0.23
0.04
19
SCZ
CovC
33.00
0.28
0.04
20
SCZ
CovD
33.00
0.28
0.05
21
SCZ
DurA
33.00
72.64
6.75
22
SCZ
DurB
33.00
76.35
9.42
23
SCZ
DurC
33.00
83.53
10.84
24
SCZ
DurD
33.00
82.69
9.91
25
SCZ
GevA
33.00
0.09
0.02
26
SCZ
GevB
33.00
0.12
0.04
27
SCZ
GevC
33.00
0.17
0.04
28
SCZ
GevD
33.00
0.17
0.05
29
SCZ
OccA
33.00
2.88
0.38
30
SCZ
OccB
33.00
3.08
0.37
31
SCZ
OccC
33.00
3.41
0.38
32
SCZ
OccD
33.00
3.39
0.40
==PAGE:106==
94
C Summary Statistics
C.5
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit
Group
variable
n
mean
sd
1
CON
CovA
77.00
0.23
0.04
2
CON
CovB
77.00
0.23
0.05
3
CON
CovC
77.00
0.25
0.04
4
CON
CovD
77.00
0.29
0.04
5
CON
DurA
77.00
77.41
9.55
6
CON
DurB
77.00
77.80
12.59
7
CON
DurC
77.00
80.48
12.75
8
CON
DurD
77.00
87.19
12.52
9
CON
GevA
77.00
0.12
0.04
10
CON
GevB
77.00
0.12
0.04
11
CON
GevC
77.00
0.14
0.05
12
CON
GevD
77.00
0.19
0.05
13
CON
OccA
77.00
3.00
0.48
14
CON
OccB
77.00
2.96
0.43
15
CON
OccC
77.00
3.13
0.43
16
CON
OccD
77.00
3.42
0.42
17
SCZ
CovA
33.00
0.23
0.05
18
SCZ
CovB
33.00
0.23
0.04
19
SCZ
CovC
33.00
0.27
0.03
20
SCZ
CovD
33.00
0.26
0.04
21
SCZ
DurA
33.00
77.19
10.44
22
SCZ
DurB
33.00
76.20
9.86
23
SCZ
DurC
33.00
82.00
10.56
24
SCZ
DurD
33.00
80.40
6.08
25
SCZ
GevA
33.00
0.12
0.05
26
SCZ
GevB
33.00
0.12
0.04
27
SCZ
GevC
33.00
0.16
0.05
28
SCZ
GevD
33.00
0.17
0.04
29
SCZ
OccA
33.00
3.05
0.42
30
SCZ
OccB
33.00
3.03
0.40
31
SCZ
OccC
33.00
3.33
0.31
32
SCZ
OccD
33.00
3.34
0.38
==PAGE:107==
C.6 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
95
C.6
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
Group
variable
n
mean
sd
1
CON
CovA
77.00
0.22
0.04
2
CON
CovB
77.00
0.22
0.04
3
CON
CovC
77.00
0.26
0.04
4
CON
CovD
77.00
0.28
0.04
5
CON
DurA
77.00
77.28
10.63
6
CON
DurB
77.00
76.96
10.70
7
CON
DurC
77.00
82.70
11.97
8
CON
DurD
77.00
86.10
13.33
9
CON
GevA
77.00
0.11
0.04
10
CON
GevB
77.00
0.11
0.04
11
CON
GevC
77.00
0.16
0.05
12
CON
GevD
77.00
0.18
0.06
13
CON
OccA
77.00
2.98
0.46
14
CON
OccB
77.00
2.98
0.43
15
CON
OccC
77.00
3.25
0.43
16
CON
OccD
77.00
3.32
0.41
17
SCZ
CovA
33.00
0.22
0.04
18
SCZ
CovB
33.00
0.22
0.04
19
SCZ
CovC
33.00
0.27
0.04
20
SCZ
CovD
33.00
0.28
0.04
21
SCZ
DurA
33.00
74.72
8.25
22
SCZ
DurB
33.00
74.07
8.67
23
SCZ
DurC
33.00
81.46
8.66
24
SCZ
DurD
33.00
84.62
11.69
25
SCZ
GevA
33.00
0.11
0.04
26
SCZ
GevB
33.00
0.11
0.04
27
SCZ
GevC
33.00
0.16
0.04
28
SCZ
GevD
33.00
0.18
0.06
29
SCZ
OccA
33.00
2.99
0.42
30
SCZ
OccB
33.00
2.97
0.36
31
SCZ
OccC
33.00
3.39
0.37
32
SCZ
OccD
33.00
3.40
0.36
==PAGE:108==
96
C Summary Statistics
C.7
Global Approach, K=7
==PAGE:109==
C.7 Global Approach, K=7
97
Group
variable
n
mean
sd
1
CON
CovA
77.00
0.17
0.04
2
CON
CovB
77.00
0.13
0.03
3
CON
CovC
77.00
0.18
0.05
4
CON
CovD
77.00
0.14
0.04
5
CON
CovE
77.00
0.11
0.03
6
CON
CovF
77.00
0.10
0.03
7
CON
CovG
77.00
0.14
0.05
8
CON
DurA
77.00
73.50
8.79
9
CON
DurB
77.00
66.43
7.08
10
CON
DurC
77.00
77.03
13.76
11
CON
DurD
77.00
69.14
8.82
12
CON
DurE
77.00
63.22
7.02
13
CON
DurF
77.00
59.85
5.87
14
CON
DurG
77.00
69.01
10.77
15
CON
GevA
77.00
0.12
0.03
16
CON
GevB
77.00
0.07
0.02
17
CON
GevC
77.00
0.15
0.05
18
CON
GevD
77.00
0.07
0.03
19
CON
GevE
77.00
0.05
0.02
20
CON
GevF
77.00
0.04
0.02
21
CON
GevG
77.00
0.07
0.03
22
CON
OccA
77.00
2.42
0.45
23
CON
OccB
77.00
2.02
0.36
24
CON
OccC
77.00
2.40
0.41
25
CON
OccD
77.00
2.12
0.42
26
CON
OccE
77.00
1.76
0.37
27
CON
OccF
77.00
1.65
0.41
28
CON
OccG
77.00
2.09
0.47
29
SCZ
CovA
33.00
0.17
0.03
30
SCZ
CovB
33.00
0.14
0.04
31
SCZ
CovC
33.00
0.19
0.05
32
SCZ
CovD
33.00
0.13
0.04
33
SCZ
CovE
33.00
0.10
0.02
34
SCZ
CovF
33.00
0.10
0.02
35
SCZ
CovG
33.00
0.14
0.04
36
SCZ
DurA
33.00
71.52
7.84
37
SCZ
DurB
33.00
68.28
9.89
38
SCZ
DurC
33.00
76.28
10.15
39
SCZ
DurD
33.00
64.16
4.75
40
SCZ
DurE
33.00
59.57
5.27
41
SCZ
DurF
33.00
58.66
5.02
42
SCZ
DurG
33.00
66.28
6.64
43
SCZ
GevA
33.00
0.11
0.03
44
SCZ
GevB
33.00
0.08
0.03
45
SCZ
GevC
33.00
0.16
0.05
46
SCZ
GevD
33.00
0.07
0.02
47
SCZ
GevE
33.00
0.04
0.01
48
SCZ
GevF
33.00
0.04
0.01
49
SCZ
GevG
33.00
0.07
0.03
50
SCZ
OccA
33.00
2.46
0.34
51
SCZ
OccB
33.00
2.15
0.35
52
SCZ
OccC
33.00
2.54
0.35
53
SCZ
OccD
33.00
2.09
0.52
54
SCZ
OccE
33.00
1.77
0.34
55
SCZ
OccF
33.00
1.69
0.36
56
SCZ
OccG
33.00
2.13
0.43
==PAGE:110==
98
C Summary Statistics
C.8
Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Comp. Fit
==PAGE:111==
C.8 Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Comp. Fit
99
Group
variable
n
mean
sd
1
CON
CovA
77.00
0.16
0.03
2
CON
CovB
77.00
0.13
0.02
3
CON
CovC
77.00
0.18
0.03
4
CON
CovD
77.00
0.14
0.03
5
CON
CovE
77.00
0.12
0.03
6
CON
CovF
77.00
0.11
0.02
7
CON
CovG
77.00
0.14
0.03
8
CON
DurA
77.00
72.35
8.56
9
CON
DurB
77.00
66.83
7.48
10
CON
DurC
77.00
77.52
9.92
11
CON
DurD
77.00
68.27
9.18
12
CON
DurE
77.00
64.79
8.01
13
CON
DurF
77.00
63.79
8.55
14
CON
DurG
77.00
69.10
9.28
15
CON
GevA
77.00
0.11
0.03
16
CON
GevB
77.00
0.07
0.02
17
CON
GevC
77.00
0.15
0.04
18
CON
GevD
77.00
0.08
0.03
19
CON
GevE
77.00
0.06
0.03
20
CON
GevF
77.00
0.05
0.02
21
CON
GevG
77.00
0.08
0.03
22
CON
OccA
77.00
2.28
0.33
23
CON
OccB
77.00
1.98
0.28
24
CON
OccC
77.00
2.45
0.32
25
CON
OccD
77.00
2.08
0.32
26
CON
OccE
77.00
1.82
0.32
27
CON
OccF
77.00
1.78
0.31
28
CON
OccG
77.00
2.10
0.38
29
SCZ
CovA
33.00
0.16
0.02
30
SCZ
CovB
33.00
0.14
0.03
31
SCZ
CovC
33.00
0.18
0.03
32
SCZ
CovD
33.00
0.13
0.03
33
SCZ
CovE
33.00
0.12
0.02
34
SCZ
CovF
33.00
0.11
0.02
35
SCZ
CovG
33.00
0.14
0.03
36
SCZ
DurA
33.00
69.36
5.85
37
SCZ
DurB
33.00
66.36
7.73
38
SCZ
DurC
33.00
75.04
7.82
39
SCZ
DurD
33.00
66.32
7.45
40
SCZ
DurE
33.00
63.92
5.47
41
SCZ
DurF
33.00
61.25
5.44
42
SCZ
DurG
33.00
67.46
8.61
43
SCZ
GevA
33.00
0.10
0.03
44
SCZ
GevB
33.00
0.08
0.03
45
SCZ
GevC
33.00
0.14
0.04
46
SCZ
GevD
33.00
0.07
0.03
47
SCZ
GevE
33.00
0.06
0.02
48
SCZ
GevF
33.00
0.05
0.02
49
SCZ
GevG
33.00
0.08
0.04
50
SCZ
OccA
33.00
2.32
0.28
51
SCZ
OccB
33.00
2.11
0.29
52
SCZ
OccC
33.00
2.51
0.26
53
SCZ
OccD
33.00
2.06
0.37
54
SCZ
OccE
33.00
1.89
0.31
55
SCZ
OccF
33.00
1.82
0.32
56
SCZ
OccG
33.00
2.08
0.33
==PAGE:112==
100
C Summary Statistics
C.9
Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
==PAGE:113==
C.9 Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
101
Group
variable
n
mean
sd
1
CON
CovA
77.00
0.16
0.03
2
CON
CovB
77.00
0.13
0.02
3
CON
CovC
77.00
0.18
0.03
4
CON
CovD
77.00
0.14
0.04
5
CON
CovE
77.00
0.12
0.02
6
CON
CovF
77.00
0.11
0.02
7
CON
CovG
77.00
0.14
0.03
8
CON
DurA
77.00
73.05
9.32
9
CON
DurB
77.00
67.65
7.57
10
CON
DurC
77.00
75.53
9.95
11
CON
DurD
77.00
68.58
9.92
12
CON
DurE
77.00
64.72
7.96
13
CON
DurF
77.00
63.42
7.06
14
CON
DurG
77.00
69.21
8.76
15
CON
GevA
77.00
0.11
0.04
16
CON
GevB
77.00
0.07
0.02
17
CON
GevC
77.00
0.14
0.04
18
CON
GevD
77.00
0.08
0.04
19
CON
GevE
77.00
0.06
0.02
20
CON
GevF
77.00
0.05
0.02
21
CON
GevG
77.00
0.08
0.03
22
CON
OccA
77.00
2.27
0.32
23
CON
OccB
77.00
2.03
0.32
24
CON
OccC
77.00
2.43
0.32
25
CON
OccD
77.00
2.08
0.40
26
CON
OccE
77.00
1.81
0.29
27
CON
OccF
77.00
1.82
0.35
28
CON
OccG
77.00
2.07
0.35
29
SCZ
CovA
33.00
0.16
0.03
30
SCZ
CovB
33.00
0.14
0.03
31
SCZ
CovC
33.00
0.18
0.03
32
SCZ
CovD
33.00
0.14
0.03
33
SCZ
CovE
33.00
0.11
0.02
34
SCZ
CovF
33.00
0.11
0.02
35
SCZ
CovG
33.00
0.14
0.04
36
SCZ
DurA
33.00
69.94
7.20
37
SCZ
DurB
33.00
67.03
7.72
38
SCZ
DurC
33.00
74.82
6.39
39
SCZ
DurD
33.00
65.44
6.80
40
SCZ
DurE
33.00
62.40
5.77
41
SCZ
DurF
33.00
62.63
5.77
42
SCZ
DurG
33.00
67.00
8.20
43
SCZ
GevA
33.00
0.11
0.04
44
SCZ
GevB
33.00
0.08
0.03
45
SCZ
GevC
33.00
0.14
0.04
46
SCZ
GevD
33.00
0.08
0.03
47
SCZ
GevE
33.00
0.05
0.01
48
SCZ
GevF
33.00
0.05
0.02
49
SCZ
GevG
33.00
0.08
0.04
50
SCZ
OccA
33.00
2.30
0.30
51
SCZ
OccB
33.00
2.10
0.29
52
SCZ
OccC
33.00
2.52
0.31
53
SCZ
OccD
33.00
2.11
0.37
54
SCZ
OccE
33.00
1.79
0.28
55
SCZ
OccF
33.00
1.84
0.27
56
SCZ
OccG
33.00
2.15
0.41
==PAGE:114==
102
==PAGE:115==
APPENDIX D
ANOVA Results
Results for the repeated measure ANOVA, for each analysis approach. The continuous
variable is given in the header of each table.
==PAGE:116==
104
D ANOVA Results
D.1
Lit. Approach, K = 4
Table D.1: Duration.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.21
0.65
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.86
0.17
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.31
0.58
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.38
0.54
0.00
5
Microstate
1.42
134.44
13.22
0.00
*
0.08
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.01
0.93
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.33
0.57
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.01
0.32
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
1.42
134.44
0.82
0.40
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
1.42
134.44
0.75
0.43
0.00
11
Gender:Microstate
1.42
134.44
0.52
0.53
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
1.42
134.44
0.10
0.83
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.95
0.33
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
1.42
134.44
0.59
0.50
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
1.42
134.44
1.20
0.29
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
1.42
134.44
1.37
0.25
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
1.42
134.44
0.17
0.76
0.00
Table D.2: Occurrence.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.03
0.86
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.07
0.30
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.23
0.64
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.29
0.59
0.00
5
Microstate
2.43
230.58
21.93
0.00
*
0.10
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.96
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.59
0.45
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.11
0.30
0.01
9
Age:Microstate
2.43
230.58
1.66
0.18
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
2.43
230.58
1.58
0.20
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
2.43
230.58
1.02
0.38
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
2.43
230.58
1.99
0.13
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.89
0.35
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.43
230.58
0.71
0.52
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.43
230.58
1.84
0.15
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.43
230.58
1.11
0.34
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.43
230.58
0.33
0.76
0.00
==PAGE:117==
D.1 Lit. Approach, K = 4
105
Table D.3: Coverage.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
3.97
0.05
*
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
5.09
0.03
*
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.64
0.43
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
1.18
0.28
0.00
5
Microstate
2.22
211.29
30.17
0.00
*
0.24
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.04
0.85
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.23
0.64
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.45
0.23
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.22
211.29
2.65
0.07
0.03
10
Group:Microstate
2.22
211.29
1.19
0.31
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
2.22
211.29
0.73
0.49
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
2.22
211.29
0.79
0.47
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.25
0.62
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.22
211.29
1.07
0.35
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.22
211.29
1.15
0.32
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.22
211.29
1.51
0.22
0.02
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.22
211.29
0.19
0.85
0.00
Table D.4: GEV.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.61
0.44
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
0.55
0.46
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.19
0.66
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
2.49
0.12
0.00
5
Microstate
1.69
160.55
38.63
0.00
*
0.27
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.63
0.43
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.04
0.84
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.43
0.51
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
1.69
160.55
2.88
0.07
0.03
10
Group:Microstate
1.69
160.55
0.85
0.41
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
1.69
160.55
0.50
0.57
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
1.69
160.55
0.45
0.61
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.65
0.42
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
1.69
160.55
1.38
0.25
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
1.69
160.55
0.76
0.45
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
1.69
160.55
1.58
0.21
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
1.69
160.55
0.27
0.73
0.00
==PAGE:118==
106
D ANOVA Results
D.2
Global Approach, K=4
Table D.5: Duration.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
1.23
0.27
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.97
0.16
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.28
0.60
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.50
0.48
0.00
5
Microstate
2.16
205.23
3.70
0.02
*
0.02
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.95
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.01
0.94
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.64
0.42
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.16
205.23
0.46
0.65
0.00
10
Group:Microstate
2.16
205.23
1.28
0.28
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
2.16
205.23
1.61
0.20
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
2.16
205.23
1.60
0.20
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
2.77
0.10
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.16
205.23
0.11
0.91
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.16
205.23
2.02
0.13
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.16
205.23
1.10
0.34
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.16
205.23
0.58
0.57
0.00
Table D.6: Occurrence.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.66
0.42
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.70
0.20
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.18
0.68
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.38
0.54
0.00
5
Microstate
2.76
262.09
6.11
0.00
*
0.04
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.06
0.81
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.01
0.90
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.84
0.36
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.76
262.09
1.32
0.27
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
2.76
262.09
0.40
0.74
0.00
11
Gender:Microstate
2.76
262.09
0.63
0.58
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
2.76
262.09
0.33
0.79
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
2.41
0.12
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.76
262.09
0.25
0.85
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.76
262.09
0.96
0.40
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.76
262.09
0.91
0.43
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.76
262.09
0.22
0.86
0.00
==PAGE:119==
D.2 Global Approach, K=4
107
Table D.7: Coverage.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
1.62
0.20
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
5.99
0.02
*
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
1.06
0.31
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.95
0.00
5
Microstate
2.53
240.80
5.83
0.00
*
0.06
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.89
0.35
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.34
0.56
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.96
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.53
240.80
0.95
0.41
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
2.53
240.80
0.72
0.52
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
2.53
240.80
1.27
0.29
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
2.53
240.80
1.13
0.33
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.05
0.82
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.53
240.80
0.09
0.95
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.53
240.80
1.70
0.18
0.02
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.53
240.80
1.32
0.27
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.53
240.80
0.20
0.86
0.00
Table D.8: GEV.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.95
0.33
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
0.70
0.40
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.07
0.79
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
2.02
0.16
0.00
5
Microstate
2.24
212.77
11.55
0.00
*
0.10
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.67
0.41
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.16
0.69
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.79
0.38
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.24
212.77
1.56
0.21
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
2.24
212.77
0.74
0.49
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
2.24
212.77
1.14
0.33
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
2.24
212.77
1.25
0.29
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.49
0.49
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.24
212.77
0.14
0.89
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.24
212.77
1.52
0.22
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.24
212.77
1.52
0.22
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.24
212.77
0.23
0.82
0.00
==PAGE:120==
108
D ANOVA Results
D.3
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Compet. Fit
Table D.9: Duration.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.52
0.47
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.95
0.17
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.19
0.66
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.69
0.41
0.00
5
Microstate
3.00
285.00
5.71
0.00
*
0.02
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.96
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.97
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.13
0.29
0.01
9
Age:Microstate
3.00
285.00
1.84
0.14
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.65
0.58
0.00
11
Gender:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.77
0.51
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
1.19
0.31
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.90
0.34
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.31
0.82
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.42
0.74
0.00
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
2.29
0.08
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.62
0.60
0.00
Table D.10: Occurrence.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.30
0.58
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.57
0.21
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.13
0.72
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.52
0.47
0.00
5
Microstate
2.36
224.39
6.55
0.00
*
0.03
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.95
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.99
0.32
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.36
224.39
1.12
0.34
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
2.36
224.39
0.51
0.63
0.00
11
Gender:Microstate
2.36
224.39
0.49
0.65
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
2.36
224.39
0.43
0.69
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.94
0.33
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.36
224.39
1.38
0.25
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.36
224.39
0.76
0.49
0.00
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.36
224.39
1.44
0.24
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.36
224.39
0.88
0.43
0.00
==PAGE:121==
D.3 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Compet. Fit
109
Table D.11: Coverage.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
5.89
0.02
*
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
6.75
0.01
*
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.15
0.70
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.06
0.80
0.00
5
Microstate
2.69
256.00
7.45
0.00
*
0.07
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.08
0.78
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
1.13
0.29
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.99
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.69
256.00
1.52
0.21
0.02
10
Group:Microstate
2.69
256.00
0.51
0.66
0.00
11
Gender:Microstate
2.69
256.00
0.78
0.49
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
2.69
256.00
1.01
0.38
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.34
0.25
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.69
256.00
0.61
0.59
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.69
256.00
0.53
0.64
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.69
256.00
2.08
0.11
0.02
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.69
256.00
0.47
0.68
0.00
Table D.12: GEV.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.56
0.46
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.13
0.29
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.06
0.81
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
1.98
0.16
0.00
5
Microstate
2.77
263.37
8.76
0.00
*
0.08
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.60
0.44
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.75
0.39
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.61
0.44
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.77
263.37
1.40
0.25
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
2.77
263.37
0.26
0.84
0.00
11
Gender:Microstate
2.77
263.37
0.67
0.56
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
2.77
263.37
1.12
0.34
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.03
0.87
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.77
263.37
0.38
0.75
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.77
263.37
0.31
0.80
0.00
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.77
263.37
1.42
0.24
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.77
263.37
0.39
0.75
0.00
==PAGE:122==
110
D ANOVA Results
D.4
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Overall Fit
Table D.13: Duration.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.62
0.43
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.86
0.18
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.34
0.56
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.95
0.33
0.00
5
Microstate
2.54
241.04
2.83
0.05
*
0.01
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.98
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.04
0.85
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.67
0.42
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.54
241.04
1.51
0.22
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
2.54
241.04
1.80
0.16
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
2.54
241.04
0.24
0.83
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
2.54
241.04
0.10
0.94
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.37
0.24
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.54
241.04
0.60
0.59
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.54
241.04
0.36
0.75
0.00
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.54
241.04
0.60
0.59
0.00
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.54
241.04
0.33
0.77
0.00
Table D.14: Occurrence.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.31
0.58
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.59
0.21
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.33
0.56
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.47
0.49
0.00
5
Microstate
3.00
285.00
2.37
0.07
0.01
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.95
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.03
0.86
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.59
0.44
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.62
0.60
0.00
10
Group:Microstate
3.00
285.00
3.69
0.01
*
0.02
11
Gender:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.37
0.77
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.28
0.84
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.51
0.22
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
3.00
285.00
1.36
0.25
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
1.99
0.12
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.93
0.43
0.00
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.75
0.52
0.00
==PAGE:123==
D.4 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Overall Fit
111
Table D.15: Coverage.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
6.49
0.01
*
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
2.51
0.12
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
2.79
0.10
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
1.20
0.28
0.00
5
Microstate
2.65
251.53
3.15
0.03
*
0.03
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.78
0.38
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.30
0.58
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.56
0.46
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.65
251.53
0.98
0.40
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
2.65
251.53
3.04
0.04
*
0.03
11
Gender:Microstate
2.65
251.53
0.28
0.81
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
2.65
251.53
0.09
0.95
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.01
0.91
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.65
251.53
0.84
0.46
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.65
251.53
1.22
0.30
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.65
251.53
0.69
0.54
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.65
251.53
0.64
0.57
0.01
Table D.16: GEV.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.52
0.47
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.13
0.29
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.02
0.88
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
1.96
0.16
0.00
5
Microstate
2.44
231.80
3.53
0.02
*
0.03
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.55
0.46
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.59
0.44
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.71
0.40
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.44
231.80
0.66
0.55
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
2.44
231.80
3.06
0.04
*
0.03
11
Gender:Microstate
2.44
231.80
0.20
0.86
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
2.44
231.80
0.27
0.81
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.04
0.84
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.44
231.80
0.54
0.62
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.44
231.80
0.84
0.45
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.44
231.80
0.62
0.57
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.44
231.80
0.45
0.68
0.00
==PAGE:124==
112
D ANOVA Results
D.5
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit
Table D.17: Duration.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.44
0.51
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.64
0.20
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.51
0.48
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
1.17
0.28
0.01
5
Microstate
2.66
252.90
2.09
0.11
0.01
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.09
0.77
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.06
0.80
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.21
0.27
0.01
9
Age:Microstate
2.66
252.90
0.94
0.41
0.00
10
Group:Microstate
2.66
252.90
3.30
0.03
*
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
2.66
252.90
1.11
0.34
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
2.66
252.90
0.51
0.65
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.22
0.27
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.66
252.90
1.20
0.31
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.66
252.90
1.58
0.20
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.66
252.90
0.44
0.70
0.00
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.66
252.90
0.63
0.58
0.00
Table D.18: Occurrence.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.33
0.56
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.57
0.21
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.26
0.61
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.77
0.38
0.00
5
Microstate
2.61
247.69
3.32
0.03
*
0.02
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.04
0.85
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.04
0.85
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.49
0.23
0.01
9
Age:Microstate
2.61
247.69
0.70
0.54
0.00
10
Group:Microstate
2.61
247.69
1.50
0.22
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
2.61
247.69
0.25
0.84
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
2.61
247.69
1.53
0.21
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.70
0.20
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.61
247.69
0.80
0.48
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.61
247.69
0.46
0.68
0.00
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.61
247.69
0.64
0.57
0.00
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.61
247.69
1.49
0.22
0.01
==PAGE:125==
D.5 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit
113
Table D.19: Coverage.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
4.74
0.03
*
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.34
0.25
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
2.95
0.09
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.40
0.53
0.00
5
Microstate
2.68
254.77
3.02
0.04
*
0.03
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.21
0.65
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.26
0.61
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.57
0.45
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.68
254.77
0.76
0.50
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
2.68
254.77
2.82
0.04
*
0.03
11
Gender:Microstate
2.68
254.77
0.58
0.61
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
2.68
254.77
0.97
0.40
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.06
0.81
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.68
254.77
1.18
0.32
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.68
254.77
0.91
0.43
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.68
254.77
0.60
0.60
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.68
254.77
1.08
0.35
0.01
Table D.20: GEV.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.71
0.40
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.21
0.27
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.05
0.82
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
1.96
0.16
0.00
5
Microstate
2.65
251.81
3.80
0.01
*
0.04
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.56
0.46
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.72
0.40
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.70
0.40
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.65
251.81
1.01
0.38
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
2.65
251.81
2.18
0.10
0.02
11
Gender:Microstate
2.65
251.81
0.64
0.57
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
2.65
251.81
1.47
0.23
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.06
0.80
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.65
251.81
1.56
0.20
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.65
251.81
0.61
0.59
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.65
251.81
0.61
0.59
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.65
251.81
0.88
0.44
0.01
==PAGE:126==
114
D ANOVA Results
D.6
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
Table D.21: Duration.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.50
0.48
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.76
0.19
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.40
0.53
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
1.14
0.29
0.01
5
Microstate
2.69
255.37
2.19
0.10
0.01
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.99
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.04
0.85
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.88
0.35
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.69
255.37
0.41
0.72
0.00
10
Group:Microstate
2.69
255.37
0.25
0.84
0.00
11
Gender:Microstate
2.69
255.37
1.34
0.26
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
2.69
255.37
0.94
0.41
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.10
0.30
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.69
255.37
2.01
0.12
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.69
255.37
0.84
0.46
0.00
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.69
255.37
1.41
0.24
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.69
255.37
0.15
0.91
0.00
Table D.22: Occurrence.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.31
0.58
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.38
0.24
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.34
0.56
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.89
0.35
0.00
5
Microstate
3.00
285.00
3.36
0.02
*
0.02
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.01
0.91
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.07
0.78
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.05
0.31
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.76
0.52
0.00
10
Group:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.60
0.61
0.00
11
Gender:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.33
0.80
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.27
0.85
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.20
0.28
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.92
0.43
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.57
0.63
0.00
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.15
0.93
0.00
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.28
0.84
0.00
==PAGE:127==
D.6 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
115
Table D.23: Coverage.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
3.16
0.08
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
2.96
0.09
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
1.62
0.21
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
1.48
0.23
0.00
5
Microstate
3.00
285.00
3.15
0.02
*
0.03
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.01
0.94
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.09
0.76
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.99
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.57
0.63
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.36
0.78
0.00
11
Gender:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.60
0.61
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.52
0.67
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.09
0.30
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
3.00
285.00
1.16
0.32
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.66
0.58
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.68
0.56
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
3.00
285.00
0.12
0.95
0.00
Table D.24: GEV.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.55
0.46
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.17
0.28
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.08
0.78
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
2.14
0.15
0.00
5
Microstate
2.59
246.11
3.64
0.02
*
0.04
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.55
0.46
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.72
0.40
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.73
0.40
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
2.59
246.11
0.44
0.70
0.00
10
Group:Microstate
2.59
246.11
0.09
0.95
0.00
11
Gender:Microstate
2.59
246.11
0.27
0.82
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
2.59
246.11
0.62
0.58
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.06
0.81
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
2.59
246.11
0.78
0.49
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
2.59
246.11
0.50
0.66
0.00
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
2.59
246.11
0.83
0.47
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
2.59
246.11
0.13
0.92
0.00
==PAGE:128==
116
D ANOVA Results
D.7
Global Approach, K=7
Table D.25: Duration.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.71
0.40
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
3.55
0.06
0.02
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.85
0.36
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.35
0.55
0.00
5
Microstate
3.76
356.96
7.34
0.00
*
0.04
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.04
0.84
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.03
0.87
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.13
0.29
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
3.76
356.96
1.27
0.28
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
3.76
356.96
2.77
0.03
*
0.02
11
Gender:Microstate
3.76
356.96
1.40
0.24
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
3.76
356.96
0.60
0.65
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.32
0.25
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
3.76
356.96
0.60
0.65
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
3.76
356.96
1.51
0.20
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
3.76
356.96
1.76
0.14
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
3.76
356.96
0.45
0.76
0.00
Table D.26: Occurrence.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.26
0.61
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
2.50
0.12
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.33
0.57
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.25
0.62
0.00
5
Microstate
4.45
422.50
9.22
0.00
*
0.07
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.05
0.82
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.17
0.68
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.92
0.34
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
4.45
422.50
2.43
0.04
*
0.02
10
Group:Microstate
4.45
422.50
0.76
0.57
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
4.45
422.50
1.24
0.29
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
4.45
422.50
0.81
0.53
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.93
0.17
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
4.45
422.50
0.42
0.81
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
4.45
422.50
0.86
0.50
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
4.45
422.50
0.58
0.70
0.00
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
4.45
422.50
0.18
0.96
0.00
==PAGE:129==
D.7 Global Approach, K=7
117
Table D.27: Coverage.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.66
0.42
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
9.03
0.00
*
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.29
0.59
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.23
0.63
0.00
5
Microstate
3.92
372.54
8.83
0.00
*
0.08
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.54
0.46
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.14
0.71
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.34
0.56
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
3.92
372.54
2.03
0.09
0.02
10
Group:Microstate
3.92
372.54
1.26
0.29
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
3.92
372.54
1.44
0.22
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
3.92
372.54
0.75
0.56
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.13
0.29
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
3.92
372.54
0.48
0.75
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
3.92
372.54
1.12
0.35
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
3.92
372.54
0.93
0.44
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
3.92
372.54
0.29
0.88
0.00
Table D.28: GEV.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.70
0.40
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.40
0.24
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.01
0.93
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
2.62
0.11
0.00
5
Microstate
3.12
296.71
17.02
0.00
*
0.15
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.50
0.48
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.24
0.62
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.06
0.31
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
3.12
296.71
2.30
0.07
0.02
10
Group:Microstate
3.12
296.71
1.01
0.39
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
3.12
296.71
1.31
0.27
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
3.12
296.71
0.67
0.58
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.58
0.45
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
3.12
296.71
0.66
0.59
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
3.12
296.71
0.88
0.46
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
3.12
296.71
0.98
0.40
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
3.12
296.71
0.33
0.81
0.00
==PAGE:130==
118
D ANOVA Results
D.8
Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Comp. Fit
Table D.29: Duration.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
1.00
0.32
0.01
2
Group
1.00
95.00
2.42
0.12
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.58
0.45
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.50
0.48
0.00
5
Microstate
5.35
508.58
4.37
0.00
*
0.02
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.04
0.84
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.01
0.93
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.54
0.47
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
5.35
508.58
0.94
0.46
0.00
10
Group:Microstate
5.35
508.58
1.01
0.41
0.00
11
Gender:Microstate
5.35
508.58
0.18
0.98
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
5.35
508.58
0.62
0.69
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.58
0.21
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
5.35
508.58
1.00
0.42
0.00
15
Group:Session:Microstate
5.35
508.58
0.76
0.58
0.00
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
5.35
508.58
2.53
0.02
*
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
5.35
508.58
1.36
0.23
0.01
Table D.30: Occurrence.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.74
0.39
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.91
0.17
0.01
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.38
0.54
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.30
0.59
0.00
5
Microstate
5.32
505.43
5.09
0.00
*
0.04
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.04
0.84
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.80
0.37
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
5.32
505.43
0.89
0.49
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
5.32
505.43
0.92
0.47
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
5.32
505.43
0.83
0.53
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
5.32
505.43
1.12
0.35
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.79
0.18
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
5.32
505.43
1.20
0.31
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
5.32
505.43
1.02
0.40
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
5.32
505.43
1.78
0.11
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
5.32
505.43
1.16
0.33
0.01
==PAGE:131==
D.8 Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Comp. Fit
119
Table D.31: Coverage.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.07
0.79
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
3.99
0.05
*
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.64
0.43
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
1.04
0.31
0.00
5
Microstate
5.34
507.37
5.66
0.00
*
0.06
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.14
0.71
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.21
0.65
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.30
0.58
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
5.34
507.37
0.86
0.52
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
5.34
507.37
0.88
0.50
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
5.34
507.37
0.43
0.84
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
5.34
507.37
0.82
0.54
0.01
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.71
0.40
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
5.34
507.37
1.27
0.28
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
5.34
507.37
1.03
0.40
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
5.34
507.37
2.19
0.05
*
0.02
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
5.34
507.37
1.39
0.22
0.01
Table D.32: GEV.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.49
0.48
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.70
0.20
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.14
0.70
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
2.65
0.11
0.00
5
Microstate
5.07
482.12
8.57
0.00
*
0.08
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.54
0.47
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.82
0.37
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.64
0.43
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
5.07
482.12
1.22
0.30
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
5.07
482.12
1.15
0.33
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
5.07
482.12
0.49
0.78
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
5.07
482.12
0.39
0.86
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.05
0.82
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
5.07
482.12
1.54
0.17
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
5.07
482.12
1.00
0.42
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
5.07
482.12
2.55
0.03
*
0.02
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
5.07
482.12
2.44
0.03
*
0.02
==PAGE:132==
120
D ANOVA Results
D.9
Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
Table D.33: Duration.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.90
0.34
0.01
2
Group
1.00
95.00
2.60
0.11
0.02
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
1.03
0.31
0.01
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.91
0.34
0.01
5
Microstate
5.39
512.46
6.88
0.00
*
0.03
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.95
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.01
0.92
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.91
0.34
0.01
9
Age:Microstate
5.39
512.46
2.23
0.04
*
0.01
10
Group:Microstate
5.39
512.46
1.73
0.12
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
5.39
512.46
0.85
0.52
0.00
12
Session:Microstate
5.39
512.46
0.34
0.90
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.29
0.26
0.01
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
5.39
512.46
2.03
0.07
0.01
15
Group:Session:Microstate
5.39
512.46
1.00
0.42
0.00
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
5.39
512.46
1.46
0.20
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
5.39
512.46
1.54
0.17
0.01
Table D.34: Occurrence.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.67
0.41
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.79
0.18
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.46
0.50
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
0.66
0.42
0.00
5
Microstate
4.80
455.78
8.61
0.00
*
0.06
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.02
0.89
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.07
0.79
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.91
0.34
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
4.80
455.78
3.00
0.01
*
0.02
10
Group:Microstate
4.80
455.78
0.63
0.67
0.00
11
Gender:Microstate
4.80
455.78
1.09
0.37
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
4.80
455.78
0.54
0.74
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.43
0.23
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
4.80
455.78
2.14
0.06
0.02
15
Group:Session:Microstate
4.80
455.78
1.21
0.30
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
4.80
455.78
0.74
0.59
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
4.80
455.78
0.83
0.52
0.01
==PAGE:133==
D.9 Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
121
Table D.35: Coverage.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.13
0.72
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.49
0.22
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
2.46
0.12
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
2.28
0.13
0.00
5
Microstate
4.79
455.23
9.72
0.00
*
0.09
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.43
0.51
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.95
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.00
0.96
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
4.79
455.23
3.32
0.01
*
0.03
10
Group:Microstate
4.79
455.23
1.20
0.31
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
4.79
455.23
1.02
0.40
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
4.79
455.23
0.47
0.79
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
1.44
0.23
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
4.79
455.23
2.47
0.03
*
0.02
15
Group:Session:Microstate
4.79
455.23
1.14
0.34
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
4.79
455.23
0.94
0.45
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
4.79
455.23
0.93
0.46
0.01
Table D.36: GEV.
Effect
DFn
DFd
F
p
p<.05
ges
1
Age
1.00
95.00
0.47
0.50
0.00
2
Group
1.00
95.00
1.74
0.19
0.00
3
Gender
1.00
95.00
0.13
0.72
0.00
4
Session
1.00
95.00
2.58
0.11
0.00
5
Microstate
4.48
425.68
14.14
0.00
*
0.12
6
Group:Gender
1.00
95.00
0.52
0.47
0.00
7
Group:Session
1.00
95.00
0.90
0.35
0.00
8
Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.57
0.45
0.00
9
Age:Microstate
4.48
425.68
3.87
0.00
*
0.04
10
Group:Microstate
4.48
425.68
0.93
0.46
0.01
11
Gender:Microstate
4.48
425.68
0.63
0.66
0.01
12
Session:Microstate
4.48
425.68
0.23
0.94
0.00
13
Group:Gender:Session
1.00
95.00
0.04
0.84
0.00
14
Group:Gender:Microstate
4.48
425.68
2.74
0.02
*
0.03
15
Group:Session:Microstate
4.48
425.68
1.26
0.28
0.01
16
Gender:Session:Microstate
4.48
425.68
0.94
0.45
0.01
17
Group:Gender:Session:Microstate
4.48
425.68
0.64
0.65
0.01
==PAGE:134==
122
==PAGE:135==
APPENDIX E
Post-Hoc Comparison - Tables
Post-hoc group comparison using an unpaired p-Welch’s test. The continuous variable
is given in the header of each table.
E.1
Lit. Approach, K = 4
Table E.1: Duration.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
1.56
60.89
0.12
1.00
ns
2
B
-0.27
47.05
0.79
1.00
ns
3
C
0.22
68.26
0.83
1.00
ns
4
D
2.91
96.17
0.00
0.06
ns
Table E.2: Occurrence.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
-0.01
63.07
0.99
1.00
ns
2
B
-1.87
73.54
0.07
1.00
ns
3
C
-1.35
83.24
0.18
1.00
ns
4
D
0.44
48.37
0.66
1.00
ns
Table E.3: Coverage.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.79
57.90
0.43
1.00
ns
2
B
-1.45
49.58
0.15
1.00
ns
3
C
-0.50
69.24
0.62
1.00
ns
4
D
1.21
55.62
0.23
1.00
ns
Table E.4: GEV.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.87
58.15
0.39
1.00
ns
2
B
-1.12
46.36
0.27
1.00
ns
3
C
-0.01
72.37
0.99
1.00
ns
4
D
1.47
62.16
0.15
1.00
ns
==PAGE:136==
124
E Post-Hoc Comparison - Tables
E.2
Global Approach, K=4
Table E.5: Duration.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
1.79
63.03
0.08
1.00
ns
2
B
0.02
56.71
0.99
1.00
ns
3
C
0.15
63.51
0.88
1.00
ns
4
D
1.54
104.20
0.13
1.00
ns
Table E.6: Occurrence.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
-0.42
65.42
0.67
1.00
ns
2
B
-1.17
79.57
0.25
1.00
ns
3
C
-0.64
75.03
0.52
1.00
ns
4
D
-0.68
54.31
0.50
1.00
ns
Table E.7: Coverage.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.36
60.88
0.72
1.00
ns
2
B
-0.78
62.04
0.44
1.00
ns
3
C
-0.21
67.50
0.83
1.00
ns
4
D
0.60
76.66
0.55
1.00
ns
Table E.8: GEV.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.70
58.87
0.49
1.00
ns
2
B
-0.58
55.44
0.57
1.00
ns
3
C
-0.18
56.43
0.85
1.00
ns
4
D
0.63
80.01
0.53
1.00
ns
==PAGE:137==
E.3 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Compet. Fit
125
E.3
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Compet. Fit
Table E.9: Duration.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
1.44
70.17
0.15
1.00
ns
2
B
0.37
69.10
0.71
1.00
ns
3
C
0.82
68.95
0.41
1.00
ns
4
D
1.55
94.58
0.12
1.00
ns
Table E.10: Occurrence.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.04
61.90
0.97
1.00
ns
2
B
-1.28
79.91
0.20
1.00
ns
3
C
-1.56
72.40
0.12
1.00
ns
4
D
-0.67
65.97
0.50
1.00
ns
Table E.11: Coverage.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.83
53.87
0.41
1.00
ns
2
B
-0.74
69.09
0.46
1.00
ns
3
C
-0.39
60.59
0.69
1.00
ns
4
D
0.43
75.78
0.67
1.00
ns
Table E.12: GEV.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.96
52.68
0.34
1.00
ns
2
B
-0.56
60.22
0.58
1.00
ns
3
C
0.46
66.29
0.65
1.00
ns
4
D
0.36
74.74
0.72
1.00
ns
==PAGE:138==
126
E Post-Hoc Comparison - Tables
E.4
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Overall Fit
Table E.13: Duration.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
3.17
86.17
0.00
0.03
*
2
B
-0.06
69.21
0.95
1.00
ns
3
C
1.35
64.40
0.18
1.00
ns
4
D
0.02
86.04
0.98
1.00
ns
Table E.14: Occurrence.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
1.53
74.94
0.13
1.00
ns
2
B
-1.94
63.78
0.06
0.90
ns
3
C
-0.55
67.64
0.59
1.00
ns
4
D
-2.27
68.16
0.03
0.43
ns
Table E.15: Coverage.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
3.24
81.68
0.00
0.03
*
2
B
-1.50
57.51
0.14
1.00
ns
3
C
0.74
70.97
0.46
1.00
ns
4
D
-1.64
65.58
0.11
1.00
ns
Table E.16: GEV.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
4.20
94.87
0.00
0.00
***
2
B
-1.56
56.66
0.12
1.00
ns
3
C
1.17
74.92
0.24
1.00
ns
4
D
-1.35
67.04
0.18
1.00
ns
==PAGE:139==
E.5 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit
127
E.5
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit
Table E.17: Duration.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.10
56.02
0.92
1.00
ns
2
B
0.72
76.59
0.48
1.00
ns
3
C
-0.65
72.57
0.52
1.00
ns
4
D
3.82
106.26
0.00
0.00
**
Table E.18: Occurrence.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
-0.57
68.76
0.57
1.00
ns
2
B
-0.76
64.51
0.45
1.00
ns
3
C
-2.63
82.10
0.01
0.16
ns
4
D
0.99
67.30
0.33
1.00
ns
Table E.19: Coverage.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
-0.48
54.14
0.63
1.00
ns
2
B
-0.14
66.62
0.89
1.00
ns
3
C
-2.69
80.05
0.01
0.14
ns
4
D
3.10
64.18
0.00
0.05
*
Table E.20: GEV.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
-0.17
53.51
0.86
1.00
ns
2
B
-0.01
60.46
0.99
1.00
ns
3
C
-1.55
59.73
0.13
1.00
ns
4
D
2.95
81.01
0.00
0.06
ns
==PAGE:140==
128
E Post-Hoc Comparison - Tables
E.6
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
Table E.21: Duration.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
1.36
77.25
0.18
1.00
ns
2
B
1.49
74.10
0.14
1.00
ns
3
C
0.61
82.53
0.54
1.00
ns
4
D
0.58
68.63
0.56
1.00
ns
Table E.22: Occurrence.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
-0.21
66.94
0.83
1.00
ns
2
B
0.07
71.92
0.95
1.00
ns
3
C
-1.80
69.67
0.08
1.00
ns
4
D
-1.01
68.40
0.32
1.00
ns
Table E.23: Coverage.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.58
65.28
0.56
1.00
ns
2
B
0.80
60.41
0.43
1.00
ns
3
C
-1.00
69.97
0.32
1.00
ns
4
D
-0.25
60.98
0.80
1.00
ns
Table E.24: GEV.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.71
65.10
0.48
1.00
ns
2
B
0.64
58.72
0.52
1.00
ns
3
C
-0.07
73.92
0.95
1.00
ns
4
D
-0.09
64.11
0.93
1.00
ns
==PAGE:141==
E.7 Global Approach, K=7
129
E.7
Global Approach, K=7
Table E.25: Duration.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
1.17
67.53
0.25
1.00
ns
2
B
-0.98
46.63
0.34
1.00
ns
3
C
0.32
81.09
0.75
1.00
ns
4
D
3.83
102.38
0.00
0.01
**
5
E
3.00
79.70
0.00
0.11
ns
6
F
1.08
70.36
0.28
1.00
ns
7
G
1.62
94.35
0.11
1.00
ns
Table E.26: Occurrence.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
-0.44
79.60
0.66
1.00
ns
2
B
-1.82
62.51
0.07
1.00
ns
3
C
-1.88
70.56
0.06
1.00
ns
4
D
0.38
50.65
0.71
1.00
ns
5
E
-0.02
66.04
0.98
1.00
ns
6
F
-0.52
69.58
0.61
1.00
ns
7
G
-0.40
65.48
0.69
1.00
ns
Table E.27: Coverage.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.42
72.68
0.68
1.00
ns
2
B
-1.76
47.38
0.09
1.00
ns
3
C
-0.87
67.60
0.39
1.00
ns
4
D
1.46
61.82
0.15
1.00
ns
5
E
1.08
69.20
0.28
1.00
ns
6
F
-0.02
72.93
0.98
1.00
ns
7
G
0.38
73.81
0.70
1.00
ns
Table E.28: GEV.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.81
71.52
0.42
1.00
ns
2
B
-1.33
45.48
0.19
1.00
ns
3
C
-0.55
67.00
0.58
1.00
ns
4
D
1.58
67.74
0.12
1.00
ns
5
E
1.58
75.88
0.12
1.00
ns
6
F
0.56
76.78
0.58
1.00
ns
7
G
0.47
69.83
0.64
1.00
ns
==PAGE:142==
130
E Post-Hoc Comparison - Tables
E.8
Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Comp. Fit
Table E.29: Duration.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
2.12
86.91
0.04
1.00
ns
2
B
0.29
58.84
0.77
1.00
ns
3
C
1.40
76.13
0.16
1.00
ns
4
D
1.17
73.92
0.24
1.00
ns
5
E
0.65
86.98
0.52
1.00
ns
6
F
1.87
92.19
0.06
1.00
ns
7
G
0.90
65.01
0.37
1.00
ns
Table E.30: Occurrence.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
-0.63
71.39
0.53
1.00
ns
2
B
-2.16
58.67
0.04
0.98
ns
3
C
-1.06
73.92
0.29
1.00
ns
4
D
0.25
53.42
0.80
1.00
ns
5
E
-1.07
62.67
0.29
1.00
ns
6
F
-0.61
58.53
0.55
1.00
ns
7
G
0.28
69.50
0.78
1.00
ns
Table E.31: Coverage.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.55
68.07
0.58
1.00
ns
2
B
-1.69
50.68
0.10
1.00
ns
3
C
0.01
58.80
0.99
1.00
ns
4
D
0.83
60.06
0.41
1.00
ns
5
E
-0.54
79.83
0.59
1.00
ns
6
F
0.32
61.98
0.75
1.00
ns
7
G
0.47
57.34
0.64
1.00
ns
Table E.32: GEV.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.58
64.76
0.57
1.00
ns
2
B
-1.46
47.14
0.15
1.00
ns
3
C
0.49
62.07
0.62
1.00
ns
4
D
1.02
61.78
0.31
1.00
ns
5
E
0.21
103.11
0.83
1.00
ns
6
F
1.11
80.56
0.27
1.00
ns
7
G
-0.02
50.34
0.98
1.00
ns
==PAGE:143==
E.9 Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
131
E.9
Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
Table E.33: Duration.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
1.89
77.60
0.06
1.00
ns
2
B
0.39
59.55
0.70
1.00
ns
3
C
0.44
91.45
0.66
1.00
ns
4
D
1.92
86.67
0.06
1.00
ns
5
E
1.71
82.44
0.09
1.00
ns
6
F
0.61
73.59
0.54
1.00
ns
7
G
1.27
64.47
0.21
1.00
ns
Table E.34: Occurrence.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
-0.48
65.25
0.64
1.00
ns
2
B
-1.13
66.37
0.26
1.00
ns
3
C
-1.27
62.72
0.21
1.00
ns
4
D
-0.40
65.12
0.69
1.00
ns
5
E
0.39
64.50
0.69
1.00
ns
6
F
-0.30
76.67
0.77
1.00
ns
7
G
-1.00
53.83
0.32
1.00
ns
Table E.35: Coverage.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.75
55.94
0.46
1.00
ns
2
B
-0.85
49.56
0.40
1.00
ns
3
C
-0.94
59.42
0.35
1.00
ns
4
D
0.54
65.12
0.59
1.00
ns
5
E
1.30
72.29
0.20
1.00
ns
6
F
0.24
75.18
0.81
1.00
ns
7
G
-0.50
50.14
0.62
1.00
ns
Table E.36: GEV.
Microstate
statistic
df
p
p.adj
p.adj.signif
1
A
0.86
56.64
0.39
1.00
ns
2
B
-0.70
46.43
0.49
1.00
ns
3
C
0.09
58.03
0.93
1.00
ns
4
D
0.44
62.47
0.66
1.00
ns
5
E
1.81
81.18
0.07
1.00
ns
6
F
0.41
70.36
0.68
1.00
ns
7
G
-0.22
51.70
0.83
1.00
ns
==PAGE:144==
132
==PAGE:145==
APPENDIX F
Post-Hoc Comparisons - Figures
Boxplot of the post-hoc comparison results. Significant findings are indicated in each
plot.
==PAGE:146==
134
F Post-Hoc Comparisons - Figures
F.1
Lit. Approach, K = 4
==PAGE:147==
F.1 Lit. Approach, K = 4
135
==PAGE:148==
136
F Post-Hoc Comparisons - Figures
F.2
Global Approach, K=4
==PAGE:149==
F.2 Global Approach, K=4
137
==PAGE:150==
138
F Post-Hoc Comparisons - Figures
F.3
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Compet. Fit
==PAGE:151==
F.3 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Compet. Fit
139
==PAGE:152==
140
F Post-Hoc Comparisons - Figures
F.4
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Overall Fit
==PAGE:153==
F.4 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Lit. Sorting, Overall Fit
141
==PAGE:154==
142
F Post-Hoc Comparisons - Figures
F.5
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit
==PAGE:155==
F.5 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit
143
==PAGE:156==
144
F Post-Hoc Comparisons - Figures
F.6
Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
==PAGE:157==
F.6 Indiv. Approach, K=4, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
145
==PAGE:158==
146
F Post-Hoc Comparisons - Figures
F.7
Global Approach, K=7
==PAGE:159==
F.7 Global Approach, K=7
147
==PAGE:160==
148
F Post-Hoc Comparisons - Figures
F.8
Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit
==PAGE:161==
F.8 Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Compet. Fit
149
==PAGE:162==
150
F Post-Hoc Comparisons - Figures
F.9
Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
==PAGE:163==
F.9 Indiv. Approach, K=7, Global Sorting, Overall Fit
151
==PAGE:164==
152
==PAGE:165==
Bibliography
[1]
World Health Organization. Schizophrenia. October 2019. url: https://www.
who.int/news- room/fact- sheets/detail/schizophrenia. (accessed: 01
February 2021) (cited on page 1).
[2]
World Health Organization. ICD-11 for Martolity and Morbidity Statistics.
September 2020. url: https://icd.who.int/browse11/l- m/en#/http:
//id.who.int/icd/entity/1683919430. (accessed: 1st of February 2021)
(cited on pages 1–3).
[3]
Sune Straszek and Oegard Christina G. Skizofreni Laegehandbogen. July 2019.
url: https://www.sundhed.dk/sundhedsfaglig/laegehaandbogen/psykiatri/
tilstandeog-sygdomme/psykoser/skizofreni/. (accessed: 1st of February
2021) (cited on page 1).
[4]
R. Walter Heinrichs. “Historical origins of schizophrenia: Two early madmen
and their illness.” eng. In: Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences 39.4
(2003), pages 349–363. issn: 00225061, 15206696. doi: 10.1002/jhbs.10152
(cited on page 1).
[5]
Eugen Bleuler. “Dementia praecox; or, The group of schizophrenias.” Translated
by J. Zinkin. In: (1950) (cited on page 1).
[6]
Watson Breedlove. “Behavioral Neuroscience.” In: Hitchhiker’s Guide to the
Galaxy Series. Sinauar Associates, 2017. Chapter 16. isbn: 9781605354187 (cited
on pages 1, 2).
[7]
The National Institute of Mental Health. Schizophrenia. May 2020. url: https:
//www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/schizophrenia/index.shtml. (ac-
cessed: 1st of February 2021) (cited on page 2).
[8]
I. I. Gottesman. “Schizophrenia genesis: The origins of madness.” In: (1991)
(cited on page 2).
[9]
Joshua Gordon. Piecing Together the Genetic Puzzle of Schizophrenia. March
2020. url: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/about/director/messages/2020/
piecing-together-the-genetic-puzzle-of-schizophrenia.shtml (cited
on page 2).
[10]
Daniel P. Howrigan et al. “Exome sequencing in schizophrenia-affected parent-
offspring trios reveals risk conferred by protein-coding de novo mutations.” eng.
In: Nature Neuroscience 23.2 (2020), pages 185–+. issn: 15461726, 10976256.
doi: 10.1038/s41593-019-0564-3 (cited on page 2).
==PAGE:166==
154
Bibliography
[11]
K C Murphy et al. “High rates of schizophrenia in adults with velo-cardio-facial
syndrome.” eng. In: Archives of General Psychiatry 56.10 (1999), pages 940–5.
issn: 15383636, 0003990x. doi: 10 . 1001 / archpsyc . 56 . 10 . 940 (cited on
page 2).
[12]
J M van Rossum. “The significance of dopamine-receptor blockade for the mech-
anism of action of neuroleptic drugs.” eng. In: Archives Internationales De Phar-
macodynamie Et De Therapie 160.2 (1966), pages 492–4. issn: 00039780 (cited
on page 2).
[13]
Kalliopi Vallianatou. “Antipsychotics.” eng. In: Medicine (united Kingdom) 48.12
(2020), pages 800–803. issn: 13654357, 13573039. doi: 10.1016/j.mpmed.2020.
09.002 (cited on pages 2, 7).
[14]
Javier Ortiz-Orendain et al. “Antipsychotic combinations for schizophrenia.”
eng. In: Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2017.6 (2017), page CD009005.
issn: 14651858, 1464780x, 1469493x, 13616137. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD009005.
pub2 (cited on page 2).
[15]
Stefan Leucht and R. Lasser. “The concepts of remission and recovery in schizophre-
nia.” eng. In: Pharmacopsychiatry 39.5 (2006), pages 161–170. issn: 14390795,
01763679. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-949513 (cited on page 2).
[16]
Erika Jääskeläinen et al. “A systematic review and meta-analysis of recovery
in schizophrenia.” eng. In: Schizophrenia Bulletin 39.6 (2013), pages 1296–1306.
issn: 17451701, 05867614. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbs130 (cited on page 2).
[17]
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders, Vol. 5th edition. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.,
2013. isbn: 978-0-89042-554-1 (cited on page 3).
[18]
E. Bearden Carrie et al. “Cognitive Phenotypes and Endophenotypes: Concepts
and Criteria.” eng. In: Neurophenotypes (2017), pages 61–80. doi: 10.1007/978-
1-4614-3846-5_4,10.1007/978-1-4614-3846-5 (cited on page 3).
[19]
Gráinne Mcloughlin et al. “In search of biomarkers in psychiatry: EEG-based
measures of brain function.” eng. In: American Journal of Medical Genetics,
Part B: Neuropsychiatric Genetics 165.2 (2014), pages 111–121. issn: 1552485x,
15524841. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.b.32208 (cited on page 3).
[20]
AJ Atkinson et al. “Biomarkers and surrogate endpoints: Preferred definitions
and conceptual framework.” eng. In: Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics
69.3 (2001), pages 89–95. issn: 15326535, 00099236. doi: 10.1067/mcp.2000.
113989 (cited on page 3).
[21]
Mark F. Lenzenweger. “Endophenotype, intermediate phenotype, biomarker:
Definitions, concept comparisons, clarifications.” eng. In: Depression and Anx-
iety 30.3 (2013), pages 185–189. issn: 15206394, 10914269. doi: 10.1002/da.
22042 (cited on page 3).
==PAGE:167==
Bibliography
155
[22]
Mary K. Wojczynski and Hemant K. Tiwari. “Definition of Phenotype.” eng. In:
Advances in Genetics 60 (2008), pages 75–105. issn: 00652660. doi: 10.1016/
S0065-2660(07)00404-X (cited on page 3).
[23]
Irving I. Gottesman and Todd D. Gould. “The endophenotype concept in psy-
chiatry: Etymology and strategic intentions.” eng. In: American Journal of Psy-
chiatry 160.4 (2003), pages 636–645. issn: 15357228, 0002953x. doi: 10.1176/
appi.ajp.160.4.636 (cited on page 3).
[24]
Glenna L. Read and Isaiah J. Innis. “Electroencephalography (Eeg).” In: The
International Encyclopedia of Communication Research Methods. American
Cancer Society, 2017, pages 1–18. isbn: 9781118901731. doi: https://doi.
org/10.1002/9781118901731.iecrm0080. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley . com / doi / pdf / 10 . 1002 / 9781118901731 . iecrm0080. url: https :
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781118901731.iecrm0080
(cited on pages 3, 14).
[25]
Christoph M. Michel et al. Electrical neuroimaging. eng. Cambridge University
Press, 2009, pages 1–238. isbn: 9780521879798. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511596889
(cited on pages 3, 20–22).
[26]
Jennifer J. Newson and Tara C. Thiagarajan. “EEG Frequency Bands in Psychi-
atric Disorders: A Review of Resting State Studies.” eng. In: Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience 12 (2019), page 521. issn: 16625161. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.
00521 (cited on page 3).
[27]
Mei-Hua Hall et al. “Substantial shared genetic influences on schizophrenia and
event-related potentials.” eng. In: American Journal of Psychiatry 164.5 (2007),
pages 804–812. issn: 15357228, 0002953x. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.164.5.804
(cited on page 3).
[28]
D Lehmann et al. “EEG ALPHA-MAP SERIES - BRAIN MICRO-STATES
BY SPACE-ORIENTED ADAPTIVE SEGMENTATION.” eng. In: Electroen-
cephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 67.3 (1987), pages 271–288. issn:
18726380, 00134694. doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(87)90025-3 (cited on pages 3,
5, 16).
[29]
Christoph M. Michel and Thomas Koenig. “EEG microstates as a tool for study-
ing the temporal dynamics of whole-brain neuronal networks: A review.” eng.
In: Neuroimage 180.Part B, Sp. Iss. SI (2018), pages 577–593. issn: 10959572,
10538119. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.11.062 (cited on pages 4, 17).
[30]
Dietrich Lehmann et al. “Core networks for visual-concrete and abstract thought
content: A brain electric microstate analysis.” eng. In: Neuroimage 49.1 (2010),
pages 1073–1079. issn: 10959572, 10538119. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.
07.054 (cited on pages 4, 17).
[31]
Felix Schlegel et al. “EEG microstates during resting represent personality dif-
ferences.” eng. In: Brain Topography 25.1 (2012), pages 20–26. issn: 15736792,
08960267. doi: 10.1007/s10548-011-0189-7 (cited on pages 4, 17).
==PAGE:168==
156
Bibliography
[32]
Janir Ramos da Cruz et al. “EEG microstates are a candidate endophenotype
for schizophrenia.” eng. In: Nature Communications 11.1 (2020), page 3089. issn:
20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-16914-1 (cited on pages 4, 6, 9, 17, 29,
32–36, 38, 40–42, 52, 53, 55, 57–59, 65–68).
[33]
Arjun Khanna et al. “Microstates in resting-state EEG: Current status and
future directions.” eng. In: Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 49 (2015),
pages 105–113. issn: 18737528, 01497634. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.
12.010 (cited on pages 4–7, 16, 17, 19, 66).
[34]
Anna Custo et al. “Electroencephalographic Resting-State Networks: Source
Localization of Microstates.” eng. In: Brain Connectivity 7.10 (2017), pages 671–
682. issn: 21580022, 21580014. doi: 10.1089/brain.2016.0476 (cited on
pages 4, 7, 17, 66, 67, 70).
[35]
D. Lehmann et al. “Brain electric microstates and momentary conscious mind
states as building blocks of spontaneous thinking: I. Visual imagery and ab-
stract thoughts.” eng. In: International Journal of Psychophysiology 29.1 (1998),
pages 1–11. issn: 18727697, 01678760. doi: 10.1016/S0167-8760(97)00098-6
(cited on page 5).
[36]
D Lehmann. “Brain Electric Microstates and Cognition - The Atoms of Thought.”
eng. In: Machinery of the Mind (1990), pages 209–224 (cited on page 5).
[37]
Rudolf Friedrich. Evolution of dynamical structures in complex systems : pro-
ceedings of the international symposium, Stuttgart, July 16 - 17, 1992. eng.
Springer, 1992, VIII, 415 S (unknown) (cited on page 5).
[38]
William James. “The Principles of Psychology.” und. In: American Journal of
Psychology 3.4 (1891), page 578. issn: 19398298, 00029556. doi: 10 . 2307 /
1412102 (cited on page 5).
[39]
J.-P. Changeux and C.M. Michel. “Mechanisms of Neural Integration at the
Brain-scale Level.” eng. In: S. Grillner and A. M. Graybie. Microcircuits : The
Interface Between Neurons and Global Brain Function, Dahlem workshop re-
ports vol. 93. 2006 (cited on page 5).
[40]
Emmanuelle Tognoli and J. A. Scott Kelso. “The Metastable Brain.” eng. In:
Neuron 81.1 (2014), pages 35–48. issn: 10974199, 08966273. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuron.2013.12.022,10.1016/j.neuron.2013.12.022 (cited on page 5).
[41]
E. R. John. “A field theory of consciousness.” eng. In: Consciousness and Cogni-
tion 10.2 (2001), pages 184–213. issn: 10902376, 10538100. doi: 10.1006/ccog.
2001.0508 (cited on page 5).
[42]
T. Dierks et al. “EEG-microstates in mild memory impairment and Alzheimer’s
disease: Possible association with disturbed information processing.” eng. In:
Journal of Neural Transmission 104.4-5 (1997), pages 483–495. issn: 14351463,
03009564. doi: 10.1007/BF01277666 (cited on page 6).
==PAGE:169==
Bibliography
157
[43]
A. Stevens et al. “Abnormal topography of EEG microstates in Gilles de la
Tourette syndrome.” eng. In: European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neu-
roscience 246.6 (1996), pages 310–316. issn: 14338491, 09401334. doi: 10.1007/
BF02189024 (cited on page 6).
[44]
Mitsuru Kikuchi et al. “EEG microstate analysis in Drug-Naive patients with
panic disorder.” eng. In: Plos One 6.7 (2011). Edited by Takeo Yoshikawa,
e22912. issn: 19326203. doi: 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0022912 (cited on
page 6).
[45]
Thomas Koenig et al. “A deviant EEG brain microstate in acute, neuroleptic-
naive schizophrenics at rest.” eng. In: European Archives of Psychiatry and
Clinical Neuroscience 249.4 (1999), pages 205–211. issn: 14338491, 09401334.
doi: 10.1007/s004060050088 (cited on pages 6, 9, 17, 40, 66, 67).
[46]
Dietrich Lehmann et al. “EEG microstate duration and syntax in acute, medication-
naïve, first-episode schizophrenia: A multi-center study.” eng. In: Psychiatry Re-
search - Neuroimaging 138.2 (2005), pages 141–156. issn: 18727506, 09254927,
18727123, 01651781. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2004.05.007 (cited on
pages 6, 7, 9, 17, 26, 32, 66, 67, 71).
[47]
Keiichiro Nishida et al. “EEG microstates associated with salience and fron-
toparietal networks in frontotemporal dementia, schizophrenia and Alzheimer’s
disease.” eng. In: Clinical Neurophysiology 124.6 (2013), pages 1106–1114. issn:
18728952, 13882457. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2013.01.005 (cited on pages 6,
9, 17, 67).
[48]
Miralena I. Tomescu et al. “Schizophrenia patients and 22q11.2 deletion syn-
drome adolescents at risk express the same deviant patterns of resting state EEG
microstates: A candidate endophenotype of schizophrenia.” eng. In: Schizophre-
nia Research: Cognition 2.3 (2015), pages 159–165. issn: 22150013. doi: 10.
1016/j.scog.2015.04.005 (cited on pages 6, 9, 17, 32, 67, 68).
[49]
Mitsuru Kikuchi et al. “Native EEG and treatment effects in neuroleptic-naïve
schizophrenic patients: Time and frequency domain approaches.” eng. In: Schizophre-
nia Research 97.1-3 (2007), pages 163–172. issn: 15732509, 09209964. doi: 10.
1016/j.schres.2007.07.012 (cited on pages 6, 9, 17, 67, 68).
[50]
Mate Baradits et al. “Multivariate patterns of EEG microstate parameters and
their role in the discrimination of patients with schizophrenia from healthy
controls.” eng. In: Psychiatry Research 288 (2020), page 112938. issn: 01651781,
18727123. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2020.112938 (cited on pages 6, 9, 67,
68).
[51]
Fanglan Wang et al. “Electroencephalographic Microstates in Schizophrenia and
Bipolar Disorder.” und. In: Frontiers in Psychiatry 12 (2021). issn: 16640640.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.638722 (cited on pages 6, 9, 67, 68).
==PAGE:170==
158
Bibliography
[52]
Renate de Bock et al. “EEG microstates as biomarker for psychosis in ultra-
high-risk patients.” eng. In: Translational Psychiatry 10.1 (2020), page 300. issn:
21583188. doi: 10.1038/s41398-020-00963-7 (cited on pages 6, 9, 67).
[53]
V. Strelets et al. “Chronic schizophrenics with positive symptomatology have
shortened EEG microstate durations.” eng. In: Clinical Neurophysiology 114.11
(2003), pages 2043–2051. issn: 18728952, 13882457. doi: 10 . 1016 / S1388 -
2457(03)00211-6 (cited on pages 6, 66).
[54]
Satoshi Irisawa et al. “Increased omega complexity and decreased microstate
duration in nonmedicated schizophrenic patients.” eng. In: Neuropsychobiology
54.2 (2006), pages 134–139. issn: 0302282x, 14230224. doi: 10.1159/000098264
(cited on page 6).
[55]
Amatya J. Mackintosh et al. “EEG Microstate Differences in Medicated vs.
Medication-Naive First-Episode Psychosis Patients.” eng. In: Frontiers in Psy-
chiatry 11 (2020), page 600606. issn: 16640640. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.
600606 (cited on page 6).
[56]
Marcus E. Raichle. “A paradigm shift in functional brain imaging.” eng. In: Jour-
nal of Neuroscience 29.41 (2009), pages 12729–12734. issn: 15292401, 02706474.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4366-09.2009 (cited on page 7).
[57]
Timothy P. Meehan and Steven L. Bressler. “Neurocognitive networks: Find-
ings, models, and theory.” eng. In: Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews
36.10 (2012), pages 2232–2247. issn: 18737528, 01497634. doi: 10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2012.08.002 (cited on pages 7, 8).
[58]
Juliane Britz et al. “BOLD correlates of EEG topography reveal rapid resting-
state network dynamics.” eng. In: Neuroimage 52.4 (2010), pages 1162–1170.
issn: 10959572, 10538119. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.02.052 (cited
on pages 7, 17, 67, 68).
[59]
Anna Custo et al. “EEG source imaging of brain states using spatiotempo-
ral regression.” eng. In: Neuroimage 96 (2014), pages 106–116. issn: 10959572,
10538119. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.04.002 (cited on page 7).
[60]
Dimitri Van De Ville et al. “EEG microstate sequences in healthy humans at
rest reveal scale-free dynamics.” eng. In: Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 107.42 (2010), pages 18179–18184.
issn: 10916490, 00278424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1007841107 (cited on pages 7,
32, 71).
[61]
Christina Andreou et al. “Resting-state connectivity in the prodromal phase of
schizophrenia: Insights from EEG microstates.” eng. In: Schizophrenia Research
152.2-3 (2014), pages 513–520. issn: 15732509, 09209964. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
schres.2013.12.008 (cited on page 9).
[62]
World Health Organization. Mental and behavioural disorders (F00-F99). 2019.
url: https : / / icd . who . int / browse10 / 2019 / en # /F20 - F29. (accessed:
26.03.2021) (cited on pages 11, 12).
==PAGE:171==
Bibliography
159
[63]
Ruth A. Hannon and Carol M. Porth. Porth pathophysiology: Concepts of altered
health states: Second Canadian edition. eng. Wolters Kluwer Health Adis (ESP),
2016, pages 1–1648. isbn: 9781496329820 (cited on page 13).
[64]
Saeid Sanei and J. A. Chambers. EEG Signal Processing. eng. John Wiley
and Sons, 2013, Online–Ressource (xxii, 289 p) (unknown). doi: 10 . 1002 /
9780470511923 (cited on page 13).
[65]
Assoc Prof Frank Gaillard. Neuroanatomy: lateral cortex (diagrams). Novem-
ber 2020. url: https://radiopaedia.org/cases/neuroanatomy-lateral-
cortex-diagrams?lang=gb (cited on page 13).
[66]
Gernot R. Müller-Putz. “Electroencephalography.” eng. In: Handbook of Clinical
Neurology 168 (2020), pages 249–262. issn: 22124152, 00729752. doi: 10.1016/
B978-0-444-63934-9.00018-4 (cited on page 14).
[67]
Alan Gevins and Michael E. Smith. “Electroencephalography (EEG) in Neu-
roergonomics.” eng. In: Neuroergonomics: the Brain at Work (2009). doi: 10.
1093/acprof:oso/9780195177619.003.0002 (cited on page 14).
[68]
Biosemi. Headcaps. url: https://www.biosemi.com/headcap.htm. (accessed:
12th of February 2021) (cited on page 15).
[69]
Arnaud Delorme. Background on Independent Component Analysis applied to
EEG. url: https://eeglab.org/tutorials/ConceptsGuide/ICA_background.
html. (accessed: 1st of June 2021) (cited on pages 15, 16).
[70]
D. Lehmann. “Multichannel topography of human alpha EEG fields.” eng. In:
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 31.4 (1971), pages 439–49.
issn: 18726380, 00134694. doi: 10.1016/0013-4694(71)90165-9 (cited on
page 16).
[71]
Andreas Trier Poulsen et al. “Microstate EEGlab toolbox: An introductory
guide.” In: bioRxiv (2018). doi: 10 . 1101 / 289850. eprint: https : / / www .
biorxiv.org/content/early/2018/03/27/289850.full.pdf. url: https:
//www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2018/03/27/289850 (cited on pages 18,
23, 26, 29, 36, 39, 42).
[72]
Arnaud Delorme and Scott Makeig. “EEGLAB: An open source toolbox for
analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analy-
sis.” eng. In: Journal of Neuroscience Methods 134.1 (2004), pages 9–21. issn:
1872678x, 01650270. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . jneumeth . 2003 . 10 . 009 (cited on
pages 18, 29, 35, 36).
[73]
Tue Herlau et al. Introduction to Machine Learning. eng. 2021, pages 299–301
(cited on page 21).
[74]
RD Pascual-Marci et al. “Segmentation óf Brain Electical-Activity Into Mi-
crostates - Model Estimation and Validation.” eng. In: Ieee Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering 42.7 (1995), pages 658–665. issn: 00189294, 15582531.
doi: 10.1109/10.391164 (cited on pages 23–25, 41, 66).
==PAGE:172==
160
Bibliography
[75]
J Besag. “On the statistical analysis of dirty pictures.” eng. In: Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society Series B-methodological 48.3 (1986), pages 259–302.
issn: 00359246. doi: 10 . 1111 / j . 2517 - 6161 . 1986 . tb01412 . x (cited on
page 26).
[76]
Joost C.F. de Winter. Human Subject Research for Engineers. eng. Springer
International Publishing, 2017. isbn: 9783319569635 (cited on page 27).
[77]
Yoav Benjamini and Yosef Hochberg. “Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A
Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing.” eng. In: Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society. Series B (methodological) 57.1 (1995), pages 289–300.
issn: 00359246 (cited on page 28).
[78]
Fabian Mager. Microstate Analaysis Code. url: https://www.dropbox.com/
sh/ptr9h416xipwb02/AAAvhYM0HNyr5N8fqNP0mzVha?dl=0 (cited on page 29).
[79]
Mette Oedegaard Nielsen et al. “Alterations of the brain reward system in
antipsychotic naive schizophrenia patients.” eng. In: Biological Psychiatry 71.10
(2012), pages 898–905. issn: 18732402, 00063223. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.
2012.02.007 (cited on page 29).
[80]
Kirsten Borup Bojesen et al. “Associations Between Cognitive Function and Lev-
els of Glutamatergic Metabolites and Gamma-Aminobutyric Acid in Antipsychotic-
Naive Patients With Schizophrenia or Psychosis.” eng. In: Biological Psychia-
try 89.3 (2021), pages 278–287. issn: 18732402, 00063223. doi: 10.1016/j.
biopsych.2020.06.027 (cited on page 29).
[81]
Kasper Jessen et al. “Patterns of Cortical Structures and Cognition in Antipsychotic-
Naïve Patients With First-Episode Schizophrenia: A Partial Least Squares Cor-
relation Analysis.” eng. In: Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and
Neuroimaging 4.5 (2019), pages 444–453. issn: 24519030, 24519022. doi: 10.
1016/j.bpsc.2018.09.006 (cited on page 29).
[82]
Karen S. Ambrosen et al. “A machine-learning framework for robust and reliable
prediction of short- and long-term treatment response in initially antipsychotic-
naive schizophrenia patients based on multimodal neuropsychiatric data.” eng.
In: Translational Psychiatry 10.1 (2020), page 276. issn: 21583188. doi: 10.
1038/s41398-020-00962-8 (cited on page 29).
[83]
Thomas Koenig et al. “Millisecond by millisecond, year by year: Normative
EEG microstates and developmental stages.” eng. In: Neuroimage 16.1 (2002),
pages 41–48. issn: 10959572, 10538119. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2002.1070 (cited
on pages 30, 32).
[84]
Arnaud Delorme. EEG Preprocessing in EEGlab. url: https://sccn.ucsd.
edu/githubwiki/files/eeglab2019_aspet_artifact_and_ica.pdf. (ac-
cessed: 1st of June 2021) (cited on page 32).
[85]
Biosemi. Frequently asked questions - What is the function of the CMS and DRL
electrodes. Ground, Reference or what ? url: http://biosemi.com/faq/cms&
drl.htm. (accessed: 1st of June 2021) (cited on page 32).
==PAGE:173==
Bibliography
161
[86]
Janir Ramos da Cruz et al. “An automatic pre-processing pipeline for EEG
analysis (APP) based on robust statistics.” eng. In: Clinical Neurophysiology
129.7 (2018), pages 1427–1437. issn: 18728952, 13882457. doi: 10.1016/j.
clinph.2018.04.600 (cited on page 33).
[87]
Arnaud Delorme et al. “Independent EEG sources are dipolar.” eng. In: Plos
One 7.2 (2012). Edited by Lawrence M. Ward, e30135. issn: 19326203. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0030135 (cited on page 33).
[88]
Nature Communications. EEG microstates are a candidate endophenotype for
schizophrenia - Supplementary Information. url: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41467-020-16914-1#Sec15. (accessed: 17th of June 2021) (cited
on page 36).
[89]
Christoph M. Michel. “High-resolution EEG.” eng. In: Handbook of Clinical
Neurology 160 (2019), pages 185–201. issn: 22124152, 00729752. doi: 10.1016/
B978-0-444-64032-1.00012-6 (cited on pages 40, 66).
[90]
Datanovia. Repeated Measures ANOVA in R. url: https://www.datanovia.
com/en/lessons/repeated-measures-anova-in-r/. (accessed: 1st of June
2021) (cited on page 44).
[91]
Arjun Khanna et al. “Reliability of resting-state microstate features in elec-
troencephalography.” eng. In: Plos One 9.12 (2014). Edited by Thomas Koenig,
e114163. issn: 19326203. doi: 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0114163 (cited on
pages 65, 66).
[92]
W. K. Strik et al. “Three-dimensional tomography of event-related potentials
during response inhibition: Evidence for phasic frontal lobe activation.” eng. In:
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology 108.4 (1998), pages 406–
413. issn: 18726380, 00134694 (cited on page 66).
[93]
Simon Anhøj et al. “Alterations of intrinsic connectivity networks in antipsychotic-
naïve first-episode schizophrenia.” eng. In: Schizophrenia Bulletin 44.6 (2018),
pages 1332–1340. issn: 17451701, 05867614. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbx171
(cited on pages 67, 68).
[94]
Julia M. Sheﬀield and Deanna M. Barch. “Cognition and resting-state func-
tional connectivity in schizophrenia.” eng. In: Neuroscience and Biobehavioral
Reviews 61 (2016), pages 108–120. issn: 18737528, 01497634. doi: 10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2015.12.007 (cited on page 67).
[95]
David L. Braff. “Information Processing and Attention Dysfunctions in Schizophre-
nia.” In: Schizophrenia Bulletin 19.2 (January 1993), pages 233–259. issn: 0586-
7614. doi: 10.1093/schbul/19.2.233. eprint: https://academic.oup.com/
schizophreniabulletin/article-pdf/19/2/233/5274860/19-2-233.pdf.
url: https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/19.2.233 (cited on page 67).
[96]
Janir Da Cruz. Private Communication. June 2021 (cited on page 68).
==PAGE:174==
