==PAGE:1==
Examination of ISOВӯ19650 standard impact on
the Danish building sector and how to faciliВӯ
tate its implementation
Master Thesis 2021 July
DTU Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Examination of ISOВӯ19650 standard impact on the Danish building sector and how
to facilitate its implementation
Master Thesis 2021 July
22 JULY, 2021
By
Mohammad Ahmad Esteitie
Supervisor:
Jan KarlshГёj, DTUВӯBYG, Lector and Head of Section,
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, , Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis is submitted as partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree
of Master of Science in Civil Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark.
The project is credited to 30 ECTS points.
The project and subject were determined in collaboration between the author and
the supervisor. And were conducted from February 2021 to July 2021
It assumed that the reader has basic knowledge and understanding in BIM, ISO
19650 and civil engineering.
Mohammad Ahmad Esteitie Вӯ S160001
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The building industry is moving towards a future with more information than ever
before. A growing interset for every aspect of the entire building lifecycle is rising
and creating more information along its way. The need for information manageВӯ
ment standards becomes more relevant.
The ISO 19650 standard and European standard sees its rise around Europe, but
what are the thoughts of the Danish building sector, a country that is already a
part of the leading movers in digital building. This thesis aims, to examine the
influence ISO 19650 have in the Danish building sector
The analysis is carried out by desktop research, interviews with leading experts in
their respective fields and individuals, that are part of the current Danish building
sector. The analysis found, that there is a place for ISO 19650 in the Danish
building sector, and that the development, and direction of digital building including
BIM is the reasons behind such, furthermore the political agenda for sustainability
and digitalization could also support this.
The current position towards the implementation of ISO 19650 in the Danish buildВӯ
ing sector is divided, primally hesitant but a few parties are ready to embrace it,
as they see it as an inescapable necessity for the building sector.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Dedication and Acknowledgements
Mohammad Ahmad Esteitie , MSc Civil Engineering degree, DTU
This thesis is dedicated to my loving and supportive family, thanks to my brothВӯ
ers, Rabii Esteitie, Khaled Esteitie and Omar Esteitie, who always pushed me to
become better, and wants the best for me.
The warmest and most special thanks, to my mother and father, Abir Khalil and
Ahmad Esteitie. Thank you for your understanding, support, and encouragement
during this time and throughout my entire life, I wouldnвҖҷt be where I am today,
without your help. You will forever be in my heart. I canвҖҷt thank you enough.
A lot of love to the newest member of the family, my nephew Isaa Esteitie.
A special thanks to my kindest and sweetest cousin, Ulla Chehaiber, you always
find time to help me and go through my assignments, and this time was not any
different.
I am especially indebted to my supervisor, Jan KarlshГёj. Thank you for your time
and support during my research. Your guidance and constructive feedback was
the backbone of this thesis. I sincerely enjoyed our conversations and meetings.
One thing I would like to say is, вҖқYou really have a kind heart. I wish you all the
best and great healthвҖқ.
Lastly, a sincere gratitude goes to the interviewees, who voluntarily helped me
collect my data, and provide me with a lot of guidance, without you guys this
research would not have been completed.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Scope of the Thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Delimitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
3
2.1
Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3
Introduction to the ISOВӯ19650 standard series
4
3.1
Introduction to ISO 19650 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
ISO 19650 Part 1 Вӯ Concept and principles
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
ISO 19650 Part 2 Вӯ Delivery phase of the assets
. . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
ISO 19650 Part 3 Вӯ Operational phase of assets . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
ISO 19650 Part 5 Вӯ Security minded approach to information manВӯ
agement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Denmark
12
4.1
Digitalization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
ICT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Software tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.4
buildingSmart International
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.5
Political agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.6
Bygningsstyrelsen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Insight to the viewpoints/actions of companies in the Danish marked 19
5.1
Public Developers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2
Perspective of COWI
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Perspective of вҖқBygherreforening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.4
Perspective of вҖқDansk Arkitekt VirksomhederвҖқ . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.5
Perspective of Molio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6
UK
24
6.1
ISO 19650 In the UK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.2
BIM In UK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7
PESTLE analyse
28
7.1
An PESTLE analyses into the impact and implementation process
of ISO 19650 standard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
8
Two scenarios
31
8.1
First scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
v
==PAGE:8==
8.2
Second scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
9
Proposal how to implement The ISO 19650 standard
38
9.1
Proposal 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
9.2
Proposal 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
9.3
Proposal 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
10 Discussion
41
10.1 Assessment of proposals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
10.2 Chosen Proposal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
11 Conclusion
46
12 Actions and remcomendations
48
Bibliography
49
A Prepared Questions for the interview
53
B Interview with Mathias Hjorth LГёvhГёj From Bygningsstyrrelsen
54
C Interview with Gunnar Friborg from Molio
57
D Interview with Sara Asmussen From Bygherreforeningen
60
E
Interview with Peter Bo Olsen an independent consultant
63
F
Interview with David Churcher an independent consultant
66
G Interview with Jens Kristian Lund Birkmose from COWI
68
H Interview with Micheal Friis from KГёbenhavns Ejendomme
70
I
Interview with Preben Dahl from Dansk Arkitekt Virksomheder
73
vi
==PAGE:9==
List of Abbreviations
SME Вӯ Small and mediumВӯsized enterprises
BIM Вӯ Building Information Modelling
AECOO Вӯ Architecture, Engineering, Construction, Owner Operator
OIR Вӯ Organizational information requirements
AIR Вӯ Asset information requirements
EIR Вӯ Exchange information requirements
AIM Вӯ Asset information model
PIM Вӯ Project information model
CDE Вӯ Common Data Environment
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
List of Figures
2.1
Table of interviewees
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.1
The life cycle for assets and asset information management [2] . .
5
3.2
Common data environment concept[2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Interfaces between parties and teams for the purpose of information
management [2]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.4
An illustration showing the responsibility of the different parties split
by activities and stages [2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
An illustration showing the activities and stages of ISO 19650 part 2
9
4.1
The figure, shows the difference in relation to the use of basic and
advanced digital tools divided between Small enterprises and big
enterprises, in Denmark between the years 2015Вӯ2020 [30] . . . .
18
6.1
A BIM Maturity levels Model for the UK, made by Mark Bew and
Mervyn Richards [47]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
ix
==PAGE:12==
x
==PAGE:13==
1
Introduction
1.1
Scope of the Thesis
The DS/EN ISO 19650 standard series, an international standard that addresses
how to manage information throughout the whole life cycle of a built asset, with
the aid of BIM. A new standard that is relevant for all European countries.
What impact can this new standard have on the Danish building sector, that is
already accustomed to information management, though the use of their ICTВӯ
requirment and ICTВӯprocessmananul.
This study, aims to investigate the ISO 19650 standard, and cover the Danish
building sector opinion in regard to it. Furthermore, see if there is any relation to
draw from the use of ISO 19650 in UK and BIM.
Additionally, to that it covers the political agenda for the Danish government, that
pushes for at more digitalized and sustainable future. Finally, it covers buildingSВӯ
mart, tools and software program that can comply with ISO 19650.
The digitalization in the building sector is evolving rapidly, more demands and
requirements, are being asked for the entire lifecycle of assets. Every single data
that can be extracted, regarding projects, is becoming more important than ever.
The involvement of multiple parties, in the projects, though the use of BIM and
similar tools, demands new requirement for standards across all systems.
This analysis is carried out by interviews, phone conversation and mail correВӯ
spondence with well experienced individuals in the Danish building sector. Some
experienced BIM specialist in the Danish building sector, and a BIM specialist
from the UK building sector, with an involved in the development of ISO 19650.
The use of desktop research for the understanding of BIM, buildingSmart, softВӯ
ware programs and their relation to ISO 19650. The use of government reports
to investigate their political agendas in relation to the Danish building sector, and
furtherer more, an analysis of BIM in the UK.
This analysis addresses two scenarios for ISO 19650 into The Danish building
sector. One scenario, is an implementation, and the other is not an implemenВӯ
tation. Lastly, this study covers 3 proposal of implementation strategies of ISO
19650 into the Danish building Sector. With a discussion of them, and finds the
most prominent one.
1
==PAGE:14==
Hypotheses
For the thesis, 3 hypotheses would be looked at, to see if they can be confirmed
or refuted, based on the research and findings in the thesis.
вҖў ISO 19650, will not have any influence in the Danish building sector ?
вҖў Would it be reasonable for the Danish building sector to implement ISO
19650 ?
вҖў The Danish building market would have to accommodate with ISO 19650 ?
1.2
Delimitations
This study doesnвҖҷt cover the listed elements.
вҖў The implementation phase over a period of time
вҖў Cost and expensive of an implementation of ISO 19650
вҖў What problems ISO 19650 would solve for the Danish building sector
вҖў Identifying the tools that can comply with all of ISO 19650
вҖў Projects that uses ISO 19650, and which benefits of it
вҖў buildingSmart projects that uses ISO 19650
2
==PAGE:15==
2
Methodology
This study, is a literature study based on, quantitative data, qualitative data, interВӯ
views. The data collected is of primary, secondary, and tertiary sources
2.1
Data collection
2.1.1
Quantitative data
Quantitative data were collected from government reports, that expressed the
statistic situation of digitalization and sustainably in Denmark. Furthermore, govВӯ
ernment reports that expressed the statistic and numeral situation of BIM in UK.
2.1.2
Qualitative data
Qualitative data were collect of literature studies, that could provide information
regarding the evolution of digital building, BIM, ISO 19650, software programs
and tools that support ISO 19650. Furthermore, the political agenda of the Danish
Government.
Additional qualitative data. The interviews provided the insight of the Danish buildВӯ
ing sector opinion, and viewpoints of the ISO 19650 standard, additionally the
insight to the UK building sector, experience with BIM and ISO 19650
Figure 2.1: Table of interviewees
The interviewees, have many years of experience and different backgrounds, they
provided the knowledge for BIM, ICT, ISO 19650, and additionally to that, their own
professional experience from their representative occupations, which fits under
the professions of AECOO.
3
==PAGE:16==
3
Introduction to the ISOВӯ19650
standard series
3.1
Introduction to ISO 19650
The DS/EN ISO 19650 standard series is the new European international stanВӯ
dard, for managing information concerning the entire life cycle of a building asset.
This standard comes in five parts, and contains the same framework as the UK
BIM framework[1]. This full official name of the standard is The DS/EN ISO 19650
standard Вӯ Organization and digitization of information about buildings and civil
engineering works, including building information modelling (BIM) вҖ” Information
management using building information modelling
The five parts, of the standard are listed as foloowing:
вҖў Part 1 Вӯ Concepts and principles
вҖў Part 2 Вӯ Delivery phase of the assets
вҖў Part 3 Вӯ Operational phase of assets
вҖў Part 4 Вӯ Information exchange
вҖў Part 5 ВӯSecurity minded approach to information management
The ISOВӯ19650 series contains, quite a long list of terms and definitions, that is
used in the standard. This is presented in EN ISO 19650Вӯ1 2018ВӯPart 1: Concept
and Principles under clause 3, some are found under abbreviations. This docuВӯ
ment would referee to those terms and principles, therefore it is necessary to have
access to the ISO 19650 standard.
4
==PAGE:17==
3.2
ISO 19650 Part 1 Вӯ Concept and principles
Part 1, of the ISO 19650 series, is the explanation of the concept and the prinВӯ
ciples, that are used for the entire series, furthermore the overall idea and terms
are described there. The series recommended that all of the involved parties
should participate in the implementation of the ISO 19650 standard, and that the
information management is based on the terms, appointing, lead appointed, and
appointed parties
Part 1, does also address the chain of command for commutations throughout a
building asset. The capability and capacity of the different parts is also explained.
Chapter 8, deals with the requirments for from all involved.
3.2.1
Life cycle for project and assets information
management
Figure 3.1: The life cycle for assets and asset information management [2]
Figure 3.1, express an assetsвҖҷ life cycle for operational and the delivery phases for
an asset. The figure shows, in a circle working pattern, the life cycle of a project,
with the starting point being at вҖқAвҖқ going to вҖқBвҖқ following вҖқCвҖқ and ending with a
return to A.
Point вҖқAвҖқ the start of the delivery phases is a transfer of information. InformaВӯ
tion which can affect the design, construction, and commissioning goes from the
assetsвҖҷ information model to the project information model.
Phase вҖқBвҖқ of the progressive development of the design intent model into a virtual
construction model, it functions as the digital replica of the physical systems.
5
==PAGE:18==
Phase вҖқCвҖқ is the end of the delivery phases, where the relevant information goes
from the project information model (PIM) to the asset information model (AIM).
This showcase that the delivery is connected to the construction process and the
operational phase.
3.2.2
Common Data Environment
A CDE platform has to be introduced for managing information in the duration of
assets management and project delivery. That is to be used in the later information
management process in ISO 19650Вӯ2:2018, 5,6 and 5,7 [3]
The concept of CDE can be seen by 3.2, the division of information should be kept
in one of the information containers, the figure shows the four states of informaВӯ
tion containers. Firstly вҖқwork in progressвҖқ, вҖқsharedвҖқ, вҖқpublishedвҖқ and вҖқarchiveвҖқ. A
journal providing all information container transactions and their audit trail of their
development should be available into the archive state.
Figure 3.2: Common data environment concept[2]
The three states
An information container for вҖқWork in progress stateвҖқ holds the information that
is being developed by its task team, which is also only visible, accessible, and
editable for them, other task teams is excluded from this. This information comВӯ
pletes a check/review and approve stage and is compared to the information deВӯ
livery plan and other agreed terms of standards, methods, and procedures for
producing information for which this procedure is for the origination task team
The information container containing вҖқshared stateвҖқ requires a consultation from
all the appointed parties. That is done in coordination with their own information
for any security related restrictions. This state is visible for all involved parties
both, and itвҖҷs not editable. Shared state is to enable constructive and collaboraВӯ
tive development. Finally, this state goes to a review/authorize transition with a
6
==PAGE:19==
comparison of every information containers at the information exchange against
the relevant deemed information requirements, where the information that donвҖҷt
meet the set out requirements would have to be returned to the previous state
вҖқwork in progressвҖқ
The next state вҖқpublished stateвҖқ requires the information container to hold, all the
reviewed information, which is the information that is to be used in the project. This
information has gone through all the steps and is therefore approved to be used.
As an example, it could be used throughout the construction of a new project or
assets management.
This figure does not reflect the total complexities of a CDE workflow, but is mainly
the overall steps that information goes through, this figure gives an insight to the
different steps. The multiple reviews, approvals, multiple iterations of information
and authorizations still happens with a CDE workflow, this figure helps to showВӯ
case an overview of this process.
The information containers that is required for asset management have to be
transferred from PIM to an AIM. Where the remaining project information conВӯ
tainers and archives state is to be kept for readВӯonly, where that information can
be used a lesson learned process, and to help resolve a possible dispute.
7
==PAGE:20==
3.3
ISO 19650 Part 2 Вӯ Delivery phase of the assets
Part 2, of the ISO standard, is an introduction and description of the setup for
the delivery phase of an asset. In this document, the requirements for the inforВӯ
mation management is specified, in terms of the management process within the
context of an assetвҖҷs delivery phase, and the exchange of information is handed
accordingly to those terms within, using the use of BIM.
This document additionally specifies, that it can be used for all types of assets and
for any organizations regardless of it types, sizes and procurement strategy.
However, the users hold to keep in mind, to scale and apply in a way so is proВӯ
portional and appropriate to the scale and complexity of the asset or project. The
document enables an appointing party to establish their requirements for informaВӯ
tion during the delivery phase of assets and to provide the right commercial and
collaborative environment within, which multiple appointed parties can produce
information in an effective and efficient manner [4]
Figure 3.3: Interfaces between parties and teams for the purpose of information
management [2]
To illustrate the interactions linking the parties, from the appointing party, lead
appointed party to appointed party, figure 3.3 is used, which can display that.
8
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.4: An illustration showing the responsibility of the different parties split
by activities and stages [2]
The appointing party is a member of the project team, which can be the client
or whoever manage information on behalf of a client, and function as the party
вҖқowningвҖқ the appointment/ project in accordance with the ISO 19650 series. A
nomination of individuals from the appointing partyвҖҷs organization has to be set
out, To insure effective management of information and reflect the longВӯterm asset
information management strategy AIR as described in ISO 19650Вӯ1 :2018, 5,3.
This role can be outsourced to third party, if such is done the appointing party
should consider certain aspects, such as which tasks the third party is responsible
for and what authority they would delegate to them. The nominated individuals
take the responsibility for information management on behalf of party thought the
entire project.
Figure 3.5: An illustration showing the activities and stages of ISO 19650 part 2
(created by Author)
Activities and stages, seen by figure 3.4, follows ISO 19650Вӯ2 clauses 5.1 to 5.8
and is an outline of all steps for the assets/projects. Each clause from 5.1 to
5.8 has underlining clauses, this is the step by step guideline for actions that the
responsible parties is obligated to do, and how to do it. Figure 3.5 details all the
steps from 5.1 to 5.4, where 5.5
9
==PAGE:22==
Clause 5.1 вҖқAssessment and needвҖқ is firstly, the adaptation of individuals to underВӯ
take the role of information management, then the establishment of basic projectвҖҷs
information which are information requirements, information delivery milestone,
information delivery standard, information production methods and procedures.
The establishment of the projectвҖҷs reference and shared resources has to be
setup, with additionally having to ensure that the CDE is implemented, configured
and supported throughout the project [5]
Clause 5.2 вҖқInvitation to tenderвҖқ entails the establishment of the appointing partyвҖҷs
exchange information requirements вҖқEIRвҖқ. To assemble reference information reВӯ
quirements and establish the tender response requirements and evaluation criteВӯ
ria for them. The appointing party has to compile invitation to tender information.[5]
Clause 5.3 вҖқTender responseвҖқ involves the following, nominate individuals to unВӯ
dertake the information management function, establish the delivery teamвҖҷs (preВӯ
appointment) BIM execution plan, assess task team capability and capacity, esВӯ
tablish the delivery teamвҖҷs capability and capacity, establish the proposed delivery
teamвҖҷs mobilization plan, establish the delivery teamвҖҷs risk register and compile
the delivery teamвҖҷs tender response [5]
Clause 5.4 вҖқAppointmentвҖқ involves the following, confirm the delivery teamвҖҷs BIM
execution plan, establish the delivery teamвҖҷs detailed responsibility matrix, estabВӯ
lish the lead appointed partyвҖҷs exchange information requirements, establish the
task information delivery plan(s), establish the master information delivery plan,
complete lead appointed partyвҖҷs appointment documents and complete appointed
partyвҖҷs appointment documents [5]
Clause 5.5 вҖқMobilizationвҖқ involves the following, mobilize resources, mobilize inВӯ
formation technology and test the projectвҖҷs information production methods and
procedures [5]
Clause 5.6 вҖқCollaborative production of informationвҖқ involves the following, check
availability of reference information and shared resources, generate information,
complete quality assurance check, review information and approve for sharing
and information model review [5]
Clause 5.7 вҖқInformation model deliveryвҖқ involves the following, submit information
model for lead appointed party authorization, review and authorize the information
model, submit information model for appointing party acceptance and review and
accept the information model [5]
Clause 5.8 вҖқProject closeВӯoutвҖқ involves the following, archive the project informaВӯ
tion model and compile lessons learned for future projects [5]
10
==PAGE:23==
3.4
ISO 19650 Part 3 Вӯ Operational phase of assets
Part 3 of the ISO series is a document that specifies the operational phase of
assets. This document is designed to enable an appointing party (such as an asВӯ
set owner, asset operator or outsourced asset management provider) to establish
their requirements for information during the operational phase of an asset. [6]
This document is also designed to enable them to provide the appropriate collabВӯ
orative environment to fulfil commercial goals. Within this environment, multiple
appointed parties can produce information in an effective and efficient manner.
[6]
This document specifies requirements for information management, in the form of
a management process, within the context of the operational phase of assets and
the exchanges of information within it, using building information modelling. [6]
Part 3 outlines a further, more elaborated information management process, then
part 2. This present, an 8Вӯstep process with 3 pathways. Pathway (1), is the
foreseeable and planned trigger events. Pathway (2) is for unforeseeable or non
planned trigger events, which are event that canвҖҷt be planned for, but if they hapВӯ
pen, you would have to take action and pathway(3) which is for acquisition of an
asset from a third party owner.
3.5
ISO 19650 Part 5 Вӯ Security minded approach
to information management
This document specifies the principles and requirements for securityВӯminded inВӯ
formation management at a stage of maturity described as вҖңbuilding information
modelling (BIM) according to the ISO 19650 seriesвҖқ, and as defined in ISO 19650Вӯ
1, as well as the securityВӯminded management of sensitive information that is
obtained, created, processed and stored as part of, or in relation to, any other
initiative, project, asset, product or service. [7]
Part 4 Вӯ Information exchange
The ISO 19650 series, is a family of standards, that still is under development,
which is why part 4, is missing in this thesis.
Part 4 is under development at the moment, it has gone to the process of a comВӯ
mittee, and is now at the process of enquiry. Lastly, a Part 6 ВӯHealth and Safety
is in the process of preparation before going to a committee. From that, we can
conclude that there is a clear interest in this and investments are being made to
evolve and expand it.
11
==PAGE:24==
4
Denmark
Denmark is a member of the European Committee for Standardization (CEN),
and as of 24 August 2018 ISO 19650Вӯ1 and Вӯ2 were approved as a European
Standard. CEN, developers and defines voluntary standards at a European Level
and CEN is recognized by the European Union and by the European Free Trade
Association [8].
The other parts of the series, were later created and approved, and as mentioned
earlier, there is further development which are being made. Thus, the use of ISO
19650 is accepted on a European level, that doesnвҖҷt necessarily translate to that
it will be used. In terms of the Danish building market, no public available data,
informs of any projects that use ISO 19650.
The CEN Technical Committee 442 вҖқBuilding Information Modelling (BIM)вҖқ, is the
technical committee that developers standards for BIM. The Danish involvement
in CEN is provided by the committee, Dansk Standard komite SВӯ808вҖқ[9]. The
members of SВӯ808, is formed by a broad variation of companies, both public and
private [10]. To name a few, companies such as вҖқCOWI A/SвҖқ, вҖқBanedanmark,
Kvalitet og SikkerhedвҖқ, вҖқDTU Вӯ bygвҖқ, RambГёll Danmark A/S and Vejdirektoratet is
involved in this committee.
ItвҖҷs worth to mention that the membership requires an annually paid subscription,
with a price range between 16350 DKr to 25150 DKr non tax[11]. The price could
exclude willing folks of being a part of the group, which is important to mentioned,
since these standards being developed, trends to be promoted as beneficial for
all sizes companies.
4.1
Digitalization
BIM and the use of digital building is very well integrated in Denmark, when comВӯ
pared to other countries [12]. The building sector, is on the contrary one of the
least digitalized sectors, compared to other sectors in Denmark.[12]. When lookВӯ
ing at the entire life cycle of a project, the primally digital work , Bim and similar
tools, is implemented by architectВӯ and engineerВӯcompanies and big contracting
companies.[12], and not smaller companies.
The current situation, shows that craftsmen and smaller companies is left out of
this process. A survey showed that only 32% of the asked craftsmen and smaller
developersВӯcompanies had minimum one digital tool. Additionally, to that only
44% of those, who works in the developing phase of the building and construction
sector, had learned a new software or ITВӯtool in 2018, which is the lowest percentВӯ
age, compared to other industries. When asked what changes digitalization had
on their daily work routine, only 17 % could see a change [12].
That clearly points out, that digital tools are not being implemented for the entire
life cycle of projects/assets, which can be a factor, that inhibit the potential and
12
==PAGE:25==
benefits of digitization. In 2019 the Danish government launched вҖқStrategi for
digitalt byggeriвҖқ by TrafikВӯ, ByggeВӯ og Boligstyrelsen for TransportВӯ, BygningsВӯ og
Boligministeriet. The strategy of digital building in Denmark, had five main goals,
which are listed. (Translated by Author, original text is in Danish [13])
вҖў вҖқBetter use of digital toolsвҖқ
вҖў вҖқOpen formats and common standardsвҖқ
вҖў вҖқBetter utilization of data вҖқ
вҖў вҖқDigital capabilty/expertise for the entire value chainвҖқ
вҖў вҖқMore sustainable building through the use of digitizationвҖқ
The focus on smaller sized companies is the building industry, is a valid concern.
Building companies with less the 50 employees constitutes for 99 % of the compaВӯ
nies of the entire building industry in Denmark [12]. Consequently, that becomes
an important focus area for the government to improve of. Especially when it is
pushing for more digitalization, while simultaneously these type of companies is
reporting, the lowest percentile in the use of more than one digital tool. The govВӯ
ernments see that an improvement in this area, would benefit the overall industry.
The report express that, the improvement could possibly be seen by, better liqВӯ
uidity in effective accounting management, better planing of projects, improved
reporting and account onВӯsite. These improvements would additionally result in a
better competitiveness when bidding for bigger projects.[12]
BimвҖҷs standards and digital work is the future for the building sector [14], an opinion
the majority shares in the sector, and is a trend in many others industries. The
evidence of that, can be seen by the many investments into digitalization on global
plan, as well as on national plan, as by 13, July 2021 an investment of 11 billion
DKr [15], is planned to improve the green transitions and digitalization in Denmark
of all industry, where most of the money, goes to green initiatives. This is a clear
indication of the future goals of governments on European level as well as national.
The fact of the matter is that, the Danish government has a clear knowledge of the
problemвҖҷs of digitalization in the building sector, which therefore most be a focus
point from them to improve of.
13
==PAGE:26==
4.2
ICT
The building legislation in Denmark is set by Byggeloven, were BygningsregleВӯ
ment breaks down the requirements and entails the detailed description, of how
to comply with those. Digital construction in Denmark uses ICT, which constiВӯ
tute how to work with digital information. ICT is used, by both private and public
developers. Where it is mandatory in public funded projects, if the contract sum
exceeds 5 million DKr TaxВӯexcluded, and additional conditions also applies in acВӯ
cordance to вҖқBEK nr. 118вҖқ [16]. ICT, is the technology that allows the users, to
access, edit, transfer, and save data.
The relation between ICT and the ISO 19650 standard, needs to be understood,
as it is of high importunateness, to find the difference and understand the conВӯ
flicts, that is between ISOВӯ19650 and ICT. ISOВӯ19650, is a framework, a process
standard of how things has to be set up and described. It contains principles and
concept, and ICT is the common term, for the digital tools and guidelines requireВӯ
ments for a digital cooperation of building projects used in Denmark[17].
The collection of tools created to carry out that work, is developed by Molio, and
products in the subscription product вҖқAftale og kommunikationвҖқ. This helps to
create the scope and framework for the digital service, based on a collect basis,
which is to create the optimal foundation for a digital collaboration on a project.
[18]. The use of ICTВӯspecifications is an integrated part of the Danish building
industry, and itвҖҷs structure and terms are coordinated with RГҘdgiverne YdelsesВӯ
beskrivelser, which is the guideline used by client consultant in Denmark.
The content of ICT and the Danish BIM practice, seen in the BIMВӯstandards ISO
19650Вӯ1 and ISO 19650Вӯ2, is closely aligned with each other [19]. To create a
more inclusive version of the MolioВӯeditions. Molio has translated A102 and A402
to an English version, which now has the name вҖқBIM Specifications A102 (EN)
and BIM process Manuel A402 (EN) [20]
Molio argues, that the ISO 19650Вӯ1 and Вӯ2, can be viewed as an alternative version
of the ICTВӯrequirements and can be lifted by the use of ICT. Molio sees that ISO
19650 part 1, is how to set up the ICTВӯrequirements, and ISO 19650 part 2, is
how such requirements can be meet and lifted.[19]. This standpoint, from Molio,
explains the reasons behind the development of the translated version of ICT,
which additionally uses and explains the terms used in the ISO 19650 series. As
identified by the interview with Molio, That is not to say, that they see ICT and
ISO 19650, to ba an identical version of each other. But that they are aware of
the difference, and that work need to be done, to highlight this difference. Molio,
would have to create the tools to fill up that void in relation to ISO 19650, or refer
to other tools that can be used in the meantime.
14
==PAGE:27==
4.3
Software tools
Software tools and similar digitalization tools, are consistently being updated, with
newer versions and functions being added. The consistent development that ocВӯ
curs within the digital building now, is shaping the future building sector. As in
many other sectors, digital software are becoming further integrated in the work
place, and the building sector is not the exception. Computers, software, and tools
is an important factor for the evolution of the building sector, and its influences is
growing rapidly which has made this element, a decisive factor for the building
industry.
Autodesk, has announced that it has released a new series of workflows for AuВӯ
todesk Construction Cloud, that is compatible with ISO 19650, and would help
users to comply with the series. [21]. These new workflows are created to offer a
robust set of tools, which defines a structured and standardized process for pubВӯ
lishing, sharing and storing project information [21]. AutodeskвҖҷs introduction of
these tools, implies that their costumers is requesting for tools that can help them
lift the ISO 19650 requirements, or that Autodesk see a benefits and opportunity
by becoming ISO 19650 compliant. Nevertheless, this is an evolution that is to be
expected to continue, tools and software products that is already implemented or
newer ones, would be more compliment for the use of ISO 19650, and makes the
transition and the use of it easier for the costumer, which would be an incentive
to use the standard
вҖңThe arrival of ISO 19650 means our industry now has a common language to talk
about and understand data. We know these standards can be complex to navigate
but are critical for construction companies to manage project data intelligently,
and meeting regional requirements around data storage give firms an additional
competitive edge,вҖқ Ilai Rotbaein,вҖқ[21]
At the moment, we find ourselves in the early phase of ISO 19650, and therefore
we find a limited number of tools and pieces of software that are developed to
support the series. The use of ISO 19650 in the UK and other European counВӯ
tries, could push this process or furthermore speed up it up. The willingness to
implement the series, could become more positively inclined, on the condition that
clients, developers, and architects finds more tools at their disposal to ease their
transition to ISO 19650.
The practical experience and testing of ISO 19650 series in the marked, would
determine what tools and software programs that best fit, therefore it is hard to
determine which software companies that would be best equipped for this. The
marked is going to express its need.
15
==PAGE:28==
4.4
buildingSmart International
To understanding what kind of development that is happening for digital transforВӯ
mation in the built asset industry, an investigation into the work being done by
buildingSmart International would help do that. buildingSmart could play a big
role, in the future importance of ISO 19650. buildingSmart, describes themselves
as ,вҖң Leading the digital transformation by enabling better collaboration and digital
workflows through the solutions and standards it deliversвҖқ [22]
The involvement from the Danish building sector has now led to its own indeВӯ
pendent chapter, of buildingSmart in Denmark, that shares the same goal as the
entire buildgSmart, which is to create a platform with shared knowledge for the
entire sector. [23]
As identified in the interview with Peter BO, buildingSmart is looking into how
ISO 19650 can be supported and used in the building sector. Their chapter in
Canada, has developed a draft version of the ISO 196550 Canadian Annex [24],
so has the Spanish chapter. Furthermore, work has been done by buildingSMART
Deutschland, that has complete courses for the introduction of all parts of the IS0
19650 standard. This indicates towards a lot of commitment from buildingSmart
for the future use of ISO 19650.
Therefore, this can become very relevant for buildigSmart Denmark, as they would
have to explore, what they can do in regard to ISO 19650 for a Danish context.
Where their experience with such, would be very important for the learning proВӯ
cess of the use of ISO 19650 on a global plan and for the Danish building sector.
4.5
Political agenda
A determining factor for the impact of the ISO 19650 standard on the Danish
marked, is the Danish government standpoint. An analysis into the current govВӯ
ernment and parties focus is done, to see if any mandatory legislation for this
subject is on the rise.
Politicians action and their political agenda is an important factor for how ISOВӯ
19650 can be implemented in Denmark. The building industry is behind on the
matter of digitation when compared to the other industry, [12], the report вҖқStrategi
for digitalt byggeriвҖқ[12] complied for the government in 2019, addresses that probВӯ
lem lies for the building industry and especially for SME, since they are the least
digitized parts of that industry.
The building industry accounts for a total of 40 % of the C02 emission globally
[25], and a willingness to reduce that high percentages, is widely spread amongst
the building industry, along with their own willingness comes the pressure, from
the high political pressure to reduce CO2 emission on a global plan[25]. There is
a push for the development of more sustainable building, better use of the limited
resources, and energy efficient operation of building assets. [25].
The Danish government has, as of 2021, reached an agreement to allocate reВӯ
sources for their national strategy for sustainable building, the agreementвҖҷs has
put 50 million DKr. for this strategy. [26]. The premiss for the agreement is based
16
==PAGE:29==
on the goal set out by the government and their supporting party to achieve 70%
less greenhouse gases compared to 1990[27]. The strategy вҖқNational strategi
for bГҰredygtigt byggeri 2021вҖқ, aims to seek an reduction of 70%, by targeting
both directly contributing factors and indirectly contributing factors for the building
industry.[28]
The setup of the strategy plan, is a stepwise plan to be rolled out over the course
of 10 years. The first step for the plan, requires that as of 2021, LCA calculation
has to made for new constructions both over and under 1000 m2, for construcВӯ
tions over 1000m2, an additional requirement for a C02 limit value of 12 kg CO2Вӯ
ГҰkv/m2/yearly. The following step is to determine the new limit values for 2023
followed by implementing it, after that, the steps follows this trends for both 2025,
2027 and ending in 2029 where the goal is to reach closes to a CO2 limit value of
5 kg CO2ВӯГҰkv/m2/yearly [28]
The 2030 climate goal, for the Danish building sector, is closing in. The plan
for that to be reached, has seen different method and tools, and as of 2023, the
requirement of LCA calculation would be rolled out on the marked.
Parts of the industry itself had listed their suggestion for how to archive the climate
goals. The development of information centre for sustainable building, where the
involved players can obtain knowledge and guidance. A further development of
LCA method and the tool вҖқLCABYGвҖқ, so that it is best integrated into the industry
and for the digital models and another suggestion, is to develop a database based
on Danish environment data including EDP and create encouragement for the
supplier. [29]
4.5.1
Digitalization part of political agenda
The political agenda, at the moment, is highly motived to combat the rising cliВӯ
mate change problems, that we face on a global plan. A measure to combat this
issue has in the resent years been digitalization, and the use of it has been highly
expanding on a global level. The benefits of digitalization are endless, and has
effective numerous industry. The building industry is no exception to this. ThereВӯ
fore, an investigation into the political agenda regarding the planned development
for building industry in regard to this, is important to cover.
The report, вҖқDanmarks digitale vГҰkst 2021вҖқ[30] carried out by the Danish governВӯ
ment, looked into the digital growth In Denmark in 2021, cemented our ranking
as the 3rd, most digital advanced country in Europa behind Finland and Sweden,
compared to our ranking in 2019, as the leading country [30]. Despite the lower
ranking, the digital growth in Denmark is developing, and deposited plans aims to
continue the growth and improving of all industries. The report point out that SME
is less digital than the bigger enterprise, that applies across the country regardless
of industry, as shown by figure 4.1
Bigger companies are more digital advanced, and uses more digital tools in their
work day when compared to small companies, while SME accounts for 99 % of
all the Danish companies, and half of the employment in 2020, that becomes a
focus area for the government, in which they want to improve of [30]
17
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.1: The figure, shows the difference in relation to the use of basic and
advanced digital tools divided between Small enterprises and big enterprises, in
Denmark between the years 2015Вӯ2020 [30]
The Danish government got their plan вҖқfart pГҘ den grГёnne omstillingвҖқ approved
by all members of EU, at the meeting for European ministry of finance. This is a
plan to kickВӯstart the Danish economic though green and environmental initiative.
The plans, means that Denmark could receive 11 billion Dkr, to invest in climate,
green transitions and digitalization. [15]. This is an additional investment plan,
that aims to reach the goal of a 70% reduction of greenhouse gases.
4.6
Bygningsstyrelsen
Bygningstryrrelsen has expressed that their focus, at the moment, has shifted
and become more inward. New guidelines have been set in place, and as of 03
February 2021 [31], they have introduced a number of new ICTВӯtools, which have
become mandatory when working with Bygningsstryrrelsen. They would also be
the provider of these tools, for all involved parties. This changes, has been caused
to prevent any ownerships problems, that they have been dealing with in previous
projects, this new tools is to ensure that data is located on the same platform, and
that data is owned by Bygningsstryrrelsen.
As mentioned in the interview, and by the actions of Bygningsstryrrelsen, there i
nothing that support, a potential use of the ISO 19650 in the near future.
18
==PAGE:31==
5
Insight to the viewpoints/actions
of companies in the Danish
marked
This section is the collection of opinions from experts and experienced individual in
the building industry, based on the conducted interviews by the author. the section
investigates the interviewees own opinion and the standpoint of their respective
companies The focus area for this analysis, is based on a selective section of the
Danish marked, as the marked includes a broad range of companies, that could
contribute with their point of view and give an insight on the matter.
As this report, is an investigation of the impact ISO 19650 can have on the Danish
marked. the area of focus naturally becomes, more narrowed down, based on
the gathered research and result in the report. As of that, the investigation looks
at the companies that is valued, to have greater importance for the impact of ISO
19650 on the Danish marked, and eventually its implementations options.
The people interviewed are, Jens Kristian Lund Birkmose (COWI), David Churcher
(Independent consultant), Peter Bo Olsen (Independent consultant), Sara AsВӯ
mussen (Leif Hansen Bygherre), Michael Friis Гҳrsted (KГёbenhavns Ejendomme
og IndkГёb), Mathias Hjorth LГёvhГёja Bygningsstyrelsen) and Gunnar Friborg (MoВӯ
lio)
5.1
Public Developers
5.1.1
Bygningsstyrrelsen
The conducted interview can be found under Appendix (B). This is a translation
of the interviewee answers, into a summary written by the author, as the original
language were Danish, because of that, it is recommended to look at the original
answer for the full intended meaning.
Bygnigsstyrrelsen is the largest public developer in Denmark, and their portfolio
consists of a total of 1400 properties [32], their opinion has a high value in this
thesis, because of their potential large impact of the marked, thanks to their size
and being a public developer.
19
==PAGE:32==
Interviewee from Bygningsstyrrelsen is Mathias Hjorth LГёvhГёj
Summary
Bygningsstyrrelsen is aware and mindful of the ISO 19650 standard, but it hasnвҖҷt
required and is not requiring it to be used for their projects. Furthermore, they donвҖҷt
demand the requirements from ISOВӯ19650 to be used for its customers, neither
in universities areas nor office areas.
From my experience, the industry is becoming more and more stanВӯ
dardized around BIM via various industry standards from e.g. Molio
and DiKon, and I have not experienced that ISO 19650, has been used
by our business partners (MHL)
The ISO 19650 standard seems to be undesirable at the moment, as It doesnвҖҷt
seem to be that available for the parties, involved with the works of BIM. It would
not make sense for the advisor to use if the client nor legislation require it to be
used. The IKTВӯrequirements and ISO 19650 donвҖҷt look to go against each other,
and Bygningsstyrrelsen could refer to the ISOВӯ19650, both they donвҖҷt see an issue
regarding the terms used in ICT, therefore the is no valid reason for implementing
ISOВӯ19650 in ICTВӯspecifications. As of 2020, Bygningsstyrrelsen future plans for
digitalization is to focus inwards on its own business, instead of influencing the
industry through standardization and more requirements, and see what can be
change of the ICTВӯrequirments to benefit them. Finally, for the time being, there
are no plans regarding implementation of ISO 19650 in Bygningsstyrrelsen.
5.1.2
KГёbenhavns Ejendomme
The conducted interview can be found under Appendix (H), This is a translation
of the interviewee answers, into a summary written by the author, as the original
language were Danish, because of that, it is recommended to look at the original
answer for the full intended meaning.
KГёbenhavns Ejendomme is another large public developer in Denmark, their portВӯ
folio consist of around 3000 building, 2.6 millions m2 (Michael Friis Гҳrsted). Based
on the same reason as to вҖқBygningsstyrrelsenвҖқ, their impact on the marked has a
high value in this thesis.
Summary
The development of ISOВӯ19650 sends a positive signal on a European level, is
shows progress that there exist an agreed product for the European countries. It
presents a framework that is available globally and nationally. ISOВӯ19650 open
framework allows us, in Denmark, to better suit it for our need. The Danish marked
can agree what tools that can be used to fulfil the requirements set by ISOВӯ19650.
KГёbenhanvs Ejendomme situation in regard to IS0Вӯ19650, is only on a superficial
level, but has a willingness to further explore it. They are awaiting the marked or
players to become more familiar with ISO 19650, and somebody to be a leading
player for this. They see, that some of their costumers, namely DTU, has the
ability to go into a project and almost fulfil all the requirements of ISOВӯ19650. The
marked, needs to see a number of successful projects in Denmark that uses ISOВӯ
19650, before it dare to implement ISO 19650, at the moment the standard is
20
==PAGE:33==
too new. The new requirements for LCAВӯanalyses in 2023, would further connect
clients and facility managers and ISO 19650, could be tools used to lift that task.
5.2
Perspective of COWI
The conducted interview can be found under Appendix (G), This is a translation
of the interviewee answers, into a summary written by the author, as the original
language were Danish, because of that, it is recommended to look at the original
answer for the full intended meaning.
COWI, is well respected international consulting company with 90 year experiВӯ
ence, involved in 10,000 project worldwide and has over 6700 employees. [33].
In Danish context, COWI one of the biggest consulting companies.
Summary
COWI focus for ISOВӯ19650, varies, their English concern is ISO 19650 certified
and already used to ISOВӯ19650, as were their Danish department donвҖҷt use ISOВӯ
19650, for the Danish department the ICTВӯ agrements and ydelsesbeskrivelser is
more relevant, and part of the reasons for why, we arenвҖҷt looking into implementing
ISO 19650. The need for change were more relevant for the English concern. The
premise and the intention of ISOВӯ19650 is something we already do in Denmark.
ISOВӯ19650 does not solve the existing problems, we face for the industry in DenВӯ
mark, and it looks to add additional requirements on projects. The SME contracВӯ
tors would have a hard time implementing IS0Вӯ19650, as they donвҖҷt have the same
resources as bigger companies.
Standards need to used as intended for the gains and benefits of it to be showВӯ
cased, there lies a great job ahead, to communicate the standard, and get all
people on board for the use of ISOВӯ19650. The consequence, ISOВӯ19650 can
have on SME, is important to look at, as the barrier for being in the marked could
rise, and force some of them out.
COWI, has investigated if they could implement ISOВӯ19650 on a concern level,
but at the moment the focus is mainly on the term used in the standard
5.3
Perspective of вҖқBygherreforening
The conducted interview can be found under Appendix (D), This is a translation
of the interviewee answers, into a summary written by the author, as the original
language were Danish, because of that, it is recommended to look at the original
answer for the full intended meaning.
Sarah Asmussen works at Leif Hansen as an Architect and Client consultant. And
has an experience of 15Вӯ20 years as a BIM specialist, is largely active in a lot of
standardizes work, and is part of the committee of CEN TC 442. Additionally,
is part of вҖңBygherreforeningenвҖқ digitalization committee, and discusses the value
standards can bring to the client
Bygherreforeningen, has around 200 public and private members, and accounts
for more than 2000 of the major decision makers for construction in Denmark [34]
21
==PAGE:34==
Summary
Has not seen, and is familiar with any project that has use ISO 19650, in the
projects, and has neither seen clients asked for ISO 19650 to be used. ISO 19650,
is a process standard, and with little to no information how to actually fulfil these
process, which is a weakness in a standard. As for part 1, and 2 the description of
process is too overall, which means that almost anything could fulfil the demands,
and there be different interpretations of it.
Denmark already uses ICT, and therefore we already have a foundation for this
type of work, but ISOВӯ19650 could be beneficial for the European countries that
donвҖҷt have similar basis for contract as we do. The Danish client, focus on the
benefits that lies by using the ISOВӯ19650, and at the moment there are no reasons
to why, they would get that from ISOВӯ19650 and not already from IKT. The practise
in Denmark, is closely allied to ISOВӯ19650, we already do most of what is required,
and that means that if implemented, the influence of ISOВӯ19650 would not be that
great.
Sara, Is not expecting that ISOВӯ19650 would become mandatory, though legislaВӯ
tion in Denmark, the government focuses on sustainably and not the efficiency of
digitalizations. Public clients are therefore not going to be forced in implementing
ISOВӯ19650, and could await the situation and see what value it could benefit them
5.4
Perspective of вҖқDansk Arkitekt VirksomhederвҖқ
The conducted interview can be found under Appendix (I), This is a translation
of the interviewee answers, into a summary written by the author, as the original
language were Danish, because of that, it is recommended to look at the original
answer for the full intended meaning.
Preben Dahl is a chief lawyer at Dansk Arkitekt Virksomheder. He advises their
members in building legal forms and contractual relationships, copyright, and proВӯ
curement law.
Summary
The development of too detailed standard, could have a negative effect on the
marked, by putting limits and possibly bind us more, which would not be in the best
interest of the building industry. They donвҖҷt want ISOВӯ19650 to become mandatory,
though legislation in Denmark. They want to maintain freedom of method in the
marked, companies already has their method, and they could be force to change
that entirely. They, and many other has our own system, and they value them to
be effective, which why the want to keep them.
It could have tremendous effect on smaller companies, if it would become mandaВӯ
tory, though legislation in Denmark. They are not ready and able to work, with that
level of digitalizations. I would favour the bigger companies and create a further
shift in the Danish marked, which would have a negative effect on the prises.
22
==PAGE:35==
5.5
Perspective of Molio
The conducted interview can be found under Appendix (C), This is a translation
of the interviewee answers, into a summary written by the author, as the original
language were Danish, because of that, it is recommended to look at the original
answer for the full intended meaning.
Gunnar Friborg, is Chairman of Danish standard S808 and works with InternaВӯ
tional relations and cooperation within Molio. In addition, he works with standardВӯ
ization, where Molio finds it relevant. And is part of the committee for both CEN
442 and ISO TC59SC13. Molio is a knowledge centre for the Danish building
and construction industry. It is an independent place for the development and
establishment of common tools, standards, and knowledge. [35]
Summary
ISOВӯ19650 is a floating element, and the foundation beneath, is the operational
phase where the focus need to at. The relation between ICT and ISOВӯ19650 are
similar in most of it, both where there is difference, we need to create a connection
for them and create the tools to meet the requirements.
Molio, has made a Danish translation of ISOВӯ19650Вӯ1 and ISOВӯ19650Вӯ2, and furВӯ
thermore described and explained the concept regarding вҖңApporting partyвҖқ. In the
fall of 2021, Molio would start to arrange courses and webinar for the introduction
of ISOВӯ19650Вӯ1 and ISOВӯ19650Вӯ2. And a preparation for making changes in ICT
in relation to ISOВӯ19650Вӯ1 and ISOВӯ19650Вӯ2, to be better aligned with the formal
requirements
The Danish market, need to prepare for ISOВӯ19650 series, as it could have a great
importance for small enterprise, which is a potential problem that Molio is aware
of, and wants to prepare for. The introduction of ISO in Molio, need to happen with
caution and be scaled with ease, or they could lose 70Вӯ80 % of their subscriber
With the right investments, the creation and development of the tools to fulfil the
demands of ISO 19650, would take 1Вӯ2 years, but for it to be a part of the marked
and integrated in small enterprises that would take a longer time, around 5 years.
23
==PAGE:36==
6
UK
6.1
ISO 19650 In the UK
The introduction of the ISO 19650 series into the UK market, comes after its preВӯ
decessor, PAS 1192Вӯ2: 2013. The PAS 1192 framework dealt with вҖқspecification
for information management for the capital/capital/delivery phase of construction
projects using building information modellingвҖқ[36]
6.1.1
PAS 1192Вӯ2 series standard
The PAS 1192Вӯ2 standard, was the predecessor for the ISO 19650 Internation
standard in the UK. As by the first quarter of 2019, both the PAS 1192Вӯ2 and BS
1192 was replaced by ISO 19650 Part 1 and 2. вҖқThe only major difference is in
the terminology of the documents. All the key concepts and principles of the UK
1192 series are said to remainвҖқ[37]
The introduction of the ISO 19650 standard series in the UK, is different to other
countries. That is based on the fact that the transition from the older standard, is
based on the same concept and principles. Since that is the case, the ISO 19650
is to be seen, from a UK perspective, as an improved and newer version of the
older standard. This give the UK a legВӯup, in the competitions sense, and place
an incentive to push for it to be implemented into the European market, since that
would benefit them on the market aboard, as they are more experienced.
Another argument can be made, which is that, the improvement and changes that
is seen in ISOВӯ19650, has come from the learned experience of problems that
were found in the older standard by the UK market, and from that an improved
product was made, which now is more suitable and easier to accept by the UK
market.
Other countries are therefore not placed in the same convenient position, as the
UK finds them self in, This could be by design, where the UK government saw an
opportunity to strengthen their position into that digital building sector. A report
by BIM Strategy Paper вҖқReport for the Government Construction Client GroupвҖқ
from 2011 [38], supports greater adaption of BIM, within the UK domestic building
sector, BIM is set out to be the future of global construction.
The BIM technology worked beyond borders, and its reach is described to have
huge potential. The findings in the report pushed forward for a transition of national
standard to international standards.[39]. A growing consensus for the globalizaВӯ
tion of BIM, would take place in the future, thus a focus on international standards
and norms was chosen over national.
24
==PAGE:37==
Other countries are not placed in this same more convenient position, and are
in a disadvantage when compared to those who are familiar with the PASВӯ1192
standards. The introduction of ISOВӯ19650, in these countries, would be something
new, and therefore the implementation phase of it would be harder, in comparison
to the one happening in the UK.
When PASВӯ1192Вӯ2 were introduced back in 2013, to the UK market. The introducВӯ
tion could be described as nonВӯoptimal. There were a lot of uncertainty regarding
the standard, especially the concept and principles. Since a guideline were not
available, the intended idea of creating this uniform standard were lost, and the
fundamental understanding of it were missing. Without a guideline to explain how
to use the documents, a lot of different interpretations were taught, which ruin the
basic idea of a standard. As identified by the interview with David Churcher, direcВӯ
tor of Hitherwood Consulting Ltd. how express these concerns and his experience
of the implementation of the PAS 1192Вӯ2.
вҖңThere was a lack of awareness about what the whole thing was. ItвҖҷs
one thing to sort out, and see the words in the standard in the docuВӯ
ment, and another thing to understand what they meant, and then put
them into practice вҖқ David Churcher, (Appendix (F))
вҖңUnfortunately, at that time, there wasnвҖҷt any detailed guidance to acВӯ
company the standards (PASВӯ1192)вҖқ David Churcher, (Appendix (F))
The transition from the PASВӯ1192Вӯ2 to the ISOВӯ19650 series has therefore been
easier. Which could explain why mandatory requirement of centrallyВӯprocured
public projects in compliance with BIM Level 2, were passed by the government
25
==PAGE:38==
6.2
BIM In UK
The understanding of BIM, or building information management, has shifted from
simply being viewed as вҖқonly being 3D modelsвҖқ[40] to this framework of digital
management of information for a project throughout its entire lifespan. The use
of BIM has grown rapidly and is a fundament part of the building industry, the
adaptation and the use/awareness of BIM, has since 2010 grown from 13 % to 73
% in 2020, and only 1 % is not aware of BIM [40].
After the financial criss in 2008, the opportunity for a change into the вҖқtraditionalвҖқ
why of working in the building sector was possible, the lack of money created
the need to improve the public sectorвҖҷs spending ways, projects went over the
projected budget and timeВӯschedule, the government saw that as an opportunity to
mandate a phased approach of BIM levels and the National building specification
levels [41]. An introduction of terms known as BIM levels was presented to the
UK market, which range from level 0 to level 3.
BIM Level 0
BIM Level 0, is its simplest form, level 0 effectively means no collaboration. 2D
CAD drafting only is utilized, mainly for Production Information [42]
BIM Level 1
Level 1 BIM, This typically comprises a mixture of 3D CAD for concept work, and
2D for drafting of statutory approval documentation and Production Information.
CAD standards are managed to BS 1192:2007, and electronic sharing of data
is carried out from a common data environment (CDE), often managed by the
contractorвҖқ.[43]
BIM Level 2
Level 2 BIM is distinguished by collaborative working, and requires вҖқan information
exchange process which is specific to that project and coordinated between variВӯ
ous systems and project participantsвҖқ [43]. As of April 2016, the UK government
had a minimum requirement for centrallyВӯprocured public projects in compliance
with BIM Level 2 [44].
The requirements to have achieved BIM level 2 for these projects, is to delivery
the processes set out in PASВӯ1192Вӯ2 and PASВӯ1193. As of the first quarter of 2019,
the ISO 19650Вӯ1 and ISO 19650Вӯ2 will replace PASВӯ1192:2013 and BS 1192:2007.
As of that transition, the new requirements to be meet to archive BIM Level 2, is
the ISO 19650 series
BIM Level 3
Level 3 BIM, has not been full described yet, the ideas and the vision of it has
been described in вҖқUK Government in Level 3 Strategic Plan from 2015 вҖқ[45]. The
overall concept is to enable all involving parties to work on a model simultaneously,
furthermore to create a platform with вҖқfresh вҖқopen dataвҖқ Development of a fresh
вҖҳOpen DataвҖҷ standard that facilitates the sharing of project data around the globe,
and Creation of new contractual frameworks for BIMВӯbased projects for promoting
collaboration and ensuring consistencyвҖқ [46],
26
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.1: A BIM Maturity levels Model for the UK, made by Mark Bew and
Mervyn Richards [47]
The 6.1 figure, is a model created to display the different requirements for each
LevelвҖҷs in the UK, this was created in 2008, therefore before the creating of the ISO
series, which is not shown in the figure. Nevertheless, it is a great model to display
the overall idea and concept for the different levels, and what the government is
aiming to archive in the future. And that is a full integrated IBM digitalized platform
for the building sector, a cloudВӯbased environment and full accessible for each
parties to share/edit their data.
The introduction of BIM maturity Levels for the UK, has been highly promoted
by the government and. The government goal as part of its вҖқGovernmentвҖҷs ConВӯ
struction StrategyвҖқ was вҖқThe overarching aim is to reduce the cost of Government
construction projects by 15Вӯ20% by the end of the ParliamentвҖқ[48], which was set
to be archived by the early mentioned, BIM Level 2 requirements for all centrallyВӯ
procured construction projects in the UK after 2016.
The UK, has spent a lot of resource into being a leading country for BIM adaption.
Multiple plans from the government has been presented, which has the goal of
reducing cost, minimizing delays and improving the quality of work in the building
sector, by the use of BIM and digitization of the building sector. As of that, the UK
can possibly be one of the leading country in BIM adaption, if not the leading one.
[49]
27
==PAGE:40==
7
PESTLE analyse
7.1
An PESTLE analyses into the impact and
implementation process of ISO 19650 standard
An PESTLE analyse of the impact and implementing of ISO19650 into the DanВӯ
ish building sector, is worked out. The concept of a PESTLE analysis is to view
the topic from 6 different aspects, to understand the potential outside influnece,
additonally to that, it further highlights the different views, by addressing these
conditions.
7.1.1
Political
Though the eyes of the political impact, being the political weather and the moВӯ
ment in 2021 from the Danish government. It looks to favour sustainability buildВӯ
ing and environment [27], The time to reach the climate goals set for Denmark
by 2030 to achieve a reduction of 39 percentage compared to 2005, is closing
in. Furthermore, with a majority of left wing parties in the government, who has
climate change as their key issues, that paves the way for an interest in such topВӯ
ics. Therefore, the pressure being showcased in today political leans towards an
improvement into the environment, and combating climate change.
ISO 19650 used as a tool to share information regarding sustainable building.
Since the product is meant to exchange information, sustainable building could
be the type of information, being exchange, which could strengthen ISOВӯ19650
politically power in Danish politic 2021. As the evidence donвҖҷt support that being
the case, an argument for this cant be made at the present time.
7.1.2
Economic
As for the economic point of view, two phases is need to be looked at, preВӯ
implementation and postВӯimplementation. The preВӯimplementation phase, would
require adaptation of the standard series ISOВӯ19650 into the Danish marked, inВӯ
cluded into that, is the price of a ISOВӯ19650 certification, introduction courses of
ISOВӯ19650 and its user guideline. Hereafter is the implementation phase for each
companyвҖҷs, with the cost and timeline being highly dependent on its size and their
previous working method, additionally a look into each companyвҖҷs willingness and
dependents of such an implementation for the business.
The post implementation phase would be the profitable phase, the argument beВӯ
ing that after introducing and requiring a standard way of working throughout the
market, it would reduce cost for the companies. Improved competition ability in
Europe, as companies can bid on projects overseas as the standard provides for a
uniform work frame, these benefits are especially interesting for big companies as
their employees can work intertwined and across department placed in different
countries.
28
==PAGE:41==
The ISOВӯ19650 series sees its strength in communicating of data or rather in imВӯ
proving such communication throughout the entire life cycle of a building asset, as
a result of that, the series would benefit and improve the different phase of a buildВӯ
ing asset. The overall quality of the building asset improves based on this logic,
and it would save companies money, time and conflicts for any building assets.
With improved commutation of data, a highlight of key problem can be handled
regarding the individual building assets.
7.1.3
Social
Social and cultural aspect of introducing a mandatory ISOВӯ19650 series into the
In Danish market, the change of old working method and process could clash with
the employees, which would have a restrained willingness to adapt and implement
it in their work. If the employees sees the standard as an unwanted requirement,
a feels it is an unwanted change, they could try to uphold their old tradition and
working method, which is proven to work on much lager scale.
A clear understanding of the value of ISOВӯ19605 series need to be explained and
its benefit needs to shine clearly for the employees for a successful adaptation of
the series.
7.1.4
Technological
The series sees its strength in the technological area, the introduction of the ISOВӯ
19650, is as the new product on the market, which is created to be the leading and
only way of working with organization and digitization of information, both domesВӯ
tically and abroad. This could as mentioned earlier improve the competitiveness
for Danish companies in the market abroad in countries that uses the IS0Вӯ19650,
an interest bigger companies could use for an early implementation of the series.
The future of building is digital, and that is a shared opinion for the world building
sector
7.1.5
Environmental
As the series is an exchange of data, a benefit for the environment could be
archived, if the information that is being created, were made with the intent to imВӯ
prove and help the environment. The global world, regardless of occupation, are
in todayвҖҷs world increasingly concerned and invest into climate change solutions.
Since this is one of the main topic around the world, government and powers alike
is going to require better use of resources and demand more improvement in this
area.
7.1.6
Legal
At the moment, nor market or the Danish government is applying pressure to
legislation the ISOВӯ19650 series. Following the trendies of market and by the
action of the government, they look to be in a more reserved role, while monitorВӯ
ing countries that has made ISOВӯ19650 series mandatory. The effect of an early
mandatory legalization of the series could be either beneficial or damaging, that
is entirely dependent on what is going to happen to the series in other countries.
Since the target group of this series is a standardization within the European counВӯ
tries and therefore its strengthen is a result of multiple users. If the countries that
29
==PAGE:42==
uses 19650, seems to benefit from the mandatory implementation of ISO 19650.
It could affect the reserved position in the Danish building sector, as mandatory
legalization could find its way. This would force companies, to adapt to the stanВӯ
dard.
30
==PAGE:43==
8
Two scenarios
The section is a collection of two scenarios, that highlight and goes through the
possible outcome based on the previous result/investigation. First scenario, deВӯ
scribes the impact of not implementing ISO 19650 in the Danish market with a
national and global perspective and second Scenario, describes what impact imВӯ
plementing ISO 19650 in the Danish market with a national and global perspective
8.1
First scenario
Effects on the Danish market, if ISOВӯ19650 is not implemented
8.1.1
Advantage
вҖў Situation of the Danish market
вҖў SME
вҖў Experience and knowledge
Situation of the Danish market
From the interviews, a conclusion can be made regarding, the current stage of ISO
19650 in the Danish market. At the current time, the interviewees all commented
that regardless of their different profession, they had a detained approach of ISO
19650 standard, one of the reasons for such an approach, stems from the lack
of pressure of implementation on all levels in the Danish building sector. The
analyses of ISO 19650 series in Denmark, pointed out the absence of political
pressure to push forward for the introduction of ISO 19650 into public government
projects, though mandatory legislation. The indication for such an absence stems
from the fact, that the main topic of todayвҖҷs society is climate change and the
prevention of it and preparations for it. The building industry has a significant role
in that topic, and the increasing focus on sustainably buildability, lack of resources,
CO2 emission and designing /planing for cities to withstand such change, has left
little room for the focus on standards such as ISO 19650 or other digitization on a
political level.
The interviewees expressed, that the conditions for the ISO 19650 standard to be
introduced and later implemented. Are that, a demand for it has to be expressed
by primarily developers, either public or private ones. As it stand now, the demand
is not there, that is based on the fact, that none of the companies has been reВӯ
quired to use ISO 19650 in any project in Denmark, and neither do they know any
projects that have required such in the tender phase. Therefore, a supply/demand
approach to the problem would not support the use of resources for this matter.
I would be seen, as a bad investment of money to pay the standard or set aside
time to educate their employees, so they can archive the ISOВӯ19650 standards
certifications.
31
==PAGE:44==
As identified by the interviews of the public developers, it can be concluded that
the ISO 19650 series, at the moment, is not a part of their future plans. For the
near future, both interviewees expressed, on behalf of their companies(public),
that they would proceed with a laid back approach to the implementing of ISO
19650, a reasons for their chosen approach to this is, that the ISO 19650 series
is, relative new, especially when seen from the speed of change in the building
sector. Another reasons for their chosen direction, is that they donвҖҷt think the
market would be ready to work with projects in compliance with ISO 19650.
The market view, would therefore support, that ISOВӯ19650 is not implemented, as
they are not expecting it to happen and are concerned about the negative impact
it would have
SME
The SME in this industry, would rather see this outcome play out, as they alternaВӯ
tive would put them at great risk. For some SME, part of their value proposition is
to provide a service for the lowest price that is profitable for them, It would be in
their best interest, not to add additional cost to their business model, as it could be
fatal for some. Implementation of ISO 19650, comes with a cost, and they would
avoid playing that, and since SME accounts for 99% of the enterprise in this inВӯ
dustry, this would be looked at positively, and being in the interest of the majority
of the industry.
Receive experience and knowledge
The Danish building market could see a benefit, by awaiting and to keeping an
eye on the progress of ISOВӯ19650 in Europe. ISOВӯ19650 haveВӯnot been on the
market for long, which means that the level of experience with the use of it is
very limited and not that common. Over time, ISOВӯ19650 would become further
implemented and used for project around Europe, which would give the market,
the needed testing, and learned experience that is to gain from using ISOВӯ19650.
The challenges and opportunities that is linked with the use of ISOВӯ19650, would
be visible and from that, the Danish marked could learn from the experience of
project in other countries, and if they see that the result speaks for it to be impleВӯ
mented, they could revaluate their approach and then implemented it, while using
the experience to prevent for similar problems. That would provide the Danish
market, with an operational test and improved product, without the additional cost
from an early implementation.
32
==PAGE:45==
8.1.2
Disadvantage
вҖў European Competitiveness
вҖў Limited influence on ISOВӯ19650 operational phase
вҖў Software and tools
вҖў Sustainability and digitalization
European Competitiveness
The building industry, in Denmark, could see themselves becoming less competВӯ
itive on the European market. If ISOВӯ19650 becomes a requirement for projects
around in Europe, and there is a rising request for the use of it, either by chose
or because it has become mandatory by legislation in other European countries.
The Danish building industry would be in a position of disadvantage, they would
exclude themselves from the European marked, and their impact and reach would
take a hit.
Another problem could be found in the near future, that is if the use of ISO 19650
becomes the standard for the majority European countries, and first then the DanВӯ
ish government or market decides to implement the use of ISOВӯ19650, which
would leave them behind. And add a new list of problems, firstly, being behind and
lacking the experience that other countries have, secondly, not being a part of the
development of tools that is need to fulfil the ISOВӯ19650 requirements, they could
have created tools that are similar or better suited to the current market, thirdly
the potential lost revue over the last years, where they didВҙnot use ISOВӯ19650
Software and tools
As ISO 19650, becomes more integrated in the building industry. Software deВӯ
velopers, such as Autodesk, would have to create/modify their products to better
comply and support the IS0Вӯ19650 standard. That would mean, that the Danish
companies would have available tools, that can be used for the standard, which
they ainвҖҷt using. These tools could potentially have a great deal of benefits, and
make the implementation phase a lot easier. That would be a disadvantaged and
loss of benefits for the market.
Sustainability and digitalization
As pointed out in the section of political agenda, the global focus and additional
the political agenda is aimed at sustainability, climate changes and how to combat
and improve of those. The plans and many strategies for the future, is mapped
out to improve in these areas, and the spotlight and focus is increasing everyday
on this topic. As the investigation showed, the Danish government is preparing to
invest a lot of resource into sustainability and digitalization of all sectors included
the building sector, and it would in the building sectorвҖҷs best interest to prepare for
a standard such as ISOВӯ19650, that could potentially be profitable for both areas.
The ISOВӯ19650 standard could create the framework, that increases sustainable
building.
33
==PAGE:46==
8.2
Second scenario
Effects on the Danish market, if ISOВӯ19650 is implemented
8.2.1
Advantage
вҖў Be involved and a part of ISOВӯ19650 in Europe
вҖў Involved in the developments of tools to support ISOВӯ19650
вҖў Using ISOВӯ19650 to promote sustainable building
вҖў Improved Digitalization in Denmark
вҖў Benefit from more ISOВӯ19650 complied software programs and tools
Be involved and a part of ISOВӯ19650 in Europe
By implementing ISOВӯ19650, the Danish building sector, would be part of the new
phase in Europe. The use of BIM and hereunder ISOВӯ19650 in European context,
is a described in the buildingSmart section becoming further tested and more adВӯ
vanced. Some projects from вҖқbuildingSmart showed how to successfully incorpoВӯ
rate parts of ISOВӯ19650 with BIM in project.
As an involved party, the Danish building sector competitive position, would reВӯ
main intact, and therefore continue to part of projects in around Europe. That
would further improve the position, as they can be included in a potential growing
market, especially their involvement in UK could spike, and additionally in other
European countries such as Italy, Spain, and Germany
The benefit here is their continued active involvement in a European context and
potential economical benefit from international projects
Involved in the developments of tools to support ISOВӯ19650
This involved would allow them, to be part of the development of the tools need
to support the operational phase of ISOВӯ19650, and from their better tailor it, to fit
their way of working and according to their needed. Companies, such as Molio,
would play a great role in this, as they are the traditional provider of these types of
service/product in the Danish building sector. As identified in chapter 3, Molio are
interested to be a part of this process, they are additionally interested to provide
tools that included SME in the industry, as they are highly dependent of them and
is aware of the potential thread it can have on them
Using ISOВӯ19650 to promote sustainable building
The analysis of ISOВӯ19650 standard, showed that it can be used to support and
further advance sustainable building, if wanted. The users of ISOВӯ19650 can use it
to promote and ask for more sustainable solutions in their building projects/assets.
As pinpointed in the section of political agenda, the Danish government is highly
focused on the improvement of suitable building and the reduction of greenhouse
gas for the building sector. One of their plans involves the introduction of LCA
analysis, which ISO 19650 can be part of and help to provide of this.
34
==PAGE:47==
Improved Digitalization in Denmark
As identified in the section of political agenda, the Danish government are planing
on a lot of change and improvement for digitalization in Denmark. The building
sector is going to experience pressure and more incentive to further improve of
their digitalization, and as pointed out the ISO 19650 standard could be used to
that. The political agenda would be fulfilled.
Benefit from more ISOВӯ19650 complied software programs and tools
As identified in the digitalization section, software programs and tools would beВӯ
come more complained with ISOВӯ19650, and by using ISO 19650 in projects, they
could benefit from this development which could possibly make the transitions
easier and be a reason for a better implementation phase
35
==PAGE:48==
8.2.2
Disadvantage
вҖў The effect on SME
вҖў The implementation cost and phase
вҖў Would be against the position of the Danish building market
The effect on SME
As described and identified in the chapter Denmark, SME could be put in an unВӯ
favourite position. They are identified to be less digitalized in comparison to bigger
companies, and additionally to that the entire building sector is found to have a
problem with digitation in comparison to other industries. Which is partly because
99% of building companies is of SME. Added to that, SME donвҖҷt have the same
resource or value position as bigger companies have. Which could entail that the
cost of implementation could be fatale for some, or at least apply additional presВӯ
sure on their economy. As mentioned in the interviews, that change would have
an effect on the overall market, and could have an effect negative effect on prices.
The argument here is based on the fact, it would reduce the number of SME in
the market, and that means bigger companies would have less competition and
rise prices based on that.
The implementation cost and phase
Bigger companies have a more advanced use of digital tools and software, the
cost is therefore assumed to be different, however the further resources and manВӯ
power puts them in a position that is assumed to better handle the implementation
of the ISOВӯ19650 standard. The conclusion would still be that the phase of imВӯ
plementation and cost would affect the entire market, and create a problem for all
type of companies.
Would be against the position of the Danish building market
The Danish building market has, as identified and described in the chapter DenВӯ
mark, shown that the market is not planing on implementing ISO 19650, in the
near future. The interviewees expressed they desire to await and see the evoВӯ
lution of the ISO 19650 standard. They expressed that they could not see, the
added benefit of it, and expressed their concerns regarding the situation of SME,
added workload, change of structure and tradition of the industry, and finally, they
already consider what they were doing applied to most of what ISO 19650, where
asking for. The ICTВӯrequirments did cover most of it, so what is the added value
for them, to implement it.
Another problem identified in the section public developers where, that if ISO
19650 becomes a requirement for new public founded project. It could but their
projects in an unfavourable position, as it would enter a nonВӯcompletive bidding
process, that is linked to the fact, that would be a limited selection of companies
that were ready to comply, and delivery a project based on the ISO 19650 stanВӯ
dard.
36
==PAGE:49==
That limitation in the bidding poll, could rise the price of their assets/projects.
Which is an outcome, they would want to prevent. Which is part of their reasons to
waiting to await, it to become more mainstream, or mandatory though Legislation.
Therefore, the market is expected to react negatively towards the implementation
of ISO 19650,.
37
==PAGE:50==
9
Proposal how to implement The
ISO 19650 standard
This section describes and examine 3 different proposal, of how to implement the
ISO 19650 standard series into the Danish building sector.
9.1
Proposal 1
вҖў Implementation for all divisions
вҖў Public developers
Implementation for all division
This proposal sees that the implementation would come from big sized companies.
The type of bigger companies that is involved on an international level, and has
serval division aboard and especially in Europe. Sees a benefit in introducing this
standard for all division, as it could improve communication inВӯhouse, strengthen
their position on the European market. COWI and similar companies would fit
that description. As mentioned in the interview with COWI, this was a benefit
they were aware of, but they decided not to go through with it(Appendix G). When
bigger companies have implemented ISOВӯ19650, and can brand themselves as,
being ISO 19650 certified. The Danish building sector would then be aware of this
change, and their demands could now include use of ISOВӯ19650.
Public developers
The next following step phase, would be to include the public developers, as they
would be able to request the use of ISOВӯ19650 for public supported projects, as
identified in the interview and section of Public developers, they were hesitant
to do such, as they demand the market not capable of it, at given time. This
proposal enables that. Public projects, can further use ISOВӯ19650 standard to
demand more sustainable building which would be in the interest of the governВӯ
ment. The government, as identified in the chapter 4, is massively involved into
and is likely willing to push or incentives public developers to demand more susВӯ
tainable building.
38
==PAGE:51==
9.2
Proposal 2
This proposal describes how to use the UK, for the implementation of ISOВӯ19650
in the Danish building sector.
The Danish building sector would study the implementations phase of ISOВӯ19650
in the UK, over a short period, around 2Вӯ3 years. As identified and described in the
chapter Uk, the UK government is highly invested and interested in the progress of
ISOВӯ19650. Large sums of money has been invested into BIM, digitalization and
frameworks that support the use of ISOВӯ19650 as the UK government sees a lot
of potential and benefits in these and the want to reduce their cost for construction
projects by 15Вӯ20%. After the short period has passed, the Danish building sector
would look to the UK, and learn from their experience of the implementation of
ISOВӯ19650. They would be able to see, how the dealt with the transition from
PASВӯ1192Вӯ2 to ISOВӯ19650, and maybe use it for their own transition of ICT to
ISOВӯ19650. The companies in the UK and other software companyвҖҷs would have
developed tools and software programs, that is more ISOВӯ19650 compliant and
could be used in the Danish sector.
Next step would be the implementation into the Danish building sector, the bigger
companies that wanted to await the progress of ISOВӯ19650 as identified in the
interview with Peter Bo, would now implement the ISOВӯ19650 standard which is
a more UK related version, as the assumed tools and software programs that is
available, has possibly been developed by the UK building sector or based on
their experience of ISOВӯ19650 standard. The last step, is that SME is next to
implement the ISOВӯ19650 standard. Similar to the bigger companies, they would
obtain from the experience SME had in the UK building sector, and deal with the
transition based on these experiences.
39
==PAGE:52==
9.3
Proposal 3
вҖў Molio and building Smart
вҖў Public developers
вҖў Political agenda
Molio and building Smart
For this implementation, Molio has to make alteration in the ICTВӯspecifications and
ICTВӯprocesmanual acording to ISOВӯ19650, so companies would be able to deliver
on all ISOВӯ19650 requirements. They have to create the manual and framework
for the use of ISOВӯ19650 in the Danish building sector, and create a form of checkВӯ
list for their costumer. This manual has to explain how to fulfil the operational
phase of ISOВӯ19650, and the framework need to be a collection of practical exВӯ
perience and learned lessons. Molio has to give courses for the introduction of
ISOВӯ19650 and the implementation of it and need to teach the collation between
ISOВӯ19650 and ICT for the Danish building sector, explain the similarities of these.
To give a better understanding of their difference.
This proposal would see, that the Danish building sector becomes more involved/aware
of building Smart, and beware of the opportunity and benefits international work
could bring.
Public developers
Public developers have to demand the use of ISOВӯ19650 in their projects. The
developerвҖҷs would have the Molio guide, that informs them how to deliver for all
the ISOВӯ19650 requirements. Companies would be able to participate in public
funded projects, as the can get access to a guide and understand how to delivery
a project that requires the use of ISOВӯ19650.
Political agenda
Using the political agenda to push for the implementation of ISOВӯ19650 into the
Danish building sector. The willingness of government and their plan to improve
of digitalization in the Danish building sector, can be used as an incentive to impleВӯ
ment ISOВӯ19650, the government would provide financial support for companies
to participate in the Molio courses.
Another political agenda, is to reduce the building sector CO2 emission. The govВӯ
ernment would tell the public developers to demand sustainable building solution
though the use of ISOВӯ19650, for all public funded projects and provide financial
support for the public developers if the projects becomes more expense as a result
of that.
40
==PAGE:53==
10
Discussion
10.1
Assessment of proposals
The proposals, described in the previous chapter 8, outlines, 3 different suggesВӯ
tion of how to implement The ISO 19650 standard in the Danish building sector.
These proposals are based on the identified results in chapter 4, ISOВӯ19650 effect
on the Danish building sector, the political agenda to better digitalization and work
towards a more suitable future, software programs and buildingsmart experience
ISOВӯ19650 with a understanding of the connetion between ICT and ISOВӯ19650.
In addition to that, they are further formed and adjusted to incorporate chapter
6, the interviewees viewpoints and experience of the Danish building sector, and
lastly chapter 5, the progress of ISOВӯ19650 in the UK and the governmentвҖҷs future
plans for BIM.
10.1.1
Proposal 1
The first proposal approached the implementation from the angle of bigger comВӯ
panies can see the benefit of ISOВӯ19650, as it could improve their global position,
if the implement ISOВӯ19650 for their division, they would be able to compete for
project around Europe and solidifies Danish companies leading in BIM and digiВӯ
talization. The present Danish digital building practise is a mentioned in multiple
interviews by leading experts, quite similar to what would be required of them if the
changed and start using ISOВӯ19650. This just shows how far the Danish building
sector is with their ICTВӯspecifications and ICTВӯprocessmanuel. The translated verВӯ
sion of this ICT, is going to be available soon, under the name BIM Specifications,
which can be used for ISO 19650, as it is their tool of Exchange Information ReВӯ
quirements(EIR), and the name of ther other one is BIM Process Manual, which
their tool for BIM Execution Plan (BEP).
This indicates that especially big companies would already be familiar to elements
of ISOВӯ19650, that would ease the implementations process for them, nevertheВӯ
less that is not to imply that i would be a easy process.It would still require a lot
of resources and time, and some would view this as an unnecessary step to take,
at the current time. This means that bigger companies can compete better on the
European market, epically in the UK, or the other countries where the use of ISOВӯ
19650 is growing, such as Italy, Spain, and Germany to name a few. Therefore,
the big Danish companies would be following and be involved in the progress of
ISO 19650 along the other countries, and leading the way for a European stanВӯ
dard.
The proposal, also suggest, that public developers can demand the use of 19650,
in some public funded project, what type of projects is not specified in this proВӯ
posal, the public developers would have to make that call. The interview with the
KГёbenhavns Ejendomme, expressed that a reason for not using ISOВӯ19650, was
that the Danish building sector were not ready for that. Therefore, they would be
41
==PAGE:54==
able to do that now. This opens the market for the bigger companies to work in
Denmark, that the introduction of ISOВӯ19650 for the Danish market. They would
share their knowledge with the other smaller companies. The indications from the
results explained how important it would be for the Danish building sector, to have
the operational knowledge for the use of IS0Вӯ19650, before it the different sectors
of the market, would change their awaiting approach and become more involved.
This proposal has its limitations in certain aspects. It doesnвҖҷt describe the clear
inВӯdepth process and timeline the implementation of ISOВӯ19650 in the bigger comВӯ
panies, which means the overall cost and time this takes is unclear, and the effect
on it can have on the company in that period is unknown. Furthermore, this proВӯ
posal canвҖҷt explain how well the exchange of experience and knowledge would
be, between the bigger companies and the smaller ones in the Danish building
market.
10.1.2
Proposal 2
This proposal, is based on the results found in chapter 6, and the interviewees
who expressed wanting to see how the implementation of ISOВӯ19650 would be
in the UK, and other European countries and learn from their experience before
implementing it into their companies, and the interview with the UK expert David
Churcher
The UK building sector, would as of the result of the mandatory minimum requireВӯ
ment for centrallyВӯprocured public projects in compliance with BIM Level 2, see
more project that uses BIM and ISO 19650. Therefore, the Danish building sector
would be able to learn from their experience with ISOВӯ19650, and how they solve
problems and issues for the operational phase. As KГёbenhavns Ejendomme and
Sara Asmussen expressed in their interview, an important element for the develВӯ
opers is to be able to see what kind of benefits and advantages, they would get
from the use of ISOВӯ19650 before considering using it. The report of NBS [40], exВӯ
press a lot of different added benefits and advantages, the use of BIM have had in
the UK, over the last 10 years. Based on that, if the Danish building sector, would
be able to observe, the benefits and experience, the building UK sector would
see, from the use of the standard over the next 3 years. It would be a catalyst, for
the developers in Denmark, to use ISO 19650.
Before the ISOВӯ19650 standard, the UK building sector had as predecessor,PASВӯ
1192Вӯ2. Which were the foundation for the creating of the European standard ISO
19650. The similarity and connection between this two is addressed, in chapter
6. That means that the UK building sector is better prepared for ISO 19650, then
a lot of other European countries. They have more experience and that gives
them the edge and puts them in a better position, on the European market, than
the other countries. As the interview with Peter Bo and Gunnar Friborg shed light
on, UK representative where highly motived to create a European standard, and
that this standard were similar to what the already had with PASВӯ1192Вӯ2. The
involvement of the other European countries changed that, but as we can see,
the principle and concept are quite similar. This, along with the massive funding
from the UK government, indicates for a clear commitment and willingness for ISO
19650 to be successful and used in other European countries. This would give
42
==PAGE:55==
the UK building sector an advantage and secure more jobs and projects for them.
BIM, is another area that the UK government is investing resources in, and want
to see their building sector to improve of. The introduction of BIM levels is their
strategy to explain the direction they, want to see the sector move towards. This
means, that BIM in the UK, is a highly important topic. In which they want to be
a leading country, for that area, and based on the identified results in the thesis
and their effort, they are expecting BIM, to be part of the foundation for the future
of the building industry, which is an opinion shared by many. What this proposal
doesnвҖҷt address, and canвҖҷt tell, is how much value the observed experience from
the UK, would give the Danish building sector. Is it as relevant and useful in the
context of the Danish market, would it be possible to implement if they use the
same implementations strategy and tools or is their approach to dependent on
their previous methods and way of working, that it would not benefit the Danish
building sector because, they are at a different level in terms of BIM and digital
building.
10.1.3
Proposal 3
This proposal are based on the finding identified and described in chapter 4 and 5,
especially the interviews with leading experts for BIM and ICT in Denmark, Peter
BO and Gunnar Friborg, and the interviews with the two biggest public developers
in Denmark
For this proposal, Molio plays a key role for the implementation of ISO 19650
into the Danish building Sector. The alteration in the ICTВӯspecifications and ICTВӯ
procesmanual to support ISOВӯ19650, would mean that the costumers of Molio has
a better understanding of which parts of overlaps each other, and from that, they
would be able to understand the difference and similarities, this give the Danish
building marked a better overview, of the actual content of ISO 19650, and remove
some of this uncertainty that is in the market. The majority of the interviewees
felt that ISOВӯ19650 where to overall, which is also expected as it is a process
standard, that is why, this would address a major concern in the Danish building
sector.
Furthermore, Molio has to create a manual and a framework that explains how to
use ISOВӯ19650 in the Danish building sector, this step, is aligned with the viewВӯ
point of Gunnar Friborg and Peter BO. That indicate this is the next step, the
Danish building sector could move to, and some can argue has to take. The preВӯ
liminary work that needs to be done for ISOВӯ19650 to develop in that Danish buildВӯ
ing market, is that the framework has to be a collection based on practical work.
This framework would enable the implementation, as this is a similar practice to
what has been done in the UK, with their BIM Framework, which as expressed by
David Churcher, has provided the fundamental steps for the Building industry in
UK in becoming more digitalized. The framework matter, as it has helped with a
better and uniform understanding of the requirements for ISO 19650.
building Smart and further involved into their work, means the gained accessed to
the shared experience of international standards and solutions for infrastructure
and building, this type of work, could be beneficial for a European standard such as
43
==PAGE:56==
ISO 19650. Some project has seen benefits by increased availability of data, and
maybe this way of working would become more common in the future. building
Smart could play a role, into how software programs would be developed and
improved to handle any new demand of the building sector. Which could affect
those software programs and tools to better support the international agenda.
In this proposal public developers would have to use IS0Вӯ19650 for some of their
public funded projects, this is a shared concern of the public developers expressed
in the interviews. They expressed by demanding this, they could affect the building
market and especially SME. This problematic where identified in section digitalВӯ
ization. When it came to digitalization in the building sector, SME, where behind
in terms of both basic technologies and advanced technologies. That is an issue,
when trying to implement a digital standard for the entire market. The SME, would
have access to the Molio guide and framework, which means they could use that
when working with public funded projects.
The last step in this proposal, is the improvement of the digital situation in the
building industry with the use of the political agenda, and additionally improve
sustainable building and the reduction of green house gas caused by the building
sector, which is also aligned with the political agenda of the current government.
The section political agenda, identified the Danish government plans and strategy,
which sees large investment and allocation of resources to meet their goals in
Denmark, and the goals on a European plan. These plans and strategy, are a clear
indication of what focus area and direction the current Danish government has for
the building sector now, and especially their future plan. They want the building
sector, to become more digitalized across all areas and all types of company sizes.
This is very important, as is can have a signification influence on the building
sector, where new legislations and requirements set by the government could
force rapid changes, for the improvement of these areas.
This proposal does not tell us what, the companies actually think of the framework,
additionally is doesnвҖҷt inform which type of companies that find this framework
relevant and useful and having created this alternation of ICT, would not indicate
how the building sector would react to this, or if that is enough to make them
start use ISO 19650 in projects. The limitation here, is that it canвҖҷt tell how well
the experience gained from this buildingSmart, would be on the Danish market, in
addition to that, i it hard to determine a direct collocation of the effect buildingSmart
would have on software companies.
Another limitations of this proposal is that, even if the SME enterprises would have
access to the guide and framework, that would not matter if they donвҖҷt have access
to the tools or human resources, that would enable them to work with the digital
standards as the bigger companies have,
Lastly, it would be hard to determine, in which area of the building sector the
Danish government are planing to improve of, and even harder to see if they
would incorporate the use of ISO 19650 and BIM as the element to archive their
goals. The political agenda, can only tell what they are planing to do, but it canвҖҷt
tell how they are expecting to archive these set goals.
44
==PAGE:57==
10.2
Chosen Proposal
This proposal highlights their advantages and disadvantages, as an implemenВӯ
tation strategy of ISO 19650 into the Danish building Sector. In proposal 1, the
majority of workload and groundwork would have to come from bigger compaВӯ
nies. That will improve their position on a European market, but this will also put
an additional risk and cost on them, especially in the beginning.
The justification for the additional cost, with limited advantages on the Danish
building market is an issue, and therefore is it more likely for them, to await another
strategy which sees that the opportunities on both markets are available, therefore
this is a more unlikely approach, where proposal 2, sees that the overall Danish
building market, should observe the experience from the UK and learn from that.
Proposal 1, could benefit from how proposal 2, as bigger companies would be able
to see, what benefit ISO 19650 could bring to their companies, and be incentive
for taking the risk now. The missing link in proposal 2, is how effective and relevant
the learned experience is for the Danish Building sector, and that is where proposal
3 focus on.
Proposal 3, sees that the connection and understanding of ISO 19650 need to
be relevant and based on the Danish building sector, before it can be used and
implemented in the sector. The proposal that is more likely to be used and is
valued to have a greater rate of success is proposal 3, this address the central
concerns and problems identified in this thesis. It is seemed as the best course
of action for the implementation of ISOВӯ19650 standard into the Danish Building
sector.
The research and identified problems in the thesis, relies on an investigation of the
Danish building sector, interviews with leading experts in Denmark and the UK,
a selected type of professions in that sector, and digitalization and sustainably
angled from a political point of view, all which has had an influence on the type of
findings found, and the approach taken by this chosen method, it is important to
mention as it can have narrowed down the entire overview of the Danish building
sector a painted the implementations strategy suggested
45
==PAGE:58==
11
Conclusion
This study has presented an in depth examination of the Danish building sector,
focusing on the potential impact ISO 19650 would have on the Danish building
sector. Furthermore, the current conditions and viewpoint of leading experts in
the market and an insight into ISO 19650 and BIM in UK
The UK building sector is highly invested and motivated to become the leading
country for BIM adapting on an international level and furthermore in digitalization,
which could be beneficial for them, and improve their ability to compete internaВӯ
tionally.
The expanded use of the ISO 19650 standard can help them with that, furthermore
PASВӯ1192 is a catalyst for the UK building sector for adapting to the ISO 19650
standard. BIM, is by the UK government, seen as the future of the building sector,
which is expected to reduce their annual building cost, and a lot of resource would
be allocated which would improve the development of BIM.
The development of more ISO 19650 compliant software programs and tools
would help further integrate the standard in the international building sector. buildВӯ
ingSmart and their work, with international shared standard and solutions, would
change the building sector in countries from national collaboration to international
collaboration. These changes are happening regardless of the opinion in the DanВӯ
ish building sector, which could push for the implementation of the ISO 19650
standard.
There is several opinions in the Danish building sector, in regard to the ISO 19650
standard. The opinion of the majority is that they donвҖҷt see its application or benВӯ
efits in a Danish context compared to the current conditions. The majority has
chosen an awaiting approach, additionally to that non, are planing to implement
it in their companies or use it for the projects. Molio are planing to prepare the
introduction of ISO 19650 in the Danish building sector. The ICT requirement and
procesmanual is being altered to comply better with ISO 19650 and provide the
need overview. Leading BIM experts point out, that the implementation of ISO
19650 and expanded use of BIM on European level, is going to be important for
the Danish building sector. The Danish building sector would be effected by the
changes happening on a European level, and the opinions of the majority would
therefore have to reconsider, their implementation strategy of ISO 19650.
The SME in the Danish building sector are less advanced and further behind, then
bigger companies. That could become a great problem for the SME, but also the
entire building market, additionally that could slow down the implementation of
ISO 19650.
The political agenda by the Danish government for the Danish building sector,
sees an expansion in the use of digitization for all parties, furthermore they have
incited a strategy to improve of sustainable building and reduce of green house
46
==PAGE:59==
gasses before 2030. This could be a factor that pushes the use of BIM, and in
extension to that ISO 19650.
Proposal 3, is the chosen implementation strategy that would facilitate ISO 19650
into the Danish building sector, and addresses the several identified problematic
in the thesis. The progress and developments happening in the digital building
sector, should be considered an important subject for the companies in the Danish
building sector, and they should be aware of the possible impact that could have
on them
47
==PAGE:60==
12
Actions and remcomendations
Throughout the research process, multiple interview and the findings in this thesis,
serval topics were meet and covered, but these fall outside the scope of this thesis.
These topics could be considered important for future work and be of interset in
studies.
вҖў A further investigation of the biggest problem that faces the Danish building
industry, furthermore, would ISO 19650 be able to solve these issues.
вҖў An analysis of buildingSmart Projects that uses ISO 19650, what advanВӯ
tages and disadvantages is there.
вҖў An examination of digitalization level and need of SME, in the Danish buildВӯ
ing Sector.
вҖў An analysis of BIM and its future application in accorders to ISO 19650
48
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
вҖңBIM Вӯ Building Information Modelling Вӯ ISO 19650 | BSIвҖқ. In: (). URL: https:
//www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/iso-19650-BIM/.
[2]
BS EN ISO 19650. вҖңInformation management according to BS EN ISO 19650
Вӯ Guidance Part 2: Processes for Project DeliveryвҖқ. In: UK BIM Alliance (3
2020).
[3]
Dansk standard. вҖңDS/EN ISO 19650Вӯ1:2018Вӯ Organisering og digitalisering
af information om byggeВӯ og anlГҰgsarbejder, herunder BIM вҖ“ InformationВӯ
shГҘndtering med BIM вҖ“ Del 1: Begreber og principperвҖқ. In: Dansk standard,
2019. Chap. 12.
[4]
Dansk standard. вҖңDS/EN ISO 19650Вӯ2:2018 Вӯ Organisering og digitalisering
af information om byggeВӯ og anlГҰgsarbejder, herunder BIM вҖ“ InformationВӯ
shГҘndtering med BIM вҖ“ Del 2: AfleveringsfasenвҖқ. In: Dansk standard, 2018.
Chap. 0.
[5]
Dansk standard. вҖңDS/EN ISO 19650Вӯ2:2018 Вӯ Organisering og digitalisering
af information om byggeВӯ og anlГҰgsarbejder, herunder BIM вҖ“ InformationВӯ
shГҘndtering med BIM вҖ“ Del 2: AfleveringsfasenвҖқ. In: Dansk standard, 2018.
Chap. 5.
[6]
Dansk standard. вҖңDS/EN ISO 19650Вӯ3:2020ВӯOrganisering og digitalisering
af information om byggeВӯ og anlГҰgsarbejder, inklusive BIM вҖ“ InformationВӯ
sstyring med BIMвҖ“ Del 3: Aktivernes driftsfaseвҖқ. In: Dansk standard, 2020.
Chap. 0Вӯ5.
[7]
Dansk standardвҖқ. вҖңDS/EN ISO 19650Вӯ5:2020 Вӯ Organisering og digitaliserВӯ
ing af information om byggeВӯ og anlГҰgsarbejder, inklusive BIM вҖ“ InformaВӯ
tionsstyring med BIM вҖ“ Del 5: Sikkerhedsorienteret tilgang til informationВӯ
sstyringвҖқ. In: Dansk standard, 2020. Chap. 0Вӯ9.
[8]
European Committee for Standardization. вҖңWho we areВӯ CENвҖқ. In: (). URL:
https://www.cen.eu/about/Pages/default.aspx.
[9]
вҖңCEN/TC 442 Вӯ BygherreforeningenвҖқ. In: (). URL: https://bygherreforeningen.
dk/glossary/cen-tc-442/.
[10]
Dansk Standard. вҖңInformationsstrukturering og modellering inden for byggeВӯ
og anlaegsarbejder Вӯ Dansk StandardвҖқ. In: (). URL: https://www.ds.dk/da/
udvalg/kategorier/byggeri-og-anlaeg/bim-_-building-information-modelling.
[11]
вҖңDet koster det Вӯ Dansk StandardвҖқ. In: (). URL: https://www.ds.dk/da/
ydelser/deltag-i-udvalg/det-koster-det.
[12]
Bygning og Boligministeriet Transport and Rosendahls a/s. Strategi for digВӯ
italt byggeri. TrafkВӯ, ByggeВӯ og Boligstyrelsen, Jan. 2019, pp. 1вҖ“42. URL:
https://www.trm.dk/publikationer/2019/strategi-for-digitalt-byggeri/.
[13]
Building smart. вҖңIFC og BIMs rolle i fremtidens byggeriвҖқ. In: (). URL: https:
//molio.dk/nyheder-og-viden/netvaerk/buildingsmart-danmark/om-bsdk/ifc-og-
bims-rolle-i-fremtidens-byggeri.
[14]
TECH RELATIONS. вҖңNye standarder for BIM Вӯ her er hvad du skal vide |
IngeniГёrenвҖқ. In: (). URL: https://ing.dk/nye-standarder-bim-her-hvad-du-skal-
vide.
49
==PAGE:62==
[15]
Finansministeriet. вҖңDanmarks grГёnne genopretningsplan endeligt godkendt
i EUвҖқ. In: (July 2021). URL: https://fm.dk/nyheder/nyhedsarkiv/2021/juli/
danmarks-groenne-genopretningsplan-endeligt-godkendt-i-eu/.
[16]
вҖңBekendtgГёrelse om anvendelse af informationsВӯ og kommunikationsteknologi
(IKT) i offentligt byggeriвҖқ. In: (Feb. 2013). URL: https://www.retsinformation.
dk/eli/lta/2013/118.
[17]
InformationsВӯ og Kommunikationsteknologi (IKT) Вӯ RambГёll i Danmark. URL:
https://dk.ramboll.com/ydelser-og-sektorer/byggeri/pharma-og-biotekraadgivning/
ikt.
[18]
вҖңHvad er IKT? | LГҰs om bekendtgГёrelse, aftale mm. | MolioвҖқ. In: (Oct. 2019).
URL: https://molio.dk/nyheder-og-viden/nyheder/seneste-nyt/hvad-er-ikt.
[19]
Elisabeth Krarup. вҖңDerfor er BIMВӯstandarder sГҘ vigtigeвҖқ. In: (Apr. 2021).
URL: https://molio.dk/nyheder- og- viden/nyheder/seneste- nyt/derfor- er-
bim-standarder-vigtige.
[20]
Elisabeth Krarup. вҖңIKTВӯspecifikationer: Digitalt samarbejde pГҘ engelskвҖқ. In:
(Oct. 2020). URL: https://molio.dk/nyheder-og-viden/nyheder/seneste-nyt/ikt-
specifikationer-digitalt-samarbejde-pa-engelsk.
[21]
вҖңAutodesk Construction Cloud Global Focus Expands with Workflows that
Support ISO 19650 Вӯ Digital BuilderвҖқ. In: (June 2021). URL: https://constructionblog.
autodesk.com/autodesk-construction-support-iso-19650/.
[22]
вҖңWhat We Do Вӯ buildingSMART InternationalвҖқ. In: (). URL: https://www.
buildingsmart.org/about/what-we-do/.
[23]
Molio. вҖңDigital Trend Вӯ buildingSMARTвҖқ. In: (Dec. 2020). URL: https://molio.
dk/nyheder-og-viden/nyheder/seneste-nyt/digital-trend-buildingsmart.
[24]
вҖңCanadian Annex NA.1 General Figure 2ВӯIdentification of information conВӯ
tainers within a common data environment Project Originator Number VolВӯ
ume/ System Level/ Location Type RoleвҖқ. In: (Mar. 2021).
[25]
Mette Glavind. вҖңByggeriet kan vГҰre med til at redde klimaet Вӯ Ydelser Вӯ TekВӯ
nologisk InstitutвҖқ. In: (). URL: https://www.teknologisk.dk/ydelser/byggeriet-
kan-vaere-med-til-at-redde-klimaet/41011.
[26]
Dansk Byggeri. вҖңDI Dansk Byggeri: God aftale om udmГёntningen af miВӯ
dlerne til bГҰredygtigt byggeri | DI Вӯ Dansk ByggeriвҖқ. In: (June 2021). URL:
https : / / via . ritzau . dk / pressemeddelelse / di - dansk - byggeri - god - aftale - om -
udmontningen- af- midlerne- til- baeredygtigt- byggeri?publisherId=12604233&
releaseId=13623356.
[27]
вҖңNyhed: En national strategi for bГҰredygtigt byggeri vedtaget Вӯ Dansk KomВӯ
petencecenter for Affald og RessourcerвҖқ. In: (Mar. 2021). URL: https : / /
dakofa.dk/element/en-national-strategi-for-baeredygtigt-byggeri-vedtaget/.
[28]
Socialdemokratiet et al. Aftale om National strategi for baeredygtigt byggeri.
[29]
вҖңKLIMAKRAV I BYGGERIET FRA 2023 Вӯ BAT Kartellet : BAT KartelletвҖқ. In:
(). URL: https://batkartellet.dk/klimakrav-i-byggeriet-fra-2023/.
[30]
Kollerup (Erhvervsministeren) Simon. RedegГёrelse af 14/4 2021 om DanВӯ
marks digitale vГҰkst 2021. Folketinget, Apr. 2021, pp. 1вҖ“23. URL: https:
//www.ft.dk/ripdf/samling/20201/redegoerelse/R15/20201_R15.pdf.
[31]
Mathias LГёvhГёj. вҖңRetningslinjer for anvendelsen af IKTВӯvГҰrktГёjer | BygnВӯ
ingsstyrelsenвҖқ. In: (Feb. 2021). URL: https://bygst.dk/byggeri/ikt/vejledning-
til-ikt-ydelser-og-implementering/retningslinjer-for-anvendelsen-af-ikt-vaerktoejer/.
50
==PAGE:63==
[32]
вҖңBYGNINGSSTYRELSEN вҖ“ InsubizвҖқ. In: (2018). URL: https://insubiz.dk/
portfolio/bygningsstyrelsen-3/.
[33]
вҖңAbout us Вӯ CowiвҖқ. In: (July 2021). URL: https://www.cowi.com/about.
[34]
вҖңOm Bygherreforeningen Вӯ BygherreforeningenвҖқ. In: (). URL: https://bygherreforeningen.
dk/om-bygherreforeningen/#formaal.
[35]
вҖңOm Molio | Faglig viden om byggerietвҖқ. In: (). URL: https://molio.dk/om-
molio.
[36]
Richard McPartlandвҖқ. What is the PAS 1192 framework? URL: https : / /
www.thenbs.com/knowledge/what- is- the- pas- 1192- framework. (accessed:
28.06.2021).
[37]
Michael Ellis. вҖңWill ISO 19650 replace BS1192 and PAS 11920 Construction
release dateвҖқ. In: (Jan. 2019). URL: https://rebim.io/goodbye-bs1192-hello-
iso19650/.
[38]
A report for the Government Construction Client Group Building Information
Modelling (BIM) Working Party Strategy Paper. 2011.
[39]
вҖңNew BIM Standards Вӯ ISO19650 Вӯ BIM Level 2 GuidanceвҖқ. In: (). URL: https:
//bimportal.scottishfuturestrust.org.uk/page/new-international-bim-standards.
[40]
Dansk standard. вҖңDS/EN ISO 19650Вӯ5:2020вҖқ. In: Dansk standard, 2020.
Chap. 0Вӯ9.
[41]
Zigurat Global Institute of Technology. BIM in the UK: Success in progress Вӯ
Engineers and Architects. Oct. 2018. URL: https://www.e-zigurat.com/blog/
en/bim-in-the-uk/.
[42]
NBS 2017. вҖңNational BIM Report for Manufacturers 2017вҖқ. In: National BIM
Library (2017). ISSN: 1098Вӯ6596.
[43]
Richard McPartland. вҖңBIM Levels explained | NBSвҖқ. In: (Nov. 2014). URL:
https://www.thenbs.com/knowledge/bim-levels-explained.
[44]
вҖңBIM level 2 Вӯ Designing Buildings WikiвҖқ. In: (Mar. 2021). URL: https://www.
designingbuildings.co.uk/wiki/BIM_level_2.
[45]
Mark Bew. Digital Built Britain вҖ“ Level 3 Strategy.
[46]
вҖңBIM Maturity Levels ExplainedВӯ Level 0 | 1 | 2 | 3вҖқ. In: (). URL: https://www.
united-bim.com/bim-maturity-levels-explained-level-0-1-2-3/.
[47]
вҖңBIM ThinkSpace:вҖқ in: (Feb. 2015). URL: https://www.bimthinkspace.com/
2015/02/.
[48]
Government Construction Strategy One Year On Report and Action Plan
Update. 2012.
[49]
вҖңBIM maturity levelsвҖқ. In: (). URL: https://campus.tekla.com/bim-maturity-
levels.
51
==PAGE:64==
52
==PAGE:65==
A
Prepared Questions for the
interview
The borderline questions for the interview where the same, but there were noticeВӯ
able difference in the prepared questions. Variation came as the result of each
personвҖҷs different profession, different profession would be effected differently by
the ISO 19650 series, and their standpoint and approach to the ISO 19650 stanВӯ
dard would be different.
The general listing of question, in the interviews about their opnion to IS0Вӯ19650
impact of the Danish sector.
1. What is your opinion regarding PAS 1192 ?
2. What is your opinion regarding ISO 19650 standard ?
3. Who is the target group of ISOВӯ19650Вӯ1Вӯ2?
4. Is there any proof/evidence to support the successfulness of the standard
or the opposite ?
5. Is bigger companies more positively inclined towards introducing IS0 19650
to the market, then smaller ones are ?
6. What is your companyвҖҷs viewpoint of the ISO 19650 series, and do they have
any implementations plans in the near future.
7. Do you think any legalizations would be made for a mandatory use of the
ISO 19650 series in your country?
8. What is the biggest challenge with the ISO 19650 series, in terms of it being
implemented in your country ?
9. Is there a need of a standard, for digitalization in the building sector ? and if
so, how do you think this would be used in the near future.
10. Any other comments to the subject, and do you have any additional inforВӯ
mation that can shed light on this topic.
53
==PAGE:66==
B
Interview with Mathias Hjorth
LГёvhГёj From
Bygningsstyrrelsen
Interviewer: Mohammad Esteitie
Interviewee: Mathias Hjorth LГёvhГёj
Date of mail correspondence: 2021Вӯ07Вӯ08
Background of the Interviewee
Mathias Hjorth LГёvhГёj, Works for Bygningsstyrelsen, with the title ICTВӯProject
manager
B.0.1
What do you think about the ISO19650 series?
Det korte svar er at Bygningsstyrelsen er opmГҰrksom pГҘ ISO19650 serien men
at den ikke bliver anvendt ift. IKTВӯspecifikationer for Bygningsstyrelsens projekter.
Der stilles heller ikke krav om ISO19650 fra Bygningsstyrelsens kunder, hverken
fra universitetsВӯ eller kontoromrГҘdet. Jeg oplever i stedet at branchen bliver mere
og mere standardiseret omkring BIM via diverse branchestandarder fra bl.a. Molio
og DiKon. Jeg oplever heller ikke at ISO standarden bliver brugt af vores Гёvrige
samarbejdspartnere, rГҘdgivere og entreprenГёrer. Standardisering er en rigtig god
ting men jeg tror at ISO standarden har svГҰrt ved at fГҘ indpas i branchen eftersom
den ikke er sГҘ tilgГҰngelig for de aktГёrer der rent faktisk arbejder med BIM. Det
kan eksempelvis vГҰre at en projekterende rГҘdgiver ikke har adgang til standarden
eller tid til at lГҰse ifm. deres arbejde med bygningsmodeller. Det giver jo heller
ikke mening for rГҘdgiveren hvis bygherre eller lovgivningen ikke fordrer at den
bliver anvendt.
B.0.2
Does the ISO 19650 standard goes against any of the
ICT requirement?
Jeg har ikke oplevet at ISO19650 serien gГҘr imod Bygningsstyrelsens generelle
IKT krav. Jeg ser det nГҰrmere som en udspecificering af mange af de anvendte
begreber. Principielt kunne Bygningsstyrelsen godt henvise til ISO standarden
men nГҘr vi ikke oplever forvirring omkring begreber eller IKT krav som helhed,
ser jeg ikke nogen grund til at ISO standarden kunne implementeres i BygnВӯ
ingsstyrelsens IKTВӯspecifikationer.
54
==PAGE:67==
B.0.3
What have Bygningsstyrelsen done in regard to the
ISOВӯ19650 standard
Bygningsstyrelsen har gennem flere ГҘr deltaget i Dansk Standard (DS SВӯ808) udВӯ
valg, som omhandler standardisering af BIM вҖ“ Building information modelling.
Derudover har Bygningsstyrelsen vГҰret en aktiv aktГёr i udarbejdelsen af IKT
bekendtgГёrelsen (BEK nr.
118 og Вӯ119) og har derved igennem adskillige ГҘr
(siden 2013), stillet krav om udarbejdelse af objektbaserede bygningsmodeller
ved nybyg og renoveringsprojekter. Dette har Bygningsstyrelsen gjort for at minВӯ
imere risici og for at fГҘ bedre koordinerede projekter. PГҘ den mГҘde har BygnВӯ
ingsstyrelsen vГҰret med til at skubbe byggebranchen mod en mere digital tilВӯ
gang, hvoraf objektbaserede bygningsmodeller er et vigtigt element for sikre hГёj
kvalitet og fГҰrre fejl. I 2020 har Bygningsstyrelsen valgt at fokusere indad pГҘ
egen forretning og i stedet for at prГҰge branchen gennem standardisering og
flere krav, har vi forsГёgt at fokusere pГҘ de vГҰrdiskabende IKT krav som gavner
Bygningsstyrelsens forretning. Vi har bl.a. valgt at sГҰtte Гёget fokus pГҘ klassifikaВӯ
tion og er begyndt at mГҘle pГҘ, om vores rГҘdgivere fГҘr klassificeret bygningsmodВӯ
eller iht. aftalen. Det fungerer ved at vi laver et udtrak (rapport) baseret pГҘ nogle
automatiserede regelsГҰt som lГҰser IFC modeller. PГҘ den mГҘde kan vi se om
modeller er klassificeret og om klassifikation fremstГҘr det rigtige sted i IFC modВӯ
ellerne. Dette projekt har vi kaldt modelafrapportering og det kan man lГҰse mere
om pГҘ Bygningsstyrelsens hjemmeside:Modelafrapportering | Bygningsstyrelsen
(bygst.dk).
B.0.4
Do Bygningsstyrelsen have any plans for implementing
of the ISO19650 standard, as a requirement for their
projects? Both now and in the future?
PГҘ nuvГҰrende tidspunkt er der ikke nogen planer om at implementere ISO1650 I
Bygningsstyrelsen. Alene det faktum, at standarden er svГҰrt tilgengГҰngelig gГёr
det vanskeligt at implementere den. SpГёrgsmГҘlet er hvordan skal man vide om
der stГҘr nogle relevante ting i standarden hvis man ikke har lГҰst den og hvorfor
skulle man kГёbe den, hvis man ikke ved om den er relevant. SelvfГёlgelig har
Bygningsstyrelsen IKT specialister mulighed for at fГҘ adgang til standarden men
hvorfor skulle vi forsГёge at implementere den hvis vi ikke skГёnner at den vil skabe
mere vГҰrdi for Bygningsstyrelsen.
B.0.5
Is sustainably development being implemented though
the use of ICT requirements ?
PГҘ nuvГҰrende tidspunkt er bГҰredygtighed og IKT to forskellige verdener i BygnВӯ
ingsstyrelsen men vi er opmГҰrksomme pГҘ at der kan vГҰre store gevinster ved
at kombinere de to verdener. Udfordringen kan vГҰre at der ifm. et byggeprojekt
kan vГҰre udgifter forbundet ved at lave bГҰredygtighedsanalyser mv. via bygnВӯ
ingsmodeller og at der i de fleste tilfГҰlde reelt fГёrst vil vГҰre besparelser (ogsГҘ
klimamГҰssige besparelser) ifm. driften af en bygning. Hos Bygningsstyrelsen er
byggeri og drift to forskellige budgetter. For mig at se er det spГёrgsmГҘlet om der
55
==PAGE:68==
sГҘ i virkelighed skulle flyttes Гёkonomi fra det man sparer i driften over til byggeВӯ
projektet. Jeg tror ogsГҘ at andre bygherre kunne stГҘ i samme situation.
56
==PAGE:69==
C
Interview with Gunnar Friborg
from Molio
Interviewer: Mohammad Esteitie
Interviewee: Gunnar Friborg
Date of interview: 2021Вӯ07Вӯ13
Location: Molio Headquarters, LyskГҰr 1, Herlev
Background of the Interviewee
Gunnar Friborg is the Chairman for Dansk standard S808, and works with InternaВӯ
tionale relations and cooperation at Molio, and furthermore works with standardВӯ
ization for Molio. Is part of the committee for CEN 442 and ISO TC59SC13.
C.0.1
What do you think about the PAS 1192Вӯ2 Standard ?
Den er meget koblet op pГҘ den engelske mГҘde at arbejde pГҘ, og er derfor baseret
pГҘ den engelske byggepraksis, som pГҘ mange mГҘder er mere bureaukratisk og
rigtig end den danske.
C.0.2
What do you think about the ISO19650 standard ?
Jeg deltog i en rГҰkke mГёder om de fГёrste udkast til ISO 19650Вӯ1 og Вӯ2, men som
ISOВӯstandard var den ikke sГҘ relevant i forhold til den praksis, vi allerede havde
indfГёrt og brugte i en dansk kontekst. Derfor var vi lidt afventende og ikke sГҘ
interesserede i at deltage pГҘ dette tidspunkt.
Vores interesse og involvering tog en drejning, da det blev vedtaget at gГёre ISO
19650Вӯ1 og Вӯ2 til europГҰiske standarder, sГҘ blev det mere aktuelt for os, og derfor
gik vi mere ind i udviklingsarbejdet med standarderne.
Til fГёrste udgave havde jeg mange kommentarer, mest af alt var det til standardВӯ
ens brug af begreber ukendte i mange andre lande, og at der blev presset pГҘ fra
Englands side for at at indfГёre standarden sГҘ tГҰt pГҘ det, de allerede havde gjort
med PASВӯstandarderne i England. En mere formel, teknokratisk og bureaukratisk
mГҘde, end hvad der er dansk BIMВӯpraksis.
En relevant kommentar til ISO 19650, er at har vГҰret nГёdvendigt at lave en
helt masse guides til brugen af den, hvordan den skal forstГҘs og hvordan den
skal implementeres, og det faktum at hvert land har brug for en guide er meget
sigende om 19650Вӯserien. Det fortГҰller mig at denne standard er lavet pГҘ et
meget overordnet plan, samt er meget formel og teknokratisk i sin tilgang.
ISO 19650Вӯ1 og Вӯ2 er de overordnede rammer for informationshГҘndtering i en
BIMВӯpraksis, og dermed fundamentet for specificeringen af BIMВӯaktiviteterne. Den
operationelle fase er der, man skal fokusere nu, og hvor arbejdet ligger.
57
==PAGE:70==
C.0.3
Does ISO 19650 standard go against any of the
ICTВӯrequirement ?
NГҘr vi fГҘr skabt en kobling til den danske BIMВӯpraksis, sГҘ vil man kunne se, at vi i
Danmark er godt med langt henad vejen. Men vi vil ogsГҘ se, at der sikkert er dele
som er en unГёdvendig del af en mere forenklet og operationel dansk BIMВӯpraksis.
Der hvor vi har mangler i forhold til standarden, vil man vГҰre nГёdt til at benytte
det, der ligger i ISO 19650, indtil vi har lavet noget der dГҰkker og gГёr det mere
operationelt.
C.0.4
What have the Molio done regarding the ISO19650
standard
Hos Molio, har vi medvirket til oversГҰttelserne af ISO 19650Вӯ1 og 19650Вӯ2 og
var inde over med over 300 forslag til rettelser, der sikrer en nogenlunde forstГҘeВӯ
lighed af standarderne pГҘ dansk. Og i forhold til vores IKT specifikationer og
IKTВӯprocesmanual, som er blevet oversat til engelsk som EIR BIM Specifications
og BEP BIM Process Manual har vi fx forklaret konceptet omkring appointing party
og appointed party fra serien.
Jeg vil sige, at 19650Вӯstandarderne kan vГҰre med til at stГёtte en stГёrre standardВӯ
isering af digitalt byggeri med BIM i Europa og globalt, men mest af alt tror jeg, at
egenskabsstandarderne EN ISO 23386 og EN ISO 23387 der udarbejdes i CEN,
bliver helt afgГёrende for at hГёste de store gevinster ved BIM. De bliver afgГёrende
for fx at fГҘ gevinst af bГҰredygtighedsinformation og simulering heraf. Disse ligger
sig op ad ISO 19650, som skaber den overordnede ramme.
Jeg tror 19650Вӯstandarderne bliver gjort gГҰldende i Europa via et EUВӯdirektiv pГҘ
et tidspunkt, og dermed bliver dansk lovgivning, som betyder at offentligt stГёtВӯ
tede byggerier vil vГҰre underlagt dette krav, gГҰldende pГҘ samme mГҘde som
IKTВӯbekendtgГёrelserne.
Dette kan have stor betydning for os, og vi mГҘ forberede os pГҘ at gГёre os klar
til anvendelse af ISO 19650 i Danmark. Dette kan have betydning for isГҰr de
mindre virksomheder, og det er her, vores fokus hos Molio ogsГҘ ligger.
C.0.5
What is Molio, doing to introduce ISO 19650 in Danish
context
Der vil blive afholdt kursus og webinarer til prГҰsentation af ISO 19650Вӯ1 og IS0
19650Вӯ2. Kurser vil sandsynligvis blive afholdt over 2 dage og vГҰre en introdukВӯ
tion til anvendelsen af ISO 19650Вӯ1 og Вӯ2. Dette er aftalt med byggeriets branВӯ
cheorganisationer og vil komme til at foregГҘ I lГёbet af efterГҘret.
C.0.6
How long, would the implementation and introduction
of the ISO 19650 series take, in Denamrk?
Hvis vi i Danmark fik penge nok til at sikre en korrekt og prГҰcis implementering,
sГҘ kan vi tilrette og lave de nГёdvendige vГҰrktГёjer pГҘ 1Вӯ2 ГҘr, men at fГҘ det ud pГҘ
58
==PAGE:71==
markedet, og ind i de smГҘ virksomheder vil det tage sin tid, nok omkring 5 ГҘr.
C.0.7
Do you have any other comments or input ?
Vi kommer til at foretage nogle revisioner i vores IKTВӯspecifikationer og IKTВӯprocesmanual
i forhold til ISO 19650Вӯ1 og ISO19650Вӯ2, for at vГҰre I overensstemmelse med
disse formelle krav og i overensstemmelse med disse standarder. Derfor kunne
det mГҘske vГҰre en idГ© at oprette en form for en matchende dansk checkВӯliste.
Vigtigheden er at kunne gГёre det meget forsigtigt sГҘledes det kan skaleres, ellers
vil det let kunne medfГёre at vi mister op til 60Вӯ70 % af vores abonnenter, fx hvis vi
gГёr det med alle 19650Вӯpunkterne i en lige sГҘ detaljeret grad. Dette ville specielt
ramme isГҰr SMV virksomheder, og det er et punkt vi i Molio er sГҰrligt opmГҰrkВӯ
somme pГҘ.
Hvis man gГёr det obligatoriske at anvende ISO 19650, kunne man frygte at SMVВӯ
virksomhederne ikke ville have fГҰrdighederne og ressourcerne til at kunne lГёfte
opgaver i henhold til ISO 19650Вӯ1 og ISO 19650Вӯ2.
59
==PAGE:72==
D
Interview with Sara Asmussen
From Bygherreforeningen
Interviewer: Mohammad Esteitie
Interviewee: Sara Asmussen
Date of interview: 2021Вӯ06Вӯ02
Location: Online (Zoom Meeting Call)
Background of the Interviewee
Sarah Asmussen works at Leif Hansen as an Architect and Client consultant. And
has an experience of 15Вӯ20 years as a BIM specialist, is largely active in a lot of
standardizes work, and is part of the committee of CEN TC 442. Additionally, she
is part of вҖңBygherreforeningenвҖқ digitalization committee, and discusses the value
standards can bring to the client
D.0.1
What do you think about the ISO19650 series?
Personligt, sГҘ kender jeg ikke nogen der har benyttet ISO 19650 serien. Den er
mig bekendt ikke taget i brug eller blevet stillet krav om den. Min egen personlige
holdning samt professionelle holdning, da jeg har vГҰret med til at skrive vejledning
af part 1 og 2, er at det er proces standarder, og derved er der masse snak om
processer og hvem der gГёr hvad, men intet om hvad indholdet der rent faktisk
skal leveres, og derved synes jeg dette er en svaghed ved en standard.
Snakken om processer er fin nok, men det bliver meget overordnet i del 1 og del
2, om man taler om nogle data leverancer der er defineret sГҘ bredt, at det nГҰsten
kan vГҰre hvad som helt.
NГҘr alt kommer til at, sГҘ er jeg ikke sГҘ sikker pГҘ at man ville fГҘ bedre kvalitet ved
brugen af de her standarder end man ellers vil opnГҘ.
Jeg har ogsГҘ haft meget svГҰrt med at se, hvordan dette kan blive en trussel mod
noget som helst, isГҰr fordi det er en sГҘ overordnet standard, sГҘ fortolkning giver
meget rГҘderum, i hvordan man ville gГёre de her ting.
Vores primГҰre opgave er at bygge noget, og her begynder vi at fokusere meget
pГҘ andre elementer og forglemmer at det, er dem der er ude pГҘ byggepladsen
der bygger projektet.
D.0.2
What are the standpoint of Danske Bygherre with
regard to ISOВӯ 19650
Vi i Danmark har allerede vores IKTВӯaftaler, sГҘ tror jeg, at set fra de danske bygherВӯ
rer og ogsГҘ nogle europГҰiske. Der er bygherrens fokus at se pГҘ hvilke gevinst,
60
==PAGE:73==
der ville vГҰre ved at krav for at min rГҘdgivere og entreprenГёrer skal fГёlge den her
standard, dette er svГҰrt at se, da vi har de IKTВӯaftaler vi har, men hvis man ikke
har et godt aftalegrundlag, sГҘ ville ISO 19650, vГҰre en god start.
Jeg synes at det er en lidt overvurderet standard. Hvis jeg skal drage en pointe
fra den vejledning jeg skrev, sГҘ er det en lille smule ГҰrgerligt, at ved nye ting af
byggeriet, sГҘ bruger vi sГҘ mange ressourcer for at opbygge et helt ny system, der
arbejder parallelt ved siden af alt det andet vi har. Det er jo ogsГҘ en standard der
handler om management af data. Der er allerede rigtig meget management i bygВӯ
geriet. Blandt andet laver vi management pГҘ at fГҘ bygget noget ud pГҘ byggepladВӯ
serne. Hvor jeg sГҘ hellere ville lave managerment hvor det er aktuelt og fornuftigt
som muligt.
D.0.3
What are your concerns regarding ISOВӯ19650
standard?
ISOВӯ19650 er alt for overordnet, hvilket giver masse af spillerum for hvordan den
kan fortolkes, og dette er en svaghed ved en strandard. Derfor ville den vГҰre svar
at indfГёre i byggemarked.
D.0.4
Is there going to be any mandatory legislations for the
use of ISO 19650?
Jeg tror ikke at der kommer noget lovgivning pГҘ dette punkt, fordi at det er sГҘdan
nu, at regeringens fokus er skrapt rettet mod bГҰredygtighed og ikke effektivitet af
digitalisering.
Man talte om for nogle ГҘr siden, om at udfase IKTВӯbekendtgГёrelsen igen, og det
fik man ikke gjort, fГёr regeringsmagten skiftede, selvom man var ret langt fremme.
Baseret pГҘ dette sГҘ tror jeg ikke at man ville lave nye krav pГҘ IKTВӯbekendtgГёrelse,
hvilket betyder at de offentlige bygherrer har nu fГҘet en frihed, til at se hvad de
selv ville gГёre, her tror jeg at de ville vГҰre tilbageholdende, og prГёve at se en
fornuft i dette.
De offentlige bygherre har ikke lyst til at vГҰre de fГёrste fremme pГҘ det her omrГҘde,
derved ser jeg ikke et pres pГҘ dem vedrГёrende implementering af ISO 19650. De
afvejer og vil gerne se hvilke vГҰrdier der her kan skabes for dem.
D.0.5
What impact would ISOВӯ19650 have on the Danish
market
Jeg kan i hvert fald sige, at i den vejledning vi skrev, Jan og jeg. Her nГҰvner
vi ogsГҘ at vi i dansk praktiks i forvejen allerede gГёr rigtigt meget af det standarВӯ
den omtaler, hvilket ogsГҘ var derfor vi nГҰvnte dette i vejledningen, for ligesom
at hjГҰlpe folk med at forstГҘ, at det kan godt vГҰre det er et nyt regime, men den
passer langt hen af vejen allerede med hvad vi gГёr i forvejen i Danmark. Derfor
tror jeg ikke, den fГҘr sГҘ stor indflydelse i Danmark.
Man kan sГҘ sige at hvis danske rГҘdgivere virksomheder eller entreprenГёr skal
61
==PAGE:74==
arbejde i udlandet, sГҘ er det udmГҰrket for dem at kende 19650, for at gГёre dem
konkurrencedygtige pГҘ udenlandsk projekt.
D.0.6
Do you have any other comments?
NГҘr man laver standarder, isГҰr en europГҰisk standard, sГҘ har man et stort ansvar
og man er nГёdt til at tГҰnke sig grundigt om. Fordi man har sГҘ stor en indflydelse
pГҘ mange lande og de henholdsvise brancher. En ny standard ville blive testet pГҘ
markedet, og her er feedbacken, det der afgГёr om dette er en god standard eller
en ringe en.
62
==PAGE:75==
E
Interview with Peter Bo Olsen an
independent consultant
Interviewer: Mohammad Esteitie
Interviewee: Peter Bo Olsen
Date of interview: 2021Вӯ06Вӯ21
Location: Online (Zoom Meeting Call)
Background of the Interviewee
Independent consultant works with information management in regard to ISO
19650.
Worked with information management for construction projects for 15
years.
E.0.1
What do you think about the PAS 1192Вӯ2 standard ?
PAS 1192Вӯ2 var egentlig meget mГҰrkelig at iagttage til at starte med, fra et dansk
perspektiv. PAS 1192Вӯ2 virkede som et forsГёg pГҘ at gГёre verden, mere kompleks.
Hvor vi her i Danmark havde gjort det mere enkelt i forvejen, som nogen af verdens
bedste.
Dette pГҘ baggrund af hvordan vi laver vores IKTВӯaftaler, som i mange ГҘr gav reВӯ
spekt ude pГҘ verdensplan, nГҘr vi fortalte om vores mГҘde at gГёre tingene pГҘ.
Men PAS 1192, var et udviklingstrin, som den engelske industri var nГҘet frem til, og
hvor man i England var blevet enige om, at dele PAS 1192 gratis med alle. Dette
stГҘr i kontrast til i dag hvor standarderne koster penge, hvilket gГёr indgangen til
digitaliseringen svГҰre for nogle parter.
Mange i England troede at man kunne tage PAS 1192Вӯ2 og omsГҰtte den til en
ISOВӯstandard pГҘ 3Вӯ4 mГҘneder, men det tog 4 ГҘr.
E.0.2
What do you think about the ISO 19650 standard?
NГҘr man taler om ISO 19650, sГҘ er det vigtigt at se standarderne som en del af
en evolution. PAS 1192Вӯ2 har givet mange en mulighed for sammen at lave fГҰlles
standarder for informationshГҘndtering i form af ISO 19650, og om fГҘ ГҘr vil stanВӯ
darderne blive revideret pГҘ baggrund af de fГҰlles erfaringer og erkendelser med
informationshГҘndtering pГҘ byggeВӯ og anlГҰgsprojekter i henhold til ISO 19650.
E.0.3
What are your concerns regarding ISOВӯ19650 series?
ISO 19650 bliver fГёrst til noget, der giver den store vГҰrdi for hele industrien, nГҘr
vi aktivt forholder os hertil, noget som sker i andre lande i dag
63
==PAGE:76==
E.0.4
How would the implementaiton of ISOВӯ19650, be on the
Danish market
Hvis man tror at, det eneste der krГҰves for at man kan implementere ISO 19650,
i vores industri, er at man laver en dansk udgave af standarden og en dansk guide
og sГҘ kommer tingene af sig selv sГҘ tager man fejl. Der er i fГёrste omgang brug for
de helt basale ting, undervisning og opsamling pГҘ praksis og erkendelser, hvilket
er hvad frameworket i England giver.
E.0.5
Can the Danish building sector allow itself to, await the
implementation of ISO 19650
Mit svar til dette spГёrgsmГҘl, ville vГҰre i form af et spГёrgsmГҘl, вҖқHvor mange de her
digitale vГҰrktГёjer vi benytter af os, i dag, er kun baseret pГҘ det danske marked?
Det jeg prГёver at sige er, at vi er nГёdt til at forstГҘ at udviklingen af de vГҰrktГёjer
vi arbejder med, vil understГёtte eksempelvis ISO 19650, uanset hvad vi gГёr og
beslutter.
E.0.6
Is the Danish market ready for the ISO19650 standard?
En af de ting, der kan blive et stort problem for den danske industri, er at hvis andre
virksomheder i Europa bliver mere effektive i at arbejde sammen fordi de benytter
ISO 19650, sГҘ ville det stille os i en dГҘrligere konkurrencemГҰssig position her i
Danmark.
Logikken bag ISO 19650, er at man kan fГҘ et bedre samarbejde, og hvis andre folk
bliver bedre til dette, og mere enige om arbejdsprocesserne omkring hГҘndtering
af informationer, samt bedre deadlines og at man modtager de korrekte relevante
informationer, sГҘ vil ISO 19650 Гёge modenheden omkring det digitale samarbejde
i projekterne.
I dag er meget fГҘ af de informationskrav bygherre stiller pГҘ danske projekter, der
er til gavn for bygherren. Bygherrerne krГҰver dette baseret pГҘ, den rГҘdgivning
de modtager, men der er ikke nogen forretningsmГҰssig logik bag det bygherren
krГҰver.
E.0.7
What are the difference between the Danish way of
working and ISO 19650 ?
ISO 19650 kan virke utrolig meget rigid, sammenlignet med det vi kender, og
der mangler her frirum. Der er ikke muligt at sГҰtte os ned ligesom med vores
procesmanual, hvor vi bliver enige om vores fremgangsmГҘde pГҘ projektet.
Forskellen ligger i at det den danske praksis er en bottom up proces i forhold til
hvordan man vil lave digitalisering pГҘ projekter, hvor ISO 19650 er en top down
tilgang med udgangspunkt i en afklaret fГҰlles tilgang til den digitale informationВӯ
shГҘndtering pГҘ projekter. AltsГҘ to vidt forskellige tilgange.
64
==PAGE:77==
E.0.8
What are the relations between buildingSMART and
ISO 19650 ?
I et globalt perspektiv ses ISO 19650, i dag (juli 2021), i tГҰt tilknytning til openВӯ
BIM, med informationshГҘndteringen i henhold til ISO 19650 som вҖңthe enabler forвҖқ
openBIM i et forretningsmГҰssigt perspektiv. BuildingSMART Canada er igang
med en afdГҰkning af hvordan ISO 19650 bedst kan understГёtte industrien og
openBIM. Det spanske chapter i buildingSMART har i den seneste ГҘr publiceret
nogle af de bedste guides til ISO 19650, og det er pГҘ bГҘde spansk og italiensk.
BuildingSMART Deutschland har 2021 gennemfГёrt kurser i ISO 19650 del 1 til
6. I Storbritanien er der i regi af UK BIM Framework, som bestГҘr af bsi (den enВӯ
gelske organisation for standardisering), cdbb (Centre for Digital Built Britain er et
britisk regeringsfinansieret organ, der blev oprettet i partnerskab med University of
Cambridge i 2017 for at stГёtte transformationen af det britiske bygningsmiljГё ved
hjГҰlp af digitale teknologier til bedre at designe, opbygge, vedligeholde og inteВӯ
grere aktiver) og UKBIM Alliance (som blandt andet omfatter buildingSMART UK),
er der udviklet vejledninger og paradigmer for informationshГҘndtering i henhold til
ISO 19650, som understГёtter openBIM, og som lГёbende forbedres af industrien.
I Norge har buildingSMART bl.a. i forГҘret 2021 orienteret om bl.a. ISO 19650,
E.0.9
Do you have any other comments?
I forhold til IKTВӯbekendtgГёrelserne, sГҘ var det mГҰrkeligt at der ikke blev lavet en
fГҰlles opsamling af den danske praksis, og set det i sammenhГҰng med hvad
der sker i Europa. Det ville have sat os i en rigtig god position nu, i forhold til en
implementering af ISO 19650.
En af de gevinster jeg tror der ville vГҰre ved at indfГёre ISO 19650 vil vГҰre en
risikominimering, med fГҰrre ugennemtГҰnkte problemer.
ISO 19650 er mГҘske ikke perfekt, men ISO 19650 kan bedre stille rammen op
for informationshГҘndteringen i det digitale samarbejde, og det med et nationalt
anneks
De seneste IKTВӯbekendtgГёrelser nГҰvner at bygherren skal opstille en informaВӯ
tions leverance plan, der fortГҰller hvem der fГҘr hvilke informationer og hvornГҘr.
Jeg har ikke set et eneste projekt i henhold til IKTВӯbekendtgГёrelse 118, der har
haft en sГҘdan plan
65
==PAGE:78==
F
Interview with David Churcher
an independent consultant
Interviewer: Mohammad Esteitie
Interviewee: David Churcher
Date of interview: 2021Вӯ05Вӯ10
Location: Online (Zoom Meeting Call)
Background of the Interviewee
David Churcher is an independent consultant in the UK helping to define and
implement information management or BIM for the construction and the asset
and facility management sectors. Background in civil engineering. For the last 10
years he has been involved in helping, the UK government in the development of
BIM Level 2. Since 2014 he has been involved in developing the ISO standards,
functioned as a UK expert on the working group and is the technical author for
19650 part 1. His position is a director of Hitherwood Consulting Ltd, and works
with business improvement and management consultancy supporting BIM and
Life Cycle Costing for the built environment
F.0.1
What do you think about the PAS 1192Вӯ2 standard?
The introduction of PAS standard was in the beginning quite a big step in the UK.
At the beginning in the industry there was a lack of awareness of what the standard
was asking for, and the PAS document was asking for a standardize process and
procedures, and not a particular software package. It was about a mindset and
how to approach information in a more professional way.
A problem for PAS and other BIM standards at that time, was that there was a lot
of different interpretation and unfortunately no detailed guidance to accompany
the standards.
F.0.2
What do you think about the ISO19650 standard?
The big consultants has already needed to implement the PAS standard because
is mandatory for clients of the UK government. Therefore, I think IвҖҷve had quite an
easy transition from PAS to ISO. The outcome of that has been with good parts
and bad parts. The good part is that it has been clearer for the users of ISO, in
terms of what is expected of them. And this is partly a reflection on the fact that
it takes three years to write the ISO standard, and that there has been a lot of
consultation and discussion around the international working group. Which helps
people to have a common understanding. To compare, the PAS document in the
UK, was written in only six months.
66
==PAGE:79==
F.0.3
What types of projects is the target group of ISOВӯ19650
series ?
Most projects are, as the main idea is the overall lifecycle.
F.0.4
How long, would the implementation and introduction
of the ISO 19650 series take?
For a single client starting a new small/medium size project, implementing ISO
19650 can be done in a few months. The client would need to train its own staff
to understand the ISO series, and to develop the information management docВӯ
uments needed in 19650Вӯ2 clauses 5.1 and 5.2. But the client would also need
access to architects, engineers and contractors who understand ISO 19650 вҖ“
these organizations would also need to train their staff and have the right working
methods and software tools. The whole project team needs to understand the
ISO 19650 and how to implement it.
Across a whole national construction industry, it will take many years to implement
ISO 19650. This is the experience in the UK where we started with our similar
processes (PAS 1192Вӯ2) in 2012/2013, and now in 2021 we still have a long way
to go.
F.0.5
Is ISOВӯ19650 too complicated for smaller projects, and
any small changes?
The ISO 19650 series can be scaled for any size of projects. While the core steps
in the process have to be done, ISO 19650 doesnвҖҷt tell the user how much data
or information to ask for or to provide. It is up to the client to determine that. If the
client, for example, think the collection of data regarding a window is important,
then the architect or contractor would have to provide this using the steps in the
ISO process. Therefore, it is a question of what the client sees as important data.
F.0.6
Has Brexit had an influence on the ISO 19650 series,
strength, and chances of implementation ?
My personal view is that Brexit hasnвҖҷt had any dramatic impact on the ISO. And I
donвҖҷt think thereвҖҷs any reason why it should because itвҖҷs no longer a UK standard,
itвҖҷs now an internationally agree standard. Yes, it comes from UK origins, but
that was a long time ago. Quite a lot has changed, which is beneficial for other
countries that were around to the discussions. They help us, and everybody, to
make a better standard than the one we started.
F.0.7
Do you have any other comments or input?
There is an incentive for the bigger clients whoвҖҷve got continuous portfolios of
projects to see the benefit of a sort of standardized information management apВӯ
proach, and they understand it. Therefore, they implement it just like they would
implement quality assurance and all those other things
67
==PAGE:80==
G
Interview with Jens Kristian
Lund Birkmose from COWI
Interviewer: Mohammad Esteitie
Interviewee: Jens Kristian Lund Birkmose
Date of interview: 2021Вӯ05Вӯ04
Location: Online (Zoom Meeting Call)
Background of the Interviewee
Works at COWI, in their building division. Where his work involves digitalization
on a broad level. At COWI, his title is Development Digitalization Lead. Have
experience as both advisor and developer.
G.0.1
What do you think about the ISO19650 series?
Nu er jeg jo i en virksomhed, der befinder sig i mange lande og man kan sige at
der er stor forskel pГҘ hvad kan man sige om serien, i forhold til hvilke land man
befinder sig i.
Der er ingen tvivl om, at det set up, man har haft i Danmark i mange ГҘr. Skabt
af tidligere Bips, nu Molio med IKTВӯaftaler og ydelsesbeskrivelser, har gjort, at vi i
mindre grad har haft et behov for at gГёre noget mere, hvorimod at hvis man ser
pГҘ England, der havde man ikke engang haft en standard omkring lager struktur.
Vores engelske koncern er ISO 19650 certificeret, de har et stempel pГҘ at de kan
det.
ISOВӯstandarder er ikke lavet sГҘ at man sidder og gГёr hvad der stГҘr i ISO, men for
at fГёlge intentionerne i standarden, og Danmark gГёr vi dette i, et langt stykke af
vejen.
ISO 19650, kommer meget godt rundt om tingene, men det er ligesom alt andet,
meget behovsdrevet i hvilken grad man benytter og implementerer dette i projekВӯ
tet.
G.0.2
What are your concerns regarding ISOВӯ19650 series?
Det vi kan komme til at lide under, er at pГҘfГёre en masse krav til det vi allerede
har i dag, som den offentlige bygherre stiller, hvilket en privat bygherre ikke stiller.
Dette gГёr sГҘ at vi stadig skal arbejde lidt forskelligt.
Et eller andet sted fГёler jeg ikke at dette lГёser vores problem i forhold til hvordan
vi allerede gГёr tingene pГҘ.
Jeg tror ikke at de store entreprenГёrer ville have et problem med at indfГёre ISO
19650, men de store entreprenГёrer gГҘr ud og vГҰlger de smГҘ entreprenГёrer til at
68
==PAGE:81==
lave opgaverne, dels fordi man vil have det gjort billigst, da man mener at vi ikke
tjener sГҰrlig mange penge.
G.0.3
What impact would ISOВӯ19650 have on the Danish
market ?
Gevinster handler ikke om standarder, men det handler om, hvordan du bruger
dem. Hvis man ikke kan fГҘ folk til at gГёre det der stГҘr eller arbejde pГҘ en bestemt
mГҘde hver gang, sГҘ kan man ligesom have standarder for nu til dommedag uden
at det vil forbedre noget som helst.
G.0.4
Is the market ready for the ISO19650 standard ?
Et problem jeg mener der er, i byggebranchen, er at niveauet for at komme ind pГҘ
byggemarkedet er for lavt, og mГҘske ville en implementering af ISO 19650, medВӯ
fГёre at man hГҰver niveauet, da det at pГҘkrГҰve certifikater og liggende beviser
for de mindre entreprenГёrer ville gГёre at man fik fjernet nogle fra, og sГҘ ville de
der kunne hГҘndtere opgaver bistГҘ.
G.0.5
What is COWIВҙs position regarding the IS0 19650 series
?
I Danmark har vi siddet og snakket om det og mГҘske har prГёvet at se om vi kan
gГёre noget pГҘ koncernniveau, men lige pt handler det nok mere om brugen af
begreber i ISOВӯserien end at benytte standard lige nu og her.
Det vi vil prГёve at gГёre her, er at afrette de termer vi allerede har her i Danmark
og det der stГҘr i ISO
G.0.6
Do you have any other comments?
En af de her problemmer med it vГҰrktГёjer er at hvis alle ikke gГёr det, pГҘ en strukВӯ
tureret mГҘde, og bruger de her vГҰrktГёjer eller systemer, sГҘ bliver det lige pludselig
enormt dyrt at komme fra A til B. det man har sparet et sted, ville man sГҘ vГҰre
nГёdt til at bruge et andet sted. Derfor er det vigtigt for hele byggeprocessen at man
benytter de her vГҰrktГёjer, for at fГҘ den tiltГҰnkte gevinst igennem hele livscyklens
af byggeriet
69
==PAGE:82==
H
Interview with Micheal Friis from
KГёbenhavns Ejendomme
Interviewer: Mohammad Esteitie
Interviewee: Michael Friis Гҳrsted
Date of interview: 2021Вӯ06Вӯ21
Location: Online (Zoom Meeting Call)
KГёbenhavns Ejendomme rГҘder over Cirka 3000 bygninger, hvilket er over 2.6
millioner m2
Background of the Interviewee
Head of digitisation in KГёbenhavns Kommune, and have worked with digitisation
in Copenhavn Airport for 12 years.
H.0.1
What do you think about the PAS 1192Вӯ2 series.
Jeg synes at den adresserede det vigtige, som var at England fik et fГҰlles sprog
for at tale processer i bГҘde byggefasen og driftsfasen. Man fik adresseret den
mГҘde, de ser opgaver pГҘ. Der kan altid vГҰre en debat om deres detaljegrad af
dette, men det vigtige er at de fik et fГҰlles sprog for dette. Der vides hvem der nu
varetog de forskellige roller der lГҘ, for de forskellige ansvarsomrГҘder.
Opdelingen gjorde at man havde fokus pГҘ bГҘde projektfasen og driftВӯfasen, hvilket
var en positiv tilgang til dette.
Det var en fordel at denne kunne skrives som et lovgrundlag, da der var et pres pГҘ
fra regeringens side. Derved var incitamentet, at man kom hurtigt i gang, hvilket
giver den fordel at man kunne fГҘ en praktisk erfaring for at vide hvordan man gГёr
det her.
H.0.2
What do you think about the ISO19650 series?
Det er positivt at man er blevet enig pГҘ et europГҰisk plan. Det sender et signal
om at man kan beskrive disse sГҘ generelt, at de rammer de europГҰiske lande,
ogsГҘ selvom vi har en forskellig tilgang til byggeri.
Det gГёr at fortolkningen ogsГҘ er ГҘben nok til at man kan sige, jamen her i Danmark,
der har vi fortolket det krav sГҘledes, og gГҘ videre pГҘ den mГҘde. Et eksempel kan
vГҰre, nГҘr der snakkes om CDE, hvor dette er fortolket som projekt web, hvilket
allerede er kendt i dansk praktisk. Og hvis dette er tanken bag dette, sГҘ er dette
en start, hvilket gГёr at vi kan begynde at tГҰnke pГҘ det nГҰste skridt, og undersГёge
de resterende krav. Dette starter sГҘ processen for at se hvor vi mangler og ikke
opfylder krav, et eksempel kan vГҰre funktionalitet hvor vi ikke har noget, og her
mГҘ der ske en naturlig udvikling.
70
==PAGE:83==
Jeg synes egentlig den formГҘr bГҘde at sГҰtte fokus pГҘ at, vi overordnet set har
samme mГҘlsГҰtninger, her omkring bedre samarbejde og et bedre projekt og
bedre forlГёb for alle parter, Samt tydelighed af hvem der skal gГёre hvad. Det
er en meget fint ordnet mГҘlsГҰtning, men ISOВӯ19650 er ogsГҘ god nok til at samВӯ
menspille med de lokale afvigelser,
H.0.3
What is the standpoint of KГёbenhavns Ejendomme og
IndkГёb with regard to ISOВӯ 19650
Der er klart nogle ting som vi, sГҘ smГҘt er gГҘet i gang med det er slet ikke noget
som har fundet noget rГҘdfГҰste endnu.
Jeg tror at man afventer og helst ikke vil vГҰre de fГёrste der gГҘr i gang med det
her, nogle er nГёdt til at lave de fejl, som vi sГҘ kan tage ved lГҰre af, fГёr vi kan
trГҰde ud i det. Vi har brug for at nogen skubber pГҘ, og viser vejen frem samt,
omtaler at de benytter ISOВӯ19650. Jeg tror hvis man samlet pГҘ elementer pГҘ et
helt almindeligt byggeprojekt pГҘ DTU, sГҘ ville man opfylde nГҰste alle kravene for
ISO 19650, men er nГёdt til at skabe den kobling og vГҰre en fortaler for det. De
fleste gГёr noget, men ikke sГҘ struktureret som serien beder om.
H.0.4
What are you concerns regarding ISOВӯ19650 series?
Der mangler her i Danmark, en hГҘndfuld projekter der er lykkedes med brugen af
serien, samt at man kan fortГҰlle at man har benyttet strukturen meget en til en,
og dette har sГҘ givet en gevinst pГҘ en rГҰkke punkter. Dette er man nГёdt til fГёr folk
ville turde, kaste sig over det. Eller en ny version af IKT, der lГҰner sig om serien
og derved gГёr brugen af den til et krav.
H.0.5
What factors is keeping your department from
requiring the use of ISO 19650
Markedet siger at de ikke vil gГёre noget pГҘ dette punkt fГёr bygherren stiller krav,
mens vi stГҘr pГҘ den anden side tГҰnker at vi stiller jo ikke det som krav, hvis vi
ikke kan vГҰre sikre pГҘ at der er nogen der kan imГёdekomme de her krav,
Problemet ligger i at vi har et marked, der er sГҘ umodent i forhold til serien, at dette
ville risikere at vi mister konkurrenceevne pГҘ markedet. Dette skyldes, at hvis der
kun er 2 i Danmark der kan lГёfte et projekt i henhold til ISO 19650, sГҘ udelukker vi
alle de andre mindre virksomheder, dette ville medfГёre at vi pГҘ markedet fjerner
konkurrenceevnen. Dette ville sГҘ fГёre til at vi mister mange af de mindre virkВӯ
somheder og nogle mindre rГҘdgivere, der ikke ville vГҰre i stand til at lГёse opgaver
efter ISOВӯ19650. Dette er en balance, vi er nГёdt til at tГҰnke over.
H.0.6
Is Denmark, losing a step on a European level, by
being in such a hesitant state.
Det undrer mig, at hvis man er stГёrre entreprenГёr ingeniГёr eller rГҘdgivende inВӯ
geniГёrvirksomhed, at man ikke mere ГҘbent og aktivt, gГҘr efter at vГҰre dem der
71
==PAGE:84==
bygger, samt er projektledere i overensstemmelse med ISOВӯ19650, med de cerВӯ
tifikater. Samt bruge det som en konkurrence fordel pГҘ markedet, dog kan dette
skyldes at markedet er sГҘ umodent, at de har taget denne afventende rolle til
dette.
H.0.7
What can Molio do ?
Molio har lagt krГҰfter i CEN arbejde og sidder i S808 udvalget, og fungerer vagt for
dette projekt med ISOВӯbrillerne pГҘ, dog tror jeg de har manglet en smule forstГҘelse
for hvilken tilstand det danske marked befinder sig i, og hvilke kampe vi er villige
til at tage i Danmark.
De har mГҘske blevet brugt unГёdig meget energi pГҘ at kГҰmpe imod ISOВӯ19650,
hvor en accept af det havde vГҰret bedre, og stillet dem i en bedre position.
ГҶndringen i Molio, gГёr at de nu kan udnytte den forretningsmulighed, der nu
fremgГҘr, ved at der er et behov for vГҰrktГёjer til at lГёfte kravene i ISOВӯ19650.
Samlet set sГҘ kan Molio, sammensГҰtte vГҰrktГёjerne til at vГҰre ISO 19650 underВӯ
stГёttende og derved kunne tilbyde en produktpakke, hvor de tilbyder de vГҰrktГёjer
de skal benyttes for at vГҰre i stand til at lГёfte ISO 19650.
H.0.8
Is the use of ISO 19650, going to become more relevant
in the future?
Der stiller i den nyeste version (bГҰredygtighedsklasser) 2023, krav om at der
skal laves LCA beregninger pГҘ alt byggeri over 1000 m2, derved er man virkelig
begyndt at koble driftsherren og bygherren mere sammen, og til sГҘdan ting kan
ISO 19650, vГҰre et godt vГҰrktГёj
H.0.9
What benefits can KГёbenhavns Ejendomme og IndkГёb
get by the inclusion of ISO 19650 and similar standards
?
Jeg tror der ligger en helt klar gevinst i bedre inddragelse af driftens strategier i
vores byggeprojekter. eg tror vi fГҘr en bedre aflevering til drift og vi fГҘr en bedre
udvikling af vores bygningsportefГёlje ved at knytte de her ting tГҰttere sammen.
Her tror jeg at ISOВӯ19650 standarden vil kunne sГҰtte nogle retningslinjer og nogle
metoder for at opnГҘ det her og for at etablere det her samarbejde, sГҘ at vi over for
en rГҘdgiver og en entreprenГёr eller andre vi samarbejder med pГҘ et projekt, stГҘr
som en stГҰrk samlet enhed, der har nogle fГҰlles krav til det fГҰrdige produkt, her
ligger der en gevinst.
72
==PAGE:85==
I
Interview with Preben Dahl from
Dansk Arkitekt Virksomheder
Interviewer: Mohammad Esteitie
Interviewee: Preben Dahl
Date of interview: 2021Вӯ05Вӯ10
Location: Online (Zoom Meeting Call)
Preben is a master of laws and lawyer, at Dansk Arkitekt Virksomheder
I.0.1
What are your concerns regarding ISOВӯ19650 series?
ISO 19650 serien bliver omtalt meget her for tiden.
вҖқDansk standardвҖқ er en privat virksomhed, der leverer standarder. Og hvis man
betaler for at sidde med, har man indflydelse pГҘ standardens udformning. Udover
omkostninger til det danske arbejde, er der ogsГҘ udgifter, til arbejdet i europГҰisk
sammenhГҰng. Det betyder at det kun er de stГёrste virksomheder, der har rГҘd til
at fГҘ indflydelse pГҘ standardernes udformning. Organisationerne og mindre virkВӯ
somheder kan ikke vГҰre med. Det er i virkeligheden ikke en sГҰrlig demokratisk
proces, og det skaber bekymring, ikke bare hos Danske Arkitektvirksomheder,
men ogsГҘ hos FRI og DIВӯDansk Byggeri
Vi har derfor en dialog med вҖқDansk standardвҖқ, og prГёver at finde en mГҘde at fГёlge
arbejdet pГҘ. Men det er stadig kun den nГҰstbedste lГёsning.
En generel bekymring, som bГҘde Danske Ark og Foreningen af RГҘdgivende InВӯ
geniГёrer sidder med er, at der bliver udarbejdet alt for detaljeret standarder, samt
de bliver forpligtende for virksomhederne, hvilket vi mener ikke er i byggebranchens
interesse. Standarder bГёr have en overordnet karakter og skal udvikle sig til obliВӯ
gatoriske standarder, men fortsat vГҰre frivillige.
I.0.2
What legal concerns, do you have regarding the
ISOВӯ19650 series ?
Det eneste vi ikke ville have er, at dette bliver lovpligtigt for byggebranchen, samt
ville vi ikke have at det bliver alt for detaljeret.
I.0.3
What are the reasons, for not wanting to use the
ISO19650 standard or other similar standard?
Vi Гёnsker ikke at arbejdet bliver for detaljeret. Vi presser pГҘ fordi vi gerne vil
bibeholde metodefrihed for virksomheder. Гҳnsket om metodefrihed vГҰgter meget
hГёjt. Vi hГёrer fra medlemmerne, at mange har udviklet deres egne velfungerende
systemer, bla.fra baseret pГҘ erfaringerne fra supersygehusene, som virkelig satte
skub i IKTВӯudviklingen. Her har man fundet et niveau, der passer alle parter, og
73
==PAGE:86==
det vil vГҰre ГҰrgerligt, hvis der kom noget EUВӯlovgivning, baseret enkelte virkВӯ
somheders sГҰrinteresser eller andre EUВӯlandes mere bureaukratiske systemer,
der ГҰndrede disse gode erfaringerne og arbejdsmetoder.
I.0.4
What effect, could a mandatory implementation of the
ISOВӯ19650 standard have on SME?
De mindre virksomheder, der arbejder med mindre opgaver, arbejder slet ikke
med de her ting. Hvis standarder blev lovpligtige, ville det favorisere de store virkВӯ
somheder, bГҘde de store arkitektВӯ ingeniГёrВӯ og entreprenГёrvirksomheder. De minВӯ
dre vil ikke kunne hГҘndtere sГҘ specifikke og detaljerede standarder. Lovpligtige
standarder ville vГҰre en katastrofe for mindre virksomheder og i sidste ende
dyrere for forbrugerne.
Dilemmaet er konkurrencemГҰssigt, AltsГҘ gГёres standarder meget detaljerede og
forpligtende, vil det favorisere de fГҘ meget store entreprenГёrvirksomheder, og
skade de mindre virksomheder. Der vil ske en yderligere forrykning af konkurВӯ
rencen, fordi meget komplekse regler og standarder vil medfГёre, at mindre andre
virksomheder udelukkes for opgaver. Dermed vil der kun vГҰre fГҘ store tilbage og
det vil have en negativ effekt pГҘ priserne. вҖҷ
74
