==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
Master’s Thesis
The impact of plasma turbulence on diagnostic microwaves in
ITER
November 15, 2020
Author:
Th´eo Verdier, s192420
Supervisor:
Jesper Rasmussen - Department of Physics, DTU
Co-supervisor:
Søren Bang Korsholm - Department of Physics, DTU
A thesis submitted for the degree of
Master of Science in Physics and Nanotechnology
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Microwave beams are a common tool for heating and diagnoses in plasmas, however they are aﬀected by
turbulence, which can deteriorate the performance of the systems using them. This report introduces
a numerical method developed to predict and quantify the eﬀects of plasma density perturbations
on the beams of the ITER Collective Thomson Scattering (CTS) system. Based on WKBeam ray-
tracing simulations, a thorough investigation of the beam widths and overlap coeﬃcients between
probe and receivers is lead, which relate directly to the CTS spatial resolution and signal, respectively.
These simulations include the inﬂuence of Gaussian turbulent layers over a wide range of parameters
relevant to the ITER standard H-mode 15MA plasma scenario. The dominant parameters aﬀecting the
diagnostics are identiﬁed and quantiﬁed to allow for a better CTS data analysis, the most detrimental
one being the maximum density reached with perturbations. The ﬂexibility of the methods employed
is demonstrated with an application to a set of steerable heating beams, that is proved not to be
dangerous for the CTS system within the validity of the models used.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
3
2
Background
4
2.1
Gaussian beams in plasma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Electromagnetic waves in plasmas
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Gaussian beams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Plasma edge turbulence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
ITER
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
ITER plasma microwave diagnostics and systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Collective Thomson Scattering measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.3
Geometry of experiments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.4
Plasma scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3
Methods
16
3.1
Introduction to WKBEAM
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
Computing the beam width . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.2
Computing the probe-receiver beams overlap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Simulating turbulence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.1
Gaussian density perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.2
Other forms of turbulence considered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Studied parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Results
26
4.1
Reference results without turbulence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.1
Vacuum results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.2
Standard plasma scenario reference results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1.3
Frequency dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2
Scattering on Gaussian density perturbation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.1
Position of the perturbation and absolute amplitude . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.2
Reference relative perturbation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.3
Passive beam study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.4
Parameter sweeps
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.2.5
Reﬂections of rays
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Scattering on alternative perturbations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5
Extended results: ITER’s heating beams
43
5.1
Design and geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.2
Internal reﬂections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Eﬀect of turbulence on the heating beams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6
Discussion
47
7
Conclusion
48
Appendices
50
A Convergence study on overlap calculations and outlier removal
50
B Absolute compared to relative perturbations
52
C Overlap volume and 3D position
54
2
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
As the world’s energy consumption keeps increasing, the need for an on-demand, reliable and safe
energy source is at an all-time high.
While renewables oﬀer the promise of a clean energy, their
intermittent nature combined with the lack of eﬃcient energy storage means they need to be assisted
by more reliable energy sources. An interesting alternative to fossil fuel power plants or nuclear ﬁssion
is found in fusion energy.
Harnessing the energy source that fuels the stars has been an elusive goal since the 1950s, but appears
closer than ever before as the joint international eﬀort assembled through the ITER project is planned
to be operational within 5 years, in 2025. ITER was launched in 1985 as the ﬁrst design for a research
tokamak, able to produce net energy. A tokamak is a device that produces a plasma (in which fusion
can happen, in the case of ITER), isolating the hot reactive elements through magnetic conﬁnement.
This magnetic conﬁnement is achieved with powerful superconducting magnets, which generate a torus
shaped magnetic ﬁeld, strong enough to conﬁne the charged particles in helical trajectories around the
ﬁeld lines through the Lorentz force. At high temperatures, the fuel used is in a plasma state, meaning
it is ionized (fully in ITER), and that all nuclei and electrons are conﬁned by the magnetic ﬁeld.
This magnetic insulation, combined with various heating processes, allows for the fuel, a mixture of
deuterium (D) and tritium (T), to reach temperatures and pressures high enough for their nuclei to
overcome the Coulomb repulsion and fuse together into Helium 4 (4He) nuclei, also called α-particles.
A temperature of 10keV (approximately 116 million Kelvin) is suﬃcient to provide enough collision
energy for the reaction to happen according to the equation
D + T −−→4He + n + 17.6MeV
(1)
The 17.6MeV of energy produced are split in 3.5MeV of kinetic energy for the α-particle which has a
charge, and is therefore conﬁned in the plasma, and the rest for a high energy neutron that escapes the
conﬁnement. All the α-particles, which possess 1/5th of the power released, therefore heat the plasma.
Some common terms used to describe plasmas refer to the ratio between the auxiliary input power
(Paux) and the power produced by the fusion itself (Pfus). This ratio, the fusion gain Q = Pfus/Paux
is equal to 1 at the break-even, i.e. when the fusion process liberates as much energy as what is
being sent into the plasma. A burning plasma happens when the fusion power that stays conﬁned
in the plasma (held by alpha particles in our case) is equal to the auxiliary sources, which corresponds
to Q = 5 for D-T fusion. What is called ignition corresponds to all the energy in the plasma being
provided by the fusion process, and Q diverges to inﬁnity in that case.
The objective for ITER is to reach Q = 10, and in order to monitor the behavior of the fast ions,
notably the α-particles, diagnostic systems are needed. For that purpose, a measurement system based
on Collective Thomson Scattering (CTS) will be implemented. This system probes the plasma with a
microwave signal, and picks the scatter resulting from the interaction of the signal with the plasma.
The quality of the gathered data depends highly on how much the probe and the receivers overlap, in
addition to how wide each beam is in the area analysed.
The behavior of electromagnetic waves propagating in magnetized plasmas is altered in several ways,
notably by eﬀects depending on the plasma density. This has, as a consequence, that variations in the
density will induce changes in the propagation of waves. In other words, diﬀerent operating modes for
ITER, characterized by distinct density proﬁles will aﬀect the CTS beams in diﬀerent ways. Notably,
a higher density, which is typical of the ITER 15MA H-mode plasma scenario - a High conﬁnement
operating mode of the tokamak where 15 mega Amperes of current are driven through the plasma -
will have a more pronounced eﬀect on the beams.
Furthermore, in any given operating scenario, quick variations in the density induced by the turbulent
nature of the plasma will have additional eﬀects. The presence of turbulence is a given, whether it stems
from local pressure gradients, or from plasma wide instabilities. Their eﬀects will be most noticeable
at the plasma edge where density and temperature gradients are the highest, especially for H-mode
plasmas, for which edge localized modes (ELMs) of turbulence are a predominant phenomenon.
The present study will therefore introduce the theoretical basis for the analysis of microwave beam
propagation in plasma and the known eﬀects of turbulence on their properties. This study is focused
on ITER’s CTS diagnostic system in the standard Q = 10 H-mode plasma scenario, all described in
the Background of this report. The beam simulation and the numerical schemes employed for beam
3
==PAGE:5==
width and overlap computation are described in the Methods section. With the workings of these
processes well-established, the ﬁrst part of the results are presented as a reference and the developed
algorithms are benchmarked against theory. The core results of this thesis consist in a detailed study
of the eﬀects of diﬀerent perturbations, covering a wide range of parameters, on the properties of the
CTS beams. The next section of the report provides an additional set of results on ITER’s heating
beams, demonstrating the ﬂexibility of the methods introduced.
2
Background
2.1
Gaussian beams in plasma
2.1.1
Electromagnetic waves in plasmas
Going into the speciﬁcs of solving Maxwell’s equations for the propagation of electromagnetic waves
in plasma gives precious insight to understand the diﬀerent properties of the various types of waves
in plasmas, and their modes of propagation. However, the tedious derivations to reach such results
would be redundant and superﬂuous in this report, as they have already been covered abundantly in
the literature, notably by D. G. Swanson[1]. Some fundamentals are nonetheless useful for a better
understanding of the context of this project, even if not directly used. Typically, some fundamental
frequencies need to be mentioned before all else, which are the plasma frequency and the electron
cyclotron frequency, noted ωp =
q
nee2
ϵ0m∗and ωc = eB
m , with ne the electron density, m(∗) the electron
(eﬀective) mass, e the electron charge, ϵ0 vacuum permittivity, and B the magnetic ﬁeld strength.
This report will be only considering the propagation of Electro-Magnetic waves (EM-waves) in mag-
netized plasmas. They therefore do not all follow the regular dispersion relation for unmagnetized
plasmas:
ω2 = ω2
p + k2c2
(2)
More speciﬁcally, in this report will be considered the O- (Ordinary) and X-mode (Extraordinary)
waves, i.e. electromagnetic waves propagating in magnetized plasmas perpendicularly to the magnetic
ﬁeld, with electrons as a medium. Noting −→
B0 the background magnetic ﬁeld, −→k the wave vector and
−→
E1 the propagating perturbation of the electric ﬁeld, these waves are characterized in more details
below:
Ordinary (O-mode) waves:
These waves appear with the conditions −→k ⊥−→
B0 and −→
E1 ∥−→
B0.
This means they are plane
polarized.
Additionally, the dispersion relation (3), though rewritten to exhibit the refractive
index n = c/vphase = ck/ω, is the the same as the regular EM-wave propagation (2):
c2k2
ω2
= 1 −ω2
p
ω2
(3)
This means it has a cutoﬀ(n →0), where waves stop propagating, at the plasma frequency
(ω →ωp) under which all O-mode waves are evanescent.
Extraordinary (X-mode) waves:
The X waves have a less trivial dispersion relation (4), hence their name. They verify −→k ⊥−→
B0
and −→
E1 ⊥−→
B0, which means they are partially transverse. Assuming the ion cyclotron frequency is
much lower than the ω considered, the dispersion relation simpliﬁes to:
c2k2
ω2
= 1 −ω2
p
ω2 · ω2 −ω2
p
ω2 −ω2
uh
(4)
This dispersion relation means there are 2 cutoﬀfrequencies, noted ωR and ωL. These frequencies
are the R- and L-wave cutoﬀfrequencies:
ωR = 1
2

ωc +
q
ω2c + 4ω2p

ωL = 1
2

ωc +
q
−ω2c + 4ω2p

(5)
4
==PAGE:6==
There is also a resonance (n →∞) at the upper hybrid frequency ωuh =
q
ω2p + ω2c. That means,
for increasing frequencies, that there can be normal propagation from ωL until the resonance
ωuh. After ωuh, the waves will suﬀer damping until the second cutoﬀis reached at ωR. Normal
propagation takes over again after ωR with n →1 as the frequency tends towards inﬁnity.
Knowing this, it becomes apparent that, for both these modes, there is a direct relation between the
plasma electron density ne and the refractive index, through ωp.
2.1.2
Gaussian beams
The propagation of an electromagnetic beam in vacuum is most commonly represented by Gaussian
beams. This stems from the fact that a Gaussian envelope is a solution to Helmholtz equation, which
governs the behavior of the complex wave function in free space. These notions will be described
below, based on the works of Bahaa E. A. Saleh and Malvin Carl Teich[2].
The ﬁrst notion considered is the optical intensity I(r, t), deﬁned as the optical power per unit area,
at time t, and position r. I relates to the temporal average of the squared wavefunction u according
to:
I(r, t) = 2⟨u2((r, t)⟩
(6)
It is convenient to represent the real wavefunction u by its complex counterpart, U, so that Re{U} = u.
Given they follow the same equations, U will be used systematically:
U(r, t) = U(r)eiωt = a(r)eiφ(r)eiωt
(7)
Where U(r) is the complex envelope of the wave function with frequency f = ω/2π, of amplitude a.
Also, i2 = −1, and φ the position dependant phase factor. Therefore, by simplifying out the time
components from the regular wave equation (left), we get the Helmholtz equation (right):
∇2u −1
c2
∂2u
∂t2 = 0 =⇒
 ∇2 + k2
U(r) = 0
(8)
Equation (8) could also be modiﬁed to account for plasma eﬀects, provided some assumptions on
the plasma and the beam are made, as in [3]. Such a study has however not been pursued, as the
approximations made would contradict the objectives of the present report.
In the free space case, intermediary regimes are reached with a minor approximation: paraboloidal
waves represent the behavior of spherical waves in the far ﬁeld (e.g.
when z ≫x, y in Cartesian
coordinates, used for all the derivations below). In that case, with r = (x, y, z), U simpliﬁes into:
U(r) = A(r)e−ikz
(9)
Where A varies slowly with z. We can then convert the Helmholtz equation into a paraxial version:
∇2
T A −2ki∂A
∂z = 0
(10)
With ∇2
T = ∂2
x + ∂2
y. Any solution to this paraxial equation is a viable complex envelope for paraxial
waves. Notably any Gaussian complex envelope:
∀q(z) = z + iz0,
A(r) = A0
q(z) exp

−ik x2 + y2
2q(z)

(11)
Which yields, after adjustments for real propagation (notably a change of coordinates so that z = 0 is
at the beam waist), the Gaussian complex wave function:
U(r) = A0
W0
W(z) exp

−x2 + y2
W 2(z)

|
{z
}
Gaussian envelope
· exp

−jζ(z)

|
{z
}
Phase correction
· exp (−ikz)
(12)
5
==PAGE:7==
Which is a solution to eq. (10), provided that, for a wavelength λ:
Beam waist
W0 =
r
λz0
π
(13)
Beam width
W(z) = W0
s
1 +
 z
z0
2
(14)
Curvature radius
R(z) = z
 
1 +
 z
z0
2!
(15)
Phase deviation
ζ(z) = arctan
 z
z0

(16)
Where the phase deviation, also known as the Gouy phase, is a correction to the phase velocity of
light for planar waves. It becomes apparent, according to eq. (13), for a given wavelength λ, the waist
W0 and the depth of focus 2z0 are interdependant, and the knowledge of one of the two is suﬃcient to
completely deﬁne the wave. This equivalence will be used at a later point (section 2.3.3), to uniquely
deﬁne a Gaussian beam knowing only the width of the beam at a given point, and its distance to the
waist.
This expression for the Gaussian complex wave function, and its amplitude term, is particularly handy,
as it allows a direct interpretation in terms of intensity:
I(r, t) = |U(r)|2 = I0
 W0
W(z)
2
exp

−2x2 + y2
W 2(z)

(17)
It is also possible to consider Gaussian beams that are not axisymmetric (i.e.
circular) but have
been stretched, squeezed or displaced along a direction, they then have elliptical cross-sections. Such
distributions can be described by the exact same formulas, provided there are deﬁnitions of W0 (and
hence z0) and the origin z = 0 that are distinct for the major and minor axis direction.
Even with this more complex method, what is commonly referred to as the beam width noted w of a
Gaussian beam is the distance from the center after which the wave envelope amplitude has decreased
to 1/e it’s central value (which means the intensity has decreased by a factor 1/e2). Mathematically,
this corresponds to, at any given z:
U(w) = U(0)
e
⇐⇒A0
W0
W(z) exp

−
w2
W 2(z)

= A0
e
W0
W(z) exp

−
0
W 2(z)

(18)
⇐⇒exp

−
w2
W 2(z)

= 1
e
(19)
⇐⇒w = ±W(z)
(20)
It is therefore proven the beam width of a Gaussian beam is W. There is however a nuance between
this parameter and with what is commonly referred to as the ”width” of a Gaussian distribution: in
rigorous terms, with σ the standard deviation of the distribution, we have W 2 = 2σ2.
When considering 2 beams, it becomes relevant to quantify how much they overlap. Formally, according
to [4], the overlap of two beams is deﬁned as:
O =
ZZZ
Ω
IiIsdV
(21)
Where Ii and Is are the electric ﬁeld normalized intensities for the two beams, which will be indexed
incident (i) and scattered (s). In that case, the intensities are normalized so that their integral over
their respective beam’s cross section is unity. Formally, at any given point of coordinate r, that is:
I(r) = P(r)/
ZZ
A
Pda
(22)
where P is the power per unit cross sectional area in the beam and the integral is over the beam cross
section A. With this deﬁnition, I’s unit is m−2 and O is in units of [I]2[m]3, i.e. m−1.
6
==PAGE:8==
For most cases of Gaussian beam propagation, the beams considered are circular, and in free space.
These assumptions are made to simplify expression (21). In that case, the overlap can be expressed
as:
O =
exp

−2D2
w2
i +w2s

| sin θ|
q
π
2 (w2
i + w2s)
(23)
With wi and ws the Gaussian half widths of the respective beams, θ is the angle between the two beams
(an angle of 0, for two parallel beams, should not be described by this formula, as other processes come
in play), and D is the closest distance between beam centers. This formula unfortunately cannot be
extended to all studied cases, most generally, as explained in section 3.2.2
2.2
Plasma edge turbulence
The study of plasma turbulence is a very active ﬁeld of research, and summarizing its entirety would
be far beyond the scope of this project. Plasma turbulence phenomena account for interesting physics
scaling from galactic interstellar plasmas to local variations inside small scale fusion reactors. Similarly
to the open challenge it poses in standard ﬂuid mechanics, turbulence in plasmas gives rise to anomalous
energy transports that are hard to analyse, and even harder to predict. It is nonetheless of utmost
importance to understand these phenomena for the design and improvement of fusion based energy
production, particularly for its most prominent candidate: magnetically conﬁned plasmas.
In that context, turbulence is the main process responsible for heat and particle transport throughout
the plasma, and is therefore responsible for the dominant power losses in tokamaks and stellarators.
This turbulence induces, among other eﬀects, variations in the density, scaling from a few percents
at the core to doubling or halving the density at the edge of the plasma. The size and behavior of
said turbulence is greatly aﬀected by the diﬀerent plasma modes considered, whether low or high con-
ﬁnement (L-mode or H-mode, respectively). A magnetically conﬁned plasma will naturally transition
from L-mode towards H-mode as the energy it receives increases, although the processes governing that
transition are not well understood. This transition is characterized by a ”pedestal” in the density and
temperature proﬁle appearing at the plasma edge. This pedestal, and the higher gradients it induces
between in and out of the plasma, fuels instabilities referred to as Edge Localized Modes (ELMs).
These ELMs can result in a greater ejection of particles and heat in the Scrape OﬀLayer (SOL), i.e.
the region characterized by open ﬁeld lines (see secction 2.3.4), and generate excessive load on the
walls and the divertor region, where the plasma exhaust is collected.
This report focuses on the turbulence-induced density ﬂuctuations at the plasma edge, which have a
noticeable eﬀect on microwave beams propagating. As has been established in section 2.1.1, density
variations translate into refractive index variations, adding up to eﬀects similar to refractive lenses:
the central path of the beam is mostly unaﬀected, but the beams are broadened. The dynamics of
such turbulences will not be included, as a much higher computing power is needed for full wave
computations in a dynamic plasma. This is also supported by the generally much lower (kHz) fre-
quency of these dynamics against the much higher frequencies for EM-waves (GHz for microwaves).
Additionally, the tools to simulate these turbulences more accurately and dynamically are currently
being developed and improved, either based on deterministic full simulations [5], or based on machine
learning for improved predicting power [6], among many others.
Nonetheless, experimental results summarized in [7] point towards general descriptions, which deﬁne
variations in the range 5-100% for the relative amplitude of the density turbulence δne/ne, at the edge.
In the case of ITER (see section 2.3), more recent simulations for H-mode steady state operations
[6] place these variations within a few percents, reducing the range of parameters to study. These
variations scale from a few centimeters perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld to several meters along,
eﬀectively making them into ﬁlaments.
The burst of such ﬁlaments are generally observed in the
Scrape OﬀLayer (SOL), and referred to as ’blobs’, due to their shape in a cross section view of the
plasma.
The eﬀect of such turbulence on propagating beams has been studied extensively in O-mode [8][3] and
X-mode [9]. These papers established clearly that the turbulence broadening eﬀect increases with their
relative amplitude, proximity with the cutoﬀfrequency, and width of the turbulent layer. They also
7
==PAGE:9==
point towards a maximized eﬀect for a correlation length of the electron density structures of Lc ≈λ0/2,
i.e.
half the vacuum wavelength of the signal.
It is also shown that a Gaussian beam perturbed
with these highly anisotropic structures are deformed away from their initial Gaussian proﬁle, with a
tendency for elevated wings and more Cauchy-like proﬁles. A review of such degradations is made in
[10]. Their inﬂuence is being estimated as negligible for devices like ASDEX (a divertor tokamak, in
operation at the Max-Planck-Institut f¨ur Plasmaphysik). However, as devices get larger, the eﬀects
scale with the length of the propagation paths, and scale with the size of the perturbations if these
were to grow as well, making a study of the relationship between turbulence and microwave beams
particularly relevant for ITER.
With the data available in the next section, it is possible to
These papers, and [11] in particular, have established that the general scattering on real turbulent
layers can be reasonably approximated by random density ﬂuctuations with the proper parameters,
and have abundantly benchmarked Full-Wave (FW) simulations with real measurements, and those
with Ray Tracing (RT) approaches (WKBEAM mostly), ensuring their use has errors inferior to 10%
for pathological cases, within the scope of this study.
2.3
ITER
ITER is the largest scale fusion energy project at the moment this report is written. This international
research project on thermonuclear fusion using magnetic conﬁnement is the leading candidate for
achieving a burning plasma (a fusion reaction that generates as much power through alpha particles
as from exterior sources). It is a fundamental milestone towards the demonstration of fusion energy as
a viable means of production in the future. The tokamak has been designed to host a wide variety of
diagnostics systems in order to investigate in-depth the physical processes ongoing in such large-scale
plasmas, some of which are expected to be absent in smaller devices.
This report focuses on one
measurement system, that uses microwave beams, presented in the following subsections. For a better
understanding of the context, the types of plasma expected to be encountered in ITER, the global
geometry of the experiments and an overview of the other microwave based systems in the tokamak
are also introduced.
2.3.1
ITER plasma microwave diagnostics and systems
The microwave-based diagnostic suite proposed for ITER includes Electron Cyclotron Emission (ECE)
for core electron temperature measurement, reﬂectometry for density proﬁles and ﬂuctuations, Fast ion
Collective Thomson Scattering (CTS), and refractometry for line integrated density. Interferometry
and polarimetry are also considered either as components of the diagnostics systems, or as complemen-
tary information sources [12]. Notably, a 60GHz interferometer for divertor monitoring was developed
for simulation experiments [13], but such a device was not implemented on ITER.
The GHz-THz frequency range enables the existence of transmission lines (TL) allowing to put distance
between the diagnostics and the plasma. The design of these lines can be challenging, but comes with
a range of advantages. When located at the front-end, these systems are inherently more susceptible to
perturbation or damage caused by stray radiation either from the plasma itself (EM waves or neutrons),
or from other systems (Heating, CTS gyrotron...). Operating the systems from the back-end induces
engineering requirements that have been integrated along their development. They however oﬀer more
accessibility to deploy later and operate the back-end, away from the vacuum vessel.
For example, the ECE system [14] needs four 45-meter long TL to guide the waves - in the frequency
range of 70-1000 GHz in both X- and O-mode polarization - from the port plug (into the vacuum
vessel of the tokamak) to the instrumentation room. This passive measurement system picks up the
emission of electron cyclotron radiations and reconstructs the core electron temperature proﬁle and
detects Neoclassical Tearing Modes (NTMs) as his primary role. It also acts as a backup indicator
for L-H mode transition, and pedestal measurements or Edge Localized Modes (ELMs) once in H-
mode plasma. It also has a supplementary role in a wide variety of other measurements. Thanks
to radiometers and Fourier transform spectrometers, it should reach suﬃcient spatial and temporal
resolution to provide the feedback necessary for the control of NTMs via Electron Cyclotron Resonance
Heating (ECRH).
8
==PAGE:10==
The reﬂectometry systems rely on the basic principles of em-waves propagating in a plasma, which,
given a frequency, are reﬂected at a critical density reached in the corresponding cutoﬀlayer. It is
therefore an active measurement system, used for several purposes in ITER [15]. The main subsystem
is the multi channel Low-Field Side Reﬂectometer (LFSR), using upper O- and X-mode cutoﬀs for
plasma edge investigation, ﬂuctuations and Doppler rotation measurements. A similar device is on the
high-ﬁeld side (the HFSR), using lower X-mode cutoﬀfor core measurements, and could also include
a refractometry system. The ITER Plasma Position Reﬂectometry (PPR) system is composed by
ﬁve reﬂectometers distributed around the vacuum vessel, operating in O-mode in the frequency range
15–75 GHz. Their goal is to provide real time analysis of the plasma edge proﬁle and distance to the
walls, fed directly to the plasma control system.
The last system in this list, which is not intended as a diagnostic device, is the Electron Cyclotron Res-
onance Heating (ECRH). It consists of 24 gyrotrons each generating 1MW of power through 170GHz
beams. Some of these, located in the upper ports, will be adjustable through steering mirrors for
localized current driving. Although these will not output measurements, they will be used to provide
start-up assist and plasma control through stabilization of magneto-hydro-dynamics (MHD) instabili-
ties.
2.3.2
Collective Thomson Scattering measurements
Collective Thomson Scattering (CTS) is a versatile diagnostic able to yield measurements for a variety
of plasma parameters. It is spatially and temporally resolved, and allows precise measurements of
the projected velocity distribution, unveiling the dynamics of conﬁned fast ions. It can also be used
among other things, with some assumptions, for estimating bulk ion temperature, rotation, density
and fuel-ion ratio (i.e. the tritium to deuterium density ratio), for example.
Similarly to (incoherent) Thomson scattering, laser radiation is injected in the plasma, interacts with
the electrons, and the reﬂected signal is picked up and analyzed to deduce plasma properties. However,
where the regular Thomson Scattering only yields information about the electrons (density, tempera-
ture...), CTS picks up the collective movement of the electrons induced by ions: in short, ions moving
in the plasma cause ﬂuctuations in the electron distribution, due to Debye shielding, looking like elec-
tron ”holes”. These collective ﬂuctuations, on scales larger than the Debye length (scale over which
the plasma is considered quasi-neutral, and ions are shielded from direct electromagnetic interactions
by the surrounding electrons), are the ones interacting with the CTS injected beam, and the resulting
radiation carries information about the ions themselves, although no direct interaction was produced
(or negligibly so, due to their much higher mass).
Based on the overview given in [16], such interaction can only be observed if the Saltpeter criteria is
veriﬁed:
α =
1
kδλD
> 1
(24)
With α the Salpeter parameter, kδ = ks −ki the wave vector of the resolved ﬂuctuations (kδ =
kδ
being its magnitude) and λD the Debye length. This imposes restrictions on the design and setup of
such a system, notably through the injected ki and scattered ks wave vectors. Typically, the angle
between the two is limited to approximately 1◦in the far infrared, but this is widely relaxed for
microwaves.
The scattering volume is the intersection of the incident and received beam, and within it, the condition
kδ = ks −ki is fulﬁlled. This means for a pair of emitter and receiver, the picked up signal will
correspond to the Doppler shifts of the ions along kδ. The spectrum of the received signal therefore
contains the full velocity distribution of the ions along that direction.
Using gyrotrons, the injection beams beneﬁt from the loosened angle restriction mentioned earlier, but
is generated in the frequency range of the Electron Cyclotron Emission (ECE). This translates in a
signiﬁcant background noise (several keV in temperature, against only a few eV for the scattered signal
[16]), needing to be minimized. This is notably possible by choosing frequencies for which the ECR
is outside the plasma. Operating pulsed measurements with the oﬀ-time dedicated to measuring the
background noise is also a common way of operating the device. An additional option, used in ITER,
is to have a dedicated passive receiver, that will continuously measure the background emissions.
The spectral power density that needs to be picked up by the receivers is expressed in the transfer
9
==PAGE:11==
function as:
∂P s
∂νs = P iOb(λi
0)2r2
ene
1
2π Σ
(25)
where νs = ωs/2π is the frequency of the scattered radiation, Ob is the beam overlap factor described
in section 2.1.2, P i,s are respectively the injected and scattered power, λi
0 is the vacuum wavelength
of the incident probe gyrotron radiation, re is the classical electron radius, ne is the electron density,
and Σ the scattering function. Σ encompasses the spectral response due to the scattering, for which i
will refer to [17] for an appropriate derivation.
For typical experiments, an injected power of 0.1-1MW is usually necessary to be able to pick up a
signiﬁcant signal with nW sensitivity for the receivers.
Numerous CTS systems have been implemented on devices such as Wendelstein 7-X [18] or ASDEX
Upgrade [19]. And a full feasibility study for such a system, on ITER, is accessible in [20].
The current state of the ITER CTS system is the result of iterations on the initial design, and the
iteration used for this study corresponds to the ﬁnal design phases. This design being very close to the
ﬁnal version should meet the measurement requirements for the conﬁned alphas. Several approaches
had been proposed (60 GHz, 170 GHz, 3 THz and 28 THz), but for ITER, the 60 GHz option was the
most attractive [12], as it combines the expectation of a good S/N ratio with the minimum required
technological developments. The system would be robust against density variations and mechanical
disturbances at the cost of a magnetic ﬁeld limitation: at 60GHz, this will be B > 3T (due to the
noise minimization mentioned above). This should not be a problem for high ﬁeld operation, in the
nominal case.
The CTS system in ITER is supported by a 1MW gyrotron. The signal is picked up by 8 receivers in
total, of which 7 are almost radial and line up with the probe, and the 8th, the passive beam, is not.
The system in itself sends the beams through the vacuum vessel windows via a set of mirrors. All the
receivers are launched from the same point, while the probe is independent. This is shown in ﬁgure 1.
Figure 1: Screen capture of the CTS CAD, showing the probe beam in pink, and receivers in blue, being
launched from their respective mirrors. The windows are represented in the brown port.
2.3.3
Geometry of experiments
The geometry of the system considered needs to be introduced, for clarity in the measurements pre-
sented later on in the project. The ﬁrst thing to consider in the context of ITER, is the vacuum
10
==PAGE:12==
vessel, that will contain the plasma, and on which are attached all measurement devices. It has the
characteristic torus shape of a tokamak, with minor and major radius of 2.01m and 6.20m respectively
(more precision in these measurements is not necessary for this study). To deﬁne the position of ob-
jects around it, this study makes use of the Tokamak Global Coordinate System (TGCS), precisely
deﬁned in the ITER coordinate system baseline report [21]. The centre of the tokamak machine is
located on a horizontal plane which stands 29 mm below the magnet middle plane at room tempera-
ture, and at the intersection between the axis of the Toroidal Field (TF) Coil 01 and the axis of the
Vacuum Vessel (VV) Port 5. Therefore, with this origin, a position can be described in several ways.
The Cartesian TGCS (x, y, z) coordinates, spherical coordinates (r, θpoloidal, φtoroidal), or cylindrical
(r, φtoroidal, z). Throughout this study, rotational symmetry is assumed around the vertical z axis,
allowing for descriptions in radial coordinates (after dropping the toroidal angle).
Within the plasma, another type of coordinates is used, referred to as the plasma coordinate. The
most used throughout this study is deﬁned as ρ =
p
ψpol with ψpol the normalized poloidal magnetic
ﬂux (more details in section 2.3.4), taking the value 0 at the magnetic axis (plasma centre, at which
the poloidal ﬂux is 0) and 1 at the separatrix (last closed magnetic ﬂux line, used for normalization).
The ensemble of points of coordinates ρ = 0 throughout the whole tokamak forms a circle, and is called
the magnetic axis.
A second geometrical consideration comes from the apparatus considered in this paper. As described
in section 2.3.2, microwave beams are sent into the vacuum vessel following the geometry described in
ﬁg. 2. For these ﬁgures, only the design beginnings and endpoints of the beams in perfect vacuum are
given.
The complete deﬁnitions of these starting- and end-points are in table 1.
Description
x[mm]
Y[mm]
Z[mm]
Receiver mirror(M2) center
-5249.318
-7069.829
-143.000
Receiver beam 1 end point
-3632.104
-4614.652
454.000
Receiver beam 2 end point
-3637.590
-4665.528
640.000
Receiver beam 3 end point
-3648.979
-4773.067
937.000
Receiver beam 4 end point
-3688.245
-4900.293
1222.000
Receiver beam 5 end point
-3758.436
-5043.994
1492.000
Receiver beam 6 end point
-3853.398
-5201.504
1747.000
Receiver beam 7 end point
-3981.813
-5369.323
1978.000
Passive view beam end point
-3281.321
-4947.242
640.00
Launcher mirror (M1) center
-5249.318
-7069.829
1327.000
Launcher beam end point
-3657.968
-4652.476
541.000
Table 1: Position in ITER global coordinate system of the design beginning and end points of the CTS
beams in vacuum.
Similarly, it is useful to deﬁne the Gaussian characteristics of the beams considered, in table 2.
It is already clearly visible that these beams are not purely horizontal or vertical, and the angle at
which they are launched indicates that the most ’vertical’ beam width is tilted in the toroidal cross-
section plane. For ease of use, the width that is closest to being in the (xy) plane will be referred to as
’horizontal’, and the other as ’vertical’. This denomination will stay true even if the major and minor
axes tilt in the plane normal to propagation.
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2: Cross section of ITER’s vacuum vessel (black) in radial coordinates. The probe (dashed red)
and receiver (dashed black) beams’ centers are dashed lines, as they are designed in vacuum. Iso ψpol
lines are also displayed to locate the plasma geometry in ITER’s standard plasma scenario. Note that
the beams are not contained by a single plane, as they are not perfectly radial. In addition, the receiver
number 8 is widely out of plane with the others as it is designed not to overlap with the probe beam.
Beam
sy0 [cm]
wy0 [cm]
sz0 [cm]
wz0 [cm]
Probe
64.550
4.430
64.550
4.430
Receiver 1
-176.540
4.847
178.174
5.625
Receiver 2
-149.189
4.886
197.941
5.642
Receiver 3
-181.197
5.629
145.073
5.532
Receiver 4
-138.633
4.879
146.633
5.539
Receiver 5
-84.077
4.631
141.396
5.517
Receiver 6
-73.581
4.532
152.495
5.561
Receiver 7
-68.297
4.474
154.630
5.568
Passive view (Rec 8)
-89.550
4.674
97.518
5.228
Table 2:
Gaussian properties of the diﬀerent beams used in the CTS system.
sy0 and sz0 are the
distances from the plasma facing mirror to the ”horizontal” and ”vertical” beam waist, respectively. A
negative value indicates that the waist is ”before” the mirror, as opposed to normally being reached after
the mirror. wy0 and wz0 are the Gaussian beam waists in the k×z and k×(k×z) directions, respectively,
where k is the wave vector and z is the ITER TGCS vertical direction.
12
==PAGE:14==
2.3.4
Plasma scenarios
A plasma scenario is an operation standard aimed at achieving speciﬁc goals. It encompasses a wide
variety of characteristics and dynamics of the plasma, for example whether it is H- or L-mode, its
pulse length, and the stability... Although their deﬁnition is much more complex, for all intents and
purposes of this study, a plasma scenario will be deﬁned as an electron density proﬁle and the magnetic
ﬁeld and ﬂux necessary to maintain it in a steady state. Described in such a way, the plasma does not
contain any dynamics, as it is deﬁned as a freeze frame of a sustained situation.
The ITER reference scenario was chosen as a robust mode with long pulse capabilities. It concerns an
H-mode plasma, recommended for inductive Q ≈10 operation. This Q factor corresponds to the ratio
in-out in power, i.e. between the fusion reaction and auxiliary sources Pfus/Paux. With this value,
the reference point is at an average electron density of ⟨ne⟩/nGW = 0.85% of the Greenwald limit (an
empirical upper limit to the density, after which disruptions systematically occur). It is driven by a
33MW neutral beam and 7MW of radio frequency waves, and is predicted to produce a fusion power
of 400MW for a burn duration of 400s. More details can be found in [22]. In the present study, the
plasma is deﬁned by its electron density, appearing in ﬁg. 3.
Figure 3: The electron density and temperature radial proﬁles, in plasma coordinates. A ρ (horizontal
axis) value of 0 is at the plasma center and a value of 1 corresponds to the last closed ﬂux surface, known
as the separatrix, where the electron density quickly drops. Axisymmetry around the magnetic axis is
assumed. The average electron density within the plasma is of around ⟨ne⟩= 10.1 · 1019m−3
The magnetic ﬁeld needed to maintain such a density proﬁle is presented in ﬁg. 4, although a 3D
vector ﬁeld is a bit cumbersome to represent. An easier visualization is provided in ﬁg. 5.
In order to deﬁne the ρ coordinates, the information needed about the in-plane magnetic ﬁeld is
presented in ﬁg.5a. The out of plane magnetic ﬁeld strength is appearing in ﬁg.5b .
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 4: Magnetic ﬁeld orientation within a poloidal plane of ITER’s vacuum vessel. The arrow size
is in arbitrary units. The color bar displays the out of plane component (toroidal) of the magnetic ﬁeld
in the standard plasma scenario, in Tesla. The toroidal component far exceeds the other 2, and decreases
empirically as 1/R. The ”−” implies the direction is through the page, and not ”out”.
14
==PAGE:16==
(a) The normalised poloidal magnetic ﬂux (ψpol) iso-lines.
ψpol = 0 is at the plasma center (x) , and ψpol = 1 is at
the separatrix (in red), by deﬁnition.
(b) Iso-lines of the out of plane component (toroidal) of
the magnetic ﬁeld in Teslas. The Btorr ∝1/R is clearly
visible.
Figure 5: A simpliﬁed representation of the baseline scenario magnetic ﬁeld, in ITER’s VV cross section.
15
==PAGE:17==
3
Methods
3.1
Introduction to WKBEAM
Relying on analytical solutions for beam propagation through turbulent layers proves to be insuﬃcient,
as most solutions rely either on beams hitting a ﬂat turbulence layer orthogonally or a slab geometry
(which is obviously not the case), or are developed for big devices’ heating beams (usually for ITER’s
170GHz O-mode, while the CTS system uses 60GHz X-mode). Further research applicable to the
speciﬁc case considered here is set to be published by E.V. Sysoeva et al, as stated in [3], but has not
been put out yet. An analytical solution to the Gaussian width through inhomogeneous turbulence [23]
has been published on 08/06/2021, but could not be analysed in time before the hand-in of this report.
No other paper has been found to be immediately relevant to the study at hand without involving
a signiﬁcant mathematical additional analysis and further simulations for benchmarking purposes,
putting them beyond the scope of this project.
However, a signiﬁcant portion of these analytical
solutions rely on the Wentzel–Kramers–Brillouin (WKB) approximation, applicable to wavelengths
being on a shorter scale that the perturbation background, and such an approximation can be used in
numerical simulations as well.
WKBEAM is a ray tracing code based on phase space description of beams, developed by Hannes Weber
for his Master’s thesis [24], published in 2013. It is a Monte Carlo code designed to solve a steady-state
wave kinetic equation. Its advantages over previous simulations are its ability to describe the eﬀect of
short scale electron density ﬂuctuations on the beam propagation and have greatly reduced accuracy
problems when employed under reﬂectometry conditions with steep injection angles. The simulations
take a variety of parameters as input in a launcher ﬁle, describing the plasma equilibrium and geometry,
the properties of the Gaussian beam sent inside of it, and speciﬁcations for the numerical models used.
The plasma, is deﬁned as being in equilibrium, in a magnetic ﬁeld given as an input within a topﬁle.
This ﬁle follows the same format as for TORBEAM, the magnetic ﬁeld and normalized poloidal ﬂux
(φ) are given at radial coordinates (r, z), thus assuming rotational invariance, and given in cylindrical
coordinates (r, t, z). This allows to deﬁne the plasma coordinate ρ = √φ, 0 at the magnetic axis (plasma
centre) and = 1 at the separatrix, in which are given the plasma electron density and temperature,
also passed on in additional ﬁles: ne.dat and Te.dat.
The beam is described with all relevant geometrical parameters: position of origin and angles of
injection (in ASDEX Upgrade format, in our case).
That is, the rays are sent from an antenna
modeled as a plane centered on the point Pa, oriented by two angles θpol and φtor, the poloidal and
toroidal angles, respectively, so that the unitary normal vector of that plane is:
n =


nx
ny
nz

=


−cos θpol cos φtor
−cos θpol sin φtor
−sin θpol


(26)
Unless speciﬁed otherwise in the launcher, all rays will be initialized with respect to that direction,
following a Gaussian proﬁle.
The beam width and curvature radius of the beam, at the point of
emission are also passed on, and in two directions, allowing for elliptical Gaussian proﬁles.
That
means the contents of table 2 need to be converted in usable data based on equations (13),(14) and
(15). The Gaussian nature of the beam is represented in terms of intensity, by the density of rays.
This can be understood by, for example, the initialization of the positions of the rays, which follow a
normal distribution.
The additional parameters include integration solver options, and optional physical models among
which absorption, cross-polarization scattering and density perturbations.
Once these parameters have been speciﬁed, the simulation can be run on CPUs in parallel. Unless
High Performance Computing (HPC) is used, this limits the capacity of the simulations to 4 cores for
most personal computers at the moment this thesis is written. New advances for ray tracing on GPUs,
making use of heavily parallelised computing, were made after the publication of this code, and appear
very promising to increase the speed of such computations. Nonetheless, the simulations output an
hdf5 ﬁle, containing a dataframe with the following entries:
16
==PAGE:18==
[’FreqGHz’, ’Mode’, ’TracesCorrectionFactor’, ’TracesGroupVelocity’, ’TracesMode’,
’TracesNparallel’, ’TracesNumberScattEvents’, ’TracesNxNyNz’, ’TracesPsi’,
’TracesTime’, ’TracesWfct’, ’TracesXYZ’, ’TracesphiN’, ’antennapolangle’,
’antennatorangle’, ’beamwidth1’, ’beamwidth2’, ’centraleta1’, ’centraleta2’,
’curvatureradius1’, ’curvatureradius2’, ’fileindex’, ’inputfile’, ’nmbrRays’,
’rayStartX’, ’rayStartY’, ’rayStartZ’]
The entries starting with ’Traces’ are tables containing information for all the rays, for a certain
amount of time steps.
The other parameters are a restitution of the input parameters, for data
treatment and bookkeeping purposes. For additional information on this data, refer to H. Weber’s
master’s thesis [24].
3.2
Data processing
Based on the results of WKBEAM simulations, the positions in ITER’s absolute coordinate system,
for each ray at each time step, are gathered in TracesXYZ, and passed on to a python data processing
script. Plotted individually, these look like ﬁgure 6, where we can see that the walls of the tokamak
are not considered by the simulation, as the rays go through them seamlessly.
(a) Reconstruction as individual rays.
(b) Rays put into the context of ITER’s vacuum vessel.
Figure 6: Output of WKBEAM, TracesXYZ plotted in ITER’s absolute coordinates system.
It becomes possible, from this data, to compute various properties of the beams, notably their widths,
and the overlap between probe and receivers.
3.2.1
Computing the beam width
In order to recover the beam width from these individual rays, it is important to remind that the ray
density in the plane normal to the propagation of the beam is proportional to the intensity of the
beam. It is therefore possible to recover the beam width, as described in section 2.1.2, by computing
the intensity described by the distribution of rays. To do so, several processing steps are needed for
each time step:
1. Identify the central trajectory of the beam
2. Project the rays into the plane normal to that trajectory
17
==PAGE:19==
3. Compute the distribution of points and retrieve the width
Each of these steps can be done independently, and in several diﬀerent ways, as described in the
following paragraphs.
Identify the central trajectory of the beam
What is called trajectory in this section and the following is a succession of 3D vectors describing
the direction taken by a point to reach its position at the next step. This part is more a semantics
consideration than pure methodology. Indeed, the question is, what is the central trajectory of the
beam? It could be, without any a priori preference:
• The trajectory of the central ray (given by WKBEAM)
• The trajectory of the average of the positions of each ray
• The average of all the individual ray trajectories
Each of these options has been considered, and even though they are not rigorously identical, they are
completely interchangeable in simple cases. The central ray option appeared to be the most pertinent,
as it could later on give indications on whether the distributions have been biased by going through
the plasma, and was assured to be stable, even if some rays suﬀered extreme refractions. It also does
not need to be computed, saving processing time.
Project the rays into the normal plane
At each time step, it is possible to deﬁne a plane, given the central ray point, and the trajectory vector
as the normal vector. A geometric consideration then comes into play, as described in ﬁgure 7.
Figure 7: Flat representation of the projection in the normal plane (vertical axis) of a ray following a
Gaussian contour. A point at time t (black) can be projected with the actual ray (blue), along the normal
vector (green), or along the local trajectory of the ray at the beam front (red), hence reducing the error.
At time t, a simplistic solution is to project the black dot orthogonally into the plane (green dot in
ﬁgure 7). However, due to the curvature radius of the Gaussian beam, projecting in the plane along
the normal vector will induce ﬁrst order errors based on the divergence of the beam.
18
==PAGE:20==
Another solution is to interpolate each ray based on its consecutive temporal positions and to individ-
ually compute the intersection with the plane (getting the blue point). This solution was deemed too
computationally intensive and highly unstable in the late steps of the simulation, as most of the rays
do not contain data points crossing the normal plane.
Considering the beam is continuous over time, a good trade-oﬀfor an accurate projection is made along
the individual ray trajectory (red dot), virtually negating the error induced by a linearly broadening
beam, and leaving only second order errors due to an accelerated broadening. Given the distance
between each consecutive data point for the rays, and the relatively stable broadening of the beams
(far-ﬁeld), the error induced by this method is negligible for all relevant data points, although it does
induce anomalies in the projection for extreme refraction cases.
Several algorithmic solutions exist to project a point into a plane, but a mathematically exact expres-
sion can be easily calculated as appears below, and computes much faster. Let us consider a 2D plane
in a 3D coordinate system, illustrated by ﬁgure 8.
Figure 8: Graphical illustration of the diﬀerent geometrical entities used in the demonstration.
This plane is entirely deﬁned by the plane equation, and its 4 variables α0, β0, γ0 and δ0. Any arbitrary
point A = [x, y, z] belongs to the plane P if and only if:
A = [x, y, z] ∈P ⇔α0x + β0y + γ0z = δ0
(27)
Equivalently, a plane is entirely deﬁned by a point M0 belonging to it, and its normal vector V0. In
that case, we have
P = [a, b, c]
V0 =


α0
β0
γ0


(28)
We therefore have the relation δ0 = α0a + β0b + γ0c and we can rewrite the plane equation as
A ∈P ⇔V0 · A = δ0
(29)
If we want to project any point A into plane P along any arbitrary projection vector Vp, we actually
try to ﬁnd the factor k so that:
A + kVp ∈P ⇔V0 · (A + kVp) = δ0
(30)
(31)
⇔


α0
β0
γ0

·




x
y
z

+ k


αp
βp
γp



= δ0
(32)
(33)
⇔k = δ0 −(α0x + β0y + γ0z)
α0αp + β0βp + γ0γp
(34)
19
==PAGE:21==
This solution obviously only exists if Vp intersects with plane P, or mathematically α0αp+β0βp+γ0γp =
V0 · Vp ̸= 0, i.e. if V0 and Vp are not orthogonal. The projection can therefore easily be written as
A′ = A + kVp with k corresponding to the expression in equation (34) as summed up in ﬁgure 8.
Starting from the beam in ﬁgure 9a, a time t is selected and the rays are projected. Once the projection
in the plane is done, The result looks like ﬁgure 9b.
It then becomes necessary to convert this collection of points scattered in 3D space into a 2D dis-
tribution, in a consistent manner. The solution considered is to observe the space from a diﬀerent
coordinate system, of which the origin is the central ray position at time t, the Z-axis is aligned with
the normal vector (meaning all projected points appear in the XY -plane), and the new X-axis is
within the former 3D horizontal plane. From this new coordinate system, it is possible to ignore the Z
coordinates which are all 0 down to numerical precision. A graphical representation of this process is
the trasition from ﬁgure 9b to 9c. In practice, this is done by subtracting the coordinates of the central
point to the ensemble of points (virtually placing it as the origin), then computing two successive ro-
tation matrices from the old reference frame to the new one, the ﬁrst being from old Z-axis to normal
vector, resulting in a ﬂat distribution, arbitrarily oriented. To systematically orient this new reference
frame, the second rotation is 2D, from the projection of the old Z-axis in this new XY -plane, into the
new Y -axis. This rotation can be understood in 2 ways: it places the old Z-axis in the rotated (new)
Y Z-plane, but also places the rotated (new) X-axis in the old horizontal plane.
After that, the points of which the z coordinate becomes useless can be plotted in 2D, and further
analysis can be done, as shown in ﬁgure 9d.
20
==PAGE:22==
(a) Regular distribution of rays, with all time steps. The
plane in which we intend to project the points is plotted.
(b) Single time step.
With central ray plotted in red
around that step, and the new reference axes are plotted.
(c) Ray front, rotated into the normal plane to the beam
propagation, now horizontal, and centered on (0, 0).
(d) Scatter plot of the projected rays in red, and 2D den-
sity histogram to illustrate the intensity. A contour plot
of the Gaussian ﬁt (the next step) is included as well.
Figure 9: Projection process, decomposed by change of reference frame, with abstract rotations and
image of distribution at that step of the process.
21
==PAGE:23==
Computing the distributions and getting the width
This last step can be completed in several ways. Two approaches have been considered: a very Gaussian
speciﬁc one, and a more general.
The most general approach made use of the scipy.optimize.least_squares built-in function to
operate a parameter optimization for the Gaussian distribution. This process optimizes the parameters
of a Gaussian function to minimize the diﬀerence between a density histogram as plotted in ﬁgure 9d,
and said density distribution.
Any other optimization method could be used, and any type of distribution can theoretically be ﬁtted
with this method. However, although oﬀering much more ﬂexibility in the types of ﬁt made, this
method is extremely computationally intensive, has a tendency to be unstable, and does not oﬀer
more precision for the cases studied than the speciﬁc approach.
The most speciﬁc approach uses the properties of covariance matrices on 2D Gaussian distributions.
Indeed, considering x and y random variables, their covariance is deﬁned by:
σ(x, y) = E [(x −E(x)) (y −E(y))]
(35)
= σ(y, x)
(36)
For two uncorrelated variables, σ(x, y) = 0. Furthermore, the variances are deﬁned by σ2
x = σ(x, x)
and σ2
y = σ(y, y). These values can be gathered in the covariance matrix:
Σ =

σ(x, x)
σ(x, y)
σ(y, x)
σ(y, y)

(37)
This deﬁnition ensures the matrix is positive semi-deﬁnite, and describes the shape of the data. This
information is accessed through an eigendecomposition: the eigenvectors are the axes of the spread of
the data, and the eigenvalues are the size of this spread. This is illustrated in ﬁgure 10.
Figure 10: Eigendecomposition of the covariance matrix of 2 normal distributions. Courtesy of Vincent
Spruyt from https://www.visiondummy.com/2014/04/geometric-interpretation-covariance-matrix/
With the deﬁnition of the Gaussian width of a beam given in section 2.1.2, it is easy to observe that the
beamwidths verify w = 2σ2
eig, with σeig the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix, making it particularly
useful.
3.2.2
Computing the probe-receiver beams overlap
Computing the overlap in a meaningful way is a major challenge in this project. However, as will
be observed, unless propagation in vacuum is considered, a high degree of asymmetry in the beam is
to be expected (see section 4), making the simpliﬁed formula (23) much harder to use. In addition,
the skew in the beam spread is not necessarily oriented in the direction of the other beam (therefore
the “large” width is not adapted, to describe the overlapping part of the beam). Also, the beams do
22
==PAGE:24==
not necessarily cross, but are rather in completely arbitrary directions, and their beam widths do not
follow mathematical expressions. These properties do not allow mathematical simpliﬁcations.
It is therefore necessary to use a numerical approach, which encounters two principal hurdles. First,
using a discretized space is possible, but depending on the precision wanted, becomes very computa-
tionally expensive. Discretizing all space is also mostly useless, as the intensities are expected to be
negligible after a few beam widths. And second, the fact that the beams do not propagate in straight
lines is a major problem to compute the ﬁeld intensity at an arbitrary point. That is, if a ray can be
curved, a single point could be equidistant of several parts of it. These parts can each have diﬀerent
beam widths or intensities, and no way to tell which one needs to be used.
It was therefore chosen to compute the volume integral manually for a discrete space around the
beams’ crossing point (or closest encounter, in the absence of a crossing point). This includes the
approximation that the beams can be considered straight around where they cross (and thus restoring
injectivity to the matching process for an arbitrary point in space with the right Gaussian width). An
illustration of the discretization of space is shown in ﬁgure 11.
Figure 11: This 3D plot displays the crossing point of two rays, and a 30 × 30 × 30cm3 cubic space
around it. The intensity is computed for both rays at each of the square colored points (in that case,
10 × 10 × 10 along x, y, z with a diﬀerent color for each x for readability).
Anywhere in space where the “straight beam” approximation holds, the intensity of the two beams
is computed. This is done by calculating the position in both local ray-coordinates of each point in
the discrete volume, i.e. the position of a point with regards to its orthogonal projection onto the
”straight” ray, within the coordinate system described in ﬁgure 9 in which Gaussian widths and skew
are deﬁned.
Based on this position, the intensity is either the value of a normal density distribution function, using
a linear interpolation of the Gaussian widths along the beams, or it is directly taken from the actual
23
==PAGE:25==
ray density, extracted from a 3D-nearest neighbor scheme from histograms similar to what appears in
ﬁgure 9d. The Gaussian approach has the advantage of compensating the discrete nature of the ray
distribution by ﬁtting a continuous function. This advantage however comes at the cost of assuming
that the rays follow a normal distribution. This hurdle is avoided by the histogram based approach,
which in turn is no longer continuous.
The product of these intensities can then be summed over a discrete space, with a factor accounting
for the volume occupied by each point, the result being the overlap.
A convergence study of this process with regards to the integration volume, the sampling size, and
the histogram binning can be found in Appendix A. This method was benchmarked with simulations
in vacuum against the results predicted by equation 23. The results of this benchmark are visible in
section 4.1.
3.3
Simulating turbulence
As mentioned in section 2.2, the actual simulation of turbulence is a very much ongoing topic of
research, very demanding in computational resources and notoriously hard to solve. Running dedicated
plasma simulations speciﬁc to this project in order to accurately represent the density variations was
not deemed necessary, even though WKBeam behaves close to on par with full-wave codes in that case
[10]. This is mostly due to the fact that WKBeam only simulates a frozen frame of the plasma, making
real time propagation simulation impossible. The other option would be to run several simulations in
multiple time frames, and average the results, which is sub optimal, as WKBeam oﬀers an alternative.
There is a need to implement a more statistics-based approach with regards to the representation of the
turbulence, and more importantly, this report only focuses on the eﬀect of the latter onto microwave
beam propagation. It is therefore only relevant to have a model that induces relevant behavior for
the beams, and not necessarily an absolutely exact perturbation simulation. It was therefore chosen,
based on previous works, to implement Gaussian local density perturbations.
3.3.1
Gaussian density perturbations
Following modelling and benchmarks from various papers [25][26], it appears that considering a Gaus-
sian amplitude perturbation is a good substitute for dedicated simulations. In a diﬀerent project run in
parallel to this one, Teitur Hansen conducted an analysis [27] of an in-house hot edge-SOL-electrostatic
(HESEL) simulation, for an L-mode ITER scenario, which estimates the relevant parameters for such
a Gaussian.
The relative density amplitude can be written as:
δne
ne
(ρ) = A · exp
−(ρ0 −ρ)2
2σ2

(38)
With an amplitude A, a position ρ0, a width σ (slight misnomer as the width W 2 = 2σ2, used for
convenience), and an additional parameter for the simulations corresponding to the correlation length
perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld ℓcorr,⊥. Based on previous studies and the results for the L-mode
perturbation, the upper limit for the relative amplitude is 10%, while another simulation in H-mode
[6] points towards an actual value of 2.5%. This diﬀerence might be explained by the transition of
isolated blob structures to connected streamers, which can appear at the plasma edge over several
centimeters, pointing towards a width of around σ = 0.02 (approximately 4cm where the CTS beams
are in ρ coordinates). With regards to ℓcorr,⊥, it should obviously not be bigger than the width of
the perturbation, but also has a lower limit, as the simulation relies on the WKB approximation,
and perturbations should still remain bigger than the wavelength considered (so 5mm for 60GHz in
vacuum), after which the accuracy of the simulation cannot be ensured.
This Gaussian can either be applied as relative to the local density, or absolute, after a normalization
so that both perturbations have the same height at ρ = 1. This distinction is represented in ﬁgure 12.
Within that amplitude modulation, WKBeam proceeds to generate random density values correlated
with the correlation lengths. Then a corresponding amount of scattering events are generating along
each ray propagating in the plasma, eﬀectively describing the average eﬀect of such ﬂuctuations, within
the limits of the Born approximation (i.e. if the scattered ﬁeld is small compared to the incident ﬁeld).
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 12: Electron edge density proﬁle in ITER 15MA scenario, with absolute and relative density
perturbation amplitude plotted. The absolute perturbation will keep its Gaussian shape, while the rel-
ative perturbation is skewed inward by the density gradient.
The vertical dashed line represents the
normalization point. The Gaussian has the following parameters A = 10%, ρ0 = 1, σ = 0.02.
3.3.2
Other forms of turbulence considered
While a single Gaussian can represent a single edge localized mode (ELM), it will happen, and might
be preferable, for ITER not to operate in the so-called type-1 ELMs. This would eﬀectively boil down
to having multiple peaks in turbulence, although a more detailed study would be needed to determine
its exact characteristics. One way, among many, to emulate these multiple peaks is to consider the
sum of multiple Gaussians, centered around diﬀerent ρs. This is represented in ﬁgure 13.
3.4
Studied parameters
A systematic study will be carried out over multiple parameters relevant to how the equilibrium plasma
and its perturbations are described, the beam sent inside the plasma, and receiver antenna properties.
A signiﬁcant portion of these parameters are set prior to the experiments and simulations, by design
of ITER’s vacuum vessel and diagnostics systems.
The simulations take as instructions to simulate a Tokamak equilibrium corresponding to ITER’s
geometry. Following the design of the CTS measurement system, the frequency considered is 60GHz
for the probing antenna, and the receivers can scan a bandwidth of 10GHz around that center frequency,
accounting for Doppler shifts and similar phenomena. This study will therefore cover frequencies from
55 to 65 GHz for the receivers.
This frequency is considered for a propagation in X-mode.
The
emitted probe beam, in vacuum, is Gaussian, rotationally symmetric, and was designed with a waist
of 4.4295cm at a distance of 64.5499cm of the plasma facing mirror. These values cannot be given
straight as input for the simulations, but as explained in section 2.1.2, the equivalent width and
curvature radius at emission (on the mirror) are entered. The same is done for all the receivers and
their respective properties included in table 2.
Temperature and electron density proﬁles are given as an input, in ﬂux coordinates. These could be
25
==PAGE:27==
Figure 13: Example of multi-peak Gaussian densities. All those curves have the same integral, but the
ﬁnal result will once again depend a lot on whether the perturbation is relative or absolute.
modiﬁed to ﬁt the diﬀerent plasma scenarios in ITER, but only the standard 15MA scenario has been
considered in this study.
As described in the previous section, the simplest approximation in perturbations for WKBeam is
to consider Gaussian variations in density, which can be either absolute or relative, and controlled
by 3 parameters: the variation amplitude A, width σ, and its center position in ﬂux coordinates
ρ0. Two additional parameters can be tweaked in the simulation, the parallel and perpendicular (to
the magnetic ﬁeld) perturbation coherence lengths, adapted to the plasma considered: the parallel
is virtually inﬁnite compared to the dimensions of ﬂuctuations, the perpendicular ﬁts the type of
perturbation represented. These 4 free parameters (A, σ, ρ0 and ℓ⊥,corr) will be investigated extensively
for single Gaussian perturbations.
Multiple peaks will also be investigated.
4
Results
4.1
Reference results without turbulence
4.1.1
Vacuum results
The ﬁrst case considered is propagation in vacuum. The beams, in the absence of plasma, can be
considered perfectly Gaussian, and the coherence between the analytical model and the simulation
results is presented in ﬁgure 14. It is visible that the width calculation method introduced in section
3.2.1 applied to the WKBEAM simulations in vacuum are in complete accordance with the theoretical
results, down to projection approximations and the use of a ﬁnite number of rays to ﬁt a continuous
distribution.
26
==PAGE:28==
Figure 14: Comparison between analytical beam widths and the results of the Gaussian ﬁt made on
normal plane distributions at each time step. The relative error is inferior to 2% for all beams.
Based on this, the theoretical behavior described in section 2.1.2 is valid and applicable to our sim-
ulations. This allows purely analytical predictions for the beam widths, and therefore the overlap
parameters of each receiver beam crossing with the probe, in vacuum. Similarly, it is possible to use
formula (23) with data coming from the simulations with regards to the crossing distance D, and
the ﬁtted beam widths. These values will be used as comparison grounds for the numerical methods
presented in section 3.2.2, and summed up in table 3.
Receiver
Distance at
Beam width [cm]
Overlap [m−1]
overlap [cm]
short/long
Analytical
Calculated
Gaussian ﬁt
Integrated
1
0.25
6.90/16.96
9.1
8.97
9.44
9.42
2
2.27
6.00/14.92
8.7
8.77
9.21
9.14
3
5.91
6.23/13.49
6.5
6.51
6.66
6.43
4
7.82
5.93/12.26
4.6
4.53
4.61
4.53
5
8.32
5.85/10.54
3.7
3.40
3.37
3.45
6
8.08
5.56/9.87
3.4
3.08
3.10
3.21
7
6.76
5.55/9.25
4.1
3.81
3.87
4.19
8
42.86
6.99/12.91
0
1.5e-6
3.2e-6
0.0
Table 3: Complete overlap results for vacuum. The distance at overlap, D, is the closest crossing distance
between the probe and the receiver, marking the center point of the overlap calculation. The beam widths
are the results of the elliptical Gaussian ﬁts of the receivers at this crossing point. The diﬀerent overlap
calculations are either purely Analytical (based on vacuum propagation), Calculated (based on formula
(23) with the previous data from this table), obtained via method 3.2.2 with Gaussian ﬁt or pure histogram
Integration.
27
==PAGE:29==
The overlap results from table 3 are plotted in ﬁgure 15, for readability.
Figure 15: All receivers comparison of diﬀerent overlap calculation methods in vacuum.
This benchmark highlights the coherence of the results in the vacuum case, showing their equivalence
(down to 5% relative errors) if the beams follow Gaussian propagation.
4.1.2
Standard plasma scenario reference results
Now that the coherence of the results has been established, it is necessary to introduce the reference
case for the Standard plasma scenario, described in section 2.3.4, without any density perturbations.
The purely analytical results, based on Gaussian propagation in a ﬁxed refractive index medium,
cannot be used anymore as the non-uniform plasma aﬀects it. The rest is presented in table 4.
Receiver
Distance at
Beam width [cm]
Overlap [m−1]
overlap [cm]
short/long
Calculated
Gaussian ﬁt
Integrated
1
1.14
11.45/22.69
6.96
7.98
7.99
2
0.86
9.20/19.60
6.43
7.71
7.74
3
1.58
8.57/16.55
6.03
7.25
7.29
4
1.43
7.54/15.25
5.77
6.92
6.95
5
0.58
7.13/12.29
6.41
7.53
7.61
6
0.93
6.55/11.70
6.35
7.54
7.66
7
3.54
6.32/58.6*
1.35*
5.49*
4.86
8
42.3
9.53/14.83
2.0e-9
2.7e-9
0.0
Table 4: Results of data analysis for standard plasma scenario without density perturbations. Same
entries as table 3, without the analytical results. * denotes partially reﬂected beam, aﬀecting data based
on Gaussian ﬁts.
The ﬁrst conclusion with this table is that the crossing distance D is much smaller (at least a factor
of 2, excepted receiver 1) for all active receivers. Given that the beams have been developed to oﬀer
the best performance in the presence of plasma, this is an encouraging observation. It has to be noted
that there is a big discrepancy between the formula-based estimation and the integrated results, the
lack of accuracy for these predictions stems from the assumptions made to reach equation (23), and
the no longer Gaussian propagation of the beams.
28
==PAGE:30==
Additionally, as can be seen in ﬁgure 16, there is a higher overlap on average than in the vacuum case.
This eﬀect is most noticeable for the outermost receivers (4-8) where the vacuum reference, appearing
in grey, follows a descending curve as the receivers become more tangent to the plasma surface, while
the tendency is a lot ﬂatter with plasma. The inaccuracy of the formula based approaches is also
blatant here, as there appears to be a clear systematic error in the square data points pitted against
the circles. This result once again stems from the no longer Gaussian beams, but also the introduction
of asymmetry to the beams, which have become elongated, pushing further away the validity conditions
for equation (23).
Figure 16: Comparison of diﬀerent overlap calculation methods for all receivers in the standard plasma
scenario, without ﬂuctuations. The results from table 4 are plotted against the vacuum analytical case.
Another crucial result here appears at receiver 7, with the ﬁst major discrepancy between Gaussian-
ﬁt-based intensities and integrated histogram methods. This result directly relates to the shape of the
wave front, and to the presence of reﬂected rays. Indeed, as appears in ﬁgure 17, in some cases, the ray
distribution is far from being Gaussian. Therefore, relying on a Gaussian approximation to compute
the intensity of the beam becomes highly inaccurate.
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 17: 2D distribution of rays (red dots) in the normal plane to the propagation. This is a snapshot
of the 250th computational step of receiver 7 in standard plasma, without ﬂuctuations, which corresponds
to roughly 2.49m of propagation. A ”blob” of heavily refracted rays is clearly visible at the upper right
corner, accounting for approximately 10% of all the rays. The Gaussian ﬁt to this distribution is obviously
skewed to take this blob into account, in addition to the far from Gaussian shape: indeed, the refracted
blob should constitute a Gaussian wing for the rest, that appears to have been sub-split once again.
30
==PAGE:32==
4.1.3
Frequency dependence
As the frequency dependence of the beam in vacuum is negligible, the study will be limited to the
presence of plasma. In that case it is possible to observe the frequency dependence of the overlap for
each receiver, displayed in ﬁgure 18. There appears to be no obvious simple relation between frequency
and overlap.
One could expect that a lower frequency should mean on average a lower overlap, as the cutoﬀfrequency
gets closer, as is the case for receiver 7. However, the maximum overlap appears usually at the probe
frequency: 60Ghz.
Figure 18: Frequency dependence of the overlap in plasma without ﬂuctuations. Computed with the
integrated histogram method.
These results are however very much a function of the incidence angle, as receiver 6 and 7 display a
drastically diﬀerent curve. This dependence is emphasized in ﬁgure 19, which is most useful to identify
the angle dependence for frequency response.
Figure 19: Same data as in ﬁgure 18, with an emphasis on the receiver dependence, on the x-axis.
31
==PAGE:33==
4.2
Scattering on Gaussian density perturbation
As described in section 3.3, it is possible to simulate turbulence with a random density distribution
perturbation of which the envelope is a Gaussian. The amplitude of this perturbation can either be
absolute, or relative to the local density.
4.2.1
Position of the perturbation and absolute amplitude
WKBEAM simulates only relative perturbations, which can be renormalized to have an absolute height.
This is, in theory, interesting to study the eﬀect of the position of a given perturbation, without having
extreme variations due to the local density inside and outside the plasma. In practice, the obtained
results are presented in ﬁgure 20, but it hasn’t been possible to quantify how much of the divergence
observed was due to numerical divergence (renormalizing by a close-to-0 density can produce NaN
occurrences, and tricks had to be employed to prevent crashes).
Figure 20: The beam width for the probe, receiver 2 and 6 are plotted along their propagation. For the
horizontal width, the position of the perturbation has close to no eﬀect. For the vertical width, emphasis
is put on the diﬀerent scale on the y-axis.
The divergence appears eﬀectively later, but is faster for
perturbations inside the plasma (ρ = 0.95), even though the perturbation is the same in actual amplitude.
The crosses mark the points at which the probe and receivers intersect (or pass each other closest).
The only physical interpretation found here for these results is that a perturbation closer to the plasma
core will push the density relatively much closer to the cutoﬀlimit than a perturbation aﬀecting the
beams earlier.
This conclusion is however to be taken with reasonable caution, as the numerical
accuracy of the used WKBeam routine has not been benchmarked in this unorthodox renormalization
case. The reason for such caution is presented in ﬁgure 43 in Appendix B.
An extension of these results to overlap calculations is plotted in ﬁgure 21.
This clear tendency of a bigger overlap for perturbations outside the plasma concurs with the pre-
vious widths conclusions, no matter the set of parameters considered. Each other parameter will be
investigated independently in the next sections.
For additional details with regards to how absolute perturbations relate to relative, refer to Appendix
B. The other results presented below will now consider relative amplitude density perturbations, as
the accuracy of the simulations is much better documented.
32
==PAGE:34==
Figure 21:
Receiver 2 and 6 overlap as a function of perturbation position for absolute amplitude
modulation. Multiple parameters considered.
4.2.2
Reference relative perturbation
For the rest of this study, the reference perturbation chosen has an amplitude A = 10%, centered at
ρ = 1.00. This corresponds to a very high amplitude single ELM mode. With a width σ = 0.02, which
corresponds to roughly 5cm for a characteristic length. The parallel correlation length is considered
inﬁnite for all intents and purposes as structure sizes along the magnetic ﬁeld are much bigger than
any other characteristic scale considered, and it is therefore set to 10m. The perpendicular length
is then set to 2cm. These are the ”by default” values, and are used unless speciﬁed otherwise. An
all-receivers plot is presented for this reference perturbation in ﬁgure 22.
Once again, the Gaussian ﬁt inadequacy is highlighted, as beam fronts get less and less Gaussian for
the outermost receivers. The situation is very similar to ﬁgure 17 in the ”no perturbations” case, with
heavily refracted rays disturbing the normal distributions. A more detailed study of these refractions
and reﬂections can be found in section 4.2.5. For this reason, the integrated histogram method will
be used systematically, as it relies on fewer assumptions, and is overall more reliable for the same
accuracy.
4.2.3
Passive beam study
As has been identiﬁed in ﬁgure 22 for receiver 8, there seems to be a non-zero overlap of the probe
beam and what is supposed to be the passive receiver. This result being critical, a more in-detail study
was needed. The perturbation amplitude dependence of this overlap is presented in ﬁgure 23.
Although the results predicted here are extremely dependant on the exact shape of the perturbation
considered, which is an approximation of what a real case scenario could look like, this result seems to
be critical. Indeed, a density perturbation a few centimeters wide at the plasma edge, with a relative
amplitude of 5%, could potentially aﬀect the signal of receiver 8. Even though the overlap is limited,
the passive beam can no longer be considered fully passive in that case.
33
==PAGE:35==
Figure 22: Comparison of the two overlap calculation methods in the presence of the reference per-
turbation. In blue squares, the previous results ( without perturbation) from the integrated histogram
method are included for reference. With perturbation, the results for receivers 1-4 are similar among the
two methods, but the more tangent ones display a much bigger variability. It also needs to be noted that
for receiver 8, which is supposed to be passive, a non-zero overlap is obtained.
Figure 23: Passive receiver overlap as a function of the perturbation amplitude. The overlap for the
2.5% amplitude point is not 0, although very small (≈1.5 · 10−4). However, the other frequencies seem
to have a reduced overlap.
34
==PAGE:36==
4.2.4
Parameter sweeps
Now that the reference perturbation has been described, it becomes relevant to study the eﬀect of
the diﬀerent parameters on the CTS beams. Running full simulations, for all the receivers, for each
set of parameters, is extremely time and resources consuming. The in-depth study has been limited
to 2 receivers: receiver 2, which yields the most central diagnostic volume, and receiver 6, which is
among the outermost ones, without being systematically reﬂected. As the inﬂuence of the position
of the perturbation has been dealt with separately, the following ﬁgures present the inﬂuence of the
perturbation amplitude A, width σ, correlation length lcor and frequency, along with some cross
interactions.
Perturbation width
The results in ﬁgures 24 and 25 point towards a simple eﬀect of width and amplitude for both receivers.
A thicker turbulent layer will refract rays over a longer length, and end up with a wider beam overall,
which translates directly in a weaker overlap. The wider perturbations aﬀect the beams in a clearly
monotonous manner, although not perfectly linearly. Similarly, a higher amplitude will systematically
decrease the overlap, as it amounts to the same eﬀects, expressed in a more extreme manner, with the
notable exception of some beams being seemingly reﬂected instead of just gradually refracted out.
Figure 24: Beam width dependence on perturbation width, with various amplitudes. All plots share the
same x and y axes.
It is already possible to observe the direct inverse relation between the beam widths (for a probe/receiver
pair intersecting) and the overlap: Extremely wide beams have a very low power at any given point,
leading to overall lower overlaps, even though the beams eﬀectively are crossing over a larger volume.
35
==PAGE:37==
Figure 25: Overlap dependence on perturbation width, with various amplitudes.
Correlation length
The correlation length appears, in ﬁgure 26, to have a limited eﬀect on low amplitude perturbations,
but gets more pronounced as the latter increases.
Figure 26: Beam width dependence on perpendicular correlation length, with various amplitudes and
widths. All plots share the same x and y axes.
36
==PAGE:38==
As could be expected from the beam width plot, and conﬁrmed in ﬁgure 27, a very low correlation
length has the biggest eﬀect, eﬀectively reducing the overlap by a factor of 2 for A = 10%. On the
other hand it appears to have a limited eﬀect for the overlap once under the 1.5cm mark, although the
beams are most spread out. This eﬀect might however be related with two things, ﬁrst the temporal
deﬁnition of the simulation, accounting for spatial propagation of around 1cm between each step in
the worst cases, and second, the WKB approximation condition (variations on a bigger scale than
the wavelength) being brought to its limits. A correlation length of 8cm is, on the other hand, very
unrealistic based on the current turbulence simulations, but it helps building a tendency.
Figure 27: Overlap dependence on correlation length, with various amplitudes.
37
==PAGE:39==
Frequency
It is also possible to make a frequency dependant study of the overlap for all receivers in the presence
of a perturbation, presented in ﬁgure 28. In that case, with the reference turbulence amplitude of
10%, the frequency dependence is monotonous, with a lower frequency meaning a systematically lower
overlap, although this eﬀect is once again more pronounced for the outermost receivers.
Figure 28: Frequency dependence with reference case perturbations.
4.2.5
Reﬂections of rays
This section focuses on the speciﬁcs of the reﬂection of some rays in the presence of a turbulent layer.
In ﬁgure 29 is a quick overview of the reﬂection process for receivers 5,6 and 7. It is easily seen from
these that the incidence angle of the receiver beam has a huge eﬀect on the reﬂection of the rays: while
for receiver 5, all the rays penetrate the plasma, with a few being refracted later on, for receiver 7,
in that reference perturbation case considered, almost 40% of the rays never make it into the plasma.
Using the equivalence of light propagation direction, these are a actually a signal picked up that does
not come from the plasma itself.
Once again, when considering the normal plane distributions of such ray fronts, that are extremely
spread out and curved in 3D space, there are obviously projection errors. Nonetheless, even with
advanced projection schemes, accounting for that curvature, the resulting distribution is far from
being a normal one. The Gaussian ﬁt is once again inadequate, as displayed in ﬁgure 30 for receiver 7.
38
==PAGE:40==
(a) Receiver 5, with a few rays being reﬂected
out.
(b) Ray front for receiver 5, with scarce outliers.
(c) Receiver 6, with a clear group of rays being
reﬂected out as the plasma edge is crossed.
(d) Ray front for receiver 6, with a reﬂected clump representing
2.7% of rays never entering the plasma.
(e) Receiver 7, with 37% of the rays being re-
ﬂected out in the ﬁrst group at the plasma edge.
(f) At that step, the ray front is mostly spread out of the vacuum
vessel, but the reﬂected clump is clearly visible..
Figure 29: 3D plot of rays in the vacuum vessel and corresponding ray fronts at time step 500.
39
==PAGE:41==
(a) Step 50, 60cm from launching mirror.
(b) Step 100, 112cm from launching mirror.
(c) Step 150, 158cm from launching mirror.
(d) Step 250, 249cm from launching mirror.
Figure 30: Evolution of the ray distribution along the propagation of the beam for receiver 7. The
overlap with the probe beam happens between steps 100 and 250, where the shape of the distribution
does not change much, but just continues spreading out steadily. We observe the refracted-out ”blob”
drifting at the upper right corner, accounting for 37% of all the rays. This blob aﬀects the ﬁt greatly, and
also reduces the power throughput of the receiver in that case. It is also noted that the light propagates
signiﬁcantly slower in the plasma than it does outside.
40
==PAGE:42==
4.3
Scattering on alternative perturbations
It has also been considered to have multiple Gaussian perturbations as presented in ﬁgure 3.3.2. For
relative perturbations, the results on beam widths are summed up in ﬁgure 31.
(a) Vertical beam widths, it appears that 2 peaks have the most detrimental eﬀect, while 3 lower sized peaks apparently
are better than just one, much higher peak. The jagged look of the curve for receiver 6 corresponds to the outlier removal
process for rays that end up more than 10 meters away from the beam, ultimately leading to poorer ﬁts from a ﬁnite
number of data points.
(b) The diﬀerence in eﬀect on the horizontal width is negligible.
Figure 31: In the A = 10% relative amplitude case, the 2-peaks relative density innermost peak beneﬁts
from the much higher density of the core, with a still high amplitude. Resulting in a higher disruption
overall.
The relative density results can be very well explained by the actual amplitude variations considered,
after being multiplied by the local density, appearing in ﬁgure 32.
The results are however a lot simpler when absolute variations are considered, as appearing in ﬁgure 33.
It appears that a higher number of peaks is directly translated into a reduced eﬀect on the width, which
hints towards higher amplitude being the dominant criteria for the same ”amount of perturbation”,
illustrated here by the integral under the amplitude curve.
This could be attributed to the same
41
==PAGE:43==
Figure 32: The relative density amplitude for multiple peak perturbations is visibly negligible after
ρ = 1.0. Eﬀectively making the ”2peaks” more favoured in ”quantity of perturbation”, illustrated by the
area under the respective curves.
tendency observed in section 4.2.1, where a peak located in the core will push the cutoﬀfrequency
relatively much closer than a peak outside. It needs to be noted that the correlation length and peak
spacing were chosen small/big enough, respectively, so that the 0-amplitude nodes did not aﬀect the
density distribution as a whole.
Once again the diﬀerences of the ”horizontal” widths are negligible, and have not been included.
Figure 33: Vertical beam widths in the A = 10% absolute amplitude case. The jagged look of the curve
for receiver 6 has the same explanation as in ﬁgure 31.
42
==PAGE:44==
Similarly, the eﬀect on the overlap is straightforward based on the eﬀects on the width.
This is
presented in ﬁgure 34.
Figure 34: Overlap of receivers 2 and 6 with various base amplitudes for the single peak perturbations,
the other peak amplitudes are derived from that reference. It is once again admitted that 2 peaks, given
its advantageous positioning in relative amplitude, yields worse overlaps.
5
Extended results: ITER’s heating beams
5.1
Design and geometry
Based on the design data from [26], simulations are run for 4 diﬀerent heating beams. 2 launching
mirrors are available, the Upper Steerable Mirror (USM) and the Lower Steerable Mirror (LSM). Each
of these mirrors can be steered poloidally to hit diﬀerent resonance surfaces, namely the q = 2 and
q = 3/2 surfaces, which correspond to absorption centered around ρ = 0.87 and ρ = 0.77 respectively,
according to [26]. All these heating beams are Gaussian, axisymmetric, use a frequency of 170GHz in
O-mode, with a power of 1MW. The actual geometrical conﬁguration that is passed to WKBeam is
summed up in table 5.
The resulting beams’ trajectories are plotted in ﬁgure 35, with the simulations set to include absorption.
It is visible, there, that the absorption of the power is reached well before the ρ = 0.87 and 0.77
predictions, which could be attributed to slight variations in the magnetic ﬁeld conditions and density
proﬁles considered.
Although the position of the electron cyclotron resonance throughout the whole cross section should
follow a close to vertical line, it appears the absorption happens perpendicularly to the beam’s propa-
gation. No obvious physical explanation to this phenomenon has been found, as the density is already
very high where the beams are absorbed, and there seems to be no reason for the ECR to have such
a shape, even with relativistic eﬀects.
43
==PAGE:45==
Beam conﬁguration
USM
USM
LSM
LSM
(q = 2)
(q = 3/2)
(q = 2)
(q = 3/2)
Beam width (cm)
5.047
5.047
4.813
4.813
Curvature radius (cm)
318.6
318.6
200.1
200.1
Antenna R (cm)
699.9
699.9
705.4
705.4
Antenna z (cm)
441.4
441.4
417.8
417.8
Toroidal angle (deg)
20
20
20
20
Poloidal angle (deg)
46.8
40.5
54.7
50.1
Resonance surface (ρ)
0.87
0.77
0.87
0.77
Table 5: WKBeam design input for the heating beams. This data is valid at the respective launching
mirrors.
Figure 35: Cross section with USM and LSM with steerable mirrors in their respective (q = 2) and
(q = 3/2) conﬁgurations.
The predicted resonance surfaces ρ = 0.87/0.77 are also plotted.
A ray is
considered stopped if 0.1% of his power is left to propagate.
44
==PAGE:46==
5.2
Internal reﬂections
In comparison to ﬁgure 35, the plot in ﬁgure 36 does not include absorption in order to get an idea of
the trajectory of the beams, and their widths. Regardless of whether they are absorbed or not, this
can predict if stray reﬂections could reach the CTS instrument’s windows after internal reﬂections.
Figure 36: It is possible to see that some rays (between 5 and 16, over 3000) get anomalously reﬂected
(instead of absorbed) where the ECR is hit. A simplistic approach with mirror reﬂection on the inner wall
for the worst ray observed is also plotted (hitting the inner wall at an angle of 35◦). This ﬁctitious ray is
not the result of a simulation, and would be bent outwards even more by the refractive index gradient at
the plasma core.
Even with the eﬀects of extreme turbulence (10% amplitude) and neglecting absorption, no rays seem
to be problematic for the receivers.
However, these simulations have been run without activating
cross-polarization scattering. This is due WKBeam overestimating it by a factor 2-3 compared to full
wave code as reported in [10], and no further study of this has been conducted within the scope of
this project. This parameter, combined with the absorption module set to 0 in the simulations is most
likely the source for the nonphysical reﬂections observed.
It is however known that turbulent layers have the ability to convert one mode into the other, making
this study relevant in case an O-mode converted into X-mode ray was not absorbed and reached the
CTS receivers.
45
==PAGE:47==
5.3
Eﬀect of turbulence on the heating beams
With regards to absorption, given the ”resolution” of the simulation used, with only 3000 rays, and
a threshold for absorption of 0.1%, the eﬀect of turbulence shows no signiﬁcant diﬀerence with the
no-ﬂuctuations case. Studying this phenomenon in details would require much ﬁner simulations, which
were not implemented, as more thorough investigations have already been carried out in [26] and [28]
with regards to the speciﬁcs of power deposition and turbulence eﬀects, applied to Neoclassical Tearing
Modes (NTM) control.
With regard to the beam widths, the results are plotted in ﬁgure 37.
Figure 37: The anomalous reﬂections produce the little peaks around 150cm of propagation, before
being taken out by the outlier removal. The bumps observed after 400cm correspond to the beams exiting
the plasma non-perpendicularly to the ﬂux surfaces, eﬀectively skewing the distribution with respect to
the central ray. Although the plot continues, anything further than 550cm is well outside the vacuum
vessel inner wall.
Based on these results, the turbulence has a very limited impact on these high frequency beams,
especially when considering that more than 99.9% of the power is absorbed at the electron cyclotron
resonance, after less than 100cm of propagation.
46
==PAGE:48==
6
Discussion
The results of this report are in good accordance with previous research, and speciﬁcally the recent
works of P. Tretinnikov, E. Gusakov and S. Heuraux [23], published only 2 weeks before the ﬁnalization
of this report.
They analysed conditions corresponding to the CTS probe beam propagation for
perturbations in a similar parameter range. They also developed an analytical model for the width
of a beam going through an inhomogeneous layer with the help of full wave simulations. The present
report relied on synthetic ﬁts, and analytical results, valid in vacuum, to benchmark the diﬀerent
numerical methods used.
The main conclusions to gain from the results presented in the previous sections are that perturbations,
even of modest amplitude, can have a dramatic eﬀect on the CTS outermost receivers’ diagnostics
capabilities. This eﬀect varies a lot from receiver to receiver, as the more tangential ones will tend to
be refracted out extremely easily, contrary to those hitting the perturbations radially. Quite notably, a
density perturbation of 2.5-5%, which is not entirely unrealistic given the current plasma simulations,
could interfere with the passive nature of receiver 8, eﬀectively making the data treatment for noise
removal much harder. However, the results presented here concern the most conservative situation: in
other plasma scenarios, notably the steady state 5MA case, the electron density will be much lower,
eﬀectively pushing the cutoﬀfrequency away from the 60GHz used, and drastically reducing the eﬀects
of refraction. This diﬀerence would have the CTS beams aﬀected in a way closer to how the heating
beams were, in the present report, increasing drastically the overall performance.
The rest of the parameters behave as expected: a higher amplitude or a wider perturbation will
systematically lead to a more pronounced eﬀect on the beams, a widened propagation, and a lowered
overlap factor. It also appears that the actual maximum density (in m−3) is by far the dominant
factor, over perturbation amplitude or width.
For the correlation length, the overlap displays an almost linear behavior at all amplitudes and cases,
with more pronounced eﬀects as the amplitude increases.
It however has a problem: it shows a
”stable” behavior as it approaches the wavelength of the signal considered. This result is in slight
contradiction with the exploding widths observed in this report, and in contradiction with [8], which
found a maximum eﬀect on O-mode beams for a correlation length of 0.5λ0.
It can however be
understood as a direct consequence of the Wentzel–Kramers–Brillouin approximation main requirement
(λ0 < ℓcorr,⊥) being violated.
With regards to the position of the perturbation, relative perturbations have the obvious consequence
of having a much more prominent eﬀect where the density is higher, i.e. inside the plasma. When
considering absolute perturbations, while one could expect an earlier perturbation to have an overall
higher widening, it is in fact the ones inside the plasma that appear to have the biggest impact, as
they bring the density even closer to the cutoﬀlimit.
Another major assumption made throughout this report, every time a beam width was mentioned,
was that its cross section followed a normal distribution, and its width could be calculated from a
Gaussian envelope. As has been repeatedly proved, this assumption is vastly false for the outermost
receivers, as they can even display several separate ”sub-beams”. This result, where as high as 37%
of the rays received do not come from the plasma, which inherently will not give out any information
about fast particles (ions, or alpha particles in burning plasmas), makes it much harder to constrain
the measurements on the latter. This comes on top of an already low overlap, which translates linearly
to the signal output of the receivers, therefore impacting the signal-to-noise ratio even further.
However, a similar consideration for the inner receivers should have been included, under the form
of a goodness-of-ﬁt (GOF) analysis. An evaluation of the GOF through a 1-way Kolmogrov-Smirnov
test was attempted, but the 2D nature of the distributions did not allow for a satisfying result to be
produced within the time frame of this study.
Also, the GOF would be useful to characterize more precisely the shape of the beams, as they have been
proven [9][26] to often follow a Cauchy-like distribution, with elevated wings instead of a Gaussian.
The general approach presented in this paper to ﬁt a Gaussian density distribution function, based on
function optimization, could be adapted to ﬁt a Cauchy distribution instead.
A combination of the two would be extremely helpful as well, as the GOF can be used as a metric to
optimize the function ﬁt, instead of a basic least-square error. Such an analysis would help evaluate the
validity of the recent analytical models for beam broadening [23] directly applied to the CTS beams.
47
==PAGE:49==
Additional data treatment could also be implemented under the form of a more sophisticated outlier
removal. An adaptive area of interest was investigated for the heating beams, which are well behaved
and easily predictable, for which the treatment was done manually.
A similar approach could be
automatized, based on width predictions from previous steps, but such a treatment was not prioritized
during this project. Similarly, the accurate computation of the overlap volumes’ sizes, shapes and
positions was proved to be possible (see Appendix C), although not pursued within the time constraints
of this Thesis.
The extensive study of the eﬀects of the perturbation parameters on the beam widths and the overlap
for receivers 2 and 6, combined with the predictions for all receivers, should allow for an estimation
of the overlap parameters for all receivers in ITER’s standard plasma scenario. This information will
become very useful as ITER’s CTS data will start being analyzed, in order to understand better the
nature and quality of the signal received. The frequency dependence of each receiver’s overlap will
translate directly into a very tangible skew in the frequency distribution of the picked up signal, which
is the basis for velocity distribution analysis (which boils down to the Doppler eﬀect). Ignoring this
frequency dependence would yield vastly erroneous results. In the same fashion, the results of this
report allow to have a better grasp of the general properties of the signal, will usually leads to a better
data treatment, and ultimately more precise results for the ﬁnal CTS system.
The heating beam study displayed the versatility of the methods employed, and any other situation
could be readily studied upon request. Notably, considering diﬀerent plasma scenarios, or even diﬀerent
machines could have been considered if the time frame allowed it. However, all these results have been
obtained with simulations ignoring cross-polarization scattering and absorption, which should have
been included in all rigorousness, even if the eﬀects are expected to be negligible in the case considered.
7
Conclusion
An automatized process for beamwidth and overlap calculation has been developed for the ITER
CTS beams. This process relies on ray tracing simulations made with WKBeam, including Gaussian
turbulent layers, and their eﬀect on the propagation of the microwaves in the plasma. Using this
method, an extensive study of the inﬂuence of the perturbations on the beam properties was carried
out for the ITER 15MA standard scenario. It was proven that the dominant factors for the X-mode
60Ghz CTS beams, increasing the beam widths and decreasing overlap factors, are mostly the actual
maximum density generated, deeply tied to the amplitude of the perturbations, and to a smaller
extent, their widths. This conclusion holds provided the perturbations are not happening well outside
the plasma edge. The perpendicular correlation length could not be investigated where its highest
impact is predicted to be, due to simulation limitations.
The least advantageous position for the
perturbation appears to be slightly inside the plasma, where it brings the density closer to the cutoﬀ
limit than in other places.
This data will be directly relevant for CTS data analysis as the overlap coeﬃcient is a linear factor
in the spectral power density picked up by the receivers. Similarly, the beam widths are a way to
constrain the spatial deﬁnition of the measurements, and give insight on the signal quality.
The methods considered in this report are nonetheless ﬂexible and can be used to consider diﬀer-
ent microwave systems, perturbation types, plasma scenarios, or even machines. This was notably
exploited to investigate a set of upper-port steerable 1MW heating beams, in order to verify that
internal reﬂections were not dangerous for the CTS receiver view ports, which are sensitive to some
tens of Watts.
These methods could also be readily built upon, for a more precise investigation of the beams’ shapes
or calculations of the overlap volumes, both of which are left for further work.
It needs to be reminded that, in order to have an accurate evaluation of the microwave systems
modeled through this analysis, it is required to have a quantitative knowledge of the perturbations
characteristics, so that the simulations can be set up accordingly. The prospective results presented
here cover a wide range of parameters to include most cases considered relevant based on current
predictions for the plasma scenario considered. They therefore establish a solid base on which further,
more speciﬁc and accurate research can build in order to reach overall better performances for the
CTS system in ITER.
48
==PAGE:50==
This report therefore provides immediately relevant information to the teams developing and, in the
near future, operating the instrument which will in turn yield invaluable results on the properties of
large scale fusion power plants that no other existing instrument will be able to produce.
49
==PAGE:51==
Appendices
A
Convergence study on overlap calculations and outlier re-
moval
This appendix presents some of the results leading to the parameter choices for the overlap computa-
tions, and the progress made by using basic outlier removal.
The ﬁrst concerned parameters of the overlap calculation are the volume of the integration and the
number of samples used in each dimension. The combination of both determines the size of a volume
pixel, also called voxel, in which the cross-section normalized intensity for each beam is computed as
constant. The presented plots are summary representations, which highlight the main conclusions, but
many other conﬁgurations have been tested.
In ﬁgure 38, we can identify that a volume of 150cm cubed contains all the non-negligible overlap,
with a good margin for wider beams. This result was conﬁrmed at a later stage of the project with
the contents of Appendix C. It is also worth noting that there appears to be interactions between
the number of samples, the integration volume, and the binning size for the histogram method. The
vertical side size was decreased to 130cm as all intensities, no matter the case, are negligible over this
value.
Figure 38: Overlap calculations for receiver 1 with both methods, for a varying integration volume,
while maintaining the same (5cm)3 voxel size (this means the number of samples per side was increased
proportionately to the size of the side).
In ﬁgure 39, once the integration volume has been set, it becomes pertinent to analyse how many
samples per side are necessary to compute an accurate overlap.
This is particularly useful as the
computation time scales as N 3
space, meaning 10 samples per side take less than half a second, while
100 can take up to 5 minutes on the same machine. According to these results, a sample number of 50
was chosen, as a multi-case study allowed to determine the ”error” produced by such a downsampling,
either in over- or underestimation, was inferior to a percent, which is overall under the uncertainty
introduced by the rest of the procedure, while cutting down the computation time by a factor 8.
50
==PAGE:52==
Figure 39: Eﬀect of the number of samples per side on a 150×150×130cm3 overlap integration volume.
With regards to the histogram based approach, the same methodology was used, with the parameters
established earlier as ﬁxed. This appears in ﬁgure 40. In order to oﬀer the highest precision possible,
and for a modest computation time increase, a higher number might be desirable.
On the other
hand, to small bins might reveal a mostly empty space, hence leading to the degeneracy observed
over Nhisto = 400 for smaller voxel numbers (blue curve). The retained histogram binning size was
(1.5cm)2, i.e. 4002 samples for a 600 × 600cm2 binning surface (this huge surface value accounts for
potentially non-centered and angled surfaces, inside the integration volume, in addition to having close
to no impact on the computation speed).
Figure 40: Caption
51
==PAGE:53==
This value could have also been implemented in a more clever way, similar to an adaptive outlier
removal. The concept relies on ﬁnding a relevant area of interest for each time step, out of which the
rays can be considered outliers, both for the beam width calculation, and for the histogram binning.
What has been implemented, and proved to be suﬃcient for most cases, was a simplistic square area
of interest, set to remove anything further than 3 to 10 (in the most extreme cases) meters away from
the central ray in the planar projections. The eﬀect of this basic approach are visible in ﬁgure 41.
Figure 41: Eﬀect of outlier removal on the computed width of the probe beam in a turbulent case.
As can be seen on the green curve after 2m, the width starts behaving strangely, going up to 50000cm
(cropped out). After removing obvious outliers, we get the blue curve, which follows the exact same path
without the divergence, down to ﬁnite sample size errors. The other smaller widths are similarly aﬀected.
B
Absolute compared to relative perturbations
This Appendix compares the eﬀect of absolute perturbations versus relative perturbations. The ﬁrst re-
sult, visible in ﬁgure 42, is that an absolute (rho0_100/absolute) and relative (scattering_test_deltane)
perturbations, with the same amplitude (10% in this case), and with proper normalization, will have
the same eﬀect on the probe beam width (orange and red curve superimposed).
With regards to
the position of the perturbation, the absolute perturbation will systematically have a more moderate
eﬀect, as the extreme local density variations between ρ = 1.05 and ρ = 0.95 are already accounted
for: a relative perturbation centered on ρ = 1.05 has an actual amplitude close to 0, amounting to
no noticeable eﬀect on the beam overall. On the other hand, a 10% relative perturbation to the local
density at ρ = 0.95 is almost twice as high as the absolute.
Quite surprisingly, there appears to be a systematic discrepancy with a higher overlap for absolute
perturbations centered at ρ = 1.00, versus the relative ones. An single explanation for this result could
not be conﬁrmed, although ﬁgure 12 can give an indication that maybe the higher peak for relative
densities causes this, pointing towards actual maximum density being the dominant factor for the eﬀect
of perturbations. With regards to everything else, this tendency goes against all previous predictions,
either in terms of density, or in terms of beam width. We Would expect a bigger disruption of the
beams by absolute perturbations, as they have a higher amplitude outside ρ = 1.00, and is comparable
inside the plasma, adding up to a higher ”amount of perturbation” overall. The beam widths have
52
==PAGE:54==
Figure 42:
Comparison of the same perturbations with absolute or relative amplitude.
The actual
perturbation with relative amplitude centered at ρ = 1.05 is extremely small, ultimately having close to no
eﬀect on the beams. This is corrected with absolute perturbations. Also, with appropriate normalization
(same amplitude at ρ = 1.00), the absolute and relative perturbations have the exact same eﬀect on the
width of the beams.
also been proven to be the same for the probe in the previous ﬁgure, which would indicate similar
overlaps, although it is not the case.
Figure 43: Discrepancy for absolute vs relative perturbations in overlap. All centered at ρ = 1.00 for the
amplitude normalization to be equivalent. Multiple widths and correlation lengths appear per amplitude
set.
53
==PAGE:55==
C
Overlap volume and 3D position
An extension to the 3D discretization method to compute the overlap is that it gives access to the
cross-section normalized intensity of the beams in 3 dimensions. This can be plotted as the probe
crosses each receiver individually, as appears in ﬁgure 44.
Figure 44: Crossing probe and receiver beams (ordered 1 to 8 from left to right, and top to bottom)
plotted as local intensities. The higher the cross-section normalized intensity, the more opaque the plot.
It is also possible to plot the product of these intensities, in order to display what is loosely referred
to as the overlap volume, for each receiver. This appears in ﬁgure 45.
Figure 45: ”Overlap volumes” for the standard plasma scenario without perturbations for receivers 1 to
8 (ordered from left to right, and top to bottom). The more opaque and red a data point, the higher the
intensity product for probe and receiver.
These results have not been included in the core of the report, because what is displayed does not
correspond to the correct deﬁnition of the overlap volume. This deﬁnition would be, while referring to
the product of the two cross-section normalized intensities as PCSNI, the volume enclosed by an iso-
PCSNI surface, containing 90% of the total overlap. For two perfectly Gaussian beams intersecting, it
should yield an ellipsoid. The voxel (volume pixel) resolution used in my method was not ﬁne enough
to compute such a volume accurately. Increasing that volume resolution enough to be able to compute
a reasonable overlap volume would however be possible, although computationally expensive.
54
==PAGE:56==
References
[1] D.G. Swanson. Plasma Waves. Academic Press, 1989.
[2] Malvin Carl Teich Bahaa E. A. Saleh. Fundamentals of Photonics, chapter 1-3, pages 1–107. John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 1991.
[3] E. V. Sysoeva, F. da Silva, E. Z. Gusakov, St´ephane Heuraux, and A. Yu. Popov.
Electron
cyclotron resonance heating beam broadening in the edge turbulent plasma of fusion machines.
Nuclear Fusion, 55(3), March 2015. ´Equipe 107 : Physique des plasmas chauds.
[4] Henrik Bindslev. A quantitative study of scattering from electromagnetic ﬂuctuations in plasmas.
Journal of Atmospheric and Terrestrial Physics, 58(8):983–989, 1996.
[5] Ben Dudson and Jarrod Leddy. Hermes: Global plasma edge ﬂuid turbulence simulations. Plasma
Physics and Controlled Fusion, 59, 09 2016.
[6] C. S. Chang, S. Ku, R. Hager, R. M. Churchill, J. Hughes, F. K¨ochl, A. Loarte, V. Parail, and
R. A. Pitts. Constructing a new predictive scaling formula for iter’s divertor heat-load width
informed by a simulation-anchored machine learning. Physics of Plasmas, 28(2):022501, 2021.
[7] S Zweben, J Boedo, Olaf Grulke, Carlos Hidalgo, B LaBombard, R Maqueda, Paolo Scarin, and
J. Terry. Edge turbulence measurements in toroidal fusion devices. Plasma Physics and Controlled
Fusion, 49:S1, 06 2007.
[8] Alf K¨ohn-Seemann, Eberhard Holzhauer, Jarrod Leddy, Matthew Thomas, and Roddy Vann.
Perturbing microwave beams by plasma density ﬂuctuations. EPJ Web of Conferences, 147, 03
2017.
[9] Alf K¨ohn-Seemann, Lorenzo Guidi, Eberhard Holzhauer, Omar Maj, Emanuele Poli, A. Snicker,
and Hannes Weber. Microwave beam broadening due to turbulent plasma density ﬂuctuations
within the limit of the born approximation and beyond. Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion,
60, 12 2017.
[10] Alf K¨ohn-Seemann, Max Austin, Michael Brookman, Kenneth Gentle, Lorenzo Guidi, Eberhard
Holzhauer, Rob Haye, Jarrod Leddy, Omar Maj, Craig Petty, Emanuele Poli, Terry Rhodes,
A. Snicker, Matthew Thomas, Roddy Vann, and Hannes Weber.
The deteriorating eﬀect of
plasma density ﬂuctuations on microwave beam quality. 05 2018.
[11] Hannes Weber, Omar Maj, and Emanuele Poli. Scattering of diﬀracting beams of electron cy-
clotron waves by random density ﬂuctuations in inhomogeneous plasmas. EPJ Web of Conferences,
87:01002, 03 2015.
[12] A. Donne, Alan Costley, Robin Barnsley, H. Bindslev, R. Boivin, G. Conway, R. Fisher, R. Gian-
nella, H. Hartfuss, Manfred Von Hellermann, Eric Hodgson, L.C. Ingesson, Kiyoshi Itami, David
Johnson, Y. Kawano, T. Kondoh, A. Krasilnikov, Y. Kusama, Andrey Litnovsky, and the Diag-
nostics. Chapter 7: Diagnostics. Nuclear Fusion, 47:S337, 06 2007.
[13] J. Kohagura, M. Yoshikawa, X. Wang, D. Kuwahara, N. Ito, Y. Nagayama, Y. Shima, K. Nojiri,
M. Sakamoto, Y. Nakashima, and A. Mase. A 60-ghz interferometer with a local oscillator inte-
grated antenna array for divertor simulation experiments on gamma 10/pdx. Review of Scientiﬁc
Instruments, 87(11):11E127, 2016.
[14] Udintsev, V.S., Danani, S., Taylor, G., Giacomin, T., Guirao, J., Pak, S., Hughes, S., Worth,
L., Vayakis, G., Walsh, M.J., Schneider, M., Pandya, H.K.B., Kumar, R., Kumar, V., Jha, S.,
Thomas, S., Padasalagi, S. B., Kumar, S., Phillips, P. E., Rowan, W. L., Austin, M.E., Khodak,
A., Feder, R., Neilson, H., Basile, A., Hubbard, A. E., Saxena, A., Nazare, C., Maquet, P., and
Gimbert, N. Progress in iter ece diagnostic design and integration. EPJ Web Conf., 203:03003,
2019.
[15] Conway G., Stegmeir A., Vayakis G., Udintsev V., Austin M., Hanson G., Peebles T., Petrov V.,
, and Estrada T. Itpa assessment of iter microwave diagnostic design issues. In (IAEA-CN–197).
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), 2012.
55
==PAGE:57==
[16] S.B. Korsholm, H. Bindslev, V. Furtula, F. Leipold, F. Meo, P.K. Michelsen, D. Moseev, S.K.
Nielsen, M. Salewski, and M. Stejner.
Collective thomson scattering capabilities to diagnose
fusion plasmas. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators,
Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 623(2):677–680, 2010. 1rs International Con-
ference on Frontiers in Diagnostics Technologies.
[17] U. Tartari, S. Nowak, and G. Ramponi. Perspectives of millimeter-wave collective thomson scat-
tering of conﬁned alphas in ignited plasmas. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, 67(11):3847–3860,
1996.
[18] D. Moseev, M. Stejner, T. Stange, I. Abramovic, H. P. Laqua, S. Marsen, N. Schneider, H. Braune,
U. Hoefel, W. Kasparek, S. B. Korsholm, C. Lechte, F. Leipold, S. K. Nielsen, M. Salewski, J. Ras-
mussen, M. Weißgerber, and R. C. Wolf. Collective thomson scattering diagnostic at wendelstein
7-x. Review of Scientiﬁc Instruments, 90(1):013503, 2019.
[19] S K Nielsen, M Stejner, J Rasmussen, A S Jacobsen, S B Korsholm, F Leipold, M Maraschek,
F Meo, P K Michelsen, D Moseev, M Salewski, M Schubert, J Stober, W Suttrop, G Tardini, and
D Wagner. Measurements of the fast-ion distribution function at ASDEX upgrade by collective
thomson scattering (CTS) using active and passive views. Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion,
57(3):035009, feb 2015.
[20] Henrik Bindslev, Fernando Meo, and Søren Bang Korsholm. ITER Fast Ion Collective Thomson
Scattering: Feasibility study. Risø National Laboratory, 2003. Annex 1 to ITER Final Design
Report, 2001 This work was performed as part of EFDA Contract 01.654.
[21] Kuehn I. Pavageau J., Croset J.-P. Baseline report - iter coordinate system. Technical Report
DOE-SLC-6903-1, ITER, September 2018.
[22] A C C Sips, for the Steady State Operation, and the Transport Physics topical group Activity.
Advanced scenarios for iter operation. Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion, 47(5A):A19–A40,
Apr 2005.
[23] P Tretinnikov, E Gusakov, and S Heuraux. X-mode beam broadening in turbulent plasma. Plasma
Physics and Controlled Fusion, 63(8):085003, jun 2021.
[24] Hannes Weber. Ausbreitung hochfrequenter wellen in ﬂuktuierenden plasmen. Master’s thesis,
Max-Planck Institute for Plasma Physics, Universit¨at Ulm, 89069 Ulm, Germany, 2013.
[25] L. Guidi, O. Maj, H. Weber, A. K¨ohn, A. Snicker, and E. Poli. Cross-polarization scattering of
diﬀracting electron-cyclotron beams in a turbulent plasma with the WKBeam code. Journal of
Physics: Conference Series, 775:012005, nov 2016.
[26] A. Snicker, E. Poli, O. Maj, L. Guidi, A. K¨ohn, H. Weber, G. Conway, M. Henderson, and
G. Saibene. The eﬀect of density ﬂuctuations on electron cyclotron beam broadening and impli-
cations for ITER. Nuclear Fusion, 58(1):016002, nov 2017.
[27] Teitur Hansen. Diagnosing iter fusion plasmas with microwaves. may 2021.
[28] A Snicker, E Poli, O Maj, L Guidi, A K¨ohn, H Weber, G D Conway, M Henderson, and G Saibene.
Interaction of the electron density ﬂuctuations with electron cyclotron waves from the equatorial
launcher in ITER. Plasma Physics and Controlled Fusion, 60(1):014020, nov 2017.
56
