==PAGE:1==
TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY OF DENMARK
MASTER THESIS IN PHARMACEUTICAL DESIGN AND ENGINEERING
30 ECTS-POINTS
Extraction, Puriﬁcation and Characterization
of Serotype Speciﬁc Capsular
Polysaccharides and Lipopolysaccharides
for Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae
Author:
Kirstine Bækgaard ANDERSEN - s164453
Supervisors:
Jens Øllgaard DUUS - DTU Chemistry
Lars Ole ANDRESEN - Center for Diagnostics DTU
July 1, 2021
==PAGE:2==
I
Preface
This 30 ECTS-points master’s thesis in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering is writ-
ten by and based on the work done by Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen over the period
from February 1st to July 1st 2021. The project was carried out under supervision of
Senior Executive Advisory Ofﬁcer Lars Ole Andresen from Center for Diagnostics at the
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and Professor Jens Øllgaard Duus from DTU
Chemistry. I would like to thank Lars Ole for his excellent support in the lab, in addition
to feedback on the writing of the thesis. I would also like to thank Jens for being a great
support throughout the duration of the project, always providing help when needed.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Ph.D Chengxin Li and Postdoc Christian Kjeld-
sen for being very helpful with acquiring the NMR data and giving great comments and
feedback.
Finally, I would also like to thank Danny Darby for freeze-drying all of my samples
and the laboratory technicians at Center for Diagnostics for their assistance in the lab.
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
July 1st, 2021
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:3==
II
Abstract
The Gram-negative bacterium Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae constitutes a major prob-
lem within the global swine industry, as it is the cause behind the highly contagious
respiratory disease porcine pleuropneumonia. Varying virulence is associated with this
infection as it can both give mild symptoms but also be fatal, making it important to
develop methods for diagnosing and treating the infection. Several serotypes of the
bacteria are known, which differ in the surface polysaccharides they express, speciﬁcally
their capsular polysaccharide (CPS). This makes CPS an interesting candidate for the di-
agnosis and treatment of infection, speciﬁc for each serotype. However, some serotypes
are found to cross-react due to common lipopolysaccharide (LPS) structures, and it
is, therefore, crucial that CPS is completely separated from the LPS to ensure speciﬁc
diagnosis. In this project, different puriﬁcation methods are tested to purify LPS and
CPS from grown bacterial cultures of serotypes 1, 9 and 11, as these serotypes are known
to cross-react. It is found that LPS can be puriﬁed by phenol-water extraction, while
the most optimal way of purifying CPS is by precipitation with cetyltrimethylammo-
nium bromide (CTAB). Indirect ELISAs with the puriﬁed CPS as antigen did, however,
still show cross-reactions between serotypes 1, 9 and 11, using both pig sera and rab-
bit antisera. Furthermore, the structures of the puriﬁed surface polysaccharides were
characterized by NMR and compared with what has been described in the literature.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:4==
III
Resume
Den Gram-negative bakterie A. pleuropneumoniae udgør et stort problem i den globale
svineindustri, idet den fører til den yderst smitsomme sygdom, ondartet lungesyge
hos svin. Varierende virulens er forbundet med denne infektion, da den både kan give
milde symptomer, men også være dødelig. Det er derfor vigtigt at udvikle metoder til
at diagnosticere og behandle infektionen. Der ﬁndes ﬂere serotyper af bakterien, som
adskiller sig fra hinanden via de overﬂadepolysakkarider de udtrykker, specielt deres
kapselpolysakkarider (CPS). Dette gør CPS til en interessant kandidat til diagnose og
behandling af infektionen speciﬁkt for hver serotype. Der ﬁndes dog nogle serotyper,
der krydsreagerer på grund af fælles lipopolysakkarider (LPS), og derfor er det essentielt,
at CPS bliver helt adskilt fra LPS, så speciﬁkke diagnoser er mulige. I dette projekt
bliver forskellige oprensningsmetoder testet for at oprense LPS og CPS fra dyrkede
bakteriekulturer af serotype 1, 9 og 11, da man ved, at disse serotyper krydsreagerer. Det
konkluderes, at LPS bedst oprenses med fenol-vand ekstrahering, mens den optimale
metode til at oprense CPS er via udfældning med cetyltrimethylammoniumbromid
(CTAB). Indirekte ELISA-tests med det oprensede CPS som antigen viste dog stadig
krydsreaktioner mellem serotype 1, 9 og 11 ved brug af både svineserum and kaninserum.
Derudover er strukturerne af de oprensede overﬂadepolysakkarider blevet karakteriseret
ved brug af NMR, og sammenlignet med hvad der er blevet præsenteret i litteraturen.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:5==
Table of Contents
IV
Table of Contents
Preface
I
Abstract
II
Resume
III
List of abbreviations
VII
1
Introduction and Background
1
1.1
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
Pathology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.2
Serotypes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.3
Treatment of A. pleuropneumoniae Infection
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Surface Polysaccharides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.1
Lipopolysaccharides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.2
Capsular Polysaccharides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.4
The Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2
Materials and Methods
13
2.1
Bacterial Strains and Growth Conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
LPS Extraction and Puriﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
CPS Puriﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Acetone Precipitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Sephadex G-50 Gel Filtration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.3
Puriﬁcation with Polymyxin B
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.4
Puriﬁcation with Cetyltrimethylammonium Bromide . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Indirect ELISA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
NMR Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Results and Discussion
17
3.1
Phenol Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Treatment With Enzymes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:6==
Table of Contents
V
3.1.2
LPS Puriﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.3
Characterization of LPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
CPS Puriﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Acetone Precipitation and Gel Filtration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.2
Puriﬁcation with Polymyxin B
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.3
Puriﬁcation with CTAB
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.4
Characterization of CPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Serological Testing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
3.3.1
Indirect ELISA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.2
ELISA on Serotype 1 CPS Containing LPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.3.3
ELISA on Serotype 1 and 9 Puriﬁed with CTAB
. . . . . . . . . .
47
3.3.4
ELISA on Serotype 1 and 9 CPS Using Rabbit Antisera . . . . . .
51
4
Conclusion
56
5
Future Perspectives
57
Bibliography
58
A Appendix – NMR Spectra
I
A.1 Serotype 9 LPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
A.2 Serotype 11 LPS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
I
A.3 Serotype 1 Supernatant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
II
A.4 Serotype 9 Supernatant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III
A.5 Serotype 11 Supernatant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IV
A.6 Serotype 1 CPS: Acetone Precipitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
A.7 Serotype 1 CPS: Gel Filtration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
A.8 Serotype 1 CPS: Polymyxin B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VI
A.9 Serotype 9 CPS: Polymyxin B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VII
A.10 Serotype 11 CPS: Polymyxin B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
VIII
A.11 Serotype 1 Supernatant for CTAB Precipitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
IX
A.12 Serotype 9 Supernatant for CTAB Precipitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
X
A.13 Serotype 1 CPS: CTAB Precipitation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XI
B
Appendix – ELISA
XII
B.1
Serotype 1 CPS Antigen 1:100 to 1:12,800 (Gel Filtration)
. . . . . . . . .
XII
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:7==
Table of Contents
VI
B.2
Serotype 1 Chess Titration (CTAB Precipitation)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XII
B.3
Serotype 9 Chess Titration with Less Antigen (CTAB Precipitation)
. . .
XII
B.4
Serotype 9 Chess Titration with More Antigen (CTAB Precipitation) . . .
XIII
B.5
Serotype 1 CPS with Rabbit Antiserum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XIII
B.6
Serotype 9 CPS with Rabbit Antiserum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
XIII
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:8==
Table of Contents
VII
List of abbreviations
BSA
bovine serum albumin
COSY
homonuclear correlation spectroscopy
CPS
capsular polysaccharide
CTAB
cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
DQF-COSY
double quantum ﬁltered correlation spectroscopy
ELISA
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
H2BC
heteronuclear two bond correlation
HMBC
heteronuclear multiple bond correlation
HRP
horseradish peroxidase
HSQC
heteronuclear single quantum coherence
LPS
lipopolysaccharide
NAD
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NMR
nuclear magnetic resonance
OD
optical density
ORF
open reading frame
PBS
phosphate-buffered saline
RTX
repeats in toxin
T
Tween 20
TLC
thin-layer chromatography
TOCSY
total correlation spectroscopy
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:9==
Introduction and Background
1
1 Introduction and Background
1.1 Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae constitutes a major problem within the swine industry
as this bacterium causes the highly contagious respiratory disease porcine pleurop-
neumonia. Pleuropneumonia is associated with high mortality which leads to large
economic losses in the industry. The bacterium has, therefore, been highly researched
for centuries to get a better understanding of the diagnosis and treatment of porcine
pleuropneumonia (1, 2). A. pleuropneumoniae is a Gram-negative bacteria also charac-
terized by being encapsulated, rod shaped, non-motile and nonspore-forming (2, 3).
Furthermore, it is haemolytic when grown on blood agar and also demonstrates the
Christie-Atkins-Munch-Peterson reaction with beta-haemolytic Staphylococcus aureus (4).
The bacterium was previously classiﬁed as Haemophilus pleuropneumoniae, but in 1983,
Pohl et al. showed its relatedness in phenotype and DNA to Actinobacillus lignieresii.
From this, it was concluded that the bacteria belonged to the genus Actinobacillus and it
thereby received its current name (5).
There are two different biovars of A. pleuropneumoniae, which are distinguished from
each other based on their need for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) for growth.
Here, biovar 1 strains, which constitutes the majority, are NAD dependent, while biovar
2 are independent of NAD, as they can synthesize it themselves when speciﬁc pyridine
nucleotides or precursors of them are present (4, 6). Besides this characterization, the
bacteria can be further divided into, so far, 18 serotypes, of which serotypes 1 and 5 are
subdivided into a and b. These 18 serotypes are based on the carbohydrate antigens,
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and capsular polysaccharide (CPS) they express as this is
the main thing that distinguishes them from each other (2). All serotypes can cause
pleuropneumonia, but there is a big variation in the virulence between them (4). The A.
pleuropneumoniae serotypes will be described in more detail in Section 1.1.2.
1.1.1 Pathology
When A. pleuropneumoniae infects the pig, it starts by colonizing the respiratory tract,
of which the bacteria preferably adhere to cells of the lower respiratory tract (4). If the
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:10==
Introduction and Background
2
host defenses are not sufﬁcient in killing the bacteria, the infection will spread. This will
typically result in gross lesions, which are mainly located in the caudal lobes but can
also occur in the middle and cranial lobes of the lung (2, 7).
The infection can be both peracute, acute, subacute and chronic, which cause
different clinical signs in the pig. How the disease develops depends on several factors
such as the immune status of the host, the A. pleuropneumoniae serotype and the number
of bacteria that colonize the lung. Because of this, there is also a possibility that pigs in
one herd will express many different clinical signs, where some might show a peracute
infection while others are chronic (1, 4). In the case of a peracute infection, the disease
progresses very rapidly and leads to severe respiratory distress, vomiting, cardiovascular
failure, high fever, among other serious clinical signs that are associated with a high
mortality rate and can cause sudden death (2, 4, 8). Like peracute, acute infections are
also associated with high mortality. Besides this, it is characterized by severe respiratory
distress, coughing, anorexia, severe shortness of breath, high fever and extensive lung
lesions. If the pig survives an acute infection, it might get chronically infected without
showing any symptoms except having chronic lung alterations (2, 4, 8). In the case
of subacute infections, the symptoms are usually milder and have smaller mortality
than the peracute and acute events (8). Chronic infections are associated with coughing
and ﬁbrous pleuritis, and furthermore, pigs becoming chronically infected will have
impaired growth and be more susceptible to other infections, which constitutes a big
economic loss for the swine industry. Besides this, A. pleuropneumoniae can be present
in the tonsil of an infected pig without it showing symptoms, and through this, the
infection can be transmitted to other animals in the herd. Other than being transmitted
directly from another pig, transmission can also occur by aerosols (2, 7).
The disease can be found in pigs of all ages, but there is a higher incidence in 12 –
16 weeks old pigs. It is even possible that the infection can be transmitted from the sow
to the piglet during nursing, as the bacteria will then colonize the respiratory tract of the
newborn pig (1). Furthermore, while there has not been found a correlation between
pleuropneumoniae and predisposing bacterial or viral infections, stress can result in a
higher incidence of pleuropneumoniae outbreaks (9). There are, therefore, several ways
A. pleuropneumoniae infection can spread and cause varying severity of disease in a herd.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:11==
Introduction and Background
3
1.1.2 Serotypes
As previously mentioned, there are currently 18 known serotypes of A. pleuropneumoniae,
and these differ in the surface polysaccharides they express. These polysaccharides
include LPS and CPS of which CPS is speciﬁc for each serotype, while similar LPS
structures are seen between some serotypes. These serotypes are 1, 9 and 11; 3, 6 and 8;
and 4 and 7, and because of the similar structure of their LPS, they have been found to
cross-react in serological tests (1, 10, 11). This cross-reactivity is caused by the presence
of antibodies targeting the similar LPS of these serotypes. This can be problematic in
serological diagnosis and serotyping to detect what serotypes are present in the infected
herd, as it is impossible to differentiate between the cross-reacting serotypes using LPS
as a single antigen (2, 11).
Discovery of Serotypes
The discovery of the different serotypes has happened gradually over the years, and
it has mostly been based on various agglutination methods such as indirect haemag-
glutination and slide agglutination (12). When discovering new strains in herds, these
methods are carried out to detect if any antibodies against a known serotype also react
to the new strains. If the new strains cannot be assigned to any of the known serotypes
based on the serotyping methods, they can be designated as a new serotype. In that
way, for example serotype 15 was discovered in 2002 (13) and serotype 16 in 2015 (12).
However, the most recently discovered serotypes 17 and 18 were proposed by Bossé
et al. 2018 (14) based on a newer method, whole genome sequencing, combined with
serology. With more complex methods emerging, it is also possible that more serotypes
will be discovered in the future as previously non-typable strains can be designated as a
new serotype.
Geographical Variation
The 18 A. pleuropneumoniae serotypes vary a lot in their geographical distribution. For
example, serotype 2 is the dominant serotype found in European herds, while in North
America, it is mainly serotypes 1 and 5. There is, however, still a large variation in
serotypes between neighboring countries as the dominant serotypes in, for example,
Poland are 1 and 9. Even though one serotype is dominant in an area, there are still many
prevalent serotypes that can be isolated (7). Even in one herd, multiple serotypes can
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:12==
Introduction and Background
4
be isolated, and this makes it even more complicated to diagnose and treat the infected
pigs (1).
In addition to the geographical variation, the distribution of A. pleuropneumoniae
serotypes has also changed over the years. In Canada, for example, serotype 1 was the
dominant serotype between 1980 and 1992, with serotypes 5 and 7 also being prevalent.
Since 1993, serotype 5 has, however, taken on the place of being the dominant serotype
instead of serotype 1 and, additionally, serotype 7 has also become more prevalent than
serotype 1 (7).
The discovery of serotypes and the surface polysaccharides they express, in addition
to which regions the serotype is prevalent in, is very important to create serotype-speciﬁc
vaccines that can prevent the spread of infection in each herd. Otherwise, if the serotype
is not known, most vaccines will not be effective.
Virulence
Because of the difference in carbohydrate antigens, among other factors, there is also
a large variation in the virulence between A. pleuropneumoniae serotypes and strains.
Besides the polysaccharides they express, the virulence is also heavily associated with
the outer membrane proteins and toxins they produce and express. Different variations
of repeats in toxin (RTX) toxins are produced from each serotype, and these are known
as ApxI, ApxII, ApxIII, and ApxIV. Serotypes 1, 5, 9 and 11 have been shown to be the
most virulent, and these, together with serotype 10, all produce ApxI, which is strongly
hemolytic and cytotoxic. These serotypes are, therefore, often causing serious outbreaks
that have high mortality and produce severe pulmonary lesions among the infected pigs
(7, 15). The remaining toxins are less associated with virulence, as ApxII is cytotoxic but
only weakly hemolytic, while ApxIII is strongly cytotoxic but not hemolytic. Finally,
ApxIV is only weakly hemolytic and cytotoxic. ApxII is produced by all serotypes
except 10 and 14, ApxIII is only produced by serotypes 2, 3, 4, 6, 8 and 15, and ApxIV is
produced by all, but only during infection. It is thus a combination of ApxI and ApxII
that results in the highest virulence (13, 14, 16, 17). It has also been demonstrated that
ApxI, ApxII and ApxIII genes are present in lung lesions, which further indicates the
importance of these toxins in the pathogenesis of porcine pleuropneumonia (18).
It is evident that the RTX toxins play a role in both the virulence and pathogenesis of
each serotype, but the surface polysaccharides they express are another important factor
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:13==
Introduction and Background
5
in the variation of virulence (4). The role of these polysaccharides will be addressed
later.
1.1.3 Treatment of A. pleuropneumoniae Infection
As with most bacterial infections, antibiotics are the main treatment against A. pleurop-
neumoniae infections, as they can effectively prevent mortality and stop the spread of
infections in herds. However, due to the risk of some strains becoming resistant to an-
tibiotics, other therapies are desired. Vaccines have been shown to be a good alternative
to this (19). There are, however, some drawbacks with the existing vaccines as they so
far are not able to prevent transmission of disease and colonization, even though they
effectively reduce the mortality and morbidity rate (2).
Traditionally, many vaccines are based on inactivated whole cells, but as this only
contains one speciﬁc serotype, these vaccines do not provide a very broad protection. It
is thus crucial to know which serotypes dominate in a speciﬁc area or herd to provide a
suitable vaccine. Otherwise, these vaccines will not be effective in preventing the spread
of disease (2, 13). Instead of inactivated vaccines, other vaccines have been developed
against A. pleuropneumoniae. These are mainly subunit vaccines consisting of ApxI, ApxII
and ApxIII and a membrane protein, but so far, it has not been possible to achieve a
complete level of protection using this type of vaccine (7, 19).
Instead, surface polysaccharides have also been shown to be suitable antigens for
vaccines. Here, both LPS and CPS can be used, as they are both present at the surface to
be easily recognized by the immune response cells of the host. In addition, they are both
involved with the virulence of the bacterium (7). It is, therefore, important to study the
characteristics and role of these polysaccharides.
1.2 Surface Polysaccharides
1.2.1 Lipopolysaccharides
As previously mentioned, the surface polysaccharides that are expressed by A. pleu-
ropneumoniae play an important role in the virulence of the bacteria. It is, therefore,
very relevant to look into these when investigating the bacteria as they can be of great
relevance in terms of, for example, diagnosis and treatment.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:14==
Introduction and Background
6
One of the surface polysaccharides that is expressed by A. pleuropneumoniae is LPS,
also known as endotoxin. LPS is generally expressed by all Gram-negative bacteria in
the outer membrane, from where it can interact with various external factors and protect
the cell from hydrophobic molecules like antibiotics. It is generally composed of three
parts: a hydrophobic part called lipid A, which provides the endotoxic function of LPS,
a core oligosaccharide that is nonrepeating and divided into an inner and outer core,
and the hydrophilic O-antigen, which consists of repeating sugar units (see Figure 1.1)
(20–22). These sugar units can generally vary a lot as they consist of 1–8 monosaccharides
and can also contain different substitutions such as acetylation and phosphorylation.
Phosphorylation is, however, not seen in LPS expressed by A. pleuropneumoniae (7, 22).
Figure 1.1: The general structure of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in Gram-negative bacteria
(23).
The complete structure of both lipid A, the core oligosaccharide and the O-antigen is
called the smooth chemotype. However, strains can also lose their O-antigen, and this is
referred to as the rough chemotype, or they can have a limited number of O-antigens,
which is called semi-rough. Serotypes 2, 4 and 7 have been identiﬁed as being smooth,
serotypes 1 and 5 as semi-rough, and serotypes 3 and 6 as rough (7). In addition, there
may be a large variation in the linear length of the O-antigen between different strains
of one serotype, meaning there will also be a variation in smooth, semi-rough and rough
LPS among a speciﬁc serotype. This has, for example, been reported in serotype 5, where
the LPS, as a result, does not only appear as semi-rough but also as smooth (24).
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:15==
Introduction and Background
7
Because of the presence of many rough-type bacteria, it is clear that the O-antigen is
not crucial for the survival of the bacteria. O-antigens are, however, highly immunogenic,
so they can be utilized to some degree in, for example, serotypic diagnosis with speciﬁc
antibodies against them. Nonetheless, this can be challenging for A. pleuropneumoniae
due to some serotypes having similar O-antigen structures, which makes it impossible
to differentiate between them (22).
Biosynthesis
As LPS consists of three separate structures; lipid A, the core oligosaccharide and the
O-antigen, this is also reﬂected in the biosynthesis of LPS. In enteric bacteria such
as E. coli and S. enterica, the genes involved in O-antigen synthesis are found in one
cluster, the wb* cluster, in which different glycosyl transferases and sugar nucleotide
synthetases are encoded. There are, however, also some genes outside this cluster that
are crucial for the synthesis of O-antigen (22). In other bacteria such as H. inﬂuenzae
the genes are distributed all over the chromosome. Labrie et al. (25) found that in A.
pleuropneumoniae, the biosynthesis of O-antigen from speciﬁcally serotype 1 is similar to
that of A. actinomycetemcomitans serotype b. A gene cluster consisting of 18 open reading
frame (ORF) has been identiﬁed, in which eleven of them are similar between the two
bacteria. Four of these genes are encoding for enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of
LPS O-antigen, and besides serotype 1, they are also shown to be present in serotypes 9
and 11, which correlates with the fact that these have similar LPS structures. In the other
serotypes, different genes are involved in the biosynthesis, as they do not express the
same O-antigen (25).
In contrast to the diversity between genes in the O-antigen biosynthesis, the biosyn-
thesis of the core oligosaccharide is more similar as this structure, in general, is more
conserved than the O-antigen is (25). Especially the inner core is very conserved, con-
sisting of 2-keto-3-deoxyoctulosonic acid and heptose residues, while the outer core can
be more variable. This is also reﬂected in the genes involved in their biosynthesis, as
these vary for the inner core between serotypes. However, all genes that are necessary
for both the inner and the outer core have been found to be located in the same locus
named waa (20, 22, 26).
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:16==
Introduction and Background
8
The Role of LPS
The different parts of LPS also constitute different roles of it, and it is thus involved in
several parts of the infection of the host. Firstly, LPS has been shown to be the major
adhesin of A. pleuropneumoniae in regards to adhering to the porcine tracheal rings, which
is crucial for the colonization of the mucosal surfaces by the bacteria. Furthermore, it
has been found that strains of A. pleuropneumoniae have different adherence to porcine
tracheal rings. Different studies have been carried out to examine which exact part
of LPS inﬂuences this adherence. In 1990, Bélanger et al. (27) found that smooth LPS
in most cases adhere much better to the tracheal rings than semi-rough LPS, which
indicates that the O-antigen is necessary for this. In that way, strains with smooth LPS
such as in serotypes 2, 4 and 7 will adhere in larger numbers than those with semi-rough
LPS. However, these serotypes with smooth LPS are known to be much less virulent
than especially serotype 1, which is semi-rough, so adherence is not necessarily the most
important factor in the virulence of A. pleuropneumoniae infection (27). In contrast, a
later study by Rioux et al. (28) showed that there was no signiﬁcant difference between
the adherence of a rough LPS mutant and the parent strain. Instead, they found the
core-lipid A region of LPS to be necessary for adherence. This was proven with a mutant
that had an inactivated galU gene, which encodes for the UTP-α-D-glucose-1-phosphate
uridylyltransferase involved in the biosynthesis of the core oligosaccharide of LPS. This
mutant showed signiﬁcantly less adherence, so this gene must, therefore, be intact for
the bacteria to adhere to the porcine respiratory tract (28).
The lipid A of LPS is the part of the LPS that provides the endotoxin activity. It
does this by activating the innate immune system through the interaction with toll-like
receptor 4, a transmembrane protein of endothelial cells and macrophages. Through
the activation of toll-like receptor 4, various inﬂammatory mediators and costimulatory
molecules are produced, which are required for the activation of the adaptive immune
system. This activation is essential for the host defense against local infections, but if the
bacteria expressing LPS is present systemically, this might lead to severe sepsis. Due to
this, the mediators and costimulatory molecules that are produced can result in septic
shock and damage of small blood vessels as well as failure of various organs (21).
Besides the effects that are provided by LPS alone, LPS can also interact with the
membrane proteins and RTX toxins in A. pleuropneumoniae. This interaction has been
found to enhance the cytotoxic activity of the bacteria. Speciﬁcally, the GalNAc-Gal
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:17==
Introduction and Background
9
II-Gal I trisaccharide of the outer core oligosaccharide is crucial for the interaction with
RTX toxins ApxI and ApxII. In a mutant without this region of the outer core, the LPS
will not interact as much with ApxI and ApxII, and as a result, its cytotoxicity will also be
reduced (26). Because of the importance of LPS in adherence to the porcine respiratory
tract in addition to the ability to interact with the RTX toxins, LPS might be a possible
vaccine candidate.
1.2.2 Capsular Polysaccharides
As previously mentioned, the serotype speciﬁcity of A. pleuropneumoniae is determined
by the type of CPS that is produced by each serotype. As the name suggests, CPS makes
up the capsule that surrounds the bacterial cell and thus protects it from host defenses.
CPS consists of repeating oligosaccharide units that, in some serotypes, also contain
phosphate bonds or are polymers of teichoic acid joined by phosphate diester bonds.
Because of the presence of phosphate, the capsule is often negatively charged, which can
also be the case if they contain carboxylic acid residues. Additionally, the CPS may also
be O-acetylated in various degrees (7). The layer of CPS can have a thickness between
80-230 nm in A. pleuropneumoniae, which depends on the serotype (29).
Biosynthesis
The biosynthesis and export of A. pleuropneumoniae CPS have been studied, and it has
been found that the genes involved are organized in a similar way to other bacteria
such as H. inﬂuenzae type b. Here, the genes that are involved in the biosynthesis are
surrounded by those encoding for CPS export. There is generally a bit of variance
between the genes encoding for biosynthetic enzymes, as these are serotype-speciﬁc,
but the genes involved in export are well-conserved (15, 30). Four ORFs for CPS export
have been identiﬁed, which are named cpxDCBA. Of these, the proteins CpxC, CpxB and
CpxA are thought to be involved in the export across the cytoplasmic membrane as part
of ATP-binding cassette transporters. CpxD is, however, an outer membrane lipoprotein
that is involved in transporting CPS across the outer membrane (29). Besides this, genes
involved in the biosynthesis of CPS from A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 5a have also
been identiﬁed. These are named cps5A, cps5B, cps5C, and cps5D. Interestingly, only low
homology was found between the encoded proteins Cps5A, Cps5B and Cps5C and many
glycosyltransferases that are needed for the biosynthesis of LPS or CPS. Cps5D, however,
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:18==
Introduction and Background
10
shows a lot of similarities with KdsA proteins from other Gram-negative bacteria. KdsA
is normally involved in LPS biosynthesis and cell growth, but once the cell growth has
stopped or slowed, the protein might be able to help in the biosynthesis of serotype 5a
CPS (31).
The Role of CPS
While LPS has an important role in the virulence of A. pleuropneumoniae, it is not serotype-
speciﬁc, so it cannot fully explain the difference in virulence between serotypes. As
previously described, RTX toxins expressed by the bacteria are also an important factor,
but even though serotypes express the same toxin pattern, they do not necessarily have
the same virulence. This is, for example, the case with serotypes 2 and 6, where serotype
6 is considered to be the least virulent serotype, while 2 has been found to be very
pathogenic in some areas of Europe (15). The role of CPS may therefore be important to
explain the differences in virulence further.
The main role of CPS is to mask the bacteria from the immune cells of the host.
This masking is achieved by, for example, inhibiting complement, which is otherwise
activated by LPS. Inzana et al. (32) have also found that the capsule of A. pleuropneumo-
niae serotype 5 provides resistance to bactericidal antibodies and complement and thus
cannot be opsonized or phagocytosed. A nonencapsulated mutant of serotype 5 is, how-
ever, able to both activate and be killed by the alternative complement pathway without
the need for antibodies. The capsule is, therefore, highly important for protecting the
bacteria and allowing bacterial invasion of the host (32). Furthermore, nonencapsulated
mutants have been shown to not cause lung lesions or other symptoms in pigs, even
at very high doses. This might make nonencapsulated A. pleuropneumoniae mutants a
suitable candidate for live vaccines as it provides a protective immunity without causing
clinical symptoms (33).
In relation to this, the expression of the capsule leads to reduced adherence to
the host cells. The adherence also depends on the thickness of the capsule layer, as A.
pleuropneumoniae strains containing a thick layer seem to have a lower afﬁnity towards
porcine respiratory mucus. Meanwhile, strains with a higher afﬁnity towards the
respiratory mucus are more likely to be trapped and removed with the mucus and
will, therefore, not reach epithelial cells from where the virulence is expressed. A.
pleuropneumoniae strains with a thick layer of CPS are thus more virulent than those with
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:19==
Introduction and Background
11
a thinner layer (29, 34). In addition, Bandara et al. (15) have also found that the amount
of CPS produced by a strain highly affects the virulence regardless of the serotype that
the CPS is derived from. In that way, strains that produce a higher amount of CPS also
seem to be more virulent, but there is also a difference in virulence between the type of
CPS that is produced (15).
It is clear that the role of CPS is much different than that of LPS, as it is more related
to protecting the bacteria against host defenses instead of causing an actual infection in
the host. Because of this, both types of polysaccharides are necessary for an infection to
be established in the pig.
1.3 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
For the analysis of the surface polysaccharides expressed by A. pleuropneumoniae, several
methods can be used. One of these is nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), which is a
popular and powerful method for structure analysis of chemical compounds. In brief,
NMR builds on the magnetic properties of the atomic nucleus, where each nucleus
has spin, and when they interact with an external magnetic ﬁeld, they will be aligned
according to their energy state. Here, the nuclei resonate at speciﬁc frequencies that
can be used to differentiate between them. The absorption of energy can be detected
and converted into an NMR spectra in the form of a resonance signal. The height of
this signal correlates to the number of nuclei that resonate at the same frequency. The
frequency, however, depends on the molecular structure like the neighboring atoms.
Instead of frequency, chemical shift is usually used in practice, and this a relative unit
measured in ppm. Like frequency, it gives information about the environment of the
nucleus in focus. For NMR mostly 1H and 13C are measured, but other isotopes are also
possible if they have spin, which especially include 31P, 15N and 19F (35).
Several experiments of NMR have been developed which record different infor-
mation from the nuclei. These include the simple one-dimensional NMR like 1H and
13C NMR, which show the resonance signals at speciﬁc chemical shifts for all nuclei
in the molecule. Besides this, there are also several two-dimensional NMR methods
like heteronuclear single quantum coherence (HSQC), homonuclear correlation spec-
troscopy (COSY) and heteronuclear multiple bond correlation (HMBC). Of these, HSQC
provides information about one bond proton-carbon correlations, COSY records the
spin-spin coupling, and thus provides information about which protons are next to
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:20==
Introduction and Background
12
each other, while HMBC shows the long-range coupling of 2–4 bonds between proton
and carbon nuclei (36). By combining methods like these, enough information can be
obtained to deﬁne the structure of a compound like, for example, a carbohydrate.
1.4 The Project
Because of the important roles of LPS and CPS in the infection with A. pleuropneumoniae,
they can be utilized for the diagnosis and treatment of the infection. For an optimal
treatment, the speciﬁc serotype that has infected each pig should be known and treated
speciﬁcally. As CPS is highly serotype-speciﬁc, it can be an important tool for this.
Based on this, it is necessary to develop methods that can extract and purify these
surface polysaccharides efﬁciently that can also be applied to a larger scale. The aim of
this project is, therefore, to develop optimized methods for extraction and puriﬁcation of
LPS and CPS expressed by A. pleuropneumoniae serotypes 1, 9 and 11. Successful methods
for extracting LPS from A. pleuropneumoniae have already been developed and used for
many years, but there is still a need for methods that can purify CPS. Because CPS is
more serotype-speciﬁc than LPS, developing methods for extracting and purifying CPS
in high yields is very relevant. Methods for the extraction and puriﬁcation of both LPS
and CPS will be researched and tested based on a literature review.
The obtained surface polysaccharides will be characterized by different NMR
experiments to both investigate their purity and characterize their structures while
comparing it to what has already been presented in the literature.
Finally, serological tests will be performed using the puriﬁed CPS for each A.
pleuropneumoniae serotype 1, 9 and 11 to examine the effect of them on various sera
isolated from infected pigs. This can both show if any cross-reactions occur and whether
the CPS has been sufﬁciently puriﬁed from LPS. For this, an indirect enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) will be carried out using different types of sera.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:21==
Materials and Methods
13
2 Materials and Methods
2.1 Bacterial Strains and Growth Conditions
A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 (strain 4074), 9 (strain 13261) and 11 (strain 56153) were
grown on chocolate agar plates incubated for 24 h at 37 °C followed by incubation on
pleuropneumonia-like organism agar plates for 24 h at 37 °C. 6 L fermentation medium
was produced by dissolving 109 g casamino acids, 85 g yeast, 15 g sodium chloride and
3.0 g potassium dihydrogen phosphate in 5.3 L demineralized water, separately from
a glucose solution (67 g D-(+)-glucose monohydrate in 700 mL demineralized water).
Both solutions were autoclaved. Just before inoculation they were combined and 23 mL
10% NAD together with 18 mL 1.0% cystein were added to the medium. Each strain was
inoculated in two 2 L Erlenmeyer ﬂasks containing 1 L fermentation medium each, and
incubated for 24 h at 37 °C with shaking. The cells were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 1
h at 4 °C in JA-10 rotor, followed by resuspension of the pellet in 20 mL Milli-Q water
and centrifugation at 4,000 rpm for 30 min at 4 °C in JA-25.50 rotor. This yielded ∼4 g
wet weight/L of serotype 1 and 9 and ∼3 g of serotype 11.
2.2 LPS Extraction and Puriﬁcation
4.0 g of wet A. pleuropneumoniae cells suspended in 20 mL Milli-Q water were treated
with 20 mL water-saturated phenol during thorough mixing. The mixture was then
heated at 65 °C in a water bath for 1 h with continued thorough mixing using a magnetic
stirrer. The mixture was allowed to cool on ice for 15 min and was then centrifuged at
10,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C in JA-25.50 rotor. The phenol and aqueous phase were
separated, and the aqueous phase was then extracted twice with phenol. 20 mL phenol
was added to the aqueous phase, and the solution was mixed vigorously for 30 min,
followed by centrifugation like before. This procedure was repeated one more time.
The aqueous phase was dialyzed in a dialysis tube (SERVAPOR®, MWCO 12,000
- 14,000, regenerated cellulose, diameter 16 mm) against demineralized water in a 5 L
ﬂask overnight changing the water 5 times. The dialyzed solutions were treated with 1
µL/mL 20% MgCl2 ·6H2O, 40 µg/mL RNase A and 20 µg/mL DNase I and incubated
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:22==
Materials and Methods
14
at 37 °C for 3 h. 100 µg/mL proteinase K was then added and the mixture was incubated
at 45 °C for 6 h, and then cooled down in the fridge overnight.
Finally, the samples were ultracentrifuged at 25,000 rpm for 23 h in an Optima XE90
Ultracentrifuge, Beckman Coulter Inc. using a SW 28 rotor. The supernatant containing
CPS was decanted into a 50 mL NUNC centrifuge tube for further puriﬁcation. The
precipitated LPS gel was dissolved in 1 mL Milli-Q water for at least 2 h until it could be
transferred to a clean tube and was then lyophilized to yield ∼15 mg LPS. The structure
was conﬁrmed by NMR.
2.3 CPS Puriﬁcation
2.3.1 Acetone Precipitation
The supernatant obtained from ultracentrifugation was treated with 6 volumes of cold
acetone and kept at -18 °C for 1 h followed by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 2 h at 4
°C in JA-10 rotor to precipitate the CPS as a white powder. The acetone was decanted to
collect the CPS, which was then dissolved in MilliQ-water and lyophilized to be puriﬁed
by Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration.
2.3.2 Sephadex G-50 Gel Filtration
The supernatant obtained from the previous ultracentrifugation was lyophilized to yield
a light brown powder. The dry supernatant from each serotype or the obtained CPS
from acetone precipitation was dissolved in 500 µL Milli-Q water and then puriﬁed
using Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration in a column of 1 × 18 cm. For this, 5 g Sephadex G-50
resin was swollen in 80 mL Milli-Q water at 5 °C overnight and then transferred to three
columns. 0.1 M sodium chloride in Milli-Q water was used as the eluent and the pump
used ensured a rate through the system of 1 mL eluent per 1.5 min. Fractions of 1 mL
were collected and thin-layer chromatography (TLC) plates stained with 8% sulfuric
acid in ethanol and burnt was used to conﬁrm the presence of polysaccharides. CPS
came out in fraction 5-9 and these fractions were then dialyzed against 1 L Milli-Q water
overnight changing the dialysate twice. The dialyzed CPS was then lyophilized to yield
a white powder that was redissolved in D2O to be analyzed on NMR.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:23==
Materials and Methods
15
2.3.3 Puriﬁcation with Polymyxin B
Following gel ﬁltration, the CPS was further puriﬁed with gravity-ﬂow chromatography
using a 1 mL Polymyxin B column (EndotoxinOUT™Resin, G-Biosciences). Before use,
the resin was allowed to settle for 30 min and then washed with 5 mL regeneration
buffer followed by 5 mL endotoxin-free water. The sample in 0.5 mL D2O was added
to the column and incubated for about 40 min. The sample was eluted using 1 mL of
endotoxin-free water which was repeated 3 times. The presence of sugars in the collected
fractions was checked by TLC staining with 8% sulfuric acid in ethanol, and fraction 1
and 2 were collected. These were lyophilized to yield a white powder, but NMR showed
that the obtained product was not pure.
2.3.4 Puriﬁcation with Cetyltrimethylammonium Bromide
20 mL of old preparations of supernatant from ultracentrifugation for serotype 1 (strain
4074) and 9 (strain 0862) not produced in this project, were treated with 0.07 g of sodium
chloride to obtain a 0.06M NaCl solution. 1% cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (0.02
g) was then added to precipitate the polysaccharide as a salt. This was obtained by
centrifugation at 20,000 rpm for 30 min (JA-25.50 rotor). The precipitated salt was
resuspended in 20 mL 95% ethanol of 1M NaCl (1.17 g) and then centrifuged at 20,000
rpm for 10 min. The reprecipitated material was dissolved in 20 mL Milli-Q water and
dialyzed against 5 L demineralized water for 5 days changing the dialysate 5 times.
It was lyophilized and redissolved in 600 µL Milli-Q water, and then pure CPS was
obtained by Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration with 0.1M NaCl as buffer. The presence of
carbohydrate in the collected fractions were conﬁrmed by TLC plates stained with 8%
sulfuric acid in ethanol and burnt. They were then dialyzed against 1 L Milli-Q water
overnight and lyophilized to yield a white powder that was analyzed with NMR.
2.4 Indirect ELISA
The 96-well microtiter plate (PolySorp 475094, Nalge Nunc International, Roskilde,
Denmark) was coated with 50 µL of the puriﬁed CPS diluted in phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) Milli-Q. The optimal concentration was determined by checkerboard titra-
tion. The plate was incubated at 4 °C for at least overnight. Excess liquid was removed
from the plate and it was then blocked with 150 µL PBS with 0.05% Tween 20 (T) and
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:24==
Materials and Methods
16
1% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 30 min at room temperature. Afterwards, it was
washed 3 times with PBS + T using a Nunc-Immuno Wash 12. Sera obtained from A.
pleuropneumoniae infected pigs were diluted in PBS + T + BSA + 0.5M NaCl in two-fold
serial dilutions and 100 µL was added to each well. It was incubated for 1.5 h at room
temperature and then the plate was washed 4 times with PBS + T. The plate was then
treated with 100 µL peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-swine immunoglobulin (Kirkegaard
& Perry, KPL. Gaithersburg, MD) diluted 1:8000 in PBS + T + BSA and incubated for 1
h at room temperature. The plate was washed 4 times with PBS + T and then 100 µL
3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB One, Kementec Solutions, Taastrup, Denmark) was
added and allowed to react for 15 min after which the reaction was stopped with 100 µL
0.5M H2SO4. The optical density (OD) was measured on an ELISA-reader at 450 nm.
2.5 NMR Spectroscopy
All NMR spectra were recorded on either a Bruker AVANCE 800 MHz system with a
TCI CryoProbe or Bruker AVANCE 400 MHz system with a CryoProbe Prodigy. All
spectra were recorded at either 298, 303 or 313 K. For all measurements, 0.5 mL D2O was
used as solvent and the chemical shifts were referenced to an internal acetone standard
(1H, 2.225 ppm; 13C, 31.07 ppm).
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:25==
Results and Discussion
17
3 Results and Discussion
3.1 Phenol Extraction
Effective methods for purifying LPS from Gram-negative bacteria have been known for
decades, and one of the most common methods for this is phenol-water extraction. This
method was therefore also used in this project, as it has proven its worth in multiple
studies (6, 24, 37–39). The principle behind this extraction is that the bacterial cells are
treated with hot phenol, which leads to lysis of the cells that make them expose their
contents. Because of the difference in polarity of water and phenol, the polysaccharides
can be separated from the other contents of the bacteria. In that way, nucleic acids and
proteins will precipitate in the phenol phase following centrifugation, while carbohy-
drates are obtained in the aqueous phase (39). Through repeated extractions of the
aqueous phase with phenol, the carbohydrates are puriﬁed even more to remove any
remaining proteins and nucleic acids. After the last centrifugation, the aqueous phase
is dialyzed against demineralized water to get rid of all small molecules such as any
phenol residues and salts.
3.1.1 Treatment With Enzymes
After dialysis, the samples were treated with RNase A and DNase I, and afterwards with
proteinase K, similarly to the procedure described by MacLean et al. 2004 (6). These
enzymes are added to degrade all protein and nucleic acids that could still contaminate
the samples after extraction. It is especially important to remove any proteins such as
RTX toxins and outer membrane proteins that are present in multiple serotypes, as these
could participate in the cross-reactivity between the three researched A. pleuropneumoniae
serotypes; 1, 9 and 11. When the samples are fully puriﬁed, the cross-reactivity can be
tested only regarding LPS and CPS and not the common proteins. For this analysis,
serological tests will be used, which is explained in Section 3.3.
Besides DNase, RNAse and proteinase K, magnesium ions are also added in the
form of magnesium chloride hexahydrate. It is important to add magnesium ions as
the samples are dissolved in Milli-Q water which is ultrapure and thus free of all ions.
However, especially DNase requires Mg2+ to hydrolyze double-stranded DNA, so if it is
not present in the surrounding environment, some of the magnesium ions contained in
the enzyme will diffuse out, inhibiting the function of the enzyme. Additionally, it has
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:26==
Results and Discussion
18
been found that sodium chloride inhibits the activity of DNase, which underlines the
importance of dialysis before treating the samples with enzymes (40).
The amount of enzymes and magnesium chloride used was determined according
to Rezania et al. 2011 (41) who has described a similar extraction of LPS from E. coli and
Salmonella typhi. 20 µg/ml DNase I, 40 µg/ml RNase A and 100 µg/ml proteinase K
were therefore used in addition to 1 µg/ml 20% magnesium chloride hexahydrate (41).
The samples were ﬁrst incubated with RNase and DNase for 3 hours at 37 °C followed
by proteinase K for 6 hours at 45 °C. The proteinase K was added last to ensure that it
did not degrade the other enzymes before they had carried out their function.
3.1.2 LPS Puriﬁcation
Following the treatment with enzymes to eliminate all contaminating compounds that
can promote the cross-reactivity seen between serotypes 1, 9 and 11, the samples were
subjected to ultracentrifugation. Ultracentrifugation was carried out to separate LPS
from CPS, where LPS will be obtained as a precipitated, clear gel, while CPS is present
in the supernatant requiring further puriﬁcation. The LPS gel was dissolved in water for
a few hours and then lyophilized to yield a white powder, which was analyzed by NMR
(see Figure 3.1).
Figure 3.1: 1H NMR spectra of LPS extracted from A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 (blue),
9 (red) and 11 (green) by phenol extraction followed by ultracentrifugation.
NMR has multiple uses at it both provides information about the purity of the sample
and is also an excellent tool in determining the structure of small and larger molecules.
By the 1H NMR recorded for the three extracted LPS samples, it is clear that the structures
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:27==
Results and Discussion
19
of serotypes 1 and 11 LPS are identical. The only difference between these two spectra
is among the smallest peaks originating from impurities of the different CPS these two
serotypes express. Because the spectra do not only show peaks belonging to LPS, it can
be concluded that LPS has not been fully puriﬁed. However, as the LPS structure is
similar between the examined serotypes, it is not important that they are pure since it will
show cross-reactivity anyway. Using LPS as the antigen for diagnosis will only conﬁrm
that the pig has been infected with either of the serotypes 1, 9 or 11, but not which one
speciﬁcally. On the other hand, pure CPS will make it possible to distinguish between
the three serotypes in serological tests, and it is thus crucial that CPS is completely
puriﬁed and free of LPS.
The spectrum obtained for serotype 9 LPS is a lot more different from that of the
other two serotypes. This can both be due to a higher ratio of CPS in the sample or
because the LPS structures are not completely identical. The structures of the LPS O-
antigens have already been presented in the literature (7, 38, 42), see Figure 3.2. While
the LPS of these three serotypes contain the same monomers, serotype 9 has a smaller
ratio of N-acetylglucosamine, which is ultimately what makes the spectra of this LPS
differ from the other two. This small difference in structure does, however, not inﬂuence
the cross-reactivity between the three serotypes as the structures are still similar enough
for antibodies to bind to all of them (10).
Figure 3.2: The structures of LPS O-antigen from A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1, 9 and
11. Figure adapted from Dubreil et al. 2020 (7).
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:28==
Results and Discussion
20
3.1.3 Characterization of LPS
The structures of the O-antigen from A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1, 9 and 11 have
previously been reported by Altman et al. 1986 (42) and Beynon et al. 1992 (38). They
were found to consist of branched tetrasaccharide repeating units, where serotype 9 LPS
O-antigen, as mentioned above, is only partially substituted with N-acetylglucosamine
residues on the backbone. The structures for serotypes 1 and 11 are, however, identical.
To conﬁrm that the LPS obtained by phenol extraction and ultracentrifugation has the
same structure as what has been reported, multiple NMR experiments were recorded
for serotype 1 LPS at 800 MHz. NMR data for serotype 9 and 11 LPS were only acquired
at 400 MHz, and the heteronuclear single quantum coherence (HSQC) of these can be
found in Appendices A.1 and A.2.
By 1H NMR, three anomeric protons were identiﬁed at 5.07, 4.98 and 4.92 ppm
(see Figure 3.3). However, a fourth anomeric position could be identiﬁed in HSQC at
4.69 ppm (see Figure 3.4). This peak is not visible in the proton spectra due to a major,
overlapping water peak. The LPS O-antigen is, therefore, found to consist of repeating
tetrasaccharide units. In the anomeric region around 4.5 – 5.5 ppm, two smaller peaks
are also seen, which belong to contaminating serotype 1 CPS, indicating that the LPS is
not completely pure. Besides the anomeric positions, two doublets at 1.32 (3H) and 1.30
ppm (3H) were identiﬁed as two terminal methyl groups of rhamnose. Additionally,
another methyl peak at 2.03 ppm could be seen, which belongs to an N-acetyl group.
These signiﬁcant peaks can be seen on Figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: 1H NMR spectra of the puriﬁed LPS O-antigen from A. pleuropneumoniae
serotype 1. The most signiﬁcant peaks i.e. the anomeric protons and methyl
groups have been assigned.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:29==
Results and Discussion
21
To determine the structure of each of the four monomers, different 2D NMR methods
were used, which include HSQC, double quantum ﬁltered correlation spectroscopy
(DQF-COSY), total correlation spectroscopy (TOCSY), heteronuclear two bond corre-
lation (H2BC) and heteronuclear multiple bond correlation (HMBC). Through a com-
bination of these methods, peaks belonging to neighboring nuclei can be determined,
and in that way, the entire structure of each monomer can be deﬁned. For example, by
starting from an anomeric proton, H2BC will indicate which peak belongs to position 2
of the sugar, and from this, each position can be assigned a peak in the NMR spectra. In
that way, it could be determined that the O-antigen consists of two rhamnose (A and
C), one glucose (B) and one N-acetylglucosamine residue (D), which was also found by
Altman et al. (42). Characteristic peaks of the rhamnose residues include the methyl
peaks appearing as doublets at around 1.3 ppm as previously mentioned, while the
third methyl peak identiﬁed at 2.03 ppm belongs to the N-acetylglucosamine. Due to
the N-acetylation at C-2, this carbon will be much more upﬁeld at 56.7 ppm than the
remaining positions with hydroxyl groups. The H-2 is, however, not majorly affected.
Generally, position 2 – 5 of carbohydrates are found at 3.0 – 4.3/70 – 80 ppm, depending
on the conﬁguration and substitutions, while C-6 is usually more upﬁeld at around 60 –
70 ppm. This region is also where the peaks from the glucose are located. The assigned
proton and carbon chemical shifts of each position in the O-antigen are seen in Table 3.1,
and the HSQC spectra can be seen in Figure 3.4.
Once the structure of each monomer has been determined, the linkages between
them can be found. For this, HMBC is highly useful as it provides information about
correlations over multiple bonds. In that way, the positions with a link to the next
monomer will show a peak from a different monomer in HMBC and not just from
positions within the same sugar. It was found that A1 sees 4.06/79.1 ppm (C2), C1 sees
3.97 and 3.91/67.3 ppm (B6), B1 sees 4.27/76.9 ppm (A2) and ﬁnally, D1 sees 3.94/79.1
ppm (A3). Therefore, the rhamnose designated A has three substituents, which is also
clear when looking at the chemical shifts of this sugar. Because of the glycosidic linkages
to other monomers, the linked positions will be downﬁeld compared to the non-linked
equivalents. A2 is thus found at 4.27 ppm instead of 3.92 - the chemical shift in a
rhamnose monosaccharide - while A3 is at 3.94 ppm instead of 3.81 (43). The same effect
is seen on the other sugar residues.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:30==
Results and Discussion
22
After determining the positions of the linkages in the polysaccharide, only the
anomeric conﬁguration is left to be determined. J-coupling is a useful tool for this as
it provides information about the distance and angle of bonds. 3JH1,H2-coupling can,
for example, be obtained from proton spectra; however, all the visible anomeric peaks
appeared as singlets which means the J-coupling is very low. Only B1 is a broad singlet,
which can indicate that the J-coupling is a higher value, but it cannot be measured.
Low J-couplings are seen when the neighboring protons are both equatorial or are
equatorial-axial (44). By comparing with the literature (42), it was conﬁrmed that both
rhamnose residues A and C are in α-conﬁguration as the protons are both equatorial,
while the glucose residue, B, is also in α-conﬁguration with the protons being equatorial-
axial. The N-acetylglucosamine D is, however, a β-anomer. For sugars like glucose
and N-acetylglucosamine, the chemical shift of the anomeric proton can also indicate
the anomeric conﬁguration. Generally, α-anomeric protons are more downﬁeld than
β-anomeric protons. Thus, when comparing the measured chemical shifts to reference
data from monosaccharides, D1 appears to be more upﬁeld, indicating that the N-
acetylglucosamine, D, is a β-anomer, while B1 is more downﬁeld and thus an α-anomer
(43). To conﬁrm the anomeric conﬁgurations reported in the literature, one could also
look at the 1JH1,C1-coupling through CLIP-HSQC or at the nuclear Overhauser effect, but
these experiments were not carried out in this project.
Table 3.1: 1H and 13C chemical shifts for the O-antigen of A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1,
which is identical to serotype 11 and similar to serotype 9.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:31==
Results and Discussion
23
Figure 3.4: HSQC of the LPS O-antigen from A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1.
The structure of the A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 LPS O-antigen has thus been deter-
mined and is identical to what has previously been published (see Figure 3.2). All the
assigned peaks can be compared between the published structural characterization and
the data obtained in this project. Generally, the data is highly similar to the published
work but with a couple of varying peaks. For example, Altman et al. (42) have assigned
the peak 4.27/76.9 ppm to B5 and 4.31/71.2 to A2, but in this project, the opposite
carbon chemical shifts were found. The same is the case for A4 and B4, which were
assigned 3.567/70.1 ppm and 3.754/72.4 ppm, respectively, by Altman et al. However,
through different 2D NMR methods, it was found that only the proton chemical shifts
corresponded with the measured NMR data. In H2BC, a clear correlation from the peak
here identiﬁed as A2-H to both A1-C and A3-C is seen, while B5-H shows correlations to
B4-C. Additionally, A2-H shows a correlation with B1-C in HMBC, where B1-H also sees
B5-C. In HSQC-TOCSY, which provides information about correlations in the entire spin
system, A2-H shows correlations with A4-C and A5-C in addition to A1-C and A3-C,
while B5-H sees B1-C, B2-C, B3-C, and B4-C. This conﬁrms that a change in the assigned
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:32==
Results and Discussion
24
peaks for A2 and B4 should be made in comparison to what was reported by Altman et
al.
The same analysis can be carried out for the peaks identiﬁed here as A4 and B4. In
H2BC, correlations from A4-C to A3-H and A5-H are seen, in addition to B4-C seeing
B3-H and B5-H. In HMBC and HSQC-TOCSY, however, no other correlations are found,
but the information gained from H2BC is also sufﬁcient for concluding that the assigned
peaks of A4 and B4 are different than what is reported in the literature. The remaining
structural characterization was, however, identical.
3.2 CPS Puriﬁcation
3.2.1 Acetone Precipitation and Gel Filtration
Now that LPS has been successfully puriﬁed and its structure has been conﬁrmed in
regards to the characterization that has previously been described in the literature,
CPS should be puriﬁed. Firstly, the supernatant obtained from ultracentrifugation was
characterized by NMR (see Appendices A.3 to A.5). The supernatant was found to
contain a mixture of both LPS and CPS in addition to other impurities such as proteins
that are assumed to be residues of the proteinase K that was previously added. In 1H
NMR, the presence of these proteins can be seen in the aromatic region around 7 – 9
ppm, as the polysaccharides do not contain any protons that are this downﬁeld, while
proteins usually do.
Puriﬁcation of CPS is necessary to both get rid of these proteins and separate the
CPS from LPS. This is crucial for serological analyses, as LPS would cause cross-reactions
making it difﬁcult to determine the speciﬁc serotype a pig has been infected with.
Existing studies were researched to determine how the CPS should be further
puriﬁed. MacLean et al. 2004 (6) have previously described a method for purifying
and characterizing LPS and CPS from A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 13. They treated the
supernatant with cold acetone to precipitate the CPS with centrifugation, followed by gel
ﬁltration with Sephadex G-50 to yield a pure CPS. This procedure was, therefore, carried
out on one half of the obtained serotype 1 supernatant to test the method. The product
obtained from gel ﬁltration was analyzed by NMR using D2O as solvent and acetone as
a reference standard (1H, 2.225 ppm; 13C, 31.07 ppm). The proton spectrum of this can
be seen in Figure 3.5 and the HSQC in Appendix A.6. These show that all the protein
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:33==
Results and Discussion
25
impurities had successfully been removed and that there was only a small amount of
LPS left in the sample. However, this also means that the CPS is not completely pure.
To test the importance of the acetone precipitation, the second half of the serotype 1
supernatant was puriﬁed by only Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration without treating it with
acetone ﬁrst. When carrying out the gel ﬁltration, 1 mL fractions were collected, and
the presence of product in these was tested on TLC plates. TLC is a common method
for determining the mixture of products in a sample as it is very fast. Normally, both a
stationary (TLC plate made of, for example, silica gel) and a mobile phase (a solvent) are
used, making it possible to separate the different compounds in regards to their polarity.
Here, only the stationary phase is used as the purpose is just to conﬁrm whether any
product is present. Each collected fraction is sampled on a silica gel plate, and this is
then stained with an 8% sulfuric acid in ethanol mixture and burnt, which allows the
visualization of multiple compounds, including carbohydrates. If the tested fraction
contains any CPS, a dark spot will be visible, making this a very simple method for
determining which fractions from the gel ﬁltration should be obtained.
After gel ﬁltration, the obtained fractions were lyophilized and dissolved in D2O to
be analyzed by NMR. By doing this, the NMR of each of the puriﬁed serotype 1 CPS
samples could be compared (see Figure 3.5). The HSQC of the CPS only puriﬁed by
gel ﬁltration can be seen in Appendix A.7. The two puriﬁed CPS samples’ spectra are
almost identical, containing the same small amount of LPS but with no other impurities.
It was, therefore, concluded that the puriﬁcation does not require the additional step
of acetone precipitation, as Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration is sufﬁcient in removing the
impurities alone. The supernatants from serotypes 9 and 11 were, thus, only puriﬁed
using gel ﬁltration.
When the gel ﬁltration was completed for serotype 9 and 11 CPS, the collected
fractions were dialyzed overnight, lyophilized, and then analyzed by NMR similarly to
serotype 1. For serotype 1, both the procedure with and without acetone precipitation
yielded CPS as conﬁrmed by NMR. However, as mentioned before, there was still a small
LPS residue present in the sample. This is especially clear when looking at the anomeric
protons of the carbohydrates, which are found at around 4.5 – 5.5 ppm. Serotype 1 CPS
consists of repeating N-acetylglucosamine and galactose units (45), and there should,
therefore, only be two peaks present in this region. Two major peaks are found at 5.57
and 4.73 ppm (see Figure 3.5), which belong to galactose and N-acetylglucosamine,
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:34==
Results and Discussion
26
respectively. However, some minor peaks are also present in this region at 5.07, 4.98,
and 4.92 ppm, and these belong to LPS as previously presented. Therefore, it can be
concluded that the puriﬁcation has not removed all the LPS, but there is still a majority
of CPS in the sample. To examine whether the slight presence of LPS affects the CPS as
antigen for different sera from infected pigs, an ELISA was carried out, which will be
explained in Section 3.3.2.
Figure 3.5: 1H NMR spectra of puriﬁed A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 surface
polysaccharides. Green: LPS obtained by phenol extraction and
ultracentrifugation, Red: CPS puriﬁed by acetone precipitation followed by
Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration, Blue: CPS puriﬁed without acetone
precipitation, but only Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration.
Once it had been conﬁrmed that the CPS puriﬁcation was very promising for serotype 1,
it was repeated for all serotype 9 and 11 samples. Surprisingly, this gave a completely
different result. Whereas the serotype 1 CPS had become mostly pure but with a small
presence of LPS, the samples acquired from both serotypes 9 and 11 showed to be a
complete mixture of LPS and CPS. The 1H NMR spectra of these CPS samples were then
shown to be identical to that of the LPS isolated by ultracentrifugation (see Figure 3.6 and
3.7). Since the same procedure was used for all three serotypes, it is difﬁcult to explain
why such a big difference was seen in the ratio of polysaccharides. One explanation
could be that serotypes 9 and 11 simply express less CPS than LPS compared to serotype
1, and there will therefore also be less CPS present in these samples. Based on these
results, it can be concluded that gel ﬁltration alone or in combination with acetone
precipitation is not sufﬁcient in removing LPS from CPS samples. It does, however,
remove the protein residues that are also unwanted.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:35==
Results and Discussion
27
Figure 3.6: 1H NMR spectra of puriﬁed A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 9 surface
polysaccharides. Red: LPS obtained by phenol extraction and
ultracentrifugation, Blue: CPS puriﬁed by just Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration.
Figure 3.7: 1H NMR spectra of puriﬁed A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 11 surface
polysaccharides. Red: LPS obtained by phenol extraction and
ultracentrifugation, Blue: CPS puriﬁed by just Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration.
3.2.2 Puriﬁcation with Polymyxin B
As the ﬁrst tested method for purifying CPS did not prove successful for all three
serotypes, a different approach was sought. Since the problem with the sample is that
it contains a mixture of CPS and LPS, a method should be found which speciﬁcally
can separate these two. This brought attention to polymyxin B. Polymyxin B is a
cyclic, lipophilic peptide antibiotic that binds to the lipid A part of LPS with high afﬁnity.
Because of this, it has also been frequently used for removing LPS from different solutions
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:36==
Results and Discussion
28
with afﬁnity chromatography (46). This has, however, mainly been used for protein
and nucleic acid solutions, and no information about its efﬁciency in carbohydrate
solutions could be found. Nonetheless, it was tested on all samples using a 1 mL column
consisting of polymyxin B sulfate linked to 6% cross-linked agarose (EndotoxinOUT™
Kit, G-Biosciences), which can remove 99.95% of endotoxins from samples (47). The
samples were run through this column by gravity ﬂow chromatography with endotoxin-
free water as a buffer. The collected fractions were stained on TLC plates with 8% sulfuric
acid in ethanol to conﬁrm the presence of carbohydrates. The fractions containing
carbohydrates were lyophilized, and a 1H NMR spectrum was obtained for each of
these to examine the efﬁciency in removing LPS. Unfortunately, this method resulted in
a very impure CPS product which, in addition to not being separated from LPS, also
did not have any CPS present in the sample for serotype 1. Instead, the samples now
contained a major, unknown impurity present in the region 1 – 2 ppm. These NMR
spectra can be found in Appendices A.8 to A.10. Based on these results, it was concluded
that polymyxin B was not a good solution for purifying CPS, even though it seemed
promising.
3.2.3 Puriﬁcation with CTAB
So far, all methods that have been tested for purifying CPS in this project have not been
successful, and the literature was, therefore, researched once more. It was found that
several studies have been using cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) for CPS
puriﬁcation (45, 48, 49). CTAB is a bromide salt with several uses, including precipitation
of nucleic acids and polysaccharides depending on the ionic strength, as they will have
different solubilities in CTAB in varying concentrations of NaCl. Hungerer et al. 1967 (48)
have described a method for purifying acidic polysaccharides from E. coli. After phenol
extraction and ultracentrifugation, nucleic acids could be precipitated by 1% CTAB from
the supernatant in 0.25M NaCl. The precipitate could then be removed by centrifugation.
However, this step was circumvented in this project by having treated the samples
with RNase and DNase. Instead, the supernatant was brought to a concentration of
0.06M NaCl to precipitate the CPS as a CTAB salt, which could then be isolated by
centrifugation. Hereafter, it was converted to the sodium salt, which was precipitated
in an ethanol solution of 1M NaCl, centrifuged, dialyzed, and lyophilized to obtain the
pure CPS (48). Because the concentration of NaCl was very high in the sample, it was
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:37==
Results and Discussion
29
dialyzed for several days to allow the full removal of salt as this can otherwise affect the
NMR by reducing the sensitivity (50). However, the white color of the sample diluted in
water indicated that the salt had not been fully removed. To purify the CPS even further,
the lyophilized product was puriﬁed with Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration using 0.1M NaCl
as the buffer, followed by dialysis and lyophilization to obtain a white powder. This
procedure was carried out for both A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 and 9, but not 11
due to a lack of supernatant. However, if the method is successful for both serotypes
1 and 9, it can be assumed that the same is possible for 11. The supernatants used for
this procedure were not produced in this project but were from 2005, and here only
serotype 1 and 9 supernatant had been produced. 1H NMR and HSQC were recorded for
the supernatants before puriﬁcation, and these spectra can be seen in Appendices A.11
and A.12.
The purity of the obtained CPS was conﬁrmed by NMR, see Figures 3.8 and 3.9.
Here, all residues of LPS had been removed, which can be seen by the absence of peaks
belonging to the anomeric protons of LPS (5.07, 4.98 and 4.92 ppm). It should be noted
that there is a signiﬁcant difference between these two CPS, as the serotype 9 CPS initially
looks messy in comparison to serotype 1. This is, however, mostly due to the structure
of the CPS and not impurities from, for example, LPS. The structure and why it results
in a more messy spectrum will be described in more detail in Section 3.2.4.
Based on these spectra, it was expected that the obtained CPS from precipitating
with CTAB was pure enough to not cause any cross-reactions. Because of this, serolog-
ical analyses using these samples as antigens were also carried out, see Section 3.3.3.
Furthermore, it is important to note that this puriﬁcation procedure is relatively simple,
so it should be possible to scale it up, which is important if the CPS antigen should be
used for many serological tests or perhaps a vaccine.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:38==
Results and Discussion
30
Figure 3.8: 1H NMR spectra of A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 CPS puriﬁed by
precipitation with CTAB followed by Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration.
Figure 3.9: 1H NMR spectra of A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 9 CPS puriﬁed by
precipitation with CTAB followed by Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration.
3.2.4 Characterization of CPS
Serotype 1 CPS Structure
The structure of A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 CPS has previously been reported by
Altman et al. 1986 to be a teichoic acid-type polysaccharide with repeating disaccharide
units of partly O-acetylated N-acetylglucosamine and galactose residues linked together
by a phosphodiester bond (45). To examine whether the structure of the serotype
1 CPS obtained from Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration is the same as what is reported
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:39==
Results and Discussion
31
in the literature, multiple NMR experiments were recorded of the CPS at 800 MHz.
For these, acetone was added to be used as a reference (2.225/31.07 ppm). The CPS
obtained by this puriﬁcation has been shown to still contain some LPS, so to get a cleaner
spectrum of serotype 1 CPS, it could have been run with the CPS puriﬁed by CTAB
precipitation. The initial 1H NMR spectrum of the CTAB precipitated CPS does not show
any contaminating peaks from LPS (see Figure 3.8) and would, therefore, have been
best for the characterization. However, only an HSQC spectrum was recorded for the
CTAB precipitated CPS, and this also shows the CPS to be pure (see Appendix A.13).
Nonetheless, it is still possible to determine the structure of CPS from a less pure sample.
By 1H NMR, two anomeric protons were identiﬁed at 5.57 (A1) and 4.72 ppm (B1),
as well as another downﬁeld major peak at 4.51 ppm, which will be examined later.
The two anomeric protons conﬁrm that the CPS consists of repeating disaccharide units
as described in literature (45). The anomeric protons found for serotype 1 LPS (see
Section 3.1.3) are also present in the proton spectrum, conﬁrming that the CPS is not
completely pure.
In addition to the anomeric protons, some upﬁeld peaks can also be identiﬁed near
the acetone peak. Here, the major peaks at 2.15 and 2.06 ppm belong to an O-acetyl and
N-acetyl group, respectively. These two peaks do not have the same intensity, which
indicates that they do not appear equally in the polysaccharide structure. To determine
the ratio of them compared to each other, integrals were applied to the spectrum. Here
it was found that the O-acetyl group is only present in about 87% of the disaccharide
units when the N-acetyl group is found in all of them.
Besides the major peaks, some smaller peaks are also present, which for example,
originate from the LPS. Here, the peak at 2.03 ppm belongs to the N-acetyl group of
LPS O-antigen, while the peaks around 1.3 ppm are from the rhamnose terminal methyl
groups. Similarly, the O-acetyl peaks from CPS could also be seen in the proton spectra
for LPS (see Figure 3.3). The signiﬁcant peaks for serotype 1 CPS can be seen in the 1H
NMR spectrum in Figure 3.10.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:40==
Results and Discussion
32
Figure 3.10: 1H NMR spectra of A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 CPS puriﬁed by
Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration. The most signiﬁcant peaks i.e. the anomeric
protons and methyl (N-acetyl and O-acetyl) groups have been assigned.
The integrals of the methyl groups are shown in red.
As the two anomeric protons have been identiﬁed, the structure of the two monomers can
now be determined by using various 2D NMR methods similar to the characterization
of LPS (see Section 3.1.3). Starting from A1, H2BC shows a clear correlation between
A1 and the peak 3.83/69.1 ppm, which is thus A2. A2 then correlates with 3.83/69.9
ppm, which also sees 3.97/69.4 ppm. These two peaks, therefore, belong to A3 and A4,
respectively. For the remaining positions, HMBC can be used to show multiple bond
correlations from both A1-H and A4-H to A5-C at 70.8 ppm. In H2BC, A5 then shows
correlations with 3.92/67.8 and 3.79/67.8 ppm. These two peaks are in the opposite
phase in a phase-sensitive HSQC as they belong to a CH2 group, which means they are
A6 and A6’. Based on the assigned peaks, it is concluded that A is a galactose residue
which corresponds with the literature (45).
Similarly, H2BC can also be used to show correlations of peaks in the monomer B.
It is here found that the carbon chemical shift of B2 is very upﬁeld at 55.9 ppm, which is
typical for an N-acetylated carbon. Based on the peaks identiﬁed, it can be determined
that B is an N-acetylglucosamine residue. Besides the B2-C, other interesting peaks are
identiﬁed, namely the peaks belonging to B6. These are found at 4.51 and 4.32/64.2
and thus have a much more downﬁeld proton chemical shift than the usual, which is
below 4 ppm. These downﬁeld peaks indicate that the N-acetylglucosamine residue is
substituted at this position. Through HMBC, a correlation between both B6-H and B6’-H
and 174.9 ppm is seen. This carbon belongs to the carbonyl of O-acetyl, as HMBC also
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:41==
Results and Discussion
33
shows a correlation between 174.9 ppm and 2.15 ppm, which was previously determined
to belong to the CH3 of O-acetyl. The N-acetylglucosamine is thus ∼87% O-acetylated
at position 6. All identiﬁed peaks can be seen in the HSQC spectra in Figure 3.11.
Figure 3.11: HSQC of the CPS from A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1.
When the structures of the two monomers have been determined, the linkages between
them should be found by HMBC. Only one correlation was identiﬁed between the two
monomers, and this was the correlation between B1 and A6. However, there must
be another linkage to form a polysaccharide. To identify this, a closer look at the
assigned peaks should be taken. Any possible outliers can be identiﬁed by comparing
the measured chemical shifts with reference data obtained from the monosaccharide
equivalents. Here, especially B4 differs a lot with the measured chemical shift being
4.09/75.2 ppm in comparison to 3.46/71.1 ppm, while A1 is also more downﬁeld at
5.57/96.6 compared to 5.22/93.2 ppm (43). This indicates that these positions are linked
to a group with a higher electronegativity than a hydroxyl group. No information about
this could, however, be obtained by the recorded NMR experiments. Instead, Altman et
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:42==
Results and Discussion
34
al. (45) have found that phosphate is linked between A1 and B4. To conﬁrm this, 31P
NMR spectra could have been recorded, but this was not done in this project.
The only thing left to be determined now is the anomeric conﬁgurations of the two
monomers. No useful information about this could be obtained from J-coupling from the
proton spectra nor the DQF-COSY, so instead, the analysis was based on chemical shifts
of the anomeric protons. As previously mentioned, α-anomeric protons are generally
more downﬁeld than β-anomeric protons. A1 at 5.57 ppm is very downﬁeld both due to
the phosphate group but most likely also because the galactose residue is an α-anomer.
B1 is, however, much more upﬁeld at 4.72 ppm, indicating that the N-acetylglucosamine
residue is a β-anomer. These ﬁndings agree with the structure reported by Altman et al.
(45). All assigned peaks and the structure of serotype 1 CPS can be found in Table 3.2
and Figure 3.12.
Table 3.2: 1H and 13C chemical shifts of CPS from A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1.
Figure 3.12: The complete structure of A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 CPS.
Serotype 9 CPS Structure
The A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 9 CPS has been puriﬁed by CTAB precipitation re-
sulting in a CPS without any LPS residue. It is, therefore, possible to determine the
structure of the CPS without any interfering signals from LPS. To do this, multiple NMR
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:43==
Results and Discussion
35
experiments were recorded at 800 MHz expressing the chemical shifts relative to an
internal acetone standard (2.225/31.07 ppm). This characterization has also previously
been done by Beynon et al. 1992, who found the CPS to be a teichoic acid-type polysac-
charide consisting of repeating O-acetylated galactose units and glycerol linked together
by phosphodiester bonds (51).
In 1H NMR, a range of peaks are present in the anomeric region, and these are
found in different intensities. Through HSQC, it can be conﬁrmed that only the three
most downﬁeld peaks are from anomeric protons, as the carbon chemical shifts are
also downﬁeld for these. The three anomeric positions are thus found at 5.37/96.3 (C1),
5.28/98.9 (B1), and 5.21/99.1 ppm (A1). The two other smaller peaks are, however,
found at 5.12/72.3 and 5.04/71.8 ppm, and because of the upﬁeld carbon shifts, these are
not anomeric positions. Because of the difference in intensities of the peaks, the integrals
were determined relative to the largest peak at 5.21 ppm. It was thus found that when
A1 is present one time, B1 is present 0.7 times, and C1 only 0.2. Due to the noise, there
may, however, be some variation in these. The integrals of the two peaks at 5.12 and
5.04 ppm were also determined, and these were found to be 0.66 and 0.12, respectively.
Because of the similar integrals, it is indicated that the peak at 5.12 ppm belongs to B and
5.04 to C. This is later conﬁrmed by various correlation spectra. Based on the measured
integrals, the presence of the monomers can be calculated, so A is 53%, B is 37%, and C
is 10% of the polysaccharide.
Besides the downﬁeld peaks, there are also some signiﬁcant upﬁeld peaks, although
only two of these are visible in HSQC. These are 2.20/21.6 and 2.15/21.2 ppm, which
belong to two O-acetyl groups. Like the identiﬁed downﬁeld protons, these are also
found in different intensities. Relatively to A1, the proton at 2.20 ppm is present 2.2
times and the proton at 2.15 only 0.23 times. If an O-acetyl group is maximally present,
it will have an integral of 3. Taking the noise into account, it is likely that the O-acetyl at
2.20 ppm is linked to B, and 2.15 is linked to C based on the measured integrals. All the
signiﬁcant peaks that have been assigned so far are seen on the 1H spectra in Figure 3.13.
The remaining upﬁeld peaks are various impurities that are not assigned.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:44==
Results and Discussion
36
Figure 3.13: 1H NMR spectra of A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 9 CPS puriﬁed by CTAB
precipitation. The most signiﬁcant peaks i.e. the anomeric protons and two
O-acetyl groups have been assigned. The integrals of these peaks are shown
in red.
Through a combination of 2D NMR experiments, the complete structure of the serotype
9 CPS can be determined. Here it was found that the CPS consists of three galactose
residues A, B, and C, but as discussed before, these are not present in the same degree.
The differences depend on the occurrence of O-acetylation. Through HMBC, a correlation
is found between the peak identiﬁed as B3 (5.12/72.3 ppm) and the carbon at 174.6 ppm,
which further correlates with the O-acetyl group at 2.20 ppm. There are, however, no
correlations seen from the peak at 2.15 to any of the three galactose residues. Nonetheless,
because the proton on an O-acetylated position will be downﬁeld in comparison to non-
acetylated positions, the chemical shifts can be considered to determine the position of
the second O-acetyl group. The peak at 5.04/71.8 ppm was identiﬁed as C2 because
of two-bond correlations with C1. Due to the downﬁeld shift of C2, it is reasonable to
think that this position is O-acetylated. No downﬁeld peaks like this were identiﬁed
for galactose residue A, which indicates that this is unsubstituted, while galactose B is
3-O-acetylated and C is 2-O-acetylated. These ﬁndings correspond with the previous
assumptions of the positioning of O-acetyl groups, based on the intensity of the peaks.
Besides the three galactose residues, other signals are also seen at 4.13/65.3 (D3),
4.07/65.3 (D3’), 3.97/78.1 (D2), and 3.80/62.2 (D1) ppm. All the peaks except the one
at 3.97 ppm, which is a CH, belong to CH2 groups as they are in the opposite phase
in the phase-sensitive HSQC (see Figure 3.14). In H2BC, a clear correlation between
3.97 and both 65.3 and 62.2 is seen, indicating that there is a chain of CH2 –CH–CH2.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:45==
Results and Discussion
37
The downﬁeld peaks of this are characteristic of a glycerol-3-phosphate where the
phosphate is linked to 4.13 and 4.07/65.3 ppm (D3). To conﬁrm that it is, in fact, a
glycerol phosphate, 31P NMR spectra could have been recorded, but this was not carried
out. Instead, it can be conﬁrmed by the literature that it is the correct substituent
(51). Through HMBC, correlations between D2-C and both A1-H and B1-H are seen,
indicating that the glycerol-3-phosphate is linked to the anomeric positions of both
galactose residue A and B through position 2 of glycerol. However, because the signals
arising from galactose C are very weak in general, there is likely a correlation between
C1 and the glycerol that is simply too weak to be detected.
Figure 3.14: HSQC of the CPS from A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 9.
While one linkage between the glycerol-3-phosphate and the galactose residues has
now been determined, some linkages are still missing to complete the structure of the
CPS. There are, however, no linkages that can be detected through HMBC. Alternatively,
the chemical shifts can be taken into account. The protons at position 4 are generally
more downﬁeld than usual in the three galactose residues being 4.68/72.8, 4.62/75.4
and 4.56/75.4 ppm for B4, C4 and A4 respectively. There may, therefore, be a linkage
between these positions to the phosphate of the glycerol resulting in a downﬁeld shift of
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:46==
Results and Discussion
38
the protons. This could also have been conﬁrmed by 31P NMR spectra, but that was not
recorded.
Now that the structure of the CPS has been resolved, the anomeric conﬁgurations
can be determined. As the anomeric protons of each of the galactose residues are
downﬁeld at above 5 ppm, these are most likely to α-anomers. Based on these ﬁndings,
the CPS seems to be consisting of repeating α-galactose residues through linkages with
glycerol-3-phosphates. The galactose residue can be either A, unsubstituted (53%), B,
3-O-acetylated (37%) or C, 2-O-acetylated (10%). The determined structure corresponds
with the ﬁndings reported by Beynon et al., except they found different ratios of the
O-acetylation, with the O-3 being the most common at 66%. The varying acetylation
patterns are also seen in other bacteria and are believed to depend on the growth
conditions (51). Alternatively, there might also be differences between strains of serotype
9. All assigned peaks can be seen in Table 3.3, and the complete structure of serotype 9
CPS is seen on Figure 3.15.
Table 3.3: 1H and 13C chemical shifts of CPS from A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 9.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:47==
Results and Discussion
39
Figure 3.15: The complete structure of A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 9 CPS.
One more thing to note about the recorded spectra, is a signiﬁcant peak at around
3.6 ppm. More speciﬁcally, this is a CH2 found at 3.66/63.4 and 3.58/63.4 ppm that
appears to be a doublet of doublets. Through H2BC, a correlation between these two
peaks is seen in addition to a CH peak at 3.79/73.0 ppm. This is very similar to the
glycerol-3-phosphate, except that it is a symmetrical compound, and it shows no clear
correlations with any part of the CPS. This suggests that there is some presence of free
glycerol in the sample, which might have been cleaved off of the CPS due to temperature
or pH, or it might be an impurity from the puriﬁcation process. It is difﬁcult to say why
exactly it is present without further analysis. Interestingly, the free glycerol was not
found in the same degree in other preparations of serotype 9 CPS like the one puriﬁed
by only gel ﬁltration (see Figure 3.6). However, the clear CH2 peaks for the free glycerol
are also found in the serotype 1 CPS puriﬁed by only Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration, but
this CPS, in contrast to serotype 9, does not contain glycerol in the repeating unit (see
Section 3.2.4). Furthermore, the glycerol is not found in the serotype 1 CPS preparations
using acetone precipitation nor CTAB precipitation (see Figures 3.6 and 3.8), which
might indicate that the glycerol comes from some part of the puriﬁcation process, but it
is unclear how.
Serotype 11 CPS Structure
As previously mentioned, serotype 11 CPS was not puriﬁed by CTAB precipitation
but only by Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration. However, this puriﬁcation did not result
in a very pure product but was instead a complete mix of LPS and CPS. Although
the CPS was not pure, various NMR experiments were recorded at 800 MHz with
acetone added as a reference (2.225/31.07 ppm). The structure of serotype 11 CPS has
previously been determined by Beynon et al. 1993 who found it to be a teichoic acid-
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:48==
Results and Discussion
40
type polysaccharide containing repeating units of O-acetylated galactose, glucose, and
glycerol linked together by phosphodiester bonds (49).
By 1H NMR in combination with HSQC, multiple protons can be identiﬁed in the
anomeric region between 4.4 – 5.3 ppm. These are, however, not all anomeric protons
from CPS. By removing the peaks belonging to LPS at 5.07, 4.98, 4.92, and 4.69 ppm, ﬁve
peaks remain. These ﬁve peaks are at 5.27, 5.09, 4.70, 4.49, and 4.43 ppm. By HSQC, it
can be seen that only two of these are bound to downﬁeld carbon atoms at 90 – 110 ppm,
in which anomeric carbons are usually found. It is, thus, concluded that the CPS consists
of repeating disaccharide units, where the anomeric positions are found at 5.27/99.1 (A1)
and 4.49/103.4 ppm (B1). The three remaining downﬁeld peaks have carbon chemical
shifts around 70 – 80 ppm, which is normal for positions 2 – 5. The proton chemical
shifts are, however, much more downﬁeld than the usual 3.0 – 4.3 ppm. The downﬁeld
proton shifts indicate that these three positions are substituted, which will be examined
later.
Besides the downﬁeld peaks, there are four upﬁeld peaks at 2.0 – 2.3 ppm and a
peak around 1.3 ppm. The peaks at 1.3 and 2.03 ppm originate from the LPS, while the
two minor peaks cannot be identiﬁed. These two peaks are also not detectable in HSQC,
making it difﬁcult to determine their origin. Nonetheless, the peak at 2.19 ppm can be
identiﬁed as an O-acetyl group. The assigned signiﬁcant peaks can be seen in the 1H
NMR spectrum in Figure 3.16.
Figure 3.16: 1H NMR spectra of A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 11 CPS puriﬁed by
Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration. The most signiﬁcant peaks i.e. the anomeric
protons and the O-acetyl group have been assigned in addition to
signiﬁcant impurities.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:49==
Results and Discussion
41
After assigning the anomeric positions, the entire structure of the disaccharide unit can
be determined. By a combination of 2D NMR experiments, it can be determined that
the serotype 11 CPS consists of a galactose (A) and a glucose residue (B). The complete
assignment of this can be found in Table 3.4. There are, however, more signals than
just from these two monomers. These are the peaks at 4.04/65.0 ppm, 3.79/62.1, and
3.85/62.1 ppm that are in the opposite phase in HSQC as they belong to CH2 (see
Figure 3.17). In addition, there is also a CH peak at 3.99/78.7 ppm. A clear correlation
between 3.99 ppm and both 65.0 and 62.1 ppm is seen in H2BC, indicating that this is
a glycerol molecule similar to that of serotype 9 CPS. Because of the downﬁeld peaks
of especially the CH2 at 4.04 ppm, it is a glycerol-3-phosphate where the phosphate is
linked to this position (C3). 31P NMR spectra could have been recorded to conﬁrm that
it is a glycerol-3-phosphate, but this was not carried out. The hypothesis can, however,
be conﬁrmed by the literature (49). Through HMBC, a correlation between C2-C and
A1-H is seen, from which it can be concluded that the glycerol is linked to the anomeric
position of galactose.
Figure 3.17: HSQC of the CPS from A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 11.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:50==
Results and Discussion
42
Now that the structure of the two monomers and the glycerol has been determined, in
addition to the linkage between galactose and glycerol, the missing linkages between
the residues must be found. In HMBC, a clear correlation between B1-H and A6-C is
seen, so there must be a glycosidic linkage between B1 and A6. This also explains the
very downﬁeld proton chemical shifts of A6 at 4.04 and 3.88 ppm. No other positions
in the glucose residue, B, seem to correlate with the other units, which is why there
must be a second linkage from the galactose residue, A, to the glycerol phosphate. The
chemical shifts of A are much more downﬁeld than they would normally be in galactose
(43), and a linkage to the phosphate of glycerol-3-phosphate can explain why such a
shift is seen on one of the positions. It has already been determined that A6 is linked
to the glucose residue, and A1 is linked to the glycerol. This leaves positions 2, 3, and
4 to be examined. Especially the protons at A3 and A4 are very downﬁeld as these
positions are found at 5.09/72.2 and 4.70/73.0 ppm, respectively. These must, therefore,
be substituted. Through HMBC, no correlations are seen from A4 except for within
the galactose, while A3-H shows correlations with 174.5 ppm which further correlates
with 2.19 ppm. This peak belongs to an O-acetyl group, which means that the galactose
is O-acetylated at position 3. Furthermore, this means that there should be a linkage
from A4 to the phosphate, making the proton shift downﬁeld, which explains why no
correlations are seen in HMBC, as there are 5 bonds between the A4-H and C3-C.
The anomeric conﬁguration of the galactose and glucose can now be determined.
For this, the chemical shifts of the anomeric protons will be used. As A1-H is very
downﬁeld at 5.27 ppm, this is believed to be in α-conﬁguration, while B1-H is more
upﬁeld at 4.49 ppm, indicating that B is a β-anomer. This, together with the remaining
structure of the CPS, corresponds with what has been reported by Beynon et al. (49). All
the assigned peaks for A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 11 CPS can be seen in Table 3.4 and
the structure of the polysaccharide is seen in Figure 3.18.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:51==
Results and Discussion
43
Table 3.4: 1H and 13C chemical shifts of CPS from A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 11.
Figure 3.18: The complete structure of A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 11 CPS.
3.3 Serological Testing
Diagnosis of A. pleuropneumoniae infection is crucial to control the outbreak of pleurop-
neumonia in pig herds, and for this, various serological tests are used. This includes,
for example, ELISA which can be used to detect antibodies in pig sera against speciﬁc
antigens. For assays like these, various extracts containing antigens can be used, but it
is important to keep in mind that many cross-reactions are seen between A. pleuropneu-
moniae serotypes. As previously described, this is usually due to serotypes expressing
similar LPS, but there are also various proteins that are common in the bacteria. The
use of whole-cell bacteria or various non-puriﬁed bacterial extracts which have often
been used is, therefore, not sufﬁcient for the serological analysis of A. pleuropneumoniae,
where a distinction between serotypes is required for effective diagnosis and monitoring
of the disease (7). Serological tests are thus carried out to examine whether the obtained
CPS antigens are sufﬁciently puriﬁed and if any cross-reactivity is seen between the
serotypes.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:52==
Results and Discussion
44
3.3.1 Indirect ELISA
For the serological tests, an indirect ELISA was carried out, which is one of the four
common forms of ELISA. The general concept of ELISA is that antigen or antibody
is immobilized on a solid surface of a microtiter plate, and then an enzyme-labeled
antibody speciﬁc for this will be able to quantify the immobilized component. In an
indirect ELISA, it is the antigen that is immobilized on the surface, and a primary
antibody will bind to it. This antibody is unlabeled and is, in this case, obtained from
pig sera from pigs naturally infected with A. pleuropneumoniae. To this, a secondary
antibody conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) is added (52). This secondary
antibody is speciﬁc against a different species, and in this project, a goat anti-swine
immunoglobulin is, therefore, used. When efﬁcient binding between the antibodies and
antigen has occurred, a chromogenic substrate for HRP is added to produce color in
each well. After sufﬁcient color has been developed, the reaction is stopped, and the OD
can then be recorded at 450 nm to give a measure of the binding between antigen and
antibody.
3.3.2 ELISA on Serotype 1 CPS Containing LPS
First, it was examined whether the CPS obtained from only Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration
(see Section 3.2.1) was sufﬁciently puriﬁed to not cause cross-reactions, even though a
small amount of LPS was detected in the sample by NMR. For this, an indirect ELISA
was carried out. This was performed to test whether the small presence of LPS had a
signiﬁcant effect on the afﬁnity towards antibodies raised against different serotypes.
The ﬁrst antigen that was tested was the serotype 1 CPS as this was much purer than for
serotype 9 and 11 based on NMR results (see Figures 3.5 to 3.7).
For the ELISA, the optimal antigen concentration should be determined to get a
strong sensitivity of the assay. With an optimal concentration, the negative control will
be close to the background noise, while the positive control ideally should have an OD
of about 1000. Two ELISAs were run, the ﬁrst one with two-fold serial dilutions from
1:100 to 1:12,800 of the antigen in PBS Milli-Q and the second from 1:10,000 to 1:1,280,000.
Furthermore, seven different pig sera were used in addition to a negative control. These
sera originated from four pigs infected with A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1, one pig
with serotype 9, one with serotype 11, and one with serotype 4 as an additional negative
control.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:53==
Results and Discussion
45
The Polysorp 96-well plates were coated with 50 µL of the antigen in either dilutions
1:100 to 1:12,800 or 1:10,000 to 1:1,280,000 on each row and incubated at 5 °C overnight.
The plates were then blocked with a solution of PBS Milli-Q, 0.05% Tween 20 and 1.0%
BSA. This blocking buffer containing BSA is added to bind to all the unbound sites on the
well surface so non-speciﬁc binding of antigen and antibodies are avoided, and a higher
speciﬁcity of the assay is achieved (52, 53). After blocking, the plates must be repeatedly
washed with PBS + T to remove all unbound compounds. This is a crucial step to avoid
any undesired bindings, which is also why the plates should be washed after each step
of adding new reactants to the plate. The primary antibody in the form of different pig
sera was now added in the concentration 1:200 in PBS Milli-Q - 0.05% Tween - 1.0% BSA
- 0.5M NaCl. When only using one speciﬁc dilution for all the sera, it will not necessarily
be the optimal concentration for all of the sera. Therefore, a checkerboard titration is
often used to determine both the optimal concentration of antigen and antibody. This
was not done in this assay, but it will be in the subsequent ELISAs.
After allowing the primary antibody to bind to the antigen, the plate was washed
again, and then the labeled secondary antibody was added. This was an HRP-conjugated
goat anti-swine immunoglobulin diluted 1:8,000 in PBS Milli-Q - 0.05% Tween - 1.0%
BSA, which is the dilution determined by the supplier. After incubating with this anti-
swine HRP and washing, TMB One was used to detect the secondary antibody. TMB is
a chromogenic substrate for HRP that, following the degradation of hydrogen peroxide
by HRP, produces a blue color that turns yellow after the addition of stop solution 0.5M
H2SO4. The OD can then be detected at 450 nm (54).
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:54==
Results and Discussion
46
Table 3.5: A) Recorded OD-values from indirect ELISA using A. pleuropneumoniae
serotype 1 CPS puriﬁed by Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration. The antigen was
added in two-fold serial dilutions from 1:10,000 to 1:1,280,000 in PBS Milli-Q.
Seven different sera obtained from naturally infected pigs in addition to a
negative control were used in dilution 1:200 in PBS Milli-Q - 0.05% Tween -
1.0% BSA - 0.5M NaCl. S = serotype. B) In reality, each well develops a yellow
color, but the differences on the plate is difﬁcult to see if the OD-values are not
measured.
Following this procedure on the two plates with serotype 1 CPS of different concentra-
tions, similar results were found. The results for the second plate with antigen dilutions
1:10,000 to 1:1,280,000 can be seen on Table 3.5. Generally, a nice titer determination
was not achieved, which is seen by the signals not decreasing with the dilutions of
antigen, so the assays are not optimal. This is also the case for the ﬁrst plate with high
antigen concentrations (see Appendix B.1). The bad results might be because of too high
concentrations of antibody. On the second plate with low antigen concentrations, the
negative control did reach background levels in the lowest concentration as desired, but
this was not achieved on the ﬁrst plate. Interestingly, similar levels of OD were found for
the four sera originating from pigs infected with A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 and for
the one from serotype 11. The OD for serotype 9 was, however, slightly lower than those.
For serotype 4 serum, the recorded OD is much lower and more similar to the negative
control, which is expected as serotype 4 is not known to cross-react with serotype 1.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:55==
Results and Discussion
47
If the antigen only consisted of CPS, it would be serotype-speciﬁc, and only signals
for the serotype 1 sera are expected. Because we also see clear signals for serotypes 9
and 11 but not for serotype 4, the presence of LPS must have caused cross-reactions as
LPS has similar structures in these three serotypes. The reason why serotype 9 has a
reduced OD in comparison to serotype 11 might be because they do not have the exact
same structure of LPS but differentiate in the ratio of N-acetylglucosamine branches (7).
Another reason could simply be that the serotype 9 serum contains fewer antibodies
than the other sera.
In conclusion, because the results from these two ELISA tests showed a large
amount of cross-reactivity, the antigen that was used had not been sufﬁciently puriﬁed
as the presence of LPS was too high to not affect the outcome. It should be noted that
these assays were not optimal as they had been saturated due to too high concentrations
of either antigen or antibody. Therefore, the results are not necessarily applicable, but
the strong correlation between the sera indicates that cross-reactivity is seen. These
results were similar to what was described by Gottschalk et al. 1994, who had used
precipitation with CTAB following phenol extraction to purify CPS. By this puriﬁcation,
they also saw cross-reactions between the serotypes in an indirect ELISA (55).
Based on these results, the CPS should be further puriﬁed to eliminate all LPS
residues so no cross-reactivity will be seen in the following ELISAs. By succeeding in
this, it should be clear which serotype the antigen or antibody originates from, as there
would only be signals seen in corresponding antigens and antibodies. The puriﬁed CPS
can then be used to diagnose infected pig herds as the antigen is pure enough to only
bind to antibodies speciﬁc to this serotype. Therefore, the next step is to test the CPS
obtained by precipitation with CTAB, as NMR indicates that these samples are pure with
no LPS residues. However, as mentioned above, Gottschalk et al. managed to purify
CPS in a similar way as used in this project, but they still saw cross-reactions between
the serotypes (55).
3.3.3 ELISA on Serotype 1 and 9 Puriﬁed with CTAB
To conﬁrm that the CPS obtained from CTAB precipitation is pure as indicated by NMR,
indirect ELISAs were carried out with these as antigens. However, only CPS from
serotypes 1 and 9 were used for this, as serotype 11 CPS had not been puriﬁed due to
lack of product.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:56==
Results and Discussion
48
First, the optimal concentrations of CPS antigen and serum were determined by
checkerboard titration. Optimizing these concentrations will ensure a strong signal
that can be detected when performing the subsequent ELISA. However, the signal
should also not be too strong as this will saturate the assay, making it unusable and
difﬁcult to distinguish between samples, which was the case for the previous ELISAs.
For the checkerboard titration for both serotype 1 and 9, the Polysorp plates were coated
with two-fold serial dilutions from 1:10,000 to 1:1,280,000 of antigen in PBS Milli-Q.
Furthermore, the serum was also diluted in two-fold serial dilutions in PBS Milli-Q -
0.05% Tween - 1.0% BSA - 0.5M NaCl from 1:50 to 1:102,400. The sera used for these
checkerboard titrations originate from pigs that have been naturally infected with A.
pleuropneumoniae and have been diagnosed with speciﬁcally serotype 1 or 9. These
sera originate from 1996 and 1987, respectively, and the speciﬁc serotypes have been
determined through complement ﬁxation, which does not only involve the surface
polysaccharides but also some protein antigens from A. pleuropneumoniae.
Besides the concentrations of antigen and serum, a similar procedure to the previous
ELISA was carried out. Based on the data obtained (see Appendices B.2 to B.4), it was
concluded that the optimal concentrations for serotype 1 are 1:20,000 for antigen and
1:400 for serum. For serotype 9, the signals were, however, too weak to determine
any optimal concentrations. Therefore, a new checkerboard titration was carried out
with a more concentrated antigen, so the serial dilutions started at 1:1,000 instead of
1:10,000. This resulted in a much more clear titration, from which it was determined
that the optimal concentrations are 1:8,000 for antigen and 1:200 for serum. However,
because only one serum is used for each of the checkerboard titrations, the optimal serum
concentration can only be applied to speciﬁcally these two sera, which can function as
positive controls.
In the following ELISAs, different sera were used, namely eight different sera
from pigs infected with serotype 1, one from serotype 9, one from serotype 11, one
from serotype 4, and one negative control. There will be a large variation between the
concentrations of antibodies in the sera depending on the infection. If the pig is only
experiencing a mild infection, it may not produce as many antibodies as a pig with a
more severe infection. Besides this, other factors can also inﬂuence this, such as at which
time of the infection the serum has been collected in addition to the natural variance
between pigs. Because of this variation, the optimal concentration is not necessarily
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:57==
Results and Discussion
49
the same for all sera, and new two-fold serial dilutions of each serum were, therefore,
used on ELISA plates coated with the optimal antigen concentrations. The dilutions
used were from 1:50 to 1:6,400, and this helps ensure that a strong signal is seen, so the
binding of antibodies to the antigen can be compared between the sera. The measured
OD-values from these two assays can be seen in Table 3.6.
Table 3.6: Recorded OD-values from indirect ELISAs using CPS puriﬁed by CTAB
precipitation as antigen from A) A. pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 diluted
1:20,000 in PBS Milli-Q, and B) serotype 9 diluted 1:8,000 in PBS Milli-Q.
Eleven different sera obtained from naturally infected pigs in addition to a
negative control were used in two-fold serial dilutions from 1:50 to 1:6,400 in
PBS Milli-Q - 0.05% Tween - 1.0% BSA - 0.5M NaCl. S = serotype
As can be seen by the results, a strong signal is obtained across all sera except for serotype
4 and the negative control on both plates. This is surprising as it would be expected
that only serotype 1 sera would give a positive result with serotype 1 CPS antigen and
serotype 9 sera only with serotype 9 CPS. Instead, antigens from both the serotypes
give similar results, which is not expected. This indicates that a lot of cross-reactivity is
occurring, as antigen from either serotype 1 or 9 provides a clear signal when using sera
against both serotypes 1, 9 and 11. There is, however, no signal with serotype 4 serum
or the negative control, indicating that the assay has been correctly performed. The
unexpected signals are, therefore, due to cross-reactivity between the three serotypes.
Interestingly, there is a large variation between the OD of the different test sera.
For example, when using puriﬁed CPS from serotype 1, it would be expected that wells
incubated with any serotype 1 serum would appear positive. However, both serotype 9
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:58==
Results and Discussion
50
and 11 sera result in a much higher OD than several of those originating from serotype
1. This is due to natural differences in the pigs from which the sera have been obtained,
including the severity of the infection, as previously mentioned. However, it is still
surprising that such a strong signal is seen with serotype 9 and 11 sera compared to most
of the serotype 1 sera. As seen in the recorded NMR spectra, Figures 3.8 and 3.9, the CPS
samples should be very clean and not contain any LPS. It is, therefore, difﬁcult to say
why the sera that should be negative appear positive. This is especially strange since the
signal is at the same level or stronger than for the expected positives, which is the case
when using serotype 1 CPS antigen. Even with a small amount of LPS present in the
sample, it is unexpected that it causes a strong reaction like this and not a weaker signal
than the positive serotype 1 sera. There are several reasons why this has happened.
Firstly, ELISA might be a too sensitive method to distinguish between the cross-
reacting serotypes even when using pure, speciﬁc antigens containing only a minimal
presence of LPS. In that way, the smallest amount of LPS should be enough to ensure
binding of a large number of primary antibodies that the secondary antibody can then
bind to, leading to a strong signal in the end.
Secondly, the cross-reactivity might be caused by other factors than LPS. As pre-
viously presented, the CPS of serotypes 9 and 11 have similar structures containing a
galactose residue, glycerol phosphate, and they are both O-acetylated. The main differ-
ence is that the galactose in serotype 9 CPS has two O-acetylation positions, while 11 only
has one O-acetyl group, but in addition also contains a glucose residue. Serotype 1 CPS,
on the other hand, also contains galactose, phosphate and is O-acetylated. Thus, some
of these components may constitute epitopes that can be involved in the cross-reactivity.
This has also been suggested by Inzana et al. 1992 (56) who experienced a similar result
between serotypes 1 and 9. It could, however, also be due to contamination of the
CPS with proteins common in the cross-reacting serotypes as reported by Gottschalk
et al., which they demonstrated by immunoblot (55). However, immunoblot was not
carried out in this project to examine this, but instead, the NMR spectra obtained of
the puriﬁed CPS did not show any contamination with proteins. NMR is, however, not
the best method to determine this because of its low sensitivity, especially when the
concentration of proteins is only minimal. Furthermore, many proteins do not have very
good NMR properties and are, therefore, difﬁcult to detect under normal conditions,
so optimally, a different method should be used to conﬁrm the absence of proteins.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:59==
Results and Discussion
51
Based on the methods used in this project, it thus cannot be conﬁrmed if any protein is
present in the samples, if the cross-reactivity is due to common epitopes in the CPS, or a
completely different factor that has not been considered before.
Finally, a different reason why the cross-reactivity is seen is that the sera themselves
might not be pure. Because the pigs have been naturally infected, they may have been
infected by several A. pleuropneumoniae serotypes and, therefore, have formed antibodies
against different serotypes, which will be present in the sera. Furthermore, most of the
sera used are from 1980-2000, so it is difﬁcult to conﬁrm that they have only been found
to contain antibodies against one serotype, as the data from these analyses are missing.
3.3.4 ELISA on Serotype 1 and 9 CPS Using Rabbit Antisera
To test whether impurities in the sera could explain the unexpected cross-reactivity, two
new ELISAs were carried out. These were coated with the puriﬁed CPS from serotype 1
and 9, respectively, but instead of using pig sera, rabbit antisera against serotypes 1 to
12 were used. As for the previous ELISA, a two-fold serial dilution of each serum was
used to ensure optimal signals for each as they may vary in antibody concentrations.
The dilutions went from 1:100 to 1:12,800 sera in PBS Milli-Q - 0.05% Tween - 1.0% BSA -
0.5M NaCl.
The rabbit antisera used have been produced experimentally by subcutaneously
injecting the rabbit with formalinized whole cells of one A. pleuropneumoniae serotype to
make it produce antibodies speciﬁcally against that serotype (57). Afterward, the sera for
cross-reacting species are additionally puriﬁed by absorbing unwanted antibodies with
whole-cell preparations of other A. pleuropneumoniae serotypes than the wanted serotype.
In that way, pure sera can be obtained, which for example, only contains antibodies
against serotype 1 and not 9 or 11. Although these sera are produced for a different use,
they should still be useful for an indirect ELISA, and because of the higher purity of
antibodies, any cross-reactivity with these should not be expected as long as the antigen
is purely serotype-speciﬁc CPS.
When using rabbit antisera as the primary antibody, it is also necessary to use a
different secondary antibody which is anti-rabbit. For this, a peroxidase-conjugated
polyclonal swine anti-rabbit immunoglobulin was used in the dilution 1:2,000 in PBS
Milli-Q - 0.05% Tween - 1.0% BSA.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:60==
Results and Discussion
52
The OD values obtained from these two ELISAs with rabbit antisera and serotype
1 and 9 CPS as antigen (see Appendices B.5 and B.6) were plotted for each serum
in different dilutions to more easily determine the cut-off for positive samples (see
Figures 3.19 and 3.20).
Figure 3.19: The recorded OD-values at 450 nm from an indirect ELISA using serotype 1
CPS as antigen and serotypes 1 to 12 rabbit antisera. The OD is plotted as a
function of the reciprocal serum dilution to determine the cut-off for
positive samples.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:61==
Results and Discussion
53
Figure 3.20: The recorded OD-values at 450 nm from an indirect ELISA using serotype 9
CPS as antigen and serotypes 1 to 12 rabbit antisera. The OD is plotted as a
function of the reciprocal serum dilution to determine the cut-off for
positive samples.
From these two ﬁgures, it is clear that the serotype 9 and 11 sera give rise to the highest
reactions with either CPS. Meanwhile, serotype 1 sera gave a much lower signal even
when using serotype 1 CPS, which is surprising as this level is much closer to the
expected negative serotypes than to serotype 9 and 11 sera. This low signal of serotype 1
sera is probably due to a lower concentration of antibodies in this sera compared to the
other two.
To determine which samples are positive, a cut-off value is usually deﬁned. For this,
many known negative and positive serum samples should be used, and the two ELISAs
carried out here are thus not enough to fully determine the cut-off. However, the results
found can still give an idea of this. As it is expected that serotypes 1, 9 and 11 are positive
and the remaining serotypes are negative, a serum dilution should be determined for
which there is a sufﬁcient difference in OD between positive and negative samples. This
dilution could, for example, be at 1:800, where a gap between serotype 1 sera and the
negative sera is seen. The cut-off can then be deﬁned as 0.200, so all samples with an OD
above this at the dilution 1:800 are designated as positive, and all below are negative.
In relation to this, it should be noted that serotype 12 serum on both plates inter-
estingly results in a stronger signal than serotype 1 at the highest serum concentration
(1:100), but it is rapidly reduced to levels of the other negative sera. It is difﬁcult to
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:62==
Results and Discussion
54
explain why a high signal of serotype 12 sera is seen, as this is not known to cross-react
with serotypes 1, 9 and 11 due to completely different structures of LPS and CPS (7).
However, with the cut-off deﬁned, serotype 12 will be designated as negative, but to
conﬁrm this, repeated tests should be carried out to ensure a correct cut-off value.
Nonetheless, because both serotypes 1, 9 and 11 appear positive with either CPS
antigen, it indicates that the cross-reactivity seen in the previous ELISA was not due
to impurities in the sera, but more probably the CPS samples. Otherwise, the rabbit
antisera may not be as speciﬁc as believed. Another explanation to why the ELISA is
not successful may be that the rabbit sera is not produced for this type of assay. It does,
however, require additional analyses to examine the exact cause for the cross-reactivity.
Despite this, it can still be concluded that the puriﬁed CPS antigen can be used for
differentiating between sera positive for serotypes 1, 9 or 11 and the remaining serotypes
that are negative, regardless of the sera originating from pig or rabbit. This makes it
useful for the diagnosis of pig herds infected with A. pleuropneumoniae, although it would
have been optimal to have a pure CPS antigen that could also be used to distinguish
between sera positive for the cross-reacting serotypes.
Use of Puriﬁed CPS for Rabbit Antiserum
The puriﬁed CPS obtained by CTAB precipitation is, despite the cross-reactions seen in
the indirect ELISAs, purer than other preparations, which opens up for different applica-
tions of it. Pure CPS can, for example, be used to produce speciﬁc rabbit antiserum. As
previously mentioned, the rabbit antisera used for the indirect ELISAs in this project
were produced by injecting the rabbits with whole cells of a speciﬁc A. pleuropneumo-
niae serotype. The whole cells will, however, still contain cross-reacting LPS making
them somewhat unspeciﬁc antigens. Thus, even though the sera are puriﬁed further
to remove unwanted antibodies, it does not guarantee that the serum is completely
serotype-speciﬁc. An alternative to the formalinized whole cells is thus to inject the
rabbits with the puriﬁed CPS samples. This would be expected to result in a more
serotype-speciﬁc antibody response than the whole cells do.
By producing more speciﬁc rabbit antisera, these can be applied to serological tests
for the diagnosis of porcine pleuropneumonia. Instead of an indirect ELISA, they can be
used for blocking ELISAs. In a blocking ELISA, the microtiter plates are, similarly to
in indirect ELISAs, coated with an antigen i.e., the puriﬁed CPS of a speciﬁc serotype,
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:63==
Results and Discussion
55
and then sera from infected pigs can be added. What separates it from an indirect ELISA
is the subsequent addition of rabbit antisera speciﬁc for the serotype of the antigen. In
that way, the antibodies from rabbits compete with swine antibodies for the binding of
the antigen. A peroxidase-conjugated anti-rabbit immunoglobulin can be added, which
means that the OD that is measured after adding TMB will depend on the binding of the
rabbit antisera. Thus, a high OD is seen for negative samples, as only rabbit antibodies
bind to them, while a low OD is seen for positive samples, as antibodies from pigs will
bind to these ﬁrst (58, 59).
Blocking ELISAs have previously been carried out for various A. pleuropneumoniae
serotypes including serotype 2 and 8 with good results (58, 59). However, it is expected
that the assay will be even more speciﬁc when using puriﬁed CPS instead of whole cells,
which will hopefully also allow for efﬁcient diagnosis of serotypes 1, 9 and 11 without
the interference from cross-reactions.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:64==
Conclusion
56
4 Conclusion
Pure CPS samples from A. pleuropneumoniae are required for the speciﬁc diagnosis of
swine herds infected with the bacteria. In this project, an effective puriﬁcation method
has been described for the surface polysaccharides of serotypes 1, 9 and 11, which are
known to cross-react due to similar LPS O-antigen structures. It was found that the
purest preparation of CPS is obtained by ﬁrst extracting the surface polysaccharides
from the bacterial cell by phenol extraction followed by ultracentrifugation to separate
the LPS and the CPS. This produced an LPS gel which still contained a small amount
of CPS, but because the three serotypes express similar LPS, a complete puriﬁcation is
not required. It is, however, necessary to purify CPS completely to avoid cross-reactions
in serological tests for the diagnosis of the infection. The most successful method for
purifying CPS from the supernatant obtained from the ultracentrifugation was found to
be by CTAB precipitation. Here, different concentrations of sodium chloride were used
to precipitate the polysaccharide as a salt, which was then dialyzed and further puriﬁed
by Sephadex G-50 gel ﬁltration. This ultimately separates the CPS from the impurities
present in the supernatant, such as various proteins and LPS. In addition, the complete
puriﬁcation process should be possible to scale up, which is desired if the CPS should be
used for diagnosis.
However, while NMR showed that the obtained CPS samples were pure, they
were not pure enough to avoid cross-reactions in indirect ELISAs with either sera from
naturally infected pigs or experimentally immunized rabbits. Although this result
does not necessarily mean that the CPS was not sufﬁciently puriﬁed from LPS, further
analyses are required to determine the exact cause of the cross-reactions.
Besides the puriﬁcation of LPS and CPS, their structures were also successfully
characterized by NMR. Generally, the collected data corresponded with what has been
reported in the literature. Only one major difference was identiﬁed, which was the
O-acetylation pattern of serotype 9 CPS. Here, the repeating galactose units were found
to be 53% unsubstituted, 37% 3-O-acetylated and 10% 2-O-acetylated in comparison to
28%, 66% and 6% respectively as determined by Beynon et al. (51). This difference is
believed to be a result of varying growth conditions or differences between strains.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:65==
Future Perspectives
57
5 Future Perspectives
As this project did not successfully avoid cross-reactions between A. pleuropneumoniae
serotypes 1, 9 and 11 in an indirect ELISA, it requires more work to be done. Speciﬁcally,
it should be examined why the puriﬁed CPS still caused cross-reactions, even though
LPS was conﬁrmed to be absent by NMR. A more sensitive method than NMR can be
used to detect possible impurities, which could, for example, be immunoblot to detect
proteins and mass spectrometry to detect any possible LPS residues or other impurities.
Furthermore, a blocking ELISA should be carried out using the puriﬁed CPS
antigens to immunize rabbits and thus produce more serotype-speciﬁc antisera. In
that way, it can be tested if the cross-reactions between the serotypes are also observed
in this assay. If this method proves to be more serotype-speciﬁc than the indirect
ELISA, this could become the preferred method for diagnosing pigs infected with A.
pleuropneumoniae that in other serological tests may cross-react.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
58
Bibliography
(1)
Marsteller, T. A., and Fenwick, B. (1999). Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae
disease and serology. Swine Health and Production 7, 161–165.
(2)
Nahar, N., Turni, C., Tram, G., Blackall, P. J., and Atack, J. M., Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae: The molecular determinants of virulence and pathogenesis, 1st ed.;
Elsevier Ltd.: 2021, pp 1–38.
(3)
Sebunya, T. N., and Saunders, J. R. (1983). Haemophilus pleuropneumoniae
infection in swine: a review. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
182, 1331–7.
(4)
Bossé, J. T., Janson, H., Sheehan, B. J., Beddek, A. J., Rycroft, A. N., Simon Kroll, J.,
and Langford, P. R. (2002). Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae: pathobiology and
pathogenesis of infection. Microbes and Infection 4, 225–235.
(5)
Pohl, S., Bertschinger, H. U., Frederiksen, W., Mannheim, and W (1983). Transfer
of Haemophilus pleuropneumoniae and the Pasteurella haernolytica-Like
Organism Causing Porcine Necrotic Pleuropneumonia to the Genus
Actinobacillus (Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae comb. nov.) on the Basis of
Phenotypic and Deoxyribonucleic Acid. INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF
SYSTEMATIC BACTERIOLOGY 33, 510–514.
(6)
MacLean, L. L., Perry, M. B., and Vinogradov, E. (2004). Characterization of the
antigenic lipopolysaccharide O chain and the capsular polysaccharide produced
by Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serotype 13. Infection and Immunity 72,
5925–5930.
(7)
Dubreuil, J. D., Jacques, M., Mittal, K. R., and Gottschalk, M. (2020).
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae surface polysaccharides: their role in diagnosis
and immunogenicity. Animal Health Research Reviews 1, 73–93.
(8)
Sassu, E. L., Bossé, J. T., Tobias, T. J., Gottschalk, M., Langford, P. R., and
Hennig-Pauka, I. (2018). Update on Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae—knowledge, gaps and challenges. Transboundary and
Emerging Diseases 65, 72–90.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
59
(9)
Rosendal, S., and Mitchell, W. R. (1983). Epidemiology of Haemophilus
pleuropneumoniae Infection in Pigs: A Survey of Ontario Pork Producers, 1981.
Canadian Journal of Comparative Medicine 47, 1–5.
(10)
Nakai, T., Kawahara, K., Danbara, H., and Kume, K. (1992). Identiﬁcation of the
Cross-Reacting Antigen among Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae Strains of
Serotype 1,9 and 11 by Use of Monoclonal Antibodies. The Journal of Veterinary
Medical Science 54, 707–710.
(11)
Mittal, K. R., and Bourdon, S. (1991). Cross-reactivity and antigenic heterogeneity
among Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae strains of serotypes 4 and 7. Journal of
Clinical Microbiology 29, 1344–1347.
(12)
Sárközi, R., Makrai, L., and Fodor, L. (2015). Identiﬁcation of a proposed new
serovar of Actinobacillus Pleuropneumoniae: Serovar 16. Acta Veterinaria
Hungarica 63, 444–450.
(13)
Blackall, P. J., Klaasen, H. L., Van Den Bosch, H., Kuhnert, P., and Frey, J. (2002).
Proposal of a new serovar of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae: Serovar 15.
Veterinary Microbiology 84, 47–52.
(14)
Bossé, J. T., Li, Y., Sárközi, R., Fodor, L., Lacouture, S., Gottschalk, M.,
Casas Amoribieta, M., Angen, Ø., Nedbalcova, K., Holden, M. T., Maskell, D. J.,
Tucker, A. W., Wren, B. W., Rycroft, A. N., and Langford, P. R. (2018). Proposal of
serovars 17 and 18 of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae based on serological and
genotypic analysis. Veterinary Microbiology 217, 1–6.
(15)
Bandara, A. B., Lawrence, M. L., Veit, H. P., and Inzana, T. J. (2003). Association of
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae Capsular Polysaccharide with Virulence in Pigs.
INFECTION AND IMMUNITY 71, 3320–3328.
(16)
Schaller, A., Kuhn, R., Kuhnert, P., Nicolet, J., Anderson, T. J., Maclnnes, J. I.,
Segers, R. P. A. M., and Frey, J. (1999). Characterization of apxlVA, a new RTX
determinant of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae. Microbiology 145, 2105–2116.
(17)
Maas, A., Meens, J., Baltes, N., Hennig-Pauka, I., and Gerlach, G. F. (2006).
Development of a DIVA subunit vaccine against Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae infection. Vaccine 24, 7226–7237.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
60
(18)
Choi, C., Kwon, D., Min, K., and Chae, C. (2001). Detection and Localization of
ApxI,-II, and-III Genes of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae in Natural Porcine
Pleuropneumonia by In Situ Hybridization. Vet Pathol 38, 390–395.
(19)
Loera-Muro, A., and Angulo, C. (2018). New trends in innovative vaccine
development against Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae. Veterinary Microbiology
217, 66–75.
(20)
Provost, M., Harel, J., Labrie, J., Sirois, M., and Jacques, M. (2003). Identiﬁcation,
cloning and characterization of rfaE of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serotype
1, a gene involved in lipopolysaccharide inner-core biosynthesis. FEMS
Microbiology Letters 223, 7–14.
(21)
Raetz, C. R. H., and Whitﬁeld, C. (2002). Lipopolysaccharide Endotoxins. Annual
Review of Biochemistry 71, 635–700.
(22)
Gronow, S., and Brade, H. (2001). Invited review: Lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis:
which steps do bacteria need to survive? Journal of Endotoxin Research 7, 3–23.
(23)
Garidel, P., and Brandenburg, K. (2009). Current understanding of polymyxin B
applications in bacteraemia/sepsis therapy prevention: Clinical, pharmaceutical,
structural and mechanistic aspects. Anti-Infective Agents in Medicinal Chemistry 8,
367–385.
(24)
Altman, E., Grifﬁth, D. W., and Perry, M. B. (1990). Structural studies of the
O-chains of the lipopolysaccharides produced by strains of Actinobacillus
(Haemophilus) pleuropneumoniae serotype 5. Biochemistry and Cell Biology 68,
1268–1271.
(25)
Labrie, J., Rioux, S., Wade, M. M., Champlin, F. R., Holman, S. C., Wilson, W. W.,
Savoye, C., Kobisch, M., Sirois, M., Galarneau, C., and Jacques, M. (2002).
Identiﬁcation of genes involved in biosynthesis of Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 O-antigen and biological properties of rough
mutants. Journal of Endotoxin Research 8.
(26)
Ramjeet, M., Cox, A. D., Hancock, M. A., Mourez, M., Labrie, J., Gottschalk, M.,
and Jacques, M. (2008). Mutation in the LPS outer core biosynthesis gene, galU,
affects LPS interaction with the RTX toxins ApxI and ApxII and cytolytic activity
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
61
of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serotype 1. Molecular Microbiology 70,
221–235.
(27)
Bélanger, M., Dubreuil, D., Harel, J., Girard, C., and Jacques, M. (1990). Role of
lipopolysaccharides in adherence of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae to porcine
tracheal rings. Infection and Immunity 58, 3523–3530.
(28)
Rioux, S., Galarneau, C., Harel, J., Frey, J., Nicolet, J., Kobisch, M., Dubreuil, J. D.,
and Jacques, M. (1999). Isolation and characterization of mini-Tn10
lipopolysaccharide mutants of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serotype 1.
Canadian Journal of Microbiology 45, 1017–1026.
(29)
Rioux, S., Galarneau, C., Harel, J., Kobisch, M., Frey, J., Gottschalk, M., and
Jacques, M. (2000). Isolation and characterization of a capsule-deﬁcient mutant of
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serotype 1. Microbial Pathogenesis 28, 279–289.
(30)
Ward, C. K., and Inzana, T. J. (1997). Identiﬁcation and Characterization of a DNA
Region Involved in the Export of Capsular Polysaccharide by Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae Serotype 5a. Infection and Immunity 65, 2491–2496.
(31)
Ward, C. K., Lawrence, M. L., Veit, H. P., and Inzana, T. J. (1998). Cloning and
Mutagenesis of a Serotype-Speciﬁc DNA Region Involved in Encapsulation and
Virulence of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae Serotype 5a: Concomitant
Expression of Serotype 5a and 1 Capsular Polysaccharides in Recombinant A.
pleuropneumoniae Serot. Infection and Immunity 66, 3326–3336.
(32)
Inzana, T. J., Ma, J., Workman, T., Gogolewski, R. P., and Anderson, P. (1988).
Virulence Properties and Protective Efﬁcacy of the Capsular Polymer of
Haemophilus (Actinobacillus) pleuropneumoniae Serotype 5. INFECTION AND
IMMUNITY 56, 1880–1889.
(33)
Inzana, T. J., Todd, J., and Veit, H. P. (1993). Safety, stability, and efﬁcacy of
noncapsulated mutants of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae for use in live
vaccines. Infection and Immunity 61, 1682–1686.
(34)
Bélanger, M., Rioux, S., Foiry, B., and Jacques, M. (1992). Afﬁnity for porcine
respiratory tract mucus is found in some isolates of Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae. FEMS Microbiology Letters 97, 119–125.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
62
(35)
Günther, H., NMR spectroscopy: Basic principles, concepts and applications in
chemistry, 2. ed; Wiley: 1995.
(36)
Atta-ur-Rahman, Choudhary, M. I., and Atia-tul-Wahab In Solving Problems with
NMR Spectroscopy; Elsevier: 2016, pp 265–386.
(37)
Westphal, O., and Jann, K. (1965). Bacterial lipopolysaccharides: extraction with
phenol-water and further applications of the procedure. Methods in Carbohydrate
Chemistry 5, 83–91.
(38)
Beynon, L. M., Grifﬁth, D. W., Richards, J. C., and Perry, M. B. (1992).
Characterization of the Lipopolysaccharide O Antigens of Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae Serotypes 9 and 11: Antigenic Relationships among Serotypes
9, 11, and 1. JOURNAL OF BACTERIOLOGY 174, 5324–5331.
(39)
Alvarez, C. A., and Cobb, B. A. (2019). Puriﬁcation of capsular polysaccharide
complex from gram-negative bacteria. Methods in Molecular Biology 1954, 25–35.
(40)
Guéroult, M., Picot, D., Abi-Ghanem, J., Hartmann, B., and Baaden, M. (2010).
How cations can assist DNase I in DNA binding and hydrolysis. PLoS
computational biology 6, ed. by Levitt, M., e1001000.
(41)
Rezania, S., Amirmozaffari, N., Tabarraei, B., Jeddi-Tehrani, M., Zarei, O.,
Alizadeh, R., Masjedian, F., and Zarnani, A. H. (2011). Extraction, puriﬁcation and
characterization of lipopolysaccharide from Escherichia coli and Salmonella typhi.
Avicenna Journal of Medical Biotechnology 3, 3–9.
(42)
Altman, E., Brisson, J.-R., and Perry, M. B. (1986). Structure of the O-chain of the
lipopolysaccharide of Haemophilus pleuropneumoniae serotype 1. Biochemistry
and Cell Biology 64, 1317–1325.
(43)
Agrawal, P. K. (1992). NMR Spectroscopy in the structural elucidation of
oligosaccharides and glycosides. Phytochemistry 31, 3307–3330.
(44)
Duus, J., Gotfredsen, C. H., and Bock, K. (2000). Carbohydrate structural
determination by NMR spectroscopy: modern methods and limitations. Chemical
Reviews 100, 4589–4614.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
63
(45)
Altman, E., Brisson, J.-R., and Perry, M. B. (1986). Structural studies of the
capsular polysaccharide from Haemophilus pleuropneumoniae serotype 1.
Biochemistry and Cell Biology 64, 707–716.
(46)
Issekutz, A. C. (1983). Removal of Gram-Negative Endotoxin from Solutions by
Afﬁnity Chromatography. Journal of Immunological Methods 61, 275–281.
(47)
G-Biosciences ’Rapid Removal of Endotoxins & Pyrogens | EndotoxinOUT’
https://www.gbiosciences.com/Protein-Research/Purification-
Chromatography/Affinity-Purification-Resins/EndotoxinOUT (accessed May 18,
2021).
(48)
Hungerer, D., Jann, K., Jann, B., Orskov, F., and Orskov, I. (1967).
Immunochemistry of K Antigens of Escherichia coli 4. The K Antigen of E. coli O
9: K 30: H 12. European Journal of Biochemistry 2, 115–126.
(49)
Beynon, L. M., Richards, J. C., and Perry, M. B. (1993). Characterization of the
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serotype K11 : 01 capsular antigen. Eur. J.
Biochem 214, 209–214.
(50)
Kelly, A. E., Ou, H. D., Withers, R., and Dötsch, V. (2002). Low-conductivity
buffers for high-sensitivity NMR measurements. Journal of the American Chemical
Society 124, 12013–12019.
(51)
Beynon, L. M., Richards, J. C., and Perry, M. B. (1992).
Nuclear-magnetic-resonance analysis of the capsular antigen of Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae serotype 9. Its identity with the capsular antigen of
Escherichia coli K62 (K2ab), Neisseria meningitidis serogroup H and Pasteurella
haemolytica serotype T15. European Journal of Biochemistry 210, 119–24.
(52)
Lin, A. V. In ELISA. Methods in Molecular Biology, Hnasko, R., Ed.; Humana Press
Inc.: 2015; Vol. 1318; Chapter 5: Indirect ELISA, pp 51–59.
(53)
Xiao, Y., and Isaacs, S. N. (2012). Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
and blocking with bovine serum albumin (BSA)—not all BSAs are alike. Journal of
Immunological Methods 384, 148–151.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
64
(54)
Kementec ’TMB ONE (& prestained) ELISA HRP Substrate’
https://kementec.com/products/substrates/soluble-hrp-substrates/tmb-one-
prestained/ (accessed April 26, 2021).
(55)
Gottschalk, M., Altman, E., Charland, N., De Lasalle, F., and Dubreuil, J. D. (1994).
Evaluation of a saline boiled extract, capsular polysaccharides and long-chain
lipopolysaccharides of Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae serotype 1 as antigens
for the serodiagnosis of swine pleuropneumonia. Veterinary Microbiology 42,
91–104.
(56)
Inzana, T. J., Todd, J., Koch, C., and Nicolet, J. (1992). Serotype speciﬁcity of
immunological assays for the capsular polymer of Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae serotypes 1 and 9. Veterinary Microbiology 31, 351–362.
(57)
Bhatia, B., Mittal, K. R., and Frey, J. (1991). Factors involved in immunity against
Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae in mice. Veterinary Microbiology 29, 147–158.
(58)
Nielsen, R., Plambeck, T., and Foged, N. T. (1991). Blocking enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay for detection of antibodies to Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae serotype 2. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 29, 794–797.
(59)
Nielsen, R., Plambeck, T., and Foged, N. (1993). Blocking enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay for detection of antibodies against Actinobacillus
pleuropneumoniae serotype 8. Veterinary Microbiology 34, 131–138.
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:73==
Appendix – NMR Spectra
I
A Appendix – NMR Spectra
A.1 Serotype 9 LPS
A.2 Serotype 11 LPS
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:74==
Appendix – NMR Spectra
II
A.3 Serotype 1 Supernatant
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:75==
Appendix – NMR Spectra
III
A.4 Serotype 9 Supernatant
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:76==
Appendix – NMR Spectra
IV
A.5 Serotype 11 Supernatant
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:77==
Appendix – NMR Spectra
V
A.6 Serotype 1 CPS: Acetone Precipitation
A.7 Serotype 1 CPS: Gel Filtration
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:78==
Appendix – NMR Spectra
VI
A.8 Serotype 1 CPS: Polymyxin B
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:79==
Appendix – NMR Spectra
VII
A.9 Serotype 9 CPS: Polymyxin B
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:80==
Appendix – NMR Spectra
VIII
A.10 Serotype 11 CPS: Polymyxin B
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:81==
Appendix – NMR Spectra
IX
A.11 Serotype 1 Supernatant for CTAB Precipitation
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:82==
Appendix – NMR Spectra
X
A.12 Serotype 9 Supernatant for CTAB Precipitation
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:83==
Appendix – NMR Spectra
XI
A.13 Serotype 1 CPS: CTAB Precipitation
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:84==
Appendix – ELISA
XII
B Appendix – ELISA
B.1 Serotype 1 CPS Antigen 1:100 to 1:12,800 (Gel Filtration)
B.2 Serotype 1 Chess Titration (CTAB Precipitation)
B.3 Serotype 9 Chess Titration with Less Antigen (CTAB
Precipitation)
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
==PAGE:85==
Appendix – ELISA
XIII
B.4 Serotype 9 Chess Titration with More Antigen (CTAB
Precipitation)
B.5 Serotype 1 CPS with Rabbit Antiserum
B.6 Serotype 9 CPS with Rabbit Antiserum
Technical University of Denmark
Kirstine Bækgaard Andersen
