==PAGE:1==

Influence of pressure on polymer 
friction 
Lorenzo Giansante  
Master’s Thesis
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Lorenzo Giansante
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Building 404, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at Department of Mechanical Engineering,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in collaboration with Novo Nordisk in the
Reasearch and Development department, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Lorenzo Giansante - s192324
Signature
Date
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
ii
02/07/2021
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The purpose of this thesis was to investigate the influence of the contact pressure on the
friction between polymers. The materials investigated are five engineering polymers used
for the production of drug delivery systems designed by Novo Nordisk.
Based on the knowledge gained from the literature and experiments previously performed,
it was known that the coeﬀicient of friction tends to decrease with the increase of the con-
tact pressure. Through the use of a tribotester and specific sample designs, it was possible
to investigate the trend of the coeﬀicient of friction over a range of contact pressures from
0 to 100 MPa.
The compression tests performed on the specimens have shown that, despite the high
level of contact pressures reached, there has been no plastic deformation of the specimens.
However, deformation has been observed during the tribotests for the combined effect of
contact pressure and temperature.
The results of the tribotests have shown that, overall, the decrease of the friction coeﬀi-
cient can be interpreted with a curved fitting. However, a linear model has given a better
approximation of the trends and has shown that there is proportionality between combi-
nations of different polymers. The results of the calculations show good correlation with
the experimental work.
The analysis of the friction force in function of the normal load has shown that the results
are in contradiction with the linear models predicted in the literature. For this reason the
nonlinear trends obtained have been interpreted with a new model.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisor at Novo Nordisk and at DTU Ion Marius
Sivebæk for his valuable guidelines throughout this project. His guidance, insightful com-
ments and his hard questions helped me in all the time of research. Next, I would like to
thank all the people of the Novo Nordisk research centre in Hillerød that helped me, in
particular Rasmus Klinck for approving the project, Dorrit Eggert Larsen for instructing
me on the use of the compression test equipment, Marco Crosio for his valuable help for
the production of the specimens, Jan Lasson Andreasen for his help with the profilometer,
Lene Løvgreen and Maj-Britt Graulund for their instructions about safety.
I would also like to thank Klaus Liltorp, from DTU Department of Mechanical Engineer-
ing for his help with the measuring equipment.
Finally, I would like to thank the entire Novo Nordisk research centre in Hillerød for al-
lowing me to conduct this work and for their valuable insights.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
iv
==PAGE:6==
Table of Content
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Nomenclature and Abbraviations
1
1.1
Mathematical expressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Introduction
3
3
Materials and Methods
11
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
The Tribotester . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
The Hertzian contact mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.4
Compression tests of specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Results and Discussion
23
4.1
Optimization of the tests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Experimental results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Results interpretation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.4
Friction force . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.5
Coeﬀicients α and β . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5
Conclusions
47
5.1
Future Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A Appendix
50
A.1 Technical drawings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
A.2 Injection molding of the specimens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
A.3 Matlab pseudo code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A.4 Compression test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.5 Temperature effect on 3P05 specimens of PP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
A.6 Temperature effect on 3P05 specimens of the other materials
. . . . . . . .
78
A.7 Tribotest results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
A.8 Study of the trend of the Friction coeﬀicient in 3P13-large combinations . .
91
A.9 Coeﬀicients α and β . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
A.10 Datasheets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Nomenclature and Abbraviations
1.1
Mathematical expressions
N
=
Normal load [N].
F
=
Friction force [N].
a
=
Adhesion coeﬀicient [N].
P
=
Contact pressure [MPa].
P0
=
Maximum contact pressure [MPa].
Pave
=
Average contact pressure [MPa].
Crad
=
Radius of the contact area [mm].
µ
=
Coeﬀicient of friction [-].
CoF
=
Coeﬀicient of friction [-].
ν
=
Poisson’s ratio [-].
Areal
=
True contact area [mm2].
Anom
=
Nominal contact area [mm2].
s
=
Shear strength [MPa].
E
=
Young’s modulus [MPa].
E′
=
Effective Young’s modulus [MPa].
R
=
Radius of the sphere/spherical cap [mm].
r10
=
Radius of the cylinder [mm].
N0
=
Adhesion [N].
Cf
=
Real contact area constant [-].
Sσ
=
Shear strength of the film material [MPa].
K1
=
Constant in Bridgman’s model [-].
Tg
=
Glass transition temperature [°C].
α
=
First coeﬀicient in equation 4.5 [-].
β
=
Second coeﬀicient in equation 4.5 [m2
N ].
G
=
First coeﬀicient in equation 4.10 [-].
H
=
Second coeﬀicient in equation 4.10 [-].
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
1
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Materials
PP
=
Polypropylene Sabic 58MNK10.
PC
=
Polycarbonate Sabic HPS7.
POM
=
Polyoxymethylene Kepital MX30BT01.
ABS
=
Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene Sabic HMG94MD.
PBT
=
Polybutylene Terephtalate Elcrin W1000XiQ.
PMMA =
Polymethylmethacrylate.
PE
=
Polyethylene.
1.3
Specimens
3P05
=
Specimen with spherical contacts of radius 5 mm.
3P13
=
Specimen with spherical contacts of radius 13 mm.
3P35
=
Specimen with spherical contacts of radius 35 mm.
R10
=
Specimen with cylindrical contact of radius 10 mm.
Flat
=
Specimen with flat contact surface.
Large
=
Specimen with flat surface used as counterpart.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Introduction
Tribology is the science of two surfaces in contact with relative sliding motion.
The
topic is of great practical and theoretical relevance, as lubrication, friction and wear are
key properties in almost all applications with moving parts. One of the applications of
tribology concerns medical devices.
Novo Nordisk is a pioneer company in the field.
Founded in 1924 and headquartered
in Bagsværd, Denmark, the Danish multinational pharmaceutical company manufactures
and markets pharmaceutical products and services, specifically diabetes care medications
and devices.
Novo Nordisk employs approximately 45,300 people in 80 countries, and
markets its products in more than 160 countries [1]. Millions of people around the world
benefit its existing treatments, especially patients living with diabetes, severe obesity
and rare blood and endocrine diseases. The company produces over 50% of the world’s
supply of insulin and, to make drug delivery possible, Novo Nordisk combines engineering
and research to produce disposable pre-filled pens, durable pens with replaceable insulin
cartridges and smart connected pens for diabetes.
The first commercially available insulin pen, NovoPen® (Novo Nordisk A/S, Bagsvaerd,
Denmark), was introduced in 1985.
The NovoPen is a reusable injection device that
incorporates a disposable insulin cartridge and a syringe into a single assembly, providing
simple insulin delivery.
The NovoPen family consists of multiple versions of durable and disposable insulin devices.
Each new generation of pen builds on the previous design, with the addition of technical
features developed to increase ease of use and implement the design [2].
The NovoPen® 4, NovoPen® 5 and NovoPen® 6 launched respectively in 2004, 2015 and
2019 are among the world’s most used durable insulin pens. They utilize disposable insulin
cartridges loaded and removed from the pen by the patients. These medical devices are
made of a polymeric and metallic materials [3].
The FlexPen® and the FlexTouch® are disposable, pre-filled pens, designed to conve-
niently perform injections and they are made of polymeric materials. It is important for
durable insulin pens to maintain their accuracy throughout their lifetime to ensure that
the intended dose is delivered consistently. Therefore the functionality of the device is
well controlled. In the matter of dry friction, it is necessary to study the nature of the
contact among the parts of the different materials used for the NovoPens. The contacts
in the devices can be between polymer-metallic parts but also between two polymers [4].
Among the polymers, engineering polymers are treated in this paper, they possess the
necessary mechanical properties, they are easy to process and they are lightweight. Most
importantly, it is easy to manufacture products with complex geometries due to the ability
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
3
==PAGE:10==
of polymers to be easily injection moulded. This makes them suitable for Novo Nordisk’s
applications.
Polymers can be semicrystalline and amorphous thermoplastics. Thermoplastic polymer’s
characteristics depend on temperature. At adequately low temperatures, polymers are
hard and glass-like, while they adopt a softer and more malleable form when a critical
temperature is reached, this is normally called the glass transition temperature Tg [5]. At
temperatures above the Tg value, the polymer chains show increased changeableness which
allows the bulk material to flow. At temperatures below Tg, the flexibility is restricted and
the polymer acts like a glassy, elastic solid. The glass transition temperature of a polymer
is conditioned by the chemical structure, degree of chemical or physical cross-linking, and
molecular weight. The glass transition temperatures for the polymers considered in this
work are shown in Table 2.1.
The polymers considered for the investigations are:
• Polypropylene Sabic 58MNK10 (PP)
• Polycarbonate Sabic HPS7 (PC)
• Polyoxymethylene Kepital MX30BT01 (POM)
• Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene Sabic HMG94MD (ABS)
• Polybutylene terephthalate Sabic Elcrin XI1000Q (PBT)
Data-sheets can be found in the Appendix A.10.
Table 2.1: The five polymers considered for the investigations of this paper with the
respective glass transition temperatures. The data is retrieved from [6].
PC and ABS are amorphous thermoplastics, their polymer chains are disordered. At low
temperatures they are tough and brittle, but they lose their toughness quickly above their
glass transition temperature and become malleable and prone to elongation. Depending on
their molecular weight, when they reach the glass transition temperature, their mechanical
properties decrease drastically or reach a steady state called ”rubbery state”. Their extent
increase with molecular weight.
At higher temperatures, these high molecular weight
polymers go through a fluidification zone and their mechanical properties drop.
PP, POM and PBT are semicrystalline thermoplastics. Their molecular structure is more
organized despite an inevitable presence of amorphous regions which coexist with the
crystalline domain. At low temperature their mechanical characteristics are similar to
amorphous polymers. Before reaching the ”rubbery state”, at the glass transition temper-
ature Tg the Young modulus decreases by one order of magnitude and the polymers reach
a “leathery state” [5].
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
4
==PAGE:11==
Due to the properties of the mentioned polymers, at room temperatures, disposable medi-
cal devices such as the FlexTouch® can sustain stresses and forces applied during a regular
use. To easily perform an injection with a FlexTouch® or a FlexPen®, the necessary force
for the injection has to be low [7]. To ensure eﬀicient use of the mechanism, the contact
forces and the friction between these parts must be known and controlled.
At Novo Nordisk several millions of such devices are produced yearly so the price of the
used polymeric material is also of significant importance.
The challenge is to control
and lower the friction between these low-cost materials without external lubrication as
this is banned in a high volume production [8]. This research’s intent is to investigate
in further details the nature of the contact between two polymers, in particular it is of
interest to analyse the influence of the contact pressure on the coeﬀicient of friction. In the
literature, very limited information is available on polymer-to-polymer friction, whereas
friction properties between polymers and metal surfaces have been extensively investigated.
The first information on tribology can be traced back to the work of Leonardo da Vinci,
in the 15th century, despite the word ”tribology” was first coined almost 450 years later
[9]. Leonardo was fully familiar with the basic tribological concepts of friction and friction
coeﬀicient but it was only in the 17th century that his work was rediscovered by Guillame
Amontons. He believed that friction was predominantly the result of work done to lift
one surface over the roughness of the other, or from deformation or wear of the opposite
surface. For several centuries after Amontons’ work, scientists believed that friction was
due to surface roughness [10].
However, Amontons was not aware of the difference between static and kinetic friction.
The experiments were further elaborated by Leonhard Euler in 1750, who derived the
angle of repose of a weight on an inclined plane and first distinguished between static and
kinetic friction. A much better understanding of the friction phenomenon in its entire
complexity is due to the works of Charles Augustin Coulomb.
In 1785 Charles Augustin Coulomb published his friction memoir [11]. From Coulomb and
Amonton’s work, it has been possible to express the three empirical laws of friction:
• Amontons’ first law: The friction force is proportional to the normal load i.e.:
F = µN
(2.1)
where F is the friction force, N is the normal load and µ is identified as the coeﬀicient
of friction.
• Amontons’ second law: The friciton force is independent of the apparent area of
contact.
• Cooulomb’s law of friction: The friction force does not depend on velocity [12].
In the introduction of his memoir, he outlined the current state of knowledge, with natural
reference to Amontons’ initial concepts and some later experimental indications of contrary
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
5
==PAGE:12==
behaviour in terms of time of repose, area of contact and cohesion. He concluded that
cohesion had a very small influence upon friction, but he retained a small constant a in
his relation between frictional force and normal load. In the general case of a normal load
of a body N, resting upon a horizontal plane, the frictional resistance to sliding F was
written as:
F = a + µN
(2.2)
Coulomb was the first one to introduce a two-terms expression for friction. Similar rep-
resentation have become commonplace in most recent times where the first components
normally represents adhesive or cohesive effects and the second is attributed to deforma-
tion or ploughing action [13].
John Theophilus Desagulier presented an account of his studies of the cohesion of lead to
the Royal Society [14]. He is the first one to recognize the role of adhesion in friction.
B. Derjaguin rediscovered the studies about adhesion of Desagulier and discussed a friction
model that takes into account deformation and adhesion factors [15]. He developed a model
called the DMT (Derjaguin–Muller–Toporov) to describe the contact of an elastic sphere
with a rigid half-space. He revised the Amonton-Coulomb law of friction and he took into
account the adhesion contribution. According to Derjaguin:
F = µ(N + N0)
(2.3)
where N0 is the normal component of the load which represents adhesion.
Derjaguin understood that the Amonton-Coulomb’s law of friction (eq. 2.1) was not valid
unconditionally for all types of materials and experiments. Inspired by the work done by
scientists of the early 20th century on the refinements of the dry friction law, many other
scientists have tried to clarify and better understand the mechanisms behind friction.
In 1950, F. Bowden and David Tabor gave a physical explanation for the laws of friction
[16]. With their theory they gave a first physical explanation to the existence of dry friction
and they managed to clarify the contradiction between the adhesive issue and Amonton’s
second Law. They did so by introducing the concept of real area of contact. The theory
was developed for ideal elastic-plastic metals and it is possible to summarize it as follows:
• When two surfaces are loaded together, they only make contact along the asperities.
• Even at low level of loads, the real contact pressure is very high and that causes
plastic deformation in the contacts of the softer material because the real contact
area is very small. The material keeps deforming plastically and causes the growth of
the contact area (both by growth of the individual initial contacts and by initiation
of new contacts). The contact area keeps growing until is suﬀiciently large to support
the load elastically.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
6
==PAGE:13==
• The yield pressure P0 can be defined as:
P0 =
N
Areal
= H
(2.4)
where N is the normal load and Areal is the real contact area. The quantity P0 is
sometimes rewritten as H since it is nearly the same as the hardness of the softer
material.
• As a result of the deformation, strong adhesive bonds form between the asperities
and the friction force is defined as the necessary force to cause shear failure. The
term s is the shear stress, hence:
F = As
(2.5)
• The friction coeﬀicient can be defined as follows:
µ = F
N = s
H
(2.6)
The friction model developed for polymers during the 20th century, is based on the formu-
lation of the two-term non-interacting dissipation process model [17]. Bowden and Tabor
were particularly influential in establishing its credibility and the model has been adopted
by many other tribologists in modern times.
The essence of the two-term model of friction is shown in fig 2.1. According to this model,
the frictional work is dissipated according to two different mechanism. In the contact
between a polymer and a metal, which happens in the elastic limits of the materials, the
frictional work is considered to be dissipated in two separate regions. The first interfacial
region corresponds to the highest rates of energy dissipation and answers to adhesive
behaviours.
The bulk region involves a higher volume of material and lower rates of
energy dissipation [17].
Figure 2.1: The two term model of friction of polymers. The frictional work is considered
to be dissipated in the interfacial region into two separate regions.
The two regions
undergo different process, the interfacial dissipation region corresponds to high rates of
energy dissipation and represents the ”adhesion model” of friction. The other process
involves larger volume of material and lower levels of energy dissipation and represents
the ”deformation model” of friction [17].
The two-term model of friction has also been adopted as the standard model for the gov-
erning equations of polymer friction, especially when considering the influence of pressure
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
7
==PAGE:14==
on polymer friction. The model has been confirmed in molecular dynamic [8].
In the 1960s, along with the increasing application of polymers in industrial applications,
it is possible to find the first experiments on the influence of pressure on polymeric ma-
terials .
With his publication, Ainbinder at.
al.
conducted tests on several types of
plastics, among which Polyethylene and Polytetrafluoroethylene [18]. They showed that
the mechanical properties of the materials investigated, would increase with the increase
of hydrostatic pressure. Among these properties they found considerable variations in the
elastic modulus, yield strength, ultimate strength and deformation at break.
The exploration in the field of hydrostatic pressure started creating some real interest
during the late 1960s and the beginning of the 1970s.
It is possible to find evidence
of extensive studies of yield and fracture on polymers, particularly on isotropic oriented
polymers.
As a part of these investigation, researchers such as Rabinowitz and Ward
began to investigate the correlations between shear yield behaviour of polymeric materials
under the influence of pressure [19]. They conducted experiments on PMMA, PET and
PE with hydrostatic pressures reaching 700 MPa. They found that there was a monotonic
increase in the initial slope of the stress-strain curve with increasing pressure. Secondly,
there was a substantial increase in the yield stress and the strain to yield as pressure was
increased.
The relation between shear strengths of polymers and the pressure has been expressed in
different ways. In 1968, Bowers and Zisman studied the behaviour of solid films on harder
backing used as dry films lubricants [20]. They based their experiments on Bowden-Tabor’s
adhesion theory of friction defining the coeﬀicient of friction as in equation 2.6. As shown
in Figure 2.2, in the mentioned case a thin layer of paraﬀin was tested against a harder
material. They found out that the shear strength of the material tested was increasing.
They interpreted the results according to Bridgman’s model [21]:
Sσ = K1P n
(2.7)
where Sσ is the shear strength of the film material. K1 is a constant, P represents the
pressure and can be also identified with H as in equation 2.6 and n is a positive exponent.
With the equation 2.7 they stated the correlation between shear strength and pressure for
a thin film of material. If we apply equation 2.7 to equation 2.6 we obtain:
µ = Sσ
P = K1P n
P
= K1P n−1
(2.8)
Therefore, according to Bowers and Zisman’s interpretation of Bridgman’s theory[21], for
thin solid films, the shear strength of the film material at the existing pressure must be
known to calculate the coeﬀicient of friction and the shear strength at the high pressure
of many materials is nearly proportional to the pressure.
In 1971, Bowers studied the influence of pressure on the shear strength and the frictional
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
8
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: Shear stress in function of pressure as interpreted by Bowers and Zisman
in 1968. The increasing value of shear strength of paraﬀin as calculated for a thin film
deposited on a harder solid surface, sliding against an half space [20].
behaviour of five different high polymers deposited on hard substrates [22]. The same five
high polymers had been studied by Towle [23], and he found out that the shear strength
increased nearly linearly with pressure for all five polymers. The relationship between the
shear strength was then revised and rewritten in a less complicated equation than the one
suggested by Bridgman (eq. 2.7):
Sσ = kP + c
(2.9)
Where k and c are constants that vary with the polymer. It follows that the coeﬀicient of
friction can be defined as:
µ = Sσ
P = c
P + k
(2.10)
To measure the variation of pressure, in his experiments, Bowers used thin layers of poly-
mers, deposited on a hard substrate (soda-lime glass or stainless steel) which were sliding
against an hard surface (same materials used for the substrate). He assumed that the film
thickness was negligible and that no contact would occur through the film. He then real-
ized that any contribution of the film in supporting the load would result in a decrease in
pressure. He disregarded the effect of temperature and sliding velocity but he considered a
secondary effect caused by the plowing effect and the plastic deformation of the polymer.
He measured it to be very low for thin films since the deformation diminishes.
Both the equations 2.8 and 2.10 will be considered in this paper for the interpretation
of the results of the influence of the pressure on the coeﬀicient of friction in the contact
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
9
==PAGE:16==
between two polymers. The experiments conducted in this paper will be not considering
thin films of polymer on a hard substrate but bulk specimens, the difference in results has
been documented in 1975 by Briscoe [24]. Briscoe established that increasing the pressure
for the contact of thin film of polymeric materials, the shear strength would increase
in accordance with equation 2.7. He focused his attention on the influencing factors of
the coeﬀicients k and c and discovered that both constants are a function of velocity of
sliding and temperature. He also compared the values of the coeﬀicients obtained for thin
polymeric films with the results obtained by Rabinowitz and Ward [19] on the influence of
hydrostatic pressure on shear strength of bulk specimen of polymers. He found similarities
in the qualitative behaviour of the shear properties of thin films and bulk specimen but
an appreciable quantitative difference [24].
It is very important to mention a further contribution by Briscoe to this thesis made in
1975 [25] where he made studies on the influence of hydrostatic pressure on the coeﬀicient
of friction of polymers and demonstrated that the area of contact had no influence on the
variation caused by the pressure. Together with Tabor and Parry he analysed the effect
of hydrostatic gas pressure on the coeﬀicient of sliding friction of several polymers thin
films and a metal slider. According to his findings, the hydrostatic pressure has no effect
on the area of contact between the metal slider and the film. Despite this, he registered a
decrease in the coeﬀicient of friction with increasing pressure. He also observed a change in
the frictional force which does not simply increase with increasing normal load, according
to a proportional linear model as in Amonton’s equation 2.1, but shows a deflection point
after which the friction force starts to decrease with increasing hydrostatic pressure.
The results contained in Briscoes’s paper have a profound importance for some of the
findings that will be presented in the results section of the thesis.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
10
==PAGE:17==
3
Materials and Methods
The investigations behind this thesis were conducted in the research and development
department of Novo Nordisk. The scope of the dissertation was to clarify the tribological
behaviour of some of the materials used for the production of Novo Nordisk’s drug delivery
systems and, as mentioned in the previous chapter, some of these devices are made of
polymer parts. This dissertation was based on the study of five polymers.
3.1
Materials
The five materials used are thermoplastic polymers of different characteristic, their abbre-
viations, their classification and the structure of the repeat units are indicated in Table
3.1.
Table 3.1: The five polymers used in the experiments of this thesis are thermoplastic
polymers with different characteristics. The table shows the abbreviation, the class to
which they belong and the structure of the basic unit of repetition [26]
.
The Polymers investigated in the paper are all commercially available and possess char-
acteristics which are suitable for injection moulding. In table 3.2 they are presented with
their main mechanical properties which have been obtained from oﬀicial data-sheets of
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
11
==PAGE:18==
the polymer producers which provide the raw material to Novo Nordisk. The properties
listed below will be utilized for further calculations involving the Hertzian contact stress
between surfaces.
As seen in Table 3.2 the five polymers possess different mechanical
characteristics, which makes them suitable for a number of applications.
Table 3.2: Main properties of polymers investigated in this paper. The materials are all
commercially available. The densities, the elastic moduli and the tensile yield stresses
are retrieved from the data-sheets shown in the appendix A.10. The Poisson ratios are
obtained from [6].
PC is a thermoplastic, the processed material is amorphous which makes it highly trans-
parent to visible light. This property confers it good aesthetic qualities. Its mechanical
characteristics and high toughness make it suitable for several applications, among which:
electronic components, construction materials [6].
POM is a semicrystalline thermoplastic with a relatively high crystallinity with very good
chemical resistance. It is used mostly for moving parts and it is one of the most versa-
tile engineering thermoplastic with excellent friction and wear properties, due to its high
strength it is widely employed to replace the traditional metals and ceramics in microelec-
tronic packaging, aerospace, automotive, and biomedical applications [27].
PP is a versatile polymeric material has high crystallinity, which imparts high tensile
strength to weight ratio. It can be easily processed on conventional processing machines.
It has low processing temperature, low cost, good toughness and chemical resistance.
Usually, it is employed in modified blends with different thermoplastics, reinforced with
fibres and fillers [27].
ABS is an amorphous thermoplastic copolymer. It provides good strength, flow, toughness
and dimensional stability. It is suitable for processing by injection moulding especially for
thin walled medical applications such as surgical instruments, fluid and drug delivery
components [28]. The ABS Sabic HMG94MD exhibits durability despite not being very
ductile.
PBT is a semi-crystalline polymer that is used as an insulator in the electrical and elec-
tronics industries. It is resistant to solvents and it is mechanically strong [6].
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
12
==PAGE:19==
3.2
The Tribotester
The focus of this thesis has been the study of the influence of pressure on the coeﬀicient
of friction in the contact between two polymers. To test the five mentioned polymer, a
tribotester has been used. This tribotester has been developed in Novo Nordisk A/S [29]
and it is able to handle polymer contacts and polymer-metal combinations. The apparatus
can be set to measure friction and wear between test specimens in accordance with ASTM
standard D3702-94 [30] and as a thrust washer test.
The novelty of the tribotester is that the test conditions can be varied transiently during
the test: due to the presence of a a dead weight and a servo motor, the contact pressure
can be varied during a test period. The same can be done with the sliding speed and
acceleration as an electric servo motor provides the rotatory motion of the lower part
of the contact. In addition to this, it is also possible to vary the relative humidity and
the test temperature since the apparatus can be placed in an acclimatised chamber. The
tribotester is shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The tribotester used for the current investigation. The test conditions can be
varied transiently during the test, the dead weight can be moved with a servo motor to
vary the contact pressure between the specimens. The rotating plate provides the motion,
its sliding speed and acceleration can be also varied.
The tribotester allows two polymer specimens to be placed in contact with each other.
Through a rotating plate, the servo motor drives the rotatory motion of the sample un-
derneath, which hereafter will be called the ”smaller” specimen for convenience and the
specimen on top will be called ”large”. Before positioning the specimens in the tribotester,
the contacting surfaces are cleaned with wipes imbued with ethanol 96%. Once the spec-
imen are positioned, the test set up needs to be programmed. The test is limited by the
practical limits of the machine:
• Variation of the gliding speed ranging between 0 and 0.02 m/s
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
13
==PAGE:20==
• Applied normal load due to the varying position of the dead weight ranging between
0 and 387 N.
• Testing conditions can vary from 0 – 50 C and 10 – 95 % relative humidity (RH).
The measurements for this paper have been carried out in ambient conditions (20°C
and 50% RH).
The test starts at 380 N with a constant sliding speed of 0.02 m/s. The load is kept for
30 seconds, after that it decreases every 20 seconds at regular intervals of 30 N until 20 N
of load is reached. The highest load is kept for 30 seconds to ensure a suﬀicient running-in
phase between the polymers [8]. The test program is schematized in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Test program used for the tribotester to measure the coeﬀicient of friction
for the various combinations of polymers. The program test has been implemented in
accordance with the machinery’s limitation to obtain the widest possible range of normal
loads.
The output of the test is a spreadsheet containing a section with the information of the
test, the set up and the acquired data with a frequency of data acquisition of 10 Hz,
meaning 10 samples per second. An example of a simplified version of the the output file
is given in Figure 3.3. In the example a smaller specimen of POM is tested against a large
specimen of PC.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
14
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.3: Simplified version of the output file of the tribotest. It contains a first section
with the information about the test, followed by the test set-up also described in Figure
3.2 and the acquired data at a frequency of 10 Hz. No information on the contact pressure
is given in the output.
We know that the contact pressure is P = N
A , the available range of the normal load N
is established by the limits of the tribotester. To obtain a valid range of corresponding
contact pressures P between the specimens, it has been necessary to modify the contact
area A. To change A different design of specimens have been used.
Figure 3.4: The four different design of smaller specimen used to obtain an wide range of
contact pressure between the two polymers. a) Three points contact specimen with 5 mm
radius of the bumps (3P05), b) Three points contact specimen with 13 mm radius of the
bumps (3P13), c) Three points contact specimen with 35 mm radius of the bumps (3P35),
d) Line contact specimen with 10 mm radius of the cylindrical contact (R10).
Four different types of smaller specimen design have been considered. Three of these are
created to obtain point contacts while the fourth is designed to obtain line contact, as
shown in Figure 3.4.
The line contact is obtained by shaping the contact part of the
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
15
==PAGE:22==
specimen as a cylinder of 10 mm of radius. The point contacts have been obtained by
applying three spherical caps on the upper surface of the specimens. By varying the radii
of these bumps it has been possible to vary the contact area.
The specimens have a
small hole on the flat surface which allows alignment and clamping of the specimen on the
tribotester. The technical drawings and the specifics can be found in the Appendix A.1.
A fifth design of smaller specimen is presented in Figure 3.5 b). This type of smaller
specimen features a contact surface which is completely flat. The flat contact will not be
included for further experiments, because it only provides information on contact pressures
that range from 0 to 3 MPa while it has been possible to reach more than 80 MPa of
contact pressure with the introduction of the three points contact.
In the same Figure 3.5 a) it is possible to observe the large specimen. This design features
three small holes which ensure the alignment and the locking of the specimen, and a wide
flat surface that serves as a flat contact surface for all other smaller specimens.
Figure 3.5: a) Large specimen with flat contact surface b) Smaller specimen with flat
contact surface. The smaller specimen slides against the flat surface of the large one. The
smaller flat specimen only provides information on contact pressures that range from 0
to 3 MPa, for this reason it has been decided not to use it for the investigation of the
influence of pressure on the coeﬀicient of friction.
All the polymeric parts have been obtained by injection moulding. Two different moulds
were used for the occasion. In one of them the 3 point contact specimens are created
simultaneously.
With the other one the large and the two specimens FLAT and R10
are created together. Some pictures of the injection mould and of the final product are
presented in the Appendix A.2.
3.3
The Hertzian contact mechanics
The smaller specimens slide against the flat surface of the large specimen. The contact
pressure between the two polymers has been calculated according to the Hertzian theory
[31]. The contact between the smaller and the large specimens are schematized as a contact
between a sphere and a half-space and as a contact between a cylinder and a half-space
[32]. The Hertzian simplification is valid if some conditions are satisfied:
1. The strain considered are small and within the elastic limit.
2. The area of contact is much smaller than the characteristic dimensions of the con-
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
16
==PAGE:23==
tacting bodies.
3. Each body is considered to be an elastic half space.
4. The surfaces are frictionless and there is no sliding.
In this work, the experiments are conducted with bodies in motion which implies that
the surfaces are sliding and the fourth assumption is not respected. Despite not being
justifiable, the Hertzian theory is still applied to calculate an approximation of the contact
pressure between the sliding specimens. The maximum contact pressure and the average
pressure between a sphere and a half space can be written as follows:
P0 =
3N
2πc2
rad
= 1
π
(
6NE
′2
R2
) 1
3
and Pave = 2
3p0
(3.1)
where
1
E
′ = 1 −ν2
1
E1
+ 1 −ν2
2
E2
(3.2)
being E1, ν1, E2 and ν2 the Elastic moduli and the Poisson’s ratios of the two contacting
bodies. For the R10 specimen, the maximum contact pressure and the average pressure
have been calculated as follows:
P0 =
( E′F
πLr10
) 1
2
and Pave = π
4 p0
(3.3)
Where L is the length of the cylinder, which represents the length of the line contact and
r10 is the radius of the cylinder which is 10 mm.
At this stage it is possible to comprehend why the 3-point specimens have spherical sections
with those specific radii. In the Figure 3.6, the average pressures corresponding to the
normal loads are calculated for the four specimen types. An example of a POM-PC contact
is given in Figure 3.6. In the POM-PC indication, the first polymer always refers to the
smaller specimen and the latter to the larger, which means that in this case POM is the
smaller specimen sliding against a large specimen of PC.
In the figure it is seen how the calculated pressures overlaps for the different types of
specimen. The red bars indicate the contact pressure calculated with the Hertzian theory
of contact mechanics, the length of the bars is limited by the limited loads of the test (20
to 380 N). The radii of the spherical caps on the specimen were chosen with the intention
of achieving a complete and uniform distribution of the various average pressures. This
allowed an analysis of the influence of contact pressure on polymer friction with a consistent
and uniformly distributed amount of data.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.6: Combination POM-PC. In the graph are reported the average pressures for
the contact between the four smaller specimens and the large one. The red bars indicate
the range of contact pressure calculated with the Hertzian theory of contact mechanics,
the length of the bars is limited by the limited loads of the test (20 to 380 N). To achieve a
complete and overlapping distribution of the various average pressures, different specimens
design have been used.
The distribution of the pressures as seen in Figure 3.6, is valid also for all the other
polymer combinations. As seen in figure, high loads applied to a smaller specimen 3P05
of PC results in average Hertzian pressures that can reach up to 83 MPa. A pressure
greater than the tensile yield stress of the HPS7 Polycarbonate Sabic (appendix A.13). A
similar situation also occurs for the other polymers: whenever the highest load is exerted
on the 3P05 specimens, the applied pressure exceeds the tensile yield stress indicated for
the specific polymer. This means that the tribotest may cause plastic deformation of the
material.
3.4
Compression tests of specimens
To investigate if the tribotest induce plastic deformation and ensure that the tribological
tests have been conducted always under elastic conditions of the polymer, it has been
necessary to measure the compressive yield stress of the spherical features of the 3P05
specimens.
The spherical caps of the 3P05 specimen are the ones that sustain the higher pressures,
hence some compressive tests have been conducted on 3P05 smaller specimens of each
polymer. The compressive tests have been carried out with a Lloyd LR5KPlus mounting
a 5000 N load cell. The tests have been based on the standard EN ISO 604 [33], about
the determination of compressive properties of plastics. The method is used to investigate
the compressive behaviour of the test specimens and for determining the compressive yield
stress. Since the specimens tested are different from the ones specified in the standard,
the method has been modified and adapted under the conditions defined:
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
18
==PAGE:25==
• Set up: the specimen is compressed between two steel plates, the upper steel surface
is in contact with one contact point on the spherical cap as shown in Figure 3.7.
• Preload: the test is performed without preload.
• Test speed = 0.1 mm/s
• Load: the test ends when the requested load is reached and the load is kept for 20
seconds before releasing the stress.
Figure 3.7: The testing machine used for the compression tests and the set up. For the
tests a 5000 N load cell has been used. During the test, the specimens are placed between
a block of steel and a flat punch. The flat punch applies the load on the spherical feature
for 20 seconds after which the load is released.
During the tribotest the single spherical feature reaches a maximum load of 126 N. For
this reason, the specimens have been tested with an initial load of 120 N. just below the
maximum load of the tribotest. This, to investigate whether there is plastic deformation
at the high loads during the test. The compression load has been increased until plastic
deformation was observable. The spherical caps of the 3P05 have been measured with a
profilometer before and after the test to observe if plastic deformation had happened. In
the case of plastic deformation, the average Hertzian pressure has been calculated and an
apparent compressive yield stress for the material has been registered. The compressive
yield stress has been called ”apparent” because it does not comply with the standard EN
ISO 604 [33]. To avoid relaxation effects, the specimens have been profiled 48 hours after
the compression test. In Figure 3.8 the profilometer set up is shown. In the set up, the
specimens are fastened to a rotating plate, which is held in place with some glue pads.
The rotating plate helps positioning the specimen so that the profile can be registered by
the stylus’ probe. The profilometer used is a MARSURF XC 2 MIT CD 120 CONTOUR.
The profiles have been obtained with a measuring speed of 0.1 m/s, a traversing length
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
19
==PAGE:26==
of 6-10 mm and a measuring force of 20 mN.
Figure 3.8: The set up of the profilometer, used for measuring the profiles of the speci-
mens. The specimens are fastened to a rotating plate held in place with some glue pads.
The stylus probe captures and registers the profiles of the specimen’s spherical caps for
comparisons and further elaborations.
The spherical caps have been profiled before and after the compression tests. The apparent
compressive yield stress has been identified as the stress for which a permanent plastic
change in the size of the spherical caps was noticed.
3.5
Data processing
For the development of this thesis, it is relevant to elaborate shortly how the data obtained
from the tribotester was made accessible to the operator and consequently processed. As
seen in Figure 3.3, the main output of the tribotester is the value of the friction coeﬀicient
as a function of time at a frequency of 10 Hz. This output is entered in a MatLab code,
the pseudo code and its extended version can be seen in Appendix A.3. The first operation
performed by the script is a cleaning operation. In this phase a new input file is created
and it is prepared for further reading. Subsequently, the code extrapolates the friction
coeﬀicients from the new input file. The extrapolation is done by an averaging process
which allows the extrapolation of the friction coeﬀicients.
A visual explanation of this operation is given in Figure 3.9. In the figure it is possible
to observe the tribotest results as they would show after the test. Two combinations are
shown and each graph presents the output of three tests: a) POM-ABS for a R10-large
pairing, b) ABS-POM also for a R10-large pairing. In both graphs the results of the CoF
of the three tests are plotted with the value of the load. It is seen how the coeﬀicient of
friction increases with the decreasing load. It is interesting to notice how the results can
vary: in a) the CoF for the three tests are similar, in b) the results are more sparse, b)
represents the worst case scenario where the collected data is more scattered.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
20
==PAGE:27==
To collect the usable data, these coeﬀicients of friction had to be extrapolated.
The
operation carried out by the MatLab script can be seen in b) and in its extended version
in Appendix A.3. For each load interval, the program obtains a value (indicated in blue)
of the CoF which is the results of the average of the values of the CoFs of the three tests
in that load interval.
Figure 3.9: The results of the tribotests obtained from two combinations of polymers. In
a) it is shown a R10 specimen of POM against a large specimen of ABS, in b) it is shown
a R10 specimen of ABS against a large specimen of POM. In both graphs, the load is also
plotted. It is possible to notice how the value of the CoF increases for decreasing load. In
a) the results of the tests are very close while in b) the results are more sparse. As shown
in b), to obtain valid values of CoF for the tests, for each load interval, three CoF coming
from the three tests have been averaged to obtain a final one (indicated as a blue line).
The discrepancy between the mean values of the CoF and the values of the tests, has been
taken into account and an error has been calculated as shown in Table 3.3. The table
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
21
==PAGE:28==
shows the CoFs calculations and errors for the combination ABS-POM also seen in figure
3.9 b) which is considered to be the worst case scenario. In the table, the first column
represents the load interval at which the CoFs have been calculated. In each interval, the
average CoFs have been calculated for the three tests. Consequently the Overall Average
values has been extrapolated from the three tests. The error between the overall average
value and the CoF of the tests is shown in the grey columns. As seen from the table,
even though the results for the three tests of the combination ABS-POM are sparse, the
calculated error between the average and the measured CoF is always less than 10%.
Table 3.3: The extrapolation of the data from the tribotest output is carried out with
a MatLab script. For each test the script extrapolates a value of the CoF and then it
averages it with the other tests. For each test, the discrepancy between the measured
value and the calculated average is measured as a percentage error. The table shows that
even in the worst case scenario with sparse results, the error appears to be always less
than 10%
Once the friction coeﬀicients are extrapolated, the code performs all the necessary calcu-
lations to obtain the contact pressures for the given polymer combinations. In the last
step, the plotting process is performed. At this stage, the data is processed and graphed,
the script also performs fitting operations that make the final results easier to read.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
22
==PAGE:29==
4
Results and Discussion
In this chapter, the results obtained with the previously illustrated methods are presented.
The idea behind the research of this paper lies in the identification of the influence of
contact pressure on the friction coeﬀicient in dry contact between polymers. It is possible
to verify this effect by considering a flat contact between two different polymers. A Flat
smaller specimen of ABS was tested at the tribotester with the program shown in Figure
3.2. The flat specimen was tested against a specimen of Kepital TS-25H (datasheet can
be found in Appendix A.10), a POM with silicone oil for friction reduction for general
injection molding, designed for applications requiring low wear, and low friction. This
type of material is used by Novo Nordisk to enhance the tribological properties of its
products.
As seen in the results obtained in Figure 4.1, despite an initial slight increase, the friction
coeﬀicient remains constant for the complete duration of the test, in accordance with
Amonton’s friction law 2.1 and the load has no influence on it.
Consequently, a Flat
specimen of ABS has been tested against a large specimen of POM. In this case, the
material had no silicon oil addition. The influence of the load on the coeﬀicient of friction
(CoF) is evident, the CoF has increased at regular intervals as the contact load decreased.
Figure 4.1: Two Flat specimens of ABS have been tested against two large specimen of
POM according to the program shown in fig. 3.2. The black colour indicates the CoF
while the red colour indicates the load applied. On the left side the graph represents the
test conducted with POM with silicone oil: the friction coeﬀicient is constant and the load
has no influence on it. The right graph shows the test conducted on normal POM: the
load has an influence on the CoF which increases regularly with the decreasing load.
From Figure 4.1 b) it is seen that for the non lubricated POM, at the maximum load, the
CoF µ ≈0.15. This value of µ is very close to the steady value of the CoF for the lubricated
POM. The influence of the load makes the CoF very low for a specimen with a flat contact
surface.
As it will be shown later in this chapter, by increasing the contact pressure,
the coeﬀicient of friction will be even lower. This effect is not encountered in lubricated
polymers which could be replaced in their applications by cheaper non lubricated polymers.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
23
==PAGE:30==
The effect has also been investigated for a contact between the non lubricated polymer
against a polished steel plate. The results of the tribotest for the combination POM-steel
are shown in Figure 4.2 and they are compared with a polymer-polymer contact POM-
PC. For the polymer-polymer contact the CoF increases much more with the decreasing
normal load.
Figure 4.2: Comparison between the tribotests results for a polymer-steel and a polymer-
polymer contact. It is seen how the load has a higher influence on the CoF of the POM-PC
contact which increases much more with the decreasing normal load.
The effect of the load on the CoF for a polymer-steel contact is existent but very low.
As mentioned in the previous chapter, this investigation has been based on the study
of five different polymers. The materials have been moulded into specimens and several
combinations have been obtained. Combinations between the same type of polymers have
not been considered because the polymers are similar [34]. The same has been done for
the combinations between the two amorphous polymers ABS and PC because severe wear
occurs on the contact surfaces.
The wear between the amorphous specimen has been
documented, in particular in Figure 4.3 a flat surface of a large ABS specimen is shown.
The picture has been taken with a optical microscope and shows how the R10 specimen
of PC has abraded the large ABS leaving a visible groove on the surface.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
24
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.3: The figure shows a picture taken with an optical microscope, it shows the
abrasion of a large specimen of ABS after being tested with a R10 specimen of PC. The
combination between the two amorphous polymers has been discarded.
After discarding the combinations of polymers just mentioned, a total number of 18 pairs
of polymers have been tested as shown in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: The combinations of polymers tested during the investigation. The five poly-
mers investigated have resulted in a total number of 25 pairs. 5 combinations between
the same polymers have been discarded. 2 more combinations between the amorphous
polymers ABS and PC have not been considered, resulting in a total of 18 combinations.
As there are many conditions that can have an influence on the results of the tribotests,
it has been decided to investigate these influencing factors and take them into account to
optimize the tests.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
25
==PAGE:32==
4.1
Optimization of the tests
Many factors can influence the results of the tests, among these can be found the temper-
ature, the sliding speed, wear and plastic deformation of the specimens. Other errors can
be caused by the operator, e.g. the contamination of the specimens’ surfaces or approxi-
mations of the test results. This section presents how some of these variables have been
identified and how their effects on testing have been evaluated.
Study of the radius
The dimensions of the manufactured specimens have been the first parameters to be in-
vestigated. The calculations of the average pressure for the spherical caps, are based on
the dimension of the radius of the spheres. It has been necessary to verify that the radii
of the different spherical caps existing on the manufactured specimens were in agreement
with the dimensions of the design. The spherical caps with the different radii have been
profiled. Consequently, a fictitious circumference has been created through a operation of
data fitting using the least squares method. In Figure 4.5 it is possible to see the profiles of
the different spherical caps and the fitted circumferences from which the real radii of the
circumferences have been obtained. The measures have been repeated for each material
and an average value with the respective standard deviation has been obtained.
Figure 4.5: The measured profiles of the three sizes of spherical caps existing on the
specimens: the black lines represents the the caps’ profiles of a) the 3P05, b) the 3P13,
c) the 3P35. To calculate the real radii of the caps, a least squares fitting operation has
been done and the red circumferences have been obtained, consequently the real radii of
the spherical caps have been calculated.
The results of the calculations are shown in the Table 4.1 below. The measurements have
shown that there is a discrepancy between the theoretical radii and the measured ones.
This discrepancy is present in all the materials and is variable, as a consequence of the
different shrinkage of the different polymers. To take this error into account, a standard
deviation has been calculated to determine the deviation to the mean. The mean is the
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
26
==PAGE:33==
result of three measures for each spherical cap of each material, the standard deviation
is higher if the data are more spread out. Hence, as seen from the figure, the results
for the 35 mm radius are more spread out in respect to the 5 mm radius. The Hertzian
calculations have been corrected with the new measures.
Table 4.1: The results of the calculations for the radii of the spherical caps existing on the
specimens. Each measured radius is the result of an average of 15 measures: 3 measures of
a certain radius for each of the 5 materials. There is a discrepancy between the theoretical
radii and the measured ones.
The discrepancy has been estimated with the standard
deviation σ which increases when the collected data are more spread out. As seen from
the results, the calculations for the 05 mm radius are much closer to the mean than the
calculation for the 35 mm radius.
Compression tests
As mentioned in the previous chapter, to investigate if the tribotest induces plastic de-
formation and ensure that the tribological tests have been conducted always under elastic
conditions of the polymer, it has been necessary to calculate the ”apparent” compressive
yield stress of the spherical features of the 3P05 specimens, because the 5 mm spherical
caps undergo the highest stresses during the tribotest. The 5 mm spherical caps have
been profiled before and after being subjected to a compressive load. The results for the
five different polymers can be seen in the Appendix A.4. To investigate whether there is
no deformation in the specimen during the test, the first compression test was carried out
with a normal load of 120 N for a single spherical cap, which mean 360 N for three spher-
ical caps, just below the maximum load of the tribotest equal to 380 N. Consequently,
the load has been increased until plastic deformation was observable. The comparisons
between the profiles have shown the load for which plastic deformation has been observed.
A plastic deformation is noted when there is a difference in the height of the spherical cap.
An example of the results for the POM is given in Figure 4.6. In the figure two profiles of
the spherical caps of POM are shown. The caps have been profiled before and after being
tested with 400 and 425 N of loads. A deformation is seen after the 425 N compressive
load, i.e. it is safe to say that the plastic deformation happened between the two loads.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.6: Compression profiles of the spherical caps of a 3P05 specimen of POM. The
profiles have been obtained before and after two compression tests at 400 N and 425 N of
normal load. It is possible to observe that there is plastic deformation at 425 N therefore
it is safe to say that the plastic deformation has happened between 400 and 425 N of
compressive load.
The method is applied to the other polymers and yields the results shown in Table 4.2.
After identifying the compressive loads for which plastic deformation appears, the cor-
responding Hertzian average pressure are calculated and the apparent yield strength is
identified as a range between two pressures.
Table 4.2: After the compression tests of the 3P05 specimens of each polymer, plastic
deformation is noticed happening between two loads.
The apparent compressive yield
strength is obtained after calculating the average pressures with the Hertzian theory.
Finite Element Analysis
The compression tests have shown that the apparent compressive yield strength of the
3P05 specimens is much higher than the tensile yield stress provided by data-sheets, To
better understand how the stresses are distributed when the specimens are compressed,
the compression test of a spherical cap of PP has been simulated through a Finite Element
Analysis. The simulation has been carried out with LS-Dyna and the results are shown
in Figure 4.7. The compression has been studied on a axisymmetric cross section of a
spherical cap of 5 mm. The specimen ( which consists of a total of 545 elements ) has
been given the PP material specifics and it has been compressed between two ideally
rigid surfaces that represented the steel compression surfaces. In Figure 4.7 it is seen
how the upper flat surface has moved downwards of 0,4 mm from the moment of contact
a) to complete extension in d), the coloured scale shows the Von-Myses stresses in the
specimen.
The red area indicates stresses close to the calculated Hertzian maximum
pressure corresponding to the apparent yield stress for PP, it is seen from the figure how
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
28
==PAGE:35==
the stresses propagate from the contact point.
In d) the stresses reach the maximum
Hertzian pressure, it is interesting to notice how the plastic deformation does not seem to
happen on the contact point but just below the contact surface.
Figure 4.7: FEM simulation of a compressive test of a spherical cap of a 3P05 specimen of
PP. The figures show an axisymmetric cross section of the specimen which is compressed
between two rigid surfaces.
The upper surface moves 0,4 mm downwards from a) to
d). The Von Myses stresses are indicated with colors, ranging from 0 to 170 MPa (the
calculated Hertzian maximum pressure corresponding to the compressive yield strength
for PP). In d) it is possible to observe the specimen reaching the maximum pressure for
which the specimen begin to deform, the deformation area seems to be positioned just
underneath the contact surface.
Temperature increase during testing
Temperature is another important factor that can affect the results of a tribotest.
It
has been shown that has an influence on polymer friction [35]. To investigate whether
temperature has an influence on the friction coeﬀicient between the polymers considered
in this thesis, two experiments were conducted with a combination of 3P05 PC-PP. The
results can be seen in Figure 4.8 below. In the first experiments shown in a) 4 tests were
performed consecutively with the same settings on the same specimens. The samples were
not let to cool down, it can be seen that the coeﬀicient of friction increased continuously
from the first test to the fourth, in accordance with the results obtained from Tabor on
the influence of temperature on polymer friction in 1953 [35]. The second experiment b)
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
29
==PAGE:36==
has been conducted with the same combination but the specimens have been left cooling
down for 1 hour between the two tests. It is possible to see how the results for the CoF
in b) do not vary as much as they do in a) where the temperature increased, affecting the
CoF.
Figure 4.8: Two experiments a) and b) were conducted to show how temperature affects
the CoF in the standard set up for the tribotest. In a) a combination 3P05 POM-PP was
tested 4 times consecutively, the temperature raised and the CoF increased. In b) two
tests were conducted on the same combination with a break of 1 hour in between. The
samples had time to cool down and there has been almost no variation on the CoF.
According to I. M. Sivebæk [34], temperature affects the yield strength of the polymers
considered in this dissertation. In particular, the semi-crystalline polymers (PP, POM and
PBT) loose 12-18% of the yield strength when the temperature vary from 23 to 40°C. PP
is the one that looses the most. The amorphous polymers (ABS and PC) loose around
10% of their yield strength for the same temperature variation.
A clear effect of the temperature has been seen on the specimens 3P05 of PP. When the
specimens were tested at the higher loads, with average pressures around 60 MPa the
spherical caps deformed plastically, despite the apparent compressive yield strength being
around 117-122 MPa (as shown in Table 4.2). In Figure 4.9 it is shown the deformation
of a spherical cap of a 3P05 PP specimen for a tribotest conducted at 380 N of load for
30 seconds. Other tests that were conducted at lower loads can be found in the Appendix
A.5. In the figure the profiles of the spherical cap before and after the test are compared.
The profiles do not coincide perfectly, this might be due to wear or plastic deformation. If
a wear phenomena had taken place there would be a loss of material. From the comparison
it is seen that the deformation areas are complementary and there has not been a loss of
material, the profile has been crushed and smeared for the combined effect of pressure
and temperature. The conservation of volume suggests that it is a plastic deformation
phenomena. According to the assumptions of the Hertzian theory, it is necessary that
the spherical caps are only elastically deformed, therefore it has been necessary to modify
the tribotest set up.
The test has been repeated for 350, 320, 290 N, with the same
conditions and the results are shown in the Appendix A.5. The plastic deformation is not
seen anymore at 290 N. Consequently, the tribotest conditions have been changed for all
the 3P05 specimens of PP: the tests involving PP have precautionary started from 260 N.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
30
==PAGE:37==
Figure 4.9: The spherical cap of a 3P05 specimen of PP has been profiled before and
after a 30 seconds tribotest at 380 N of load, 0,02 m/s of sliding speed. It is possible
to observe that the profiles do not coincide. Two complementary areas are highlighted,
they indicate that there is a conservation of the volume, hence not a wear phenomena
but plastic deformation. PP loses yield strength with a slight increase in temperature and
this causes the cap to deform despite its apparent compressive yield strength has been
measured for higher loads.
The plastic deformation caused by the combined effect of pressure and temperature has not
only been noticed for the 3P05 specimens of PP, but also for the PP large specimens. When
acting as counterpart at very high loads, the large specimens of PP deforms plastically.
An example of this deformation is shown in Figure 4.10, a large specimen of PP has been
tested at 380 N at 0,02 m/s for 30 second, it has been profiled and it is possible to see the
deformation caused by the sliding and the pressure. To avoid plastic deformation of the
specimens, in all the combinations 3P05 in which PP is one of the pairing, the high loads
are avoided and the test starts at 290 N of load.
Figure 4.10: Profile of a large specimen of PP after being tested against a 3P05 specimen
of PC at 380 N of load, 0,02 m/s of sliding speed for 30 seconds. It is possible to see how
it has deformed plastically due to the high levels of pressures.
The other materials have not shown any sign of plastic deformation after the tribotests.
The 3P05 specimen’s spherical caps of all the other materials have been measured at 380
N of load, at 0,02 m/s and no plastic deformation has been observed. The results are
shown in the Appendix A.6. The other materials have been tested at the tribotest with
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
31
==PAGE:38==
the standard conditions shown in Figure 3.2.
After having made the necessary adjustments for the optimization of the test, the tribotests
were carried out and the results have been processed with the Matlab script presented in
Appendix A.3.
4.2
Experimental results
In this section, the results of the tribotests will be presented, a discussion will be made on
the influence of the contact pressure on the coeﬀicient of friction of the 15 combinations.
The experiments and the findings of this thesis are modelled after a study performed
in 2018, in the same Novo Nordisk department with the same equipment [36]. In those
experiments, only three types of specimens were used: the Flat, the R10 and the 3P05 slid
against the usual large specimen. The combinations taken in considerations were twelve,
result of the coupling of only four different types of polymers.
The experiments were
conducted with a different setting: the loads used during the tribotest were only four:
387, 200, 100 and 50N, resulting in a total of four points per combination, as observed in
Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11: Results of the tribotest for a combination PP-POM from the study carried
out in 2018, the figure is adapted from [36]. The Coeﬀicient of Friction is plotted against
the calculated Average Hertzian Pressure. The results showed in the graph are obtained
from the coupling of the R10 and 3P05 against large specimens. The loads used during
the tribotest were reduced to 4: 387, 200, 100 and 50N, hence there are only 4 points for
each specimen coupling. The contact pressure values of the two specimens are far apart
and the results have been interpreted with equation 2.10.
The results obtained in 2018 are presented in the figure above: it is possible to see the
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
32
==PAGE:39==
CoF values for the PP-POM combination of R10 and 3P05 plotted with the calculated
Hertzian contact pressure values.
It can be seen from the figure how the CoF values
decreases with the increasing calculated average pressure. The results of this trend were
interpreted with the model provided in equation 2.10. The model seems to fit the results
well but, as observable, the contact pressure values are far apart without intermediate
values of the average pressure, the interpretation is therefore approximated.
The purpose of this thesis has been to fill this information gap and determine if the
interpretation of the results has been indeed correct.
Building on the results obtained in 2018, it was decided to investigate how the calculated
contact pressure affects the CoF trend over a full range of Hertzian Average Pressure.
This was made possible with the introduction of the 3P13 and 3P35 specimens.
The
expectation was to obtain data that roughly followed the trend of the equation curve 2.10
as in figure 4.11. The results have been diverse and are presented in the Appendix A.7.
For each combination the results are displayed in three separate graphs. The results are
presented as in Figure 4.12 where a PP-POM pairing is shown.
Figure 4.12: Results of the tribotest for a combination PP-POM. The graph a) and b)
display the CoF on the calculated Average Hertzian Pressure with two different interpre-
tation of the trends: a) as linear fitting and b) as the equation 2.10. c) presents the friction
force as a function of the normal load.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
33
==PAGE:40==
The graphs a) and b) show the trends of the friction coeﬀicient with the Hertzian contact
pressure. As mentioned in chapter 3, the measures have been repeated three times for
each specific specimen of a combination, hence each dot represents a value of the CoF,
result of an average of three measures for a specific specimen, at a certain pressure. The
graph b) presents the results with a fitting curve µ = k + c
P , the same as the one used
for the study carried out in 2018 [36]. In a) the results have been interpreted with linear
fitting. By observing all the combinations’ results, it has been noticed that the values of
the CoF seem to be distributed linearly. The results for each specimen have been fitted
to the equation:
µ = α + β ∗P
(4.1)
where α and β are coeﬀicients, α indicates the intercept at P=0 and β is the inclination of
the fitting line. The graph c) displays the friction force as a function of the normal load.
As seen in the previous Figure 4.12, the tribotest has been modified due to the presence of
PP in the combination.The results regarding the specimen 3P05 are missing the values for
the loads 290, 320, 350, 380 N, to avoid plastic deformation of the specimens. The graphs
a) and b) show how the contact pressure has an influence on the CoF which decreases
with the increasing Hertzian contact pressure. The graph c) shows that the friction force
increases with the normal load, despite not presenting any proportionality, in disagreement
with Amonton’s law of friction 2.1.
As seen in Figure 4.12, the graphs do not show the values of CoF for the flat specimen
because it has not been included in the study, as discussed previously in chapter 3.2. To
better understand the reason behind the exclusion of the flat specimen, the results of the
flat for the CoF as a function of the average Hertzian pressure have been included in the
plot of figure 4.12 b) and are presented in figure 4.13. The calculated Hertzian pressure
of the flat varies between 0 and 3 MPa but the values of the CoF are similar to the ones
of the R10. The values do not follow the fitting model because the pressure is calculated
with the nominal contact area. As discussed in the introduction of the thesis the real
contact between two flat surfaces is smaller than the nominal contact area. Therefore the
calculated pressure for the flat specimen is inaccurate while in the R10 and the three point
contacts specimens the contact area is more precise, because of the presence of the line
and point contacts.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
34
==PAGE:41==
Figure 4.13: Results of the tribotest for a combination PP-POM including the flat spec-
imen. The graph displays the CoF on the calculated Average Hertzian Pressure. The
values of the CoF for the flat specimen do not follow the fitting model as the pressure is
calculated with the nominal contact area for a contact between two flat surfaces. The real
contact area occurs at a limited number of regions of the nominal contact area hence it
is smaller. The calculated pressure for the flat specimen is inaccurate, while for the other
specimen it is more precise because of the presence of the line and point contacts.
The values of the coeﬀicients K and C of equation 2.10 for the overall interpretation of
CoF in function of the Average Hertzian Pressure are provided in table 4.3.
Table 4.3: Values of the coeﬀicients K and C from equation 2.10. The equation has been
fitted to the overall results the CoF in function of the Average Hertzian Pressure for the
18 combinations.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
35
==PAGE:42==
4.3
Results interpretation
The results have shown that the CoF of each specimen decreases with the increasing con-
tact pressure. The interpretation of the trends of the results has been a central discussion
for the development of the thesis: for some combinations there seem to be linearity in the
trends, some other combinations show trends that can be interpreted with curved fittings,
usually convex, occasionally concave. To understand how these trends vary, some tests
have been carried out for 9 combinations of 3P35 against a large specimen.
Each combination has been tested with the standard set up but the interval times have
been changed. For the first test, the CoF have been obtained by shortening the waiting
time for each load to 5 seconds, the second test for 10 seconds, the third for 20 seconds and
the fourth for 40 seconds. This has been done to investigate whether the waiting times
have any influence on the curves’ trends. In addition to that, the averaging times have
been varied: the last 5, 3 and 1 second of each load interval have been used to calculate
the average CoF. These averaging times have been varied to determine which interval to
use to obtain the best results.
All the results can be seen in the Appendix A.8 and an example is provided in figure 4.14.
As seen from the picture, the results for the 5 seconds load interval are in a), 10 seconds
in b), 20 seconds in c) and 40 seconds in d). For each graph, the three coloured lines
represent the results of the CoF in function of the Hertzian pressure, obtained averaging
in the three different intervals: the last 5, 3 and 1 seconds.
As seen from the results for the PP-POM and the other combinations in the appendix, the
waiting time does not have an influence on the trends of the results, which appear in their
linear, concave and convex forms randomly. The averaging time seems to indicate that
the average done on the last second does not indicate a correct CoF for the low Hertzian
pressures: the yellow line indicates lower values of CoF on the low pressures and that is
against the the model of equation 2.10.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
36
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.14: The trends of the CoF in function of the Hertzian pressure for a combination
3P13-large of PP-POM has been investigated: the waiting time for each load interval has
been varied to a) 5 seconds, b) 10 seconds, c) 20 seconds and d) 40 seconds. The waiting
time seems to have no influence on the trend which has been observed to be randomly
distributed. The CoF have been obtained averaging the last 5, 3 and 1 seconds for each
load interval and the results show that the 1 second averaging interval provides a lower
CoF for the low pressure, in contradiction with the model of equation 2.10.
From the study of the trends of the CoF in function of the Hertzian pressure, it has been
decided to interpret the trends with three different models.
• Model 1 : µ = α+β ∗P, the linear fitting that has been determined after the results
of the experiments of this thesis.
• Model 2 : µ = k + c
P as theorized by Bowers [22].
• Model 3 : µ = K1P n−1 as theorized by Bridgman [21].
To investigate which model fitted the results better, the coeﬀicient of determination R2
has been used. R2 provides a measure of how well the observed results are replicated by
the model used. The general definition of the coeﬀicient of determination is:
R2 = 1 −SSres
SStot
(4.2)
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
37
==PAGE:44==
where SSres is defined as the sum squared residual error. It is the measure of the discrep-
ancy between the data and the estimation model and is written as:
SSres =
n
∑
i=1
(µi −ˆµi)2
(4.3)
and SStot is the total sum of squares and it is written as:
SStot =
n
∑
i=1
(µi −¯µ)2
(4.4)
where
• µi is the value of the measured coeﬀicient of friction.
• ¯µ is the mean of the µ values.
• ˆµi is the predicted value of µ according to the model used.
Through the use of MatLab the three models have been fitted to the results for the CoF
in function of the Hertzian pressure of each specimen, for each combination. This meant a
total of 216 values of R2 which have been useful to understand the best fitting. As it can
be seen from the table 4.4, some combinations are better approximated by curved fitting
models, i.e. model 2 and 3. Some other combinations are better approximated by model
1 because of the presence of linear trends. The values of R2 for a specific model of each
specimen contact have been averaged to obtain an overall comparison. The results show
that the values of the R2 for model 1 are generally the highest. This indicates that model
1 can provide a general approximation that is more accurate than the other two models.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
38
==PAGE:45==
Table 4.4: The trends of the CoF in function of the Hertzian pressure for all the combina-
tions have been approximated with three different models. Model 1 as equation 4.1, model
2 as equation 2.10 and model 3 as equation 2.8. The values of R2 have been obtained to
estimate the best fitting model. The values of R2 indicates that the best fitting model
vary from combination to combination. Overall it is possible to say that model 1 is the
model that better approximates the results, as seen from the average values.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
39
==PAGE:46==
4.4
Friction force
As shown in figure 4.13 c), when the friction force is plotted in function of the load, the
trend is not linear, in contradiction with Amonton’s law of friction. If model 1 is used to
approximate the trends of the CoF in function of the Average Hertzian pressure, knowing
that µ = F
N and P =
N
Areal , it is possible to write:
µ = α + β ∗P
F
N = α + β
N
Anom
F = N ∗α + β N2
Anom
(4.5)
The equation 4.5 represents the friction force F in function of the normal load N in a
parabolic trend.
The representation of the trends of the friction force in function of
the normal load with parabolic trends highlight that there is a maximum point in the
trends, after which the friction force starts decreasing with an increasing normal load, in
agreements with Briscoe’s findings of 1975 [25]. To investigate whether equation 4.5 is a
good approximation of the results, it has been plotted with the results of a POM-PBT
combination as shown in 4.15 a). In figure 4.15 b), a regression fitting has been done with
a parabola equation of the kind F = coef1 + coef2 ∗N + coef3 ∗N2 and the results have
been compared to see if the values of the two equations are similar.
Figure 4.15: The friction force in function of the friction coeﬀicient for the four specimen
of POM-PBT combination. In a) the trends are compared with model 1 simulation: the
plotted parabolas derive from equation 4.5. In b) the trends are compared with a MatLab
fitting. Model 1 seems to approximate the trends accurately.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
40
==PAGE:47==
The model 1 simulation seems to approximate the trends of the friction coeﬀicients for the
four specimens quite well. The results have shown that the coeﬀicients of the simulation
and the fitting are of the same order of magnitude. The fitting has also shown that coef1
is an existing value and represents the intercepts with the y axis when N = 0.
The
values of the coef1 seem to be ranging between 0.01 and 1.5 N. This indicates that there
is adhesion in the contact between the two polymers, in compliance with the two-term
model of friction [17]. Equation 4.5 can be rewritten as:
F = N0 + N ∗α + β N2
Anom
(4.6)
where N0 represents adhesion and it has been added to equation 4.5. The interpretation
of the CoF in function of the pressure as straight lines has been controversial because of
its physical nonsense: In the equation µ = α + β ∗P, when the pressure tends to 0, µ
tends to a finite value and that is in contradiction with the two term model of friction
[17]. With the introduction of the term N0, equation 4.6 can be rewritten as:
µ = N0
N + α + β ∗P
(4.7)
The term N0
N tends to infinity when the pressure tends to zero. This is physically acceptable
since there is already a finite frictional force in the absence of a normal force which is given
by adhesion [37].
The new interpretation of the results of the CoF in function of the Average Hertzian
Pressure with equation 4.7 is shown in Figure 4.16. The figure shows the results for a
combination of POM-PBT, the trends have been fitted with model 1 in a) and the new
term N0
N has been introduced in the fitting in b). It is seen how the new model fits the
results quite well. The fitting is very precise if the term N0 is fairly low because the term
N0
N becomes predominant at low values of the normal load.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.16: CoF in function of the Hertzian Pressure for POM-PBT combination. In a)
the results are interpreted with model 1 (eq. 4.1), in b)the results are interpreted with
the equation 4.7. The new term N0
N gives physical meaning to model 1 and the fitting is
still very precise.
To determine whether model 2 and 3 could also approximate the trends in figure 4.15, the
friction force in function of the normal load has been extrapolated from equations 2.10
and 2.8 as follows:
model 2:
µ = k + c
P
F
N = k + c ∗Anom
N
F = k ∗N + c ∗Anom
(4.8)
and model 3:
µ = K1P n−1
F
N = K1 + (
N
Anom
)n−1
F = K1 ∗Nn ∗Anomn−1
(4.9)
The equations 4.8 and 4.9 can be plotted with the measured results of the friction force
in function of the normal load. This can be seen in figure 4.17 where in a) and b) it is
possible to see the simulations conducted according to model 2 and 3 respectively. It is
seen from the figure that the two models do not represent the results accurately, especially
the simulations conducted for the R10 which shows no inflection point. In general, the two
models do not predict that an increase of the normal load could correspond to a decrease
of the friction force, a phenomena that has been observed for almost all the combinations.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
42
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.17: The friction force in function of the friction coeﬀicient for the four specimen of
POM-PBT combination. In a) the trends are compared with model 2 simulation: the blue
trends derive from equation 4.8. In b) the trends are compared with model 3 simulation.
The red trends are derived from equation 4.9.
Neither model 2 nor model 3 seem to
accurately approximate the results as model 1.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
43
==PAGE:50==
4.5
Coeﬀicients α and β
The chapter on results and discussion is concluded with a study on the coeﬀicients α and
β from equation 4.1. The coeﬀicients are plotted in Table 4.5 for the 18 combinations
tested.
Table 4.5: Values of the coeﬀicients α and β for all the 18 combinations. The values have
been obtained after a fitting operation with Matlab, of the results of the CoF in function
of the Hertzian Pressure with the equation 4.1.
It has been decided to plot the coeﬀicient α in function of β for all the combinations
and the results are shown in Figure 4.18. In the figure there is a value of α and β for
each specimen, meaning 4 values for each combination, for a total of 72 points. As seen
from the figure the results have been divided into four major categories according to the
different specimens. It has been observed that the values are distributed along four major
lines.
The distribution of the values is remarkable because it shows a proportionality
among the same specimens of different combinations, in general it suggests that there is
proportionality between combinations of different materials. The proportionality has been
highlighted by fitting the values with a linear regression operation. The fitting equations
are of the kind:
α = G + H ∗β
(4.10)
where G is the intercepts with the y axis for β = 0 and H is the inclination of the fitting
lines.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
44
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.18: From equation 4.1, coeﬀicient α has been plotted in function β. The results
have shown that there is proportionality between the same specimens of different materials.
The proportionality between the combinations has been highlighted with a linear regression
operation.
After having plotted all the results together, it has been decided to analyze each combi-
nation to see how the values would be distributed along the lines. All the combinations
are shown in Appendix A.9. In Figure 4.19, the values of the coeﬀicients α and β of two
combinations PP-POM and PBT-PC are compared and it is possible to notice how there
is no order in the distribution of the coeﬀicients. The random distribution of the values
along the lines also applies to the other combinations and it indicates that there is no
particular pattern for specific pairings or materials.
Figure 4.19: The values of coeﬀicient α in function β for two combinations PP-POM and
PBT-PC have been plotted and compared. The results show that there is no order in the
distribution of the coeﬀicients along the lines.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
45
==PAGE:52==
The proportionality between the combinations has been investigated and has yielded the
results for the the coeﬀicients G and H shown in Table 4.6. As seen for the table, the r10
specimens have minimum inclination H and maximum intercept G, the 3P05 specimens
have maximum inclination H and minimum intercept G.
Table 4.6: Values of the coeﬀicients G and H of equation 4.10 for the different specimen
combinations.
The results of the study of the coeﬀicients α and β indicate that in the equation µ =
α + β ∗P, when β decreases, α tends to a finite value.
β that tends to a null value
means an horizontal inclination of the lines and a pressure that tends to infinity. The
finite value of α could be considered as the adhesive factor of the friction coeﬀicient
between the two polymers. This implies that the straight lines are a good approximation
of the equation µ = k + c
P .
As mentioned in the introduction of this thesis, Bowers
conducted his experiments with thin films of polymers while all the experiments of this
work have been carried out studying the influence of the pressure for the friction coeﬀicient
of bulk specimens and differences between the two experiments have been noticed [24].
Overall, Bower’s equation of the CoF in function of the pressure for polymers [22] is a
good interpretation of the results obtained in the tests conducted for this work as seen
also in Figure 4.12, but the linear interpretation coming from model 1 can evaluate the
trends of the specific specimens more accurately.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
46
==PAGE:53==
5
Conclusions
This thesis has presented the results of the effect of contact pressure on the friction coef-
ficient between bulk specimen of five polymers used for medical devices by Novo Nordisk.
The results have shown that there is a decrease of the friction coeﬀicient with an increase
in contact pressure.
The tribological tests have been performed over a range of contact pressures from 0 to
100 MPa. The compression tests have shown that, for all the material investigated, the
contact pressure has caused no plastic deformation in the specimens. However, the combi-
nation effect of temperature and pressure has caused plastic deformation in the PP 3P05
specimens.
Overall, the decreasing trend of the coeﬀicient of friction can be interpreted by the equation
µ = k + c
P , in agreement with the literature. However, the investigation has shown that
the decrease of the coeﬀicient of friction for each specimen contact can be approximated
with a linear a function of the kind: µ = α + β ∗P. In a redesign of a Novo Pen, a specific
geometry could be applied in the contact between two polymer surfaces to reach the
desired coeﬀicient of friction. The use of linear equations suited to the particular contact
geometry allows to estimate accurately the required friction coeﬀicient. An analysis of the
coeﬀicients α and β has highlighted a proportionality between the trends of combinations
of different materials, the proportionality can be expressed as α = G + H ∗β and it differs
from contact to contact according to the specific geometry.
The analysis of the friction force in function of the normal load has shown that the resulting
trends are not linear, in contradiction with Amonton’s law of friction. The parabolic trends
could not be interpreted with the models found in literature: several curves presented an
inflection point after which a decrease of the friction force with the increasing load has
been observed. The trends have been modelled with the equation F = N0+N ∗α+β
N2
Anom .
Both the studies of the coeﬀicients α and β and the friction force have shown that the
adhesion factor N0 is an existing value and it has been taken into consideration.
5.1
Future Works
The influence of the contact pressure on the coeﬀicient of friction has been investigated
for four types of specimen. The resulting trends have been interpreted with linear trends.
Considering different contact geometries and involve more polymer in the study could help
understand if the linear interpretation of the curves is valuable and if the proportionality
of the coeﬀicients α and β is respected.
The contact pressure and the contact area of the specimens have been calculated with the
Hertzian contact theory, a deeper analysis of the contact mechanics could help improve
the calculations and obtain less approximated results.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
47
==PAGE:54==
Bibliography
[1]
Novo Nordisk. “Annual Report”. In: 24256790 (2020), pp. 1–99.
[2]
Jacob Hyllested-winge et al. “NovoPen Echo ® insulin delivery device”. In: (2016).
[3]
Carsten M. Kristensen and Morten Donsmark. “Dose accuracy and durability of the
NovoPen® 4 insulin delivery device before and after simulation of 5 years of use and
under various stress conditions”. In: Clinical Therapeutics 31.12 (2009), pp. 2819–
2823.
[4]
Mary Korytkowski, Leo Niskanen, and Toshinari Asakura. “FlexPen®: Addressing
issues of confidence andconvenience in insulin delivery”. In: Clinical Therapeutics
27.SUPPL. 2 (2005).
[5]
Jean Louis Halary et. Al. Polymer Materials. by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1377,
pp. 68–70.
[6]
Bryan Ellis and Ray Smith. Polymers: A Property Database, Second Edition. CRC
Press, Taylor Francis Group, 2008, p. 1210.
[7]
Novo Nordisk A/S. “How to use Quick guide Injection sites Injection technique”. In:
(), pp. 4–5.
[8]
I.M. Sivebaek, V.N. Samoilov, and B.N.J. Persson. “Frictional properties of confined
polymers”. In: European Physical Journal E 27.1 (2008), pp. 37–46.
[9]
Ian M Hutchings. “Hutchings: Leonardo on friction Leonardo da Vinci’s studies of
friction”. In: 361 (2016), pp. 51–66.
[10]
D. Arnell. “Mechanisms and laws of friction and wear”. In: Tribology and Dynamics
of Engine and Powertrain: Fundamentals, Applications and Future Trends (2010),
pp. 41–72.
[11]
C.A. Coulomb. “”Theorie des Machines Simples, En Ayant egard au frottement
de leurs parties, et a la roideur des Cordages,” Memoires de Mathematique et de
Physiques”. In: (1785), pp. 161–342.
[12]
Elena Popova and Valentin L. Popov. “The research works of Coulomb and Amon-
tons and generalized laws of friction”. In: Friction 3.2 (2015), pp. 183–190.
[13]
Duncan Dowson. “Men of Tribology”. In: 100.April (1978), pp. 148–155.
[14]
J. T. Desaguliers. A Course of Experimental Philosophy, 2 Vols. 1734.
[15]
B. V. Derjaguin and Yu P. Toporov. “Influence of adhesion on the sliding and rolling
friction”. In: Progress in Surface Science 45.1-4 (1994), pp. 317–327.
[16]
F. P. Bowden and D. Tabor. The Friction and Lubrication of Polymers. Royal So-
ciety, 1950, p. 374.
[17]
Briscoe Mittal K. L. physicochemical aspects of polymer surfaces. Vol. 1. 3. Plenum
Press New York, 1983, pp. 387–412.
[18]
S. B. Ainbinder, M. G. Laka, and I. Yu Maiors. “Effect of hydrostatic pressure on
mechanical properties of plastics”. In: Polymer Mechanics 1.1 (1965), pp. 50–55.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
48
==PAGE:55==
[19]
S. Rabinowitz, I. M. Ward, and J. S. C. Parry. “The effect of hydrostatic pressure on
the shear yield behaviour of polymers”. In: Journal of Materials Science 5.1 (1970),
pp. 29–39.
[20]
R. C. Bowers and W. A. Zisman. “Pressure effects on the friction coeﬀicient of thin-
film solid lubricants”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 39.12 (1968), pp. 5385–5395.
[21]
P. W. Bridgman. “Effects of high shearing stress combined with high hydrostatic
pressure”. In: Physical Review 48.10 (1935), pp. 825–847.
[22]
R.C. Bowers. “Coeﬀicient of friction of high polymers as a function of pressure”. In:
Journal of Applied Physics 42.12 (1972).
[23]
Laird C. Towle. “Shear strength and friction measurements on polyethylene under
high pressure”. In: Journal of Applied Physics 44.4 (1973), pp. 1611–1615.
[24]
B. J. Briscoe and D. Tabor. “The effect of pressure on the frictional properties of
polymers”. In: Wear 34.1 (1975), pp. 29–38.
[25]
B. J. Briscoe, E. Jones Parry, and D. Tabor. “The friction of polymers under hydro-
static pressure”. In: Wear 30.1 (1974), pp. 127–134.
[26]
James E . Mark. Physical Properties of Polymers Handbook. Royal Society, 2014.
[27]
Brian J Briscoe Sinha Sujeet K. Polymer Tribology. Imperial College Press, 2005.
[28]
Sabic. Cycolac Resin HMG94MD.
[29]
Torben Ruby, Torben Jørgensen Herslund, and Ion Marius Sivebæk. “New Tri-
botester For Polymeric Materials”. In: Proceedings of the 12th Nordic Symposium
on Tribology (2006).
[30]
Standard Test Method for Wear Rate and Coeﬀicient of Friction of Materials in Self-
Lubricated Rubbing Contact Using a Thrust Washer Testing. 1999.
[31]
H. Hertz. “H. Hertz, Über die Berührung fester elastischer Körper, Journal für die
reine und angewandte Mathematik 92, 156-171 (1881)”. In: Journal für die reine und
angewandte Mathematik 171 (1881), pp. 156–171.
[32]
K. L. Johnson. Contact Mechanics. 1994.
[33]
Copyright Dansk Standard. “Dansk standard DS / EN ISO 8256 Plast – Bestemmelse
af trækslagstyrke Plastics – Determination of tensile-impact strength Deskriptorer
:” in: (2012).
[34]
Ion Marius Sivebæk. Personal communication. unpublished. 2021.
[35]
F. King and D. Tabor. “The Effect of Temperature on the Mechanical Properties
and the Friction of Plastics”. In: Advanced Materials Research (1953).
[36]
J R Sveinbjörnsson. Coeﬀicient of friction of sliding polymers as a function of contact
pressure. DTU, 2018.
[37]
Rainer Heise and Valentin L. Popov. “Adhesive contribution to the coeﬀicient of
friction between rough surfaces”. In: Tribology Letters 39.3 (2010), pp. 247–250.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
49
==PAGE:56==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
50
==PAGE:57==
A
Appendix
A.1
Technical drawings
Figure A 1: 3P05 specimen technical drawing
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
51
==PAGE:58==
Figure A.2: 3P13 specimen technical drawing
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
52
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.3: 3P35 specimen technical drawing
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.4: R10 specimen technical drawing
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
54
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.5: FLAT specimen technical drawing
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.6: BIGGER specimen technical drawing
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
56
==PAGE:63==
A.2
Injection molding of the specimens
(a)
Injection
molder
ARBURG
ALL
ROUNDER 470 A
(b) Collected injection molded Parts in Poly-
carbonate
(c) Mold core with mould cavities
(d) Final molded part
Figure A.7: The injection molding process for the creation of the FLAT, the R10 and the Bigger
polymer specimens.
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
57
==PAGE:64==
A.3
Matlab pseudo code
Begin
Input cleaning and Extrapolation;
Insert output of the tribotest:;
clean the three files and tables reading
n= numbers of tests
l= number of loads
Variables definition
→Initialization of variables by setting them to 0
Loads definition
Extrapolating loop starts
while i=1:n do
while i=1:l do
calculate coeﬀicient for load interval
average the CoF
end
end
Begin Hertzian calculations
→Insert materials specifics (ν, E)
E’ calculation
s=number of specimens
while i=1:s do
calculate max pressure for each specimen contact;
calculate Average Hertzian pressure
Assign Cof to determined pressures
end
Simulations and fittings
Use external functions for fitting and simulations
call sseval model2 →µ = K + c
P fitting
call sseval2 model1 →µ = α + β ∗P fitting
call sseval3 model3 →µ = K1P n−1 fitting
Calculations of friction force and fittings
Plotting
Plot CoF in function of pressure
Plot Friction Force in function of Normal loads
End
Algorithm 1: Pseudo code of MatLab script
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
58
==PAGE:65==
A.3.1
Matlab Script
1
%This code extract the results of the file created with 'extrapolating ' and
2
%makes calculations and plots. it also prints the results for the
3
%coefficient A and B
4
5
%insert here the input Files obtained with extrapolating
6
%they need to be in order ---> 05, 13, 35, r10, flat
7
table = readtable('resultsmx30bt01_3p_05_HPS7.txt');
8
table2 = readtable('resultsmx30bt01_3p_13_HPS7.txt');
9
table3 = readtable('resultsmx30bt01_3p_35_HPS7.txt');
10
table4 = readtable('resultsmx30bt01_r10_HPS7.txt');
11
table5 = readtable('resultsmx30bt01_flat_HPS7.txt');
12
13
%input lower material information: young modulus and poisson coefficient
14
Ebigger=2270;
15
poissbigger=0.38;
16
17
%
EHPS7=2270 poisHPS7=0.38
18
%
EPOM=2850 poisPOM=0.35
19
%
EPP=1550 poisPP=0.38
20
%
EPBT=2550 poisPBT=0.34
21
%
EABS=2480 poisABS=0.38
22
23
Esmaller=2850;
24
poissmaller=0.35;
25
26
%radii
27
r05=4.95;
28
r13=14;
29
r35=40;
30
31
%definition of coefficients
32
t05 = size(table ,2);
33
coefficients05 = table(:,t05-1);
34
coef05(:,1) = coefficients05{:,1};
35
loads05 = table(:,t05);
36
loa05(:,1) = loads05{:,1}/3;
37
38
39
t13 = size(table2 ,2);
40
coefficients13 = table2(:,t13-1);
41
coef13(:,1) = coefficients13{:,1};
42
loads13 = table2(:,t13);
43
loa13(:,1) = loads13{:,1}/3;
44
45
46
t35 = size(table3 ,2);
47
coefficients35 = table3(:,t35-1);
48
coef35(:,1) = coefficients35{:,1};
49
loads35 = table3(:,t35);
50
loa35(:,1) = loads35{:,1}/3;
51
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
59
==PAGE:66==
52
53
tr10 = size(table4 ,2);
54
coefficientsr10 = table4(:,tr10 -1);
55
coefr10(:,1) = coefficientsr10{:,1};
56
loadsr10 = table4(:,tr10);
57
loar10(:,1) = loadsr10{:,1};
58
59
60
tflat = size(table5 ,2);
61
coefficientsflat = table5(:,tflat -1);
62
coefflat(:,1) = coefficientsflat{:,1};
63
loadsflat = table5(:,tflat);
64
loaflat(:,1) = loadsflat{:,1};
65
66
%calculations
67
68
E=-((Esmaller*Ebigger)/((Esmaller*poissbigger^2)+(Ebigger*poissmaller^2)-
Ebigger -Esmaller));
69
70
71
%calculate the pressures for r05
72
contacrad05=zeros(13,1);
73
maxpres05=zeros(13,1);
74
avepres05=zeros(13,1);
75
areatot05=zeros(13,1);
76
77
for i = 1:length(loa05);
78
79
contacrad05(i,1) = ((3*loa05(i,1)*r05)/(4*E))^(1/3);
80
areatot05(i,1)=pi*contacrad05(i,1).^2
81
maxpres05(i,1) =(3*loa05(i,1))/(2*pi*(contacrad05(i,1)^2));
82
avepres05(i,1) = (2/3)*maxpres05(i,1);
83
84
end
85
86
%calculate the pressures for r13
87
contacrad13=zeros(13,1);
88
maxpres13=zeros(13,1);
89
avepres13=zeros(13,1);
90
areatot13=zeros(13,1);
91
92
for i = 1:length(loa13);
93
94
contacrad13(i,1) = ((3*loa13(i,1)*r13)/(4*E))^(1/3);
95
areatot13(i,1)=pi*contacrad13(i,1).^2;
96
maxpres13(i,1) =(3*loa13(i,1))/(2*pi*(contacrad13(i,1)^2));
97
avepres13(i,1) = (2/3)*maxpres13(i,1);
98
99
end
100
101
%calculate the pressures for r35
102
contacrad35=zeros(13,1);
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
60
==PAGE:67==
103
maxpres35=zeros(13,1);
104
avepres35=zeros(13,1);
105
areatot35=zeros(13,1);
106
107
for i = 1:length(loa35);
108
109
contacrad35(i,1) = ((3*loa35(i,1)*r35)/(4*E))^(1/3);
110
areatot35(i,1)=pi*contacrad35(i,1).^2;
111
maxpres35(i,1) =(3*loa35(i,1))/(2*pi*(contacrad35(i,1)^2));
112
avepres35(i,1) = (2/3)*maxpres35(i,1);
113
114
end
115
116
%calculate the pressures for r10
117
maxpresr10=zeros(13,1);
118
avepresr10=zeros(13,1);
119
depthr10=zeros(13,1);
120
halfwidth=zeros(13,1);
121
contactarear10=zeros(13,1);
122
123
for i = 1:length(loar10);
124
125
maxpresr10(i,1) = ((E*loar10(i,1))/(3.1415*84.82*10))^(1/2);
126
127
%indentation depth
128
d=(loar10*4)/(E*84.84*pi);
129
%halfidth of contact
130
halfwidth=(10*d).^(1/2);
131
contactarear10=pi*((13.5+halfwidth).^2-(13.5-halfwidth).^2);
132
avepresr10(i,1) = (pi/4)*maxpresr10(i,1);
133
134
end
135
136
%calculate the pressures for flat
137
maxpresflat=zeros(13,1);
138
avepresflat=zeros(13,1);
139
140
for i = 1:length(loaflat);
141
142
avepresflat(i,1) = loaflat(i,1)/((3.1415*(15^2)) -((3.1415*(12^2))))
143
144
end
145
146
%flipping the voectors to creat a massive one which is linear
147
avepresflatf=flipud(avepresflat);
148
avepresr10f=flipud(avepresr10);
149
avepres35f=flipud(avepres35);
150
avepres13f=flipud(avepres13);
151
avepres05f=flipud(avepres05);
152
153
coefflatf=flipud(coefflat);
154
coefr10f=flipud(coefr10);
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
61
==PAGE:68==
155
coef35f=flipud(coef35);
156
coef13f=flipud(coef13);
157
coef05f=flipud(coef05);
158
159
%creating the massive vector for the simulation
160
aveprestot= vertcat( avepresr10f , avepres35f , avepres13f , avepres05f );
161
coeftot=vertcat(coefr10f , coef35f , coef13f , coef05f);
162
163
%------------------------------------------------------------
164
%calling sseval for the first simulation qith A+B/P
165
fun = @(x)sseval(x,aveprestot ,coeftot);
166
167
x0 = rand(1,2);
168
bestx=[];
169
bestx = fminsearch(fun,x0);
170
171
bestx(1)
172
bestx(2)
173
174
%finding the two values A and B of the function
175
A=bestx(1);
176
B=bestx(2);
177
aveprestotordered=sort(aveprestot);
178
yfit=A+(B./aveprestot)
179
180
%----------------------------------------------------
181
%calling sseval for the first simulation qith A+B*P for each line
182
%r10
183
184
fun2 = @(x)sseval2(x,avepresr10f ,coefr10f);
185
186
x2 = rand(1,2);
187
bestx2=[];
188
bestx2 = fminsearch(fun2,x2);
189
190
bestx2(1)
191
bestx2(2)
192
193
%finding the two values A and B of the function
194
A2=bestx2(1);
195
B2=bestx2(2);
196
197
avepresr10fordered=sort(avepresr10f);
198
yfit2=A2+(B2.*avepresr10f)
199
200
%r35
201
202
fun3 = @(x)sseval2(x,avepres35f ,coef35f);
203
204
x3 = rand(1,2);
205
bestx3=[];
206
bestx3 = fminsearch(fun3,x3);
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
62
==PAGE:69==
207
208
bestx3(1);
209
bestx3(2);
210
211
%finding the two values A and B of the function
212
A3=bestx3(1);
213
B3=bestx3(2);
214
215
216
yfit3=A3+(B3.*avepres35f);
217
218
%r13
219
220
fun4 = @(x)sseval2(x,avepres13f ,coef13f);
221
222
x4 = rand(1,2);
223
bestx4=[];
224
bestx4 = fminsearch(fun4,x4);
225
226
bestx4(1);
227
bestx4(2);
228
229
%finding the two values A and B of the function
230
A4=bestx4(1);
231
B4=bestx4(2);
232
233
234
yfit4=A4+(B4.*avepres13f);
235
236
%r05
237
238
fun5 = @(x)sseval2(x,avepres05f ,coef05f);
239
240
x5 = rand(1,2);
241
bestx5=[];
242
bestx5 = fminsearch(fun5,x5);
243
244
bestx5(1);
245
bestx5(2);
246
247
%finding the two values A and B of the function
248
A5=bestx5(1);
249
B5=bestx5(2);
250
251
252
yfit5=A5+(B5.*avepres05f);
253
254
%flat
255
256
fun6 = @(x)sseval2(x,avepresflatf ,coefflatf);
257
258
x6 = rand(1,2);
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
63
==PAGE:70==
259
bestx6=[];
260
bestx6 = fminsearch(fun6,x6);
261
262
bestx6(1);
263
bestx6(2);
264
265
%finding the two values A and B of the function
266
A6=bestx6(1);
267
B6=bestx6(2);
268
269
270
yfit6=A6+(B6.*avepresflatf);
271
272
%----------------------------------------------------------------
273
%FRICTION FORCE AND PLOTTING
274
fforce05=[];
275
fforce13=[];
276
fforce35=[];
277
fforcer10=[];
278
fforceflat=[];
279
280
for i=1:length(loa05);
281
fforce05(i)=loa05(i)*coef05(i);
282
fforce13(i)=loar10(i)*coef13(i);
283
fforce35(i)=loar10(i)*coef35(i);
284
fforcer10(i)=loar10(i)*coefr10(i);
285
fforceflat(i)=loaflat(i)*coefflat(i);
286
end
287
288
loaflip=flipud(loa05);
289
loaflip2=flipud(loar10);
290
291
% ---------------------------------------------------
292
% simulations for the friction force plot
293
fforce05=transpose(fforce05);
294
fun7 = @(x)sseval4(x,loar10,fforce05);
295
296
x7 = rand(1,2);
297
bestx=[];
298
bestx = fminsearch(fun7,x7);
299
300
bestx(1);
301
bestx(2);
302
303
%finding the two values A and B of the function
304
A7=bestx(1)
305
B7=bestx(2)
306
307
yfit7=A7.*loar10+B7.*loar10.^2;
308
309
% 13 !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
310
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
64
==PAGE:71==
311
fforce13=transpose(fforce13);
312
fun8 = @(x)sseval4(x,loar10,fforce13);
313
314
x8 = rand(1,3);
315
bestx=[];
316
bestx = fminsearch(fun8,x8);
317
318
bestx(1);
319
bestx(2);
320
321
%finding the two values A and B of the function
322
A8=bestx(1)
323
B8=bestx(2)
324
325
yfit8=A8.*loar10+B8.*loar10.^2;
326
327
% 35 !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
328
329
fforce35=transpose(fforce35);
330
fun9 = @(x)sseval4(x,loar10,fforce35);
331
332
x9 = rand(1,2);
333
bestx=[];
334
bestx = fminsearch(fun9,x9);
335
336
bestx(1);
337
bestx(2);
338
339
%finding the two values A and B of the function
340
A9=bestx(1);
341
B9=bestx(2);
342
343
yfit9=A9.*loar10+B9.*loar10.^2;
344
345
% r10 !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
346
347
fforcer10=transpose(fforcer10);
348
fun10 = @(x)sseval4(x,loar10,fforcer10);
349
350
x10 = rand(1,2);
351
bestx=[];
352
bestx = fminsearch(fun10,x10);
353
354
bestx(1);
355
bestx(2);
356
357
%finding the two values A and B of the function
358
A10=bestx(1);
359
B10=bestx(2);
360
361
yfit10=A10.*loar10+B10.*loar10.^2;
362
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
65
==PAGE:72==
363
% flat !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
364
365
fforceflat=transpose(fforceflat);
366
fun11 = @(x)sseval4(x,loar10,fforceflat);
367
368
x11 = rand(1,2);
369
bestx=[];
370
bestx = fminsearch(fun11,x11);
371
372
bestx(1);
373
bestx(2);
374
375
%finding the two values A and B of the function
376
A11=bestx(1);
377
B11=bestx(2);
378
379
yfit11=A11.*loar10+B11.*loar10.^2;
380
381
%-----------------------PROVA fitting with results ----------
382
383
384
YY05= A5*loa05 + (B5.*loa05.^2)*1./(areatot05)
385
386
YY13= A4*loar10 + (B4.*loar10.^2)*1./(3.*areatot13)
387
388
YY35= A3*loar10 + (B3.*loar10.^2)*1./(3*areatot35)
389
390
YYr10 = A2*loar10 + (B2.*loar10.^2)*1./(contactarear10)
391
392
%TRIAL-----------------------------------------------------
393
% interpolation
Y = b + c / p for each single line
394
%------------------------------------------------
395
396
% ---------------05
397
fun = @(x)sseval(x,avepres05 ,coef05);
398
399
xtry = rand(1,2);
400
bestx=[];
401
bestx = fminsearch(fun,xtry);
402
403
bestx(1)
404
bestx(2)
405
406
%finding the two values A and B of the function
407
BB=bestx(1);
408
CC=bestx(2);
409
410
YYtry=BB+(CC./avepres05)
411
412
%------------13
413
414
fun2 = @(x)sseval(x,avepres13 ,coef13);
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
66
==PAGE:73==
415
416
xtry = rand(1,2);
417
bestx=[];
418
bestx = fminsearch(fun2,xtry);
419
420
bestx(1);
421
bestx(2);
422
423
%finding the two values A and B of the function
424
BB1=bestx(1);
425
CC1=bestx(2);
426
427
YYtry2=BB1+(CC1./avepres13)
428
429
%------------35
430
431
fun2 = @(x)sseval(x,avepres35 ,coef35);
432
433
xtry = rand(1,2);
434
bestx=[];
435
bestx = fminsearch(fun2,xtry);
436
437
bestx(1);
438
bestx(2);
439
440
%finding the two values A and B of the function
441
BB2=bestx(1);
442
CC2=bestx(2);
443
444
YYtry3=BB2+(CC2./avepres35)
445
446
%------------r10
447
448
fun2 = @(x)sseval(x,avepresr10 ,coefr10);
449
450
xtry = rand(1,2);
451
bestx=[];
452
bestx = fminsearch(fun2,xtry);
453
454
bestx(1);
455
bestx(2);
456
457
%finding the two values A and B of the function
458
BB3=bestx(1);
459
CC3=bestx(2);
460
461
YYtry4=BB3+(CC3./avepresr10)
462
463
%%%% counterproof
464
465
%%%
FRICTIONFORCE = N * BB + CC * AREATOT
466
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
67
==PAGE:74==
467
Ionfric05 = loa05 * BB + CC * areatot05;
468
469
Ionfric13 = loa13 * BB + CC * areatot13;
470
471
Ionfric35 = loa35 * BB + CC * areatot35;
472
473
474
%%
475
% NEW TEST
476
% MU = K1 * p ^ (N-1)
477
478
% 05
479
480
fun = @(x)ssevalK1(x,avepres05 ,coef05);
481
482
xK1 = rand(1,2);
483
bestx=[];
484
bestx = fminsearch(fun,xK1);
485
486
bestx(1)
487
bestx(2)
488
489
%finding the two values A and B of the function
490
K05=bestx(1);
491
enne05=bestx(2);
492
493
mu05=K05.*avepres05.^(enne05 -1)
494
495
% 13
496
497
fun = @(x)ssevalK1(x,avepres13 ,coef13);
498
499
xK2 = rand(1,2);
500
bestx=[];
501
bestx = fminsearch(fun,xK2);
502
503
bestx(1)
504
bestx(2)
505
506
%finding the two values A and B of the function
507
K13=bestx(1);
508
enne13=bestx(2);
509
510
mu13=K13.*avepres13.^(enne13 -1)
511
512
% 35
513
514
fun = @(x)ssevalK1(x,avepres35 ,coef35);
515
516
xK3 = rand(1,2);
517
bestx=[];
518
bestx = fminsearch(fun,xK3);
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
68
==PAGE:75==
519
520
bestx(1)
521
bestx(2)
522
523
%finding the two values A and B of the function
524
K35=bestx(1);
525
enne35=bestx(2);
526
527
mu35=K35.*avepres35.^(enne35 -1)
528
529
% counterproof
530
%
F = K1 * P^N * A^(1-N)
531
532
effe05 = K05 * (loa05.^(enne05)) .* (areatot05.^(1-enne05))
533
534
effe13 = K13 * (loa13.^(enne13)) .* (areatot13.^(1-enne13))
535
536
effe35 = K35 * (loa35.^(enne35)) .* (areatot35.^(1-enne35))
537
538
%% PLOTTING
539
540
figure(1)
541
plot(aveprestot ,yfit,'b','linewidth ',1.2)
542
hold on
543
scatter(avepres05 ,coef05,'MarkerEdgeColor ',[0.25
0.41 0.87],'MarkerFaceColor
',[0.25
0.41 0.87])
544
hold on
545
scatter(avepres13 ,coef13,'MarkerEdgeColor ',[0.68 0.76 .86],'MarkerFaceColor
',[0.68 0.76 .86])
546
hold on
547
scatter(avepres35 ,coef35,'MarkerEdgeColor ',[0.5 0.5 0],'MarkerFaceColor ',[0.5
0.5 0])
548
hold on
549
scatter(avepresr10 ,coefr10 ,'MarkerEdgeColor ',[0.5 0 0.5],'MarkerFaceColor
',[0.5 0 0.5])
550
xlim([0 100])
551
ylim([0 1])
552
set(gca,'fontname ','times','FontSize ', 16)
553
xlabel('Average Hertzian Pressure [MPa]');
554
ylabel('CoF [-]');
555
box off;
556
557
558
figure(2)
559
plot(avepresr10f ,yfit2,'b','linewidth ',1.2)
560
hold on
561
plot(avepres35f ,yfit3,'b','linewidth ',1.2)
562
hold on
563
plot(avepres13f ,yfit4,'b','linewidth ',1.2)
564
hold on
565
plot(avepres05f ,yfit5,'b','linewidth ',1.2)
566
hold on
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
69
==PAGE:76==
567
scatter(avepres05 ,coef05,'MarkerEdgeColor ',[0.25
0.41 0.87],'MarkerFaceColor
',[0.25
0.41 0.87])
568
hold on
569
scatter(avepres13 ,coef13,'MarkerEdgeColor ',[0.68 0.76 .86],'MarkerFaceColor
',[0.68 0.76 .86])
570
hold on
571
scatter(avepres35 ,coef35,'MarkerEdgeColor ',[0.5 0.5 0],'MarkerFaceColor ',[0.5
0.5 0])
572
hold on
573
scatter(avepresr10 ,coefr10 ,'MarkerEdgeColor ',[0.5 0 0.5],'MarkerFaceColor
',[0.5 0 0.5])
574
xlim([0 100])
575
ylim([0 1])
576
set(gca,'fontname ','times','FontSize ', 16)
577
xlabel('Average Hertzian Pressure [MPa]');
578
ylabel('CoF [-]');
579
box off;
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
70
==PAGE:77==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
71
==PAGE:78==
A.4
Compression test results
Figure A.8:
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
72
==PAGE:79==
Figure A.9:
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
73
==PAGE:80==
Figure A.10:
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
74
==PAGE:81==
Figure A.11:
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
75
==PAGE:82==
Figure A.12:
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
76
==PAGE:83==
A.5
Temperature effect on 3P05 specimens of PP
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
77
==PAGE:84==
A.6
Temperature effect on 3P05 specimens of the other
materials
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
78
==PAGE:85==
A.7
Tribotest results
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
79
==PAGE:86==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
80
==PAGE:87==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
81
==PAGE:88==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
82
==PAGE:89==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
83
==PAGE:90==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
84
==PAGE:91==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
85
==PAGE:92==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
86
==PAGE:93==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
87
==PAGE:94==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
88
==PAGE:95==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
89
==PAGE:96==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
90
==PAGE:97==
A.8
Study of the trend of the Friction coeﬀicient in
3P13-large combinations
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
91
==PAGE:98==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
92
==PAGE:99==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
93
==PAGE:100==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
94
==PAGE:101==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
95
==PAGE:102==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
96
==PAGE:103==
A.9
Coeﬀicients α and β
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
97
==PAGE:104==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
98
==PAGE:105==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
99
==PAGE:106==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
100
==PAGE:107==
A.10
Datasheets
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
101
==PAGE:108==
Figure A.13: Datasheet Sabic Resin PC HPS7
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
102
==PAGE:109==
Figure A.14: Datasheet Kepital MX30BT01
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
103
==PAGE:110==
Figure A.15: Datasheet Sabic PP 58MNK10
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
104
==PAGE:111==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
105
==PAGE:112==
Figure A.16: Datasheet Sabic ABS HMG94MD
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
106
==PAGE:113==
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
107
==PAGE:114==
Figure A.17: Datasheet Sabic PBT W1000XiQ
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
108
==PAGE:115==
Figure A.18: Datasheet Kepital TS-25H
The influence of contact pressure on polymer friction
109
==PAGE:116==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Section of Manufacturing Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Produktionstorvet, Bld. 425
DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
Denmark
Tlf.: +45 4525 4763
Fax: +45 4525 1961
www.mek.dtu.dk
July 2021
