==PAGE:1==
Multichannel acoustic feedback control for the
interactive auralisation of virtual acoustics
Master thesis, July 2021
Wannes Van Ransbeeck, s192798
Supervisors:
Toon van Waterschoot
Efren Fernandez Grande
Hannes Rosseel
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Acoustic Technology, Department of Electrical Engineering
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3949
elektro@elektro.dtu.dk
act.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The objective of this thesis is to study the effect of control strategies in a multichannel sound system
designed for auralisation of virtual acoustics. Knowledge of the overall performance of these control
strategies, including phase-modulation and frequency shifting, would allow for better management of
the underlying auralisation system. In doing so stability may be maintained at higher amplification
levels along with circumventing distortion effects arising due to the acoustical coupling between mi-
crophone and speaker pairs. Alternative control strategies, for example adaptive feedback cancellation
and notch filters, were not considered due to the low delay requirements and computational limits that
were necessary for a real time interactive auralisation. The overall system under test involved a phys-
ical auralisation room located in the Library of Voices property of the Alamire Foundation situated
in Abdij van Park in Leuven, Belgium. The impulse responses of the setup present, consisting of a 4
microphone and 24 speaker array, was initially measured to reconstruct the system in a digital envi-
ronment. A computer model of the system was created in MATLAB simulating the full response and
allowing observation of the influence of individual control methods on the overall performance of the
system. Simulations were carried out for two control strategies: Frequency Shifting (FS) and Sinusoidal
Phase-Modulation (PM). Underlying parameters for these were altered throughout, being a common
modulation frequency fm, relative phase shift ∆γ and, for phase modulation specifically, the modula-
tion amplitude β. Performance in all setups was defined by two criteria. One being the maximal gain,
denoted by Kmax (single channel) or µstab (multichannel), which still provided a stable signal response.
Secondly, the signal distortion SD, providing a comparative measure of distortion present in a signal
relative to a reference response without acoustic feedback coupling.
As earlier papers stated, the decreasing performance of the stable gains µstab as channel count N
increased was confirmed once more for both modulation types, be it phase-modulation or frequency
shifting. However, differences in performance, given by the added stable gain µASG, relative to a non-
modulated reference, were visible between both. A reduction in µASG for FS was clearly present as
channel count increased, which was deemed a consequence of the added flattening of the loop gains
due to the summation of more speaker/microphone paths. The latter effects were also visible in PM,
although to a significantly less extent, leading to a mostly constant improvement µASG of PM as chan-
nel count N increased. Perceptual evaluation together with SD measurements also illustrated the gain
margins (3dB) needed for PM and raised gain margins (6dB) needed for FS to avoid perceptible artefacts.
These margins along with the decreases observed for FS in µASG gave a clear indication of the possibil-
ities for PM to approach FS in terms of performance (µstab and SD) and potentially outperform it for
auralisation applications. Additionally indications were found as well for a potential improvement in
performance of FS with limited channel counts due to the addition of channels providing complementary
flattening effects to the loop gain besides the ones realised by FS.
Lastly the relative phase shift ∆γ resulted in regions of increased added stable gain for both modu-
lation types in a smaller system setup with 2 microphones and 2 speakers. Significantly higher improve-
ments were however found for PM (4.2dB) than for FS (0.5dB).
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This Master thesis, ”Multichannel acoustic feedback control for the interactive auralisation of virtual
acoustics”, was submitted to the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) as partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering Acoustics. The project was completed
between 8-February-2021 and 8-July-2021 at the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Acoustic
Technology group, for 30 ECTS credits, under the supervision of Toon van Waterschoot (KU Leuven),
Efren Fernandez Grande (DTU) and Hannes Rosseel (KU Leuven).
Kongens Lyngby, July 8, 2021
Wannes Van Ransbeeck, s192798
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, profound gratitude should be expressed towards my two main supervisors, Toon
van Waterschoot and Efren Fernandez Grande, who have guided me along the entirety of the way and
provided me with much needed regular feedback, additional material, new insights and renewed interest
and motivation each week.
Also I would like to greatly thank Hannes Rosseel for introducing me to the measurement setup in
the Library of Voices and helping with the initial setup and parameters of the system along with pro-
viding material to generate the sweeps and carry out simulations and measurements.
Lastly I would like to thank Rudi Knoops for granting me access to the measurement lab whenever
I needed and Thomas Dietzen for providing me with reference measurements allowing verification of
the simulations and auralisation of the system output.
==PAGE:6==
Symbols
LoV
Library of Voices
DVI
Dante Virtual Interface
PFC
Phase-modulation Feedback Control
PM
(Sinusoidal) Phase-modulation
FS
Frequency Shifting
NHS
Notch-filter-based Howling Suppression
AFC
Adaptive Feedback Cancellation
DFT
Discrete Fourier Transform
LTV
Linear Time-Varying
fs
Sampling frequency, in Hz
fc
Critical frequency, in Hz
fl
Limiting frequency, in Hz
fm
Modulation frequency, in Hz
β
Modulation amplitude, in rad
∆γ
Relative phase shift, in rad
N
Channel count
M
Window size for DFT
S × L
System setup consisting of S microphones and L speakers
F
Feedback path operator
G
Forward path reverberation operator
H
Modulator operator
F(ω)
Single channel feedback path frequency response
G(ω)
Single channel forward path frequency response
|F(ω)G(ω)|
Single channel loop gain
F(S×L)(ω)
Multichannel feedback path matrix
G(L×S)(ω)
Multichannel forward path matrix
FGij
Multichannel transfer matrix evaluated at indices i and j
λn
Characteristic function
Λ
Diagonal matrix of characteristic functions λn(ω)
Kmax or µstab
Maximal stable gain for a single/multichannel system, in N.A./dB
GBI
Gain Before Instability, in dB
µASG
Relative gain improvement, in dB
SD
Signal Distortion
SD
Signal Distortion averaged over channels
SDavg
Signal Distortion averaged over time and channels
SDmax
Maximal Signal Distortion averaged over channels
H(ω, t)
Frequency response of a modulator H
H(ω, n)
Discrete fourier transform of H(ω, t)
CS
Carrier Suppression, in dB
ya
Analytical signal
Umaster
Auralised signal
σnorm
Normalised standard deviation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Symbols
iv
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Literature overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Contribution to research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theory
4
2.1
The Feedback Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Single Channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Multichannel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Control Strategies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Control strategy argumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Phase-Modulation Feedback Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.2
Single Channel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3.3
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.3.4
Extension to Multichannel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Simulation, measurements and setup
20
3.1
Measurements and Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.1
Room layout and properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.2
Transducer Layout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.3
System connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.4
Measurement setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Model setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.1
Setup parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.2
Performance and quality evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.2.3
Delay compensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Results
32
4.1
Single Channel Verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.1.1
Frequency shifting influence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.1.2
Phase-modulation influence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2
Multichannel
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
4.2.1
Channel count increase influence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2.2
Parameter influence on modulation control strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.2.3
Relative phase shift on a 2×2 system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Conclusion
51
6
Future Work
53
Bibliography
54
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The acoustic feedback problem, as has been studied over the past 60 years [vM11] mainly in single
channels systems, still poses a major problem in the correct functioning of systems today. This applies
to a widespread range of applications be it hearing aids, concert venues, auralisation rooms or more
generally put, Public Address (PA) systems. The core concept behind this feedback problem may be
illustrated by a simple setup consisting of a microphone connected to a speaker located in the same
room. Consider a person situated in front of the microphone. The subject may start to talk or sing
into the transducer, exciting it and thus realising an electrical signal travelling along the connection to
the speaker. The output produced by the speaker membrane will travel through the room and partly
also excite the microphone again, this backwards acoustic coupling is an example of acoustic feedback.
In turn, the speaker contribution to the microphone signal will be fed back into the speaker once more
and so the cycle continues. Depending on the amplitude and phase with which the signal arrives back
at the microphone the system will be either stable or unstable.
For the unstable case, the signal amplitude inside the system will be amplified at each cycle and
presented back at the microphone at higher magnitudes than the initial input, [Sch64]. This leads to a
rise in level over time which can result in saturation of the equipment realising undesired artefacts as
for example sustained oscillation, [Sch64] & [Nie+99].
The overall behaviour of a system with feedback is thus dependent on the feedback path present and
amplification provided within, be it in a positive [GB71] or negative [Sch64] manner. Besides purely
stability, the feedback path itself presents a strong influence on the system even when stable. Arte-
facts as howling, where certain frequency components persist longer than intended, or signal distortion
(colouration) in which the overall spectral content of the signal is altered, are present as well due to
feedback [Pol00]. As these artefacts are undesirable, control strategies should be implemented.
A multitude of different methods, control strategies, has been developed successfully, [vM11] &
[Nie+99], all aimed at overcoming the earlier mentioned artefacts by utilising different properties of
the system setup. These include manual methods in which the system is controlled by an operator and
automatic methods based around automated signal alternations, the latter will be mainly discussed.
Although advanced methods have been developed for the automatic control strategies, which are
based around phase-alternations of the signal (Phase-modulation Feedback Control (PFC)), automated
filters (Notch-filter-based Howling Suppression (NHS)) or complete filter operations based around the
modelling of the feedback paths (Adaptive Feedback cancellation (AFC)), their implementation for
multichannel systems has been found cumbersome. This with regards to computational complexity
[vM11] and general decreased performance [Pol00], in turn resulting in limits posed on the improvements
that can be made for multichannel systems. The decreased performance has been discussed and analysed
for frequency shifting FS [Pol04] & [Nie+99], being a type of PFC, with regards to both achievable
amplification and noticeable distortion. However, relative performance to the un-modulated cases were
not discussed extensively leaving room for an in depth analysis of FS and potential PFC variants of it,
i.e. phase-modulation PM, with regards to the altering behaviour and performance as channel count
increased. Limited computational complexities and overall flexibility of these methods (PM and FM)
promotes their use in a multichannel environment as well.
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Research objective
2
1.2
Research objective
Hence, as an extension upon earlier research on single and multichannel systems this thesis will focus
on evaluating the overall performance of phase-modulation and frequency shifting control strategies
in a multichannel sound system. The objective of the thesis will be to determine: If and to which
extend channel count influences frequency shifting and phase-modulation and how perfor-
mance, in terms of amplification and distortion, compares between both in a multichannel
auralisation environment.
1.3
Literature overview
A literature study was initially carried out to verify the extend to which research was performed for
modulation techniques in a multichannel environment for feedback control.
The starting point for
this was initial research preformed by Schroeder in ”Improvement of Acoustic-Feedback Stability by
Frequency Shifting” [Sch64].
Here a theoretical derivation is given for the stability limits, i.e.
the
maximal amplification which can be introduced before instability, of a single channel system with
frequency shifting applied as controlling strategy. The method assumed a complete flattening of the
frequency response and further illustrated a theoretical optimal frequency shift, giving the highest
stability improvement, in diffuse fields around fm = 4/T60 with T60 being the reverberation time. These
limits were confirmed as well in the paper by carried out measurements of the gain before instability
(GBI), i.e. the stability limit, as a function of modulation frequency fm. A needed minimal 6dB margins
below the actual stability limits was further also emphasised to avoid audible artefacts. To this a limit
was already earlier suggested by Schroeder for FS [Sch61], on the allowed maximal frequency shifts fm,
stating shifts up to 5Hz were inaudible for speech and most types of music.
Alternative modulation strategies, regarding phase-modulation PM and delay-modulation DM were
then investigated with regard to stability (GBI) improvements by Svensson in [Sve95]. Their respective
parameters’ influences were studied, these being a modulation frequency fm and modulation amplitude
β for PM and delay variation ∆τ for DM . The limited influence of DM was illustrated for low frequencies
as well as dependencies for PM. The latter showing the independence on fm in the range fm = [0.5, 4] Hz
and increasing performance with β for the GBI of PM. Keeping audibility of artefacts in mind it was
also suggested the modulation frequencies fm should be kept as low as possible.
These trends were reevaluated, confirmed and expanded by Nielsen and Svensson in ”Performance
of some linear time-varying systems in control of acoustic feedback” in which the performance (GBI)
of PM, FS and DM were evaluated along with the influence of the introduction of reverberation in the
forward path to the microphones. The analysis and discussion were performed through a unified point
of view for all three methods (PM, FS and DM) as proposed by [CM82]. Here the control strategies
are represented as Linear Periodic Time-Varying filters (LPTV) which allowed realising expressions for
the frequency responses of each method’s output. This led to the conclusion of FS serving as an ideal
frequency response smoothing and all other LPTV’s (PM and DM) corresponding to less performing
alternatives for a single channel system resulting in smaller improvements in stability. Irregularities
(peaks in the loop gain), as introduced by the forward reverberation were also shown to have a negative
effect on the achievable GBI in the unmodulated case, suggesting the use of equalisation to counteract
this.
To evaluate multichannel stability, Poletti [Pol00] presented a statistical analysis which was based
upon an eigenvalue decomposition of the forward path G and feedback path F matrices. The analysis
was also confirmed via Monte-Carlo simulations and allowed identifying stability limits in term of a
general applied gain µ and furthermore illustrated the destabilising influence of inserting reverberation
in the forward path. A decrease of stable µ with increasing channel count N also clearly resulted from
both analysis and simulation. The analysis was later further extended by Poletti [Pol04] to also included
frequency shifting. Here as well both a statistical and simulation based stability analysis were carried
out. The analysis indicated FS serving as an upper limit for the increases in stability limits that may
be expected from the application of time-variation methods in sound systems. Additionally a needed
==PAGE:11==
1.4 Contribution to research
3
gain margin to remove artefacts and a decreased stable gain improvement of FS with channel count
increase was also concluded.
A promising extension upon this research was performed by Schlecht and Habets [SH16] in which
time-varying mixing matrices MM, performing complex modulations, are analysed and simulated. Their
performance was compared to FS and indicated similar stability improvements, however with a subjec-
tive preference to MM allowing higher amplification.
A general overview of feedback control as performed over the last 60 years can also be found in
[vM11]. This documents provides an in-depth overview of both manual and automated feedback control
strategies as well as there limitations along with a comparative simulation to illustrate stable gain
improvements, distortion and other signal properties. In here AFC was shown to outperform both NHS
and PFC. It furthermore also emphasised the limited room for improvement for NHS and PFC due to
their theoretical limits which has been shown to typically be around 10dB.
1.4
Contribution to research
The added value of this thesis can be found in its extension into a multichannel system, since the
main research has been directed towards modulation strategies performance in single channel cases
[Sch64],[Sve95],[Nie+99], with the exception of work by Poletti [Pol00],[Pol04] and Schlecht and Habets
[SH16]. However, the latter analyses only provided a statistical and simulated evaluation of the overall
performance of the modulation control strategies’ stability, mostly for FS, in a multichannel system.
Effects of the underlying governing parameters for PM (modulation index β and modulation frequency
fm) and FS (modulation frequency fm) have not been studied extensively in a multichannel context.
Furthermore, although valid, assumptions with regards to the feedback and forward path limit the ap-
plication of the theory given in the latter papers to general systems. Hence a more detailed discussion of
the modulation parameter influence of PFC methods, regarding stability and signal distortion SD will
be discussed here for a multichannel system. Adding to this, the system is modelled after real physical
environment measurements thus providing more insight into the in situ performance of these methods.
The system under test consisted of a 4 microphones and 24 speakers setup connected via a rever-
beration unit located at the Library of Voices in Abdij van Park in Leuven, Belgium. The main usage
of the system involves an interactive auralisation of desired room acoustics through the proper playback
of present singers’ voices back into the room through the speakers. In here the presence of a feedback
problem is clear. However, due to practical considerations and to furthermore ensure reproducibility,
the entire system was simulated in a digital environment. The system was reconstructed in MATLAB
based upon Impulse Reponse (IR) measurements conducted in the room.
The thesis will first line out all theoretical background needed to understand the feedback problem,
responsible for the instabilities and colouration, in both a single and multichannel context, Chapter 2.
Here, the control strategies (PM and FS) will be discussed as well along with how these may control
stability. Additionally an overview is given in Chapter 3 of the measurement setup and how measure-
ments and simulations were conducted, followed by an overview of the simulation results, Chapter 4.
Afterwards a conclusion is given in Chapter 5 along with further potential research that may improve
the application of PFC strategies in a multichannel system, Chapter 6.
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Theory
In order to properly manage and control the behaviour of a multichannel sound system a proper under-
standing of the underlying mechanisms is necessary. For this reason an overview of the system under
test as well as the feedback problem will be given first. Additionally a rundown will be presented of the
most prominent strategies, as mentioned earlier in the introduction, followed by a discussion on Phase-
Modulation PM and Frequency Shifting FS. The structure of the theory discussion was furthermore
largely based upon a discussion made in [vM11].
STAGE
MIXER
AUDIENCE
L loudspeaker signals
S microphone signals
Figure 2.1: A typical public address (PA) system scenario, featuring seven microphones, four onstage
loudspeakers, four loudspeakers directed towards the audience, and a mixing/signal pro-
cessing/amplification console, provided by T. van Waterschoot from [vM11].
2.1
The Feedback Problem
Consider a system as presented in Figure 2.1 in which a multitude of speakers and microphones, situ-
ated in a room, are coupled together via a mixer unit. In both single and multichannel cases the main
objective of the system is the reproduction of the presented signals to the microphones via the available
output. The desired inputs v, be it speech or music, are then presented at the microphones. These S
microphone signals travel through a mixing unit and potential other effects, denoted as G. Afterwards
the modified signals exit through the L speakers as outputs u. These outputs propagate through the
room or environment and eventually reach the desired listeners’ ears. Unfortunately, unavoidable re-
flections created by walls, ceilings and objects present in the room result in a fraction of the output
energy of the speaker to be redirected towards the microphones again. The acoustic coupling between
microphone and speaker will be represented here as the feedback block F creating the feedback signal
x which together with the above introduced desired input v produces the full microphone signal y. A
schematic overview of this coupling is illustrated in Figure 2.2 for a single channel system based upon
the setup discussed earlier and illustrated in Figure 2.1.
==PAGE:13==
2.1 The Feedback Problem
5
+
G
F
v(t)
y(t)
x(t)
u(t)
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the single channel feedback problem in discrete time t.
It should be noted that simplified models for speakers and microphones are assumed here, i.e. flat
frequency responses which do not alter the signal’s content. Furthermore the analysis in this thesis will
be performed in discrete time which will be represented by an indexing (t) for all signals. The input
of all available signals (v, u, y, x) is thus sampled at specific time instants. These are separated by a
constant sampling time Ts with sampling frequency fs = 1/Ts. The time index t can be found from
the continuous time τ via t = τ/Ts. All signals are thus also assumed to be bandlimited to allow a
correct sampling with the used sample frequency. Moreover, it should be emphasised that the signal
v as presented to the microphone is the signal as presented close to the transducer. Should however a
source be placed further from the microphone, as was the case in the LoV, the source signals vsource(t)
as observed close to its origin must first be passed through a transfer function to achieve the signal v(t)
close to the transducer .
2.1.1
Single Channel
A system consisting of only a single speaker and microphone, as shown in Figure 2.2, can alternatively
be expressed via two relations. These describe the summation (Equation 2.1) as well as the input-output
relation of the gain block G (Equation 2.2).
y(t) = F(q, t)u(t) + v(t)
(2.1)
u(t) = G[y(t), t]
(2.2)
The gain operator G and feedback operator F correspond to their likely named counterparts in
Figure 2.2. Here F is assumed linear, time-varying and of finite order nF . The first assumption can
be argued for by the level independence of sound propagation and reflection in acoustic environments
[vM11].
However, as the gain operator G potentially does contain non-linearities, due to potential
compression or expansion for example, extending the linear assumption to G would be invalid. Never-
theless the linearity as well as time-varying and finite order are assumed for both to analyse the system’s
stability. Following from this, both operators may alternatively be written as
F(q, t) = f (0)(t) + f (1)(t)q−1 + ... + f (nF )(t)q−nF
(2.3)
G(q, t) = g(0)(t) + g(1)(t)q−1 + ... + g(nG)(t)q−nG
(2.4)
in which q represents a discrete-time shift operator, i.e. q−ku(t) = u(t −k), thus resulting in a convo-
lution with either the impulse response of the system G or F. The limited order used for the impulse
response of the feedback path F can be justified by the typical observed exponential decay of room
impulse responses [vM11] allowing truncation. This may be illustrated and extended to G by obser-
vations of the instantaneous energy content of impulse response measurements made for both forward
path G and feedback path F.
The latter indicate an initial zone of pure exponential decay after
==PAGE:14==
2.1 The Feedback Problem
6
which the noise floor is reached. This is illustrated below in Figure 2.3 with the Energy Time Curve
ETC(t) = 20 log10 (|h(t)|) of the measured impulse response, denoted by h(t)[A+95].
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3: Energy Time Curve of a single channel impulse response sampled at fs =16kHz.
(a) Forward path reverberation G and (b) feedback path F.
Following from the above relations the closed loop frequency response relating speaker output u to
the input signal v is then given by
U(ω, t)
V (ω, t) =
G(ω, t)
1 −G(ω, t)F(ω, t)
(2.5)
where ω ∈[0, 2π[ is the radial frequency. The short-term frequency responses (STFT) of both input
v(t) and speaker output u(t) are given by V (ω, t) and U(ω, t) respectively. Likewise F(ω, t) and G(ω, t)
are the short-term frequency responses of the feedback path F and feed forward path G respectively.
As the overall behaviour of the speaker output is defined by Equation 2.5, the importance of the open
loop response G(ω, t)F(ω, t) with regards to stability is illustrated by it. Note that the relations defined
above assume suﬀicient zero padding is applied to all signals (u, v, G, F) before transitioning to the fre-
quency domain. This in order to avoid the linear convolution, given in Equation 2.1 and Equation 2.2,
transitioning into a circular one [PM96].
Seeing as a zero denominator results in a infinitely large response, following the equation, a loop
response with a value close to unity should be avoided. For convenience the ”loop gain” and ”loop
phase” are introduced, corresponding to the magnitude |G(ω, t)F(ω, t)| and phase ∠G(ω, t)F(ω, t) of
the loop response respectively. In order to avoid any distortion from altering the signal content, i.e.
howling or signal colouration, a stability assessment of the closed loop system is needed. Here the sta-
bility analysis is based upon a stability criterion as proposed by Nyquist [Nyq32]. The Nyquist stability
criterion states that if a radial frequency ω = 2π(f/fs) exists for which
{
|G(ω, t)F(ω, t)| ≥1
∠G(ω, t)F(ω, t) = n2π, n ∈Z
(2.6)
the closed loop system is unstable. Here the first statement ensures the magnitude of the considered
open loop response is larger than unity to which the second line adds the requirement of being real
and positive. A system excited at these specific critical frequencies fc or associated radial frequency
ωc with (ωc = 2π(fc/fs)), will thus become unstable and showcase artefacts in its output signal, i.e.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 The Feedback Problem
7
howling or signal colouration. It should however be mentioned that the criterion outlined here assumes
a linear time-invariant system. These assumptions do not necessarily hold true as feedback paths or
reverberation units present in the forward path may be varying in time. Alternatively a circle criterion
can be utilised to analyse time-varying systems [vM11]. This will however be omitted as the time-varying
nature of both the electro-acoustic forward path G and the feedback path F are assumed slow.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.4: Timed domain response of u sampled at fs =16kHz of two single channel systems with
identical feedback path F but rescaled forward reverberation path G.
The relevance of this instability criterion may be better illustrated by a single channel simulation
performed for two systems with an identical time-invariant feedback path F(ω) and scaled forward paths
G2(ω) = c G1(ω) with scaling constant c. The time responses, loop gains |G(ω)F(ω)| and spectrograms
of their speaker output u(t) can be found for both cases in Figure 2.4, Figure 2.5 and Figure 2.6
respectively. Alternatively by considering a more stringent stability criterion [Ohs90] & [Pol00], the
observed behaviour can be explained. The latter criterion states a system may only be guaranteed to
be stable by a loop response with a magnitude smaller than unity regardless of the loop phase. As
the open loop frequency response clearly illustrates a magnitude larger than 0dB, i.e. |G(ω)F(ω)| ≥1,
being present around 500 Hz, the system becomes unstable. This is illustrated in Figure 2.4 through
an ever increasing amplitude of the response u(t). Alternatively this is represented by a strong single
frequency component in the spectrogram (Figure 2.6).
==PAGE:16==
2.1 The Feedback Problem
8
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.5: Loop gain |G(ω)F(ω)| sampled at fs =16kHz of two single channel systems with identical
feedback path F but rescaled forward reverberation path G.
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
(a)
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
(b)
Figure 2.6: Spectrogram sampled at fs =16kHz of two single channel systems with identical feedback
path F but rescaled forward reverberation path G.
To quantify the overall performance of a system under test and its maximal achievable amplification
an averaged broadband gain K(t) is introduced. This gain is defined as the magnitude of the forward
path frequency response G(ω, t) averaged over the entire frequency range, see Equation 2.7.
From
this an alternative notation for the forward path can be written down relative to the averaged level,
Equation 2.8.
The function J(ω, t) corresponds here to a simple weighting function for deviations
relative to the average.
K(t) = 1
2π
∫2π
0
|G(ω, t)|dω
(2.7)
G(ω, t) = K(t)J(ω, t)
(2.8)
==PAGE:17==
2.1 The Feedback Problem
9
The maximal achievable amplification will then be be given by the highest K(t) which still provides
a stable response, i.e. decaying magnitude over time once the input v(t) has died out. This will be
denoted as Kmax(t). Of course Kmax(t) can then also be related back to when the Nyquist criterion
is just not met. Often a margin of a couple dB below the stability limit is handled, as suggested by
Schroeder [Sch64], to ensure limited distortion, colouration and audible artefacts. This will be revisited
in Chapter 3.
The Maximal Stable Gain (MSG) may then be defined as
MSG(t)[dB] ≜20 log10 K(t)
with max
ω∈P |G(ω, t)F(ω, t)| = 1
(2.9)
This may be rewritten as a function of J(ω, t) and the feedback path F(ω, t)
MSG(t)[dB] = −20 log10
[
max
ω∈P |J(ω, t)F(ω, t)|
]
(2.10)
The highest stable Kmax(t), or associated MSG, is found here by considering the set P of ω values
for which the phase condition is fulfilled P = {ω|∠G(ω, t)F(ω, t) = n2π}. From these frequencies the
highest magnitude of the loop gain will provide the most stringent requirement for stability. Hence,
setting the loop gain at these frequencies to be unity results in the highest stable values for K(t).
Alternatively to the MSG the maximal amplification can also be expressed via the Mean Loop power
Gain (MLG), MLG(t) = |G(ω, t)F(ω, t)|2.
The stability limit of MLG is labeled the Gain Before
Instability (GBI) [Nie+99], Equation 2.11. This provides a second representation of the maximal am-
plification, expressed via the mean square of the open loop response instead of the mean of the forward
path only as is the case for the MSG.
GBI(t)[dB] = 10 log10 MLG(t)
(2.11)
Both the feedback path F and forward path G will henceforth be assumed to be time-invariant,
due to their slowly varying nature. As a consequence the time indication (t) as introduced into each
stability criterion may thus be omitted. A similar reasoning will be followed for the multichannel case
as well.
2.1.2
Multichannel
To properly analyse the LoV system as introduced earlier, a single channel analysis will not provide
suﬀicient insight. As a multitude of speakers and microphones is implemented in the public address
system, an extension of the single channel theory is needed. The increased amount of inputs and outputs
likewise also introduces more potential signal paths that can be followed and introduce instabilities.
Comparable to the single channel system, these paths introduce a fraction of the speaker output to
be presented back at the microphone. However, due to the added channel count N and thus feedback
paths, lower maximal gains are observed, [Pol00], [Pol04] & [SH16]. An overview detailing the overall
structure of a multichannel system is presented in Figure 2.1. From this an input/output system model
can be created as well, Figure 2.7.
==PAGE:18==
2.1 The Feedback Problem
10
acoustic
forward path
electro−acoustic
feedback path
yS(t)
y2(t)
y1(t)
vS(t)
v2(t)
v1(t)
u1(t)
uL(t)
uL−1(t)
G
...
...
...
...
F
Figure 2.7: Discrete-time model of a PA system with S microphones and L loudspeakers, provided by
T. van Waterschoot from [vM11].
The forward path G and feedback path F are represented here as separate subsystems taking all
individual channels as inputs or outputs. The overall system can then be described by:
y(t) = F(S×L)(q, t)u(t) + v(t)
(2.12)
u(t) = µG(L×S)[y(t), t]
(2.13)
The signals (u, v, x, y) represent the multichannel signals as observed at each individual speaker
or microphone. An additional constant gain value µ is introduced as well to allow for flexibility with
regard to later stability analyses. Considering a system comprised of S sources and L loudspeakers the
signal vectors are
v(t) = [v1(t)v2(t)...vS(t)]T
(2.14)
y(t) = [y1(t)y2(t)...yS(t)]T
(2.15)
u(t) = [u1(t)u2(t)...uL(t)]T
(2.16)
where each individual vi(t), yi(t) and ui(t) corresponds to an individual channel’s signal. The feedback
path F and forward reverberation unit G are represented as two linear operators F(S×L) and G(L×S).
Here all individual feedback and forward paths for each microphone i and speaker j pair are modelled
as separate transfer functions. For the feedback path these become
Fij(q, t) = f (0)
ij (t) + f (1)
ij (t)q−1 + ... + f (nF )
ij
(t)q−nF
(2.17)
analogous to the single channel case. The full feedback operator F(SxL) is represented by a matrix
containing all individual paths.
F(S×L)(q, t) =


F11(q, t)
· · ·
F1L(q, t)
...
...
...
FS1(q, t)
· · ·
FSL(q, t)


(2.18)
As the gain operator is further assumed to also be linear a similar transfer function can be constructed
for each forward path microphone i speaker j pair. However, as G(L×S) is applied to the incoming signals
v reversed indexing is needed.
Gji(q, t) = g(0)
ji (t) + g(1)
ji (t)q−1 + ... + g(nG)
ji
(t)q−nG
(2.19)
==PAGE:19==
2.1 The Feedback Problem
11
G(L×S)(q, t) =


G11(q, t)
· · ·
G1S(q, t)
...
...
...
GL1(q, t)
· · ·
GLS(q, t)


(2.20)
Note that both models introduced for F and G rely on alike assumptions to the single channel case,
i.e. limited order and linearity. In order to assess the stability of a multichannel system an alternative
approach is handled however.
The frequency domain representation of both Equation 2.13 and Equation 2.12 results from applying
a Fourier transform to each component inside of the relations. The signal construction of each yi(t) can
be interpreted as a summation of convolutions between ui(t) and Fij(q, t) added to the input signal
vi(t). From this, once again assuming suﬀicient zero padding is applied to each component, a discrete
Fourier transformation (DFT) results in Equation 2.21. A similar reasoning may be followed to arrive
at Equation 2.22.
Y(ω) = F(S×L)(ω)U(ω) + V(ω)
(2.21)
U(ω) = µG(L×S)(ω)Y(ω)
(2.22)
Here V(ω), Y(ω) and U(ω) denote the DFT of each individual channel of the input signal v,
microphone signal y and speaker output signal u respectively. Likewise F(S×L) and G(L×S) give the
DFT of each individual microphone-speaker path response, i.e.
Fij and Gij from there respective
matrices. The DFT for both F(S×L) and G(L×S) has been performed while assuming the time variations
of the forward path G and backward path F to be slow, these variations are thus excluded in the
analysis. The subscripts (S × L),(L × S) and ω dependence will no longer be explicitly mentioned for
clarity reasons, but do still hold.
Combining both relations results in
U = µG [I −µFG]−1 V
(2.23)
For convenience in Equation 2.23 an equal amount of input and output channels N will be assumed
here, i.e. S = L = N. The speaker response U indicates that the stability of the system is thus governed
by inverse matrix term (I −µFG)−1 [Pol00].
Ohsmann [Ohs90] has shown that the multichannel
response can be decoupled by applying an eigenvalue decomposition to the loop transfer matrix FG at
each frequency [Pol00]. Although the diagonalisability of the latter is not guaranteed, the assumption
of it in practice, is not too restrictive [Pol94] & [Ohs90].
FG = ΨΛΨ−1
(2.24)
Λ = diag [λ1(ω), λ2(ω), ..., λN(ω), ] .
(2.25)
Here Λ denotes the diagonal matrix of the characteristic functions λn(ω) and its associated eigen-
vectors represented by the matrix Ψ . The characteristic functions λn(ω) contain the eigenvalues as
defined for each radial frequency ω.
Equation 2.23 may then be rewritten as a function of the introduced eigenvalues Λ.
U = µGΨ [I −µΛ]−1 Ψ−1V
(2.26)
The overall behaviour and stability of the system is now determined by the diagonal feedback matrix
[I −µΛ]−1 with elements 1/ [1 −µλn(ω)]. The spectral content of the output U results here from the
transmission through a set of N scaled characteristic functions along with the eigenvectors and the
forward path G. Note that the analysis as made here assumed equal microphone and channel counts N,
this is not a necessity as dissimilar microphones and speaker arrays may also be evaluated. The amount
of non zero characteristic eigenfunctions is however dependent on the smallest of both dimensions,
i.e. S and L [Pol94]. The single channel Nyquist criterion as introduced earlier can be extended into a
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Control Strategies
12
multichannel case as has been shown by Mac Farlane and Postlethwaite [MP77]. Since the forward path
G introduces a known acoustic environment with its related impulse responses and the decomposition as
given in Equation 2.24 is possible, stability depends solely on the behaviour of the scaled characteristic
functions. Therefore, if no scaled characteristic function µλn(ω) exists which encircles the point 1 +
j0, the loop transfer function is stable [Pol94]. The frequencies fc for which µλn(ωc) is real and larger
than unity can then also be called critical frequencies.
A maximum stable gain (MSG) can be defined here as well. However, as the frequency averaged
gain K(t) for the forward path is not guaranteed to be equal for each individual microphone speaker
pair an alternative definition is needed. The global gain factor µ is thus implemented as alternative
indication of the overall gain applied to all channels. With this in mind a multichannel maximal stable
gain MSGN can be constructed, Equation 2.27, the associated highest stable gain will be denoted as
µstable.
MSGN[dB] ≜20 log10 µ
with max
ω,n∈PN |µλn(ω)| = 1
(2.27)
PN = {ω, n|∠λn(ω) = i2π} i ∈Z, n ∈[1, N]
(2.28)
Alternatively a more simplified version of the stability criterion of both single and multichannel systems
can also be used. Here either only the real part or the magnitude is considered of the open loop response
F(ω)G(ω) (single channel) or the scaled characteristic eigenfunction µλn(ω) (multichannel). Should any
real value or magnitude be larger than unity, the system is deemed unstable as well. Between both the
preference is often given to the real part criterion as this gives a better indication of the overall stability
of the system [Pol00].
2.2
Control Strategies
As illustrated for both the single and multichannel case the operation of the system is dependent on
the open loop response containing both the forward path G and the feedback path F. Should the
combined response of these components approach the above defined stability criteria, artefacts can be
expected to appear in the response. These may include howling, colouration or more generally put,
signal distortion. Note, as earlier stated, that these stability limits only provide a guideline for the
occurrence of instability.
Meaning, although instability (ever increasing amplitude) may be absent,
colouration or other distortions can still be perceived. Gain margins of 2dB have thus been defined
below these criteria in order to further insure stability and reduce perceptible distortion [Sch64].
In order to avoid feedback interfering with the correct representation of the signal, control strategies
should be implemented.
The idea being that an additional signal alteration, represented as block
operator H in Figure 2.8, is inserted in the forward part to properly control stability by producing the
signal d(t). It should be mentioned that the illustration as presented here does not uniquely define the
only possibility of controlling a system but simply serves as a functional illustration for the discussion
made within this thesis.
+
H
G
F
v(t)
y(t)
d(t)
x(t)
u(t)
Figure 2.8: Closed-loop system model including control operator H in discrete time t.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Control Strategies
13
As stability of both single and multichannel systems is governed by two conditions, i.e. phase and
magnitude (Equation 2.6), feedback control strategies are aimed at avoiding both conditions from be-
ing met simultaneously. However, automatic control strategies will only be presented to govern these
conditions, as these served as the main point of interest for this thesis. Manual methods and their
discussion, in which speaker and microphone directivity are taken into account for example, may be
found in [ME98]. Regarding the automatic methods four different types of control strategies will be
discussed. These include: Phase-Modulation Methods, Gain Reduction Methods, Spatial Fil-
tering Methods and Room Modelling Methods [vM11].
Being mainly aimed at altering the phase, Phase-Modulation Methods aim at avoiding the sec-
ond condition (real-valued loop response) from being met. The idea is that as the signal travels along
and around the system, the phase content of the signal will be altered at each pass through the time-
varying filter block H, hence the phase condition is avoided from being met for multiple cycles. These
strategies can be further split up into two types being Frequency- Shifting (FS) and Phase-Modulation
(PM).
The former (FS), considers alterations of the frequency content through phase-modulation at each
pass through. As a result of FS the loop gain of the system is smoothed so that the stability limit is
no longer determined by the peak values of the magnitude response but by the averaged value [Sch61].
Optimal frequency shifts have been suggested to be around 5Hz based upon the averaged distance
between two magnitude peaks in a room to be around 10Hz [Sch64]. However, as the method applies
an equal frequency shift across all components, the harmonic relations between frequencies will be lost
which limits music applications.
Alternatively to this, phase-modulation (PM) can also be applied. Here the zero phase condition is
avoided as well by constantly changing the phase of frequency components at each pass. The distinction
between both lies in how the phase-modulation is realised. Both methods can be generalised under the
term Phase-modulation Feedback Control (PFC) [Sve95] allowing a clear unifying theoretical approach
to the underlying working as will be illustrated in Section 2.3. However, PFC has been suggested to be
only applicable for transient signals as speech and less appropriate for audio signals with sustained tones
[Sve94]. Furthermore, a study by [Pol04] illustrates the reduced improvement of phase-modulation as
channel count increases.
Considering frequencies for which the phase condition P then holds, stability can still be guaranteed by
controlling the magnitude via Gain Reduction Methods. These methods ensure a magnitude larger
than unity is not achieved for any of the critical frequencies fc. Similarly to the human reaction of
reducing the overall level at instability, systems performing the same operation may be introduced as
well. The performance is then dependent on the width of the frequency range on which the reduction
is applied. These may be divided into three main categories: Automatic Gain Control (AGC) in which
the broadband gain K(t) or the constant gain µ is lowered. Automatic Equalisation (AEQ) which is
applied only in critical bands in which the loop gain is close to unity and thus more locally counteracts
too high magnitudes. Lastly Notch-based Howling Suppression (NHS) for which an even narrower band
around the frequency in question are filtered out/lowered.
To avoid a permanent distortion of the signal, these gain methods must be activated only when
instability arises. A proper detection algorithm for this must thus be implemented as well. As these
control strategies respond to an initial detection of instability they are mostly reactive [vM11]. As a
consequence, howling will generally be observed before it is detected and gains can be reduced. The
detection of these howling components can be based upon the temporal and spectral content analysis
of the microphone signal. In here the largest spectral magnitudes are considered as potential howling
components, after which the distinction is made between desired and undesired tonal components. The
undesired parts will then correspond to ”detected” howling components. Potential criteria for this dis-
tinction can be the power ratio of the suspected spectral howling components versus either the total
power, the neighbouring components power or the (sub)-harmonics power content [vM11]. However,
it should be mentioned that AGC does not provide any increase in the MSG values as a pure gain
reduction is applied across all frequencies. This will eventually always provide a stable system since
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Control Strategies
14
the averaged gain K(t) is influenced by this as well. Nevertheless, it serves as a final reliable backup
method to avert colouration or howling.
A potential alternative to the above mentioned methods can also be found by considering Spatial
Filtering Methods in which spatial separation is applied. Here the microphone or speaker signal is
modified by considering beamforming. The signal is then captured or sent out via an array of micro-
phones or speakers. Via the correct weighting of these signals directional components can either be
identified from microphone signals or created for speakers [JP].
Care should however be taken to the correlation that is present between the desired source signal
v and speaker feedback signal x. This being as the speaker’s contribution x to the microphone can
be directly constructed from filtering the source signal v with the closed-loop response [PM62]. Hence,
when canceling the speaker contributions, part of the desired signal v will be attenuated due to the
correlation. The constructed input signal will thus still contain some speaker contribution and the
desired source signal will also be attenuated [vM11].
In the fourth and final method considered, Room Modelling Methods, a model is used to approxi-
mate the behaviour of the room in question. This can be either data-driver or with prior knowledge of
the room. Provided that the model is valid, compensations can be implemented to properly cancel out
any feedback artefacts and thus make the system unaffected by the feedback path at all. Two meth-
ods for this compensation are Adaptive Feedback Control AFC and Adaptive Inverse Filtering (AIF).
Consider first a system with AFC implemented, Figure 2.9. A model of the feedback path ˆF is used
here to predict the signal contribution from the speaker back into the microphone signal y. With this a
compensated microphone input can be realised in which the predicted feedback estimate is subtracted
from the actual microphone input. If an accurate model is used for the feedback path ˆF, near-zero open
loop responses can be realised thus creating theoretical infinite MSG values.
+
+
G
F
ˆF
v(t)
y(t)
d(t)
x(t)
−ˆx(t)
u(t)
Figure 2.9: Single channel AFC control strategy in discrete time t.
Alternatively, not illustrated in the figure above, an inverse filter of the feedback path can be
introduced behind the microphone (AIF). This results, in a best case scenario, in a perfectly smooth
loop gain [vM11] for which Schroeder predicted a MSG of 10dB [Sch64]. Due to the input and feedback
signal being correlated, as discussed for spatial filtering, decorrelation is required [vM11]. Additionally
as both, AIF and AFC, are dependent on correct modelling of the feedback path the overall performance
will also reflect this. Time variations of the acoustic feedback path will thus unavoidably affect the
correct functioning of these methods. Suggestions with regards to smoothing the inverse filter for AIF
have been suggested to further promote robustness against time variation of the feedback path [vM11].
Finally it should be noted that the computational complexity of AFC in room acoustic applications
provides another added intricacy to handle while implementing it.
==PAGE:23==
2.3 Phase-Modulation Feedback Control
15
2.2.1
Control strategy argumentation
As more than 50 years of acoustical research precedes the topic presented in this thesis on feedback
control in multichannel systems only a limited section of the research can be properly implemented and
evaluated. Consequently only Phase-modulation Feedback Control (PFC) will be discussed.
Further argumentation for this decision can be found in the limits presented in the alternative control
strategies. The Room Modelling methods have a high computational complexity, which will be even
more present should the extension be made to a multichannel system due to multiple feedback paths
and channels. Additionally correct modelling of all feedback paths will also contribute to the stability.
Secondly considering Gain Reduction methods, in particular NHS due to its narrow stopband, are
implemented via a combination of a reactive and proactive methods. Here the proactive part involves
an initial ”Ringing out” procedure to identify the system resonances and introducing narrow filters
accordingly to remove them, [vM11]. The reactive nature of the system, resulting in perceptible howling
before it can be cancelled, combined with the proactive room dependent calibration proved suﬀicient
argumentation against the implementation.
Moreover, considering Spatial Filtering methods the setup, as will be presented in Chapter 3, does
not allow an exact identification of the source position. This is a consequence of multiple sources being
present and potential source displacements, i.e. the singers, with time. Hence weighting functions can
not uniquely be defined and depend upon the location and quantity of sources being present. To this
the needed perceptual calibration as suggested by [EG93] for Spatial Filtering may add to the argumen-
tation against their implementation. Lastly it should be mentioned that the original description of this
thesis was directed toward the evaluation of phase-modulation in a multichannel context, which further
justifies limiting control strategies to the latter.
From the flexibility in system environment and the lack of feedback path modelling requirements PFC can
be argued for and will be implemented. Note, that the latter should not be considered as an optimal algo-
rithm, since higher stability improvements have been reported with AFC for example [MKJ98]. However,
feedback path independence was considered more valuable here. Adding to this, the lower computational
costs furthermore indicates the benefits of PFC, even more for realtime multichannel implementations
[vM11].
2.3
Phase-Modulation Feedback Control
2.3.1
Methodology
To avoid stability from arising, a time-varying control strategy such as PFC, is chosen and will be
implemented into the LoV auralisation system. The governing mechanism behind PFC is the smoothing
of irregularities in the loop gain FG, [Nie+99], which allows for increased average gain values. This
smoothing is realised via ensuring that each frequency component possesses a different phase in each
cycle in the closed-loop system and thus avoids the Nyquist criterion from being met for the same
frequency at two successive cycles. To realise these phase alterations a phase-modulation is inserted in
the forward path as illustrated in Figure 2.8 with the modulation block H. Operators which realise
a phase-modulation may be analysed as Linear Time-Varying (LTV) filters [Sve95]. A review of this
matter [CM82] considers these as causal linear systems which may be represented by the impulse
response g(τ, t), which gives the response at time t, to an impulse applied τ time units earlier. Note
that both time indexes given here correspond to discrete time indexes. Considering an input y(t) as
presented to the modulator H the response may be given by
d(t) =
∞
∑
τ=−∞
g(τ, t)y(t −τ)
(2.29)
Here the output of the control operator H, d(t), is constructed from the summation of a weighted
version of the input signal y. The frequency response of the modulator can then be represented as
==PAGE:24==
2.3 Phase-Modulation Feedback Control
16
H(ω, t) =
∞
∑
τ=−∞
h(τ, t)e−jωτ
(2.30)
with ω ∈[0, 2π[ corresponding to the radial frequency. Should furthermore the above frequency response
be periodic, i.e. LPTV with a period Tm = NmTs, an Nm-point DFT representation can be realised as
well.
H(ω, n) =
Nm−1
∑
t=0
H(ω, t)e−jn(2π/Nm)t
(2.31)
From this, Equation 2.29 can be transformed into the frequency domain as well resulting in the
following input-output relationship [CM82]. Here the output spectrum of the modulator is denoted
with D(ω) and the input spectrum of y(t) as Y (ω).
D(ω) =
1
Nm
Nm−1
∑
n=0
H(ω −nωm, n)Y (ω −nωm)
(2.32)
The distinction should be made here between both frequency notations. The radial frequency ω
illustrates the variable frequency denoting the frequency component of interest for which the response
of the modulator H is desired. Alternatively, ωm = 2π/Nm gives the fundamental frequency of the
LPTV filter and is a constant defined by the modulation function g(τ, t).
The notation as stated in the frequency domain does however provide further insight into the oper-
ation of any linear periodic time-varying function. The frequency response indicates that the output
spectrum D(ω) can be seen as a summation of frequency shifted and weighted versions of the input
spectrum Y (ω). The frequency shifts here are always a multiple of the modulation frequency ωm. The
application of this operation can immediately be understood from the altered frequency content. Con-
sider for example an initial critical radial frequency ωc for which the open loop response G(ωc)F(ωc) is
unstable. Via weighting or shifting this critical component can be attenuated or shifted by which the
system may become stable.
For the DFT coeﬀicients of the LPTV H(ω, n) the zeroth index n = 0 is identified as the carrier
response and the sideband reponses for n ̸= 0. The total response does unfortunately not only contain
shifted versions of the spectrum. The carrier response, given by H(ω, 0), unavoidably introduces the
original frequency response of Y (ω). This being the unshifted version of the spectrum, is undesireable
with respect to feedback control performance as the initial instabilities are excited by it [Nie+99],
nevertheless the sidebands can cause instabilities as well. The overall performance of the modulator
regarding the contribution of the non shifted version is expressed via the Carrier Suppression CS:
CS[dB] = −10 log10
[∫2π
0
|H(ω, 0)|2dω
]
(2.33)
Serving as an indicator of the original frequency content’s contribution it has been hypothesised
to provide an upper limit on the maximal increase of MSG that can be achieved via PFC [Nie+99].
This can be understood from the idea that if a larger reduction in the original frequency content
is present more amplification can be introduced before the instability arises again. Alternatively the
hypothesis was also made, ,[Nie+99], that a larger number of sideband responses with a significant power
contribution |H(ω, n)|2 results in more energy being shifted away from the original carrier frequencies
and thus improves stability. It should however be noted that the latter hypothesis does not account for
the discrete nature of the problem as presented here. Due to this any frequency component above the
Nyquist frequency fN = fs/2 will unavoidably wrap back onto lower frequencies, introducing aliasing,
and potentially compromise the frequency shift benefits.
==PAGE:25==
2.3 Phase-Modulation Feedback Control
17
2.3.2
Single Channel
In this thesis the modulation techniques of interest which will be studied are Sinusoidal Phase-Modulation,
denoted by the earlier introduced PM, and Frequency Shifting (FS). Alternatives to these do exist as
for example Sinusoidal Delay Modulation (DM), however the application is limited in frequency range
as the performance is frequency dependent and instability occurs earlier at low frequencies [Sve95]. Dif-
ferent modulation functions to sinusoidal modulation have also been studied, [Nie+99], however their
performance appears to be comparable to the sinusoidal case and are thus not considered.
For PM the modulation may be most easily understood from the frequency response of its modula-
tor.
H(ω, t) = ejβ sin ωmt
(2.34)
Here the modulation is defined by the modulation amplitude denoted with β and the modulation
frequency ωm. The DFT representation follows from this as well, Equation 2.35. The latter can be
represented by a Bessel function of the first kind of an order equal to the index of the sideband response
n evaluated at the modulation amplitude β, note the frequency independence inside these.
H(n) = Jn(β)
(2.35)
Figure 2.10: Overview of Bessel functions of the first kind of variable order n.
Optimal values for β result from the CS hypothesis. As the carrier response contribution should
be nullified to promote stability, the zero crossing values of the zeroth order Bessel function J0(β) are
optimal as β values, i.e. [2.40,5.52,8.65], see Figure 2.10. Note that although sinusoidal frequency mod-
ulation (FM) is not explicitly handled here, the frequency response of the latter type can be seen to be
identical to the PM case [vM11]. For FM the modulation frequency fm = ωm(fs/2π) and modulation
depth ∆f can be shown to correspond to a phase-modulation with identical modulation frequency and
modulation index β = ∆f/fm [Nie+99].
Frequency shifting FS, in which each frequency component is shifted by a constant frequency shift fm
can furthermore also be modeled by a LPTV system. The FS is then represented by a phase-modulation
operation, which again is frequency independent, see Equation 2.36 and Equation 2.37.
==PAGE:26==
2.3 Phase-Modulation Feedback Control
18
H(ω, t) = ejωmt
(2.36)
H(n) =
{
1, n = 1
0, n = 0, 2, ..., N −1
(2.37)
The frequency response consists here of an ever linearly increasing phase being solely dependent on
the radial modulation frequency ωm and time. A DFT representation can also be realised, Equation 2.37,
here only the first sideband response contains a non zero component. The absent (zero) carrier response
results in an infinite CS. Furthermore, frequency shifting will be able, in its ideal case, to fully flatten
out the frequency response, [Nie+99]. The absence then of a carrier response and any other sidebands
results in FS being expected to serve as an upper limit for achievable improvements via time-variation
methods as PFC [Pol04].
2.3.3
Implementation
The implementation of any of the above mentioned modulation techniques relies on the analytical
representation ya(t) of the input signal y(t). This analytical signal is used instead of the real valued
signal to properly apply modulation techniques in a signal processing application [Mar99]. Originally,
the analytical signal ya{τ} is defined in continuous time {τ} and is given by
ya{τ} = y{τ} + jˆy{τ}
(2.38)
Here ˆy denotes the continuous-time Hilbert transform of the incoming signal y{τ}. However, the
finite sample frequency fs does not allow for a continuous-time evaluation of the input signal, hence
a discrete-time implementation of the analytical signal is required in which the discrete-time known
signals are used.
ya(t) = y(t) + jˆy(t)
(2.39)
Furthermore, the analytical representation of the signal y(t) has two underlying properties which
must be met as well. Firstly, the real part of the analytical signal ya should result in the original signal
y. Secondly, the real and imaginary part must be orthogonal over the finite interval of interest [Mar99].
Here, a discrete Hilbert transform approximation must be introduced as well in order to construct the
analytical signal. Methods to approximate the discrete-time analytical signal or the Hilbert transform
separately have been developed via FIR filter implementations, [RFB94]. However as the FIR methods
presented within do not guarantee both orthogonality and preservation of the initial data values (real
part) another approach is needed.
An alternative frequency-domain approach is implemented as suggested in [Mar99]. To create the
one-sided periodic spectrum associated with an analytical signal, [Mar99], an M-point DFT is taken
from a windowed part of equal size M from the data input y, i.e. Y [m]. The analytical spectrum Z [m]
may then be constructed from this input spectrum,
Z [m] =









Y [0] , m = 0
2Y [m] , 1 ≤m ≤M
2 −1
Y
[ M
2
]
, m = M
2
0, M
2 + 1 ≤m ≤M −1
(2.40)
The analytical signal ya(t) can then be created as an M-point inverse DFT. Using the latter both
orthogonality and original data are preserved [vM11]. This method is used throughout the remainder
of this paper in order to construct the analytical signal and will thus also be implemented in the
simulations. The modulated signal d(t) can be determined from the analytical signal as the real part
of the product between the analytical signal and the frequency response of the desired modulation,
Equation 2.41.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Phase-Modulation Feedback Control
19
d(t) = Re{ya(t)H(ω, t)}
(2.41)
2.3.4
Extension to Multichannel
As the system under test in the carried out simulations involves a multichannel system the modulation
should be extended accordingly. Hence single channel modulators will be introduced in each individual
microphone signal yi(t). The analytical signal for each channel is calculated identically to its single
channel variant. However, a slight extension upon the modulation is made. Here, the relative timing of
the modulations in different channels can be considered which allows extending the modulation operator
with an extra parameters γi. The parameter allows introducing phase shifts of the modulators of two
or more channels relative to one another.
The extended frequency responses for PM and FS are given below for each individual channel
modulation Hi(ω, t), Equation 2.42 and Equation 2.43 respectively. Note, that as these methods only
provide an additional initial constant phase shift they do not interfere with the internal behaviour of
both modulation methods.
Nevertheless, each microphone input contains a contribution from all speaker outputs as is clear from
the notation given in Equation 2.21. The potential of realising constructive or destructive interference
from the correct summation of different paths seemed a valid addition to earlier made research on
multichannel systems stability. This of course also depends on the feedback paths F and the actual
speaker outputs U.
Hi(ω, t) = ej(γi+β sin ωmt)
(2.42)
Hi(ω, t) = ej(ωmt+γi)
(2.43)
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3
Simulation, measurements
and setup
In order to realise a simulation framework with an accurate representation of a real life environment a
reference system must first be examined on which the simulations can be based. An overview is given
here of the used reference system along with the underlying assumptions and measurement setups.
Secondly, the simulation along with its modulation operators will be outlined to provide insight into
how stability and overall performance is evaluated.
3.1
Measurements and Setup
3.1.1
Room layout and properties
A multichannel reverberation system, situated at the Abdij Van Park located in Leuven, Belgium in the
Library of Voices (LoV), was provided by the KU Leuven as reference system. The room in question
consisted of two stone brick walls in which windows were present on two opposite sides of the room,
Figure 3.2(a) & Figure 3.3(b). The other two opposing sides, one of which visible in Figure 3.2(b),
have been draped with curtains.
As the room and system are mainly used for the auralisation of
sound environments, the curtains allow limited interference of the actual room acoustics with these
auralisations.
Furthermore a wooden ceiling and wooden laminate flooring ensured the absence of
strong reflections in the vertical dimension, reducing the influence of the present room acoustics further.
The reverberation time was found to be T30 = 0.57s , as obtained from the Early Decay Curve (EDC)
[Sch65], of the measured feedback impulse response F(q, t) Figure 3.1. The lack of a suﬀicient dynamic
range in Figure 3.1 (−5dB to −65dB), required a T30 (−5dB to −35dB) calculation instead of T60 for
the reverberation time. This is clear from the saturation present between −40dB −60dB in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: EDC for an impulse response measured between microphone 1 and speaker 1 in the LoV.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Measurements and Setup
21
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: Overview of the measurement room Part 1.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: Overview of the measurement room Part 2.
Figure 3.4: Overview of the measurement room Part 3.
==PAGE:30==
3.1 Measurements and Setup
22
3.1.2
Transducer Layout
Given the room’s purpose of serving as an interactive auralisation environment, a proper recording and
playback of people singing inside it is desired. Hence an all-round speaker array is set up in the room.
The speakers in question, Martin Audio 6,5” CDD speakers, have been mounted onto a metal frame as
well as on the ceiling in order to auralise artificial reverberation from all directions. The layout of the
speakers can be found in Figure 3.5 from a top view, where each speaker is defined by its number and
represented via a black rectangle. Speakers placed at the same (x, y) coordinates are represented by the
same black rectangle. Lower number indexes correspond to speakers located closer to the ground. The
four speakers (21, 22, 23, 24) present on the ceiling of the room, are depicted here in the centre of the
room. The curtains are located behind speakers (12, 13, 14, 15), the ”Digital Lab”, and (9, 20, 19, 18).
The individual speaker locations relative to the centre of the frame on the floor (CF) can be found
in Table 3.1.
1m60
1m60
2m
1m60
1m60
2m
2m
2m10
2m
2m10
2m
2m
Digital Lab
1m60
1m60
2m50
2m50
1m60
2m50
1m60
2m50
9
1
10
2
11
3
12
4
13
14
15
5
22
23
21
24
20
19
18
8
17
7
16
6
Figure 3.5: Layout of speaker placement. Provided by Hannes Rosseel.
The singers and other sound sources present are recorded with 4 Technica AT4051b cardioid con-
denser microphones attached to the frame, two of which are illustrated in Figure 3.4 by red circles.
The other two microphones can be found on the opposing side of the frame. The coordinates for all
microphones are given below in Table 3.2. Note the presence of two extra microphones (5, 6), these are
not included in further measurements or simulations as the respective inputs to the reverberation unit
G are not implemented by the system.
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Measurements and Setup
23
LoudspeakerNo
x(m)
y(m)
z(m)
1
-2.10
-3.05
2.40
2
-2.10
-1.05
1.60
3
-2.10
1.05
1.60
4
-2.10
3.05
1.60
5
2.10
3.05
1.60
6
2.10
1.05
1.60
7
2.10
-1.05
1.60
8
2.10
-3.05
1.60
9
-2.10
-3.05
3.10
10
-2.10
-1.05
3.10
11
-2.10
1.05
3.10
12
-2.10
3.05
3.10
13
-1.00
3.05
3.10
14
1.00
3.05
3.10
15
2.10
3.05
3.10
16
2.10
1.05
3.10
17
2.10
-1.05
3.10
18
2.10
-3.05
3.10
19
1.00
-3.05
3.10
20
-1.00
-3.05
3.10
21
-1.00
-0.55
4.10
22
-1.00
0.55
4.10
23
1.00
0.55
4.10
24
1.00
-0.55
4.10
Table 3.1: Overview of speaker coordinates relative to CF. Positive coordinates for both x and y
correspond to the right upper section of Figure 3.5. Provided by Hannes Rosseel.
MicrophoneNo
x(m)
y(m)
z(m)
1
-1.78
-2.25
3.97
2
-1.88
2.35
4.00
3
1.76
2.33
3.95
4
1.72
-2.15
3.80
5
2.25
0.00
3.70
6
2.25
0.00
3.70
Table 3.2: Overview of microphone coordinates relative to CF. Positive coordinates for both x and y
correspond to the right upper section of Figure 3.5.
3.1.3
System connections
The overall connection of both speakers and microphones is illustrated by Figure 2.7, where the speaker
count L is set to 24 and the microphone count S to 4. In the physical system the signals recorded by
all 4 microphones are sent through microphone amplifiers AMPM after which these inputs are collected
and provided to the ASTRA Reverberation server. Here a virtual environment is implemented based
upon which the governing transfer functions of the forward path are altered. For the chosen virtual
room environment, Dome Setup, the 24 speaker outputs uj(t) are calculated based upon the 4 provided
inputs yi(t) and returned. As the speakers in question are passive an additional amplification AMPS
is applied to the latter signal before exiting through the speaker. The forward path is illustrated in
Figure 3.6. Note that this represents the full forward path and thus includes multiple channels which
==PAGE:32==
3.1 Measurements and Setup
24
are not depicted individually here but do provide individual inputs to each operation.
Under the
assumption that each operation, as performed within the discrete system, is a LTI-system, the general
structure of the entire system can be represented as Figure 3.7. The amplifiers for both microphones
and speakers are split up into individual channels.
AMPM
ASTRA
AMPS
Input
Output
Figure 3.6: Illustration of subcomponents of physical forward path.
+
+
+
AMPM1
AMPM2
AMPMS
...
...
...
G ASTRA
F
AMPS1
AMPS2
...
AMPSL
v1(t)
v2(t)
vS(t)
...
y1(t)
y2(t)
yS(t)
u1(t)
u1(t)
uL(t)
Figure 3.7: Schematic overview of the LoV Setup with the ASTRA reverberation system for S source
inputs and L speaker outputs.
The microphones in here are also denoted as simple summations as the frequency response is assumed
flat. Furthermore, due to the nature of the setup inputs, could only be provided at vi, yi and ui and read
at yi and ui. Hence, for measurement and notation convenience and due to the assumed LTI-nature of
AMPMi, the latter component is shifted in front of the summation (Microphone) operator. From this
both the microphone and speaker influence can be included in the feedback path, resulting in Figure 3.8.
The signals v∗
i (t) denote the already amplified input signal vi(t). Furthermore will the feedback path,
including both speaker and microphone influences, henceforth be combined into the feedback matrix
F, which allows rewriting the entire system as Figure 2.7. In the latter the ASTRA reverberation unit
corresponds to the forward reverberation matrix G.
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Measurements and Setup
25
+
+
+
AMPM1
AMPM2
AMPMS
...
...
G ASTRA
F
AMPS1
AMPS2
AMPSL
v∗
1(t)
v∗
2(t)
v∗
S(t)
...
y(t)
y2(t)
yS(t)
...
u1(t)
u2(t)
uS(t)
...
Figure 3.8: Modified schematic overview of the LoV Setup with the ASTRA reverberation system for
S source inputs and L speaker outputs.
3.1.4
Measurement setup
To characterise the entire system, impulse response (IR) measurements were carried out for both the
forward path matrix G and feedback path matrix F. Each measurement was performed at a sampling
rate of fs = 48kHz to ensure the entire audible frequency range 20-20000Hz was properly included
without aliasing effects appearing. A Synchronised Exponential Sinusoidal Sweep (SESS) was used as
excitation signal, this was constructed as presented in [Far21] and [NLS15]. Code for the generation of
these sweeps was provided by Hannes Rosseel. Each sweep spans the frequency range f = 20-24000Hz
and is sampled at 48kHz. Proper windowing was furthermore performed to ensure no discontinuities
appeared at the onset and end of the excitation signal. An overview of all measurement parameters is
given below.
Input channels NI
4
Output channels NO
24
ASTRA Setup
Dome
Sample frequency fs
48kHz
Excitation type
SESS
Range f
20-24000Hz
Table 3.3: Measurement settings.
The measurements were recorded and processed in provided audio software, AdobeAudition, in
which an in-program buffer size of 2048 samples is handled for both input and output signals. All
input and output signals were handled by specific software, i.e. the Dante Virtual Interface (DVI). The
software controlled the server to which each individual input and output signal arrived and exited. To
read each measurement to the provided computer system a buffer size of 4ms was set up internally of
the DVI. Delays of both mentioned buffer sizes were accounted for as much as possible, see Section 3.2.3.
Throughout all measurements external input levels vi(t) are kept as low as possible to ensure noise
contributions are kept to a minimum. The IR for each individual input-output combination is individu-
ally measured by setting all other inputs to zero. Hence a single input is provided to either F or G, from
this the behaviour at all outputs for the respective system can be evaluated. For example, with a single
==PAGE:34==
3.2 Model setup
26
input sweep presented at yi(t) the signal output uj(t) allows identifying the forward path Gij(q, t). This
process is then repeated for each input yi(t)/output uj(t) pair and likewise for the feedback path F for
each input uj(t) /output yi(t) pair to measure Fji(q, t). To verify these measurement a comparison was
made with earlier experiments conducted as well in the LoV, [Ali+21]. Evaluated properties such as
Clarity (C80), Early Decay Time (EDT), and reverberation time (T60) confirmed the validity of made
measurement.
acoustic
forward path
electro−acoustic
feedback path
yS(t)
y2(t)
y1(t)
vS(t)
v2(t)
v1(t)
u1(t)
uL(t)
uL−1(t)
G
...
...
...
...
F
Figure 3.9: Discrete-time model of a PA system with S microphones and L loudspeakers, provided by
T. van Waterschoot from [vM11].
3.2
Model setup
The measurement of these impulse responses allows the construction of a simulation environment to
evaluate the stability of the system. The entire simulation as well as data analysis was evaluated in
MATLAB [MAT20]. Due to the feedback nature of the problem at hand, a sample-by-sample calculation
was performed in which each time instant t was calculated before the next one t + 1 was considered.
The input signals v∗
i (t) as used for each simulation were provided by Hannes Rosseel. These contain
a 4 channel signal as recorded by the 4 microphones (+AMPM) used for the impulse response measure-
ments at a sampling frequency of fs = 44.1kHz. These audio files were recorded with no reverberation
G introduced into these signals and speaker playback turned of as well.
(a) Time response
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
(b) Spectrogram
Figure 3.10: Single channel input v∗
1(t) (a) response and (b) spectrogram sampled at fs =44.1kHz..
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Model setup
27
The original provided files had a total length of 150s. From this a 10s interval is extracted in which
the majority of the spectral content of the signal was assessed to be present, Figure 3.10. Furthermore a
20s silence was introduced behind as suggested by Poletti [Pol04], since (in)stability is less visible once
time-variations, i.e. PFC operations, are introduced. Hence with a prolonged silence period eventual
decay or exponential growth become more visible [Pol04].
The latter effect is illustrated below by
a low-passed squared signal response u1(t) for a 4×4 system simulation with phase-modulation, see
Figure 3.11. Although appearing to be stable, the purple line (µ =33.65) is an unstable case as the
magnitude slightly increases in the last 20s.
Figure 3.11: Low-passed squared response of a single speaker output u1(t) for a 4×4 system with
phase-modulation for different µ(dB) values sampled at fs = 16kHz.
Modulation parameters: fm = 0.5Hz and β = 1 rad.
The simulation algorithm can be split up into its three separate sections being the Modulation
operator H, Forward reverberation G and Feedback path F, Figure 3.12. The calculations for each time
instant (”sample”) t are performed in this same order. The system is furthermore assumed to be at
rest at times t < 0.
+
H
G
F
v∗(t)
y(t)
d(t)
x(t)
u(t)
Figure 3.12: Simplified representation of a multichannel system in discrete time t.
Considering the initial condition t ≤0, no input has yet been provided and thus, as the system
is initially assumed to be at rest, all signals (v∗(t), y(t), d(t), u(t) & x(t)) will be set to zero. From
here forward (t > 0) the input signal v∗(t), as provided, is presented to the summation operator along
with x(t).
Although the system seems to be dependent on itself due to the feedback path F, this
did not provide any further complications. The subsystems (F,G) contained some initial delay in their
==PAGE:36==
3.2 Model setup
28
responses, which resulted in the system behaviour at positive time instants tcurrent > 0 to be determined
only by the system behaviour at time instants t prior to the current t < tcurrent.
The modulator, being the first operation, will construct the discrete analytical signal based upon
the last M samples yi ([t −M + 1, t]). However as overlapping windows are used with a time shift of
R samples inside the modulator, a proper windowing was applied. The windowing is performed in
accordance with [Xia14] to allow for a correct reconstruction for each individual sample. Depending
on the modulation performed (FS, PM or None) the analytical signal is modulated accordingly and
returned, see Equation 2.41. However, due to the overlapping windows the modulated signal is only
returned M samples later, resulting in di(t+M) being the modulated signal of yi(t). Additionally, block
processing is applied. Thus, if a window ends at time instant t each output sample afterwards until
t+R, at which a new window is terminated, is already fixed at time instant t, i.e. di(t+1) until di(t+R).
The implementation of both reverberation unit G and feedback path F was more straight forward
and consisted of a simple convolution operation. Due to the sample-by-sample calculation the mod-
ulator was always run before both F and G blocks. Hence at time instant t the next samples until
t + R of di are known. Convolution allows then calculating each individual channel ui ([t + 1, t + R])
and xi ([t + 1, t + R]). From this all values needed for the next modulation window are available and
calculations can proceed.
3.2.1
Setup parameters
The main simulation as presented is governed by a set of chosen parameters, Table 3.4 . First, considering
the sampling frequency fs, a value of 16kHz was used. It can be argued that as the limited sampling
frequency only allows correct representation of frequencies up till 8kHz, due to aliasing, it is not fit
for speech/music as these may include frequency components above 8kHz. However, as the simulation
was aimed at evaluating stability of a multichannel system and instabilities mainly occurred below
8kHz, the sampling frequency may be limited to 16kHz. This is illustrated in Figure 3.13(a), giving
the most limiting frequency fl for each type of system tested within this thesis. The latter limiting
frequencies fl are determined by considering either the real part of the open-loop response G(ω)F(ω)
(for single channel) or the real parts of all characteristic functions λn(ω) associated with a setup of S
microphones and L speakers, i.e. S ×L. From these the frequency associated with the highest real part
of G(ω)F(ω) or λn(ω) is taken as limiting frequency. This can be understood as the highest component
provides the most stringent limitation on amplification, Kmax or µstab, regarding stability, which follows
from Equation 2.9 and Equation 2.27. The general trend as observed for both frequency response and
highest characteristic function was a decrease with increasing frequency, see Figure 3.13(b). The latter
behaviour along with the limited computational power further strengthen the made decision.
fs
16kHz
M
1024
R
512
Window type
Hamming
TG
0.4s
TF
0.4s
Gsat
15
Table 3.4: Simulation parameters.
The window size is chosen to ensure the spectral content can be properly identified as is needed
for the modulation. The windows are thus chosen short enough, allowing the spectral content to be
assumed as constant throughout the entire window. A guide value in the range 20 −80ms is suggested
in [RDS06] for speech signal processing and will be used here as well. A window length of M = 1024,
which results in a 60ms time frame, seemed adequate for the made simulations. The window shift size R
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Model setup
29
was taken as high as possible to reduce the amount of needed DFT representations for modulation and
further speed up calculations. As overlap was still required for proper reconstruction half the window
size was chosen. A periodic Hamming window was implemented as analysis window, see Figure 3.14,
and a corresponding synthesis window was constructed as defined in [Xia14]. Lastly a saturation level
Gsat was introduced in the output signals ui(t), as unavoidably a maximal output would be present
in a physical system. Hence a maximal amplitude of 15 is handled. Guidelines by van Waterschoot
[Wat03] for the proper implementation of the latter as well as for the input level of v(t) and feedback
path simulation were used as reference material.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.13: (a) Overview of limiting frequencies fl for each system setup.
(b) Illustration of highest real values of all characteristic functions λn(f) evaluated at
each frequency f for a 4×4 system, fs = 48kHz.
Figure 3.14: Hamming analysis window for DFT representation.
Computational complexity was further reduced by considering only a part of the measured impulse
responses Gij(q, t) and Fji(q, t) until TG and TF respectively. The argumentation for these follows from
two made observations. One being that the observed energy content via ETC, Figure 2.3, illustrated
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Model setup
30
that the major contributions above the noise floor occurred before t = 1s for all forward and feedback
paths. Secondly because stability simulations for TG = TF = 1s and TG = TF = 0.4s resulted in MSGN
values which differed less than 0.15dB.
3.2.2
Performance and quality evaluation
The simulations as carried out throughout this thesis were performed in order to assess the influence of
modulation control strategies on the behaviour of multichannel systems. This behaviour of the systems
under test is evaluated based upon the distortion of the signal as well as the system stability. Here the
Signal Distortion (SD) of the distorted signal d is defined relative to a reference signal v, its definition
is given in Equation 3.1 as taken from [Spr+08].
SD(t) =
√∫fs/2
0
wERB(f)
(
10 log10
Sd(f, t)
Sv(f, t)
)2
df
(3.1)
The SD is constructed as a weighted sum (discrete time) / integration (continuous time) of the ratio
of short-term Power Spectral Density PSD of the distorted signal Sd(f, t) to its reference Sv(f, t). Due to
the discrete nature of the simulations, the short-term PSD is estimated here from the squared magnitude
of the short-term DFT. The latter is calculated using overlapping windows of length M = 2048 and
overlap of R = 1024 sampled at fs = 16kHz. The weighting function wERB(f) ensures equal weighting
within each auditory critical band in the Nyquist interval [0, fs/2], [vM11]. The values for each of these
critical band can be found in Table 2 of the ANSI S3.5-1997 standard [97]. The discrete nature of
the simulation furthermore requires the approximation of the integration with a finite summation with
widths of df = ∆f giving the finite difference between evaluated frequencies. As the system contains
multiple outputs a binaural auralisation Umaster(Ch, t) is constructed from the 24 speaker outputs and
serves as the main evaluated signal throughout this thesis. Here Ch corresponds to either the left ear
channel (Ch = 1) or right ear channel (Ch = 2). Impulse response measurements between each speaker
and in ear microphones were provided by Dietzen [Ali+21].
These auralised signals Umaster(Ch, t) are evaluated by SD. A simulated auralised response with
the feedback path disabled and zero modulation for both channels will serve as the main reference
v(Ch, t). The reference excludes any feedback path F as the ideal case aims at fully counteracting and
cancelling out any feedback influence. Needless to say this is a simplification to better evaluate the
system as cases of desired improved reverberance via feedback have been reported [Val+12]. However,
as the clean reverberation G is assumed to fully realise the desired reverberation, any deviation from
this is considered as undesirable, be it simple colouration, distortion or howling. The feedback-enabled
versions with any modulation will thus serve as the distorted counterparts d(Ch, t). Signal distortion
can hence be evaluated for both channels Ch, the average of both is used in further discussions and
will be denoted as SD(t). Note that as this criterion does not have an upper bound it should not be
evaluated as an absolute indication of sound quality of a signal. The SD implementation was provided
by T. van Waterschoot.
Stability on the other hand was evaluated by considering the overall trends of the auralised responses.
If an ever increasing trend was observed in the signal response Umaster the system was termed unsta-
ble. Based upon this reasoning the highest possible stable gain µstab was determined. Performance
of the system was then expressed via the Maximal Stable Gain MSGN, Equation 3.2, for all systems
to a resolution of 0.05dB. It should be emphasised that both criteria (µstab and SD) served as crucial
contributions to the performance of the system. This being as control strategies, although realising
stability improvements, can still introduce noticeable artefacts in the response. The latter are, albeit
to a limited extend, illustrated by SD.
MSGN[dB] ≜20 log10 µ
(3.2)
==PAGE:39==
3.2 Model setup
31
3.2.3
Delay compensation
During the measurement of the impulse responses of both the forward path G and feedback path F an
inconsistency was present which needed accounting. Seeing as the impulse responses, measured under
identical settings, showed time shifts of a multiple of 2048 samples in Adobe Audition, see Figure 3.15,
the responses could not be used directly into simulations. Furthermore as the inputs and outputs were
managed by the DVI the additional delays as introduced due to the measurement setup of 4ms require
a proper compensation as well. The initially measured delays, i.e. the time until the impulse response
peak, could thus not be used directly in the simulations. Custom values are introduced to approximate
the expected behaviour and thus produce valid simulations.
Figure 3.15: Illustration of first 10000 samples of an identical impulse response measurement of the
reverberation path G1,9, sampled at fs = 48kHz.
Considering the reverberation unit G, the lowest initial delay was observed to be around 3000
samples. Consequently all delays of the measured impulse responses were reduced until their initial
early responses deviated less than 2048 samples from 3000. Alternatively the delays of the feedback
paths inside F were chosen based upon the physical distances between each microphone and speaker as
given in Table 3.1 and Table 3.2. Since both components, forward and feedback path, are governed by
the DVI, the input-output delay of 4ms should be added as well. The resulting delays were simulated
and are used throughout the remainder of this thesis.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4
Results
The system of interest, as discussed earlier, involves a multichannel interactive auralisation setup. The
feedback as present within will introduce colouration and distortion limiting the actual gain µ which can
be used in the system. To counteract this limitation control strategies will be introduced and evaluated
here. A few initial single channel simulations are presented first to confirm known theory about the
behaviour of modulation control strategies and to verify the correct functioning of the simulations.
Afterwards the extension to multichannel is made in which both PM and FS techniques are evaluated
in the full system (4×24). The influence of modulation parameters with regards to stability limit µstab
as well as signal distortion SD is evaluated and discussed. Initially a perceptual evaluation was kept
in mind to properly estimate the sound quality of the perceived signal via the GSTPEAQ criterium
as given in [HZ15]. However, due to the limited sampling frequency, agreement can not be guaranteed
between the observed quality and the GSTPEAQ values, as is the case for higher sampling frequencies,
[Ber+18]. Alternatively, although suboptimal, the signal distortion (SD) will be taken as a measure of
sound quality, as verified by Bernardi et al. [Ber+18]. Lastly the influence of relative phase shifts in a
modulated (PM or FS) systems will be evaluated for a 2×2 system.
All simulations presented here are carried out at a sampling frequency of fs = 16kHz. The actual
simulated system responses will be discussed and evaluated based upon the underlying modulation
types. Hence the distinction between both is made by notation. The bold font, for example FS, indi-
cating an actual simulation and the regular font, i.e. FS, referring to the underlying modulation type
only.
Note that the stability limits as shown in this section are not derived from the initial stability Nyquist
criteria or any characteristic function. These resulted from simulations as performed on a system for
individual gain values, K or µ, which were varied with resolutions up to 0.05dB to identify stability
limits, i.e. Kmax or µstab. The theoretical stability criteria as discussed for both the single and mul-
tichannel system, Equation 2.9 and Equation 2.27 respectively, were used as a starting point for the
un-modulated reference system. This in order to limit the needed iterations before the stability limits
were found. A 2dB margin below theoretical limits was handled here for the starting point. The latter
and final stability limit never differed more than 3dB, with the theoretical criteria generally overesti-
mating the stability limits. Furthermore it should be stated that SD is not evaluated at maximal gain
values. This is due to the audible artefacts which clearly manifest itself close to the instability limit,
[Sch64]. A margin of 3dB is therefore handled below the actual stability limits. The distortion present
is thus strongly reduced and more practical, less distorted signals are compared.
4.1
Single Channel Verification
The single channel system was constructed by considering only the first channel of each operator (H,G,F)
of the LoV system, i.e. S = 1 and L = 1, see Figure 3.8. Solely here in the single channel case the
stability will not be expressed in terms of Kmax/µstab but alternatively by the GBI. The latter deci-
sion allowed for better comparison with earlier papers. Discussion of the relative phase shift γi is not
included as it is aimed at evaluating the potential of interference between multiple channels which is
absent in a single channel system.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Single Channel Verification
33
+
H
G
F
v(t)
y(t)
d(t)
x(t)
u(t)
Figure 4.1: Feedback path representation in discrete time t.
4.1.1
Frequency shifting influence
Considering frequency shifting first, the influence of the modulation frequency fm, i.e. the frequency
shift, is examined for the system depicted in Figure 4.1. Figure 4.2 represents the GBI then as simulated
for a single channel system for two setups.
One with the forward path reverberation G included
(G(ω) = KJ(ω)) and the second in which the reverberation is replaced with a pure gain block with
a constant frequency response of magnitude K (G(ω) = K). The latter thus directly feeds a scaled
version of the modulated signal d1(t) back into the feedback path F, i.e. u1(t) = Kd1(t). The GBI
limits are thus determined here via altering the scaling factor K for both cases.
Figure 4.2: Gain before instability (GBI) as a function of the modulation frequency fm in FS for a
single channel feedback system with (FS+Rev) and without reverberation (FS).
Although in theory the stability limits should be independent of frequency shift, [Nie+99], a clear
overall rise of the GBI with increasing modulation frequency fm is observed for both cases. This can
be better understood from the earlier introduced frequency domain representation, Equation 2.32. As
the output of the modulator contains both original Y (ω) and the shifted versions Y (ω −nωm) of the
frequency response the actual behaviour is dependent on not only the response at certain frequencies but
also its neighbouring frequencies. However, for small frequency shifts fm the actual distance between
shifted frequency components is limited. Hence, as the shifted components are close for small frequency
shifts, [Nie+99], high peaks will be shifted to other strong components and momentary buildups occur,
resulting in saturation and instability.
This is also in agreement with the earlier made hypothesis
stating that the more energy content is shifted away from the original spectrum the larger stability
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Single Channel Verification
34
improvements may become. Note however the limited sampling frequency will result in aliasing, by
which some components will be shifted to lower, potentially critical, frequencies.
Furthermore for higher modulation frequencies a reduction in improvement can be seen, which
eventually leads to GBI values saturating at around −1dB and +1dB for FS and FS+Rev respectively.
The difference in achievable GBI may be understood from a statistical analysis performed by Poletti
[Pol04]. The latter showed the added variance due to including a reverberation unit G allowed for
achieving higher GBI limits for small channel counts. The saturation itself may be better understood
from the flattening of the open loop gain |F(ω)G(ω)| [Nie+99]. As the more flattened the loop gain
becomes, due to modulation, individual critical frequency spikes will tend more towards the averaged
frequency response, i.e. the MLG. The maximal achievable gain will then be determined by the latter,
providing an upper limit for the achievable amplification or GBI. In practice modulation frequencies
can not be chosen infinitely high due to clear perceptible artefacts [Sch62]. As 5Hz is claimed to be
inaudible for speech and most types of music, see Schroeder [Sch61], this value is taken as the upper
limit for further simulations.
Besides this, the influence of the reverberation G is clearly visible in the reduced GBI at low modu-
lation frequencies. The lowered starting point (fm = 0Hz) can be understood as a consequence of the
added irregularities in the loop gain |F(ω)G(ω)| being a result of the reverberation, [Nie+99]. These
added irregularities introduce spikes with potentially higher magnitudes than the non reverberant coun-
terpart and increase the risk of instability [Pol00], thus the non modulated GBI will be lowered. As the
latter is lowered, the maximal achievable GBI improvement will thus increase as well, [Nie+99]. From
these considerations one can understand that an equalisation of the loop response can serve as a first
method to further control GBI, [SH16], as higher GBI increases do not necessarily represent a better
performing modulation algorithm if the initial system is less equalised and thus shows more loop gain
irregularities.
The observations as made here for FS are in clear agreement with observation made by Schroeder
[Sch64] and Nielsen et al. [Nie+99], confirming thus the validity of conducted simulations for frequency
shifting. It should however be mentioned that a peak GBI was expected based upon the above men-
tioned research on frequency shifting around fm = 4.4/T60, the black vertical line at fm = 12Hz in
Figure 4.2, for the non reverberant case FS. The absence of the latter can be explained as a consequence
of the underlying assumption of a diffuse field in order to derive the relation. As curtains were present
along two of the opposing walls the latter assumption is expected to be invalid.
4.1.2
Phase-modulation influence
Secondly considering the performance of phase-modulation, its effect may be expressed in function of
both governing parameters being modulation index/amplitude β and modulation frequency fm. An
overview is given here of simulations carried out for different indexes and modulation frequencies, the
considered valued here are β = [0, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.4, 3, 3.4, 3.8, 4.5, 5.5] rad and fm = [0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5] Hz
between which each combination was evaluated. The modulation index influence is illustrated in Fig-
ure 4.3 for different setups.
A first average (PM) over all fm values is made for each β with no
reverberation. The other three lines depict simulations as performed with reverberation (+Rev). A
distinction is further made in the latter based upon which frequencies fm are used for the averages,
low fm for fm = [0.5, 1] Hz and high fm for fm = [2, 3, 4, 5] Hz. The case PM+Rev considered all
modulation frequencies in its average.
A monotonic upward trend is visible for all evaluated cases as a function of β. This behaviour may be
better understood from considering Equation 2.32 once more along with the general DFT representa-
tion of the modulator’s frequency response, Equation 4.1. As the modulation index is increased more
sideband contributions H(n) with n > 0 are excited and hence a larger portion of the frequency content
is shifted farther away from the initial critical frequencies. Moreover, the carrier response J0(β) is re-
duced as well for higher modulation indexes, further lowering the contribution of the original frequency
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Single Channel Verification
35
response.
H(n) = Jn(β)
(4.1)
Figure 4.3: Gain before instability (GBI) as a function of the modulation index β in PM for a single
channel system without (PM) and with reverberations (PM+Rev, low & high fm).
Although local GBI peaks can be expected for the modulation amplitude equal to the zero crossings
of the carrier response due to their high CS, i.e. β = [2.40, 5.52, 8.6] for Equation 4.1, these are not
present in the current simulations both with and without reverberation. An explanation for the latter
may be found in the presence of sideband components at the relevant critical frequencies still limiting
the GBI. Alternatively, as found in earlier work [Nie+99], the reverberation needs to introduce suﬀicient
irregularity in the loop gain before the influence of high CS become visible.
The reverberation influence itself (+REV) is line with earlier made observations for frequency
shifting, where the added irregularities lowered the non-modulated GBI and thus allowed higher im-
provements, which are visible here. Improvements of the GBI can be seen to be present for the rever-
beration case as well, for both low and high modulation frequencies. Furthermore the reverberation
cases are seen to eventually converge towards one another around β = 5.5. This indicates that although
GBI improvements may be smaller for lower modulation frequencies at low modulation indices, similar
performance is visible at higher modulation amplitudes, indicating the modulation frequency’s limited
influence here. As these modulation strategies are still aimed at audio applications, an upper limit on
the modulation around β = 4.5, 5.5 is chosen to avoid unnatural sound, [Nie+99].
==PAGE:44==
4.1 Single Channel Verification
36
Figure 4.4: Gain before instability (GBI) as a function of the modulation frequency fm in PM for a
single channel system without (PM) and with reverberations (PM+Rev).
Evaluating then further the modulation frequency influence, an overview is given in Figure 4.4.
Here the same simulations as the previous plot are illustrated with averaged results over all modulation
indices β. Only a distinction with (+Rev) and without reverberation is made here as the individual im-
portance of β has already been illustrated in the previous figure. The system without reverberation PM
clearly shows the independence on the modulation frequency above fm = 0.5Hz which is however clearly
visible in the case when reverberation is introduced. This may be understood from the same reasoning
as above. For if the modulation index β is fixed the contributions/weightings of the sidebands H(n > 0)
are unaltered as well. Regardless then of which modulation frequency fm is chosen, the contributions
from the unshifted carrier response H(0) along with the relative weight of each side band are unchanged,
fixing the performance in terms of CS. The observed reverberation case PM +Rev behaviour results
from the introduction of more irregularities. Frequency response peaks may lie closer to each other and
require a larger modulation frequency fm to fully shift them away from instability as was the case for FS.
Note as well the initial lower GBI following from the identical same reasoning as in the previous sections.
The modulation frequency itself fm has a direct influence on the instantaneous frequency deviations
observed for a single frequency [Sve95]. This means that for a pure tone exposed to phase-modulation,
instantaneous frequency deviations along the lines of fdev = βωm
2π
can be expected. Furthermore, the
audibility limit of frequency modulation fdev is approximately constant as a function of modulation
frequency fm, [Sve95] & [ZF67]. The frequency modulation fdev should thus be kept as low as possible.
Due to the similar performance of PM at high modulation indices β regardless of fm, Figure 4.3, the
modulation frequency fm will be limited to 0.5HZ. Added argumentation for this can be found in the
influence of fm above 0.5Hz having been shown to be limited and in other work by Nielsen & Svensson
[Nie+99]. Nonetheless, β is limited in value as well, as too high values will unavoidably also result in
noticeable frequency modulation.
As is clear from both plots the performance of PM can also be improved by performing an initial
equalisation to avoid additional irregularities from reducing the non-modulated case’s GBI. The ob-
served behaviour was found to be in agreement with earlier research on the matter, [Sve95]&[Nie+99],
providing further argumentation for the correct functioning of the simulation. It should additionally be
noted that as FS, theoretically, completely smooths the loop gain |F(ω)G(ω)|, it is the most eﬀicient
feedback controlling LTV method, [Pol04]. The CS, which can be seen as an upper limit on achievable
==PAGE:45==
4.1 Single Channel Verification
37
GBI improvement, illustrates this as well (CS = +∞dB for FS). Consequently PM can not outperform
FS for any modulation frequency fm, which the plot below confirms. Here FS and FS+REV represent
the results depicted in Figure 4.2 and PM and PM+REV give the results as given in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.5: Overview of Gain before instability (GBI) as a function of the modulation frequency fm in
frequency shifting (FS) and phase-modulation (PM) for a single channel system without
(PM) and with reverberations (PM+Rev).
==PAGE:46==
4.2 Multichannel
38
4.2
Multichannel
For the multichannel case the system used for all following simulations consisted of 4 microphone and
24 speakers (4×24). Unless stated otherwise all results depicted in the figures are for the latter setup.
This section will evaluate the overall influence of channel count on control strategies followed by the
in depth discussion of performance for both FS and PM in a multichannel system. Finally a smaller
system with 2 microphones and 2 speakers (2×2) is evaluated. Here the influence of introducing a
relative modulation phase shift ∆γ between channels is examined.
4.2.1
Channel count increase influence
4.2.1.1
Overall behaviour
The main influence of channel count is illustrated below in Figure 4.6.
Here a distinction is made
between three modulation cases. First FS, representing a frequency shift with modulation frequency
fm = 5Hz. The latter frequency choice is to ensure the modulation is imperceptible, [Sch61]. Second
and third are two types of phase-modulation, PM_B10 & PM_B55, corresponding to modulation
indexes of β = 1 & β = 5.5 respectively with a modulation frequency of fm = 0.5Hz. The time-invariant
reference case (TI), corresponds to the same system setup performed with a modulation of fm = 0Hz.
Note that the latter does not exclude a modulation operator but simply puts its modulation to zero,
this in order to ensure the proper relative phase shift and delay, as introduced by the modulation, are
included as well.
Figure 4.6: Stable gains µstab as a function of system setup for frequency shifting (FS), phase-
modulation (PM) and the time-invariant case (TI).
Considering first the overall trend as present within each individual modulation type, a strong
decrease can be observed as channel count is increased. This relates to the dimensions of the square
transfer function matrix FG connecting each speaker and microphone. For as the channel count is
increased, i.e. speakers and/or microphones, extra transfer function paths are created between the
newly added transducer and earlier present ones. The added paths will result in an increased variance
for the characteristic functions λn(ω) [Ohs90]. The latter is illustrated in Equation 4.2, giving the
distribution function pN of the real and imaginary parts, xλ and yλ respectively, of the characteristic
function λn(ω) for each frequency [Ohs90] & [Pol00]. The variance of both real xλ and imaginary yλ
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Multichannel
39
parts is assumed to be equal and is denoted with σ2
λ. Furthermore the dimensions of the matrix of
interest are still given by N and the function of a cumulative Poisson distribution is represented by gN.
A visualisation can be found for N = 20 and N = 40 in Figure 4.7 for a variance of σ2
λ = 0.5.
pN(xλ, yλ) =
1
2πNσ2
λ
gN(x2
λ + y2
λ
2σ2
λ
)
gN(t) = e−t
N−1
∑
k=0
tk
k!
(4.2)
Note that the equation as presented here assumes a random matrix with Gaussian, zero mean
entries at each frequency for the transfer matrix FG. The zero mean can alternatively be interpreted
as a negligible direct sound transmission from speaker to microphone, [Pol00]. Although, the frequency
responses in F of a room have been shown to be normally distributed, above a frequency fsch =
2000
√
T60/V, with V being the volume, [SK62], the validity of this assumption is limited due to the
absence of a strongly diffuse field in the room. However the addition of a reverberator G, in which
statistical artificial reverberation is applied for the non-direct component, further strengthens the normal
distribution assumption and associated validity of using the distribution given in Equation 4.2.
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
(a) N=20
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
(b) N=40
Figure 4.7: Probability distribution of characteristic functions λn(ω) with σ2
λ = 0.5 for (a) N = 20
and (b) N = 40.
This variance increase, and thus increased probability of higher characteristic functions, is also
visible in the actual values for the system as is illustrated below in Figure 4.8. Here the highest real
part of all characteristic functions λn(ω) is illustrated for each frequency for different setups (4×4, 4×8
& 4×16).
The overall real part magnitude increase for higher channel numbers, visible in both channel increases
in Figure 4.7, will then result in more stringent requirements, illustrated by MSGN in Equation 4.3.
A reduction in the maximal stable gain µstab is then expected and clearly visible. These trends are
furthermore also in line with a statistical analysis done by Poletti [Pol00] & [Pol04] and observations
made by Schlecht [SH16].
MSGN[dB] ≜20 log10 µ
with max
ω,n∈PN |µλn(ω)| = 1
(4.3)
==PAGE:48==
4.2 Multichannel
40
(a) 4×4 vs 4×8
(b) 4×8 vs 4×16
Figure 4.8: Comparison of the highest real part of the characteristic functions λn(ω) at each radial
frequency ω for different channel counts (4×4, 4×8 & 4×16).
The fluctuations as observed for the reference case (TI), about the general above derived decrease
for µ in Figure 4.6, can further be explained from the characteristic functions as well. An example
of this being the clear sudden dip between 4×8 and 4×16. Although the total response of a system
depends on the combination of all paths (FG), i.e. FGij = ∑N
k=1 FikGkj at indices (i, j), one can
reason a strong coupling between one speaker and one microphone will dominate the stability of the
entire system or at least provide a strong added limitation to it. From this, considering the speaker and
microphone locations given in Chapter 3, the overall distance between microphone and speaker pairs is
not constant and dominating paths will unavoidably be present.
Figure 4.9: Averaged microphone-speaker distance for each speaker.
Comparison of average distance to all microphones from each speaker, see Figure 4.9, illustrates the
overall reduced distance for higher speaker numbers. As the reduced distance generally corresponds to
an increased coupling for omni-directional microphones and speakers, the open loop gains and associated
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Multichannel
41
characteristic functions will both increase, resulting once more in lower stability limits as well. However,
the latter is not guaranteed as shorter microphone/speaker distances lead to a reduction of the delay in
the closed-loop system. Since reduced delays, in a single channel context, correspond to a slower and
less steep varying phase, less frequencies will exist for which P is fulfilled, resulting in higher stability
limits. The reduction of delays here can thus increase stability as well in the system and simulations
should verify the most prominent influence.
An overview of the highest real parts λn,Rmax over all frequencies for the three systems (4×4, 4×8
& 4×16) depicted above in Figure 4.8 is given in Table 4.1. Note that the relative change of λn,Rmax
from 4×4 to 4×8 is relatively small (+60%) to the next shift, 4×8 to 4×16, being +120%. This can be
seen as a consequence of the former only introducing paths with similar microphone distance and the
latter introducing more dominant shorter paths. Additionally, the inverted highest real characteristic
functions, −20 log10 λn,Rmax, illustrate close agreement with the stable gains µstab observed for the time
invariant case, Table 4.1. The latter observation validates further the use of λn and its real part as an
indicator of overall stability. Additionally it illustrates the magnitude increases mainly govern stability
and outweigh the stabilising influence of delay reductions.
System setup
4×4
4×8
4×16
λn,Rmax
0.015
0.024
0.053
−20 log10 λn,Rmax
36.5
32.4
25.5
20 log10 µstab
33.35
31.75
21.25
Table 4.1: Overview of highest real part of the characteristic functions λn,Rmax over all frequencies.
Furthermore, the absence of any further expected reductions in µstab when adding the last 8 speakers
(4×16 to 4×24) in Figure 4.6 is likely related to the overall setup of the system.
In here cardioid
microphones are used which limit the acquisition of any signal not arriving from the main pointing
direction of the microphone. Due to this, the last added speakers (21 to 24), although placed closest
to the microphones, show marginal influence on the overall stable gain µstab. Here the microphones
are not pointed towards these speakers and as a consequence will only pick up weak contributions from
them due to reflections from the walls. The use of dominant ”visible” paths should thus be avoided in
order to increase stability.
4.2.1.2
Channel count influence on phase-modulation and frequency shifting
Regarding the behaviour observed for both modulation types (FS and PM), presented in Figure 4.6,
similar trends to the time invariant case are clearly visible. This behaviour can be understood from
earlier single channel made observations. As the reference case (TI) shows a decrease, due to added
variance of the characteristic functions and the introduction of dominant paths, the modulated versions
will follow this behaviour due to the limited gain improvements/performance both methods can realise.
For frequency shifting this relates to the maximum achievable smoothing, since the ideal behaviour
corresponds to a fully flattened out response, [Nie+99]. Hence the behaviour of the system is no longer
determined by the strongest peaks of an individual response but rather by the averaged response. The
average thus provides an insurpassable limit of performance. The frequency shifted version will thus
follow the overall trends of TI.
Considering then phase-modulation, i.e. PM_B10 & PM_B55, µstab is situated in between both
extremes (TI and FS). This behaviour can be understood from a less well performing smoothing as
mentioned also in the single channel Section 4.1.2. As it is performed to a less degree due to the presence
of other sidebands H(n > 0), its ability to limit the frequency response to the averaged level (MLG)
is reduced and thus the stable gain µstab can be expected to be lower due to the presence of some
remaining peaks. Note however that as phase-modulation provides an alternative modulation method
its performance should not directly be considered inferior to frequency shifting.
As both methods
introduce audible artefacts these must be discussed as well before stating the clear advantage of one
over the other. This discussion is provided in Section 4.2.1.3.
==PAGE:50==
4.2 Multichannel
42
Figure 4.10: Added stable gain µASG relative to the time invariant case (TI) for each system setup.
Extending the discussion to the performance differences between both modulation types, Figure 4.6
is redrawn as the added stable gain µASG relative to TI, Figure 4.10. This to ensure that stability im-
provements due to any modulation are compared to their respective references. In the overall behaviour
a small decrease can be observed for FS while PM_B55 shows a more stable trend with increasing
channel count.
The trend for FS can be understood from the earlier mentioned fact, Section 4.2.1.1, that each
component of the transfer function matrix FGij = ∑N
k=1 FikGkj does no longer contain a single
channel forward path G(ω) and feedback path F(ω), as was the case in the single channel system, but
a multitude of path contributions. Due to this the needed flattening out of the frequency response is
not removed, quite the opposite. As a matter of fact, the added channel count and thus associated
summation of different paths results in a more averaged out and thus flattened frequency response for
each index (i, j) of FGij. However, the inherent flattening present due to this limits the achievable
impact of frequency shifting.
Normally, since the modulation is applied individually to each channel, associated benefit should be
expected from frequency shifting which ideally fully flattens out the response. Nevertheless, the already
present smoothing in TI, due to multiple channels, will thus reduce the overall impact frequency shifting
presents as a whole.
This hypothesis is confirmed by considering the normalised standard deviation of the loop gains
|FGij|. These give an indication of the overall irregularity/spread on values inside the latter. In addition
they also provide a method of quantifying the overall flatness or alternatively put the overall potential
for further smoothing out the response via PFC. The earlier made reasoning of a dominant path limiting
the response, due to its higher response magnitude, will be extended here. The degree to which this
dominant response (iD, jD) is flattened out relates back to the achievable gain improvements, smoothing,
via FS. Consequently for each system setup (S × L) the indices (iD, jD) in |FG| corresponding to the
highest maximal loop gain value, i.e. the dominant component, are only considered. Figure 4.11 gives an
overview of the normalised standard deviation associated with the latter dominant loop gains |FGiD,jD|
for each setup. The normalised standard deviation σnorm is calculated from Equation 4.4, with µavg and
σ corresponding to the average and standard deviation of the considered loop gain |FGij| respectively.
σnorm =
σ
µavg
(4.4)
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Multichannel
43
The overall decreasing trend of σnorm is in line with the observed decreased performance of frequency
shifting for µstab. Moreover, the strong decrease, as transitioning from 4×4 to 4×8 is present as well
in both, adding to the argument of frequency shifting performance being dependent on the normalised
standard deviation.
Figure 4.11: Normalised standard deviation σnorm of the highest magnitude loop gain |FGiD,jD| for
each system setup.
The PM behaviour is in line with the hypothesis on the channel summation and related averaging
influence on the loop gains |FGij|. Firstly, the general lower improvements µASG, relative to FS, results
from the less optimal smoothing which is performed due to PM. However, as a less optimal averaging
is thus performed on the loop gain due to modulation, peaks will be more present here. Studying then
the influence of averaging over the channels, i.e. the summation, it is assumed that the influence of
additional channels provides an averaging which mainly smooths out small fluctuations and provides
limited influence on the large present peaks. This assumption can be made reasonable by an illustrative
example.
Consider for this two fictional loop gain components A and B, which are related to their respective
matrix components Fi,kAGkA,j and Fi,kBGkB,j, in a fictional 2×2 system. The components will be
summed together to form FGij. Assume both loop gains A and B, have a frequency region where
low random magnitudes with a similar average and deviation and another region with a single strong
resonance peak at frequencies fA and fB respectively. For simplicity the mean loop gain MLG and
resonance peak magnitudes are assumed identical. Evaluating the addition of both Fi,kAGkA,j and
Fi,kBGkB,j to form FGij, with its own loop gain given by C, one can understand that the peaks of
both A and B will remain present in C. However, in the overlapping part of both low magnitudes
regions, troughs and peaks are summed and average each other out. This results in a more flattened
low magnitude region with two strong peaks in the loop gain C.
Hence, since the channel addition mainly provides flattening for the non-peak regions, there is still
room for an initial flattening as performed by PFC. The latter can then still perform the initial smooth-
ing, towards the average level MLG. The large peaks are thus reduced by this modulation operation H
for each individual loop gain |FikGkj| and will show smaller fluctuations in magnitude about its MLG.
Furthermore, as the individual loop gain then becomes more flat, less dominant peaks will be present.
The latter then creates room for smaller contributions to the stability limits, being the averaging due
to channel addition to construct FGij. From this it is also clear that the more initial smoothing that
is performed on the individual loop gains |FikGkj| via PM or FS, the smaller the fluctuations that
==PAGE:52==
4.2 Multichannel
44
become relevant in the stability assessment.
The earlier stated influence of a reduced standard deviation on FS, due to channel count increases,
will mainly influence FS’s performance as it performs better smoothing on an open loop gain. This
realises higher µstab values which in turn again reflects smaller fluctuation in the loop gain to become
relevant. As these smaller changes are then smoothed by the channel addition to construct FGij the
need for higher modulation frequencies fm of FS to provide the same result is removed. As a conse-
quence, for higher channel counts N, increased smoothing is provided by the channel averaging and
less benefit can be found from FS. Alternatively, as PM provides smaller µASG improvements, the loop
gain for each path FikGkj is located farther from its mean level and will as a consequence suffer less
from the reduced σnorm, i.e. the channel addition. Nevertheless, the main drop from 4×4 to 4×8 is
present for phase-modulation as well, indicating still a limited contribution from the channel averaging
to PM_B55’s response. Note that the flatness of PM_B10 can be explained due to the very limited
influence on stability limits for low modulation indexes, thus giving lower µstab limits and reducing even
further the actual influence of channel count increases. The latter was simply added to emphasize the
need for suﬀiciently high β values in PM. Furthermore, the general absence of a decrease in PM_B55
may indicate the possibility for it to approximate and converge to FS at increased channel counts under
suﬀicient σnorm reductions.
4.2.1.3
Signal distortion evaluation
To further evaluate the relative performance of phase-modulation and frequency shifting to the time-
invariant case the actual auralised response Umaster and its sound quality should be discussed as well.
Although the response may be stable, i.e. decreasing over time, strong colouration or distortion com-
ponents can still be present resulting in perceptual artefacts which limit the applicability of control
strategies as found in multiple earlier works ([Sch64], [Nie+99], [Pol04] & [SH16]). Nonetheless, the
evaluation of sound quality and distortion is limited here to only consider artefacts through the signal
distortion (SD) along with an informal perceptual evaluation due to ease of implementation. The evalu-
ation by ear was performed on a normalised version of the auralised signals to a root mean square value
(rms) of Vrms = −25dB in order to perceptually evaluate artefacts to the same degree via headphones.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.12: (a) Auralised response d(1, t) reference v(1, t) of a 4×24 system with FS at fm = 5Hz
(b) Associated signal distortion averaged over left and right ear SD(t).
To illustrate the need for evaluating the signal content, the output signal (left ear) d(1, t) of a 4×24
FS setup is evaluated at 3dB below µstab together with its reference v(1, t) and shown in Figure 4.12.
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Multichannel
45
The signal distortion, averaged over both ears SD(t) is given here as well.
A strong disagreement
between the reference v(1, t) and the distorted version d(1, t) throughout the entire response displays
the presence of distortions which are not represented/reflected by µ. This illustrates the necessity to
include some form of distortion measurement to evaluate performance besides simple level criteria as
SD(t) clearly illustrates.
Note that SD(t) is only given for the first 15s period of our signal. This is a consequence of the
reference signal v(Ch, t) returning to zero after the latter time instant which would result in infinite
signal distortion. Nevertheless, the main objective here is to only consider the perceptual distortion in
the distorted signal d(Ch, t) while the reference is audible. Hence, further analysis will only include the
first 10s window, in which the input signal excites the system. An underestimation can be expected for
SD due to this, since the relative distortion Sd(f,t)
Sv(f,t), as given in SD Equation 3.1, is more perceptible
when the input signal is decaying or absent. Furthermore, the chosen time range will mainly reflect the
distortion influence while being masked by the input signal itself. The masked response, was deemed
more valuable in this analysis and will be evaluated through the time averaged mean SDavg and the
maximal value of SD(t), i.e. SDmax. It should still however be emphasised, as stated earlier, that the SD
criterion is not the best suited to evaluate sound quality [Ber+18] and only serves as a simple indication.
Both values SDavg and SDmax are evaluated for the earlier discussed 4×24 system at µ values 3dB
below their respective stability limits µstab. This is illustrated in Figure 4.13, with the exception of
FS which was evaluated for two µ values being 3dB (FS_3dB) and 6dB (FS_6dB) below the max-
imal stable gain µstab due to clearly audible distortion. The limited modulation amplitude case, i.e.
PM_B10 was also not considered due to its limited µASG, PM here thus corresponds to simulations
carried out at 3dB below the PM_B55 case. Considering first the time invariant case (TI), although
evaluated at 3dB below its stable limits, a clear distortion (SDavg) is already present which remains
constant as channel count increases. Perceptual evaluation of the TI showed close to none audible
artefacts in its response to be present. The time invariant case will thus function as a baseline for what
distortion is still acceptable with regards to both mean and maximum signal distortion.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.13: Channel averaged signal distortion for each system setup, (a) Time average SDavg and
(b) maximal value SDmax.
For PM an increased average signal distortion SDavg, relative to TI along with higher peaks, SDmax
increase, are visible in both plots. This indicates that some distortion components tend to be more
present throughout the signal with sudden spikes, maximal values, resulting in stronger and more domi-
nant distortions. Perceptual traits are in line with this, confirming the presence of some slightly audible
==PAGE:54==
4.2 Multichannel
46
artefacts. This indicates that slightly lower gain values might be needed to fully cancel out the arte-
facts as present here. Nevertheless, they were not experienced as troublesome and thus provide a valid
argument to state that the stable gain improvements given in Figure 4.10 for PM lead to limited signal
distortion. They can thus still realise some stability improvement at higher channel counts.
Lastly considering both frequency shift scenarios FS_3dB and FS_6dB, the signal distortions for
the averaged levels is the strongest among observed modulations. This indicates the deviation from the
reference signal is present for the entire system to a substantially larger degree for both cases. Besides
this, higher SDmax values are observed as well. From these values, more substantial sudden distortion
components should be expected relative to the PM case. These trends are confirmed by perceptual
evaluation indicating both a longer persisting ringing leading to strong colouration (SDavg increase)
and stronger sudden distortion components at longer notes (SDmax increase) .
Comparing both FS cases to each other does show the significance of the additional 3dB reduction,
strongly lowering perceptible artefacts. Nevertheless these reductions still proved insignificant as dis-
tortions were still more audible in FS_6dB than in PM which is confirmed by the latter lying closer
to the baseline TI in both plots of Figure 4.13. These findings indicate further the need of a minimal
margin of 6dB which is in line with earlier suggested values by Schroeder [Sch64].
The earlier shown additional stability µASG for both FS cases relative to PM, see Figure 4.10, will
thus in practical implementation, as confirmed via perceptual evaluation and SD, be significantly less
than indicated. Meaning the perceptual acceptable limits for both FS and PM will be closer to each
other. Furthermore, as the added channel count produces a decrease µASG for frequency shifting, PM
might surpass FS due to its lower perceptible artefacts closer to its stability limit µstab at higher channel
counts N.
A small note with regards to the maximal values SDmax should be made in the sense that although
the values for FS and PM were close to one another, at higher channel counts, their artefacts were
not equally audible. This might be explained by the audibility of artefacts to be more influenced by
the average SDavg then its extremes SDmax. The reason for this is that the main observed distortion
components manifested in prolonged howling and colouration which are, due to their longer time nature,
more related to the average value than the maximal value of SD.
4.2.2
Parameter influence on modulation control strategies
As the channel count has already been shown to reduce the general influence of frequency shifting
and provides limited influence on phase-modulation the performance of their individual parameters is
considered. However, as was the case for the single channel system, due to perceptual artefacts the
frequency shifting modulation frequency fm is limited to 5Hz. Likewise the modulation frequency for
phase-modulation is only evaluated for β ≤5.5 rad and fm = 0.5Hz, due to the limited influence on
performance as was illustrated for the single channel case and the perceptible artefacts. The influence
of the introduction of a reverberation unit is also omitted here and assumed always present, as the main
application of the system involves the recreation of reverberant spaces through its forward reverberation
unit G.
4.2.2.1
Frequency shifting, modulation frequency fm influence
The added stable gains µASG for frequency shifting for both the initial discussed 1×1 system, FS_1x1,
and the current 4×24 case, FS_4x24, are illustrated below in Figure 4.14. The added stable gains are
defined here relative to their respective un-modulated counterparts for the proper channel counts with
included reverberation.
==PAGE:55==
4.2 Multichannel
47
Figure 4.14: Added stable gains µASG for frequency shifting defined relative to their respective un-
modulated cases for a 1×1 system FS_1x1 and a 4×24 system FS_4x24.
Looking at the general trend for FS an increased performance is observed as the modulation fre-
quency fm is raised. Similarly to the single channel case, this can be explained from Equation 2.32 and
the idea that for small shifts the frequency components close to each other are related and high ampli-
tude responses in the open loop gain will then more likely be shifted to another high amplitude response.
This would then allow momentary signal buildup resulting in saturation and instability. Hence larger
shifts of the frequency content are needed to avoid these momentary buildups and further increase
stability by smoothing the loop gain. A decrease in added benefit for larger modulation frequencies
is, once again similarly to the single channel case, a consequence of frequency shifting smoothing out
the loop gain to the average level. As this average level has a finite value, the maximal improvements
realisable with FS are finite as well. The benefit of the last 3Hz added (fm = 2 to 5Hz) clearly illus-
trates this in absence of further improvements in stark contrast to the initial 9dB improvements for
FS_4x24 from fm = 0 to 2Hz. Furthermore, the lower final improvements µASG = 11 for FS_4x24
relative to µASG = 14.2 for FS_1x1 also illustrate the influence of reduced normalised standard devi-
ation σnorm. The decrease in σnorm, as earlier discussed in Section 4.2.1.2, will reduce the potential of
further smoothing via FS as this is already performed via the summation of multiple channels. This
behaviour is also in agreement with the earlier made channel comparisons in Section 4.2.1. Additionally
the initial outperforming of FS_4x24 at fm = 1Hz for µASG may very well also be related to the
reduced σnorm. As soon as some initial flattening is realised via FS (fm > 0.5Hz) in each path’s loop
gain |FikGkj|, the added benefit of summing the different paths into FGij will contribute to a larger
extent as each individual path is already more flattened and thus lowered more towards MLG due to
FS. Nevertheless, due to this same additional smoothing component present in the multichannel system,
the total improvements which can be expected with FS will be lower, as the actual smoothing provided
by FS to stabilise the system is lowered, due to the addition of multiple channels.
4.2.2.2
Phase-modulation, modulation amplitude β influence
Furthermore for phase-modulation the influence of the modulation amplitude β is given in Figure 4.15.
Here the added stable gain µASG is illustrated for two phase-modulated signals, a single channel system
PM_1x1 and a multichannel 4×24 system PM_4x24, both defined relative to their respective non-
modulated counterparts. For both these simulations a reverberation unit G was included as well.
==PAGE:56==
4.2 Multichannel
48
Figure 4.15: Added stable gains µASG for phase-modulation defined relative to their respective un-
modulated cases for a 1×1 system PM_1x1 and a 4×24 system PM_4x24 .
Likewise to the single channel case an increase of µASG for increasing modulation amplitudes β
is present. Since modulation is applied individually to each channel, this relates back to the idea of
shifting the frequency content. As β is increased further, the contribution of the carrier response and
the lower indexed sidebands of H(n) will be lowered, hence reducing the contribution from less shifted
frequency bands to the response and shifting energy further away from the critical frequency fc. In turn
the response is flattened to a larger extent, adding to the stability improvements. However, besides
these general trends no clear outperforming of one over the other is present. This further reinforces
the hypothesis that phase-modulation is influenced to a significantly lesser degree by the reduction in
normalised standard deviation σnorm than FS, as was clear in Figure 4.14. The explanation is thus in
line with the previous section, as the PM smooths out the frequency response to a lesser extent, the
contributions of adding multiple channels, which also provides some smoothing, will be small. This
conclusion should be put into perspective as achievable improvements in µASG for FS are still multiple
dB above PM. Additionally, should the modulation amplitude be increased further one would expect
that the PM becomes more eﬀicient at flattening out each component |FikGkj| and as a consequence
the normalised standard deviation influence will increase.
For high enough values for β the single
channel case PM_1x1 will potentially then also outperform PM_4x24. Further investigation for
higher β in the latter trend is however unnecessary due to the perceptual artefacts associated with
higher modulation amplitudes.
4.2.3
Relative phase shift on a 2×2 system
Lastly the influence of an additional phase shift between channels is investigated for both modulation
types. Potential constructive/destructive interference between both paths is examined here to further
increase stability limits. It should however be emphasised that the interference effects are strongly
dependent on the actual path lengths from speaker to microphone due to the needed agreement in
phase between both paths. Furthermore, as the constant distance between microphones and speakers
does not provide a constant phase shift to each frequency component, the determination of an ideal
relative phase shift ∆γ to realise an optimal destructive interference is complex. Due to the latter effect
and the easily variable path length, through the introduction of an obstacle for example, an adaptive
tuning of the relative phase shift ∆γ must be performed to find an optimal value. Additionally, as only
==PAGE:57==
4.2 Multichannel
49
a constant extra phase shift is introduced, it should not be expected to provide destructive interference
for each frequency component.
The altered modulation functions For both modulation types are illustrated below for convenience
in Equation 4.5 and Equation 4.6. The system considered here consisted of 2 inputs and outputs (2×2)
as to only provide an initial illustration of potential benefits of relative phase shifts. Since the relative
phase shift ∆γ is of importance the constant phase shift γ1 of channel 1 will be set to 0 while varying
the second channel’s phase shift γ2. The difference in phase shift, denoted by γ2 −γ1 = ∆γ will be the
main point of discussion here.
Hi(ω, t) = ej(γi+β sin ωmt)
(4.5)
Hi(ω, t) = ej(ωmt+γi)
(4.6)
The performance for both modulation types is illustrated in Figure 4.16 and Figure 4.17, for FS and
PM respectively. Here the added stable gains µASG for FS and PM are given relative to the modulated
cases with zero relative phase shift ∆γ = 0.
For frequency shifting, Figure 4.16, an overall fluctuating behaviour was observed indicating both the
beneficial and detrimental influence of the interference between paths. Although full cancellation can
be expected for a single frequency due to destructive interference, the presence of multiple frequency
components will of course limit the actual achievable added stable gain µASG. Since frequency shifting
aims at smoothing the loop gain, the rather modest improvements due to correct destructive interfer-
ence can be understood from the transfer matrix FG. Assuming a single path to be dominant in the
response FikGkj, the constructive/destructive interference of the latter will mainly influence the achiev-
able improvements in µASG. Should the latter be well flattened out the difference between the highest
peak and overall level will be small, hence limiting improvements under destructive interference. Note
as well that likewise, the undesired constructive interference can only raise the amplitude of the critical
frequency component fc of the loop gain |FGij| to no more than the summation of the amplitudes of
all components from which it is constructed, i.e. |FGij| ≤∑N
k=1 |FikGkj|.
Figure 4.16: Added stable gains µASG as a function of the relative phase shift ∆γ between channels for
a frequency shifted 2×2 system with a modulation frequency fm = 5Hz defined relative
to an unshifted version ∆γ = 0 rad.
==PAGE:58==
4.2 Multichannel
50
Additionally considering the phase-modulated system, Figure 4.17, shows this same fluctuation
between regions with dominating effects from the occuring constructive interferences, here ∆γ ∈
[
0, 7π
6
]
,
and its destructive counterparts, ∆γ ∈
[ 8π
6 , 11π
6
]
. The maximal achievable improvements, +4.3dB, are
significantly higher than the considered FS case +0.5dB, which can be explained from PM containing
stronger present peaks in its loop gains |FGij| relative to the associated MLG. This of course results
from inferior smoothing performed in PM to FS. The latter allows then for stronger reductions at the
stability-controlling critical frequencies, i.e. with the highest magnitudes in the loop gain |FGij|, thus
realising more improvements.
Figure 4.17: Added stable gains µASG as a function of the relative phase shift γ between channels
for a phase-modulated (PM) 2×2 system with a modulation frequency fm = 0.5Hz and
modulation amplitude β = 5.5 rad defined relative to an unshifted version ∆γ = 0 rad.
As is clear from both figures the stability can thus be influenced and improved by relative phase
shifts although its effects are limited by the modulation algorithm applied and thus the associated loop
gain content. Furthermore, given the path dependence of phase, the performance is expected to be
environment dependent. Usability in actual rooms will then be dependent on the degree of variation of
the paths over time and should thus be evaluated in a real life setup to verify its effectiveness.
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
In agreement with earlier work by Poletti [Pol00] & [Pol04], it can be concluded that phase-modulated
systems, be it PM and FS both reduce in performance as channel count N increases. Nevertheless
the general trend, as being a consequence of the increased variance in characteristic functions λn(ω),
shows a decrease of the maximal stable gain µstab for an increased channel count regardless of whether
any modulation is introduced. The increased variance was considered a result of the introduction of
more speaker/microphone paths, [Pol00]. However, additional increases in variance and thus sudden
drops in µstable, were concluded to results from the addition of more (dominant) paths to the response.
The added benefit µASG of modulation types was then evaluated relative to their time invariant TI
counterparts to assess the actual performance of PM and FM. Evaluating the latter illustrated a visible
performance difference between both. For frequency shifting FS the added stable gain µASG reduced
as channel count increased. This being a result of the summation of different channels in FGij, which
in turn reduced the normalised standard deviation σnorm.
Hence, the potential for FS to provide
additional smoothing to the frequency response in the multichannel case was lowered.
For PM these trends in µASG are only visible to a less degree indicating a present but limited in-
fluence of σnorm. The actual improvement due to PM remain more or less constant as a function of
channel count N. The stable performance of µASG in PM and decrease in FS provide an argument for
the performance of both methods to converge towards one another as channel count increases. Further-
more this adds to the potential for the use of PM in audio applications as no longer being outperformed
by FS due to it’s higher performance. This should however still be put into perspective due to the
performance in µASG of FS to be multiple dB above PM. Evaluation of the signal distortion SD for the
modulation types, as channel count increased, furthermore confirms the stark contrast in performance
for PM and FS. Indicating a needed 6dB minimal margin to achieve a level of perceptible artefacts
similar to PM at a margin of 3dB. These larger margins needed for FS relative to PM along with the
reduced performance of FS at higher channel counts illustrates further the potential for PM to outper-
form FS at suﬀicient channel counts.
Individual assessment of the 4×24 system with modulation types FS and PM for their respective
parameters, compared to the 1×1 case, further confirmed these trends as well. The parameter influence
for both modulation types was similar to the single channel reference with the exception of a clear
lower saturation for FS relative to its 1×1 case. This indicated also a clear outperforming of FS_1x1
to FS_4x24 for µASG. The outperforming, being deemed a consequence of the channel addition, i.e.
σnorm decrease, was absent in PM further illustrating its robustness against channel addition. Addition-
ally a small but noticeable outperforming of FS_4x24 to FS_1x1 can arise for limited modulation
frequencies fm. This being due to the initial loop gain flattening performed by FS to a substantial
degree so that the channel summation can realise further complementary smoothing. Nevertheless the
smoothing performed by the latter reduced/overtook the contributions of FS at higher modulation fre-
quencies fm.
Lastly for the relative phase shifts ∆γ, regions of increased added stable gain µASG relative to the
unshifted case were observed for both modulation types. Indicating the potential for added benefits
of destructive interference for a 2×2 system. The actual improvements were however limited by the
presence of other frequency components, limiting the added benefit one could realise by canceling out
a component. Improvements under PM were clearly higher then for FS. Resulting in a µASG of 4.2dB
==PAGE:60==
5 Conclusion
52
for PM relative to the limited 0.5dB for FS, which can be explained from the smoothed loop gain
for FS containing more reduced frequency components, resulting in limited improvements due to the
destructive interference of one.
==PAGE:61==
CHAPTER 6
Future Work
Although a clear first indication is made here of the converging and potential outperformance of PM to
FS further confirmation of the latter is needed since only a single system was evaluated. Furthermore
the simulations, although based upon measurements, only still provide a prediction with respect to the
actual performance one would expect from a similar system. Originally the simulations were meant
as guideline for a real-time implementation in the actual LoV, however due to time limits these were
not implemented and should be carried out to further verify the simulations and confirm the made
assumptions and conclusions.
Additionally the observed trends with regards to σnorm and its influence on FS and PM performance,
relative to TI case, are purely based on observations and reasoning and thus demand an additional
mathematical/ statistical analysis or further Monte-Carlo simulations to confirm the made conclusion
with regards to potential convergence and outperformance of PM to FS. As the perceptual evaluation,
as has been illustrated, is key in showing the perceptual outperformance of one over the other, care
should taken to properly include it in derivations or potential simulations. This indicating further the
need for perceptual evaluations in a real life venue.
With regard to relative phase shifts ∆γ the perceptibility and introduction of artefacts in PM and FS
should be examined before application can be considered. Adding to this, the path lengths dependence
should be evaluated in the real LoV setup with regards to robustness, since the introduction of objects
or people may strongly affect its performance. Lastly the relative phase shifts ∆γ served only as a
proof of concept for a 2×2 system. As indications show a potential for the improvement of µASG in a
limited 2×2 setup further implementation with regards to more-channels and it’s performance should
be considered.
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[97]
“American National Standard Methods for Calculation of the Speech Intelligibility Index.”
In: ANSI Std. S3.5-1997 (1997).
[A+95]
Lundeby A et al. “Uncertainties of measurements in room acoustics.” In: Acta Acustica united
with Acustica 81.4 (1995), pages 344–355.
[Ali+21]
R. Ali et al. ““MYRIAD: Multi-array realistic acoustic database,” Technical Report, ESAT-
STADIUS, KU Leuven (Leuven, Belgium).” In: (2021).
[Ber+18]
G. Bernardi et al. “Subjective and Objective Sound-Quality Evaluation of Adaptive Feedback
Cancellation Algorithms.” In: IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing 26.5 (2018), pages 1010–1024. doi: 10.1109/TASLP.2018.2808042.
[CM82]
T. Claasen and W. Mecklenbrauker. “On stationary linear time-varying systems.” In: IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems 29.3 (1982), pages 169–184. doi: 10.1109/TCS.1982.
1085130.
[EG93]
G. W. Elko and M. M. Goodwin. “Beam dithering: Acoustic feedback control using a
modulated-directivity loudspeaker array.” In: 1993 IEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech, and Signal Processing. Volume 1. 1993, 173–176 vol.1. doi: 10.1109/ICASSP.
1993.319083.
[Far21]
A. Farina. “Advancements in impulse response measurements by sine sweeps.” In: (May
2021).
[GB71]
R. W. Guelke and A. D. Broadhurst. “Reverberation Time Control by Direct Feedback.” In:
Acta Acustica united with Acustica 24.1 (1971), pages 33–41. issn: 1610-1928.
[HZ15]
M. Holters and U. Zölzer. “GstPEAQ – An Open Source Implementation of the PEAQ
Algorithm.” In: December 2015.
[JP]
F. Jacobsen and P. Peter Moller. Fundamentals of General Linear Acoustics.
[Mar99]
L. Marple. “Computing the discrete-time ”analytic” signal via FFT.” In: IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing 47.9 (1999), pages 2600–2603. doi: 10.1109/78.782222.
[MAT20]
MATLAB. version 9.9.0.1495850 (R2020b) Update 1. Natick, Massachusetts: The Math-
Works Inc., 2020.
[ME98]
P. Mapp and C. Ellis. “Improvements in acoustic feedback margin in sound reinforcement
systems.” In: Preprints AES 105th Convention (September 1998).
[MKJ98]
F. J. van der Meulen, S. Kamerling, and C. P. Janse. “A New Way of Acoustic Feedback
Suppression.” In: Audio Engineering Society Convention 104. May 1998.
[MP77]
A . G. J. Macfarlane and I Postletwaite. “The generalized Nyquist stability criterion and
multivariable root loci.” In: International Journal of Control 25.1 (1977), pages 81–127. doi:
10.1080/00207177708922217.
[Nie+99]
Nielsen et al. “Performance of some linear time-varying systems in control of acoustic feed-
back.” In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 106.1 (1999), pages 240–254.
doi: 10.1121/1.427053.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
55
[NLS15]
A. Novak, P. Lotton, and L. Simon. “Synchronized Swept-Sine: Theory, Application, and Im-
plementation.” In: Journal of the Audio Engineering Society 63 (November 2015), pages 786–
798. doi: 10.17743/jaes.2015.0071.
[Nyq32]
H. Nyquist. “Regeneration Theory.” In: Bell System Technical Journal 11.1 (1932), pages 126–
147. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1932.tb02344.x.
[Ohs90]
M. Ohsmann. “Analyse von Mehrkanalanlagen.” In: Acta Acustica united with Acustica 70.4
(1990), pages 233–246. issn: 1610-1928.
[PM62]
A. J. Prestigiacomo and D. J. MacLean. “A Frequency Shifter for Improving Acoustic Feed-
back Stability.” In: J. Audio Eng. Soc 10.2 (1962), pages 110–113.
[PM96]
J. G. Proakis and D. G. Manolakis. Objective measures for real-time evaluation of adaptive
feedback cancellation algorithms in hearing aids. Volume 3. Prentice-Hall, 1996, pages 425–
427.
[Pol00]
M. A. Poletti. “The Stability of Single and Multichannel Sound Systems.” In: Acta Acustica
united with Acustica 86 (January 2000), pages 163–178.
[Pol04]
M. A. Poletti. “The stability of multichannel sound systems with frequency shifting.” In: The
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 116.2 (2004), pages 853–871. doi: 10.1121/1.
1763972.
[Pol94]
M. A. Poletti. “The Performance of a new assisted reverberation system.” In: Acta Acustica
united with Acustica 2 (December 1994), pages 511–524.
[RDS06]
M. H. Radfar, R. M. Dansereau, and A. Sayadiyan. “On the Choice of Window Size in Model-
Based Single Channel Speech Separation.” In: 2006 Canadian Conference on Electrical and
Computer Engineering. 2006, pages 298–301. doi: 10.1109/CCECE.2006.277299.
[RFB94]
A. Reilly, G. Frazer, and B. Boashash. “Analytic signal generation-tips and traps.” In: IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing 42.11 (1994), pages 3241–3245. doi: 10.1109/78.330385.
[Sch61]
M. R. Schroeder. “Improvement of Feedback Stability of Public Address Systems by Fre-
quency Shifting.” In: Audio Engineering Society Convention 13. October 1961.
[Sch62]
M. R. Schroeder. In: J. Audio Eng. Soc 10.2 (1962), pages 108–109.
[Sch64]
M. R. Schroeder. “Improvement of Acoustic‐Feedback Stability by Frequency Shifting.” In:
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 36.9 (1964), pages 1718–1724. doi: 10.
1121/1.1919270.
[Sch65]
M. R. Schroeder. “New Method of Measuring Reverberation Time.” In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 37.6 (1965), pages 1187–1188. doi: 10.1121/1.1939454.
[SH16]
S. Schlecht and E. Habets. “The Stability of Multichannel Sound Systems With Time-
Varying Mixing Matrices.” In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 140 (July
2016), pages 601–609. doi: 10.1121/1.4955285.
[SK62]
M. R. Schroeder and K. H. Kuttruff. “On Frequency Response Curves in Rooms. Comparison
of Experimental, Theoretical, and Monte Carlo Results for the Average Frequency Spacing
between Maxima.” In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 34.1 (1962), pages 76–
80. doi: 10.1121/1.1909022.
[Spr+08]
A. Spriet et al. “Objective measures for real-time evaluation of adaptive feedback cancellation
algorithms in hearing aids.” In: 2008 16th European Signal Processing Conference. 2008,
pages 1–5.
[Sve94]
P. Svensson. “On reverberation enhancement in auditoria.” In: (1994). Edited by Chalmers
Univ. Technol. Dept. Appl. Acoust.
[Sve95]
Peter U. Svensson. “Computer Simulations of Periodically Time-Varying Filters for Acoustic
Feedback Control.” In: J. Audio Eng. Soc 43.9 (1995), pages 667–677.
==PAGE:64==
Bibliography
56
[Val+12]
V. Valimaki et al. “Fifty Years of Artificial Reverberation.” In: IEEE Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing 20.5 (2012), pages 1421–1448. doi: 10.1109/TASL.2012.
2189567.
[vM11]
T. van Waterschoot and M. Moonen. “Fifty Years of Acoustic Feedback Control: State of
the Art and Future Challenges.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE 99.2 (2011), pages 288–327.
doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2010.2090998.
[Wat03]
T. van Waterschoot. “A Unifying Framework for Closed-Loop System Identification Experi-
ments in an Acoustic Environment.” In: (2003).
[Xia14]
Li Xiaoyang. “A simplified normalization operation for perfect reconstruction from a mod-
ified STFT.” In: 2014 12th International Conference on Signal Processing (ICSP). 2014,
pages 42–45. doi: 10.1109/ICOSP.2014.7014966.
[ZF67]
E. Zwicker and R. Feldtkeller. “Das Ohr als Nachrichtempfanger.” In: Hirzel Verlag 2 (1967),
pages 66–68.
