==PAGE:1==
DEVELOPING IMPROVED TEMPERATURE MODELS
FOR ANOMALY DETECTION
WITH SMART METER DATA
by
Stanislas Bromberg
This thesis is submitted for the degree of
Master of Environmental Sciences
Supervisors:
Morten Borup
Former Associate Professor at DTU Environment
Janus Hartmeyer Christiansen
Director of International Water and Energy Projects and delivery at NIRAS
Jonas Kirstein
Water Consultant at NIRAS
Martin Rygaard
Associate Professor and Head of MSc studies at DTU Environment
DANMARKS TEKNISKE UNIVERSITET (DTU)
July, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Preface
During my thesis, I have been helped and received precious advice from my supervisors.
I would ﬁrst like to thank my company supervisors, Janus Hartmeyer Christiansen and Jonas Kirstein for
being so open-minded with regard to my work. They both managed to give me the good directions for my
thesis and they made me improve my critical thinking. I would also like to say a special word of thanks for
Janus who maybe kick-started my professional life.
I would also like to acknowledge my supervisors from DTU, Morten Borup and Martin Rygaard. They
made this project possible and oﬀered me the best support I could have wished. Your feedback gave me
some hints on how to become more rigorous in my writings and presentations and that is, in my case, the
most valuable guidance.
In addition, I would like to thank Jenn for being such a sympathetic ear. Even if you are still mocking
me because I did not code a machine learning part in this study ...
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
With the rise of a new generation of connected sensors, it is now possible to monitor in real time the evolution
of ﬂows and temperatures in the drinking water networks. Based on this data capture, this study describes
how the temperature can be modeled in a small danish water distribution system.
Three temperature models were formulated. The ﬁrst one was based on the assumption that the soil
temperature is steady around pipes. The second took into account the transient behaviour of the ground
surrounding the pipes. In a third time, a complete model of the soil temperature was used to determine how
much the ground warmed the water pipes that passed through it.
To compare the models, the correlation (r) and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) of their outputs
with regards to the measured temperature in the water network were computed. Although there is still some
uncertainty in the thermal forecasts, the correlation of the models outputs with the measurements is signif-
icant (r = 0.8 in average) and the steady soil model presents a low error to the measure (RMSE = 0.22 °C).
The ﬁrst temperature model was used to detect leaks in existing installations. A leak was artiﬁcially
generated in the danish supply network. Then, a burst identiﬁcation was performed by a simple algorithm
based on the ﬁrst temperature model. It managed to locate the abnormal discharge and predicted an average
leak ﬂow of 0.6 m3/h when the real one was 1 m3/h .This algorithm still has to be tested and certiﬁed on
larger water networks before being applied on a wide scale.
In practice, this thesis highlighted the minimal data required to model the temperature in water networks.
It also conﬁrmed the high potential of thermal modeling applied to anomaly detection in water networks.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Conceptual Framework
3
2.1
Modeling the temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Deterministic network modelling with EPAnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Kornumgaard water system : Building the hydraulic model
8
3.1
Brønderslev network structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2
Meters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Leak Scenario and Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Building the hydraulic model and the quality ﬁle for the temperature simulation . . . . . . .
10
4
Model 1: Water Temperature with a Steady Soil Warmth
12
4.1
Calibration method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.4
Results and discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Model 2 : Including the transient ground temperature.
15
5.1
Concept and Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.3
Calibration results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.4
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.5
Results Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Model 3 : Modeling the ground behaviour
20
6.1
Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
6.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6.3
Sensitivity Analysis Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.4
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
7
Detecting Leaks with the temperature models
32
7.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
7.2
Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7.3
Post treatment and Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
7.4
Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
8
Discussion
37
9
Conclusion
39
Bibliography
40
A Appendix
43
iii
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
In the European Union, an average of 20 % of the produced water never reaches the consumer [1]. These
losses can be explained by the presence of leaks in every distribution system. However, the extent of this
damage varies from one country to another. Among the best performing suppliers, danish companies lose
7.8% of their production when, on the other hand, 50% of the water vanishes in bulgarian pipes [2][3].
In the context of an increasing scarcity of resources and a desire to lower the energy consumed when
treating drinking water (e.g., reducing chlorine usage, UV treatments), it becomes urgent to identify leaks
and illegal water extractions from the networks. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has stressed out how
much sanitation is important to prevent health issues. Reaching universal access to washing facilities goes
hand in hand with eﬃcient water networks. If too much water was lost in the infrastructures, prices would
raise signiﬁcantly. Then, poor populations, who are already at risk, could not aﬀord their basic water needs
[4].To limit wastage, the use of sensors is gradually spreading around the world. Pressure, temperature and
ﬂow loggers became indeed more reliable and economical in the past decade. However, the beneﬁt from
meters installations depends on how the data is analysed. In this sense, optimising post processing techniques
could oﬀer some faster and less manpower demanding leak detection opportunities.
Leak detection is traditionally carried out on site. Old pipes are highlighted and then probed with acoustic
methods [5]. For instance, several acoustic sensors can be installed on a suspect duct. They can detect noise
emission from leaks and identify a burst location if it is not too far from the sensor [6]. However, these
methods are often limited by the sound reﬂection and attenuation. Because they also need a lot of hardware,
they can not be applied on large networks neither. It would require the deployment of sensors for almost
every conduit and the investment costs would thus skyrocket [7].
In contrast, remote leak detection methods started to appear since the beginning of the 21st century
with the raise of connected sensors. More recently, new sensors called smart-meters were installed on some
networks to collect even more data [8]. They are able to record and send temperature, pressure and ﬂow
data to a far server with very ﬁne time steps. Therefore, it paves the way to real-time monitoring and faster
network maintenance.
Usually, temperature measurements are not used. On the other hand, a pressure model is simulated with a
software (e.g., EPAnet, Watercad, Piccolo). The diﬀerences between the expected and observed pressures
are lastly used to identify potential anomalies on the network [9]. However, the pressure is sometimes hard to
forecast and this parameter is not following the water. It is necessary to have a large set of sensors to actually
get an overview of the network. With only a few loggers, the eﬃciency of the method radically diminishes
[10].
1
==PAGE:6==
As for now, the pressure based models do not allow a perfect leak detection. Other physical variables
were investigated to replace pressure as a way to detect burst. The temperature is probably the most advanced
one. This parameter has in fact already been studied to control the growth of micro-organisms or to estimate
the potential of using drinking water for district heating [11] [12]. The temperature also allows a convenient
tracking of water ﬂows since the water temperature is usually changing very slowly. Hence, water paths can
be fairly easily pinpointed into the network by comparing some junctions temperature.
This study aims to ﬁnd how the temperature can be used for anomaly detection on water supply infras-
tructures. The goal is to ﬁnd a way to use as few temperature information as possible to detect and locate
leaks the most eﬃciently as possible. To that end, the following questions will be answered:
• Can temperature be modeled in a drinking water network ?
• Which physical parameters should be measured to model the temperature ?
• How can temperature be used to detect leaks ?
• How eﬃcient would be a temperature based leak detection ?
If this study highlighted an eﬃcient approach to detect leaks with only a few sensors, water companies
such as Niras could adroitly equip their own networks with smart-meters. In this way, they would radically
improve their detection eﬃciency.
To proceed with the development of reliable techniques to detect leaks from temperature data, a case
study was investigated. A smart metered area was monitored while opening a ﬁre hydrant to simulate a leak
scenario. The network was equipped with ﬂow loggers at every end node and the temperature was measured
at the ﬁre hydrant and the inlet of the system.
The keystone to an accurate leak identiﬁcation is the temperature model. Because anomalies can be very
small, the model has to reach the highest possible precision. Therefore, several temperature models were
ﬁrst benchmarked. Three models were studied in this thesis. First, the ground was assumed to have a steady
temperature (section 4). Then, some transient variations close to the pipe were taken into account (section 5).
Lastly, the entire ground temperature was modeled to see if the weather variations could inﬂuence the water
temperatures.
To evaluate the relevance of the models, they were calibrated and a sensibility analysis was performed for
each of their input parameters. The comparison between models was completed by analyzing the diﬀerence
between their temperature simulations and the data that was measured during the leak case study.
To conclude, a leak detection algorithm was implemented and tested for the previously studied network
(section 7). The aim was to retrieve a leak that was artiﬁcially generated in a smart-metered area. This
detection was performed with a very few data. Its quality was then assessed by checking if the leak was
retrieved. Moreover, the quality of the identiﬁcation process was determined by assessing if the algorithm
found back how much water was lost due to burst. To be reckoned as conclusive, the method also had to
locate the leak close enough to its real location.
2
==PAGE:7==
2
Conceptual Framework
2.1
Modeling the temperature
The Nusselt theory
To model the temperature in pipes, it is ﬁrst necessary to understand how heat is exchanged between the
components of the water networks. Energy is transferred between the pipe wall and the water contained in
the pipe (Equation 1). This phenomenon is the key to understanding each of the models that will hereby be
developed [13]:
Φ = hA(Twall −Twater)
(1)
Where :
Φ = Heat ﬂux [W]
h = Heat Transfer Coeﬃcient [W.m−2.K−1]
A = Contact Area [m2]
T = Temperature [K]
Every model from the literature is based on this basic equation. Moreover, the only unknown in Equation 1
is the heat transfer coeﬃcient h. Nusselt studies showed a correlation between the type of observed ﬂow
in the pipe and the heat transfer coeﬃcient h. In his conclusions, the german scientist established the
dimensionless number Nu. This number informs if convective heat exchanges are greater than conductive
ones [14]. The Nusselt number only depends on the ﬂow regime and the chemical structure of the ﬂowing
liquid (Equation 2) .
h = λwaterNu
Lc
(2)
Lc
= Characteristic Length ( radius R in a pipe ).
λwater = Water thermal conductivity [W.m−1.K−1].
Nu
= Nusselt number.
Estimating Nu in a pipe
From the Equation 1 and Equation 2, the only unknown is the Nusselt number. This number can only be
estimated with the experimental conditions. In this study, the ﬂow is turbulent and it is bounded by two
isothermal walls. For these conditions, the Equation 3, developed by Ludwig Prandtl, is valid [15].
Nu = 0, 664 Re1/2Pr1/3
If Re < 5.105 and Pr > 0.7
(3)
Re = Reynolds Number
Pr = Prandtl Number.
The Reynolds Number is the dimensionless ratio of the inertia over the viscous forces of the ﬂow. When
the Reynolds number is high (>4000) the ﬂow can be qualiﬁed as turbulent [16].
Re =
V D
νwater
(4)
νwater = Water kinematic viscosity m2.s−1
3
==PAGE:8==
Figure 1: Water Prandtl number as a function of the the
temperature [17].
Because the kinematic viscosity νwater is
constant in the ﬂuid, the Reynolds number is
only dependant of the velocity of the water in
the ducts and the pipe diameter (Equation 4).
Simulation softwares are able to compute this
indicator for every pipe and each time step [18].
In this study, the Reynolds numbers have all
been computed and none of them is lower than
10 000 : the Equation 3 is always legitimate to
use.
The Prandtl number is an experimental
number that only depends on the type of liq-
uid and its temperature. Here, the water tem-
perature variations are assumed steady enough
for Pr to be a constant. The values of Pr are
stated in the literature as a function of temper-
ature (Figure 1).
In this part, it was proved that the Nusselt Number can be calculated in every pipe thanks to the previously
presented assumptions. In that respect, the heat transfer coeﬃcient h from the Equation 1 can be reckoned
as well. Thus, the heat ﬂux from the pipe wall to the bulk water is known. .
The steady soil temperature model
The results from the previous section can be included in models that take more heat transfers into account.
As a matter of fact, heat is also exchanged in the pipe wall towards the ground. The temperature models
from the literature balance the exchanged energy : all the calories that go from the ground to the pipe are
absorbed or transmitted to the water.
In a turbulent ﬂow, water is assumed perfectly mixed. In this respect the temperature is assumed homogeneous
in the liquid phase. Moreover, the temperature of the soil can be assumed steady since the pipe is not likely to
induce high variations in its vicinity. Under those hypotheses, the temperature of the water can be described
by the following diﬀerential Equation 5 [19].
dTwater
dt
=
2k
ρwaterRpipeCp,water
(Tsoil −Twater)
(5)
k
= Thermal transmittance coeﬃcient [W.m−2.K−1]
Cp,water
= Heat Capacity of the water [J.kg−1.K−1]
ρwater
= Density of the water [kg.m−3]
Rpipe
= Pipe radius [m]
Tsoil, Twater = Temperatures of the soil and the bulk water [K].
With :
k =
1
Ωpipe.wall + Ωwater
=
1
Thwall
λwall +
2Rpipe
λwaterNu
(6)
Taken into account the following terms :
Ωpipe.wall, Ωwater = Thermal resistances of the pipe wall and water [W −1.m2.K1]
Thwall
= Pipe wall thickness [m]
λwall, λwater
= Thermal conductivity of the pipe and the water [W.m−1.K−1]
4
==PAGE:9==
The main assumption of the previous networks is that the soil has a steady temperature. This means
that the pipe has no eﬀect on the close ground. Indirectly, it is here assumed that the heterogeneity of the
soil is negligible. Otherwise, the temperature around the wall would be diﬀerent at every point and the heat
transfers would be harder to model [20].
To conclude, there is no analytical solution to the Equation 5 because the parameters are changing at each
time step and for every pipe. The diﬀerential equation can only be solved numerically by assuming that the
hydraulic parameters are constant in-between 2 time steps. Then, for a selected time step the model can be
solved separately in every pipe.
Known physical parameters and conﬁdence intervals
The inputs of the steady soil model, stated in Equation 5, are mostly speciﬁc to the water and do not vary
with the leak scenario. They can be retrieved in the literature (Table 1).
Kinematic Viscosity
Cp,water
ρwater
λwater
λwall
1.307.10−6m2.s−1 [21]
4184 J.kg−1.K−1 [22]
999 kg.m−3 [23]
0.57 W.m−1.K−1 [24]
0.17 W.m−1.K−1[25]
Table 1: Variables stated in the literature for a pressure of 1 bar, a temperature of 15 °C, and pipes made of
PVC.
On the other hand, the parameters related to the soil and the pipes depend on the network where
experiments were carried out. However, the unknown values could be framed in conﬁdence intervals. They
were compared with drinking water systems that are similar to the one that were studied in the following
analysis (Table 2).
Thpipe [% dpipe]
Pr
Tsoil [°C]
Conﬁdence Interval
[1, 2.5] (Source : [26])
[7.5, 9] (Source : [17])
[15, 18] (Source : [19])
Table 2: Conﬁdence intervals for thermal parameters in a water system buried in the danish ground during
the month of July.
In order to speciﬁcally determine the value of the parameters listed in Table 2, a calibration with the
measured data was performed (section 4).
2.2
Deterministic network modelling with EPAnet
Computing Hydraulics with EPAnet
In the course of this study, the amounts of water entering and leaving the network were known. In that
respect, the analysis is called deterministic. It means that, after performing a modelling, the computed ﬂows
are the ones that could be observed in real life [27]. No matter which method is used to calculate the ﬂows,
the two next constraints always have to be respected :
1. The ﬂow in a node equals the ﬂow out the node at every time step (Mass Conservation).
2. If there are two possible paths between two nodes, the energy (head) diﬀerence between them does
not depend on the path taken by the water to ﬂow from one the other (Second KirchhoﬀLaw) [28].
5
==PAGE:10==
Computing Water Quality with EPAnet
The American Environmental Agency (EPA) developed in the late 90’s a software that solves the deterministic
problem from above. To work, the network characteristics (pipe lengths, materials, elevation of nodes) need
to be provided. The software uses the node consumptions at every time step to come up with a unique
solution of the water paths and ﬂows in every pipe [29].
Figure 2: MSX modus operandi for half a pipe. The grey segment shows
the pipe wall and the blue one the bulk ﬂuid. The ﬁgures represents the
concentrations of modelled chemical (Source : [30])
Once the hydraulics are de-
ﬁned and the ﬂows have been
computed by EPAnet, it is possi-
ble to simulate the fate of chem-
icals in the water network. As a
matter of fact, the EPA also de-
veloped an add-on called MSX to
model the path of reactive com-
pounds in pipes.
After getting the ﬂows in the sys-
tem from EPAnet , MSX can
determine how the species are
mixed or where they react. Usu-
ally, these reactions happen in
the bulk ﬂuid or at the pipe sur-
faces. At every time step, MSX
keeps in memory the concen-
trations of every compound in
the ﬂow and also for the resid-
uals stuck in the pipe surfaces
[30].
From one time step to an other,
MSX evaluates how the hydraulics impact the presence of each specie for every pipe with the same modus
operandi (Figure 2).
MSX can be used to model the temperature in the system. As a matter of fact, this physical parameter can
be seen as a specie that reacts in the pipes with the growth rate given by Equation 5 [19].
Computing Setup
The software EPAnet has its own user interface. However, the input information can be stored in a text ﬁle
and directly provided to the calculation core. The calculation core is called an Application Programming
Interface (API). It communicates directly with the user interface. After the simulations, the calculated ﬂows
are exported by EPAnet into a report text ﬁle.
On the other hand, the add-on MSX does not have a user interface. Its settings, like the species reaction
rates, have to be speciﬁed in an independent text ﬁle. MSX uses the hydraulic data from EPAnet to compute
the state of the chemicals. Finally, the add-on MSX reports the concentrations in a second text ﬁle.
In addition, when it comes to optimizing networks, it becomes necessary to automatize the process of mod-
ifying the network’s properties and running many simulations. To this extent, the Environmental Protection
Agency developed a tool that permits to control directly the API with some standard instructions. This tool
is called a dynamic link library. It contains functions (e.g., import a ﬁle, solve hydraulics) that can be called
from any script written in the computing language C++ (Figure 3).
6
==PAGE:11==
Figure 3: Computational framework. The orange arrows represent information and the blue ones some
orders.
To use EPAnet and MSX in the most eﬃcient way, their dynamic link library were the only tools that were
used. Scripts were written in Python to modify input ﬁles and read the reports ﬁles. Lastly, and because the
toolkits can only be called with instructions written in C++, an interpreter from python to C++ instructions
was developed (Figure 3). Thus, from many separate blocks, a single python tool was created to be able to
create and run simulations and then explore the model results in an easier way. This computational setup
was essential to compute the temperature models from subsection 2.1.
7
==PAGE:12==
3
Kornumgaard water system : Building the hydraulic model
3.1
Brønderslev network structure
The researches presented in this study have been operated on a subsection of the Brønderslev network. The
so called Kornumgaard area is located in the South West of Brønderslev. This stretch has been chosen
because it contains its own water work. Moreover, every consumer is supplied with water coming from a
single source (Figure 4). Thanks to this characteristic, the water temperature can be calculated everywhere
in the system. Provided that a thermometer is installed at the source and that all the other parameters of
interest are known, it is possible to use a model to predict the temperature at every junction in the area.
Figure 4: Brønderslev network. The arrows represent the ﬂow directions at every moment in the system.
Each point is a consumer.
The studied sub-network is only made of Polyvinyl chloride pipes (PVC). Their diameters can be equal
to 36, 81 or 101 mm.
8
==PAGE:13==
3.2
Meters
• Smart-meters
In Kornumgaard, the houses and facilities are equipped with smart meters. Smart-meters are able to measure
the ﬂows at every end node of the system. Moreover, they are designed to log ﬂows with a very ﬁne time
time step (10 to 30 seconds between 2 measures).
Even if all the houses are equipped with smart meters in Kornumgaard, the network from Figure 4 is a
simpliﬁed version of a more complex one. As a matter of fact, houses have been grouped to create some
clusters of consumers. Originally made to respect consumers data protection, this assembling adds more
simplicity to the network.
It could be argued that merging the consumers goes with losing the location of the consumption. When
studying the warming of water in pipes it is indeed very important to know the exact location of the sensors.
Nevertheless, the gathering of consumers is performed at the end nodes of the system, in a residential area,
where the consumers are very close one to each other. Therefore, it is possible to assume that the nodes of
Figure 4 consumes water exactly where they are located on the map.
• Ground thermometer
A thermometer was installed in the ground to assess the temperature for diﬀerent times at the leak location.
The thermometer was recording the temperatures for a depth of 1.1 m and 1.4 m. For those depths, the
temperature was measured constant (Table 3).
Depth [m]
Temperature [°C]
1.1
15.4
1.4
14.8
Table 3: Measured ground temperature at the ﬁre hydrant’s location for diﬀerent depths.
3.3
Leak Scenario and Measurements
A leak was artiﬁcially created in the network by opening a ﬁre hydrant for several hours (Figure 4). Moreover,
a ﬂow meter was recording the amount of water that left the system from the hydrant. The conditions of
the experiment match exactly a burst emergence situation. The experimental settings are given in Table 4.
During one day, the hydrant was open with an outﬂow of 1 m3.h−1 and then it was open with an outﬂow of
2.5 m3.h−1 for another day. This way, two leak scenarios were experimentally created.
Start Date
End Date
Duration
Flow
1st Leak
28-07-2020 08:45
29-07-2020 08:00
23h 15 min
1 m3/h
2nd Leak
04-08-2020 10:00
05-08-2020 07:00
21h 00 min
2.5 m3/h
Table 4: Time and ﬂow parameters of the 2 generated leaks.
The leaking ﬁre hydrant was also equipped with a thermometer in order to monitor the temperature at this
location. The thermometer recorded measurements every 15 minutes. However, it was only able to measure
the water temperature when there was water passing through the hydrant. As a result, the temperature at the
leak location is only known for the dates listed in the Table 4.
9
==PAGE:14==
On the other hand, the water inlet was also monitored regarding its temperature and its ﬂows for the full
simulation. The temperature of the water entering in the system was indeed always evolving due to some
external factors. Thanks to the input temperature data, it became possible to model the thermal state of the
nodes at every time step. Moreover, a diﬀerence of measured ﬂows was expected between the consumptions
given by the users smart-meters and the amount of water supplied by the source. This diﬀerence is due the
water losses at the leaking ﬁre hydrant.
3.4
Building the hydraulic model and the quality ﬁle for the temperature simulation
Method
Before modeling the temperature in the system, it was necessary to build an hydraulic model of the Kornum-
gaard area. This was done by using the geometry of the system that was provided as an EPAnet ﬁle from
Niras. Later, the consumptions measured by the smart meters were imported from their log ﬁle to EPAnet.
However, the smart-meters were not synchronized : they recorded data with diﬀerent time steps (Table 5).
The average time between two measures is called a sampling period.
Inlet Thermometer
Smart-meters
Hydrant Flow meter
Hydrant Thermometer
Sampling Period
1 min
5 min
1 hour
1 hour
Table 5: Average sampling periods of the sensors.
Data pre-processing
To work correctly, EPAnet needs to be provided synchronized data. There should be only one sampling time
for every sensor and the measurements have to be done exactly at the same moment. Some resamplings and
interpolations were performed to harmonize the data and allow the hydraulic model to operate properly.
The hydraulic model only needs the two following inputs to run normally :
−Water consumptions measured by the smart meters at every node of the system.
−Flow that goes through the ﬁre hydrant.
The ﬂow from the ﬁre hydrant is measured every hour. However, the meter has recorded a steady water ﬂow
leaving the system through the open hydrant at this location. It matches exactly the leak conditions given
in Table 4. Therefore, this consumption was set as a constant in EPAnet. Its time step was not taken into
account to deﬁne the time step of the hydraulic simulation.
Then, the meters are all set with a sampling period of 5 minutes, it was thus decided to model the system in
EPAnet with the same time step. The software solves the hydraulics and reports the ﬂows with a time step
of 5 minutes. Therefore, it was only necessary to re-synchronize the data with some linear interpolations to
set all the measurements at the same times. The resulting time series were input directly in the EPAnet model.
Secondly, the temperature was modeled in MSX as if it was a chemical specie. To that extent, it was
necessary to write an MSX input ﬁle with the temperature data. The heat at the inlet was the only necessary
data to model the warmth everywhere in the system.
Because the hydraulics were calculated and reported with a time step of 5 minutes, MSX could only be used
with a time step higher or equal to 5 min. The heat simulation was also performed with a time step of 5
min in order to keep the best visibility on the temperature variations. Consequently, the input data had to be
given to MSX with a time step of 5 minutes as well. Hence, the temperature data from the water source was
reworked. Its time step was changed from 1 minute to 5 minutes between two measurements.
10
==PAGE:15==
• Inlet Temperature Data : Increasing the time step of the data.
∗Method
The inlet temperature had the lowest sampling period (Table 5). In the same time, it was also the most
ﬂuctuating measurement due to the coarse deﬁnition of the sensor. The latter was recording with a resolution
of 0.1 °C. Thus, some leaps could be observed in the records of the thermometer (Figure 5). While increasing
the time step, it was possible to correct this behaviour due to the sensing material defaults.
To smooth the signal, the Savitzky-Golay algorithm was performed on the source time-series. This algorithm
is usually valuable for outliers removal and for retrieving correct variations when measurements are too coarse
[31]. The algorithm directly provided results formatted as time-series with a time step of 5 minutes.
∗Results
Even if the algorithm provided a trustworthy signal, it sometimes tended to lose information from the
initial signal as it can be noticed on the 5th of August at 10.am during the second leak (Figure 5). The sensed
temperatures were oscillating signiﬁcantly and the algorithm was polishing these variations too much. It led
to a loss of information.
Figure 5: Measured temperature (dots) at the inlet and its Savitzky-Golay interpolation (grey line) during
the leak times
∗Conclusion
Because it is complicated to tell which ﬂuctuations are due to the sensing limits of the source thermometer
and which are caused by the actual shifting of the water temperature at the inlet, the smoothing was left
aside. The original source temperature data was simply interpolated linearly and imported in the MSX data
ﬁle to be used in the following studies.
11
==PAGE:16==
4
Model 1: Water Temperature with a Steady Soil Warmth
4.1
Calibration method
The temperature model described in the Equation 5 was used to forecast the temperature in the Kornumgaard
area water network. In this section, the ground temperature was assumed constant everywhere. That means
that the pipe has no eﬀect on the ground thermal state. The heat exchanges have no impact on the soil.
Furthermore, the unknowns from the heat model were stated in Table 2 from section 2.
To know the
actual Prandtl Number, temperature of the soil and pipe thicknesses, a calibration was led. To calibrate the
temperature model, it was necessary to ﬁnd which value of the previous parameters permitted the simulated
temperature to match the measurements from the ﬁre hydrant. For this, a Brute Force method was performed.
Every combination of parameters was computed in order to ﬁnd the best ﬁtting combination of settings.
Two parameters were used to determine the quality of a combination : the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient (r)
and the Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE).
RMSE =
s
1
nsteps
X
t in Leak 1
(Tmeasure,t −Tmodel,t)2
(7)
nsteps
= Number of simulation time steps
Tmeasure,t = Temperature measured at the leak for the time step t
Tmodel,t
= Temperature modeled at the leak for the time step t
∗Root mean squarred error
The RMSE gives an indication of the gap between the measured and the modelled temperature for each time
step. The best model is the one presenting the lowest Root Mean Squared Error. It would indeed present the
lowest divergence to the reality.
∗Pearson Correlation
The RMSE is not suﬃcient to assess the quality of a simulation. If there was only a delay between two
data sets, then the errors would be signiﬁcant between both data sets. Although they could be exactly equal
and only diﬀer because of a delay. The RMSE would not detect the correlation of the two time series. The
Pearson coeﬃcient, notiﬁes if there is or not a linear relationship between two data sets (Equation 8)[32].
Two perfectly correlated data sets will have a correlation of 1. On the other hand, two random draws with
no correlation are expected to have a Pearson coeﬃcient equal to 0. To appraise if a simulation mirrors
the reality, it is necessary to check which combination of settings provides the highest absolute value of the
coeﬃcient r.
r =
P
t in Leak 1(Tmeasure,t −Tmeasure,t)(Tmodel,t −Tmodel,t)
qP
t in Leak 1(Tmeasure,t −Tmeasure,t)2
qP
t in Leak 1(Tmodel,t −Tmodel,t)2
(8)
The error and correlation coeﬃcients were only calculated for the ﬁrst leak because the ground tem-
perature changed from the 27thof July to the 4th of August (Figure 29). In this situation, two calibrations
12
==PAGE:17==
were needed instead of one because the thermal parameters are slightly diﬀerent from one leak scenario to
another. Since the ﬁrst leak was the smallest one (1 m3.h−1), it was studied hereby. As a matter of fact, if
the analysis allowed to detect a burst with an outﬂow of 1 cubic meter per hour, it could also detect higher
leak ﬂows.
The Brute force calibration was performed for every possible combination of parameters.
For each of
them, the water temperature proﬁle was computed in MSX and the resulting RMSE and r coeﬃcient were
calculated after the simulation Figure 6.
4.2
Results
RMSE for Tsoil = 15.95 °C
Correlation for Tsoil = 15.95 °C
Figure 6: Squarred Error and Correlation for diﬀerent sets of Thickness, Prandtl number and Ground
temperature. At Tsoil = 15.95 °C, the RMSE is the lowest (RMSE = 0.22 °C).
In all the simulations, the correlation shifted from r = 0.84 to r = 0.85 (Figure 6). It means that the
correlation was always very good between the model and the observed data. The parameter changes had a
low impact on the Pearson coeﬃcient. On the other hand, the RMSE oscillated from 0.22 °C with a ground
temperature of 15.95 °C to an error of 1 °C with other temperatures. RMSE was thus chosen as a criteria to
ﬁnd the best set of parameters to match the thermometer data at the leak.
The RMSE was the lowest for a ground temperature of 15.95 °C. It was also noticeable with a thickness of
the pipe that was equal to 1.3 % of the pipes diameters. The Prandtl Number had to reach 7.4 to guarantee
the lowest RMSE. With the calibrated model, rmax = 0.84 and RMSEmin = 0.221 °C .
The Prandtl that was found after calibration is the one stated in the literature for a water temperature of 15
°C (Figure 1). Moreover, the measured temperature in the ground was 15.4 °C at a depth of 1.1 m whereas
the optimal soil temperature was found to be 15.95 °C. The two values are close enough to assume that the
thermometer was buried a few centimeters deeper than the pipe so it detected a lower warmth.
13
==PAGE:18==
4.3
Validation
Once the model was calibrated, the temperature modeling results were plotted with the parameters from
Table 6 to verify the accuracy of the calibration results (Figure 7).
Thickness [% dpipe]
Tsoil [°C]
Pr
1.13
15.95
7.4
Table 6: Parameters of interest for the optimized simulation (Figure 7).
Figure 7: Simulation results for the parameters listed in Table 6. The dotted grey line represents the inlet
measured temperature. The orange line shows the simulation outputs and the black crosses give the measured
temperature at the ﬁre hydrant.
4.4
Results and discussion
The calibrated model replicated well the temperature behaviour at the ﬁre hydrant. After midnight on the
29th a gap could still be observed though (Figure 7). The heating of the water was over-stated by the model
by almost half a degree.
If the temperature Equation 5 is correct, only one explanation could justify a lower warming of the water :
the soil was cooling down too and the temperature around the pipes was not steady during the simulation.
Implementing a model with a transient soil temperature could help decreasing the amplitude of the warming
and cooling processes. This hypothesis was studied in section 5.
14
==PAGE:19==
5
Model 2 : Including the transient ground temperature.
5.1
Concept and Method
In the section 4, it was assumed that the ground temperature was never changing. The soil behaved as a
perfect buﬀer in the vicinity of the pipes. This model can be questioned. The role of the close ground was
perhaps important to model and it could lead to a slower warming of the water than the one modeled with a
steady soil temperature model. This could solve the modeling anomaly detected on Figure 7.
Around the pipe, the soil was assumed to exchange heat with the system. As a result, the temperature close
to the tube was expected to change as well. Since the temperature was changing every single moment in
the pipe, the close substrate did not have enough time to reach a steady state. It was adopting a transient
behaviour. A layer of soil was introduced in the previous model to model the soil variations at each time step
(Figure 8). The thickness of this layer was not known and was found thanks to a later calibration.
Figure 8: Scheme of the transient model structure. Timp is the impact temperature that conditions Twater
15
==PAGE:20==
5.2
Algorithm
The aim of the transient ground temperature model was to calculate Timp,t, the temperature close to the pipe,
based on the surface temperature and the temperature at the wall. Every 5 minutes, the temperature was
calculated for every pipe and was later used to calculate the new water temperature (Figure 9).
Figure 9: Calculation algorithm for every pipe and each time step with Model 2.
1
Step 1 : Initialisation
The ground is assumed homogeneous at the beginning. The model from Figure 10a is used to calculate
Timp after 5 minutes in this setup.
2
Step 2 : Hydraulic modeling for a time step of 5 minutes
The hydraulics are computed for the ﬁrst 5 minutes only (1 time step). A new water temperature is
found by inputting the impact temperature as well as the wall temperature in MSX.
3
Step 3: Ground homogenising
The model is back to the original state except that the water temperature has changed. Twall = Twater
and Timp = Tground
16
==PAGE:21==
4
Step 4: Transient ground model used to ﬁnd the new Timp
As from the step 1 to the step 2, the transient equation from Figure 10a is used to ﬁnd the impact
temperature of the next time step. This calculation is based on the far soil steady temperature and the
new water temperature calculated in Step 2.
5
Termination
The algorithm ends when all the water temperature has been calculated for every time step.
Timp,t+1 = Twall,t + (Tsurface −Twall,t) erfc(a)
Where :
a = xsoil
2
√
αt
And :
α
= Thermal Diﬀusivity [m2/s]
α
= 1.5 × 10−6[m2/s] (In a regular soil [33])
Twall,i = Twall during previous time step
(a) Transient Model for a buried pipe
[33].
(b) Erfc function for the possible range of xsoil.
t is the
modeling time step t = 300s and α = 1.5 × 10−6[m2/s].
Figure 10: Transient Heat Transfer Model adapted to a buried pipe. (Source : A.Cengel [33]).
MSX is in fact unable to keep in memory any diﬀerent parameters than the pipe diameter. Therefore, the
algorithm described in Figure 9 was implemented by coupling EPAnet to some python scripts that allowed
the memorization of each pipe temperature. It also kept in memory the impact temperatures Timp from one
time step to another.
These Python scripts were used to store every temperature and to operate the steps 1,3 and 4. This technique
was computationally more complex than running a simple MSX script because EPAnet-MSX had to be
opened and closed every time. It induced a computation time that was close to 10 minutes for the Model 2
compared to 1 min for the Model 1 in the section 4.
To calibrate the transient model, it was only necessary to ﬁnd the thickness xsoil that minimized the root
mean square error after running the transient algorithm. Because of the long computation times, only a few
thickness values were tested. The goal was to identify a trend and then infer which single xsoil could lower
the best the RMSE between the measured and the simulated data.
17
==PAGE:22==
5.3
Calibration results
Figure 11: Calibration of the transient model. The RMSE is a function
of the impact thickness xsoil
A thickness of 1.7mm provided the lowest
RMSE that could be obtained with the tran-
sient model (Figure 11). For this thickness, the
Pearson correlation was calculated beside. The
error and the correlation were lastly compared
with the results from Model 1 (Table 7).
RMSE
[°C]
r
Model 1
0.221
0.86
Model 2
0.226
0.813
Table 7: Best calibration indicators for the two models.
5.4
Validation
Figure 12: Result after calibration of the transient model. The orange line represents the model results from
Model 1. The magenta line shows Model 2, the transient improvement on the simulation.
18
==PAGE:23==
The transient model from the calibration was veriﬁed to check if it replicated better the measured temperatures.
It was actually polishing the quick coolings and heatings of the water that the Model 1 simulated wrongly.
For instance, at 6.pm on the 28th of July, a quick oscillation could be noticed with the Steady Soil Model
results (Figure 12). The latter was completely erased by the new model. However, this stability was not
bringing more accuracy to the results since the RMSE from Model 2 was higher than the Model 1 outputs.
The correlation was also worse. To that extent, the transient ground simulation is not better than the steady
ground temperature model (section 4).
5.5
Results Discussion
The calibration performed in subsection 5.3 led to an impact thickness of 1.7 mm. The impact layer is too
small to make a real change in the simulation. To slow the quick water warming that happens on the 29th at
midnight, it would be worthy to model the behaviour of the entire ground. As a matter of fact, it is important
to know the temperature everywhere in the ground to see if some temperature variations, due to the weather,
could happen if the pipe was not located exactly next to the ground thermometer from Figure 29.
19
==PAGE:24==
6
Model 3 : Modeling the ground behaviour
The Model 2 proved that the transient behaviour of the ground layer surrounding the pipe could not explain
the mismatch foreseen with the Model 1 (Figure 12). However, the soil temperature could still shift because
of weather factors. As a matter of fact, the distant ground temperature likely changed depending on the
time of the day. Model 1 and Model 2 were unable to consider those variations, therefore a third model
was developed to emphasize the weather impact on the land. This simulation was performed with the exact
weather conditions of the ﬁrst leak scenario from the 27thto the 29th of July 2020.
6.1
Theory
Ground structure
While it would be necessary to model every geological layer (e.g. loam, clay, sand) for a dry soil, a moist
soil has almost the same thermal properties for each layer (Figure 30). In July 2020, it rained enough in
Brønderslev for the ground to be moist (Figure 31). The soil was assumed to be made of a 5 meter deep
homogeneous layer [34][35]. Finally, a 15 cm thick asphalt layer was added to the model to represent the
impact of the pavement in the heat equilibrium.
In Denmark, the temperature of the subsoil for a depth of 10 m is known. It is stable throughout the year and
remains at 10 °C [36].
Figure 13: Simulation setup for the ground thermal modelling
20
==PAGE:25==
Conduction in the soil
In the soil, the thermal diﬀusion drives the heat transfers. A heat ﬂux can be observed from the top irradiated
zone to the bottom layer of ground. The conductive ﬂux is charaterised by the Fourier Equation 9 [37].
div(λ ⃗
gradT) = ρC ∂T
∂t
(9)
where:
λ = Soil Conductivity[ W.m−1.K−1 ]
T = Temperature [K]
ρ = Density [ kg/m−3]
C = Material Thermal Capacity [ J.kg−1.K−1]
Since the ground is a mixed layer, it is necessary to evaluate the impact of the thermal conductivity and
its capacity by performing a sensibility analysis on the variables from Equation 9. Although, because of the
ground type, the parameters of this study are framed in the ranges of the Table 8.
Material
λ [W.m−1.K−1 ]
C [J.kg−1.K−1]
ρ [kg.m−3]
Asphalt
2
900
2240
Ground
[1.1-3.1]
[1000-2000]
1200
Table 8: Possible ranges for every signiﬁcant parameter of Equation 9 [38][35].
Convection
Heat convection inﬂuences signiﬁcantly the ground temperature at the surface. The wind ﬂowing on top of
the ground is cooling or warming the asphalt. In most cases, the pipes are buried under the pavement. Due
to the resulting ﬂat surface, the wind is free to blow and refrigerate the soil. The convective phenomenon is
put in equation by the Newton Equation 10.
P = h(Tambient −Tasphalt)
(10)
with:
h = Heat Transfer Coeﬃcient [W.m−2.K−1]
P = Convective Power received by the ground [W.m−2]
The heat transfer coeﬃcient is, this time, the only parameter to ﬂuctuate in the convection process.
Because it changes every time, this parameter is hard to forecast. Therefore, the sensitivity of the ground
temperature to the variation of h was computed to evaluate how much convection can inﬂuence the thermal
equilibrium.
However, under normal circumstances, the heat transfer coeﬃcient reaches from 5 to 25
W.m−2.K−1 [39].
21
==PAGE:26==
Radiations
Lastly, the radiative heat transfers impact the ground temperature. On the one hand, the soil receives some
sun irradiance. It can be calculated based on the weather data and the experiments season. On the other
hand, because it is warmed up, the surface also emits radiations that cool it down. This eﬀect is called the
blackbody radiation and the lost power per square meter is given by the Stefan Boltzmann Law [Equation 11]
[40].
P = ϵσ(T 4
asphalt −T 4
ambient)
(11)
where:
P = Emitted power [ W.m−2 ]
ϵ = Surface Emissivity
σ = Stefan-Boltzmann constant [ 5.67 × 10−8W.K−4]
T = Temperature [K]
The emissivity of black asphalt is provided in the literature. It is about 0.95. Thus, asphalt presents a
behaviour that is very close to the perfect black-body (Surface emissivity equal to 1) [38].
6.2
Method
Evaluation of the sun irradiance
Based on the angle between the Earth and the Sun, the solar irradiance ﬂux is stated for every time and every
location in the world. The literature provides the intensity of this ﬂux for the month of July in Denmark
[41]. Furthermore, cloud absorption should be taken into account when studying the radiative heat transfers.
Light clouds like the ones detectable in the end of July 2020 in Brønderslev were indeed able to catch up to
20% of the solar energy [42].
It was necessary to calculate the absorption of clouds in order to estimate the solar radiation that was
actually received by the ground. Nevertheless, this data is very speciﬁc and not often recorded by the weather
stations. The Dansk Meteorologiske Institut (DMI) archives only provide the number of minutes per hour
during when the sun enlightened directly the ground. This is called the sun exposure. Unfortunately, there
was no irradiance meter installed in the ﬁeld when the experiment was carried out. Accordingly, it was
necessary to establish how much of the solar ﬂux was transmitted to the ground with the exposure data. For
this, the cloud transmission index α was conceived. If α was equal to 0, the sun radiation would be totally
absorbed. Otherwise if it was equal to 1, the ground would receive the complete solar heat. When there are
clouds, since they absorb 20 % of the energy, αmin is worth 0.8. Over an hour, the sun exposure tells how
much time the clouds were not absorbing light and consequently α was equal to 1. The rest of the time, α
equals 0.8. Therefore it is possible to interpolate the cloud transmission index based on the sun exposure
with α that was made up for this study (Equation 12).
α(t) = αmin + ΣSunExposure(t)
60 minutes
= 0.8 + ΣSunExposure(t)
60
(12)
with
ΣSunExposure(t) = Minutes of sun exposure during the hour t
α(t)
= Cloud Transmission Index [0<α<1]
22
==PAGE:27==
Figure 14: Calculation of irradiance from exposure data
Modeling the temperature with Finite Elements
Figure 15: Mesh used in Comsol® for the Ground
Model.
To model the temperature in complex geome-
tries and time dependent problems, ﬁnite ele-
ments can be used to compute the tempera-
ture at every point in the system [43].
For
these reasons,
the software COMSOL Multi-
physics® was used to solve the thermal sim-
ulations
based
on
a
ﬁnite
elements
resolu-
tion.
The software divides the ground into a grid
[44]. Later, the heat partial diﬀerential equations
are solved in each subset of the grid (often pyra-
mids).
Moreover, COMSOL Multiphysics® also
ensures that the proposed solution is stable, unique
and converges certainly [45]. Thanks to this sim-
ulation, the temperature was estimated and the soil
temperature proﬁle was known at every time step.
23
==PAGE:28==
Sensitivity Analysis
From the subsection 6.1 it appears that some thermal parameters were not determined for the context of this
experiment. It was indeed necessary to estimate the soil thermal conductivity λ and its thermal capacity
Cp (Equation 9). In a second time, the heat transfer coeﬃcient h at the surface should be known as well
(Equation 10).
Lastly, the ﬁnite elements method needed an initial ground temperature at every point to be able to com-
pute the temperature proﬁle for the duration of the experiment. An undisturbed soil presents a temperature
gradient [46]. From the surface, the temperature decreases linearly until it reaches a steady state at a depth
of 10 meters where the temperature is equal to 10 °C [36]. As a consequence, to input the initial temperature
gradient in COMSOL®, the only missing value was the initial surface temperature.
In this study, the sensibility of soil temperature with regards to each of the previously cited parameters
was investigated. The aim was to ﬁnd which variable inﬂuenced signiﬁcantly the ground behaviour. For
this, a base scenario was established. This scenario and its temperature outcomes acted as a reference for
the sensibility analysis. Then, every parameter was shifted several times from this scenario in order to study
the impact of their variations on the ﬁnal ground temperature proﬁle.
Beforehand, a base scenario was conceived to reﬂect the expected conditions in a jutlandic ground
(Table 9). From the soil thermometer records, the initial gradient could be approximated (Table 3). The base
scenario is given an initial surface temperature of 17 °C. In addition, the convective heat transfer coeﬃcient h
is in the range of 20 W.m−2.K−1 for a road subjected to free convection [47]. The loam thermal conductivity
and capacity were eventually assigned the values λsoil = 1.3 W.m−1.K−1 and Csoil = 1000 J.kg−1.K−1.
Those amounts are representative of the typical danish loam [48] [49].
To perform the sensibility analysis, it was also essential to evaluate how much could the parameters variate.
The range of ﬂuctuation of every variable was extracted from the literature from which they were retrieved.
Heat Transfer Coeﬃcient
h
[W.m−2.K−1]
Heat Capacity
C
[ J.kg−1.K−1]
Conductivity
λ
[ W.m−1.K−1 ]
Initial Top Temperature
TSurface
[°C]
Value
20
1000
1.3
17
Range
[5, 25]
[1000, 2000]
[1, 3]
[15, 18]
Table 9: Parameters and ranges of the base scenario.
24
==PAGE:29==
6.3
Sensitivity Analysis Results
Base Scenario
With the base settings and the irradiance calculated above in subsection 6.2, the base scenario temperature
proﬁle was modelled for the end of July, when the ﬁrst leak was generated (Figure 16).
Figure 16: Temperature as a function of the depth for diﬀerent time steps of the base scenario.
The aim of the ground model was to forecast which temperature would reach the ground before impacting
the water temperature. Under the conditions of the base scenario, the temperature is already changing with
a range close to 0.2 °C over three days for a depth of 1 meter (Figure 16). This gap does not seem to be large
enough to inﬂuence the water temperature. Furthermore, one can notice that for a depth of 50 centimeters
the variation amplitude reached 0.5 °C in 3 days (Figure 16). In this way, the pipe’s depth of burying is also
a parameter that inﬂuences the heat exchanges with the water. However, the law in Denmark requires that
pipes have to be installed 1 meter deep in the ground [50]. The rest of the sensibility analysis was hence
performed for a ground depth of 1 m (Figure 17).
Figure 17: Soil temperature at a depth of 1 m as a function of the time in the base scenario.
25
==PAGE:30==
Sensibility to the initial soil temperature for a depth of 1 m
First the starting temperature gradient, given by the initial surface temperature, was shifted around the base
scenario. The goal was to assess its inﬂuence on the ground temperature proﬁle. A maximum soil variation
of 0.4 °C was obtained with an initial surface temperature of 15 °C (Figure 18). The temperature step of 1 °C,
the temperature variations due to the weather conditions are low. As a consequence, the starting temperature
gradient plays a signiﬁcant role in the ground average temperature but it does not condition the amplitude of
the soil thermal variations.
Figure 18: Temperature evolution for a depth of 1 m with the base scenario settings and for diﬀerent initial
surface temperatures
Sensibility to other thermal properties
As done with the initial temperature, the inﬂuence of the heat transfer coeﬃcient, heat capacity and conduc-
tivity were tested on the ground behaviour. The variation of each variable had a diﬀerent eﬀect with regard
to the evolution of the soil temperature.
For instance, the lower the conductivity was in the soil the more curtailed were the temperature variations in
the ground. If the conductivity was high, the heat ﬂuxes were important in the ground and the temperatures
were changing faster (Figure 19). The conductivity impact could make a diﬀerence of at most 0.15 °C in the
ground temperature.
26
==PAGE:31==
Figure 19: Eﬀect of conduction λ on the ground temperature for a depth of 1 m.
The conductivity changes impact less the soil temperature variations since they only cause a temperature
gap of 0.07 °C (Figure 20). High soil capacities are lowering the temperature variations because the soil
needs more energy to heat up.
Figure 20: Eﬀect of the soil capacity C on the ground temperature for a depth of 1 m.
27
==PAGE:32==
Lastly the heat transfer coeﬃcient is also impacting moderately the soil since the proﬁle of the ground
temperature only varies from 0.06 °C depending on the convective transfer at the surface (Figure 21). It can
be noticed that a great heat transfer coeﬃcient leads to more variations of the ground temperature.
Figure 21: Eﬀect of the heat transfer coeﬃcient h on the ground temperature for a depth of 1 m
One can observe that none of the 3 parameters studied before had a greater impact on the ground behaviour
than 0.2 °C at a depth a one meter. However, the sum of their respective inﬂuence on the soil temperature
proﬁle could still be signiﬁcant. The sensibility analysis stressed the way every parameter impacted the
ground temperature. Based on the ranges of existence of Table 9, two extreme soil variation scenarios could
be inferred. They represented the most and the least ﬂuctuating soil temperatures that could be observed for
an initial temperature of 17 °C (Table 10).
Heat Transfer Coeﬃcient
h
[W.m−2.K−1]
Heat Capacity
C
[ J.kg−1.K−1]
Conductivity
λ
[ W.m−1.K−1 ]
Least Variations
10
2000
1.1
Most Variations
25
1000
3
Table 10: Two most extreme variations scenarios for a depth of 1 m.
28
==PAGE:33==
Figure 22: Soil Temperature proﬁles for the most and least ﬂuctuating scenarios for a depth of 1 m.
This sensibility analysis showed that the ground temperature was not largely inﬂuenced by the previously
studied parameters. Even with the most varying scenario, the soil temperature changed by 0.25 °C (Figure 22).
The water temperature should still be simulated with these ground variations to appraise if the soil ﬂuctuations
were really not aﬀecting the water warmth (subsection 6.4).
6.4
Validation
The previous sensibility analysis pinpointed a scenario that led to the most variations in the ground. These
ground temperature variations showed a reduced amplitude of 0.25 °C (section 6.3). In this part, the water
temperature was computed under these conditions to validate that the soil ﬂuctuations were too low to
signiﬁcantly aﬀect the water temperature.
In the section 5, the water temperature was modeled while changing the ground temperature at every time
step with a transient model. Here, the same process was used to simulate the water temperature. The soil
data, though, was directly extracted from the soil most varying simulation in COMSOL (Figure 22).
It was previously noticed that the initial ground surface temperature was the main factor to aﬀect the
ground temperature. Since that value is not known, a calibration was performed to ﬁnd this parameter.
Diﬀerent temperature proﬁles were computed in COMSOL Multiphysics® with the thermal parameters from
the most varying scenario. For each of them, the water temperature was then computed in MSX. The output
with the lowest RMSE to the measured data was kept to assess if the ground inﬂuenced the water temperature
(Figure 23).
The most varying scenario provided a temperature proﬁle that was quite steady during the time of the
experiment. To solve the temperature error from Model 1, a ground cooling would be expected after the 29th
of July at midnight (Figure 23). Instead, the temperature is slowly increasing in the ground simulation from
COMSOL Multiphysics®.
29
==PAGE:34==
In that respect, the RMSE of the water temperature simulation with the ground calculation is higher than the
one from Model 1 (Table 11).
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
RMSE
0.221
0.226
0.302
Table 11: RMSE of the three studied models
Figure 23: Comparison of the model outputs between the steady soil temperature Model 1 (blue), the transient
Model 2 (grey) and the ground temperatures Model 3 calculated in COMSOL Multiphysics® (green). The subplot
gives the temperature of the ground for the depth of 1 m in the most varying scenario.
30
==PAGE:35==
Results and discussion
From a computational point of view, the Model 3 seems to be misleading. In that respect, the COMSOL
Multiphysics® model followed by the MSX simulation are very demanding in terms of computations.
Nevertheless, the ground temperature corroborated the steady soil theory from Model 1. In the most varying
scenario, the ground temperature was indeed only rising by 0.1 °C during the experiment times (Figure 23).
Consequently, the Model 1 and Model 3 are providing very close results. For any further leak detection, the
ﬁrst model should eventually be used.
31
==PAGE:36==
7
Detecting Leaks with the temperature models
7.1
Method
When burst occurs in a network, it creates ﬂows that leave the system at the leakage location. These ﬂows
inﬂuence the hydraulics of the system and they also impact the temperature at every node. The aim of leak
detection algorithms is to detect and locate additional ﬂows in the system [51]. For a matter of simpliﬁcation,
the new ﬂows are assumed to leak from the nodes that already exist. Even if a pipe is punctured in the middle,
the ﬂow related to that leak is assumed to be close enough to the pipe end. An additional demand is added
to the consumption of the node at the end of the pipe. There is no creation of a new consumption point.
In this section, the ﬁre hydrant leak consumption was removed from the EPAnet model (Figure 24). An
algorithm was implemented to retrieve it. To build the hydraulic model, the algorithm needed the known
consumptions measured by the smart meters. Then, the diﬀerence between the ﬂows measured in the end
nodes and the amount of water from the inlet was calculated to quantify how much water is lost in the system.
Thirdly, the algorithm had to locate the overﬂows locations. For this, it needed the temperature that was
measured at the ﬁre hydrant. Then it compared it with the temperature simulation that it would compute
with the Model 1.
Here, a heuristic method was chosen to locate the new ﬂows in the network.
Every time an overﬂow
was detected at the source, it was assumed that the burst came from only one single node in the network.
Therefore, for every time step, the new consumption was added to the system nodes one by one. Every time,
the temperature at ﬁre hydrant was computed and compared to the measured one. The algorithm looked for
the node that, after receiving a new demand, permited to reach the best matching between simulation and
measurements (lowest RMSE). Once found, the extra consumption was kept at this location and for this time
step (Algorithm 1).
Figure 24: Model 1 applied to the Kornumgaard network when the leaks is not informed to EPAnet.
RMSE = 0.46 °C
32
==PAGE:37==
7.2
Algorithm
Leak Detection Algorithm
Algorithm 1 Returns Ωoptimized, the list of new outﬂows for every node.
Ωoptimized ←Ω0
RMSEbest ←10
for tstep in Times do
δ ←∆tstep
if δ > 0 then
for ni in Nodes do
Ωnew ←add_extra(Ωoptimized, tstep, δ, ni)
Run Simulation with Ωnew
RMSEsim ←RMSE from the Simulation
if RMSEsim < RMSEbest then
RMSEbest ←RMSEsim
Ωt+1 ←Ωnew
end if
end for
Ωoptimized ←Ωt+1
end if
end for
With:
Ωbest
= Lists of consumptions for each node at every time step with extra leak consumption.
Ω0
= List of initial consumptions for each node at every time step.
∆
= List of diﬀerences between outﬂow from the source and sum of consumptions for every time step
add_extra(Ω, tstep, δ, ni) = Function to add an over consumption δ at a node niin Ωwhen t = tstep .
RMSE
= Root Mean Squared Error between Tsimulated and Tmeasured.
Times
= Hydraulic time steps from the leak scenario.
Nodes
= Nodes with a consumption.
This algorithm is an empirical technique that was only elaborated here. Its eﬃciency was tested by applying
it to the area of Kornumgaard (subsection 7.3) Moreover, the Algorithm 1 returned the nodes consumptions
that lowered the best the temperature gap between the measures and the simulations at the ﬁre hydrant. The
overﬂows were stated by substracting the initial node demands to the outputs of the method.
33
==PAGE:38==
7.3
Post treatment and Results
The extra consumption that was added to the nodes is a discrete value. Moreover, the algorithm allocated
the extra ﬂows to only one single node per time step. Thus, the extra allocations of water were too dispersed
to be easily interpreted. The extra ﬂows were averaged over 60 minutes to provide better results and to ease
the understanding of the outputs (Figure 25).
Figure 25: Averaging the algorithm outputs for the ﬁre hydrant node.
If the algorithm worked perfectly, a steady extra consumption of 1 m3/h would be expected at the ﬁre
hydrant. Even if it did not bring this result, a signiﬁcant extra consumption was detected at this node. Its
amplitude was varying with time but its range was close to 1 m3/h Figure 25.
The other node extra consumptions given by the algorithm were analyzed too. If the detection was able to
locate the leaks perfectly, the extra ﬂow would be equal to 0 at every other node else than the ﬁre hydrant.
In reality, some nodes are receiving some extra allocation of water as well (Figure 27). Nevertheless, the
range of these extra ﬂows is lower than the one detected at the ﬁre hydrant. Thus, the algorithm is correctly
locating and estimating the amplitude of the leak.
34
==PAGE:39==
Figure 26: Nodes locations.
Figure 27: Over consumption for the nodes of Figure 26
35
==PAGE:40==
7.4
Validation
The temperature proﬁle was plotted for the consumption pattern stated by the algorithm (Figure 28). The
discrepancy between the simulation and the measurements that could be observed in Figure 24 was reduced.
The RMSE was indeed lowered from 0.46 °C in the initial scenario to 0.33 °C with the new consumption
patterns.
Figure 28: Temperature Proﬁle at the ﬁre hydrant with the results provided by the Algorithm 1 (RMSE =
0.33 °C).
The Algorithm 1 provided very conclusive results. It was able to quantify roughly how much water was
leaking through the ﬁre hydrant (Average of 0.6 m3.h−1). Furthermore, most of the extra consumptions
were assigned to the ﬁre hydrant. The other nodes only received a few leftovers and the leaks has thus been
highlighted as it should. Even if it is heuristic, the algorithm allowed a very good location and estimation of
the leak in this setup.
36
==PAGE:41==
8
Discussion
The results from section 4 showed that it is possible to model the temperature in a drinking water network.
The source temperature and consumption time series were needed to implement the simulation. However,
even after calibration, the temperature forecast at the ﬁre hydrant was not matching exactly the measurements
at this point. Moreover, the model had to be calibrated very frequently. As a matter of fact, the ﬁt model
that worked at the end of July during the ﬁrst leak scenario failed to estimate the temperature on the 5th of
August for the second leakage.
With the same Equation 5, a study performed in Netherlands managed to forecast the temperature in a
water network with the same accuracy [19]. Moreover, the latter was performed over 3 months and the soil
temperature was only changed every day in the model. This simulation also showed a discrepancy and a
trend to exaggerate the fast variations of the water temperature. To that extent, this drawback is apparently
linked to the Model 1 and do not come from a wrong capture of the measured ﬂow data.
To evaluate if the ground temperature could cause the model deviation, its transient behaviour was
modeled in section 5. The improved model did not provide a better temperature proﬁle. Furthermore, it was
found that the pipe could only impact a 1.7 mm thick layer of soil around in its vicinity. With a time step of
5 minutes it is unrealistic to assume that the pipe cools down such a small volume of ground. This trouble
certainly comes from the assumption that the soil returns to an homogeneous temperature every 5 minutes
(step 3 in Figure 8). A transient study could be performed again by coupling the model to a ﬁnite element
mode in which the pipe and ground interactions would be implemented. This way, it would be possible to
observe what happens to the ground after being cooled for many time steps.
On the other hand, some other model from the literature consider that the layer of ground around the pipe
has time to reach a permanent heat transfer with the surrounding ground [52]. These models were mostly
tested for district heating with time steps equal or higher than one hour. Under these assumptions, the ground
is more likely going to reach a permanent state. However, this simulation setup would not provide enough
information if it was applied on this 24 hours case study.
Lastly, the hypothesis that the ground temperature is not steady was tested in section 6. In fact, it was
showed that the ground temperature was not changing signiﬁcantly during the simulation time at a depth of
1 m. Furthermore, it was noticed that some temperature variations were noticeable until a depth of 50 cm
in the ground. With those results, the Model 1 that uses a steady ground temperature was veriﬁed because
pipes have to be buried at a depth 1.2 m in Denmark [50].
It could still be argued that the ground was wrongly assumed to be homogeneous. In real life there could
indeed be several layers that conduct more or less the heat. Moreover the sun irradiance might have been
overestimated in section 6. However, for this depth, a thermometer was installed by the water company Niras.
It did not record any temperature ﬂuctuation neither. It is very unlikely that the network is only buried at a
low depth such as 50 cm. In this respect, the Model 1 can fairly be performed without questioning the steady
soil temperature assumption.
In the section 7, an empirical algorithm was implemented to detect the artiﬁcially generated leak in the
network. With only one thermometer in the system, the algorithm was able to locate perfectly the leak and
estimate how much water was lost there. The estimation gave a good range of ﬂow leaking through the pipe.
However, it was not able to tell that the outﬂow at this point was constant. Besides, the outputs could be less
performing if the thermometer was located far from the leak. With the results from section 7, it is indeed
37
==PAGE:42==
not possible to tell what would happen if the leak was not located on the same pipe as the thermometer. In
a more complex network, a single thermometer is likely to be an insuﬃcient source of data. Thus, it would
be important to study the algorithm outputs with more than one temperature logger in order to analyze its
sensibility to the sensors location before stating that it works perfectly.
It is also important to look for the detection limit of the algorithm. In real life, when a leak is very small
or when there is noise in measurements, it becomes harder to identify the anomalies. However, the method
that came out of this study does not seem to be limited. The algorithm is always allocating to a node the
water that was produced and that does not appear in the consumption records. Thus, the sensing limit of the
method seems to depend only on the resolution of the source meter and the ﬂow loggers. However, if a delay
occurred between the consumption and the production data, then the algorithm would not work correctly
neither. This drawback can easily be solved by re-synchronizing the data from the source and the sum of the
smart data ﬂows. Those two time series should in fact be perfectly correlated.
The studied network was very small. It included only one stretch. Perhaps a larger network would lower
the accuracy of the algorithm results. More complex networks are also likely to present more than one leak.
Unfortunately the detection method from section 7 has been implemented to allocate the diﬀerence between
the consumed and the supplied water to only one single node per time step. To detect multiple leaks, it would
be necessary to try diﬀerent combinations of water allocations at the nodes of the system for every time step.
That process would importantly increase the computing time. To lower the needed processing power in such
a case, it would be needed to ﬁnd a way to identify the most relevant nodes where a new water consumption
should be added.
Research Perspectives
When performing pressure based leak detection, such techniques already exist. They are mostly based on
machine learning tools. In 2011, leak detection was ﬁrst implemented with neural networks that learned
where to locate the consumptions to make a pressure simulation match some measurements. This learning
was based on a signiﬁcant amount of pressure data that was recorded before. The algorithm was able to
link the demand to the pressure patterns thanks to neural networks [53]. This principle could be adapted to
make the thermal simulation match the measured temperature. To do so, the algorithm would ﬁrst need to
be trained on a diﬀerent data set (typically an other day in July).
Unfortunately, this could not be implemented hereby because of the limited amount of data that was gener-
ated. A model could be trained on the case study data set but another data set would be required to assess
the eﬃciency of the process. Otherwise, the leak detection results would then be biased.
For the moment, the algorithm that has been studied here could still be used on water systems where at most
one leak is expected. For instance, in Denmark, this method could be used to monitor a network and prevent
the appearance of losses.
38
==PAGE:43==
9
Conclusion
The aim of this study was to use the smart-meters data to model the temperature in a drinking water network.
Some computing tools were used to model the temperature in a stretch of the Brønderslev area. First an
hydraulic simulation of the system was implemented with the software EPAnet. This was performed thanks
to the smart-meters that recorded the ﬂows at every endpoint of the network. Once the hydraulic ﬂows were
computed, the add-on MSX could be combined to EPAnet to calculate the temperature everywhere in the
system.
To make the model work, it was mandatory to monitor the warmth of the water at the inlet of the network.
Apart from this variable, the other physical parameters such as the pipes thickness, the water Prandtl Number
and the ground temperature could be found by the mean of a calibration.
Three models were implemented. First, the soil temperature was supposed constant (Model 1). Then,
the ground was assumed to adopt a transient behaviour close to the tubes (Model 2). Lastly, the inﬂuence of
the weather on the soil was tested to determine if the climate could inﬂuence the ground and thus the water
temperature (Model 3).
The three models were compared by analyzing the diﬀerence between their output water temperature
proﬁle and the thermal measurements that were taken in the experimental ﬁeld. The three models simulated
the water temperature with a high accuracy (RMSE < 0.31 °C). Their correlation with the measured data
was signiﬁcant as well. The Pearson correlation coeﬃcient was indeed always higher than 0.8 for the three
models. Furthermore, with a root mean squared error of 0.221 °C in opposition to 0.226 °C for Model 2 and
0.302 °C for Model 3, the steady soil model led to the most accurate simulation of the water temperature in
Brønderslev.
A ﬁre hydrant was opened in the studied area to generate a leak scenario. Later, an empirical algorithm
was implemented to retrieve this anomaly in the network. This detection was based on the temperature
Model 1 that was previously highlighted. The algorithm actually pointed the leak with an average ﬂow 0.6
m3.h−1. The experiment implied a leak ﬂow of 1 m3.h−1. Thus, the algorithm demonstrated a certain
ability to detect the leak and estimate how much water was leaving the network unintentionally at this point.
The method did also locate exactly at the real leak position. Therefore, a temperature based detection is very
conclusive on a simple network such as Brønderslev.
To conclude, this study proved that it is possible to model the temperature in a water network without
knowing the exact state of every physical parameter in the system. It also highlighted the big potential of
thermal models for detecting leaks in the water networks handled by Niras A/S. These encouraging results
could still be strengthened by applying the temperature based detection algorithm to larger networks and
customize its operating mode to match even more conditions of use.
39
==PAGE:44==
Bibliography
[1]
EurEau. “Europe’s water in ﬁgures”. In: The European Federation of National Water Services (2017).
url: https://www.eureau.org/resources/publications/1460-eureau-data-report-
2017-1/file.
[2]
Ministry of Environment of Denmark. Identify sources of water loss. url: https://eng.mst.dk/
nature-water/water-at-home/water-loss/ (visited on 06/29/2021).
[3]
European Environmental Agency. Losses from urban water networks. 2012. url: https://www.
eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/losses-from-urban-water-networks (visited
on 06/15/2021).
[4]
United Nations. Goal 6: Ensure access to water and sanitation for all. 2021. url: https://www.
un.org/sustainabledevelopment/water-and-sanitation/ (visited on 06/15/2021).
[5]
Samer El-Zahab and Tarek Zayed. “Leak detection in water distribution networks: an introductory
overview”. In: Smart Water 4.1 (2019). issn: 2198-2619. doi: 10.1186/s40713-019-0017-x.
[6]
Leslie Karr et al. “Leak detection system”. In: Military Engineer 593 (1998), pp. 38–40. issn:
00263982. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-394432-0.00006-8.
[7]
Bambos Hamilton, Stuart; Charalambous. Leak Detection - Technology and Implementation. 2013,
pp. 1–17. isbn: 978-1-78040-4-707.
[8]
G Hauber-Davidson and E Idris. Smart Meter Metering. 2006.
[9]
Yu Shao et al. “Time-series-based leakage detection using multiple pressure sensors in water distribu-
tion systems”. In: Sensors (Switzerland) 19.14 (2019). issn: 14248220. doi: 10.3390/s19143070.
[10]
Ramon Pérez et al. Real-Time Monitoring and Operational Control of Drinking-Water Systems. 2017,
p. 437. isbn: 978-3-319-50750-7. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-50751-4.
[11]
A. M. De Pasquale et al. “District heating by drinking water heat pump: Modelling and energy analysis
of a case study in the city of Milan”. In: Energy 118 (2017), pp. 246–263. issn: 03605442. doi: 10.
1016/j.energy.2016.12.014. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2016.12.014.
[12]
Emmanuelle I. Prest et al. “Biological stability of drinking water: Controlling factors, methods, and
challenges”. In: Frontiers in Microbiology 7.FEB (2016), pp. 1–24. issn: 1664302X. doi: 10.3389/
fmicb.2016.00045.
[13]
Yunus Cengel. “Heat Transfer: A Practical Approach”. In: Journal of Chemical Information and
Modeling 53.9 (2013), pp. 1689–1699. issn: 1098-6596.
[14]
W Nusselt. Heat transfer from tube to water. 1931, pp. 309–313.
[15]
Franck P. Incropera Theodore L. Bergman Adrienne S. Lavine. Fundamentals of heat and Mass
transfer. 2011, pp. 443–444.
[16]
L D Landau. Fluid Mechanics. eng. Pergamon, 1987, 539 s. isbn: 0080339336.
[17]
Calin Zamﬁrescu and İbrahim Dinçer. Drying phenomena : theory and applications. eng. 2016. isbn:
1119975867.
[18]
Donald E.Wroblewski. Applied ﬂuid dynamics handbook. 1992. doi: 10.1016/0894-1777(94)
90012-4.
[19]
E. J. Mirjam Blokker and E. J. Pieterse-Quirĳns. “Modeling temperature in the drinking water
distribution system”. In: Journal - American Water Works Association 105.1 (2013), pp. 35–36. issn:
15518833. doi: 10.5942/jawwa.2013.105.0011.
40
==PAGE:45==
[20]
Richard B. Simms, Simon R. Haslam, and James R. Craig. “Impact of soil heterogeneity on the
functioning of horizontal ground heat exchangers”. In: Geothermics 50 (2014), pp. 35–43. issn:
03756505. doi: 10.1016/j.geothermics.2013.08.007. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.geothermics.2013.08.007.
[21]
Engineersedge Community. Kinematic viscosity of water. url: https://www.engineersedge.
com / physics / water _ _density _ viscosity _ specific _ weight _ 13146 . htm (visited on
03/20/2021).
[22]
EngineerToolBox. Water Speciﬁc Heat. url: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.com/specific-
heat-capacity-water-d_660.html (visited on 06/15/2021).
[23]
USGS. Water Density. url: https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/losses-
from-urban-water-networks (visited on 06/15/2021).
[24]
Maria L.V. Ramires et al. Standard Reference Data for the Thermal Conductivity of Water. 1995. doi:
10.1063/1.555963.
[25]
Emmanuel B Ettah et al. “Investigation of the Thermal Conductivity of Polyvinyl Chloride ( Pvc )
Ceiling Material Produced In Epz Calabar , For Application Tropical Climate Zones”. In: Journal
of Polymer and Textile Engineering (IOSR-JPTE) 3.2 (2016), pp. 34–38. doi: 10.9790/019X-
03023438. url: www.iosrjournals.org.
[26]
Union of Pipe Suppliers. PVC Pipe and Fittings. url: https://www.plasticpipeshop.co.uk/
PVC-Pipe-and-Fittings_c_492.html (visited on 04/20/2021).
[27]
Robert J Houghtalen, A Osman, and Ned HC Hwang. Fundamentals of hydraulic engineering systems.
Prentice Hall New York, NY, 2016.
[28]
Finin G.S Ostapenko V.V. Modeling of water ﬂow by the generalized Kirchhoﬀlaw. Journal of
Automation and Information Sciences, 1999, pp. 66–69.
[29]
L. A. Rossman. “EPANET 2 Users Manual EPA/600/R-00/57”. In: Water Supply and Water Resources
Division, U.S. Agency, Environmental Protection September (2000).
[30]
Lewis Rossman. EPANET Multi-Species Extension User’s Manual.
[31]
M. J. E Savitzky, A.; Golay. “Smoothing and Diﬀerentiation”. In: Anal. Chem 36.8 (1964), pp. 1627–
1639.
[32]
Friday ZinzendoﬀOkwonu, Bolaji Laro Asaju, and Festus Irimisose Arunaye. “Breakdown Analysis
of Pearson Correlation Coeﬃcient and Robust Correlation Methods”. In: IOP Conference Series:
Materials Science and Engineering 917.1 (2020). issn: 1757899X. doi: 10.1088/1757-899X/917/
1/012065.
[33]
Yunus A. Cengel & Yunus Cengel. Heat Transfer: A Practical Approach With EES CD. 2002, p. 896.
isbn: 9780072826203.
[34]
Amir Moradifam, Adrian Nachman, and Alexandru Tamasan. “Conductivity imaging from one interior
measurement in the presence of perfectly conducting and insulating inclusions”. In: SIAM Journal on
Mathematical Analysis 44.6 (2012), pp. 3969–3990. issn: 00361410. doi: 10.1137/120866701.
[35]
Thomas Vangkilde-Pedersen, Claus Ditlefsen, and Anker Lajer Hojberg. “Shallow geothermal energy
in Denmark”. In: Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland Bulletin 26 (2012), pp. 37–40. issn:
19044666. doi: 10.34194/geusb.v26.4746.
[36]
Hicham Johra. Aalborg Universitet Integration of a magnetocaloric heat pump in energy ﬂexible
buildings. Vol. 17. 2018, p. 49. isbn: 9788772101811.
41
==PAGE:46==
[37]
Yunus A. Cengel & Yunus Cengel. Heat Transfer: A Practical Approach With EES CD. 2002, p. 61.
isbn: 9780072826203.
[38]
Lei Gao et al. “Cooling performance and thermal radiation model of asphalt mixture with modiﬁed
infrared powder”. In: Materials 14.2 (2021), pp. 1–20. issn: 19961944. doi: 10.3390/ma14020245.
[39]
Philip Kosky et al. “Chapter 12 - Mechanical Engineering”. In: Exploring Engineering (Third Edition).
Ed. by Philip Kosky et al. Third Edition. Boston: Academic Press, 2013, pp. 259–281. isbn: 978-
0-12-415891-7. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978- 0- 12- 415891- 7.00012- 1. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780124158917000121.
[40]
Yunus A. Cengel & Yunus Cengel. Heat Transfer: A Practical Approach With EES CD. 2002, p. 561.
isbn: 9780072826203.
[41]
Lucien Wald. Basic Solar Radiation at Earth Surface. July. 2019.
[42]
Davis, LM.S.K. Cox. Solar Absorption in Clouds of Finite Horizontal Extent. 1978, p. 57.
[43]
Evan Mitsoulis and John Vlachopoulos. “The ﬁnite element method for ﬂow and heat transfer analysis”.
In: Advances in Polymer Technology 4.2 (1984), pp. 107–121. issn: 10982329. doi: 10.1002/adv.
1984.060040203.
[44]
Comsol Multiphysics Support. Setup and Meshing of Inﬁnite Elements. url: https://www.comsol.
dk/support/knowledgebase/1272 (visited on 06/28/2021).
[45]
H Oudin. Introduction à la méthode des éléments ﬁnis. 2008.
[46]
M. R. Alam et al. “Underground soil and thermal conductivity materials based heat reduction for
energy-eﬃcient building in tropical environment”. In: Indoor and Built Environment 24.2 (2015),
pp. 185–200. issn: 14230070. doi: 10.1177/1420326X13507591.
[47]
Philip Kosky et al. “Chapter 14 - Mechanical Engineering”. In: Exploring Engineering (Fifth Edition).
Ed. by Philip Kosky et al. Fifth Edition. Academic Press, 2021, pp. 317–340. isbn: 978-0-12-815073-
3. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-815073-3.00014-4. url: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128150733000144.
[48]
Per Schjønning. “Thermal conductivity of undisturbed soil – Measurements and predictions”. In:
Geoderma 402.January (2021). issn: 00167061. doi: 10.1016/j.geoderma.2021.115188.
[49]
The engineering toolbox. Speciﬁc HeatofsomecommonSubstances. url: https://www.engineeringtoolbox.
com/specific-heat-capacity-d_391.html (visited on 04/29/2021).
[50]
Dansk Bygnings Reglementet. Bygningsreglementetsvejledningomvand. url: https://bygningsreglementet.
dk / Tekniske - bestemmelser / 21 / Vejledninger / Vejledning _ vand / Frost (visited on
06/29/2021).
[51]
S. R. Mounce et al. “A neural network approach to burst detection”. In: Water Science and Technology
45.4-5 (2002), pp. 237–246. issn: 02731223. doi: 10.2166/wst.2002.0595.
[52]
Helga Hubeck-Graudal et al. “Drinking water supply as low-temperature source in the district heating
system: A case study for the city of Copenhagen”. In: Energy 194 (2020), p. 116773. issn: 03605442.
doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2019.116773. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.
116773.
[53]
S. Mambretti and E. Orsi. “Genetic algorithms for leak detection in water supply networks”. In:
WIT Transactions on the Built Environment 122 (2011), pp. 63–71. issn: 17433509. doi: 10.2495/
UW120061.
[54]
M.A. Pagola et al. “Measurement of Thermal Properties of Soil and Concrete Samples.” In: DCE
Technical Reports,No.235 (2017). issn: 1901-726X.
42
==PAGE:47==
A
Appendix
Figure 29: Temperature measured in the ground during the 2 leak scenarios.
43
==PAGE:48==
Figure 30: Stratigraphic proﬁle in Horsens, Jutland. Bulk density ρ, water content WC, thermal conductivity
λ and volumetric heat capacity ρcp measured in the laboratory using the Hot Disk apparatus are also provided.
ρcp,eff eﬀand λeff are weighted average estimates over the length of the drilling. Source : [54]
.
Figure 31: Rainfall in Brønderslev in July 2020. Source : Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut
.
44
==PAGE:49==
Figure 32: Rainfall in Brønderslev in August 2020. Source : Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut
.
45
