==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Master Thesis
Introspective classification for decision-making tasks
Xinyuan Liu(s192161)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Elektro
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej
Building 326
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 1700
www.elektro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
This work creates an automated system that can recognize the quality of fruits (e.g.,
apples) according to two categories that are valuable or not (of good or bad qual-
ity), which can be applied in the scenarios decision need to be made that the object
deserves to be sorted for different uses, such as to traditional markets, relatively high-
class supermarkets or for export commodities that require higher quality. I design
and implement the classification model based on the state-of-the-art convolutional
neural network, MobileNet. Specifically, I trained a MobileNet to classify Red Apple.
It achieves an accuracy of 80.3% in classification. However, when encountering some
unseen classes, e.g., images of Orange, Golden Delicious Apple (these data does not
appear in the training set), it produces scores with inappropriate confidence which
may lead to dangerous decisions - we measure the ability to associate an appropriate
assessment of confidence with any test case, that is the introspective capacity. To
improve the introspective capacity of the network, a novel classification model named
”MotoEncoder”, in which an architecture similar to of autoencoder is constructed
based on traditional MobileNet. The experiment results demonstrate that MotoEn-
coder shows more consistent uncertainty than the traditional MobileNet when given
test data that are not represented by the training data, which is the introspective
behavior we are expected.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis has been prepared about five months at the Department of Electrical
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for
the degree Master of Science in Electrical Engineering, MSc Eng.
Kongens Lyngby, July 8, 2021
Xinyuan Liu(s192161)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to sincerely thank my supervisor Silvia Tolu for giving me the opportu-
nity to write this thesis as well as her inspiration, guidance and supports throughout
the work with this project. Thank you for your time and for good discussions along
the way.
I would also like to thank DTU and Department of Electrical Engineering for many
resources they have granted us during this project.
Besides, I really appreciate my friend Manxi Lin for his support on the knowledge of
CNN, programming, thus laying the foundation for the completion of this project.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Contents
vii
1
Background
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Goal and methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Related Work
5
3
Data
7
3.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Data processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Data annotation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Classification
23
4.1
Convolutional Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
MobileNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Autoencoder
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Implementation and Uncertainty Study
35
5.1
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2
Training result for classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.3
Uncertainty study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6
Conclusion
49
6.1
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Limitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Bibliography
51
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Background
In robotics, the output of classification frameworks is intended to be used to make
decisions [7]. This is expected to be able to improve tasks related to industrial appli-
cations, for example toward an automated sorting and grading classification system.
The quality of fruit is very important to increase its sales and competitiveness in
the market. In general, the apple classification process is still completed by humans,
and based on artificial perception, there are some problems such as visual and fatigue,
slow speed, and low precision. According to a different level of quality of the apples,
decisions need to be made that it deserves to be distributed to traditional markets,
supermarkets, or for export commodities. There needs to be an automated system
that can recognize the quality of fruit according to two categories that are worthy or
not, simply saying, good or bad and the selection process is done based on visuals.
Image classification is a supervised learning problem: define a set of target cate-
gories (objects to be classified in an image) and then use labeled sample images train-
ing model for classification. Though there have been many studies in this field using
deep learning and machine learning methods, such as Support Vector Machines(SVM),
K-Nearest Neighbours(KNN), Decision Tree, Artificial Neural Networks(ANN), but
their general inability to provide reliable confidence estimates will ultimately lead to
fragile and unreliable systems. For example, what would happen when the classifier
is presented with a test datum which is unlike anything it saw during training. These
new and unusual test data are common in practice since the training data can never
be fully representative of the continually evolving and complex environment in which
the robot operate. At this point, the appropriate response is for our classifier to re-
spond with high uncertainty. Otherwise, by classical decision theory, a poor choice of
action can incur a relatively large cost, the system will only choose that action if its
classifier is supremely certain. For example, in the field of high safety requirements
such as autonomous driving, complete reliance on deep models for decision making
can have disastrous consequences. More simply, the classification error might occur
when a classification model used to classify apples into different level quality classes
encounters an orange. We prefer to use a classifier that gives the confidence, so it
makes mistakes only with high uncertainty, and correct classifications with high cer-
tainty, rather than using a classifier that makes correct and incorrect decisions with
similarly high confidence.
==PAGE:12==
2
1 Background
The neural network is adaptive in that the structure can be changed to solve prob-
lems based on information of external as well as internal flow through the network, it
can be said to have the ability to learn from knowledge. This work investigates this
introspective capacity in the state-of-the-art classification frameworks: MobileNet, A
small and eﬀicient model of Convolutional Neural Network(CNN) with the significant
advantages of smaller in size compared to classic large networks, less computational
effort, low latency which can be applied in more diverse application scenarios .On
that basis, focus on the improvement of the introspective capacity, we propose an in-
tegration of autoencoder with MobileNet aiming to endow the vanilla MobileNet with
the ability to handle more complex scenarios. The validity of the proposed methods
against state-of-the-art methods is demonstrated by experimental studies.
1.1
Problem statement
In regarding this the problem, this study attempts to figure out:
• How can we measure the reliability/certainty of a prediction given by the deep
neural network, i.e., the confidence of classifiers?
• What would a classifier behave when it faces with a test datum that is unlike
any data it saw during training?
• How can we enhance the introspective ability of classifiers?
1.2
Goal and methods
Based on the current state-of-the-art image classification model, Convolutional Neu-
ral Networks (CNN), the project aims to design an image-based system that can
recognize the quality of fruit (e.g.,apples) according to two categories that are valu-
able or not (of good or bad quality) and the selection process is done by automated
means, which can be applied in the scenarios decision need to be made that the ob-
ject deserves to be sorted for different uses, such as to traditional markets relatively
high-class supermarkets or for export commodities that require higher quality.
The work can be divided into four main parts:
• Collecting some apple images and processing the acquired data to extract the
region of interest which can be used for the subsequent training of classification
model.
• Implementing the classification by the state-of-the-art convolutional neural net-
works, MobileNet, and getting a confidence level /uncertainty of output.
==PAGE:13==
1.2 Goal and methods
3
• Based on the traditional MobileNet, proposing integration of MobileNet and
autoencoder to improve the introspective capacity of the network.
• Comparing and discussing the introspective capacity by feeding a test data
which is unlike anything it saw during training.
Thus the goals of the thesis are to:
• analyze and identify the problem of current machine learning and deep learning
methods in classification.
• clarify the problems of the state-of-the-art methods and propose a solution to
solve it which can be the innovation point of the work.
==PAGE:14==
4
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
There have been researches to investigate the quality of apples using Neural Networks.
The work done by [27] investigated the quality of apples using MLP-Neural Network
on the Golden Delicious and Jonagold apple get the accuracy of 89.9% and 83.7%.
Apple recognition system is proposed by [26], in which features analysis are color
based, entropy-based, shape based, size-based, and boundary analysis to increase
the accuracy of recognition of normal and infected apples. Liu et. al [21] proposed
an accurate identifying approach for apple leaf diseases based on deep convolutional
neural networks, in which the image generation technique proposed can enhance the
robustness of the convolutional neural network model.
One of the techniques of deep learning Convolutional Neural Network used in this
work has a high network depth and has been widely applied to the field of image
classification. The work conducted by [20] described a novel deep convolutional neu-
ral network (CNN) that is deeper and wider than other existing deep networks for
hyperspectral image classification showed enhanced classification performance of the
proposed approach over the current state-of-the-art.
Wang et al.[28] investigated
multi-label classification models, they proposed a CNN-RNN framework that learns
a joint image-label embedding to characterize the semantic label dependency as well
as the image-label relevance. Based on the foregoing, Convolutional Neural Network
can classify for image data, and results can be implemented more easily and quickly,
so we will CNN as the classification models of good and bad apples.
Grimmett et al. [7] argued the suitability of the classification framework employed
concerning its introspective capacity has not previously been considered in robotics.
Thus, they consider motivating, defining, and investigating introspection in a robotics
context to be the primary contribution. Kapoor et al. [16] presented an active learn-
ing framework for object categorisation using a GPC where classifications with large
uncertainty (as judged by posterior variance) lead to a query for a ground-truth label
and are subsequently used to improve classification performance. Joshi et al. [15]
addressed multi-class image classification using SVMs and propose criteria based on
entropy and bestversus-second-best measures for disambiguating uncertain classifica-
tions. Hospedales et al. [11] discuss optimizing rare class discovery and classification
using a combination of generative and discriminative classifiers.
Those researches
give the inspiration for the design and implementation of introspective classification
==PAGE:16==
6
2 Related Work
models for decision-making tasks based on state-of-the-art methods.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Data
3.1
Data Collection
To collect a mass of apple images, there are two possible ways. Firstly, randomly
select various types of apples from fruit ranch or market and take pictures of apples
with a camera. Considering that different light intensity and angles, as well as the
background in which the sample is collected, will have a great impact on the quality
of the image and the subsequent image processing results. The diversity of collected
data may also be is influenced by the factors, such as the regional economy, geogra-
phy, and the season and so on.
Therefore, we chose another approach, data crawling, acquiring apple images from
the web by a crawler.
Data crawling is to fetch large data sets on the Internet by developing crawlers or bots,
which crawl to the deepest of the web pages. A crawler is a computer program that
automatically searches documents on the web. Crawlers are primarily programmed
for repetitive actions so that browsing is automated [29]. The Internet is an open
world and the quintessential practicing platform of our right to freedom. Thus a lot of
content gets created and then duplicated, which ensures data diversity and be more
time-saving.
We developed a web crawler. The flow chart of the crawler is shown in Figure 3.1.
With the set keyword, ”Apple”, a large number of apple images are downloaded in
an orderly and non-repetitive manner from the web page.
==PAGE:18==
8
3 Data
Figure 3.1: Flow Chart of crawler program.
These two sites Pexels [22] and Baidu [1] serve as sources of our data.Pexels is a
free stock photo and video website and app that helps designers, bloggers, and every-
one who is looking for visuals to find great photos and videos that can be downloaded
and used for free.Baidu is the leading search engine in China, containing a database
of over 100 billion Chinese web pages that can instantly find relevant search results.
The database images collected with some of the samples of images are shown in Table
3.1.
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Data Collection
9
Table 3.1: Characteristics of the database used.
#
Apple variety
Illustration
Description
1
fresh apples
ripe, red, bright in colour,
without obvious defects
2
rotten apples
rotten, with wrinkled dry
skin, obvious defect
3
Golden
Deli-
cious apples
golden,
different
variety
with red apples
4
bitten apples
trace of being bitten, been
cut to show the flesh
5
unripe apples
unripe, with a green/yel-
low tint
==PAGE:20==
10
3 Data
The rough classification statistics above give a clue for subsequent data process-
ing, binary classification, and valuable-or-not decision making. Usually, there is a
consensus that apples with round and full shape, brilliant red, skin with waxy shine,
no obvious rotten defects are good and worthy buy. On the contrary, rotten, bitten,
and unripe apples we probably think of as bad apples and unworthy.
3.2
Data processing
The raw data images might have other objects such as green tree leaves and fruit
plates. Since in this work, we are only interested in apples in the data images, we
need to remove promiscuous and irrelevant background and frame out the region of
interest. The process is called segmentation.
Segmenting the objects is the most diﬀicult operation involved in image processing,
which is to distinguish different areas of an image that have special meaning. These
regions are non-intersecting. Each satisfies the conformance of a particular region. It
is the basis of image recognition, analysis, and understanding. Although many meth-
ods of edge extraction and region segmentation have been developed, there is still no
effective method that is universally applicable to all shapes of objects. Given that
the shape of apples is approximately round, which can be seen as a circle, I consider
using Hough transform to implement the segmentation.
The image data were preprocessed in three steps, which are summarised in Table
3.2 and will be discussed in detail in the following.
Table 3.2: Data processing summary.
#
processing step
target data
1
Image filtering
The
noise
is
effectively
sup-
pressed, and the edge character-
istics of the apple in the original
picture are maintained.
2
Edge detection
Extracting apple edges by Canny
operator
3
Hough transform
Segment the shape characteris-
tics of the target objects through
Hough transform
3.2.1
Image filtering
Color images are obtained by digital equipment under natural conditions, due to the
influence of sunlight, imaging equipment internal noise, and other factors, the orig-
==PAGE:21==
3.2 Data processing
11
inal image obtained cannot be used directly in the visual system. Noise filtering is
necessary to be performed on the original image before image processing.
Image noise processing is also known as image smoothing or image filtering. Noise
treatment can be divided into two categories according to the different processing
methods: the spatial filtering of the image is carried out directly and indirect pro-
cessing of the image in the frequency domain filtering. Spatial filtering is the domain
processing of an image by using a template on the image to be processed, mainly di-
vided into linear filtering and nonlinear filtering. Frequency domain filtering is based
on the Fourier transform and convolution theorem. For the processing image f(x, y),
the appropriate filter transfer function H(u, v) is selected to carry out convolution op-
eration to get the target image g(x, y). Common frequency domain filtering includes
low pass filtering, high pass filtering, and bandpass filtering. From the perspective of
implementation, in spatial filtering, the template operation between the image to be
processed and the template is a convolution operation. In frequency domain filtering,
the signal filtering can also be expressed in the form of convolution. The two filter-
ing methods are the same, but frequency domain filtering requires a large amount of
computation and is not strong in real-time.
Common noises in images include Gaussian noise, salt-and-pepper noise, and quanti-
zation noise. The position of Gaussian noise is certain and the amplitude of the noise
is random. The location of salt-and-pepper noise was random. Noise caused by the
quantization error in the quantization process of quantization noise which is reflected
at the receiving end, the position is random. Aiming at the above image noise, the
most commonly used denoising methods include median filtering, mean filtering, and
vector median filtering.
Vector median filter
Vector median filter is a kind of nonlinear filter, which is widely used in the noise
reduction of color images. Different from grayscale images, color images are multi-
channel image signals. When denoising the color images, it is necessary to consider
whether the noise in the image can be effectively suppressed and the deviation of the
images before and after denoising should be reduced as far as possible. The main
principle of vector median filtering is to use the median filtering method to process
vectors in color images in new space.
A color image can be represented as Vi = Ri, Gi, Bi(i = 1.2, 3..., N), for a give win-
dow with K-vectors, W = Wi(i = 1.2, 3..., K). According to the definition of median
filtering, the specific algorithm goes as follows:
==PAGE:22==
12
3 Data
• Computes the distance Si between the vectors in the window
Si =
K
X
j=1
∥Wj −Wi∥
i = 1.2, 3..., N
(3.1)
• Select the minimum value Smin from Si
• The vector with the minimum value of Smin is the median vector of output.
The results of vector median filtering on apple images are shown in Fig 3.2.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: Image of apple fruit image of before and after vector median filtering
((a) Original Image;(b) Filtered Image).
It can be seen from the above figures that the vector median filter is used to filter the
apple image, thus the noise is effectively suppressed, the edge features of the apple in
the original image are kept, which is beneficial to the segmentation of the apple in the
future. The mean filtering can smooth the image and the processing speed is fast, but
the mean filtering can only slightly reduce the noise but can not eliminate the noise,
which has an impact on the subsequent image segmentation and feature extraction.
The processing speed of the median filter is fast, which solves the shortcoming of most
linear filters in denoising and blur the image at the same time. However, when the
template size is large, the processing speed is slow and the real-time performance is
poor. In summary, vector median filtering is used to de-noise the image here.
3.2.2
Edge detection
One representative feature of the image is the edge, which refers to the local discon-
tinuous image features in the target image.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Data processing
13
The image is accompanied by the abrupt change of the color component in the color
image and the step change of the middle gray value in the gray image. The edges
of the image exist in each target area, it can not only express the characteristics of
the object but also provide the corresponding message for the detection of the object
shape.
Image filtering is to filter the image to reduce noise before edge detection. All kinds
of edge detection operators use the derivative to calculate, but the existing noise will
directly affect the result of the derivative, resulting in a poor edge extraction effect.
Edge enhancement is usually achieved by calculating the gradient amplitude of pixel
points on the target image, and the difference between edge points and ordinary pixel
points is highlighted by detecting the intensity value of each point in the pixel field
of edge points. Edge detection is to determine those pixel points in the target image
as edge points.
The simplest edge detection is to use the magnitude relationship
between the gradient amplitude of the suspicious edge point and the selected high
threshold and low threshold.
Canny edge detector
The Canny edge detector is an edge detection operator that uses a multi-stage al-
gorithm to detect a wide range of edges in images.
It was developed by John F.
Canny in 1986 [3].
The Canny edge detection algorithm is composed of five steps:
• Noise reduction
• Gradient calculation
• Non-maximum suppression
• Double threshold
• Edge Tracking by Hysteresis
The two-dimensional Gaussian filter function is illustrated as Equation 3.2 vectors in
the sliding window. The equation is presented as
G(x, y) =
1
2πσ2 e−x2+y2
2σ2
(3.2)
where σ is the filtering parameter, calculating the gradient amplitude and direction
of each pixel on the smoothed target image. Two partial derivatives at each point are
shown as Equation 3.3 and 3.4:
Gx(x, y) = (f(i, j + 1) −f(i, j) + f(i + 1, j + 1) −f(i + 1, k))/2
(3.3)
==PAGE:24==
14
3 Data
Gy(x, y) = (f(i, j) −f(i + 1, j) + f(i + 1, j + 1)/2
(3.4)
Then the gradient amplitude and gradient at each point can be calculated in polar
coordinates shown as Equation 3.5 and 3.6:
M[x, y] =
q
Gx(x, y)2 + Gy(x, y)2
(3.5)
θ[x, y] = arctan(Gx(x, y)2/Gy(x, y)2)
(3.6)
After the gradient amplitude and gradient direction are obtained, the high threshold
and the low threshold which have an inhibitory effect on the image are selected. If
the threshold is too low, the false edge will be detected and the area of the target
image will be enlarged. If the threshold is selected too high, part of the contour might
be lost. After the threshold is selected, all candidate edge points in the target image
are traversed and detected. If the gradient amplitude of the candidate point is higher
than the high threshold, the algorithm determines that the point is an edge point. If
the gradient amplitude of the candidate point is lower than the low threshold value,
the candidate point must not be an edge point. For pixels between high and low
thresholds, the judgment is made according to their connectivity. If an edge point
is detected in the adjacent pixels of the pixel, the pixel is an edge point; if no edge
point is found in the adjacent pixels, the point is judged as a non-edge point by the
algorithm.
The result of the Canny edge operator extracting apple edges is shown in Figure
3.3.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.3: Image of apple fruit image of before and after Canny edge detection ((a)
Original image;(b) Edge detected image).
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Data processing
15
3.2.3
Hough transform
Hough transform is one of the basic methods to identify geometric shapes from images
in image processing. The basic principle of the Hough transform is to use the duality
of points and lines to transform a given curve in the original image space into a point
in the parameter space through a curve expression form. In this way, the problem of
detecting a given curve in the original image is transformed into a problem of finding
a peak in the parameter space. That is, the detection of the overall characteristics
is transformed into the detection of local characteristics, e.g., straight lines, ellipses,
circles, arcs, etc.
Hough transform was first proposed by Paul Hough in 1962[12], and then popularized
by Richard Duda and Peter Hart in 1972[5]. The classical Hough transform is used
to detect straight lines in images. Some works extend Hough transform to recognize
objects of other shapes, especially circles and ellipses.
3.2.3.1
Hough Line transform
In a 2-dimensional image space x −y, any collinear point (xi, yi can be expressed by
the point-oblique equation of a straight line as Equation 3.7,where a is the slope and
b is the intercept of the line.
yi = axi + b
(3.7)
Equation 3.8 can be obtained by the deformation of Equation 3.7.
b = −axi + yi
(3.8)
Comparing equations 3.7 and 3.8, it is found that equation 3.8 also constitutes an
image space a −b, which is called parameter plane. From the above equations, it
can be seen that any point (x, y) in the image space can correspond to a straight
line in the parameter space. In the same way, any line in the image space can be
determined by a point (a, b) in the parameter space. Thus, a set of maps from image
space to parameter space can be defined. This set of maps represents two mapping
relationships: A single discrete point in the image space is mapped to a straight line
in the parameter space, shown as Figure 3.4. The points on the same line in the image
space are mapped to the line clusters in the parameter space, and they intersect at
the same point c, shown as Figure 3.5.
In the process of calculation, the parameter space a −b is discretized into an ar-
ray. Within the range of slope and intercept in Equation 3.4 , the algorithm let the
array take all the values in the range of slope a, calculate b according to Equation
==PAGE:26==
16
3 Data
Figure 3.4: The mapping of the discrete points of the image space to parameter
space.
Figure 3.5: Collinear points of the image space to parameter space mapping.
3.5, and then accumulate the array according to the known a and b, and detect the
peak point in the array after the end of the accumulation. The peak indicates that
this is a common point for many curves, and these curves can be thought of as being
collinear in a plane, the linear coordinates of these curves, as shown in Equation 3.4,
are the target lines.
However, it can be seen from Equation 3.7 that when the slope increases infinitely and
the line is close to vertical, there would be an infinite value of a and b, which would
require an infinite number of accumulators, thus the detection cannot be completed.
In order to correctly identify and detect any line, Equation 3.7 can be replaced by the
polar coordinates equation of a straight line as Equation 3.10. As shown in Figure
3.6￿ρ is the distance from the origin to the nearest point on the line, and θ is the
angle between the x axis and the line connecting the origin to the nearest point.
The line can be expressed by
y =

−cos θ
sin θ

x +

ρ
sin θ

(3.9)
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Data processing
17
Figure 3.6: Polar equation of a line.
We can simplify the equation above and get
ρ = x cos θ + y sin θ
(3.10)
After substitution, the parameter space becomes (ρ, θ) space, and the corresponding
principle is the same as that in (x, y) space. It is known that given the values of x
and y, Equation 3.10 will be a sine curve, where 0◦≤θ ≤180◦, thus the number of
accumulators can be controlled.
3.2.3.2
Circle Hough Transform
In the (x, y) space, the parameter equation of a circle is
(x −a0)2 + (y −b0)2 = r2
(3.11)
where the radius of the circle is r, the coordinate of the center of the circle is (a0, b0).
Convert the circle in x −y space to a −b −r parameter space, then in the x −y
space, any point on the circle corresponds to a circle in a −b −r parameter space,
and all corresponding circles in the a −b −r parameter space intersect at one point
(a0, b0, r). That is, any point in the image space corresponds to a three-dimensional
cone in the parameter space, as shown in Figure 3.7.
Build a accumulator, find the peak point (a0, b0, r) in the summative array by Hough
transform, that is, the intersection point of the three dimensional cone, thus, the
circle is detected in the x −y space.
The result of a success Hough circle detection is presented in Figure 3.8.
==PAGE:28==
18
3 Data
Figure 3.7: Circle parameter images.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.8: Image of apple fruit image of pre.
and after Hough transform ((a)
Original image;(b) Edge detected image).
3.2.3.3
Limitation of Hough transform
I found two main problems in detection in implementation:
(1)Incomplete and truncated objects
In practice, the leaves or some other objects tend to block the apple fruit, apples
in the same picture might also block each other, resulting in inaccurate segmentation
of the apple. Leaves block the apple fruit, and the apple surface appears dented and
incomplete during edge detection, which directly leads to the wrong radius detection
by mistake.
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Data annotation
19
(2)Not adaptive
The function HoughCircles() from OpenCV1 is used to detect the circles in an image.
It takes the following parameters:
• image: the input image.
• method: detection method.
• dp: the nverse ratio of accumulator resolution and image resolution.
• mindst: minimum distance between centers od detected circles.
• param_1 and param_2: these are method specific parameters.
• min_Radius: minimum radius of the circle to be detected.
• max_Radius: maximum radius to be detected.
This function can easily detect the center of a circle, but it may not find the right
radius for the circle. We can assist the effect of circle detection by specifying the
minimum and maximum radius of the circle with the parameters minRadius and the
maxRadius. Alternatively, we can simply ignore the return radius, since they all have
a default value of 0, simply use the center of the circle detected by the HoughCircles()
function, and then take a few extra steps to further determine the radius. However,
in this work, there are a large amount of images with random and various features
like the radius of apples. It’s diﬀicult to find appropriate parameters adaptive to all
the images.
3.3
Data annotation
3.3.1
Graphical image annotation tool
With regard to the limitation of the Hough transform described above, I labelled ob-
ject bounding boxes in images manually through a graphical image annotation tool.
OpenLabeling2: an open-source image and video labeler was used, which is easy
and fast to operate. The graphical image annotation is shown as Figure 3.9.
The generated annotations save in YOLO_darknet format. Each image corresponds
to a .txt file in the following format:
1https://opencv.org/
2https://github.com/Cartucho/OpenLabeling
==PAGE:30==
20
3 Data
Figure 3.9: Illustration of graphical image annotation.
<object-class> <x_center> <y_center> <width> <height>
The object-class is the index of the class, and the following four values are rela-
tive to the entire original image. x_center and y_center mean the x-coordinates and
y-coordinates of the center of ROI(Region of Interest). width and height are width
and height of ROI.
Then crop the objects(ROI) from the images, that is converting YOLO_darknet for-
mat file into images as following. An example of cropped objects(Region of interest)
is shown as Figure 3.10. Finally, 1049 cropped images are obtained
Figure 3.10: An example of cropped objects (Region of interest).
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Data annotation
21
3.3.2
Labelling
In this work, we focus on supervised learning.
In a supervised learning problem,
there’s some ground truth we want the algorithm to predict. The ground truth could
be a discrete label (Classification).
To train a supervised learning algorithm, the
ground truth does need to be provided.
We manually labeled the 1049 cropped images, which is the region of interest. There
are two classes of sample images: worthy and unworthy, or put more simply good
and bad apples. The classification standard is associated with the characteristics of
the database in Table 3.1 in chapter 3.1 Data collection.
The classification is based on red apples, therefore the rotten apples, bitten apples,
and unripe apples are bad, the fresh apples are undoubtedly good. Golden delicious
apples are of a different variety from red apples, so they are excluded from the train-
ing data. They involve in a further experiment testing models’ introspective ability.
We label good apples with marks ”1”, and bad apples with ”0”, discarded data with
”-1”.
==PAGE:32==
22
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 4
Classification
4.1
Convolutional Neural Network
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a Deep Neural Network model that is widely
used in the fields of image and natural language processing. In 1998, LeCun et al.[19]
proposed a gradient-based backpropagation algorithm for document recognition. In
this neural network, the convolutional layer plays a crucial role. With the contin-
uous enhancement of computing power, some large CNN networks began to show
great advantages in the field of image. In 2012, Krizhevsky et al.[17] proposed the
AlexNet network structure and won the first prize in ImageNet Image Classification
Contest 1 11% more than the previous state-of-the-art. Later, different scholars pro-
posed a series of network structures and constantly updated the achievements of Im-
ageNet, among which the classic networks include: Visual Geometry Group (VGG)
[24], GoogLeNet [25] and ResNet [9]. CNN has made remarkable achievements in
image classification. Meanwhile, some scholars also try to apply it in other fields of
image, such as object detection, semantic segmentation, image summary, behavior
recognition, etc. In addition, CNN has also made some achievements in the non-image
field.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs / ConvNets) are deep learning architectures
with one or more convolutional layers typically followed by a pooling/sub-sampling
layer (LeCun et al., 2015)[18]. The two final layers of a CNN are typically a Multi-
layer Perceptron (MLP). CNN can be applied to input data with a grid-like structure
such as images or time-series.
Typically, there are some basic parameters in the terminology of convolutional net-
works: input, kernel function and output (or feature map) [2].
Figure 4.1 shows an example CNN with two convolutional layers, two pooling lay-
ers, and a fully connected layer which decides the final classification of the image into
one of several categories.
1https://image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/index.php
==PAGE:34==
24
4 Classification
Figure 4.1: An example CNN with two convolutional layers, two pooling layers, and
a fully connected layer from[19].
4.1.1
Convolutional layer
Let X be a single 2D input sample, The forward computation for a convolutional
layer with k filters can be defined as
Z(k) = W (k) ∗X + b
(4.1)
H(k) = g(Z(k))
(4.2)
where is the convolution operator, H is the output, g is an activation function, W is
a 2D kernel known as weight factors and b is bias.
Zi,j = (W (k) ∗X)i,j =
W (k)
: ,j

X
m=1
W (k)
i, :

X
n=1
W (k)
m,nXi+m−1,j+n−1
(4.3)
Figure 4.2 illustrates the 2D convolution operation when k = 1.
Figure 4.2: 2D convolution operation.
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Convolutional Neural Network
25
Then we get the output matrices H(k) for each filter H(1) ,H(2) H(3) ..., which can
be concatenated to form a 3D tensor. The tensor should be flattened into a vector so
as to pass the output to a fully connected layer.
Convolutional operations help improve machine learning systems through three im-
portant properties: sparse interactions, parameter sharing, and translation-invariant
representations.
In a fully connected neural network, each node in the hidden layer is connected
to all nodes in the upper layer, and there are all nodes connected to the next layer
at the same time. The connectivity between nodes in the convolutional layer is deter-
mined by the size of the convolutional kernel and thus is sparse. Sparse interactions
causes in the case of m input and n output, the number of parameters is reduced
from m x n to k x n, where k is the size of the convolution kernel. This enables
the network to eﬀiciently describe the complex relationship between multiple input
variables only through this sparse interaction. In addition to the reduction of the
number of parameters caused by sparse interaction, parameter sharing also plays a
similar role. The so-called parameter sharing means that the same parameters are
used in different operations. Specifically, when we slide the convolution kernel on the
image to calculate the convolution, the convolution kernel remains the same in each
step. It is precise because of the parameter sharing mechanism that the convolutional
layer has the property of translation invariance. For the image, if we move all the
pixels, the convoluted output representation will move by the same amount, meaning
that it is able to detect patterns no matter where they appear in the input.
4.1.2
Pooling layer
Usually, a pooling layer is periodically inserted between successive convolutional lay-
ers. The pooling layer, also called sub-sampling is a network layer that uses pooling
functions to further adjust the network output. Sub-sampling enables us to reduce
the dimensions of the feature-space and ensures the invariance to small shifts or
distortions in the input The pooling function replaces the network’s output at a loca-
tion with the overall statistical characteristics of the adjacent outputs at that location.
Commonly-used pooling functions include the max pooling function and average pool-
ing function.
Take the max pooling function as an example. Max-pooling sub-samples an input by
sliding a window over the input and only giving the maximum value in each window
as the output. For a window of size, L x W it can be is defined as Equation 4.4:
¯Hi,j = max
n
Hi′,j′
o
i ≤i
′ < i + L, j ≤j
′ < j + W
(4.4)
==PAGE:36==
26
4 Classification
Similarly, average pooling calculates the average value of each sub-region of the fea-
ture maps.
The max pooling and average pooling operator with a window-size of 2 × 2 and
a stride of 2 is illustrated in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: Pooling layer operation with a window-size of 2 × 2 and a stride of 2
from [30].
4.2
MobileNet
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has been widely used in the field of computer
vision and has achieved good results. Figure 4.4 shows CNN’s performance in the
ImageNet competition in recent years. It can be seen that in order to pursue classifi-
cation accuracy, the model is deeper and deeper, and the model complexity is higher
and higher. For example, the deep residual network (ResNet) has up to 152 layers.
However, in some real-world applications such as mobile or embedded devices, such
a large and complex model is diﬀicult to apply. First of all, the model is too large,
facing the problem of insuﬀicient memory, and second, these scenarios require low
latency, or fast response time, thus the study of small and eﬀicient CNN models is
very important in these scenarios. The current research can be summarized in two
directions: one is to compress the trained complex model to get a small model; The
second is to directly design a small model and conduct training. In any case, the
==PAGE:37==
4.2 MobileNet
27
Figure 4.4: CNN’s performance on ImageNet from CVPR2017.
goal is to reduce the model size and improve model latency while maintaining model
accuracy. MobileNet belongs to the latter. It is a compact and eﬀicient CNN model
recently proposed by Google, which makes a trade-off between accuracy and eﬀiciency.
4.2.1
depth-wise separable convolution
The basic unit of MobileNet is depth-wise separable convolution (Figure 4.5), which
has been used previously in the Inception model. depth-wise separable convolution
is actually factorized convolutions, that can be divided into two smaller operations:
a depth-wise convolution and a point-wise convolution as shown in Figure 4.6.
Simply analysis the gap between depth-wise separable convolution and standard
convolution in calculated quantity. Assume the size of the input feature graph is
DF × DF × M, and the output feature graph size is DF × DF × N, where DF rep-
resents the width and height of the feature graph,M is the number of input channels
and N is the number of output channels. Although the size of the convolution kernel
adopted is a special case, it does not affect the generality of the following analysis.
For the standard convolution DK × DK, where DK is the size of the convolution
kernel, the computation will be: DK × DK × M × N × DF × DF .
For depth-wise convolution, the amount of computation is DK ×DK ×M ×DF ×DF ,
for point-wise convolution, it is M × N × DF × DF ,and the sum means the channels
or depth, so the total computation amount of depth-wise separable convolution is
DK × DK × M × DF × DF + M × N × DF × DF .
==PAGE:38==
28
4 Classification
Figure 4.5: depth-wise separable convolution.
Figure 4.6:
depth-wise convolution and point-wise convolution[13].
The comparison of depth-wise separable convolution with standard convolution is
shown as Equation 4.5:
DK × DK × M × DF × DF + M × N × DF × DF
DK × DK × M × N × DF × DF
= 1
N +
1
D2
K
(4.5)
In general, N is relatively large. If 3x3 convolution kernels are used, depth-wise sepa-
rable convolution will reduce the amount of computation by about 9 times compared
with standard convolution.
==PAGE:39==
4.2 MobileNet
29
4.2.2
MobileNet network architecture
Depth-wise separable convolution is a basic component of MobileNet. In addition,
batch normalization [14] is also added into the network in real applications. The non-
linear activation function is the Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) [8]. the basic structure
of depth-wise separable convolution is shown in Figure 4.7
Figure 4.7: depth-wise separable convolutions with dapthwise and point-wise layer
followed by batchnorm and ReLU.
The network structure of MobileNet is shown in Figure 4.8. It starts with a 3x3
standard convolution, which is followed by many stacked depth-wise separable con-
volutions.
In addition, some depth-wise convolutions down sample feature maps
through strides =2. Feature maps are average pooled to 1x1 after the convolutions,
and then processed by a fully connected layer and activated by softmax function. If
the depth-wise convolution and point-wise convolution are calculated separately, the
whole network has 28 layers (the pooling and softmax layer are not counted here).
==PAGE:40==
30
4 Classification
Figure 4.8: MobileNet body architechture.
4.3
Autoencoder
4.3.1
Generative vs. discriminative
Generative and discriminative models are the two main types of supervised learning
models.
In general, a discriminative model models the decision boundary between the classes.
A generative model explicitly models the actual distribution of each class. Both of
them are predicting the conditional probability, but they learn different probabilities.
The illustraction of discriminative and generative models is shown as Figure 4.9.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Autoencoder
31
Figure 4.9: Illustration of discriminative and generative models from[4].
In math, a discriminative model learns the conditional probability distribution P(y|x).
• Pick a model to learn P(y|x)
• Update parameters of the model by feeding training data
A generative model learns the joint probability distribution P(x, y).
• Pick models to learn P(y), P(x|y) respectively
• Update parameters of the models by feeding training data
• Use Bayes rule to calculate P(y|x), then select the y which gives the maximum
value of P(y|x)
That is:
argmax
y
P(y|x) = argmax
y
p(x|y)p(y)
p(x)
(4.6)
Common discriminative classifiers include k-nearest neighbor, SVM, decision tree.
Common generative classifiers include Naïve Bayes, Bayesian networks, Markov ran-
dom fields, Hidden Markov Models (HMM) and Autoencoder.
==PAGE:42==
32
4 Classification
4.3.2
autoencoder
The idea of Autoencoder was first put forward in 1988 [2]. At that time, due to sparse
data and high computational complexity, it was diﬀicult to optimize the model, for
which it was not widely used. Until 2006, Hinton et al. [10] adopted gradient descent
to optimize Restricted Boltzmann Machine layer by layer to achieve the abstract rep-
resentation of original samples/features, and achieved significant effects in feature
dimension reduction. This makes the method of using a neural network to build au-
toencoder get widespread attention.
An autoencoder is a neural network architecture capable of discovering structure
within data to develop a compressed representation of the input. Autoencoders con-
sists of 4 main parts:
• Encoder: In which the model learns how to reduce the input dimensions and
compress the input data into an encoded representation.
• Bottleneck: which is the layer that contains the compressed representation of
the input data. This is the lowest possible dimensions of the input data.
• Decoder: In which the model learns how to reconstruct the data from the
encoded representation to be as close to the original input as possible.
• Reconstruction Loss: This is the method that measures measure the similarity
between the input and reconstructed output.
The basic architecture of autoencoder is shown as Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: The basic architecture of autoencoder.
The input sample X is mapped to the feature space Z through encoder, that is, the
encoding process. Then the abstract feature Z is mapped back to the original space
by decoder to get the reconstructed sample ˆX. In other words, the optimization goal
==PAGE:43==
4.3 Autoencoder
33
of the decoding process is to optimize the encoder and decoder simultaneously by
minimizing the reconstruction error, so as to learn and obtain the abstract feature
representation Z for the sample input X, which can be defined as
f, g = argminf,gL(x, f(g(x)))
(4.7)
where g represents encoder, f represents decoder, the function argmin is an operation
that finds the argument that gives the minimum value from a target function.
For the autoencoder model based on a neural network, the encoder part compacts the
data by reducing the number of neurons layer by layer. Decoder partially increases
the number of neurons layer by layer based on the abstract representation of data,
and finally realizes the reconstruction of input samples.
==PAGE:44==
34
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 5
Implementation and
Uncertainty Study
5.1
Implementation
5.1.1
MobileNet model
The convolutional Neural Networks generally have several layers including convolu-
tion, pooling, and dropout.
In this work, I built a simplified version of MobileNet, since the data set is small.
The structure of the network is shown in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1: MobileNet body architecture used.
Layer
Kernel size
stride
in_channel
out_channel
conv1
3
1
3
32
conv2
3
4
32
32
conv3
3
4
32
64
conv4
3
4
64
128
avg_pool
2
1
dropout
linear
1152
2
softmax
This MobileNet model contains several types of layers including four convolution lay-
ers, average pooling layer, dropout layer, and a linear layer. The average pooling
calculates the average value of every sub region of the feature maps, to reduce the
dimensions of the feature maps (down sampling) and overcome the overfitting. The
size of the kernel used for each convolution layer is 3x3 and the size of the pooling
kernel is 2x2. The number of kernels used in layers 1 and 2 is 32 and in layer 3 and
4, the number is respectively 64 filters and 128 filters. The size of the feature map
becomes smaller with the deepening of the network, which leads to the enlargement
==PAGE:46==
36
5 Implementation and Uncertainty Study
of receptive fields. The receptive field of a feature is the region in the input that
produces the feature. Dropout is a trick used to prevent overfitting when the sample
data is too small in the training of the neural network model. It is the method of
regularization neural network where some neurons will be randomly selected set to 0,
and not used during training. The linear layer aims to reduce the number of channels
to the number of classes (2 in our case). Finally the softmax function is applied in
the classification process. It ensures the two outputs for each input sample indicates
the probability of the sample belonging to each class.
The architecture of the MobileNet model implemented in this work is illustrated
in Figure 5.1. The loss is representative by cross entropy, a commonly-used loss func-
tion for classification.
Figure 5.1: The architecture of the MobileNet implemented in this work.
Cross entropy is a concept in information theory, which was originally used to esti-
mate the average encoding length. In machine learning, cross entropy describes the
distance between two probability distributions (predictions and labels).
Now we have two probability distributions for our sample set p(x) and q(x), p(x)
the true distribution (labels), and q(x), the estimated distribution (predictions). If
we use the true distribution p(x) to measure and identify another sample, the expected
length of code required is show as Equation5.1:
H(p) =
X
x
p(x)log
1
p(x) = −
X
x
p(x)logp(x)
(5.1)
If the estimated distribution q(x) is used to represent the average code length from
the true distribution p(x), that is shown as Equation 5.2, which is the definition of
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Implementation
37
the cross entropy Hcross(p, q).
Hcross(p, q) =
X
x
p(x)log
1
q(x) = −
X
x
p(x)logq(x)
(5.2)
5.1.2
MotoEncoder: MobileNet-based Autoencoder
Grimmett et al.[7] demonstrated how performance metrics traditionally used in ma-
chine learning for classifier training and evaluation may be insuﬀicient to characterize
system performance in a robotics context, where a single misjudgment can have dis-
astrous consequences. As a consequence, they proposed the concept of introspection.
Their experimental results imply that generative models (Gaussian process classifier
in the paper) possess a more pronounced introspective capacity than discriminative
frameworks commonly employed in robotics. The generative models maintain a use-
ful balance between being confident when they are correct, and uncertain when they
are making mistakes.
Traditional convolutional neural network frameworks (e.g., MobileNet in this project)
are usually discriminative models, which implies that they lack introspective ability.
We demonstrate this assertion in experiments.
The autoencoder structure is a panacea for this problem - it learns data distribu-
tions before making predictions. Specifically, I added an extra autoencoder structure
in the original MobileNet architecture. As shown in Figure 5.2, a decoder (orange
blocks in the figure) processes the latent features learned by the first four convolu-
tional layers, which is the encoder (gray blocks in the figure) in our structure.
I
added the reconstruction loss into the loss function. Hence, the network is trained
to learn the distribution of data. The compressed image, i.e., the latent feature map
learned by the encoder, is then further downsampled by average pooling and a fully
connected layer (Linear in the figure), to make predictions. We call the proposed
network structure MotoEncoder.
The reconstruction loss used here is the Mean Square Error (MSE). MSE loss, also
known as L2 loss, is the most commonly used loss function in regression tasks. The
basic form is shown as Equation 5.3:
LMSE = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(5.3)
where yi is the true value and ˆyi is the predicted value.
To intuitively understand the mean square error loss, this loss function has a mini-
mum value of 0 (when the prediction is equal to the true value) and a maximum value
of infinity. With the increase of the absolute error |y −ˆy| between the prediction and
==PAGE:48==
38
5 Implementation and Uncertainty Study
Figure 5.2: The architecture of the ”MotoEncoder”.
the true value, the mean square error loss increases quadratically.
As stated before, the loss of MotoEncoder consists of two parts, cross entropy for
classification and mean square error for reconstruction. Consequently, the loss can
be represented as Equation 5.4:
Loss = LCE + LMSE
(5.4)
In this way, the model can guarantee the high accuracy of training, while keeping a
sense of the data distribution.
I trained MotoEncoder on the collected apple images.
There are some examples
of the reconstruction, showing the input images and the reconstructed images in Fig-
ure 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5. From these examples, we can see that the reconstructed images
preserve most of the key information in the input images, e.g., color and shape of
apples, which means that the autoencoder has a good approximation of the data dis-
tribution.
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Implementation
39
(a) Original image
(b) Reconstructed image
Figure 5.3: Example of reconstruction (Apple 1).
(a) Original image
(b) Reconstructed image
Figure 5.4: Example of reconstruction (Apple 2).
==PAGE:50==
40
5 Implementation and Uncertainty Study
(a) Original image
(b) Reconstructed image
Figure 5.5: Example of reconstruction (Apple 3).
5.2
Training result for classification
The data images used for training by the two classification models are 963 images,
the size of each image is 256 × 256. Each image has three channels (RGB).
The images are randomly separated into training sets, validation sets, and test sets.
Firstly I divided the datasets into two categories in a ratio of eight to two: training
set; test set. Then in a ratio of nine to one, I divided the training set into a new
training set and validation set.
Table 5.2 presents the amount and proportion of
images in each dataset.
Table 5.2: Datasets used for training.
#
training sets
validation
sets
test sets
Total
amount
693
77
193
963
proportion
72 %
8%
20%
1
The model classifies apples into two categories good or bad (valuable or not), the
input of the models is apple images, the output is the probability of each apple be-
longing to each category. We define the probability of an apple belonging to the good
category as the quality coeﬀicient of the apple. An example is shown in Figure 5.6.
The quality coeﬀicient of Apple 1, Apple 2, and Apple 3 in Figure 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Training result for classification
41
are 0.1599, 0.8341, 0.8023 respectively. The result is explainable. According to the
quality coeﬀicient, the decision that Apple 1 is bad, Apple 2, and Apple 3 are good
will be given by the system, which is in accordance with manual labeling standard in
section 3.3.2.
Figure 5.6: The output of classification: Quality Coeﬀicient.
The training process of the designed models MobileNet and MotoEncoder is shown
in Figure 5.7 and 5.8 respectively.
The accuracy is represented by the correct classification. After 100 epochs’ training,
the highest training accuracy of MobileNet reaches 80.3%, and the highest accuracy
of MotoEncoder at 80.8%. From Figure 5.7 and 5.8, we can see that with the increas-
ing number of training times, the loss of validation sets show an increasing trend,
which implies over-fitting, therefore I took the highest accuracy in the whole process,
instead of the result in the last epoch.
==PAGE:52==
42
5 Implementation and Uncertainty Study
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.7: Accuracy and loss plot of MobileNet from data training and valida-
tion.(a)Accuracy;(b)Loss.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8: Accuracy and loss plot of MotoEncoder from data training and vali-
dation.(a)Accuracy;(b)Loss.
==PAGE:53==
5.3 Uncertainty study
43
5.3
Uncertainty study
5.3.1
Entropy
The term entropy is originally derived from thermodynamics. In 1948, Claude El-
wood Shannon [23] introduced entropy from thermodynamics to information theory
in order to solve the problem of quantitative measurement of information. In machine
learning, entropy is a very important basic concept, which has involved in many mod-
els such as logistic regression and decision tree.
Self-information Self-information is the basis of entropy theory. Self-information
represents the amount of information brought about by an event, which is also called
the amount of information.
I(x) = −log(p(x))
(5.5)
Where pi represents the probability of the occurrence of the i-th event of the random
variable, and the unit of self-information is bit, representing the number of bits needed
to describe the information.
• I(x), known as the self-information of random variable x , describes the amount
of information brought by the occurrence of an event of the random variable.
• The minus sign is used to ensure that the information quantity is positive or
zero. The generation of information is the process of introducing negative en-
tropy (thermodynamics) into the system, so the sign of information entropy and
thermodynamic entropy should be opposite
• The amount of information can be added to each other.
I(mn) = −log(mn) = −log(m) + (−log(n))
(5.6)
• The choice of the basis of the log function is arbitrary. In information theory,
the basis is usually chosen as 2, so the unit of information is bits. In machine
learning, the basis is often chosen as a constant of nature e, so the units are
often called Nats.
Information Entropy Self-information describes the amount of information brought
by an event of a random variable, while information entropy,which is also called Shan-
non Entropy is usually used to describe the average amount of information brought
by the entire random distribution, which has more statistical characteristics.
H(X) = Exp[I(x)] = −Exp[log(p(x))]
= −
n
X
i=1
p(xi)logp(xi)
= −
Z
x
p(x)logp(x)dx
(5.7)
==PAGE:54==
44
5 Implementation and Uncertainty Study
Figure 5.9: Self-information and Shannon Entropy from [6].
• H(X) is called the entropy of random variable X, which is the expected amount
of information generated for all possible events. The entropy only depends on
the distribution of the random variable, independent of the value of the random
variable.
• From equation 5.7, the information entropy H(X) is the sum of the self-information.
The amount of information measures the amount of information generated by
the occurrence of a specific event, while entropy is the total amount of informa-
tion generated by an event, which is the amount of information generated by
each possible scenario multiplied by the probability of their occurrence, namely
the expected amount of information generated by all possible events.
Entropy is a measure of the uncertainty of a random variable, also a measure of
the degree to which the system is ordered. The greater the entropy, the greater the
uncertainty of the random variable, the more chaotic (disordered) the system is, and
the greater the amount of information it has when choosing a particular value.
5.3.2
Introspective capacity and uncertainty
Grimmett et al. [7] introduced and motivated the importance of a classifier’s intro-
spective capacity: the ability to associate an appropriate assessment of confidence
with any test case. They use the term ‘introspective’ to describe a classifier that
gives appropriate probabilities, thus making true classifications with confidence and
makes mistakes only with high uncertainty. In their work, they proposed that a key
ingredient for introspection is a framework’s potential to increase its uncertainty with
the distance between a test datum its training data.
To characterize the introspective capacity of a classification framework, a well-tempered
measure of the inherent uncertainty in the classification output is required.
An
information-theoretic quantity known as normalized entropy is used, HN, defined
as Equation 5.8. It is equivalent to the Shannon entropy measure normalized by its
==PAGE:55==
5.3 Uncertainty study
45
maximum, which is the entropy of the c-dimensional uniform distribution, log(c). In
this work, we classify the data into two categories, thus c = 2. The result is a measure
ranging between 0 and 1 where a higher value indicates greater uncertainty in the
classifier’s belief (the less confident the classifier is), as shown in Figure 5.10.
HN = −
c
X
i=1
p(y = Ci|x)logc[p(y = Ci|x)]
(5.8)
Figure 5.10: Normalized entropy and best-versus-second-best as measures of uncer-
tainty in the binary classification case from[7].
5.3.3
Results
I conducted experiments investigating the introspective capacity of the two classifica-
tion models implemented and introduced in section 5.1. Specifically, I focused on two
tasks: the classification of known classes of apples, and the unknown classes. Classifi-
cation addresses the case where a decision is made between two, well-defined classes
(two types of apples). The classifier performance is investigated when a third, pre-
viously unseen class is presented. In practice, novel instances probably occur which
often result in misclassification, for example, when the designed system is applied
in the apple sorting and grading classification system, accidentally an orange gets
involved, I expect to see the behavior of the classification model. Though these is-
sues presented with a test datum ameliorated somewhat by expanding the dataset
used for training, the complexity of the feature space encountered during persistent,
long-term autonomy will keep perplexing even the most expensively trained classifiers.
The uncertainty with which each classifier makes errors is examined, and measured
==PAGE:56==
46
5 Implementation and Uncertainty Study
by normalized entropy, shown as Figure 5.11.For the designed classifiers trained on
the apple class good
and bad and tested on not only the training classes but also
classes that do not appear in the training set. Here the discarded data images which
are of a different variety with the red apples when manually labeling, the ”-1” classes
in section3.3.2 are used as unseen classes. High values of normalized entropy imply
(a) MobileNet to trained classes
(b) MobileNet to unseen classes
(c) MotoEncoder to trained classes
(d) MotoEncoder to unseen classes
Figure 5.11: Normalized entropy histograms of the marginal probabilities for the
designed classification models trained on the apple classes good and
bad and tested on not only the training classes, but also classes which
do not appear in the training set.
==PAGE:57==
5.3 Uncertainty study
47
more uncertainty in the output of classification. A more introspective classification
framework should be certain on the trained classes, namely, show low normalized en-
tropy(low NE, the left-hand end of the X-axis) for more samples. On the contrary, A
more introspective classification framework should be uncertain for the unseen classes,
that is, showing high normalized entropy (high NE, right-hand end of the x-axis) in
more cases. From sub-Figure (a) and (c) in Figure 5.11, both MobileNet and Mo-
toEncoder are confident when tested on classes that were present in the training set.
For unseen classes, the mean normalized entropies for MotoEncoder is higher than
MobileNet, indicating greater uncertainty in its judgement. In addition, MobileNet
has inconsistent levels of uncertainty, for relatively more samples, low ME and high
ME exist at the same time.
The conclusion can be drawn that when facing with novel test data which are not
represented by the training data, MotoEncoder is more consistently uncertain than
the traditional MobileNet, which is the expected introspective behavior.
==PAGE:58==
48
==PAGE:59==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
6.1
Conclusion
In this work, an automated system is created that can recognize the quality of
fruits(apples) according to two categories that are valuable or not (good or bad),
which can be applied in the scenarios decision need to be made that the object de-
serves to be sorted for different uses, such as to traditional markets, relatively high-
class supermarkets or for export commodities that require higher quality. Many apple
images are collected from the web using data crawling and the acquired data needs
to be processed to extract the region of interest as well as for subsequent training of
classification models. Two different ways to extract the region of interest are used: (1)
segment round shape objects in the images using Hough Transform (2) label object
bounding boxes in images manually by graphical image annotation tool. In practice,
the first method presents some limitations in that it is diﬀicult to handle incomplete/
truncated objects and the method is not adaptive.
Finally, 1049 cropped images were obtained as processed data. Then I implement
the classification based on the state-of-the-art convolutional neural networks, Mo-
bileNet.
Inspired by the question that how the classification frameworks perform will be bet-
ter when it is presented with a test datum, unlike anything it saw during training,
which is common in practice since the training data can never be fully representative
of the continually evolving and complex environments in which robots operate. To
remedy the shortcoming, the concept of introspection is introduced: the ability to mit-
igate potentially overconfident classifications, which is proposed by [7]. To improve
the introspective capacity of the network, an innovative classification model named
”MotoEncoder”, in which an architecture similar to of autoencoder is constructed
based on traditional MobileNet. The experiment is carried out focusing on investigat-
ing the performance of classification models when a third, previously unseen data is
presented, The results demonstrate that MotoEncoder shows more consistently uncer-
tainty than the traditional MobileNet when given test data which are not represented
by the training data, which is the introspective behavior we are expected.
==PAGE:60==
50
6 Conclusion
6.2
Limitation
In the machine learning and deep learning field, data is more important than the
model in some cases. If the sampling size is big enough and the sampling density is
dense enough, the results learned from the model may approach the true distribution.
The dataset used in this work is not large enough, which results in over-fitting and
the accuracy is not high enough through we have adopted some methods to alleviate
the problem of over-fitting.
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
baidu. https://www.baidu.com/.
[2]
Hervé Bourlard and Yves Kamp. “Auto-association by multilayer perceptrons
and singular value decomposition.” In: Biological cybernetics 59.4 (1988), pages 291–
294.
[3]
John Canny. “A computational approach to edge detection.” In: IEEE Trans-
actions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 6 (1986), pages 679–698.
[4]
disvsgeneral. https://www.programmersought.com/article/26773335602/.
[5]
Richard O Duda and Peter E Hart. “Use of the Hough transformation to detect
lines and curves in pictures.” In: Communications of the ACM 15.1 (1972),
pages 11–15.
[6]
entropy. http://www.neutroninterferometry.com/background/probability-
theory.
[7]
Hugo Grimmett et al. “Introspective classification for robot perception.” In: The
International Journal of Robotics Research 35.7 (2016), pages 743–762.
[8]
Richard HR Hahnloser et al. “Digital selection and analogue amplification co-
exist in a cortex-inspired silicon circuit.” In: Nature 405.6789 (2000), pages 947–
951.
[9]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition.” In: 2016
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 2016,
pages 770–778. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.90.
[10]
Geoffrey E Hinton and Ruslan R Salakhutdinov. “Reducing the dimensionality
of data with neural networks.” In: science 313.5786 (2006), pages 504–507.
[11]
Timothy M Hospedales, Shaogang Gong, and Tao Xiang. “Finding rare classes:
Active learning with generative and discriminative models.” In: IEEE transac-
tions on knowledge and data engineering 25.2 (2011), pages 374–386.
[12]
Paul VC Hough. A COMPUTER LEARNS TO SEE. Brookhaven Lecture Series
No. 14. Technical report. Brookhaven National Lab., Upton, NY, 1962.
[13]
Andrew G. Howard et al. “MobileNets: Eﬀicient Convolutional Neural Networks
for Mobile Vision Applications.” In: arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1704.04861 (April
2017), arXiv:1704.04861. arXiv: 1704.04861 [cs.CV].
==PAGE:62==
52
Bibliography
[14]
Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep
network training by reducing internal covariate shift.” In: International confer-
ence on machine learning. PMLR. 2015, pages 448–456.
[15]
Ajay J Joshi, Fatih Porikli, and Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos. “Multi-class active
learning for image classification.” In: 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. IEEE. 2009, pages 2372–2379.
[16]
Ashish Kapoor et al. “Gaussian processes for object categorization.” In: Inter-
national journal of computer vision 88.2 (2010), pages 169–188.
[17]
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Imagenet classifica-
tion with deep convolutional neural networks.” In: Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems 25 (2012), pages 1097–1105.
[18]
Yann LeCun, Yoshua Bengio, and Geoffrey Hinton. “Deep learning.” In: nature
521.7553 (2015), pages 436–444.
[19]
Yann LeCun et al. “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition.”
In: Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (1998), pages 2278–2324.
[20]
Hyungtae Lee and Heesung Kwon. “Going deeper with contextual CNN for
hyperspectral image classification.” In: IEEE Transactions on Image Processing
26.10 (2017), pages 4843–4855.
[21]
Bin Liu et al. “Identification of apple leaf diseases based on deep convolutional
neural networks.” In: Symmetry 10.1 (2018), page 11.
[22]
pexels. https://www.pexels.com/?locale=en-us.
[23]
Claude Elwood Shannon. “A mathematical theory of communication.” In: The
Bell system technical journal 27.3 (1948), pages 379–423.
[24]
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. “Very Deep Convolutional Networks
for Large-Scale Image Recognition.” In: arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1409.1556 (Septem-
ber 2014), arXiv:1409.1556. arXiv: 1409.1556 [cs.CV].
[25]
Christian Szegedy et al. “Going deeper with convolutions.” In: June 2015, pages 1–
9. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298594.
[26]
Bindu Tiger and Toran Verma. “Identification and classification of normal and
infected apples using neural network.” In: International Journal of Science and
Research 2.3 (2013), pages 160–163.
[27]
Devrim Unay and Bernard Gosselin. “Apple defect detection and quality classi-
fication with mlp-neural networks.” In: Proceedings of the ProRISC Workshop
on Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing. Citeseer. 2002.
[28]
Jiang Wang et al. “Cnn-rnn: A unified framework for multi-label image classifi-
cation.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition. 2016, pages 2285–2294.
[29]
Web Data Crawling vs Web Data Scraping. https://www.promptcloud.com/
blog/data-scraping-vs-data-crawling/.
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
53
[30]
Huo Yingge, Imran Ali, and Kang-Yoon Lee. “Deep Neural Networks on Chip-
A Survey.” In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Big Data and Smart
Computing (BigComp). IEEE. 2020, pages 589–592.
==PAGE:64==
