==PAGE:1==
Design and implementation of a
secure medical storage and
inventory system
Oleksandr Subtselnyi
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
Digitalization is revolutionizing the future of healthcare in many diﬀerent ways.
One of the areas that are changing is the way the medication supply chain is
managed.
The goal of this thesis is to develop a smart system, called drug safe, for the
storage and inventory of pharmaceutical preparations. The system will be used
in pharmacies and in hospitals for storing narcotic drugs. In addition to being
a locked safe, the smart storage system keeps track of the usage of the medica-
tions. The system enables automatic checks and audits on correct usage. The
inventory system warns about low inventory and prioritizes the order of taking
out packages to avoid the expiry of medications. The easy-to-use access control
removes the need to share keys and ensures accurate logging of access. It saves
the pharmacist’s or nurse’s time by automatically ﬁlling the drug card and re-
duces human errors and omissions in the bookkeeping. The logging mechanism
discourages misuse and enables forensic analysis of any suspected cases of theft.
The inventory system includes the big physical metal safe with separate drawers,
Raspberry Pi controller with a touch screen for interaction with users, lock
control unit for software-based control of the locked drawers, bar code reader to
validate medications. The backend solution for inventory database, logging, and
system management is based on Google Cloud Platform services, Node.js and
Python. A web application makes it possible to create reservations, generate
reports, check inventory, and view logs.
The most important goal of the project is to keep both the controlled medica-
tions and the customer data safe and secure. The critical features of the system
==PAGE:4==
ii
are the protection of the customer’s or patient’s personal data when it is stored
in the system and secure event logging to a cloud platform that focuses on the
integrity of the logs. Each of these topics is discussed in separate chapters of the
thesis. Moreover, the evaluation part of the thesis includes a systematic threat
and risk analysis of the system.
In the thesis project, the author has designed and implemented the software
for the drug safe product, including the safe controller, web application, and
backend services. The project spans from the initial design to delivery to the
ﬁrst customers.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at DTU Compute in fulﬁllment of the requirements
for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
This thesis will present a solution for pharmacies and hospitals that want to
increase safety and security of the stored drugs and reduce paperwork and hu-
man mistakes. The company Remomedi Oy has created a universal product for
pharmacies and hospitals that takes care of drug inventorying and documenta-
tion of the drug store. The author of this thesis was responsible for the software
design and implementation for the product.
The result of the research and development is a ready-to-market commercial
product for the medication inventory system, the implementation of which was
entirely done by the current author. The project included: problem investiga-
tion, software and database architecture design, communications architecture
design, software development, deployment, provisioning, security implementa-
tion, data protection, and delivery of the ﬁrst products to the customer.
The thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 1 makes introduction of the product
and thesis. Chapter 2 describes the system architecture of the product and secu-
rity requirements. Chapter 3 presents the software design and implementation.
Chapter 4 explains methods that were used to fulﬁll data protection and privacy
requirements. Chapter 5 demonstrates the logging system. Chapter 6 presents
used technologies for the software. Chapter 7 presents threat models for the
system, and introduces risk analysis for the system and the product. Chap-
ter 8 compares the results with goals and plans future improvements. Finally,
chapter 9 sums up the results of this master thesis.
==PAGE:6==
iv
Lyngby, 20-June-2021
Oleksandr Subtselnyi
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I want to thank my thesis supervisors, Tuomas Aura and Nicola Dragoni, for
helping and guiding me throughout the thesis process. Also, I would like to
thank you for the knowledge gained during studying, your openness and friend-
liness, and your help in the educational process. I would also like to thank my
advisor and director, Kari Paukkeri, for giving me the opportunity to build a
great product on my own, for believing in me, trusting me, and for giving me
the position of my dream.
Finally, I want to express my gratitude to my mom and wife for supporting me,
being worried about me, boosting and believing in me. This accomplishment
would not have been possible without you.
Thank you.
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Abbreviations and Acronyms
GTIN
Global Trade Item Number
PC
Product Code
VNR
Nordic Product Number
GS1
Global Standards 1
UI
User Interface
UX
User Experience
VM
Virtual Machine
GCP
Google Cloud Platform
AES
Advanced Encryption Standard
DES
Data Encryption Standard
IV
Initialization vector
2D code
Two-Dimensional code
2FA
Two-Factor Authentication
API
Application Programming Interface
CIS
Corporate Information System
DoS
Denial of Service
DLP
Data Loss Prevention
GDPR
General Data Protection Regulation
IDS
Intrusion Detection Systems
IPS
Intrusion Prevention Systems
PDIS
Personal Data Information Systems
JSON
JavaScript Object Notation
JWT
JSON Web Token
KMS
Key Management System
HSM
Hardware Security Module
RFID
Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abbreviations and Acronyms
v
1
Introduction
1
2
System requirements and design
7
2.1
System architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
User experience outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Security requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Software architecture
17
3.1
Drug safe
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.1
Controller: Raspberry Pi board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.1.2
Drug safe software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.3
Local database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.4
Display
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.1.5
Bar code reader . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.1.6
Lock control unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Backend server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Backend application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.2
Online Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.3
Web application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.4
Third party service connection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Web client . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
==PAGE:12==
x
CONTENTS
3.4
Maintenance server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Data protection
23
4.1
Information security breach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Data protection methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2.1
Symmetric encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.2
Public key encryption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.3
Hash functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2.4
Digital signatures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.2.5
Encryption key storage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Logging
37
5.1
User access logs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.1
Logs from the drug safe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.1.2
Logs from the web application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.2
Administrator access logs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.1
Logs from the backend server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.2.2
Logs from the drug safe controller
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2.3
Logs from the Firebase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Implementation
43
6.1
Software implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.1
Backend server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.1.2
Drug safe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.1.3
Maintenance server . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
User interface implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7
Evaluation
47
7.1
Systematic threat analysis with STRIDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.1.1
Spooﬁng identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.1.2
Tampering with data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.1.3
Repudiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.1.4
Information disclosure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
7.1.5
Denial of service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
7.1.6
Elevation of privilege . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
7.1.7
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.2
Risk analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
7.2.1
Inventory checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
7.2.2
Risk identiﬁcation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
7.2.3
Building risk analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
7.2.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
==PAGE:13==
CONTENTS
xi
8
Discussion
63
8.1
Comparison of goals and results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
8.2
Comparison of online storage and oﬄine storage
. . . . . . . . .
64
8.3
Future improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9
Conclusion
67
A Drug safe screenshots
69
B Web application screenshots
77
C Drug safe usage screenshots
87
Bibliography
91
==PAGE:14==
xii
CONTENTS
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Technology is slowly leading the world towards digitalization. The healthcare
industry stays in the ﬁrst rows of revolutionaries of technology and the prosper-
ity it creates. Medications, examination apparatus, and treatment equipment
need constant updates of technology and continuous upgrades of date processing
capabilities. These examples are from crucial branches of medicine, but today
every patient and human can also use technology in everyday life to improve
their health. "Doctors and patients are discovering new ways to use technol-
ogy to monitor personal health" [Hum16]. Big data is used to aggregate all
previous cases of illness and make a precise and accurate diagnosis. Mobile ap-
plications help to track our sleep, heart rate, and weight. 3D printing is used
to grow bones for the human body. Scientists have succeeded in injecting the
nanostructured bio-materials into people’s bones to promote bone regeneration
[LPH+20]. These examples seem to be deep in science, but technology is also
changing how healthcare operates on the more everyday level. In today’s world,
pharmacies, hospitals, and healthcare systems use technology to simplify every-
day routine work and increase productivity. IT industry also helps to minimize
human mistakes and builds security for every patient.
However, every institution faces the problem of security because of thefts, hack-
ers, unscrupulous employees. The healthcare resources and technology can be
misuses.
Each institution uses an online system of identifying patients and
stores their data online, and thus the security and data protection should be a
==PAGE:16==
2
Introduction
priority for any company that delivers the software. For example, In October
2020, hackers broke the data security of a mental healthcare provider and stole
data about the patients [HC20].
Problem. Pharmacies and hospitals use technology to store medication. For
them, storing and inventorying medicines is an essential part of everyday life.
They need to ensure that the correct medication is dispensed. Medicine that
could be misused or stolen needs special care. Few big chains of pharmacies
have bought robotic systems that manage the storage and inventory and, thus,
reduce the possibility of human error or misuse.
Robots get the delivery of
drugs, store them and give them to the pharmacist when needed. But most
of the pharmacies in Finland and Europe do not have the robotic systems due
to their size and cost. Together with most hospitals, they use simple safes or
even cupboards with a lock to store medications. The process is particularly
complicated when the customer or patient needs opioids or another narcotic
drug: the pharmacist or the nurse opens the cabinet and writes the person who
will receive the medicines in the particular drug card or "kulutuskortti".
It
seems simple but unfortunately not secure, and the paperwork of the personnel
is always prone to mistakes. Even the robotic systems do not relieve personnel
from manual paperwork, and they have to ﬁll the drug card with pen and paper.
Storing drugs in the cupboard or even in a safe is risky because they could be
stolen by the unscrupulous personnel.
Unfortunately, the pharmacy owners
sometimes complain about missing medications, and there is no way to catch
the thief. The situation in hospitals is even worse. The patients need pills, but
not the whole package, and therefore most nurses have unlimited access to the
opened packages of drugs. All of this is uncontrolled, not logged, and dangerous
for the owners and the workers themselves.
Solution of problem. This thesis will present a solution for pharmacies and
hospitals that want to increase safety and security of the stored drugs and re-
duce paperwork and human mistakes. The company Remomedi Oy has created
a universal product for pharmacies and hospitals that takes care of drug inven-
torying and documentation of the drug store. The author of this thesis was
responsible for the software design and implementation for the product. The
drug safe helps the personnel store drugs safely in one place, creates an extra
layer of security by accessing the safe with a personal pin code, logs all the ac-
tions done in front of the safe, and ﬁlls in the drug card automatically on behalf
of the pharmacist or nurse.
Goal. This thesis aims to present the ready-to-sale product for pharmacies,
hospitals, and health care systems, and analyze the cybersecurity of the system
by investigating threat models and risks and providing security requirements
and data protection.
==PAGE:17==
3
Figure 1.1: Drug Safe box
Methodology. The engineering methodology was structured in the following
way: software engineering, threat modeling, risk analysis, building and imple-
menting security requirements, data protection implementation, ﬁnal develop-
ment of a ready-to-market commercial product, evaluation of the product.
The product consists of several parts:
1. The physical safe with Raspberry Pi for controlling access to the safe and
its locked storage drawers.
2. Web application for the pharmacist to get overall view of the inventory
and access logs, and to produce the drug cards.
3. Online backend for the web application and Raspberry Pi controller that
gathers the logs.
4. Database for storing the logs and personal data of the customers or pa-
tients that receive the medication.
A picture of the safe is in ﬁg. 1.1.
To make the product secure, the company that produces it has to cover a lot
of cases.
The product consists of a few components that may be attacked
by the hackers, speciﬁcally: server, connections of the Raspberry Pi controller
and the web application to the backend, backend code, database, and the web
application. Hackers and thieves may try to access the safe with drugs. The
company has to protect the safe against break-in or theft. In order to provide
security against these attacks, the company has to protect the physical access
to the safe and take care of the supply chain including manufacturing of the
==PAGE:18==
4
Introduction
locks and metal parts. When a supply chain is compromised, its security can
no longer be trusted [Nat21].
Maintaining the drug cards requires the pharmacist or the nurse to enter the cus-
tomer’s or the patient’s name, prescription number, and doctor’s name. These
data have to be stored in the database to be ﬁlled into the automatically pro-
duced drug card. Thus, the product involves data protection and privacy issues.
This work has to prepare the security requirements for the drug safe product
to ensure that pharmacies and hospitals get a secure system with all its compo-
nents.
In order to provide a tracking system of the drugs and actions, the product
should have a logging system. All the activities done in front of the drug safe
have to be logged and saved so that it would be easy to catch a thief in case of
theft.
Goals. Goals and results achieved during this master thesis are the following:
1. Design and implementation of the drug safe software, including the safe
controller, web application, and backend services.
2. Analysis of the security requirements for the medication inventory system.
3. Implementation of data protection for the system components that store
sensitive data.
The most substantial result of the research and development is a ready-to-market
commercial product for the medication inventory system, the implementation
of which was entirely done by the current author. The project included: prob-
lem investigation, software and database architecture design, communications
architecture design, software development, deployment, provisioning, security
implementation, data protection, and delivery of the ﬁrst products to the cus-
tomer.
Sustainable development. Secure systems development contributes to the
following UN sustainable development goals: Piece, justice and strong institu-
tions by reducing the opportunities for crime, increasing trust, and making the
legal use of controlled substances more transparent. The innovative products
developed in the project contribute to the goals of Industry, innovation and
infrastructure. Since the project is on healthcare systems, it also contributes to
Good health and well-being.
The rest of this thesis is structured as follows. Chapter 1 introduces the prod-
uct and thesis.
Chapter 2 describes the system architecture of the product
==PAGE:19==
5
and security requirements. Chapter 3 presents the software design. Chapter 4
explains methods that were used to fulﬁll data protection and privacy require-
ments. Chapter 5 demonstrates the logging system. The evaluation in chapter 6
presents technologies used for the software implementation. Chapter 7 presents
threat models for the system and introduces risk analysis for the system and the
product. Chapter 8 compares the results and goals and plans future improve-
ments. Finally, chapter 9 sums up the results of this master thesis.
==PAGE:20==
6
Introduction
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 2
System requirements and
design
2.1
System architecture
The development of the drug safe starts with building the system architecture.
The drug safe needs to have the display for the user to interact with a safe. The
display has to be connected to the drug safe controller. The drug safe controller
is in charge of the display, bar code reader and physical locks. Between the
physical locks and the controller should stay intermediate layer — lock control
unit. The unit can accept commands from the controller and trigger events on
the locks.
Each drug safe should be maintained remotely. For that purpose each drug safe
controller should be accessible by a maintenance server.
All actions at the drug safe user interface (UI) should be logged and saved in a
database. For that purpose the product needs to have a remote backend with
database. The backend will probably need to access third party services. This
step should be also planned beforehand.
User should have the access to application from their personal computer or
==PAGE:22==
8
System requirements and design
Figure 2.1: Cyber-physical system architecture
mobile device. Most practical solution is a web application user interface. Each
pharmacist will have access to the web application to check the action logs,
inventory, drug cards, etc.
All the described components are displayed in ﬁg. 2.1.
The drug safe can be equipped with a refrigerator or without it.
As some
medications require to be stored in a refrigerator, the company produces several
types of drug safes [Fimc]. The drug safe can exist in several conﬁgurations:
a big one with 8 drawers and with a refrigerator, a big one with 10 drawers
and without a refrigerator, a small one with 2 drawers and a small refrigerator,
a small one with 3 drawers and without a refrigerator. In accordance with a
supply chain rule, the company that produces refrigerators is a partner company
of the Remomedi Oy. They are responsible for the smooth operation of the
refrigerator and precise temperature maintenance.
Most of the hospitals in
==PAGE:23==
2.2 User experience outline
9
Finland buy refrigerators from the same company. The refrigerator is located
inside the locker. To get access to the refrigerator, the user has to open the
locker ﬁrst, and no security rules are added to the refrigerator component.
Each big drug safe uses 9-10 lockers, and each small one 2-3 lockers. For this
component, security rules are applied. The lockers should be opened only from
the application. They should be shockproof, resistant to attacks, should not
have any back doors for opening them. The company that produces lockers is
one of the biggest in the world. It supplies the same lockers to car manufacturers,
and lockers of this company have been used by Remomedi Oy since 2017. Only
2 lockers have been replaced during 4 years. Lockers are simple in construction,
and they don’t have any electronic backdoors or internet connection. They are
connected with wires to the control unit.
For the emergency opening, they have a thin rod on top of them for opening
the locker manually. Access to this rod is prohibited and protected by the metal
shield of the drug safe. The rod is needed because, one additional feature that
the drug safe should include is emergency take-out. The drug safe is supplied
with the emergency stick that is connected to each rod of the locker. In case
of emergency, the pharmacist has a key that can open the lid of the drug safe
and get access to an emergency stick. The pharmacist pushes the stick that
activated the rods for all lockers. In that case, all the lockers will be opened at
once. If the drug safe is switched on, it will detect the emergency opening and
log this action. In case of electricity loss, this action cannot be detected. The
action liability lies on the pharmacy, and they have to keep the emergency key
in a safe place.
In addition, it is essential to mention that the drug safe is located inside the
pharmacy in a protected room. In case of burglary, the robber has to get inside
the pharmacy, gain access to the protected room, and after that, he will face the
drug safe. It is not possible to get inside the lockers without special equipment
like a circular saw. Another solution would be to steal the whole drug safe, but
it weighs more than 120kg.
2.2
User experience outline
The ﬁrst stage of software development is the extraction of the features needed
for the product. Based on the requirements from pharmacy owners and phar-
macists, the author of this thesis has built user stories for web applications and
user interfaces on the drug safe.
==PAGE:24==
10
System requirements and design
Figure 2.2: Drug safe web application workﬂow
For the web application usage, each pharmacist needs the following functionality:
1. View and change their own pharmacy information
2. View, create and modify users for the web application and drug safe con-
troller
3. View the list of all used medications
4. View and add logs
5. View and print the drug card, ﬁlled automatically by the backend
6. View the current inventory
7. View, change and create reservations for clients
The above requirements are displayed in the workﬂow diagram in ﬁg. 2.2.
The requirements for the drug safe controller and UI are more complicated,
comprehensive, and demanding. Most of the complicated algorithms will be
==PAGE:25==
2.2 User experience outline
11
done on the Raspberry Pi side, such as searching for old medications, taking
care of partials packages, alarm system, extracting information from 2D bar
codes, creating new relationships between Global Trade Item Number(GTIN)
and Nordic Product Number(vnr), etc. GTIN provides a global supply chain
solution by identifying any trade item that may be priced, or ordered, or invoiced
at any point in the supply chain upon which there is a need to retrieve predeﬁned
information [GS116]. GTIN or Product Code(PC) is the number that is encoded
into the product bar code or data matrix. Vnr is a six-digit code for medicines
that allows reliable identiﬁcation of a single drug packet throughout all phases
of drug delivery [L¨].
For the drug safe local UI, each pharmacist needs the following functionality:
1. Deliver and put in medications
2. Take out medications for clients
3. Take out medications based on reservation
4. Inventory check
The essential function of the take-out is to validate the package to check whether
the pharmacist has taken out the correct medication with the proper dosage and
active ingredient. The pharmacist has to scan the 2D bar code of the package,
and the drug safe should validate it. Take out functionality should also propose
such actions as taking care of the expired medications, and it should oﬀer the
pharmacist to take those packages of medicine that expire sooner. It should also
take care of partial packages and partial take out. The take-out from reservation
option has the same workﬂow as ordinary take-out; the only diﬀerence is that
the pharmacist has already ﬁlled in the client’s data and has set up the number
of packages needed.
It is not so easy with put-in functionality.
Remomedi Oy has access to the
database of all medications for Finland — Database of Pharmaceutical Prepa-
rations. Each drug has its own vnr and set of GTINs. Each package has a 2D
bar code that contains the GTIN, Serial Number, expiry date, and lot number.
The drug safe backend should read the 2D bar code and parse it to get the
GTIN and fetch the vnr of the medication. If the 2D bar code is damaged, the
user should have the possibility to ﬁll in 2D bar code data manually. If the 2D
bar code data is missing, the user should have the opportunity to label the med-
ication with a bar code or other code and manually ﬁll in vnr and expiry date.
In some cases, the Association of Finnish Pharmacies is delayed with updates,
and medications appear in the pharmacies before they get to the Database of
Pharmaceutical Preparations. In these cases, the drug safe cannot detect the
==PAGE:26==
12
System requirements and design
vnr, and the user should have the possibility to choose vnr manually and save
this relationship for this pharmacy.
Inventory check should enable the pharmacist to open the lockers one by one
and check the inventory that is logged by the drug safe against what is physically
present in the box.
In case of a discrepancy at any stage (put-in, take-out, inventory check), the user
can report a mistake. Additionally, if the mistake was found during an inventory
check, the user with higher permissions can make inventory corrections.
The requirements mentioned above are shown in the workﬂow diagram in the
ﬁg. 2.3.
2.3
Security requirements
According to Fimea (Finnish Medicines Agency) regulations, the information
that is needed for drug inventory is listed below. Fimea is the competent national
authority for regulating pharmaceuticals in Finland [Fima].
The pharmacy inventory system needs to have:
1. Name of the drug.
2. Amount taken from inventory, date taken, and patient.
3. Inventory amount.
4. Doctor who prescribed medicine.
5. Prescription diary number or lot.
6. Signature and date of the person putting in and taking out medicine.
Based on this information, the web application should record the following in-
formation:
1. Drug (name+vnr).
2. Amount.
3. Patient name.
==PAGE:27==
2.3 Security requirements
13
Figure 2.3: Drug safe UI workﬂow
==PAGE:28==
14
System requirements and design
4. Doctor name.
5. Prescription diary number or lot.
Requirements table is the output of the requirements analysis for the software
engineering phase.
Requirement
All access to the systems functions must be authorized e.g. through role-
based authorization control.
All access to system administration functions must be authorized.
Any user (system or person) that only needs to retrieve information from
the system must only have read authorization to the system.
Customer modiﬁcation of a standard system must follow the suppliers guide-
lines and recommendations.
Customer modiﬁcations shall be separated from the systems standard func-
tionality in order to avoid complexity when patching or upgrading the stan-
dard system.
Customer modiﬁcations must not be aﬀected when patching or upgrading
the system.
Customer modiﬁcations of the standard system must not aﬀect the perfor-
mance of the system.
All customer modiﬁcations must be documented.
The system and its belonging APIs shall be designed, developed, tested
and put to production according to well-recognised security standards (e.g.
OWASP for web applications) and current regulatory requirements (e.g.
general data protection regulation (GDPR) for personal records).
The user input information (password, pin codes etc.) during the authenti-
cation process must not be visible in the UI.
Any error message during the sign-on process must not reveal the cause of
the error during the sign-on attempt.
All users must be authenticated by using a unique and personal ID enabling
traceability.
All system administrators must be authenticated by using a unique and
personal ID enabling traceability.
Updates to software must be made with secure updating software.
Changes to information that originates from a sending system must only be
allowed if the approved functional speciﬁcation says so.
Data validation must be performed when loading ﬁles or data from sur-
rounding systems.
Conﬁdential information shall be encrypted.
If the system handles sensitive personal data, the information shall be en-
crypted with an encryption key that is unique to the pharmacy.
==PAGE:29==
2.3 Security requirements
15
Conﬁdential information must be encrypted with Advances Encryption
Standard (AES) in transit to prevent unauthorized access.
Encryption in transit shall be implemented either at the communication end
point or at an intermediate end point, i.e., ﬁrewall or load balancer.
Conﬁdential information must be protected by access control based on user
accounts.
In connection with encryption, the original information contained in text
must be cleaned from the disk and memory.
Conﬁdential information shall not be temporarily stored (cached), e.g., in
the browser cache, cookies, web proxy, or reverse proxy.
Error messages presented to end users must not contain information that
could be used to compromise the security of the application or the system
environment. Only generic and harmless default messages must be displayed
to users.
After logout, the work must be easily and safely resumable by the same or
other logged-in user with the appropriate authorization.
The system shall only process (including store) personal data to the extent
strictly necessary for the system to fulﬁll its purpose.
If the system processes personal data, the system shall allow encryption
or anonymization of the data. The requirement applies to all information
storage databases, logs, backups, ﬁles, etc.
If the system stores personal data, there shall be a retention time based on
a conﬁgurable time period (number of days).
If the system handles sensitive personal data, the system shall be operated
within the EU.
The system shall enable deletion or anonymization of data. The requirement
applies to all information storage databases, logs, backups, ﬁles, etc.
All access to the system including access by administrators must be logged.
CRUD operations on conﬁdential information must be logged.
Logs must be structured so that they can be easily processed and analyzed.
A log entry must not contain conﬁdential information, unless it is necessary
for the systems functions or due to traceability reasons.
All log items must be provided with individual time stamps.
Security log items must specify the subject (user identity) that initiated the
event.
Security log items shall specify the object, i.e., the information which was
processed or for which an action was requested.
Security log item shall specify the action, i.e., how the information was
processed (C) create, (R) read, (U) update, (D) delete.
Security log entry for login together with the time and username must in-
dicate whether the login was successful or failed.
==PAGE:30==
16
System requirements and design
Security log entries for actions together with the time and username must
indicate whether the actions were successful or failed.
Failed log entries must indicate the type of failure whether the action was
failed, denied or other type of an error.
The error management must be designed so that detailed error messages are
logged to the server to facilitate debugging while error messages presented
to the client must not reveal unnecessary details about the application.
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 3
Software architecture
The software architecture in ﬁg. 3.1 adds details to the system architecture of
ﬁg. 2.1.
3.1
Drug safe
A Raspberry Pi board acts as the main controlling unit of the drug safe. Next
sections will explain its components and how it connects to the cloud.
3.1.1
Controller: Raspberry Pi board
The Raspberry Pi controller launches the Docker image with drug safe UI ap-
plication. The Docker image is launched after each reboot. It is also rebooted
automatically in case of an unexpected error.
The controller communicates with the backend through HTTPS API endpoints.
The Raspberry Pi controller is connected to the maintenance server through a
reverse ssh connection. Raspberry Pi is closed to all connections from outside
==PAGE:32==
18
Software architecture
Figure 3.1: Software architecture architecture
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Drug safe
19
and enables only one connection with the maintenance server in the cloud. Each
drug safe controller has a unique port in the cloud for the connection.
3.1.2
Drug safe software
The drug safe software, hosted in the Docker image, logs every action done at
the drug safe: from user authentication to the system until logout of the user.
The system also checks the timeout for an active user. If a pharmacist has not
logged out, the system logs him out automatically and creates an event log entry
that the system did this action. If a pharmacist has not logged out and has not
closed the locker, the system turns on the alarm mode and asks someone to
close the lockers. After switching the alarm mode the controller sends the log
to the backend with a special tag — "open door". When the lockers are closed,
the drug safe logs the user out and edits the log that a particular pharmacist
was logged in and had not closed the locker, i.e., that he had left the locker
full of drugs open. It may be beneﬁcial from security perspective to send the
request with the log every time when the user acts at the drug safe UI. Sending
log entry after each action will help losing last logs of the user in case of the
robbery or disabling the controller forever. But this idea brings a weakness that
will be discussed in section 7.2. The application logs every action: who, what,
when. All the logs are sent at the log-out step to the online backend for storage.
By the law, all the records have to be stored for at least 5 years.
3.1.3
Local database
The drug safe controller needs a local database for quick access to the data
of that particular safe stored in the pharmacy or hospital. The local database
doesn’t contain pin codes or sensitive customer data. All data that it has is the
current inventory of the safe, pairs of GTINs and vnrs for each medication, the
up-to-date list of all medicines on the market, and conﬁguration of the particular
safe. Each time the safe is rebooted, the local database is synchronized with the
online database.
3.1.4
Display
The Raspberry Pi’s screen is an oﬃcial device sold by OKdo Technology Limited
and manufactured in the United Kingdom. These devices are conﬁrmed to be
safe and secure.
==PAGE:34==
20
Software architecture
3.1.5
Bar code reader
A bar code reader is used for reading the 2D bar codes from the packages,
reservation bar codes, and traditional bar codes from packages that don’t have
a 2D bar code. No security rules are required for this component, as it is not
using the internet and has no access to sensitive data. But the bar code reader
should serve without mistakes in reading the 2D bar codes and should be reliable
and fast. The drug safe uses the same bar code readers as some pharmacies have
at checkouts in Finland.
3.1.6
Lock control unit
The lock control unit uses interface RS485 for communicating with the lockers.
RS485 allows multipoint communication, i.e., up to 32 transmitters or receivers
and may be connected on a conductor pair in a half-duplex communication.
Note that the RS485 standard deﬁnes only the electrical characteristics of the
signals and devices and not the rules for accessing the RS485 bus, i.e., the
communication protocol [SM05].
The lock control unit has no access to the
internet and can be contacted only by the Raspberry Pi controller. They have
a wired connection via USB. The lock control unit cannot accept any wireless
requests. It has no manual buttons for opening the lockers. The control unit
fulﬁlls the security rules for such a component. The unit is located under the
drug safe in a closed place. The pharmacy personnel or the potential robber
can not access the control unit without breaking the whole drug safe. Only
the Remomedi Oy personnel can open the closed place with the control unit to
change it in case of a crash.
3.2
Backend server
The backend and web application are hosted in the cloud.
3.2.1
Backend application
The backend application processes all requests from the drug safe controller
and the web application. The backend application provides a REST API for
the drug safe controller and the web application. The backend code is hosted in
Google Cloud Platform (GCP) Functions. The cloud platform provides Cloud
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Backend server
21
Endpoints for the web application and the drug safe controller for triggering
REST API endpoints. The backend application has a connection with the online
database to store and fetch data.
3.2.2
Online Database
The online database includes all information about the pharmacies and safes
that are served by the application server. It contains: users registered and their
pin codes, all medications on the market, pairs of GTINs and vnrs (Finland-
wide and local of each pharmacy or hospital), conﬁgurations for the drug safes
in each pharmacy and their information, drug card information with customer
data, all logged actions done in front of the safes, and user logins and logouts.
All sensitive data is encrypted or hashed, which is explained in chapter 4.
3.2.3
Web application
The web application should be implemented in such a way that the app would
be reachable by any pharmacy user from the local PC. The most appropriate
way is to build a web app that can be opened in all browsers. Hosting of the
web application is also done in the cloud hosting provider.
The server-side web application communicates with the backend application
server through API endpoints secured by a HTTPS tunnel.
3.2.4
Third party service connection
The drug safe has to update the list of medications in the local database twice a
month. For that purpose, it should have a scheduled function that runs twice a
week a piece of code that requests the updated list from the third party service.
The third part has a list of white-listed IP addresses, and thus Remomedi Oy
has added one private static external IP address to that list.
To fetch the data from the service, the request should go though the cloud
NAT, cloud VPC network, cloud router, serverless VPC access, and after that,
the request from the scheduled function will reach the third party service with
the required private IP address and the response will be sent back.
==PAGE:36==
22
Software architecture
3.3
Web client
The web browser represents the web client for the users. The purpose of the
web client is to display to the pharmacist the inventory and data logged by the
drug safe and to add more data or reserve medications. All actions of the web
client are framed by sending CRUD requests: POST, GET, PUT. All requests
and responses are sent through a secure HTTPS tunnel.
3.4
Maintenance server
The maintenance server does not host any website or backend. The need for the
server lies in the reverse ssh connection to the drug safe controllers for remote
maintenance. The server has a static external IP address for the reverse ssh
connections with the drug safe controllers.
==PAGE:37==
Chapter 4
Data protection
This chapter shows that the processing of personal data is necessary for any pub-
lic institution or organization and requires the introduction of a personal data
information system (PDIS) and tools for data protection. The existing meth-
ods and techniques of information protection are mainly focused on protecting
corporate data in information systems. This fully applies to the processing of
personal data; personal data protection is required under the current legislation.
4.1
Information security breach
Information technologies are widely used in data processing, as well as in their
exchange between diﬀerent users. Such processes cover an individual organiza-
tion, its structures, which act as internal users and external users. The ques-
tions of information security are focused on signiﬁcant attention. Security of
information resources covers several issues related to organizational measures,
protection against external threats, protection against leakage of conﬁdential in-
formation. It should be noted that most information security systems are aimed
at protecting against external threats and leakage of conﬁdential information.
Such systems use various protection methods, particularly information ﬁltering
with content analysis to prevent unwanted disclosure of conﬁdential information
==PAGE:38==
24
Data protection
Figure 4.1: Threats to information security breaches.
The picture is taken
from site [EY14]
by publishing ﬁles, sending letters, transferring ﬁles over the network, etc. How-
ever, as the results of studies of various centers show [EY14] working in the ﬁeld
of information security, a signiﬁcant number of incidents related to information
security breaches are caused by internal threats.
The source of such threats is legal users of information systems. The problem of
protecting information resources is fundamental from the point of view of pro-
tecting personal data. Such protection provides for the minimization of losses
that arise when security threats are implemented. Personal data with the ensu-
ing consequences — physical, material, and ﬁnancial is harmful to the subject
of personal data. Therefore, the protection of personal data is recently given
considerable attention in many countries around the world. First of all, this con-
cerns the development of systems for the protection of such data. An important
place is occupied by technical methods, including software, hardware, hardware,
and software that perform information security functions. They should be built
considering the concepts of personal data protection, in accordance with their
structure, threat models, security of personal data, methods of processing, anal-
ysis and data management, database structure. In other words, personal data
protection provides the implementation of a set of organizational and technical
measures that form the structure of the personal data protection system, which
is implemented within the framework of the system being created. We get closer
==PAGE:39==
4.1 Information security breach
25
to the methods in the section 4.2.
Information security threats to their relevance ranked second among such main
threats to business as economic instability, industrial espionage, theft of intel-
lectual property, damage to reputation, etc. It has been established that the
issues of internal security of information systems, in particular the issue of un-
controlled dissemination of data, are now relevant. This is due to the steadily
growing number of recorded cases of information leakage in all countries of the
world. Compared with 2019, when current employees were the primary source
of threats, in 2020, threats more often came from former employees companies.
Moreover, among all sources, the most signiﬁcant increase (58%) compared to
the previous year was noted in incidents related to former service and service
providers. In 2020, the number of incidents in information security identiﬁed by
research participants was 2.5 times higher than the same indicator the previous
year. The number of cases of theft of intellectual property has grown 2.8 times
over the previous year. In 2015, 64% of companies identiﬁed as the strategic
direction of development of information security used big data analysts.
Among the threats to information security, two groups of threats are distin-
guished: internal and external. External threats include threats that arise and
are controlled outside of information systems (IS). From the perspective of in-
formation security and information resources, an advantage is given to external
threats: the ﬁght against external threats. Almost all enterprises use software
and hardware defenses designed to deal with external threats and eﬀectively
resist them, such as anti-virus and anti-spam systems, access control systems
and network screens, intrusion detection system (IDS) and intrusion prevention
system (IPS), etc. At the same time, as studies show, there has been an in-
crease in information leakage outside protected IP in recent years. The amount
of such information (data) is constantly growing. Therefore, protecting informa-
tion from leakage and the implementation of appropriate tools and systems are
receiving increasing attention. These include monitoring systems and audits, au-
thentication systems, encryption, information leakage detection, and prevention
systems. When classifying IP, a number of initial data are taken into account:
the category of information (data) processed in the IP, the volume of processed
information, operator-speciﬁed safety characteristics information or information
resources, the structure of the required IS, the availability of IS connections to
public communication networks or international information networks exchange,
necessary information processing modes, location of technical means of IP, etc.
Other software and hardware tools protecting information from its leaks can-
not be directly attributed to those listed above, such as funds blocking external
storage media. Such systems cannot distinguish information by categories, do
not distinguish restricted information from general information, and implement
individual functions of these information security systems. Systems for detect-
ing and preventing information leaks, the data loss prevention (DLP) systems,
==PAGE:40==
26
Data protection
which are most widespread, are used to preventing information leakage outside
the protected IP space in real-time based on data ﬁltering or external attributes
that accompany the data movement process. Various methods, technologies,
and algorithms are used. They include methods for processing text documents
in order to obtain meaningful information about the structure of the data under
study [PWC16].
However, it should be noted that in the general case, the analysis of information
in such systems concerns blocks or templates. At the same time, it is vital to
analyze the information processed as a whole. This is especially true for per-
sonal data (PD). Initial data for determining actual threats are formed based
on the list of sources of such threats, weak links of the information system, a list
of technical channels of information leakage. Information security threats are
determined based on the results of assessing the capabilities (potential, equip-
ment, and motivation) of external and internal oﬀenders, analysis of possible
vulnerabilities of the information system, possible ways of implementing security
threats information, and consequences of violation information security proper-
ties (conﬁdentiality, integrity, availability). This fully applies to protection PD
that have speciﬁc features; that is, the concept of PD may not apply to block
of information but separate deﬁnitions. For this type of data, it is crucial to
forming a conceptual approach with the deﬁnition of measures that need to be
implemented. A feature of information that circulates in personal data informa-
tion systems (PDIS) is its conﬁdentiality. The main tasks in the work of PDIS
are to provide and support the required level of information security of their re-
sources. The security level of such systems, according to [[EY14], [PWC16]], is
determined by the degree of protection of information from unauthorized access
to it, as well as protection from loss and distortion of data that is processed. At
the same time, the provision required level of PDIS security includes a set of or-
ganizational and technical measures that will exclude or signiﬁcantly minimize
the possibility of the unauthorized dissemination of information, distortion, or
destruction of data. By their structure, PDISs are local information systems, the
composition of which includes hardware and software that are used for PD pro-
cessing. Such systems cannot be separated from corporate information systems
(CIS) but must be an integral part.
This is due to several reasons:
1. The corporate information system (CIS) aims to process and transfer in-
formation to unify all structures (departments, services, etc.) of its owner
into a single space.
2. The separation of PDIS from the CIS complicates both the technical and
software implementation of information processing processes.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Information security breach
27
3. Material costs for the maintenance of information processing systems in-
crease signiﬁcantly.
In case of separation of PDIS from the CIS excludes the possibility of joint
use for processing PD of hardware and software and data transmission chan-
nels included in the CIS. CIS has geographically distributed complex software
and hardware facilities located at all structure management institutions and
interconnected data transmission channels. Such systems may include local in-
formation systems of the corporate center, geographically dispersed branches,
including foreign.
In their composition, they can have external information
systems, such as information systems of partner organizations with access to
information or technical resources of the CIS. Individual elements (jobs) can
be mobile, including those where data processing is carried out, particularly
personal.
Considering the possible types of threats to the security of PD and the require-
ments for their processing, within the framework of the CIS, it is necessary to
introduce an information system that will be aimed at processing PD, that is,
PDIS. To establish the required level of security, PD development and imple-
mentation of such systems require the use of the following protection measures
information:
1. Identiﬁcation and authentication of access subjects and access objects
2. Access control of subjects of access to access objects
3. Limitation of the software environment
4. Protection of machine storage media
5. Registration of security events
6. Anti-virus protection
7. Detection (prevention) of intrusions
8. Control (analysis) of information security
9. Ensuring the integrity of the information system and information
10. Ensuring the availability of information
11. Protection of the virtualization environment
12. Protection of technical equipment
==PAGE:42==
28
Data protection
13. Protection of the information system, its means and communication, and
data transmission systems
Using the above protection measures minimizes threats associated with unau-
thorized access to PDIS resources and partly threats related to unauthorized
data dissemination.
Now let’s discuss the data protection methods and mechanisms.
4.2
Data protection methods
With the development of telecommunication technologies, the number of ways of
data exchange increases. The existing security methods do not provide adequate
protection against data interception or tampering. This is the problem with this
exchange.
To avoid possible negative consequences from the disclosure of transmitted infor-
mation and ensure its protection and privacy security, specialists and scientists
in cryptography have developed appropriate security measures.
Currently, one of the most eﬀective data protection methods is encryption. EN-
CRYPTION is the process of scrambling a message in such as way that its
original content cannot be seen. The original message is called plain text, and
the encrypted message is ciphertext [Gil03]. The primary purpose of encryption
is to ensure the conﬁdentiality and security of data storage and transmit.
For example, when converting plain text into a certain digital code, the readable
text is encrypted into an unreadable set of characters (ciphertext). The neces-
sary knowledge for decrypting the original text is the algorithm and the secret
with which this text was encrypted. Decryption is the process of converting
ciphertext back into the original plain text [Gil03].
There are various types and methods of data encryption. All of them are de-
signed to perform one task — to provide reliable protection of conﬁdential data.
Modern data encryption includes [Gil03]:
1. Symmetric encryption
2. Public key encryption
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Data protection methods
29
3. Hash functions
4. Digital signatures
4.2.1
Symmetric encryption
Symmetric encryption algorithms provide authentication and data integrity. Au-
thentication allows you to verify the source of the message. Integrity ensures
that the content of the message has not been changed since it was sent. Symmet-
ric key encryption uses one public key (shared secret). The public key is used
to encrypt and decrypt the message at the same time. For modern symmetric
algorithms, the cryptographic strength is deﬁned by the key length.
"The AES algorithm (Rijndael) has a variable block length and variable key
length. The current speciﬁcation has the AES block size set to 128 bits, with
three possible key sizes of 128, 192, and 256 bits" [Gil03].
For creating the ciphertext, the AES algorithm uses a cycle of substitutions,
replacements, permutations, and linear shuﬄing of the input data in the block.
The cycle of data transformation is called a "round." AES uses a data lookup
table in one round, shifts rows, shuﬄes columns, and adds round keys.
For example, for a 128-bit key, the algorithm performs 10 rounds; for a 192-bit
key, 12 rounds; and for a 256-bit key, 14 rounds. The increase in the number of
rounds makes data encryption with 192 and 256-bit key lengths even stronger
and more diﬃcult to break.
This algorithm implementation allows AES to be reliable, secure, and eﬃcient
for encrypting large amounts of data. AES’s main advantage is resistance to
multiple known cryptanalysis methods (e.g., diﬀerential and linear cryptanaly-
sis, truncated diﬀerential attack) and hacking [KR11].
"Because the minimum key size speciﬁed by AES is 128 bits, the cipher should
not succumb to brute force attacks any time soon. With 128 bits, 3.4 x 1038
diﬀerent keys are possible, which is 4.72 x 1021 times more keys than with Data
Encryption Standard (DES). Using enough computing power to try all possible
56-bit keys in 1 sec, it would take 150 trillion (1.5 x 1014) years to try all possible
128-bit keys, 2.7 x 1033 years to try all possible 192-bit keys, and 5.1 x 1052
years to try all possible 256-bit keys" [Gil03].
AES-256 is the obvious choice for the encryption of personal data. The diagram
on ﬁg. 4.2 shows the encryption and decryption ﬂow of the sensitive data in the
==PAGE:44==
30
Data protection
drug safe backend. Each pharmacy has its own random cryptographically strong
256bit-key. Every reservation (log) with sensitive customer data is encrypted
with a key and unique IV(initialization vector), created randomly for every new
data stored. When the data is needed to be shown backend decrypts it with
the pharmacy’s key and initialization vector (IV) of this particular data. All
data is transmitted over a secure HTTPS channel with the help of the Google
Firebase Functions API system. Example data in ﬁg. 4.3 shows how the personal
data of the customers are stored, e.g., prescription number, customer name, and
doctor name. Symmetric encryption algorithms are much faster and require less
processing power, but their main drawback is key distribution. Since the same
key is used to encrypt and decrypt information, this key must be passed on to
everyone who needs access, which naturally creates certain risks. But in the case
of the drug safe, the online backend is the only machine that uses the key, and
there is no actual distribution of the keys. This drawback is not applicable, but
the algorithms are faster. This is a massive advantage for the system because
the backend always has to encrypt and decrypt the data.
Because of its speed, symmetric encryption is widely used to protect the infor-
mation in many modern computer systems and governmental systems [KR11].
One more advantage is the key size needed for symmetric encryption: a 128-bit
symmetric key and a 2048-bit asymmetric key provide roughly the same level
of security.
The drug safe keeps it safe and changes the encryption key every 2-4 months.
That’s why the logs have an additional key_gen that keeps the key generation
(it also will hold the encryption algorithm if AES is compromised someday).
Each log entry uses its unique initialization vector for an extra level of security.
4.2.2
Public key encryption
Public Key encryption is asymmetric encryption. This algorithm uses two keys:
public and private. The public key can be shared with everyone, but only the
owner needs to know the private key. These two keys are mathematically related
to each other and are essentially numbers with speciﬁc properties.
If encryption is performed with a public key, decryption can only occur with the
associated private key and vice versa. Thus, the public key is made available
to the public, allowing messages encrypted with this key to be sent, which only
the owner of the corresponding private key can decrypt.
RSA (Rivest-Shamir-Adleman) is public-key encryption used to protect sensi-
tive data when sent over an insecure network. The sender of the message uses
==PAGE:45==
4.2 Data protection methods
31
Figure 4.2: Encryption and Decryption of sensitive data
==PAGE:46==
32
Data protection
Figure 4.3: Personal data encryption in logs
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Data protection methods
33
the recipient’s public key to encrypt messages. Today it is impossible to calcu-
late the coeﬃcients of numbers larger than 768 bits. That is why all modern
cryptosystems use a minimum key length of 3072 bits.
4.2.3
Hash functions
Hashing is a process in which a user enters data of any length and size, and the
output is a string of ﬁxed-length digits. The size of the string depends on the
selected hashing function algorithm.
Hashing is used to authenticate data. Hashing provides relatively high security.
Even if an attacker can get the hash, such data will be useless because he cannot
read it. It means that it is impossible to recover the message from the hash.
Hashing also helps to keep the password safe. Instead of storing the password
itself, it is suﬃcient to store only its hash.
When entering a password, the
system checks and compares the hash of the entered password with the stored
hash. Hashing uses algorithms known as hash functions.
"Argon2 is a multi-purpose family of hashing schemes, which is suitable for
password hashing, key derivation, cryptocurrencies, and other applications that
require provably high memory use. The key feature of Argon2 is its performance
and the ability to use multiple computational cores in a way that prohibits time-
memory tradeoﬀs" [BDK16].
Today graphics processing units (GPU) and special devices dramatically accel-
erate brute force attacks, which are diﬃcult to ﬁght even with the help of such
things as bcrypt. A competition was started, the result of which was to de-
termine an algorithm that is diﬃcult to accelerate on special chips and GPUs.
At the same time, it should be customizable depending on the wishes of the
developer. Argon2 became such an algorithm [PHC].
Argon2 allows you to conﬁgure the following hashing parameters: number of
iterations, desired memory footprint, degree of parallelism, result size in bytes,
the secret key, additional data.
Also, Argon2 is available in two modes: Argon2i and Argon2d. The ﬁrst one
makes more memory passes and is slower, the second one is faster, but it lacks
protection against timing attacks, and it is also more challenging to brute force
it on the GPU.
The ﬁrst is recommended for hashing passwords, and the second is for cryp-
tocurrencies, where timing attacks are not scary. In the case of the drug safe
==PAGE:48==
34
Data protection
Figure 4.4: Pin code hashing in the user model
the obvious choice for storing passwords and pin codes is Argon2i. The ﬁg. 4.4
shows how the pin code is stored for the drug safe user.
Although, pin code has extremely low entropy, due to that brute forcing and
guessing the pin code is easy even with the argon2 function. This threat will
be discussed in section 7.1. But in case of spooﬁng the hashed pin code the
attacker can easily brute force and get the pin code of the user. The possibility
of using a pin code with low entropy is justiﬁed by the fact that the pin code
can be used only by entering it at the drug safe UI. Hashing of the pin codes
is done mostly for anonymization of the pin codes for the administrator of the
database.
Hashing the passwords for the web application users is a required security condi-
tion. Passwords of the users have high entropy with possibility to use characters,
digits and special symbols. This part is also discussed in section 7.1.
4.2.4
Digital signatures
A digital signature is an array of data generated using a private key. Digital
signatures are used to conﬁrm the sender’s validity (only the sender has the
private key).
The process of creating and verifying a digital signature can be represented in
the following way:
1. Formation of a string of data
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Data protection methods
35
2. Generation of a private-public key pair
3. Encrypting the string with the sender’s private key using a hash function
4. Formation of a signature
5. Adding the signer’s public key to the signature
6. Veriﬁcation of the signature by the recipient using the public key and the
key certiﬁcate
7. Authorship check of the message, i.e., whether the signature belongs to its
owner
Since digitally signed ﬁles and messages are vulnerable to public key attacks, the
signature is not placed on the data itself but its hash computed by cryptographic
hash functions. In this case, when verifying the signature, only the hash of the
original text will be available. If the used hash function is cryptographically
strong, it will be diﬃcult to calculate the source text, which means that an
attack of this type becomes impossible.
4.2.5
Encryption key storage
Having chosen and implemented the encryption algorithm is only the ﬁrst step
of creating the secure application. Few more issues arise: key derivation, key
storage, and key distribution. As the application that runs and processes the
sensitive, conﬁdential data is alone and single, there is no need for key distribu-
tion. It is enough to create the key and properly store it.
If there were no need to create or change encryption keys, the task of key
derivation would no arise also. Due to security requirements, it is mandatory to
have a unique key for each pharmacy, and the keys should be changed from time
to time. Of course, the administrator can do it manually, but that is not the
most stable way. Backend functionality should include automatic encryption
key derivation. For that purpose, the backend should have a separate function
that excepts the pharmacy’s id as a parameter and can be called anytime needed
to change or create a key for the pharmacy.
The last but not the least important issue is key storage. There were always
quite a lot of ways to store the key.
Some developers save it as plain text
hardcoded. This approach makes the application vulnerable because the keys
are stored in plain text in the source code. Some developers use .env ﬁles to
store the key. It is still saved as plain text, or probably as base64, but already
==PAGE:50==
36
Data protection
not included in the source code. Still, this approach is not the safest way to
manage the keys. Another solution would be to create a separate function that
will return the key, but this approach is similar to mentioned before. The safest
way is using the external Hardware Security Module (HSM). The problem of
storing the key is relocated to safe storing of the physical device. Unfortunately,
this method does not apply to the system used by pharmacies all over the Nordic
countries. Even if the key transportation problem can be solved, the possibility
of spontaneous change of the key disappears.
The drug safe will use the cloud Key Management System (KMS) from Google.
Google provides the service for handling the keys and passwords — Secret Man-
ager. "Secret Manager is a secure and convenient storage system for API keys,
passwords, certiﬁcates, and other sensitive data. Secret Manager provides a cen-
tral place and single source of truth to manage, access, and audit secrets across
Google Cloud" [Goob]. The backend application has to import the google cloud
secret manager service and feed the project’s credentials. Every time the ap-
plication needs the key for encryption or decryption, it should call the client of
the Secret Manager and fetch the appropriate key.
==PAGE:51==
Chapter 5
Logging
This chapter discusses all possible logs for the system. It includes access logs of
the users to the drug safe UI and web application, access logs of the adminis-
trator to the backend server and Raspberry Pi controller, and access logs to the
Firebase hosting. This is mandatory, as it is one of the requirements by the law.
In addition to being a legal requirement, the access log reduces the likelihood
that employees misuse their access to the drugs, and it enables accountability
for the employees if something goes wrong.
Of course, not everything should be logged. Sometimes it is unnecessary and
even dangerous, e.g., if someone’s personal data is being logged. But there are
also things that must be logged:
1. Application’s start and ﬁnish. That is needed to know that the application
started as was expected and completed as expected.
2. Security issues. The system should log any detected security incidents,
such as failed password entries and drawers left open after access.
3. User access. Login and logout, and access to the drug safe UI, to any
sensitive data, and to the drawers and drugs, as well as access to the web
application data.
==PAGE:52==
38
Logging
4. States of the application. Transition from one state to another in a busi-
ness process can be logged to provide information to the developers on the
application usage and to detect deviations from expected patterns.
5. Information for debugging, with an appropriate level of logging.
6. Executed threads can be logged when there is a need to check for correct
operation.
There are also several common mistakes in the logging process:
1. Excessive logging. It is not necessary to log every step. Logging must
not increase the system load by more than 10%. Otherwise, there will be
performance problems.
2. Logging all data into one ﬁle. This will make it diﬃcult to read and write
to it at some point.
5.1
User access logs
This section will discuss how the user logs are saved and stored.
5.1.1
Logs from the drug safe
The most important part of the drug safe product is logging the user actions.
Each action at the drug safe should be logged and stored for the next 6 years,
as the law requires.
Logs of the drug safe can be separated into two categories: mandatory logs of
login-logout and logs of the actions. Mandatory login-logout logs are stored in
the separate table of the database. Each pharmacy has its dedicated path for
the storage of the login-logout data. The algorithm is the same for the drug safe
UI users and web application users. The storage of the logs will be discussed in
section 5.1.2.
One of the drug safe’s critical features is the logging of all user actions at the
drug safe. Whatever the user does at the drug safe, it is stored in the database.
If the user opens the locker to ﬁll in medication or take out or perform an
inventory check, it is logged and stored to the backend. All actions are saved
==PAGE:53==
5.1 User access logs
39
Figure 5.1: Example log entry from an inventory check action
locally at the drug safe and are sent to the backend at the end of the operation.
The example of the log storage is shown in ﬁg. 5.1.
5.1.2
Logs from the web application
The system logs user access to the web application. The backend stores the
logins of the user to the database. Also, if the user logs out explicitly or the
session times out, the logout is logged and stored in the database. An example
of the storage is shown on ﬁg. 5.2.
==PAGE:54==
40
Logging
Figure 5.2: Log entry for login-logout actions in a separate database
5.2
Administrator access logs
This section discusses accessing the administrator tools by the maintainers or
theoretical attackers.
5.2.1
Logs from the backend server
The server is a Linux server, and it uses the same commands as any Linux
machine. Information about who access (logged in) or tried to access the system
is stored in the log ﬁles. Three log ﬁles are used for this:
1. /var/log/btmp — failed login attempts.
2. /var/run/utmp — who is currently logged in (current sessions).
3. /var/log/wtmp — list of all login sessions.
The last command is used to view the login logs. By default, the last command
prints information from the ﬁle /var/log/wtmp, which stores records of all login
sessions. Listing 5.1 shows an example of the last command output.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 Administrator access logs
41
Listing 5.1: Example of logs in the GCP VM server
s a f e u s e r
pts /1
193. xx . 6 7 . xx
Fri
Jun 04
15:38 −15:40
( 0 0 : 0 1 )
alex . sub
pts /0
35. xxx . 2 4 1 . xxx
Fri
Jun 04
15:35 −16:35
( 0 0 : 5 9 )
alex_sub
pts /0
35. xxx . 2 4 1 . xxx
Fri
Jun 04
14:30 −15:33
( 0 1 : 0 3 )
A ﬁle should have write permissions only for the system to prevent the at-
tacker from cleaning the access logs. One additional security level step would
be deploying a script that subscribes to the access log ﬁle, and when a new
entry appears in the ﬁle, the log is sent to the backend and saved in the online
database. The backend can add more logic and validate the IP address of the
user. If the IP address is not white-listed or in a new geolocation, an alert can
be sent to the maintainer’s email.
5.2.2
Logs from the drug safe controller
As it was described in chapter 3, the controller is closed to all connections
and closed for accepting any requests, but it is connected via reverse ssh to
the maintenance server. The controller runs the same Linux system, and the
logs from the Raspberry Pi (together with logouts) can be checked with the
same command last. Due to the reverse ssh, the IP address connected to the
Raspberry Pi stays the same, but the user can vary. One critical issue to mention
is that even with reverse ssh, the user still needs to know the password to the
particular Raspberry Pi machine. Each Raspberry Pi has its own password for
authorizing user access and public key for authenticating the machine connecting
to the maintenance server.
Listing 5.2: Example of logs in the Raspberry Pi
remo_admin pts /1
: : 1
Fri
Jun 04
17:13
s t i l l
logged
in
remo_admin pts /1
: : 1
Fri
Jun 04
16:38 −16:52
( 0 0 : 1 4 )
remo_admin pts /1
: : 1
Fri
Jun 04
11:27 −16:35
( 0 5 : 0 7 )
5.2.3
Logs from the Firebase
Google provides an easy way to check all the users that were logged in to the
Firebase system. Firstly, access to the Firebase is given by email. If there is only
one person on the project, the developer is sure no other people are accessing the
project. If the email was compromised, then the activity logs will show all the
access to the Firebase and the owner can change the password. Activity logging
is disabled by default, but it can be enabled with a REST API request. After
enabling it, a log entry is created for each user request, including authentication.
==PAGE:56==
42
Logging
If more than one developer is working in the Firebase system, the logs viewer
will help the maintainer to check the accessing of the Firebase services and other
logs.
Developers can also quickly check the logs from the Firebase Functions or Host-
ing in the Firebase admin panel.
==PAGE:57==
Chapter 6
Implementation
This chapter will discuss the implementation of the drug safe product. The
drug safe contains several components: online backend, online database, online
web application, remote cloud server, safe, Raspberry Pi controller, dockerized
backend server and frontend application. Let’s get closer at the implementation
of each of them.
6.1
Software implementation
6.1.1
Backend server
The online backend has the Node.js application based on Typescript. Using
Typescript as the backend language enables the use of Firebase Functions eas-
ily. The Firebase Functions service is a secure and easily maintainable way to
host the backend. Firebase Functions provide by default secure HTTPS API
endpoints and scheduled functions for automated updates. The Node.js applica-
tion is the heart of the whole project as it processes all requests from the Docker
application in the Raspberry Pi controller and from the online web application.
Firebase Realtime Database was chosen for the online database. It is light and
==PAGE:58==
44
Implementation
easy to use, and fast to get data. The backend does not use complex database
requests, and Firebase Realtime Database perfectly fulﬁlls its function with no
delays and extra backend manipulations. Due to sensitive data in the online
database, the choice of Firebase Realtime Database is justiﬁed, as it is stable,
secure, and includes automated backups.
The Node.js application does not use any frameworks such as Express or Impress
but implements its native API. Using native Node.js is the most eﬃcient way
of creating REST API application. Otherwise, the frameworks downgrade the
performance of the application. Node.js without frameworks is faster than the
same applications built with the help of Express. The comparison of the speeds
can be measured based on examples of Timur Shemsedinov in his Github repos-
itories [Sheb] and [Shea]. As Timur writes in his post [Shec], the best synergy of
application can be reached by combining the web applications and backend in
one language. The main idea is that the problems of technology fragmentation
can be solved if the entire technology stack is designed in accordance with fo-
cusing on data structures, syntax, and communication protocols of components.
Most incompatibility issues will disappear by themselves. Even if this approach
is alternative and experimental, its task will be fulﬁlled if it outlines the path
and demonstrates the fundamental possibility of creating a simple and elegant
general-purpose solution. This idea is a natural extension of the Node.js ap-
proach, where the number of languages and technologies are reduced through
developing both the client and server sides in JavaScript.
Due to this idea, the web application was also developed with a Javascript
framework. The web application was built using the VueJS framework. It is
lightweight, easy to develop, and includes all the tools needed to create a secure
web application. There is no need for more powerful frameworks such as React
or Angular for building this web application.
The web application is hosted on Firebase hosting.
6.1.2
Drug safe
Unfortunately, the idea of using the same language on all systems could not be
completed because of the impossibility of using only JavaScript on a Raspberry
Pi device. Each Raspberry Pi drug safe controller launches a Docker image.
The Docker image consists of the Kivy framework, Python backend, and SQlite
Database that is mounted with local database of the drug safe controller. It
also includes all the libraries, dependencies, and extra services that the appli-
cation needs for running. The Python application uses HTTP API requests for
synchronizing with the online backend and Firebase Realtime Database.
==PAGE:59==
6.2 User interface implementation
45
The Raspberry Pi controller starts the Docker image, which includes the appli-
cation. For automatic updates, the Raspberry Pi uses a script that checks for
an update of the Docker image and pulls it. The application makes requests
to the backend hosted on Firebase Functions, and all drug safe controllers have
open access to the internet. But they don’t accept any requests from outside,
and the response and information can come only as answers to the requests sent
from the drug safe controller.
SQlite3 acts as the local database in the controller. It is lightweight and fast.
6.1.3
Maintenance server
The choice of the server was made in favor of the Google Cloud Platform (GCP)
and a virtual machine (VM) instance. The choice of GCP VM instance is con-
ditioned by the ﬂexibility and variety of the available machine types, easy and
automated scalability, automated backup system, stability, and security. Choos-
ing the GCP VM implies getting the protection that Google has developed.
The server is located in Europe and has a static external IP address for connec-
tion from the drug safes controllers and for remote access by users.
6.2
User interface implementation
The drug safe box is assembled from a big drawer with a Raspberry Pi screen
and bar code reader, 8 small drawers, and two large ones. Appendix C shows few
live photos of the usage of the drug safe box together with UI. Photos presented
in appendix C show few examples of take-out and put-in functionality.
Appendix A shows screenshots of the drug safe UI. This chapter presents all
the screens that the user sees when working at the drug safe (as shown in the
pictures in appendix C).
The display that the pharmacist uses is a touch screen display. Considering
that the quality of the display is not the best on the market, all the buttons
are large enough for use without missing, and the responsiveness of the screen
is fast enough. The bar code reader auto-detects the objects in front of it and
tries to read any bar code found in the area of accessibility. The drawers are
telescopic and easy to pull and push.
==PAGE:60==
46
Implementation
Appendix B demonstrates the screenshots of the web application.
The web
application can be opened in every modern browser like Google Chrome, Safari,
Mozilla Firefox, Chromium, Edge, etc. The usage of the web application comes
down to using a simple website.
==PAGE:61==
Chapter 7
Evaluation
7.1
Systematic threat analysis with STRIDE
One of the ﬁrst steps to consider when building a secured system is to understand
the threats as best as possible. Threats are potential events that can cause a
system to respond in an unexpected damaging way [TCT06]. Threat modeling
is the approach of identifying potential threats and security holes to protect
valuable information, such as conﬁdential data.
In the ﬁeld of secure software systems, STRIDE is a model that is well known
and can be used to categorize the threats to ﬁnd strategies to overcome them.
STRIDE is an acronym that stands for the following threats [TCT06]:
1. Spooﬁng identity. Spooﬁng occurs when an attacker successfully poses as
an authorized user of a system.
2. Tampering with data. Data tampering occurs when an attacker modiﬁes,
adds, deletes, or reorders data.
3. Repudiation. Repudiation occurs when a user denies an action and no
proof exists to prove that the action was performed.
==PAGE:62==
48
Evaluation
4. Information disclosure. Information disclosure occurs when information is
exposed to an unauthorized user.
5. Denial of service. Denial-of-service denies service to valid users. Denial-
of-service attacks are easy to accomplish and diﬃcult to guard against.
6. Elevation of privilege. Elevation of privilege occurs when an unprivileged
user or attacker gains higher privileges in the system than what they are
authorized.
7.1.1
Spooﬁng identity
Spooﬁng identity is aimed to ﬁnd a vulnerability in the authentication process.
For drug safe, spooﬁng can occur when an unauthorized user gets access to the
drug safe UI or the web application.
Drug safe UI gives access to the user only after entering the correct pin code.
Each user of the pharmacy has his unique 5digit code. In terms of security
regarding brute-forcing attacks — the 5digit code is weak. Still, the drug safe
is located inside the pharmacy in the inventory room, and no people except the
pharmacists have physical access to the room and the drug safe. There is no
way to access the drug safe over the air; the drug safe application is running
locally with no connection to the internet (except sending the API endpoints
and receiving the response).
Suppose one of the pharmacists appears to be an attacker. He has to brute
force 100000 password combinations. It takes 3 seconds to type 5 digit code and
approximately 1 second to send the request, receive the response, and display
the result. The attacker needs 4 seconds for each combination. It is 400000
seconds to brute force all passwords. It is 111 hours of manual brute forcing
in front of the box. The pharmacist cannot do it all day as the pharmacy is
open only 8-12 hours per day. This is not less than 10 days of brute-forcing.
Another blocking factor is that the pharmacist cannot brute force the passwords
the whole day because it is suspicious.
Brute forcing the pin code is not possible as each request from each box comes
with a secret token of the pharmacy and static IP address delivered by the
carrier.
Secondly, the drug safe backend blocks the drug safe UI pin code request for 5
minutes after failed authorization, 15 minutes after the next 5 failed attempts.
Finally, after the subsequent 5 failed attempts, the authorization is blocked for
the drug safe UI, and the pharmacy owner has to unfreeze the block.
==PAGE:63==
7.1 Systematic threat analysis with STRIDE
49
Summing it up, it is implausible that the unauthorized user gets access to the
drug safe by brute-forcing the pin code.
The next instance to review is the web application. The web application has a
login page that requires entering the email and the password. Password should
be at least 8 characters long, at least 1 uppercase letter, and at least 1 digit.
The incorrect login error message does not include information on whether the
email or password was incorrect. After every 3 incorrect passwords for the web
user email, the account is frozen for 5 minutes. After 9 incorrect attempts, the
IP address of the request sender is frozen. It can be unfrozen from the super
admin panel only.
Choosing a strong enough password that most likely is not in the dictionary
of well-known passwords lies on the user. In case of successful brute-forcing
of the weak password, the responsibility lies on the user. For setting up the
password, the user has a set of 32 characters, 10 digits, and at least 52 upper-
and lowercase letters.
~‘!@#$%^&*()_-+={[}]|\:;"’<,>.?/
It is at least 94 character choices for each position in 8 characters length pass-
word.
These are 948 possible passwords.
Disregarding the email freezing of
account for 5 minutes and disregarding the IP blocking, and assuming that each
request with response takes 0.01sec, the attacker needs 6∗1013 seconds or 3∗109
years.
Additionally, Each pharmacy can request to allow the IP address range that
they use and blacklist all other IP addresses. In that case, all web users of that
pharmacy can access the web application only from the network of the pharmacy
under speciﬁc IP.
The login function is handled by Firebase authentication. After successful login,
the web application receives the Firebase token. Each API endpoint is secured
by a token middleware function that checks the token sent with the request.
Firebase token authentication system uses a secure JSON Web Token (JWT)
standard for the implantation of the authentication process.
Summing it up, it is implausible that the unauthorized user accesses the drug
safe we application by brute-forcing the password.
==PAGE:64==
50
Evaluation
7.1.2
Tampering with data
The main goal of data tampering is to break the integrity of the system. In the
case of drug safe, an attacker can try to add, modify or delete logs.
Drug cards and logs are the most crucial data that stores the database. Take-
out logs also include encrypted personal customer data. Keeping the integrity
of the logs and providing security is the highest priority of the system. Data
tampering also includes possible modiﬁcations to user’s data, inventory, medi-
cation information, adding unknown medications to the database, etc. Making
any CRUD operations to the data is possible in 2 ways: manually to Firebase
Database or via API endpoints.
For manual Database modiﬁcations, the user’s email should be included in the
Firebase project with at least Editors permissions. Firebase project has only
1 email with Owner permissions for Oleksandr Subtselnyi, and there are no
other emails that can access the project. It means that breaking the access
to the Firebase project is possible only by breaking the email. It means that
the security of the email is the critical point in the security of the database.
For that reason, the password for the email is cryptographically secure with
32 randomly generated characters. Additionally, the email is connected to a
2-Factor authentication system that allows the user to enter the email box only
when the user knows the password and has access to the mobile two-factor
authentication (2FA) application.
With regards to modiﬁcations through API, the developer has to take more
factors into account. There are 2 types of API endpoints in the system: for
the drug safe UI and the web application. Due to the high importance of the
log information, there is no endpoint available to change the log data. It is
only possible to create logs or append information to the logs. Logs cannot be
deleted or changed. All information that should not be changed is restricted to
all "write" operations with the help of Firebase Database rules. Medications
list table, List of GTIN-vnr relationships are open only to read actions. It is
not possible to add or change data to these tables.
API for drug safe UI is allowed only to authenticated users from Remomedi
whitelisted IP addresses. Each drug safe is connected to a modem with a Re-
momedi sim card. The carrier of the Remomedi has supplied the company with
a range of IP addresses which each sim card uses. It means that the requests
to drug safe API are accepted only from sim cards that were supplied for the
Remomedi company. Secondly, each web API endpoint (except authentication)
requires the unique JWT token generated for the authenticated user.
Each
route is guarded by the middleware that authenticated the user that sends the
==PAGE:65==
7.1 Systematic threat analysis with STRIDE
51
request.
Each pharmacy can request extra security by blacklisting all IP addresses for
their web application users except the IP address of the pharmacy. By default,
this option is not included. The middleware guards each endpoint and checks
the user’s token included in the header of the request that the user should have
received during the authentication process.
7.1.3
Repudiation
A repudiation attack is aiming to break non-repudiability protocol. In frames
of the drug safe the user can deny acting upon the web application or drug safe.
A non-repudiation protocol requires that the user cannot deny actions.
In the case of the drug safe, it is impossible to repudiate actions that the user
has performed; it is not possible to erase data from the logs as it is a prohibited
action due to Firebase rules. There is also no possible access to the Database
and no API endpoints available for removing or changing the logs.
7.1.4
Information disclosure
Information disclosure is aimed to break the conﬁdentiality of the system. For
drug safe it is vital to retain all the logs and especially user data conﬁdential.
The biggest threat if the information about the individual is disclosed. In this
case, the attacker can threaten a person for having disease or for a need to
buy speciﬁc drug-containing medications. All data about private customers and
individuals are encrypted in the best way for the 2021y market. We get closer to
it in chapter 4. In this chapter, we assume that the data is stored not properly,
and that it is dangerous to disclose information for an attacker.
Drug safe UI is protected against information disclosure attacks. First of all,
the local database does not contain any sensitive or personal data. It contains
only the list of medications and the current inventory. Secondly, drug safe is
not reachable from the outside. It has no API and no open ssh connection. The
drug safe Raspberry Pi is closed to all requests and all connections except the
GCP VM server connection. The only possible way to connect to the drug safe
is through the GCP VM server. For that, the attacker has to get access to the
GCP VM server. The only way to access the GCP server is to authenticate as
a user with an RSA key. Currently, only one user has access to the server, and
thus, only one allowed RSA key added. To get access to the server, the attacker
==PAGE:66==
52
Evaluation
has to steal the RSA key. The RSA key to the GCP server is stored locally on
the developer’s computer and has a reserve copy on the USB stick. The security
of the server lies in properly storing and hiding the RSA key from the server.
The online database has way more sensitive data stored as well as private cus-
tomer data. It is also a threat when an attacker gets access to the pharmacy’s
logs or inventory. The system should be secured from information disclosure
to third parties.
Firstly, the system should be protected from access to the
database, which was already discussed and supposed to be secure. Secondly,
all the API requests should be accepted only from authenticated users with the
Firebase token. Thirdly, all the requests and responses should go through a se-
cure HTTPS tunnel which is implemented. It means that no unauthorized user
can access the logs, inventory, or customer data information. One additional
step of security can be whitelisting the pharmacy’s IP address and blacklisting
all others.
7.1.5
Denial of service
The goal of a denial of service attack is to undermine the stable availability of
the system. The total number of attacks during Q3 2019 increased by 241%
compared with the same period of 2018 [The20]. For drug safe the threat of
denial of service (DoS) attack lies in multiple brute-forcing and spamming the
API endpoints.
Firstly, the API endpoints for the Drug safe cannot be DDoSed as they are
acceptable only from the whitelisted range of IP addresses. It is more diﬃcult
with API endpoints for web applications, as it is globally accessible. Then the
responsibility of protecting the service against DDoS attacks mitigates to the
Google Cloud Functions. Due to one received answer from the engineering team
(as of 4th of April 2018): "Cloud Functions sits behind the Google Front End
which mitigates and absorbs many Layer 4 and below attacks, such as SYN
ﬂoods, IP fragment ﬂoods, port exhaustion, etc." Also, Google has prepared a
checklist to follow for securing the google cloud functions. One of the points is
"Set up monitoring and alerting for backend services. To detect abusive traﬃc,
such as denial-of-service (DOS) attacks, set up monitoring and alerting for Cloud
Firestore, Realtime Database, Cloud Storage, and Hosting" [Gooa]. One more
signiﬁcant piece of information included in the checklist is "Cloud Functions
automatically scales to meet your app’s demands, but in the event of an attack,
this can mean a big bill" [Gooa]. It means that the cloud functions are easy
and automatically scalable, then if the attacker tries to DDoS the service, it
would not stop answering, but it will be enlarged with instances that will raise
the bill. A good feature of the google functions is that the owner can set up
==PAGE:67==
7.1 Systematic threat analysis with STRIDE
53
the alerting system and receive a notiﬁcation when the bill goes too high (which
means that the number of responses grew very fast). It probably means that
the attacker tries to DDoS the system. As [The20] proposes, system should use
methods such as monitoring for fast identiﬁcation of infections.
One more layer of protection is enabling Google cloud Armour that helps to
protect web applications against DoS and web attacks.
(https://cloud.google.com/armor/)
An attacker can also route all of his power to one speciﬁc pharmacy and can
interfere with the internet connection for a particular pharmacy. Elimination of
this danger is the responsibility of the pharmacy.
7.1.6
Elevation of privilege
Elevation of privilege is aimed to ﬁnd vulnerabilities in the authorization process.
In the case of drug safe, the threat lies in gaining higher privilege: from a simple
pharmacist to a pharmacy owner. In that case, the pharmacist can complete
inventory checks or signing the reports in the web application.
In case of access to the server or database, there is also a possibility of users
getting higher permissions.
There is only one owner and developer on both
platforms. The user is connected directly with the email for database access.
The user needs to have the RSA key for accessing the server. There is no dan-
ger in other users getting higher privileges, as there are no other users. Let’s
look closer for situations where they’re more than one administrator. For the
database, each user is granted access based on his email. Firebase has its role-
based system, which shows itself secure and stable. For the server, each user
is granted access with his own RSA key pair. Each user receives the permis-
sions for the server as a UNIX-system user. Role-based access control (RBAC)
in Unix systems shows itself as a secure and stable solution for already many
years. RBAC is more appropriate and central to the secure processing needs
within industry and civilian government than Discretionary Access Controls
(DAC) [FK92]. The RBAC model has the following components: users, roles,
permissions and sessions; a many-to-many permission to role assignment rela-
tion; a many-to-many user to role assignment relation; a function mapping each
session to the single user; and a function mapping each session to a set of roles
[SCFY95]. "Fine-grained authorization is built into the design of the RBAC
databases so that various aspects of their management can be assigned to sep-
arate roles. Treating roles as UNIX principals allows existing applications and
interfaces to work with RBAC without requiring that they be rewritten to use
new interfaces and databases" [Fad99]. Each user who has access to the server
==PAGE:68==
54
Evaluation
with its key cannot upgrade his role without spooﬁng the user’s identity with
higher permissions.
A more realistic scenario for the drug safe system is an elevation of privileges
for the registered users, both: drug safe UI and web application. Each user of
the drug safe UI or web user has his role. The application uses a role-based
access control system. Each user has his own role assigned in the system. The
permissions are assigned through the API endpoint. API endpoint for changing
the permissions is available only through the web application and only for the
pharmacy owner. The role checking middleware guards the Endpoint, and only
the owner can assign or change the roles to other users. The backend is imple-
mented in a way that the owner cannot create another owner but can create the
pharmacist with higher permissions — the main pharmacist. The main pharma-
cist with higher permissions can fulﬁll all the same actions as an owner, except
changing the permissions for the users and assigning main pharmacists. This
solution protects against elevation of privilege, such as downgrading the owner’s
permissions for the web application, creating users with higher permissions.
7.1.7
Conclusion
Based on described protections against the main points of the threat model,
build on the STRIDE methodology, we can claim that the drug safe system is
secure against possible threats and attacks. Let’s go ahead and move on to the
next topic of risk analysis.
7.2
Risk analysis
As stated in [ANY06], the risk is a probable loss occurring on future time points
at a conﬁdence probability level related to the expected value of a measure.
Losses can be assumed because of the non-expected behavior of component or
resource or working environment of a critical process.
Project Risk Management Institute has developed guidelines for risk manage-
ment. These guidelines include risk management planning, risk identiﬁcation,
qualitative risk analysis, quantitative risk analysis, risk response planning, and
risk monitoring and tracking [HR09].
In software development, risk analysis is used to ﬁnd the risks in the product
or project, deﬁne who or what can be harmed because of the hazard, assess the
==PAGE:69==
7.2 Risk analysis
55
risks, and take precautions.
To get the solution and minimize risks, the developer should complete few steps:
1. Identify risks
2. Assess the impact of uncertainty.
3. Build risk analysis
4. Analyze the results
5. Find the solution
A risk assessment methodology typically includes: a risk assessment process; an
explicit risk model; an assessment approach; and an analysis approach [Nat12].
Let’s check the legal requirements for the drug safe system. They can aﬀect the
risk assessment and add additional threats to the model.
7.2.1
Inventory checks
There are no rules for how often inventory needs to be checked. The pharmacy
owner can decide this for themselves (the pharmacy makes its own rules and
is responsible for it). Due to this, the drug safe should allow the pharmacy to
do the action as often as possible, i.e., make inventory check after each action
(put in, take out). However, this possibility has to be optional. Due to this, the
drug safe has to propose another solution for the inventory check. The inventory
check can be processed as a separate action at any time.
When the medication is taken out because of the expiry date or other reason
except selling to the customer, the log should be signed by 2 people, one of
which is responsible for the take-out action. The log entry should contain the
name of the drug, the amount of the drug, lot number, and serial numbers of
the drug.
For each pharmacy or hospital, expiring medications causes problems from both
sides: ﬁnancially and administratively.
According to Fimea’s regulations, the pharmacy always has to take care of ex-
pired medications: "Go through the contents of your medicine cabinet regularly
and remove any expired or unused drugs" [Fimb].
==PAGE:70==
56
Evaluation
The drug safe helps the pharmacy sell the drugs that are closer to the expiry
date. Each package stored has a unique GS1 (Global Standards 1) Data Matrix
that includes the 2D code with the encoded expiry date. The drug safe can read
the 2D codes and detect the expiry date. If the package does not include a 2D
code, the pharmacist can enter the expiry date manually. The main idea of this
preparation is when the customer needs medication, the pharmacist will take
the package with the soonest expiry date. All other packages inside the cabinet
will remain valid.
Also, the web application provides the possibility to track all medications inside
the cabinet and check expiry dates remotely. If medications are getting expired
soon, the pharmacy gets a notiﬁcation about that a few months before.
Drug safe has an easy feature to take expired medication out to exempt staﬀ
from paperwork. Expired medications are taken out during inventory by the
pharmacy owner and are marked as expired. The log is added to the drug card,
and inventory is decreased automatically.
Storing conditions. "Some medicines that are stored at room temperature
may be sensitive to light, and the best place for the medicine is your medicine
cabinet or shelf where the temperature is suitable (below 25 degrees Celsius), and
the package will not be exposed to sunlight or humidity" [Fimc]. Each package
in the drug safe is not exposed to sunlight. As the drug safe is located in a
designated room inside the pharmacy where the pharmacy keeps the appropriate
temperature, no other requirements (temperature check or coolers, etc.) are set
for the drug safe. For some medications that require a temperature close to 0,
the drug safe proposes a locker with a fridge.
7.2.2
Risk identiﬁcation
One more additional step that helps in identifying risks is building a SWOT
analysis.
SWOT analysis is a process by which a group of stakeholders (a)
identiﬁes internal and external inhibitors and enhancers of performance, (b)
analyze those factors based on estimates of their contributions to net value and
approximations of their controllability, and (c) decide what future action to take
with regard to those factors [Lei09].
Each abbreviation letter has its own meaning: S- Strength, W- Weakness, O-
Opportunity, T- Threat.
As Doug Leigh says in one of his chapters, "SWOT Analysis," each abbreviation
means the following:
==PAGE:71==
7.2 Risk analysis
57
Figure 7.1: SWOT Analysis
1. Strength: internal proﬁciency improvement, valuable source or property
2. Weakness: internal interference of capability, sources, or properties
3. Opportunity: a possible external improvement that will bring beneﬁts
4. Threat: external interference of performance that can lead to achievement
degradation
Let’s build the SWOT Analysis model for the drug safe ﬁg. 7.1.
The SWOT analysis shows that the product has more strengths and opportu-
nities than weaknesses and threats. This is a good sign for the future of the
product.
==PAGE:72==
58
Evaluation
7.2.3
Building risk analysis
Let’s take a look closer at the threats and weaknesses of drug safe. Such weak-
ness as "manual actions" can be considered insigniﬁcant because this is part of
the work required for a semi-robotic system and cannot be removed for now.
Threat as "competitors entering the market" is always a threat for each prod-
uct. It is essential to start selling the product and gathering customers as soon
as possible and as fast as possible. Mainly the outcomes of this threat have
to be miniﬁed by the marketing group of the Remomedi company. The drug
safe has killing features that make the customers but the product. The Sooner
the company takes over the market — the fewer chances competitors have to
get part of this market. One more threat that is neglected for this moment is
"Automatic robots start producing drug cards automatically." By the law, the
fully automated robotic system cannot ﬁll in the drug card. Part of the job
has to be done by a human, speciﬁcally inventories. This is the main diﬀerence
between drug safe and robots in pharmacies. Also, robotic systems are more
than 30 times expensive, which makes them less popular.
Now let’s come closer to more technical issues. The table below includes threats
and weaknesses from the SWOT analyses box and includes more speciﬁc tech-
nical issues.
1. Slow internet connection in closed rooms with thick walls
2. Obsolescence of data encryption model
3. Server-side betrayal
4. Weak passwords
5. Medications steal
Slow internet connection in closed rooms with thick walls. This issue
theoretically can lead to data loss and slow down the application as a whole.
The probability of having a bad internet connection is 20% at the moment.
Based on the questionnaire of the customers who received the Drug Safe: 1 out
of 5 pharmacies has a slow internet connection, and the time of receiving the
response from the backend is approximately 30 seconds. This does not aﬀect
data loss or errors but only in slow communication.
In order to get rid of slowing down the application, the drug safe UI uses internal
cache memory for storing all the actions until closing the locker door. When the
==PAGE:73==
7.2 Risk analysis
59
Figure 7.2: Encryption model versioning
locker door is closed and the action is completed, the drug safe backend sends
the API request with all data done at the box. With this solution, the drug
safe UI gets rid of long requests and sends the data only once at the end of the
action.
To minimize the risks of losing data because of a bad internet connection, the
data done at the box is saved to local permanent memory until it is sent suc-
cessfully to the backend. Firstly, the drug safe backend tries to send the request
to API 3 times in a row. If this does not succeed, the request will be sent next
time after 5 minutes break or at the next login. Only after receiving the suc-
cessful response, the permanent memory can remove the action. This solution
also reduces the risk of data loss when the electricity disappears.
As mentioned in chapter 3 in section 3.1.2, sending log entries after each action
would reduce the number of lost logs in case of the robbery or permanent con-
troller disabling. In comparison of losing one last log entry or receiving major
connection issues every time using the drug safe UI, the latter is preferred. The
chance of the robbery and the importance of the last log, in this case, is not
comparable with performance improvements of the drug safe UI.
Obsolescence of data encryption model. This threat is dangerous due to
possible revealing personal data information. The cost of this threat will be
enormous and grows in proportion to the number of clients.
Currently, the
probability of exploitation is minimal, as the Drug Safe uses AES-256 as a data
encryption model.
But generally, no encryption model can be safe forever. The application should
be prepared for switching the algorithm to new more technological and safe at
some point.
In order to keep this possible, the Drug Safe product implements encryption
versioning. Picture ﬁg. 7.2 shows part of the model of the database entry for
each log entry. key_gen ﬁeld holds the generation of the key for the algorithm or
the encryption model. Based on this ﬁeld, the backend can check the generation
of encryption and use the correct model or key.
==PAGE:74==
60
Evaluation
Server-side betrayal. This is one of the most dangerous but less probably
threat. Google services show themselves as reliable and trustworthy services.
The outcome of such an exploit can be a disclosure of user data, service failure,
data falsiﬁcation, etc. The costs of this attack will be uncountably high, but the
probability of it will be enormously small. In terms of attack eﬀort calculating,
the costs of the repercussion of the service betrayal are thousands of times higher
than the beneﬁt or rewards they can get by exploiting the attack on Remomedi
servers.
Weak passwords. The most probable threat is a weak pharmacist password
that will lead to password brute-forcing and accessing personal data by the
attacker.
Exploiting this attack will lead to personal data leakage. It is still not possible
to change the data or falsify it. The responsibility for this lies on the pharmacist
that has chosen a weak password. Although this is out of Remomedi compe-
tence, the application should take care of security as much as possible from its
own side.
To prevent the attack, the backend enforces the pharmacist to use at least
8character passwords with at least 1 big letter, 1 small letter, 1 digital, and 1
special character. Sometimes this is still not enough, as the pharmacists use
easy to brute force passwords, such as "Lassi1995!@". A better solution would
be to use the generator that is available for pharmacists when making their
passwords. An additional layer of security would be enabling 2FA. In that case,
having a weak password would not let the attacker get access to the pharmacist
account.
Medications steal.
The most dangerous action from a pharmacy owner’s
perspective is medication loss; it can be theft or robbery, or human mistake.
The threat does not cost any money in terms of the software development or
Remomedi company, and it would not bring any penalties. But for the phar-
macy and pharmacy owner, this can lead to severe consequences up to license
revocation. One of the primary purposes of drug safe is to prevent such cases.
Drug safe is created to prevent thefts by pharmacists and nasty employees. Each
employee has to sign in electronically and process all the actions, i.e., opening
the lockers with drugs, being recorded. At this point, it makes it easier to detect
who was the person that has stolen the medication. Going through the logs,
the pharmacy owner can detect who was opening the lockers with stolen medi-
cations. One additional possibility that allows the pharmacy owner to ﬁnd the
robber is to make inventory checks or even more thoroughly make mandatory
validation after each action. Only the fact of electronic authentication and logs
==PAGE:75==
7.2 Risk analysis
61
makes the thief already nervous and reduces the thievery. Validation of medi-
cations, i.e., scanning packages, reduces the human mistakes during inventory,
taking medications out, or ﬁlling in. The actual robbery of the pharmacy is not
less likely due to the impossibility of taking the medications out of the drug
safe without knowing the password, and the weight of the empty drug safe is
almost 150kg. Another approach of the robber would be to ask the pharmacist
to open the drug safe. For such cases, the drug safe has a special pin code that
the pharmacist can use to freeze the drug safe. It will look like the drug safe
cannot connect to the internet for the burglar, and the drug safe freezes until
the pharmacist do not unfreeze it from the web application. Drug safe is highly
protected against burglary.
7.2.4
Conclusion
Based on the processed risk analysis, the solutions to each risk were found and
implemented in the drug safe product. Based on the Threat model and Risk
Analysis model, it is possible to build security requirements for drug safe.
==PAGE:76==
62
Evaluation
==PAGE:77==
Chapter 8
Discussion
8.1
Comparison of goals and results
1.
The result of the master thesis is the ready-to-market product that the
pharmacies are actively using in Finland. It means that the design and im-
plementation of the drug safe software were successful and correct. Chapter 3
demonstrates the software architecture of the whole product that was imple-
mented by the author of the thesis.
2. The thesis states the security requirements for the drug safe product and all
components of it. It analyzes requirements and implements them to fulﬁll all
the law requirements, and thus the drug safe can be used as a secure medication
inventory system.
3. The thesis examines several solutions for data protection algorithms, that
are discussed in chapter 4, chooses the most appropriate method, and justiﬁes
the choice. The drug safe implements the data protection algorithm, and the
system fulﬁlls the requirements and can be used with conﬁdential data of the
customers.
4. The drug safe includes the logging functionality, and the thesis demonstrates
examples of its outcome. The results shown in chapter 5 conﬁrm the reliabil-
==PAGE:78==
64
Discussion
ity and safety of the system. All actions are appropriately and safely stored.
The system can easily detect the theft or wrong actions of the pharmacy. The
implementation of the logs does not disclose any conﬁdential data.
5. The thesis discusses possible threats and analyzes risks. Chapter 7 researches
these problems and provides solutions to each of them.
6.
Chapter 6 explains the technologies used for implementation and shows
results of the thesis with photos and screenshots.
Based on described results of the master thesis, it can be stated that the goals of
the thesis are met and the work done during the master’s degree thesis exceeds
initial expectations.
8.2
Comparison of online storage and oﬄine stor-
age
During the development of the drug safe, a discussion was raised about the stor-
ing of the data locally in the pharmacy. This idea leads to the development of
the local system for the local operating system (OS) (most probably windows,
as most of the pharmacies use). It means that the web application moves to
the native OS application (.exe for windows), drug safe controller has to com-
municate with the API hosted inside the pharmacy network, database storage
is stored on the physical disk. This approach implies storing data on a physical
device inside the pharmacy and processing all the data without access to the
internet. Would this bring more security? Does "no internet connection" means
"no attackers"? There is no simple answer to this question. Indeed, it relieves
the system from the possibility of being attacked online. But in terms of attacks,
it is cheaper for the intruder to possess the data from a physical location (steal)
than to break the online storage.
Let’s compare these two solutions.
Online storage
Oﬄine storage
Easy to maintain and update
Requires developing and maintaining
software for diﬀerent OS
Secure encrypted remote storage
Secure encrypted local storage
No physical access to data
Access to data from physical devices
brings danger to be stolen
==PAGE:79==
8.3 Future improvements
65
Automated Backups
Backups should be done manually by
pharmacy
Remote support
In some cases, for providing support,
the developer has to be present at the
machine
Easy
upgrade:
encryption
algo-
rithms, security improvements, opti-
mization
Diﬃcult to maintain or update
Fast working functionality even on
old PCs (all is processed and hosted
online)
It may happen to require a change of
the local machine if it is not powerful
enough to handle requests
Easy scalable
Diﬃcult to scale
In any case, it still needs to be connected to the internet, at least for the up-
dates of the Database of Pharmaceutical Preparations. It may require more
third-party integration in the future. Even at this stage, it will create many dif-
ﬁculties for Remomedi Oy to add all pharmacies’ IP addresses to the white-list
table of the Association of Finnish Pharmacies for fetching the updates of the
medications database. Instead, the Association of Finnish Pharmacies can add
only one IP address of the function that fetches the data and saves it in the
drug safe online database.
Moreover, the attacker will succeed more likely in breaking the pharmacy’s PC
than the Firebase database.
To conclude the section, there are no valuable advantages of using the local
storage for the drug safe system, and the choice of online storage is justiﬁed.
8.3
Future improvements
During the project’s development, several ideas arose for improving the product,
in particular safety and user experience (UX).
1. The identiﬁcation of the pharmacist can be made with the help of biomet-
rics. Several solutions can be considered stable and reliable, for example, face
recognition with the help of a camera or ﬁngerprinting.
2. A video camera can record all the actions done at the drug safe. All actions
performed at the drug safe can be stored as logs. In case of theft or incorrect
==PAGE:80==
66
Discussion
actions, it can be not only easily detected but also proved.
3. A video camera can detect the items in the drawers. The camera can be
screwed in such a way that the area of camera visibility will cover the drawers
that will be opened during actions. In that case, the camera can detect medi-
cations’ packages that lie in the drawer opened at that moment. This will help
in detecting not allowed or wrong actions of the pharmacist, thefts, etc.
4. Another solution that is similar to mentioned above is using radio-frequency
identiﬁcation (RFID) for continuous inventory. The drug safe can always keep
accurate inventory based on the RFID tags. Inventory can be checked auto-
matically by comparing the logged medications and physically present RFID
tags.
==PAGE:81==
Chapter 9
Conclusion
The project results are highly signiﬁcant and top priority to the company. The
whole Master thesis and development of the project (frontend and backend
programming, data security, deploying) was done thoroughly and independently
by the author of the thesis on his own. Drug Safe is safe storage for drugs and
automatic maintaining of drug cards. It is the only burglar-proof semi-automatic
machine on the market, where a pharmacy can store and administer narcotic
medications safely. The result of the thesis is a ready-to-market product that
is successfully delivered to the end customers and is being actively used by
pharmacies in Finland.
The possibilities of the drug safe are:
1. Medicines storage in a free-standing burglar-proof steel drawer unit.
2. Digital user authentication and usage accounting.
3. Production of product-speciﬁc drug cards.
4. Online automatic and up-to-date inventory.
5. Expiry date checking.
6. Break-proof construction.
==PAGE:82==
68
Conclusion
The Master thesis discusses the design and system requirements for the product,
shows the software architecture, and demonstrates the implementation. Besides,
the thesis investigates the threats and risks of the product, builds the threat
models and performs risk analysis, and provides the solutions for resolving the
possible issues. The thesis discusses possible solutions for data protection of
the customer information, proves and conﬁrms the reliability of the decision
chosen for privacy security. The thesis shows the logging system for the drug
safe product and acknowledges the safety from this point of view.
To conclude, the drug safe product shows itself as a secure and reliable decision
for storing and administrating narcotic medications.
==PAGE:83==
Appendix A
Drug safe screenshots
This appendix will show the screenshots of the drug safe UI.
==PAGE:84==
70
Drug safe screenshots
(a) Login page
(b) Enter Pin code page
(c) Main page
(d) Select locker for put in or scan
medication to ﬁnd default locker
Figure A.1: Screenshots of the drug safe UI
==PAGE:85==
71
(a) No default locker for medication
found (need to select locker manually)
(b) Set this locker as default for the
medication
(c) Message with suggestion to change
the locker if the medications default
locker is diﬀerent
(d) View with scanned packages
Figure A.2: Screenshots of the drug safe UI
==PAGE:86==
72
Drug safe screenshots
(a) Undo scan
(b) Mandatory inventory validation
after each action
(c) Manual put in page with no detec-
tion of 2D code from GS1 in case of
medication from abroad
(d) Manual put in page, one package
added
Figure A.3: Screenshots of the drug safe UI
==PAGE:87==
73
(a) Undo scan at manual put in page (b) Check scanned package at manual
put in page
(c) Take out page manually without
reservation, specify VNR
(d) Take out page manually, specify
amount
Figure A.4: Screenshots of the drug safe UI
==PAGE:88==
74
Drug safe screenshots
(a) Take out page manually, specify
amount and partial medications
(b) Take out instructions page
(c) Take out page validations
(d) Take out page instructions
Figure A.5: Screenshots of the drug safe UI
==PAGE:89==
75
(a) Take out page, all packages are
scanned
(b) Take out page manual validation
pf package
(c) Report page in case of errors
(d) Enter reservation PIN
Figure A.6: Screenshots of the drug safe UI
==PAGE:90==
76
Drug safe screenshots
(a) Information from reservation
(b) Validate medications from reserva-
tion
Figure A.7: Screenshots of the drug safe UI
==PAGE:91==
Appendix B
Web application screenshots
This appendix will show the screenshots of the Web application.
==PAGE:92==
78
Web application screenshots
Figure B.1: My pharmacy page
Figure B.2: My account page
==PAGE:93==
79
Figure B.3: Users page
Figure B.4: Drug safe UI users
==PAGE:94==
80
Web application screenshots
Figure B.5: Create user page
Figure B.6: Edit drug safe UI user
==PAGE:95==
81
Figure B.7: Edit web app user
Figure B.8: Whole inventory page
==PAGE:96==
82
Web application screenshots
Figure B.9: Inventory for separate lockers
Figure B.10: Logs page
==PAGE:97==
83
Figure B.11: Show of the log
Figure B.12: Medication list (all medications that were used in the pharmacy)
==PAGE:98==
84
Web application screenshots
Figure B.13: Drug card
Figure B.14: Reservations page
==PAGE:99==
85
Figure B.15: Create new reservation
575957 BUFOMIX EASYHALER (80/4,5 mikrog/annos, 120 annosta)
Manufacturer: Orion Corporation
Dosage: 80/4,5 mikrog/annos
Package size: 120 annosta
Dosage form: inhal jauhe
Pharmacy: Alex Office
Time period: all
Print date: 2021-06-08 at 23:32
Date
Supplier
Added
[packages]
Taken
[packages
(+ meds)]
Inventory
[packages
(+ meds)]
Client
name
Doctor
name
Prescript.
number
Pharmacist
Inventory
check
Comments
2021-06-08
10:59
Oriola
0 (+ 109)
Alex
Subtselnyi
–
Inventory correction
(no medication)
2021-06-07
20:38
Oriola
1
1 (+ 109)
Alexander
Alexander
123456
Alex
Subtselnyi
–
2021-06-07
20:37
Oriola
1
2 (+ 109)
Alex
Subtselnyi
–
2021-06-07
20:33
Oriola
1
1 (+ 109)
Alexander
Alexander
12345678
Alex
Subtselnyi
–
2021-06-07
20:30
Oriola
2
2 (+ 109)
Alex
Subtselnyi
–
2021-06-07
20:27
Oriola
2
4 (+ 109)
Alex
Subtselnyi
–
2021-06-07
20:23
Oriola
1
2 (+ 109)
Alex
Subtselnyi
OK
2021-05-19
14:19
Oriola
1
1 (+ 109)
Alex
Subtselnyi
OK
2021-05-19
14:18
Oriola
1
2 (+ 109)
ufktu
kjgfkut
34567
Alex
Subtselnyi
OK
2021-05-18
15:23
Oriola
1
3 (+ 109)
Alex
Subtselnyi
OK
Page 1 / 3
Figure B.16: PDF outlook of the drug card
==PAGE:100==
86
Web application screenshots
==PAGE:101==
Appendix C
Drug safe usage screenshots
This appendix will demonstrate the demo of the usage of the drug safe by
showing the live photos.
==PAGE:102==
88
Drug safe usage screenshots
Figure C.1: Opening drawer for put in
==PAGE:103==
89
Figure C.2: Scanning the package of medication
==PAGE:104==
90
Drug safe usage screenshots
Figure C.3: Taking out medication
==PAGE:105==
Bibliography
[ANY06] Anatoliy Antonov, Vladimir Nikolov, and Yanka Yanakieva. Risk sim-
ulation in project management system. In International Conference on
Computer Systems and Technologies - CompSysTech’06, 2006.
[BDK16] Alex Biryukov, Daniel Dinu, and Dmitry Khovratovich. Argon2: new
generation of memory-hard functions for password hashing and other
applications. In IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy
(EuroS&P). IEEE, 2016.
[EY14] EY. Get ahead of cybercrime EY’s global information security survey
2014. Report, EY Limited, 2014.
[Fad99] Glenn Faden. RBAC in UNIX administration. In RBAC’99. ACM,
1999.
[Fima]
Fimea. Finnish Medicines Agency Fimea. Web page. https://www.
fimea.fi/web/en/ Accessed 01.02.2021.
[Fimb]
Fimea.
How should medicines be disposed of?
Web page, Finnish
Medicines
Agency.
https://www.fimea.fi/web/en/for_public/
correct-use-of-medicines/how-to-dispose-of-medicines
Ac-
cessed 15.02.2021.
[Fimc]
Fimea.
How to store medicines?
Web page, Finnish Medicines
Agency. https://www.fimea.fi/web/en/for_public/correct-use-
of-medicines/how-to-store-medicines- Accessed 15.02.2021.
[FK92] David F. Ferraiolo and D. Richard Kuhn. Role-based access controls.
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 1992.
==PAGE:106==
92
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[Gil03] JeﬀGilchrist. Encryption. In Hossein Bidgoli, editor, Encyclopedia of
Information Systems. Elsevier, 2003.
[Gooa]
Google.
Firebase
security
checklist.
Web
page.
https:
//firebase.google.com/support/guides/security-checklist Ac-
cessed 21.05.2021.
[Goob] Google. Google Cloud Secret Manager documentation. Product doc-
umentation. https://cloud.google.com/secret-manager/ Accessed
01.02.2021.
[GS116] GS1.
GTIN Management Standard, release 1.0.
Industry stan-
dard,
June 2016.
https://www.gs1.org/sites/default/files/
docs/barcodes/GS1_GTIN_Management_Standard.pdf.
[HC20] Melissa Heikkila and Laurens Cerulus. Hacker seeks to extort Finnish
mental health patients after data breach.
Politico, October 2020.
https://www.politico.eu/article/cybercriminal-extorts-
finnish-therapy-patients-in-shocking-attack-ransomware-
blackmail-vastaamo/.
[HR09] Hooman Hoodat and Hassan Rashidi. Classiﬁcation and Analysis of
Risks in Software. World Academy of Science, Engineering and Tech-
nology, 2009.
[Hum16] Humanitas University.
How technology is changing the world
of medicine.
Web page, 2016.
https://www.hunimed.eu/news/
technology-changing-world-medicine/ Accessed 09.04.2021.
[KR11] Lars R. Knudsen and Matthew J. B. Robshaw. The Block Cipher Com-
parison. Springer International Publishing, 2011.
[L¨]
Lääketietokeskus.
Nordic
Vnr-numbers
and
product
notiﬁca-
tions.
Web
page,
Pharmaceutical
Information
Centre,
Fin-
land.
https://www.laaketietokeskus.fi/en/pharmaceutical-
information/vnr-services Accessed 05.02.2021.
[Lei09] Doug Leigh. SWOT analysis. In Handbook of Improving Performance in
the Workplace: Selecting and Implementing Performance Interventions,
Volume 2, pages 115–120. Wiley, 2009.
[LPH+20] Joseph G. Lyons, Mark A. Plantz, Wellington K. Hsu, Erin L. Hsu,
and Silvia Minardi. Nanostructured biomaterials for bone regeneration.
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology, 2020.
[Nat12] National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). Guide for con-
ducting risk assessments. Publication, 2012. https://nvlpubs.nist.
gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-30r1.pdf.
==PAGE:107==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
93
[Nat21] National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
Cyber
supply chain risk management.
Report, 2021.
https://csrc.
nist.gov/CSRC/media/Projects/cyber-supply-chain-risk-
management/documents/C-SCRM_Fact_Sheet_Draft_May_25.pdf/.
[PHC]
PHC. Password hashing competition and our recommendation for hash-
ing passwords:
Argon2.
https://www.password-hashing.net Ac-
cessed 03.03.2021.
[PWC16] PWC Group. Turnaround and transformation in cybersecurity. key
ﬁndings from the global state of information security. Report, 2016.
[SCFY95] Ravi S. Sandhu, Edward J. Coyne, Hal L. Feinstein, and Charles E.
Youman. Role-based access control models. Article, 1995.
[Shea]
Timur Shemsedinov. HowProgrammingWorks: Express simple routing.
Online.
https://github.com/HowProgrammingWorks/NodeServer/
blob/master/express-simple/server.js Accessed 29.01.2021.
[Sheb]
Timur Shemsedinov. HowProgrammingWorks: native simple routing.
Online.
https://github.com/HowProgrammingWorks/NodeServer/
blob/master/native-simple/server.js Accessed 29.01.2021.
[Shec]
Timur Shemsedinov.
Node.js and JavaScript instead of the de-
crepit web.
Online.
https://habr.com/ru/post/306584/ Accessed
29.01.2021.
[SM05] I. Susnea and M. Mitescu. Microcontrollers in Practice. Springer, 2005.
DOI:10.1007/3-540-28308-0_13. Chapter 12: Simple RS485 Network
with Microcontrollers.
[TCT06] Dale R. Thompson, Neeraj Chaudhry, and Craig W. Thompson. RFID
security threat model. In Proceedings Acxiom Laboratory for Applied
Research (ALAR) Conference, 2006.
[The20] The European Union Agency for Cybersecurity (ENISA). Distributed
denial of service.
Report,
2020.
https://www.enisa.europa.
eu/topics/threat-risk-management/threats-and-trends/etl-
review-folder/etl-2020-denial-of-service.
