==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This thesis covers practical positioning methods in cellular networks, where the
term practical covers positioning methods that are reproducible using oﬀ-the-shelf
products and publicly available data. The methods deemed practical were cell
identity-based, network scan-based, proprietary-based, and LTE cell identity with
timing advance-based methods. Additionally, Wi-Fi-based methods were also tested
as an alternative to the cellular-based ones. The best-performing methods were one
of the Wi-Fi-based ones having an error distance of under 40 m in 100% of the cases
where a position could be estimated, as well as one of the LTE cell identity with
timing advance-based ones, where multiple operators’ cells and timing advance bands
were intersecting which resulted in an error distance of under 200 m in 80% of the
cases. Intersecting a single cell and its LTE timing advance band yielded an error
distance of around 220 m in 80% of the cases, which was deemed more usable than
the one using multiple operators as this only require a single modem. Moreover, as
part of the thesis, an algorithm for mapping cell IDs to cell towers was also developed,
which seemed to perform quite well.
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over ﬁve months at the Department of Photonics
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulﬁlment for
the degree Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering.
Håkon Eske Westh-Hansen (s154313)
Date
29/6/2021
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Fundamentals of Positioning
2
2.1
Foundational Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2.1
Received Signal Strength (RSS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.2
Time of Flight (ToF) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2.3
Angle of Arrival (AoA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
The Current State of Positioning in Cellular Networks
7
3.1
Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Cell Identity (CID) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Enhanced Cell Identity (E-CID) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Time Diﬀerence of Arrival (TDoA)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5
Fingerprinting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Practicality Analysis
15
4.1
Deﬁnition of Practicality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2
Evaluating Oﬀ-the-Shelf Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Methods
17
5.1
Cell Identity Based . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Network Scan Based
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.3
Proprietary Based . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.4
Wi-Fi Based . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.5
LTE Cell Identity and Timing Advance Based . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
6
Field Testing
25
6.1
Methodology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.1.1
Test Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.1.2
Test Locations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.1.3
Evaluation Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2
Intermediate Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2.1
Cell Identity Based . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6.2.2
Network Scan Based
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2.3
Proprietary Based . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.2.4
Wi-Fi Based . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
6.2.5
LTE Cell Identity and Timing Advance Based . . . . . . . . .
45
6.3
Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
i
==PAGE:5==
7
Future Work
54
8
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
56
Appendix
60
ii
==PAGE:6==
1 Introduction
The value of positioning things is huge, which is also why governments around
the world have spent immense resources on Global Navigation Satellite Systems
(GNSSs) [1]. GNSSs are however not always available and it is therefore important
to have methods to fall back on in such cases. Cellular networks are often seen as
an opportune technology to base fallback methods on, as mobile devices in need of
positioning are often already communicating with/through these networks. This is
probably also a strong contributor as to why the ﬁeld of positioning within the realm
of cellular networks has and is being standardised and heavily researched [2]–[4]. A
big portion of the studies and standards however use information or equipment that
is not readily available, e.g. relying on information that is only available to private
actors (operators), self-obtained ﬁngerprinting, custom-made user equipment that
can be expensive, have a lack of robustness, or just plain hard to recreate.
This thesis tries to take a look at the subject of positioning in cellular networks
through the lens of practicality, meaning the presented and discussed methods are
all based on oﬀ-the-shelf products and publicly available data.
The thesis is written in a standalone fashion, meaning that it can be read and
hopefully understood without any prior experience or knowledge in positioning
solutions for cellular networks. Some basic understanding of geometry, statistics,
cellular networks, and computer science is however assumed.
First and foremost some fundamental theory about positioning solutions is presented
in section 2, after which a selection of currently used cellular network-based posi-
tioning methods are presented and related to the fundamentals in section 3. Next,
an analysis of practicality and which methods are practical is discussed in section 4
followed by a more in-depth explanation of the methods deemed practical in section
5. Following this, results from the conducted ﬁeld tests are presented, analysed, and
compared in section 6. Lastly, before concluding the thesis future work is discussed
in section 7.
1
==PAGE:7==
2 Fundamentals of Positioning
This section seeks to cover the fundamental concepts and ideas used in positioning.
First and foremost, the foundational concepts with oﬀspring in 2D geometry are
presented. Next, some of the basic measurements that are used to infer the diﬀerent
parameters used for positioning are presented.
2.1 Foundational Concepts
Positioning is at its core simply estimating and thereby also describing a point or
area in a given coordinate system. So before digging deeper into the subject of
positioning a review of how points are described is needed – which can roughly be
summarised in ﬁgure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the subparts which make up a point in two-dimensional
space, which is the origin and a length and an angle (lÎ, ◊) or two lengths
with predeﬁned angles (lx, ly). The black and grey parts signify the main
and supporting illustration.
This geometric description can readily be extended to 3D, but as this thesis only
touches upon 2D the description thereof is left out. It is important to note that in
essence, the origin is a reference point, which is a fact that can sometimes be taken
as a given.
When estimating or measuring any meaningful metric it needs to be in relation to
something. For instance in a coordinate system to extract meaningful and spatial
understanding of a given geometry an origin is needed, or at least reference points
to other geometries in that coordinate system is needed to extract information in
relation to these. For instance, in an electrical engineering setting how would one
know when 5 V is measured if no ground is present?
2
==PAGE:8==
Estimating positions is no diﬀerent, and therefore absolutely needs one thing above
anything else; reference points.
From one or more known reference points it is then possible to estimate a position,
which is true for any positioning estimation method. How would you know where you
are situated if not for references? The whole notion of knowing a position becomes
pointless unless an idea of where other stuﬀor places are in relation to the given
position.
So, once reference points are obtained how can positions be estimated? Well, that
was already kind of answered earlier by the description of how a point in 2D is
described, i.e. given a single reference point, both an angle and a distance needs to
be known. Alternatively, given an origin and two distances with independent angles
associated with them a point can also be described. In most real-world scenarios
such information is not available, what is available however is multiple reference
points, e.g. in the context of cellular networks usually more than one cell tower is
observable.1
Given more than one reference point that is not aligned, two metrics can be used
to describe a given point, i.e. angles and distances. So given one or more reference
points, one can estimate a position using these basic categories:
1. Distance-based
2. Angle-based
3. Angle- and distance-based (could be argued to be a subset of the union of the
two above)
In ﬁgure 2.2 an illustration of the ﬁrst two categories is shown in order to bring this
point home.
Using various measurements distances or angles can be estimated, but no matter the
measurement type the fundamental thing that is done to estimate a position falls
back on one of these two categories, or the combination thereof.
2.2 Measurements
Having understood that reference points in combination with distances, angles, or
both are needed to estimate a position the question of which measurements could be
used to infer distances or angles arises.
In relation to this [3] mentions the following basic measurements which can are used
in all positioning methods:
1. Received Signal Strength (RSS)Î
2. Time of Flight (ToF)Î
3. Angle of Arrival (AoA)\
4. Phase diﬀerence between electric- and magnetic ﬁeldsÎ
1Of course this is not true in all situations, but it is true in most due to the density of cell towers.
3
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2.2: Illustration of the two fundamental categories of positioning methods,
i.e. angle- and distance-based. The distances are expressed as circles as
no information about the direction is assumed to be known.
Where Î means distance-based and \ means angle-based.
Each of the ﬁrst three measurements is described in more detail in the following
subsections, wherein each measurement is also interpolated into the realm of cellular
networks.
A description of the phase diﬀerence between electric- and magnetic ﬁelds is omitted
as it has little relevance to readily available data within cellular networks. It is
however mentioned here for the sake of completeness, if the matter sounds interesting
consult [3].
Additionally, two other types of principle methods for estimating a position are men-
tioned by [3], namely proximity and ﬁngerprinting. But as they are not measurement-
based per se they are left out of this section, they are however mentioned later in
the thesis.
2.2.1 Received Signal Strength (RSS)
RSS can infer distance as the power density of an electromagnetic wave, which
carries the signal and therefore is often simply referred to as “the signal” is inversely
proportional to the square of the distance, which can also be expressed as:
P Ã 1
d2
Where P is the power density and d is the distance [3].
4
==PAGE:10==
RSS has the unfortunate property that it is not only proportional to the square of
the distance, but can also be aﬀected due to noise, interference, reﬂections, and the
medium that the signal travels in.
In cellular networks received signal strength is used by the mobile device and cell
towers to determine serving cells, as well as the selection of network if the SIM or
mobile device does not contain any preferred network lists [5], so it is something that
is readily available both to the user and the operator of a cellular network.
2.2.2 Time of Flight (ToF)
Time of ﬂight is another term for propagation delay, which is the time it takes for a
signal to reach a receiver from a transmitter.
Figure 2.3: Illustration of time of ﬂight. Note that the y-axis does not have a unit
as it simply denotes the some signal. In practice tToF will never truly be
the actual time of ﬂight, as the message that the signal carries will be
time-stamped prior to the message being transmitted, a similar eﬀect
also goes for the receiver.
Given the time of ﬂight a distance, usually called pseudo-range, can be inferred using
the following formula:
d = v t
Where d is the distance, t is the time of ﬂight, and v is the propagation speed of
the signal. Usually, in wireless communication systems the speed of electromagnetic
propagation is assumed to be the speed of light in a vacuum [6].
As electromagnetic signals are travelling at such high speeds it is paramount that
the timing used to measure the time of ﬂight is precise, as even small fractions of a
second can have a huge impact on the estimated distance.
1 ns · c ¥ 0, 3 m
10 ns · c ¥ 3 m
1µs · c ¥ 299, 8 m
where c = 299792458 m/s
This puts quite a high constraint on the equipment doing the timing, as not only do
the clocks of these systems need to be ultra-precise they also need to be synchronised
in the scenario where the transmitter puts a timestamp on a signal and the receiver
then determine the time of ﬂight when receiving that signal.
5
==PAGE:11==
In cellular networks, there are multiple signals of opportunity (SOPs) that can be
used to calculate the time of ﬂight. None is however as readily available as the timing
advance. A timing advance is a number representing a time with which a piece of
user equipment should adjust its transmission time to fulﬁl synchronisation needs at
the cell tower, in other words, it is the propagation delay described with a range.
This number is something that the cell tower calculates and informs the mobile
device of, which is fortunate as the synchronisation of receiver and transmitter is
therefore not an issue [7].
The need for synchronisation and therefore the precision of the timing advance is
diﬀerent based on each network generation. This is something that is explored in a
later section.
2.2.3 Angle of Arrival (AoA)
The angle of arrival or direction of arrival is probably the most self-descriptive of
the measurements. Using angles or directions of the received signal a position can
be estimated, in particular, if two angles or directions intersect, as shown in ﬁgure
2.2.
Angle- or direction of arrival can become quite erroneous due to reﬂections of a
signal [4]. Furthermore, it becomes a lot harder to rely on if the antenna used for
measuring the angle/direction is not ﬁxated, which is also why such measurements
in a cellular context are only made at the cell tower and not the user equipment.
Information about the direction of a sector in cellular networks is readily available
though. It is however hard to use as the main piece of information to estimate
a position as the directional coverage of a sector is usually quite big, e.g. for a
three-antenna conﬁgured cell tower.
6
==PAGE:12==
3 The Current State of Positioning in
Cellular Networks
This section seeks to cover the current state of positioning technologies and methods
in cellular networks. Firstly, an overview of the diﬀerent positioning methods is
presented, whereafter a more in-detail description of each category is presented.
3.1 Overview
The amount of information and facets that pertain to this ﬁeld is hard to distil.
Whether it is the actual positioning methods or all the politics that surround it,
e.g. operators ﬁghting regulators to keep the cost down, competing standardisations,
and so on.
So, before jumping into the attempt that has been made here to try and give an
overview, some surveys and meta-studies which provide excellent overviews of the
ﬁeld are recommended, and they are [4], [8]–[10].
First and foremost positioning methods in cellular networks can be put into two
categories, which are:
1. Mobile-based, also called user equipment/UE-based
Is when the mobile device can make the position estimation itself – a better
term for it might be self-positioning as [11] refers to it
2. Network-based, also called E-SMLC-based in 3GPP standards [2]
Is when the network makes the position estimation – a better term for it might
be remote-positioning as [11] refers to it
There are nuances of the two categories as one part might need assistance from the
other, e.g. the network or some server needs the measured RSSI from the mobile device
and in such cases, the method is still considered network-based but mobile-assisted.
Making the distinction on which entity the estimation is calculated on can seem a bit
silly as the real value comes from where the measurements used for the estimation is
7
==PAGE:13==
made, and not where the estimation itself is carried out. Nevertheless, this is how
the diﬀerent methods are usually categorised.
A selection of the most relevant positioning methods and their performances is shown
in table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Overview of the most relevant positioning methods and their performance,
where µhor,Q67% is the horizontal error distance in 67% of the cases. The
data is from Table III in [4]. Note that the TDoA methods have been
merged to the same row as there was no diﬀerence in their performances.
Method(s)
Technology
Category
µhor,Q67% [m]
CID+TA / RTT
2G, 3G, LTE
Mobile, Network
> 100
E-CID
2G1, 3G, LTE
Mobile, Network
~ 50
Uplink ToA
2G
Network
> 100
TDoA
3G, LTE
Mobile, Network
< 50
Fingerprinting
2G, 3G, LTE, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth
Mobile
> 50
The acronyms used in table 3.1 have the following meanings; Cell Identity (CID),
Timing Advance (TA), Round Trip Time (RTT), Enhanced Cell Identity (E-CID),
Time of Arrival (ToA), and lastly Time Diﬀerence of Arrival (TDoA).
In general, the naming of the diﬀerent methods can be a bit confusing, as the naming
for some methods change based on the input and not necessarily the input type. For
instance, CID including TA or RTT is sometimes considered E-CID and other times
not [4], [11].
For this reason, speciﬁc methods like Observed Time Diﬀerence of Arrival (OTDoA),
Uplink Time Diﬀerence of Arrival (UTDoA), and Enhanced Observed Time Diﬀerence
(E-OTD) are lumped together in the following sections as the fundamental principles
for them is the same. So, the general methods presented in the following sections
are:
• Cell Identity (CID)
• Enhanced Cell Identity (E-CID)
• Time Diﬀerence of Arrival (TDoA)
• Fingerprinting
Note that not all current positioning methods in cellular networks are presented here,
as that would simply make this thesis too long. The selection of these particular
methods is somewhat random.
1Not originally included in [4] for this method but is in [11]
8
==PAGE:14==
3.2 Cell Identity (CID)
This method is based on the notion that given a cell ID which is a unique identiﬁer
a position can be estimated by assigning the coverage of the cell, or the very least
the position of the base station that the cell belongs to, to the mobile device.
Figure 3.1: Illustration of a cell tower and its cells. Using CID either the cell tower
location or the area of the cell are used as the estimated position.
In essence, the cell ID-based method is the fundamental method for all the other
positioning methods as it is about ﬁnding the reference points, which in the context
of cellular networks is cell towers.
As the cell ID is something so fundamental it is also a piece of information that is
readily available both in the network and to the mobile device. In all the network
generations 2G through 5G the cell ID is present throughout a substantial amount
of the signalling, for instance for 2G and 3G the cell ID is called the Cell Global
Identiﬁcation (CGI) and should be present in all Create Packet Data Protocol (PDP)
Context Requests and likewise in LTE and 5G (at least in NSA-mode), the E-UTRAN
CGI (ECGI) is present in Create Session Requests [12], [13]. Moreover, the ECGI or
CGI is something that the mobile can see in broadcast messages.
The cell ID-based method requires a database of cell towers and their related cells,
or at the very least a ﬁngerprinting database that can be used to infer these two
things.
The cell ID-based method can also be extended with multiple cell IDs where the
cells are then intersecting to give a better positioning estimation. This is illustrated
in ﬁgure 3.2. In many situations, the cell towers and cells will not be placed as
fortunately as they are in ﬁgure 3.2 though.
9
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3.2: Illustration of multiple cell tower and their overlapping cells. This is
something that can be done with a network survey/scan.
3.3 Enhanced Cell Identity (E-CID)
As the name suggests these methods build on top of CID. Using information about
the cell tower location, the coverage area of the cell, and additional data the area
wherein the device is can be better estimated.
First oﬀthe CID method can be enhanced using the time advance or round trip
time, which is something the network/cell tower reports to the mobile device, as it
needs to adjust its transmission time for the signal to get to the cell tower in the
right time slot [7], [11]. In other words, the timing advance or round trip time is a
time of ﬂight measurement.
The timing advance however has a constrained resolution and is therefore not a
precise ToF measurement. For GSM (2G) the resolution for the timing advance is
3, 69 µs which translates into ≥554 m, and for LTE the resolution is 0, 52 µs which
translates into ≥78 m. This means that the distance away from the cell tower will
vary at minimum with these values and that the maximum distance away will then
be the minimum plus one more, meaning that it is a band as illustrated in ﬁgure
3.3.
Next, the CID method can be enhanced using received signal strength indicators,
either by measuring the received signal strength at the cell tower or on the mobile
device. One of the problems with signal strength is that the transmission power
needs to be known in order to make a somewhat qualiﬁed guess as to how great of a
distance the mobile device is situated away from the cell tower.
10
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.3: Illustration of the timing advance bands for GSM and LTE.
Moreover, RSSI enhancements suﬀer from inference and reﬂections issues which can
be hard to predict as the environment that the network is in usually is in an unknown
state due to weather, changing structures, etc. To combat these issues ﬁngerprinting
methods can be used.
Additionally, the CID method can be enhanced using the direction of the cell
compared to the cell tower. In combination with TA and/or RSSI this enhancement
becomes even greater, as shown in ﬁgure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Illustration of the timing advance band intersected with a cell.
11
==PAGE:17==
3.4 Time Diﬀerence of Arrival (TDoA)
Methods of the time diﬀerence of arrival (TDoA) variety are fundamentally based
on time of ﬂight (ToF). TDoA however diﬀers conceptually but not fundamentally
from traditional ToF methods as the distances used to estimate a position are
diﬀerential.
A conceptual illustration of the steps used to estimate a position using TDoA methods
can be seen in ﬁgure 3.5. The time diﬀerences of arrival of a given signal can both
be uplink or downlink, which is also why it is not indicated in the ﬁgure whether the
detected signal is made on the network side or mobile device, in both cases the cell
towers’ locations are however necessary.
Figure 3.5: Conceptual illustration of the steps involved in using a TDoA method.
The basic pseudo range equation can then be translated into a diﬀerential form like
so:
∆d = c ∆t
Where ∆d is the distance diﬀerence, c is the propagation velocity of a given signal,
and ∆t is the time diﬀerence, where the diﬀerences are between reference points,
i.e. cell towers. The diﬀerences in distance between each pair of cell towers then end
up being a hyperbola. Looking for the intersection between all the hyperbolae then
yields a position, which is how TDoA methods estimate a position. The matter of
why and how a distance diﬀerence can be expressed as a hyperbola is a bit tricky and
well outside the scope of this thesis, [14] is a good starting point if an explanation is
wanted. An intuitional understanding is however presented in ﬁgure 3.6.
Given the diﬀerential pseudo-range equation and two cell towers from which the time
diﬀerence of arrival is known, and thereby the distance diﬀerence, it can be seen that
the line formed between them must be a straight line given that the time diﬀerence
is zero in order to satisfy the equation. Additionally, if the time diﬀerence of arrival
is not zero each point on the ﬁnal shape of the line between the two cell towers ends
up being a hyperbola.
12
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.6: Illustration of how time diﬀerences of arrival can be expressed as a
hyperbola.
In standards Observed TDoA (OTDoA) both in downlink- and uplink are deﬁned
[2], [10], where the former is measured on the mobile device and the latter in the
network with or without a Location Measurement Unit (LMU), which is a network
unit that is situated on a cell tower.
For downlink OTDoA, there are multiple signals which can be used, referred to as
Signals Of Opportunity (SOPs) however there is one in the LTE standards that is
dedicated to this purpose, namely the Positioning Reference Signal (PRS) [2]. To
use the PRS for downlink OTDoA one has to know the transmission timing scheme
for the given cell tower though. This is something that only the operator will have
access to. There are however standardised channels wherein this information should
be available given that the operator has implemented PRS as well as LTE Positioning
Protocols (LPP) [10].
As mentioned other SOPs can also be utilised for OTDoA, this however still requires
the knowledge of the transmission time as otherwise the SOPs can only be used
for dead-reckoning, which is what [15] was able to accomplish using the Secondary
Synchronisation Sequence (SSS).
13
==PAGE:19==
3.5 Fingerprinting
The foundation that all ﬁngerprinting methods are built upon is a database that
contains measurements of a big variety, e.g. RSSI, TA, and Wi-Fi access points,
with a related known location. Such databases are what geolocation providers like
OpenCelliD and Google have built.
Figure 3.7: Visualisation of OpenCelliD’s measurements zoomed in on Denmark.
On the right, the amount of measurements are shown which relates to
the outlined square hovering over the general Copenhagen area. The
visualisation provided by [16].
How a position is estimated using either geolocation providers or such databases
directly can vary, and at times is an unknown matter. Ways to do it could be
something similar to how CID methods work, but can also be extended even further
with pattern recognition, machine learning etc.
14
==PAGE:20==
4 Practicality Analysis
This section analyses which non-GNSS positioning are practical as well as tries to
uncover in more general terms which factors make a positioning method practical,
starting with the latter.
4.1 Deﬁnition of Practicality
So what makes a positioning method practical? This is debatable, but in the context
of this thesis by practicality the meaning is some method that lives up to the
following:
1. The measurements used to estimate a position are readily available, and by
readily available the meaning is something that:
1. Is retrievable from an oﬀ-the-shelf product, e.g. cellular modem or Wi-Fi
module running factory or at least publicly available ﬁrmware
2. Is retrievable through a standard interface of the product, e.g. for cellular
modems either via AT1 commands, QMI2, QCDM3, or MBIM4
2. The estimation of locations from measurements is done using publicly available
data, including data provided by paid services, e.g. Google’s geolocation API
The thought behind these criteria is that the positioning methods evaluated in this
thesis are those that are easily replicable without having to invest large amounts of
money or time in either specialised equipment or software.
4.2 Evaluating Oﬀ-the-Shelf Products
Given the deﬁnition of practicality from the previous subsection, nine diﬀerent
cellular modems were evaluated.
1Hayes commands
2Qualcomm MSM Interface
3Qualcomm Diagnostic Monitor
4Mobile Broadband Interface Model
15
==PAGE:21==
Table 4.1: Overview of the nine modems of which the interfaces, mainly AT, were
researched to ﬁgure out what measurements were readily available. Note
that the use of GSM, UMTS, and LTE as the access technologies also in
most cases cover other technologies, e.g. EDGE. Most of the manufacturers
themselves use these terms, so the used terminology simply conforms to
this.
Model
Manufacturer
Access Technologies
EC25
Quectel
GSM, UMTS, LTE
BG96
Quectel
GSM, NB-IoT, LTE-M
SIM808
SIMCom
GSM
SIM800L
SIMCom
GSM
SIM7070G
SIMCom
GSM, NB-IoT, LTE-M
SIM8200EA
SIMCom
GSM, UMTS, LTE, 5G-NR
LE910C1
Telit
GSM, UMTS, LTE
ME910C1
Telit
GSM, UMTS, LTE
SARA-R412M
u-blox
GSM, NB-IoT, LTE-M
From their AT command speciﬁcation documents [17]–[24] the following positioning
methods are deemed practical:
1. Cell identity-based, e.g. for SIM7070G and SIM8200EA-M2 the command AT+CPSI?
supplies information about the serving cell and for LE910C1-EU the same is true
for AT#MONI
• Including signal strength
• Including timing advance given an active 2G connection
2. Network survey/scan-based, e.g. for
SIM808 and
SIM800L the command
AT+CNETSCAN makes the modem perform a network scan, and for the LE910C1-EU
the command AT#CSURV does the same
• Including signal strengths for 2G and 3G
3. LTE cell identity and timing advance-based, separate from 1. as this information
can only be retrieved via QMI – also requires an active connection
4. Proprietary positioning, e.g. for SIM808 and SIM800L the command AT+CLBS
returns an approximate location based on some proprietary method
Moreover, Wi-Fi scan-based methods also seemed plausible for most Wi-Fi modules
out of the box, but as it did not pertain to the evaluation of the 10 modems above,
it is not included on the list.
All in all, the conclusion is that only ﬁve diﬀerent measurement types are practical
when including Wi-Fi scan-based methods. This results in many more positioning
methods though as the measurement types can be processed in a lot of diﬀerent ways
and combinations.
16
==PAGE:22==
5 Methods
This section goes through each of the selected methods from parsing, measuring, and
estimation with a focus on the two latter, as well as some light analysis in the case
of cell to cell tower mapping.
5.1 Cell Identity Based
To use and test cell ID-based positioning the AT command AT#MONI was used with
the Telit LE910C1 modem. An example of the information that is available from this
command can be seen in the following listing.
1
>> AT#MONI
2
#MONI: 3 DK RSRP : -100 RSRQ :-14 TAC:9CA7 Id :1955 E32 EARFCN :1500
PWR:-65dbm DRX :128
3
<< OK
Where the ﬁrst part after #MONI: is the operator name, and the others can be inferred
from their abbreviations and the AT command manual provided by Telit [22]. The
information is parsed using fairly simple regex expressions.
To estimate a position using this information two diﬀerent geolocation providers
were used, namely Google and UnwiredLabs who also runs OpenCelliD [25]. There
is no need to write out an algorithm as the parsed information was simply delivered
to the application interface (API) of the given geolocation provider.
5.2 Network Scan Based
To use and test network scan-based positioning the AT command AT#CSURV was used
with the Telit LE910C1 modem. An example of the information that is available from
this command can be seen in the following listing.
1
>> AT#CSURV
2
3
Network
survey
started
...
4
earfcn: 1500
rxLev:
-62 mcc: 238 mnc: 06 cellId: 53 tac: 40103
5
earfcn: 1500
rxLev:
-78 cellId: 338
6
...
7
uarfcn: 2993
rxLev:
-61 mcc: 238 mnc: 01 scr code: 4112
cellId:
3529668
lac: 611
8
3 cellStatus: CELL_SUITABLE
17
==PAGE:23==
9
...
10
uarfcn: 10562
rxLev:
-108 mcc: 238 mnc: 06 scr code: 5104
cellId:
26282255
lac:
11
40103
cellStatus: CELL_LOW_LEVEL
12
...
13
arfcn: 39 bsic: 255 rxLev:
-57 ber: 0.00 mcc: 238 mnc: 01 lac: 541
cellId: 5533
14
cellStatus: CELL_SUITABLE
15
...
Where each line starting with earfcn is an LTE cell, and the lines starting with
uarfcn is a 3G cell, and lastly, the lines starting with arfcn are 2G cells. These lines
are parsed using regex expressions.
Notice that non-serving LTE cells do not provide a usable cell ID as they only
broadcast their physical cell ID, which makes the results thereof hard to use. Some
research has been done into matching nearby physical IDs to their ECGI [26], but as
this requires a ﬁngerprinting-like database it is not something that is explored. In
conclusion, the network scans considered are only for 2G and 3G.
Besides supplying the parsed data directly to the geolocation provider(s) two other
ways of estimating a position were explored. The two algorithms pertaining to these
estimation methods are described in algorithm 1 and 3. A visualisation of algorithm
1 is included in ﬁgure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Visualisation of algorithm 1, where the ﬂow of execution is from left to
right. The red dot represents the center of mass used as the estimated
longitude and latitude, and the red square represents the bounding box
where the longest side is used as the estimated range.
18
==PAGE:24==
Algorithm 1: Network scan: Estimate position by intersection
Data: A single observation which is constituted by a cell ID and operator, i.e.
MCC and MNC
Result: Latitude and longitude of the cell tower that the cell ID belongs to
/* parallelized mapping to list
*/
1 cellsGeoLocation Ω foreach observedCellInfo o in observedCells do
2
return getGeoLocationFromCellInfo (o)
3 intersection Ω intersectCells (cellsGeoLocation)
4 if intersection = ÿ then
5
return ÿ
6 latitude, longitude Ω centerOfMass (intersection)
7 range Ω getMaxLengthOfPolygon (intersection)
8 return latitude, longitude, range
In algorithm 1 the functions intersectCells and getMaxLengthOfPolygon are custom-
made, the former is described in algorithm 2 and the latter is fairly trivial so the
pseudo-code is not included.
Algorithm 2: Intersect cells algorithm
Data: A list of shapes describing a list of cells
Result: A shape that describes the intersection between the list of cells
/* parallelized
*/
1 intersectingShape Ω ÿ
2 foreach index i in cellShapes do
3
temporaryShape Ω intersect (cellShapes [i], cellShapes [i + 1])
4
if temporaryShape ! = ÿ then
5
intersectingShape Ω temporaryShape
In algorithm 2 the function intersect is provided by the geospatial analysis library
turf [27], which is also the case for the function centerOfMass in algorithm 1. Note that
in algorithm 2 the intersectingShape can potentially be set to something completely
new if concurrent cells, in the list of cells, do not overlap but the next pair does.
This is a potential risk and can be averted by incorporating another intersection with
intersectingShape in the case where it is not empty. This is however not something
that was observed to be a problem in practice, and therefore was not implemented,
but it is something that should be kept in mind if used.
19
==PAGE:25==
Algorithm 3: Network scan: Traditional centroid localisation
Data: A list of observed cell IDs with auxiliary data, e.g. signal strength
Result: Latitude and longitude of the cell tower that the cell ID belongs to
1 cellsGeoLocation Ω foreach observedCellInfo o in observedCells do
2
getGeoLocationFromCellInfo (observedCellInfo)
/* implicit loop(s)
*/
3 latitude Ω 1
N
qN
i=0 cellsGeoLocation [i].latitude
4 longitude Ω 1
N
qN
i=0 cellsGeoLocation [i].longitude
5 range Ω 1
N
qN
i=0 cellsGeoLocation [i].range
6 return latitude, longitude, range
Note that the calculation of the range in algorithm 3 is something that has been
inferred but not described in [28] and might be rather inaccurate due to this.
5.3 Proprietary Based
The only proprietary method used is one from SIMCom and can be accessed on some
of their modems using the command AT+CLBS.
There are more proprietary solutions out there, but this was the one that was readily
available to test. In some sense using Google or UnwiredLabs geolocation services are
also proprietary based, but that is not what is meant by proprietary in this context.
Rather the term proprietary based positioning method covers a method in which
knowledge about what information is used is not disclosed or available, which in
essence is what AT+CLBS does as it just spits an estimated position out. The method
requires an active data connection and it is possible to conﬁgure which server to use,
so it is at least known that it is something like a ﬁngerprinting method or similar to
Google or UnwiredLabs’ geolocation services.
Since the output from AT+CLBS is the estimated position with some range an example
of the raw output is left out as it does not need further explanation.
5.4 Wi-Fi Based
To use and test Wi-Fi-based positioning the iwlist [29] tool with the built-in Wi-Fi
module on the Raspberry Pi 3 was used. No parsing was needed as wireless-tools
[30] was used in conjunction with the tool, which is also why an example of the raw
output is omitted.
Two overall methods were used to estimate a position:
1. Providing all visible access points and their RSSI to Google, like with the
CID-based methods
20
==PAGE:26==
2. Providing all visible access points and their RSSI in a sliced manner to Google
and then intersecting them
The second one used a variation of algorithm 1. As the variation is insigniﬁcant the
variation of said algorithm is not included.
5.5 LTE Cell Identity and Timing Advance Based
To use and test LTE CID with TA the command qmicli -d {device-port}
--nas-get-cell-location-info was used, as the timing advance information was not
available via AT commands. Note that the capability to retrieve the TA information
was ﬁrst added in libqmi v1.28 [31]. Additionally, to get a TA reading the connection
needs to be in use or just have used. To achieve the “activeness” of the connection a
ping to 1.1.1.1 was sent just before doing each measurement.
The output from the command looks something like this:
1
[/dev/cdc -wdm0]
2
Successfully
got cell
location
info
3
Intrafrequency
LTE Info
4
UE In Idle: 'no '
5
PLMN:
'23806'
6
Tracking
Area Code:
'40403'
7
Global
Cell ID:
'26381874 '
8
EUTRA
Absolute RF Channel
Number:
'1500' (E-UTRA band 3: 1800+)
9
Serving
Cell ID:
'105'
10
Cell [0]:
11
Physical
Cell ID:
'105'
12
RSRQ:
'-11.4' dB
13
RSRP:
'-72.8' dBm
14
RSSI:
'-45.5' dBm
15
Cell [1]:
16
...
17
LTE Timing
Advance: '1' us
Note that the TA value has µs appended to it as the unit, which does not make
much sense when consulting the standards [6], [32]. As stated in section 3.3 the
minimum converted time unit for the LTE TA value is 0, 52 µs, this is at least what
it is assumed to be through the thesis, as again the other ﬁgure would not make
sense when consulting the standards.
A critical feature needed to use LTE CID with TA-based methods is to know which
cell tower an observed cell ID belongs to, as this will be the basis for bounding circles
or bands using the TA value(s). To be able to do this algorithm 4 was created. A
naive approach of mapping the nearest cell tower to a given cell was also tried, but
it yielded a poor mapping of cells to cell towers, which is understandable given the
density of cell towers as seen in ﬁgure 5.2.
21
==PAGE:27==
Algorithm 4: Cell to cell tower mapping
Data: A single observation which is constituted by a cell ID and operator, i.e.
MCC and MNC
Result: Latitude and longitude of the cell tower that the cell ID belongs to
1 latitude, longitude Ω getCellTowerLocationByCellId (observedCellId)
2 if latitude ! = ÿ · longitude ! = ÿ then
3
return latitude, longitude
4 candidateCellIds Ω [ ]
5 m Ω getMultiplierBasedOnOperator (observedCellOperator)
6 for i Ω ≠2 m to 2 m by m do
7
candidateCellIds.insert(i)
8 candidateCells Ω getGeoLocationFromCellIds (candidateCellIds)
9 bestCandidateCells Ω [ ]
10 foreach set of three cells s in candidateCells do
11
t Ω distanceBetweenCellPairs (s)
12
q Ω distanceBetweenCellPairs (bestCandidateCells)
13
if bestCandidateCells = ÿ ‚ t < q then
14
bestCandidateCells Ω s
15 if bestCandidateCells = ÿ then
16
return ÿ
17 intersection Ω intersectCells (bestCandidateCells)
18 latitude, longitude Ω getNearestCellTower (centerOfMass (intersection),
observedCellOperator)
19 return latitude, longitude
In algorithm 4 the functions getCellTowerLocationByCellId and getNearestCellTower
are provided by an extended version of Telemaster which relies on Mastedatabasen [33],
[34]. For the latter function, i.e. getNearestCellTower, MongoDB’s geospatial queries
were used under the hood [35]. Note that the coordinates of a given cell tower are
only as precise as what is recorded in Mastedatabasen, see appendix for an example
of a poor cell tower location record.
The getMultiplierBasedOnOperator function’s output was experimentally determined
to be 1 for 3 and 10 for TDC and Telia/Telenor when trying to ﬁnd the adjacent
120¶ cells/sectors. The way these values were determined was by querying Google’s
geolocation API for the 100 surrounding cell IDs of the observed ones for a number of
observations, the notion being that the operators have some unknown naming/num-
bering scheme as noted in [36]. Visualising the resulting cell areas for a number of
the test locations as well as the known cell locations these patterns emerged. In
ﬁgure 5.2 three examples of this are shown.
22
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.2: Visualisation of the resulting cells/sectors using the experimentally de-
termined values for getMultiplierBasedOnOperator for each operator. The
colour coded dots represent cell towers and the marked areas the cells/-
sectors, where blue is TDC, orange is 3, and purple is Telia/Telenor.
After the fact it was discovered that the ECGI, in other words, the LTE cell ID, can
be broken down as shown in ﬁgure 5.3, according to [37], [38].
Figure 5.3: ECGI breakdown for a macro cell [37], [38]. Note that was has been
referred to as cell ID throughout this thesis is the ECI.
According to the breakdown of the ECGI shown in ﬁgure 5.3 a macro cell will be
able to hold 28 = 256 sectors, meaning that the initial attempt of querying the
surrounding 100 cell/sector IDs is not encapsulating all values, but nevertheless it
seemed to work.
Moreover, the heuristic about using the distance between each cell pair seems to work
ﬁne. Theoretically, there could be several issues with this heuristic, but in practice,
it seemed to work at least for the observations made throughout this thesis.
To estimate a position a variation of algorithm 1 was used. The main diﬀerences being
that in addition to the cellsGeoLocation the geolocation information for each observed
cell tower was also found using algorithm 4, whereafter for each cell tower a band or
circle bounded by the TA value was added and intersected with the given cell. After
which each cell and cell tower band/circle intersection was overlapped and intersected,
and ﬁnally the same procedure using centerOfMass and getMaxLengthOfPolygon was
applied to get the latitude, longitude, and range.
23
==PAGE:29==
An analysis of the numbers and formula used to create the cell tower band/circle
bounded by the TA value is presented later. Note that the height of cell towers was
not accounted for which in most cases would shorten the estimated distance away
from a cell tower that a band would have, this was however not something that was
observed to be a potential beneﬁt as the opposite was the case, i.e. the mobile device
being further away than what the TA value indicated.
24
==PAGE:30==
6 Field Testing
This section covers the ﬁeld tests that were carried out. First, the methodology is
described starting with an overview and then the test setup, after which test sites and
the chosen evaluation framework is presented. The section is concluded by presenting
and discussing the results.
6.1 Methodology
All tests carried out were done in a stationary scenario, meaning that while a
given measurement was collected the testing equipment remained stationary. At
each position, three measurements were carried out sequentially with the given
measurement type in order to suss out any variance that might occur at a particular
location with a particular measurement type.1 The measurements were then parsed
and processed at a later time on other equipment than the test equipment.
The overall framework of how data was collected and processed is summarised in
ﬁgure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Diagram of the overall framework used to do ﬁeld tests and process the
data resulting from the ﬁeld tests.
For each measurement type, a script was written to collect a measurement as well as
one for parsing the measurement. After having collected the data and being able
to parse it, a bunch of estimation methods were written so that positions could
1Measurement type: The type or method used to collect the raw data/measurement, e.g. Wi-
Fi scan using the Raspberry Pi’s built-in Wi-Fi module or a cellular network survey issuing
AT+CENG? on the SIM800L modem.
25
==PAGE:31==
be estimated as described in section 5. This also means that there are multiple
estimated positions for a given measurement based on which estimation method is
used.
Moreover, the measurement contains auxiliary data such as the timestamps for when
the measurement was initiated and when it was completed. The location at which
the measurement was collected was also noted when doing the ﬁeld tests so that it
later could be mapped to the true location. The reference locations were corrected
using Google Maps.
6.1.1 Test Setup
Two setups were used, the one used to make multiple-operator timing advance
measurements was developed at a later time as well as required a diﬀerent logical
connection which would have been cumbersome to use in combination with the initial
setup.
In both setups the elements used were:
1. Raspberry Pi 3
2. Telit LE910C1 Mini PCIe LTE CAT1 Module
• In combination with either
– Pulse Electronic W6113XXXXX or W3906XXXX (Antenna)
– CableCC Mini PCI-E Wireless WWAN to USB Adapter Card or EXVIST 4G
LTE Industrial Mini PCIe to USB Adapter W/SIM Card Slot (mPCIe to
USB adapter)
3. LILYGO TTGO T-CALL V1.3
• In combination with an antenna from an unknown manufacturer
The logical version of the setups is straightforward as seen in ﬁgure 6.2. Essentially
it is just a computer in this case a Raspberry Pi interfacing with some modems.
In reality, things are a bit more complicated though. A more complete diagram of
what the setup looked like can be seen in ﬁgure 6.3.
The actual test setups were put in a shoebox, which can be seen in ﬁgure 6.4.
26
==PAGE:32==
Figure 6.2: Logical diagram of the two diﬀerent test setups. Note that the Raspberry
Pi contains a Wi-Fi module, which was used to collect the related Wi-Fi
scan measurements. Setup #1 was used for all measurements except the
ones related to timing advance with LTE, which setup #2 was used for.
Figure 6.3: More complete diagram of setup #1. The grey parts signify the auxiliary
or intermediate communication channels that were present in the setup.
As setup #2 was simply an extension of setup #1 it is not included, but
should be easily inferred from this ﬁgure.
27
==PAGE:33==
Figure 6.4: Pictures of the actual test setups, where the left one is setup #1 and the
right setup #2.
Figure 6.5: Illustration of the test locations. Note that all tests were carried out at
corners of buildings or intersecting streets.
28
==PAGE:34==
6.1.2 Test Locations
The tests were carried out at 20 diﬀerent locations, 10 near Lergravsparken and
another 10 on the campus of the Technical University of Denmark.
All locations were chosen to be corners of streets or buildings to make correcting
the reference coordinates easy. A sample of the pictures used to infer the reference
coordinates can be seen in ﬁgure 6.6. All pictures are timestamped as well as
coordinate-stamped. The coordinates on the pictures are from the phone’s GPS
module and might diﬀer a bit from the corrected coordinates used as the true
reference position.
Figure 6.6: Sample of test locations, namely location 6, 8, 15, and 16. The test
equipment was situated inside the shoebox shown on the pictures.
6.1.3 Evaluation Framework
To ﬁgure out how good a given positioning- and estimation method is an under-
standing of which performance metrics to use is needed. [39] puts forward ﬁve main
metrics that positioning methods can be scored upon, which is a good starting point.
Some of the proposed metrics are more concrete than others, and some contain
sub-metrics, whereas others stand alone.
The ﬁve main metrics are:
1. Accuracy, mainly RMSE, but also CERP and SERP
2. Reliability, deﬁned diﬀerently for positioning methods in 2D and 3D
3. Availability, this one is kind of hard to use, so a less strict deﬁnition and
evaluation is proposed in [39]
4. Latency, from power-on how long does it take to get the ﬁrst estimate
5. Applicability, power consumption, cost, hardware- and software complexity,
network dependency, etc.
[39] goes more in-depth with each, which is summarised in the following subsections,
followed by a conclusion that will present the chosen evaluation framework.
29
==PAGE:35==
6.1.3.1 Accuracy
Basically [39] proposes that the main metric to use for accuracy should be RMSE.
Here’s the deﬁnition of RMSE:
RMSE =
ˆ
ı
ı
Ù 1
N
N
ÿ
k=1
(xmeasured(k) ≠xtrue(k))2
Where:
• N: Number of observations
• xmeasured(k): Estimated location for the k’th observation
• xmeasured(k): True location for the k’th observation
This measure is sensitive to the variance, or rather the variance of the frequency
distribution, of the errors. It would however in all cases make sense to include the
variance, or rather the standard deviation for the errors. Thus it gives an idea of
both accuracy and precision.
For estimations where a range is given, e.g. a circle or sphere, the Circular- or
Spherical Error Probability can be used (CERP and SERP). To compare two
positioning methods where a circle or sphere is given one can either take the middle
of said sphere or circle and use the RMSE, or:
1. Look at the percentage of times where the true location was inside the given
radius and sphere, this percentage number is called CERP and SERP
2. Look at the ranges given, e.g. on average method A gave ranges of 10 m whereas
method B gave ranges (on average) of 20 m
6.1.3.2 Reliability
The reliability can be measured as two things:
1. How consistent a horizontal error level can be maintained below a speciﬁed
reliability threshold, traditionally how this metric is deﬁned for GNSS according
to [39]
2. The ratio of successful positioning attempts out of all attempts made, i.e.:
R = Nsuccessful
N
Where:
• R is the reliability
• Nsuccessful is the number of successfully made estimations, that is any
estimation was able to be made
• N is the total number of estimation attempts, might be higher than
Nsuccessful as there could be times where an estimation cannot be made
based on the provided data, e.g. unknown cell IDs etc.
30
==PAGE:36==
6.1.3.3 Availability
This is hard to measure but basically, it is the physical places where data can
successfully be gathered. In other words how many physical places is the reliability
good, where good is up for debate.
6.1.3.4 Latency
According to [39] it is the time from when you turn on the device to when the
ﬁrst estimation is complete. This is also called Time To First Fix (TTFF) in other
publications.
6.1.3.5 Applicability
Covers a couple of things, here they are in short:
• Power consumption, how many J (Joule) does it take to make one estimation
• Hardware size, like in mm3, basically how much physical space does the method
require
• Software/hardware complexity (this one could be in Big O, but could also be
something a bit more ﬂuﬀy)
• Autonomous level, basically how few components does it rely upon and does it
need access to network data that only the operator can provide etc.
• Cost – what does the solution cost, both in terms of hardware and software
6.1.3.6 Conclusion
To incorporate all the proposed performance metrics would be too big of a scope for
this thesis. The ones deemed the most important from the proposed performance
metrics are accuracy and reliability. Furthermore, another metric that [39] does not
touch upon but is relevant for practical usage is the frequency at which measurements
can be made, i.e. how much time is needed between each estimation both on average,
minimum, and maximum.
So in conclusion these are the metrics used in this thesis to evaluate positioning
methods:
1. Accuracy
2. Reliability
3. Frequency
Instead of using the RMSE for accuracy, the distribution of the error distance and
range is inspected directly. This is done to have a more reﬁned overview of how the
accuracy performs for a given method instead of a single value.
31
==PAGE:37==
6.2 Intermediate Results
6.2.1 Cell Identity Based
As mentioned in section 5.1 three diﬀerent scenarios were tested with two diﬀer-
ent geolocation providers, namely Google and Unwired Labs, the latter including
OpenCelliD [25]. The scenarios were:
1. Providing cell ID and MCC MNC combo
2. Providing cell ID, access technology, and MCC MNC combo
3. Providing cell ID, access technology, signal strength, and MCC MNC combo
This was done so that a diﬀerence in geolocation providers could be sussed out, as
well as determine if there was a diﬀerence for each geolocation provider based on the
amount of information made available to them.
Note that this test was only carried out while being connected via LTE, so that is
the only access technology under test in this section.
The setup used to make all of the measurements was setup #1 shown in ﬁgure 6.4.
6.2.1.1 Accuracy
Without further ado, these are the results:
Table 6.1: Overview of descriptive statistics for the error distance for cell ID-based
positioning methods. All numbers are in meters and have been rounded
to the nearest integer.
Method
min
max
Q50%
¯x
s
Google Plain
27
1166
362
541
409
Google With AcT
42
490
223
233
157
Google With AcT and RSSI
26
484
194
221
156
UnwiredLabs Plain
41
1069
556
527
371
UnwiredLabs with AcT
41
862
401
377
251
UnwiredLabs With AcT and RSSI
41
862
401
377
251
OpenCelliD Plain
513
3110
1819
1821
1302
OpenCelliD with AcT
513
3110
1819
1821
1302
OpenCelliD with AcT and RSSI
513
3110
1819
1821
1302
32
==PAGE:38==
Table 6.2: Overview of descriptive statistics for the range for cell ID based positioning
methods. All numbers are in meters and have been rounded to the nearest
integer.
Method
min
max
Q50%
¯x
s
Google Plain
933
2053
1147
1367
368
Google With AcT
576
1035
722
716
159
Google With AcT and RSSI
576
842
700
674
99
UnwiredLabs Plain
500
2562
1175
1407
835
UnwiredLabs with AcT
500
1477
858
953
447
UnwiredLabs With AcT and RSSI
500
1536
717
826
361
OpenCelliD Plain
593
736
664
664
74
OpenCelliD with AcT
593
736
664
664
74
OpenCelliD with AcT and RSSI
500
593
500
526
43
As it often is easier to extract meaning from graphs the following cumulative distri-
bution function (CDF) graphs are included.
Figure 6.7: CDF for the error distance for each of the geolocation providers.
From ﬁgure 6.7 it is clear that Google performs the best of the three geolocation
providers, and that OpenCelliD performs the worst. It can also be seen in the same
ﬁgure that for Google there is a diﬀerence in the estimation of the given cell based
on the diﬀerence in information fed to the API, whereas for UnwiredLabs the only
thing making a diﬀerence is whether or not the access technology has been provided,
and lastly for OpenCelliD there is no diﬀerence.
In ﬁgure 6.8 it can be seen that Google provides the tightest ranges, followed by
UnwiredLabs and OpenCelliD. UnwiredLabs and OpenCelliD both diﬀer in the
ranges based on signal strength, which was not the case with the error distance.
This must mean that Google and UnwiredLabs/OpenCelliD diﬀer in their estimation
method.
33
==PAGE:39==
Figure 6.8: CDF for the range for each of the geolocation providers.
Lastly, all methods have a 100% CERP if the data is ﬁltered for reliability, meaning
that the rows where an estimation was not available with the given method have
been ﬁltered out.
6.2.1.2 Reliability
Google and UnwiredLabs have a 100% reliability, whereas OpenCelliD only has a
30% reliability. This is somewhat surprising since UnwiredLabs and OpenCelliD
both are operated by UnwiredLabs. On the other hand, it is not that surprising that
UnwiredLabs discriminate between their free and paid service.
6.2.1.3 Frequency
As all outcomes rely on AT#MONI the execution time and thus the frequency is the
same for all.
Table 6.3: Overview of descriptive statistics for the execution time for AT#MONI.
¯x
s
min
Q25%
Q50%
Q75%
max
Execution Time [ms]
11.48
1.03
9
11
11
12
14
34
==PAGE:40==
Figure 6.9: Violin plot of the execution time of AT#MONI, where the bottom whisker
is the minimum, the middle one is the median, and the top one is the
maximum.
So for all methods, the minimum frequency that measurements would be attainable
with is:
fmin =
1
tmax
=
1
14 ms ¥ 71 Hz
Which is adequate in most situations. This is however not taking the response time
of geolocation APIs and processing into account, so the real obtainable frequency
will be substantially lower.
6.2.2 Network Scan Based
The tested positioning methods based on this type of measurement are:
1. Provide all cell IDs, MCC MNC combos, and signal strengths
2. Provide 2G cell IDs, MCC MNC combos, and signal strengths
3. Provide 3G cell IDs, MCC MNC combos, and signal strengths
4. Provide all cell IDs, MCC MNC combos, and signal strengths one at a time
and intersect them
5. Provide all cell IDs, MCC MNC combos, and signal strengths one at a time
and use a traditional centroid algorithm
6. Provide 2G cell IDs, MCC MNC combos, and signal strengths one at a time
and intersect them
7. Provide 3G cell IDs, MCC MNC combos, and signal strengths one at a time
and intersect them
Some of the methods were also varied over geolocation providers.
The setup used to make all of the measurements was setup #1 shown in ﬁgure 6.4.
35
==PAGE:41==
6.2.2.1 Accuracy
Information about including the MCC MNC combos and signal strength is not
mentioned as this is the case for all methods presented in this section.
Before jumping into the error distance and range that the diﬀerent methods provide
the CERP and reliability ﬁltered CERP is good to keep in mind, as for some
methods a better error distance and/or range comes at the cost of a worse CERP or
reliability.
Table 6.4: Overview of CERP and reliability ﬁltered CERP for network scan-based
positioning methods. By reliability ﬁltered CERP is understood the CERP
of the measurements which yielded an estimated position. The numbers
have been rounded to the nearest integer.
Method
CERP
Reliability ﬁltered CERP
Google All Cells
100%
100%
Google 2G Cells Only
62%
65%
Google 3G Cells Only
85%
85%
UnwiredLabs All Cells
100%
100%
OpenCelliD All Cells
78%
92%
Google Intersecting All Cells
98%
98%
Google Intersecting 2G Cells
85%
85%
Google Intersecting 3G Cells
98%
98%
Google All Cells Traditional Centroid
53%
53%
Only the Google- and UnwiredLabs All Cells methods have a 100% CERP, followed by
Google Intersecting All Cells and Google Intersecting 3G Cells with a 98% CERP.
Table 6.5: Overview of descriptive statistics for the error distance for network scan
based positioning methods. All numbers are in meters and have been
rounded to the nearest integer.
Method
min
max
Q50%
¯x
s
Google All Cells
26
1421
522
486
309
Google 2G Cells Only
29
31252
517
5764
10585
Google 3G Cells Only
25
20838
354
1050
2827
UnwiredLabs All Cells
500
6776
527
1071
1292
OpenCelliD All Cells
500
9366
500
983
1268
Google Intersecting All Cells
922
2020
1482
1415
253
Google Intersecting 2G Cells
430
5376
2124
2567
1514
Google Intersecting 3G Cells
922
2020
1482
1415
253
Google All Cells Traditional Centroid
832
1450
1124
1130
143
36
==PAGE:42==
Based on the numbers from table 6.5 as well as the considerations of the varying
CERP Google All Cells as well as Google Intersecting All Cells/3G Cells seem to
pull ahead of the others.
Table 6.6: Overview of descriptive statistics for the range for network scan based
positioning methods. All numbers are in meters and have been rounded
to the nearest integer.
Method
min
max
Q50%
¯x
s
Google All Cells
1079
5000
2266
2809
1295
Google 2G Cells Only
704
3604
1120
1628
934
Google 3G Cells Only
591
1791
873
922
283
UnwiredLabs All Cells
500
6776
527
1071
1292
OpenCelliD All Cells
500
9366
500
983
1268
Google Intersecting All Cells
922
2020
1482
1415
253
Google Intersecting 2G Cells
430
5376
2124
2567
1514
Google Intersecting 3G Cells
922
2020
1482
1415
253
Google All Cells Traditional Centroid
832
1450
1124
1130
143
Looking at table 6.6 it gets a bit harder to decipher which method is doing well, as on
one hand some of the methods result in lower ranges than others but cross-referencing
with table 6.4 it seems to come at a cost for some of them.
These tables are not perfect at portraying the data alone, so the CDF of the error
distance and range are also presented.
Figure 6.10: CDF for the error distance for each of the geolocation providers as
well as a special group, wherein the special group are methods wherein
custom algorithms have been utilized.
From ﬁgure 6.10 and 6.11 it is evident that some method perform better than
others.
In terms of error distance Google All Cells, UnwiredLabs All Cells, and Google
Intersecting All Cells/3G Cells perform the best. For range Google 3G Cells Only,
37
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.11: CDF for the range for each of the geolocation providers as well as the
special group.
Google All Cells Traditional Centroid, and Google Intersecting All Cells/3G Cells
perform well.
Note that Google Intersecting All Cells and only using 3G cells perform identically.
Going forward the comments made about Google Intersecting All Cells also apply
to the Google Intersecting 3G Cells method.
It is a bit hard to see which one performs the best as the x-axis is not the same
for all groupings, therefore another CDF plot comparing the most relevant ones is
included in ﬁgure 6.12.
Figure 6.12: CDF for the error distance and range for the best network scan-based
methods.
From ﬁgure 6.12 it looks like Google Intersecting All Cells perform better than the
other two if both metrics are used. Keeping table 6.4 in mind further discredits
UnwiredLabs All Cells as a good performing method.
38
==PAGE:44==
Overall looking at Google Intersecting All Cells 80% of the estimated positions lie
under 400 m away from the true location and have a conﬁdence range of 1600 m. In
principle, the range could be adjusted in regard to the error distance but this would
require further analysis which is out of the scope for this thesis.
6.2.2.2 Reliability
Even though the reliability can be partly inferred from 6.4 a table presenting the
reliability for each method is included for completeness sake.
Table 6.7: Overview of the reliability for network scan based positioning methods.
All numbers have been rounded to the nearest integer.
Method
Reliability
Google All Cells
100%
Google 2G Cells Only
95%
Google 3G Cells Only
100%
UnwiredLabs All Cells
100%
OpenCelliD All Cells
85%
Google Intersecting All Cells
100%
Google Intersecting 2G Cells
88%
Google Intersecting 3G Cells
100%
Google All Cells Traditional Centroid
100%
In conjunction with table 6.4 these reliability numbers give an idea as to which
methods perform badly across the board and which perform better when an estimated
position is indeed possible to get with the given method. For instance Google
All Cells Traditional Centroid simply performs badly across the board, whereas
OpenCelliD All Cells has a bad CERP but also has bad reliability, but adjusted for
that the CERP rises signiﬁcantly.
6.2.2.3 Frequency
As all outcomes rely on AT#CSURV the execution time and thus the frequency is the
same for all.
Table 6.8: Overview of descriptive statistics for the execution time rounded oﬀto
the nearest integer.
¯x
s
min
Q25%
Q50%
Q75%
max
Execution Time [ms]
29744
5377
23420
27253
29211
31570
62601
As the execution time on average is quite high, almost 30 seconds, it does not make
much sense to express it in frequency. Which also makes these methods impractical
39
==PAGE:45==
Figure 6.13: Violin plot of the execution time of AT#CSRUV, where the bottom whisker
is the minimum, the middle one is the median, and the top one is the
maximum.
for navigation. The only real use cases for such a high execution time would be
somewhat stationary devices, including ones that move around occasionally, e.g. cargo
and packages. Overall it might not be the best approach though, as such a high
execution time might also lead to high power consumption – that is however an
assumption and not something that can be backed up in this thesis.
6.2.3 Proprietary Based
As the AT+CLBS method2 is the only one under test and parameters are not changeable,
as they are unknown, there is no variation in the tested method.
6.2.3.1 Accuracy
First and foremost the CERP and reliability adjusted CERP is presented:
Table 6.9: Overview of CERP and reliability ﬁltered CERP for SIMCom’s proprietary
positioning method (AT+CLBS). The numbers have been rounded to the
nearest integer.
CERP
Reliability ﬁltered CERP
80%
88%
Seeing as there was only one method being tested in this category the error distance
and range tables have been merged into one.
2The command used is actually AT+CLBS=4,1, but for brevity’s sake it is referenced to as AT+CLBS.
40
==PAGE:46==
Table 6.10: Overview of descriptive statistics for the error distance and range for
AT+CLBS. All numbers are in meters and have been rounded to the nearest
integer.
Attribute
min
max
Q50%
¯x
s
Error distance
134
775
313
361
149
Range
550
550
550
550
0
In table 6.10 it can be seen that the range does not vary at all. This might suggest
that SIMCom has hardcoded the value.
In any case, more information cannot be extracted from the range attribute, so it is
only the CDF of the error distance that is presented in ﬁgure 6.14.
Figure 6.14: CDF for the error distance of SIMCom’s proprietary positioning method
(AT+CLBS).
In ﬁgure 6.14 it is seen that in 40% of the observations the error distance is below
300 m and in 80% of the observations it is below 450 m or so. Considering that the
method is only 2G based it seems to perform rather well when compared to the 2G
results in ﬁgure 6.10.
6.2.3.2 Reliability
The reliability for the given method is 91% when rounding it to the nearest integer.
6.2.3.3 Frequency
As only one method was tested no further introduction or explanation is needed.
41
==PAGE:47==
Table 6.11: Overview of descriptive statistics for the execution time for issuing AT+CLBS
rounded oﬀto the nearest integer.
¯x
s
min
Q25%
Q50%
Q75%
max
Execution Time [ms]
3399
7269
886
1196
1282
1565
32672
Figure 6.15: Violin plot of the execution time of AT+CLBS, where the bottom whisker
is the minimum, the middle one is the median, and the top one is the
maximum.
From table 6.11 and ﬁgure 6.15 it can be seen that on most executions of the
command will lie under 2 seconds. There are however some big outliers that can
most likely be attributed to the observations in which an estimated position was not
available as the server timed out.
Overall the frequency is adequate in a lot of settings except for navigation maybe
with the exception of low-speed navigation, e.g. walking.
6.2.4 Wi-Fi Based
As mentioned in section 5.4 two overall methods were used:
1. Providing all visible access points and their RSSI to Google
2. Providing all visible access points and their RSSI in a sliced manner to Google
and then intersecting them
With the second approach a slicing size from one to six were tested, but only slicing
sizes from two to six are presented as the reliability for slice size one was nil.
The setup used to make all of the measurements was setup #1 shown in ﬁgure 6.4.
42
==PAGE:48==
6.2.4.1 Accuracy and Reliability
Firstly the CERP and reliability CERP is shown in table 6.12. Note that the
geolocation provider, Google, is not mentioned beyond this point as no other providers
were tested.
Table 6.12: Overview of CERP and reliability ﬁltered CERP for Wi-Fi-based po-
sitioning methods.
The numbers have been rounded to the nearest
integer.
Method
CERP
Reliability ﬁltered CERP
All Access Points
83%
98%
Intersecting Slice Size 2
75%
94%
Intersecting Slice Size 3
60%
97%
Intersecting Slice Size 4
43%
97%
Intersecting Slice Size 5
43%
100%
Intersecting Slice Size 6
25%
100%
From table 6.12 it can be observed that the CERP falls with an increasing slice size
but is the highest for the method where all access points are provided.
Table 6.13: Overview of descriptive statistics for the error distance for Wi-Fi-based
positioning methods. All numbers are in meters and have been rounded
to the nearest integer.
Method
min
max
Q50%
¯x
s
All Access Points
5
37
14
15
7
Intersecting Slice Size 2
3
48
19
21
11
Intersecting Slice Size 3
2
46
17
18
9
Intersecting Slice Size 4
4
38
12
14
7
Intersecting Slice Size 5
3
32
12
14
7
Intersecting Slice Size 6
4
30
14
14
7
Table 6.14: Overview of descriptive statistics for the range for Wi-Fi-based positioning
methods. All numbers are in meters and have been rounded to the nearest
integer.
Method
min
max
Q50%
¯x
s
All Access Points
20
107
46
47
23
Intersecting Slice Size 2
2
63
46
44
11
Intersecting Slice Size 3
29
56
44
43
7
Intersecting Slice Size 4
25
59
41
41
8
Intersecting Slice Size 5
33
66
41
44
8
Intersecting Slice Size 6
30
59
41
44
7
43
==PAGE:49==
In table 6.13 it can be seen that there are only minor variations between the methods
however if is taken into account it can be seen that the max range is almost halved
when using the intersecting methods.
A more granular view of how the error distance and range compare the CDF for both
attributes is included in ﬁgure 6.16. Only the All Access Points and Intersecting
Slice 2 are included as they are the only ones with acceptable reliability.
Figure 6.16: CDF for the error distance and range for the Wi-Fi-based methods with
an acceptable reliability.
Figure 6.16 conﬁrms what is seen in the previous tables, namely that the range can
be signiﬁcantly lowered at the expense of some error distance loss when comparing
the two methods with acceptable reliability.
In general, the Wi-Fi-based methods perform quite well compared to cellular though.
Also, from the ﬁndings thus far it indicates that providing all the access points to
Google performs better than any of the custom intersection algorithm, even though
they also rely on Google. Moreover, increasing the slice size beyond two yields such
poor reliability that it cannot be justiﬁed to do so.
6.2.4.2 Frequency
As all outcomes rely on a Wi-Fi scan carried out with iwlist the execution time is
the same for all the discussed methods.
44
==PAGE:50==
Table 6.15: Overview of descriptive statistics for the execution time for issuing iwlist
rounded oﬀto the nearest integer.
¯x
s
min
Q25%
Q50%
Q75%
max
Execution Time [ms]
3667
127
3352
3549
3694
3748
3862
Figure 6.17: Violin plot of the execution time of iwlist.
The execution time for iwlist is in the range where it does not make sense to calculate
a frequency but instead simply state that a measurement can be carried out roughly
every four seconds. This value is not acceptable in most navigational settings but is
adequate for asset tracking or the likes. There might also be faster ways of doing
these scans, but this is not an avenue that has been explored.
6.2.5 LTE Cell Identity and Timing Advance Based
The tested positioning methods based on this type of measurements are:
1. Intersecting the cells, same as in the network scan based methods but with a
functioning approach to get multiple LTE cells
2. Intersecting one cell at a time with its LTE TA band per operator, comparable
to the CID with LTE
3. Intersecting all LTE TA bands
4. Intersecting all cells and their LTE TA band
A variation between using the LTE TA band and simply the circle that it makes,
meaning that the inner circle is not subtracted from the geometry in the latter, is
evaluated in all the aforementioned methods except the ﬁrst.
The setup used to make all of the measurements was setup #2 shown in ﬁgure 6.4.
45
==PAGE:51==
Before testing any of the decided upon methods an analysis of the timing advance
bands was carried out. One of the initial things that were done with the measurements
was to visualise it on a map, after having mapped cells to cell towers, which is
something that was touched upon earlier in section 5.5. A sample of the resulting
visualisations is shown in ﬁgure 6.18.
Figure 6.18: LTE TA bands with for location 1 with multipliers 1, 1,5, and 2 going
from left to right. The dots are cell towers, the mark the true location,
and the coloured areas are the bands inferred from the measured LTE
TA values. Each operator is colour coded, orange being 3, blue TDC,
and purple Telia/Telenor.
From the visualisations, it was noticed that using the LTE TA values as per the
standard did not result in the LTE TA bands covering the true location in a lot of
cases. To combat this multiplications of the TA values were added, essentially adding
an error margin. As to why this needs to be done is hard to say, one guess could
be that operators do not need the network to be as synchronised as the standards
specify. Another source of error could be that the TA values were not measured
multiple times over a longer period.
To evaluate which multiplications or error margins works the best for each operator
the CERP is considered for diﬀerent multiplication values, where the goal is to ﬁnd
the minimum multiplication value that gives a 100% CERP.
Table 6.16: CERP stats for the diﬀerent operators, where the two rows surrounding
the selected value is also included. TDC and Telia/Telenor the reliability
ﬁltered CERP was used.
Operator, multiplier
CERP
Reliability ﬁltered CERP
3, – = 2, 25
98%
98%
3, – = 2, 3125
100%
100%
3, – = 2, 375
100%
100%
TDC, – = 2, 5
97%
98%
TDC, – = 2, 75
98%
100%
TDC, – = 3
98%
100%
Telia/Telenor, – = 3
83%
94%
Telia/Telenor, – = 3, 25
83%
100%
46
==PAGE:52==
Operator, multiplier
CERP
Reliability ﬁltered CERP
Telia/Telenor, – = 3, 5
83%
100%
To calculate the CERP the estimated position was that of the cell tower with a range
calculated like so:
R = – (— “ + —)
Where R is the range, – the multiplier/error margin, — the distance per TA value
which is ≥78, 07 m for LTE [6], and “ the TA value.
The reason for adding — in the last term is that the TA value indicates a range from
the given TA value up to the next one, this is also why the formula was not reduced
to R = – — (“ + 1) as it is more clearly conveyed given the meanings in the other
format.
The approximated best values for each operator are – = 2, 3125 for 3, – = 2, 75 for
TDC, and – = 3, 25 for Telia/Telenor. The values were found using a manual binary
search approach.
As the discrepancy is noticeable between operators one might wonder if some operators
have a less synchronised network. It could also be that one of the operators have
at random had a skewed set of TA values, the thought being that maybe higher or
lower TA values are more prone to being unsynchronised, or simply does not required
synchronisation as much.
To verify that the latter is not the case the distribution of TA values is visualised in
ﬁgure 6.19.
Figure 6.19: Distribution visualised as a histogram of the timing advance values per
operator.
From the histograms there is nothing that indicates that any of the operators has
a signiﬁcantly skewed distribution of larger or lower timing advances, this might
suggest that the synchronisation in Telia/Telenor is not as important as it is in the
other networks, although it could also be due to other factors.
47
==PAGE:53==
The information, especially the multiplication factors, uncovered in this analysis are
used in the following unless something else is stated. Additionally, all the methods
in which a cell is considered the geolocation provider is Google.
6.2.5.1 Accuracy
As mentioned earlier the variation of using the LTE TA value to make a circle or a
band was considered in all the cases except the ﬁrst method, this is reﬂected in the
methods that are marked TA circle and TA band respectively, the meaning should
be self-explanatory.
Moreover, a method where the TA multiplier was one below (≠1) from what the
value for each operator that was found in the analysis was also considered. This was
done to check if there might be something to gain in terms of error distance or range
when sacriﬁcing CERP.
Table 6.17: Overview of CERP and reliability ﬁltered CERP for LTE CID and
TA-based positioning methods.
Method
CERP
Reliability ﬁltered CERP
Intersect all LTE cells (network scan)
97%
98%
Intersecting cell and TA circle [3]
100%
100%
Intersecting cell and TA band [3]
100%
100%
Intersecting cell and TA circle [TDC]
98%
100%
Intersecting cell and TA band [TDC]
98%
100%
Intersecting cell and TA circle [Telia/Telenor]
88%
100%
Intersecting cell and TA band [Telia/Telenor]
88%
100%
Intersect all TA circles
100%
100%
Intersect all TA bands
100%
100%
Intersect all TA circles and cells
98%
100%
Intersect all TA bands and cells
98%
100%
Intersect all TA bands and cells with low multiplier
72%
91%
Table 6.18: Overview of descriptive statistics for the error distance for LTE CID and
TA-based positioning methods. All numbers are in meters and have been
rounded to the nearest integer.
Method
min
max
Q50%
¯x
s
Intersect all LTE cells (network scan)
17
751
133
242
210
Intersecting cell and TA circle [3]
27
412
179
187
92
Intersecting cell and TA band [3]
41
422
187
191
89
Intersecting cell and TA circle [TDC]
60
404
197
202
89
Intersecting cell and TA band [TDC]
60
420
192
199
91
Intersecting cell and TA circle [Telia/Telenor]
8
471
247
226
118
Intersecting cell and TA band [Telia/Telenor]
8
435
247
222
113
48
==PAGE:54==
Method
min
max
Q50%
¯x
s
Intersect all TA circles
42
366
184
185
81
Intersect all TA bands
42
366
185
188
80
Intersect all TA circles and cells
33
365
162
157
80
Intersect all TA bands and cells
42
417
151
156
83
Intersect all TA bands and cells with low multiplier
46
370
197
209
86
Table 6.19: Overview of descriptive statistics for the range for LTE CID and TA-
based positioning methods. All numbers are in meters and have been
rounded to the nearest integer.
Method
min
max
Q50%
¯x
s
Intersect all LTE cells (network scan)
111
1550
1100
1102
253
Intersecting cell and TA circle [3]
370
2080
969
1065
380
Intersecting cell and TA band [3]
370
2080
969
1065
380
Intersecting cell and TA circle [TDC]
355
1649
880
1023
314
Intersecting cell and TA band [TDC]
355
1649
880
1023
314
Intersecting cell and TA circle [Telia/Telenor]
519
1616
1040
1161
323
Intersecting cell and TA band [Telia/Telenor]
519
1616
1040
1161
323
Intersect all TA circles
370
1479
812
862
280
Intersect all TA bands
370
1479
812
862
280
Intersect all TA circles and cells
155
1083
740
711
245
Intersect all TA bands and cells
155
1083
740
705
241
Intersect all TA bands and cells with low multiplier
140
750
400
412
172
From table 6.18, 6.19, and 6.17 a couple of things are noticed of which the most
important are listed here:
1. Using TA bands instead of TA circles does not always yield a lower average
error distance, the eﬀects are at least negligible
2. Intersect all TA bands and cells has the lowest, and therefore best, average
error distance
3. Sorting the operator by multiplier also yields a sorted list of the best-performing
methods
4. The mean range does not fall signiﬁcantly when using the TA bands over the
TA circles
5. Using a lower TA multiplier signiﬁcantly worsens the average error distance as
well as CERP
To dive a bit deeper on the ﬁrst and third point all the methods using a single TA
band/circle and cell per operator is plotted in ﬁgure 6.20. In this ﬁgure, it can be
seen that only Telia/Telenor seems to be performing signiﬁcantly worse than the
other two in terms of error distance, but it eventually catches up. Maybe a bit
surprising at ﬁrst sight 3 has the largest range, keeping ﬁgure 6.19 in mind it becomes
49
==PAGE:55==
less surprising though as 3 is the only operator with a recorded timing advance of
ﬁve.
Figure 6.20: CDF for the error distance and range for each of the Intersecting cell
and TA circle methods per operator.
Next, a visualisation of the intersecting multiple bands and cells is considered in
ﬁgure 6.21.
Figure 6.21: CDF for the error distance and range for each of the LTE CID and TA
methods where multiple cells and TA bands/circles are used.
From ﬁgure 6.21 it is evident that one method stands out, and that is the Intersect
all LTE TA bands and cells method, which has an error distance of less than or equal
to 200 m 80% of the time. Looking at the methods where a single measurement
is required and the ones in ﬁgure 6.21, which require multiple measurements, the
question arises of whether it is really worth it. To answer that the best-performing
method of each category is compared in ﬁgure 6.22.
From what can be seen in ﬁgure 6.22 it is evident that there is indeed a diﬀerence,
but the one using multiple modems only performs marginally better, which simply is
not enough to justify the use of two additional modems.
50
==PAGE:56==
Figure 6.22: CDF for the error distance and range for the best-performing methods
in each category, i.e. Intersect LTE TA band and cell and Intersect all
LTE TA bands and cells.
6.2.5.2 Reliability
The reliability can partly be inferred from 6.17. For completeness sake a table of the
reliability is still included though.
Table 6.20: Overview of reliability for LTE CID and TA-based positioning methods.
Method
Reliability
Intersect all LTE cells (network scan)
98%
Intersecting cell and TA circle [3]
100%
Intersecting cell and TA band [3]
100%
Intersecting cell and TA circle [TDC]
98%
Intersecting cell and TA band [TDC]
98%
Intersecting cell and TA circle [Telia/Telenor]
88%
Intersecting cell and TA band [Telia/Telenor]
88%
Intersect all TA circles
100%
Intersect all TA bands
100%
Intersect all TA circles and cells
98%
Intersect all TA bands and cells
98%
Intersect all TA bands and cells with low multiplier
78%
6.2.5.3 Frequency
All outcomes rely on the execution of the qmicli -d {device-port} --nas-get-cell-location-info,
but some methods require this command to be run three times, once per modem as
51
==PAGE:57==
well as a ping. The measurements were done in parallel, so the stats should also be
somewhat representative for the methods where only one modem is used.
Table 6.21: Overview
of
descriptive
statistics
for
the
execution
time
for
pinging
1.1.1.1
once
and
issuing
qmicli -d {device-port}
--nas-get-cell-location-info for three modems in parallel rounded oﬀ
to the nearest integer.
¯x
s
min
Q25%
Q50%
Q75%
max
Execution Time [ms]
771
141
622
665
696
917
1115
Figure 6.23: Violin plot of the execution time of pinging 1.1.1.1 and issuing qmicli
-d {device-port} --nas-get-cell-location-info for three modems in par-
allel.
From ﬁgure 6.23 and table 6.21 it can be seen that roughly every 3-4 seconds these
measurements are possible. It was not recorded how long each ping took, but it likely
took a signiﬁcant part of the execution time. So if a setup where a data connection
is active due to other ongoing communication the execution time would probably be
signiﬁcantly lowered. Keeping this in mind it cannot be ruled out that it could be
used for low precision navigation. In any case, it is usable in most asset tracking
use-cases.
6.3 Comparison
Considering all the diﬀerent methods a few of the methods stand out for their
performance or ease of implementation:
1. Google CID LTE
2. Google CID LTE and TA band
3. Intersect all LTE TA bands and cells
4. Wi-Fi scan
52
==PAGE:58==
Note that none of the network scan methods are included, as well as the proprietary
method from SIMCom, i.e. AT+CLBS, which is simply because overall they performed
poorly when compared to the ones.
In general Wi-Fi scanning seemed to be performing signiﬁcantly better than any of
the cellular-based methods, but to pin down the diﬀerences the CDF for the error
distance and range is shown in ﬁgure 6.24.
Figure 6.24: CDF for the error distance and range of the best-performing methods.
In ﬁgure 6.24 it can be veriﬁed that the Wi-Fi scanning method performs much better
than the cellular-based ones. But if a cellular positioning method was to be chosen
out of the bunch, which is also the main focus of this thesis, then Intersect all LTE
TA bands and cells perform the best in terms of error distance, it does however not
perform so much better than simply using a single modem that it can be justiﬁed to
do so. Using the TA band over using purely the CID performs quite a bit better,
and it does not come at an expense in the cases where an active session is already
established.
53
==PAGE:59==
7 Future Work
It is clear that there are practical positioning methods that can do better than simple
CID-based methods, but making them better to the extent where they could be
used as a fallback or even as a replacement for current GNSS solutions requires an
improvement by a factor of at least 4 to be usable in a wide range of use-cases. A
couple of potential avenues that could be explored to obtain this are listed here:
• Better algorithms
– Try some pattern recognition techniques, e.g. by using machine learning
or the likes
– Cover more state of the art research, e.g. see if the SSS is obtainable
through oﬀ-the-shelf products
• Revisit the way the range is determined as that seemed to be way out of
proportion for the methods where the maximum length of the bounding box
was used
• Test of hybrid methods
• Incorporate the height of the cell tower, for Denmark this could be done by
incorporating [40] into the dataset
• Measure the TA value over time and average it
Other interesting aspects which were not covered in the thesis but would have been
insightful to know for the diﬀerent methods:
• Power consumption comparison
• Cost comparison
• Latency comparison (TTFF)
• Navigational setting comparison, i.e. test the methods in a setting where
measurements were carried out continuously
54
==PAGE:60==
8 Conclusion
The practical positioning methods within the realm of cellular networks were deemed
to be cellular identity, network surveys/scans, proprietary methods using special AT
commands only found on speciﬁc modem manufacturers’ modems and cell identity
intersected with the timing advance band formed from the observed cell identity and
a database with the known cell tower locations. Wi-Fi scan-based methods were
also considered even though they are not within the scope of cellular networks but
was deemed interesting as they are widely used and live up to the proposed rules of
practicality.
Of the tested positioning methods the Wi-Fi scan-based method, using Google as a
geolocation provider performed the best overall, although it did have lower reliability
and therefore CERP than some of the cellular-based methods.
Of the cellular-based methods the method where multiple modems were used to
measure the timing advance and observe the cell ID for LTE, to then intersect
the observed cells and timing advance bands, performed the best in terms of error
distance. It did however not perform signiﬁcantly better than doing the same but
just using a single operator, namely 3. Having practicality in mind the latter would
in most cases be the best choice.
Furthermore, fairly simple algorithms to estimate positions from cells were proposed.
Also, an algorithm for mapping cells to cell towers given a database of known cell
tower locations without their cell tower ID was proposed. Concerning this, rules for
synthesising cell IDs (speciﬁcally sector IDs) which seem to be the adjacent 120¶ cells
to the observed cell were presented for each of the network operators in Denmark,
i.e. 3, TDC, and Telia/Telenor.
55
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
European Space Agency, “Navipedia.” [Online]. Available: https://gssc.esa.i
nt/navipedia/index.php/Main_Page. [Accessed: 29-Jun-2021]
[2]
3GPP, “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN);
Stage 2 functional speciﬁcation of User Equipment (UE) positioning in E-
UTRAN,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical Speciﬁcation
(TS) 36.305, 2020 [Online]. Available: https://portal.3gpp.org/desktopmodul
es/Speciﬁcations/SpeciﬁcationDetails.aspx?speciﬁcationId=2433
[3]
A. Bensky, Wireless positioning technologies and applications. Artech House,
2016, pp. xiv, 401 Seiten (unknown).
[4]
J. A. Del Peral-Rosado, R. Raulefs, J. A. López-Salcedo, and G. Seco-Granados,
“Survey of Cellular Mobile Radio Localization Methods: From 1G to 5G,”
Ieee Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1124–1148,
2018, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2017.2785181.
[5]
3GPP, “Non-Access-Stratum (NAS) functions related to Mobile Station (MS)
in idle mode,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical Speciﬁ-
cation (TS) 23.122, 2021 [Online]. Available: https://portal.3gpp.org/deskto
pmodules/Speciﬁcations/SpeciﬁcationDetails.aspx?speciﬁcationId=789
[6]
B. K. P. Horn, “Timing Advance in LTE.” [Online]. Available: https://people
.csail.mit.edu/bkph/cellular_repeater_TA.shtml. [Accessed: 10-Feb-2021]
[7]
3GPP, “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA) and Evolved
Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN); Overall description;
Stage 2,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical Speciﬁcation
(TS) 36.300, 2021 [Online]. Available: https://portal.3gpp.org/desktopmodul
es/Speciﬁcations/SpeciﬁcationDetails.aspx?speciﬁcationId=2430
[8]
S. M. Razavi et al., “Positioning in cellular networks: Past, present, future,”
Ieee Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, Wcnc, vol. 2018–,
pp. 1–6, 2018, doi: 10.1109/WCNC.2018.8377447.
[9]
P. Gilski and J. StefaÒski, “Survey of radio navigation systems,” International
Journal of Electronics and Telecommunications, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 43–48,
2015, doi: 10.1515/eletel-2015-0006.
56
==PAGE:62==
[10]
M. Thorpe, E. Zelmer, and Rohde & Schwarz, “LTE Location Based Services
Technology Introduction White paper.” 2013 [Online].
Available: https:
//scdn.rohde-schwarz.com/ur/pws/dl_downloads/dl_application/applicati
on_notes/1sp05/1SP05_1e_LTE_location-based-services.pdf. [Accessed:
01-Feb-2021]
[11]
T. Kos, M. Grgic, and G. Sisul, “Mobile user positioning in GSM/UMTS
cellular networks,” Proceedings Elmar-2006, pp. 185–+, 2006.
[12]
3GPP, “General Packet Radio Service (GPRS); GPRS Tunnelling Protocol
(GTP) across the Gn and Gp interface,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project
(3GPP), Technical Speciﬁcation (TS) 29.060, 2020 [Online]. Available: https:
//portal.3gpp.org/desktopmodules/Speciﬁcations/SpeciﬁcationDetails.asp
x?speciﬁcationId=1595
[13]
3GPP, “Evolved Packet System (EPS); Evolved General Packet Radio Service
(GPRS) Tunnelling Protocol for Control plane (GTPv2-C); Stage 3,” 3rd
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical Speciﬁcation (TS) 29.274,
2021 [Online]. Available: https://portal.3gpp.org/desktopmodules/Speciﬁcat
ions/SpeciﬁcationDetails.aspx?speciﬁcationId=1692
[14]
G. A. Mizusawa, “Performance of Hyperbolic Position Location Techniques
for Code Division Multiple Access,” 2012.
[15]
N. Ikhtiari, “Navigation in GNSS denied environments using software deﬁned
radios and LTE signals of opportunities.” PhD thesis, University of Canterbury,
2019.
[16]
A. Çınar, “OpenCelliD Visualization.” 2021 [Online]. Available: https://alpe
rcinar.com/open-cell-id/. [Accessed: 23-Jun-2021]
[17]
Quectel, “EC25&EC21 AT Commands Manual Version 1.3.” 2021.
[18]
Quectel, “BG96 AT Commands Manual Version 2.3.” 2021 [Online]. Available:
https://www.quectel.com/download/quectel_bg96_at_commands_manua
l_v2-3/
[19]
SIMCom, “SIM800 Series AT Command Manual Version 1.09.” 2015.
[20]
SIMCom, “SIM7000 Series AT Command Manual Version 1.03.” 2018.
[21]
SIMCom, “SIM8200 Series AT Command Manual Version 1.00.01.” 2020.
[22]
Telit, “LE920A4/ LE910C1 AT Commands Reference Guide.” 2017 [Online].
Available: https://www.telit.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/80490ST1
0778A_AT_Commands_Reference_Guide_LE9x0A4_LE910Cx__R2.pdf
57
==PAGE:63==
[23]
Telit, “ME910C1/NE910C1/ML865C1 AT Commands Reference Guide.” 2018.
[24]
U-blox, “SARA-R4 AT Commands Manual.” 2021.
[25]
UnwiredLabs, “OpenCelliD - Largest Open Database of Cell Towers & Ge-
olocation - by Unwired Labs.” [Online]. Available: https://opencellid.org.
[Accessed: 28-Jun-2021]
[26]
C. Lim, J. Kim, and H. Kang, “Device-centric positioning using radiomap
database on cellular networks,” 2018 24th Asia-paciﬁc Conference on Com-
munications, Apcc 2018, p. 8633569, 2019, doi: 10.1109/APCC.2018.8633569.
[27]
Turfjs, “GitHub - Turfjs/turf:
A modular geospatial engine written in
JavaScript.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/Turfjs/turf/. [Ac-
cessed: 22-Jun-2021]
[28]
J. D. Sretenovic, S. M. Kostic, and M. I. Simic, “Experimental analysis of
Weight-Compensated Weighted Centroid Localization algorithm based on
RSSI,” 2015 12th International Conference on Telecommunications in Modern
Satellite, Cable and Broadcasting Services, Telsiks 2015, p. 7357834, 2015,
doi: 10.1109/TELSKS.2015.7357834.
[29]
Die.net, “iwlist(8) - Linux man page.” [Online]. Available: https://linux.die.
net/man/8/iwlist. [Accessed: 29-Jun-2021]
[30]
C. Baker, “GitHub - bakerface/wireless-tools: Wireless tools for Node.js.”
[Online]. Available: https://github.com/bakerface/wireless-tools. [Accessed:
29-Jun-2021]
[31]
Freedesktop.org, “Libqmi.” 2021 [Online]. Available: https://github.com/fre
edesktop/libqmi. [Accessed: 23-Jun-2021]
[32]
3GPP, “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Physical
layer procedures,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical
Speciﬁcation (TS) 36.213, 2021 [Online]. Available: https://portal.3gpp.org/
desktopmodules/Speciﬁcations/SpeciﬁcationDetails.aspx?speciﬁcationId=24
27
[33]
H.
Westh-Hansen,
“GitHub
-
westh/telemaster:
like
https://mastedatabasen.dk,
just
better.”
[Online].
Available:
https://github.com/westh/telemaster. [Accessed: 28-Jun-2021]
[34]
Energistyrelsen, “Mastedatabasen.” [Online]. Available: https://www.masted
atabasen.dk/viskort/PageMap.aspx. [Accessed: 28-Jun-2021]
58
==PAGE:64==
[35]
MongoDB, “Geospatial Queries — MongoDB Manual.” [Online]. Available:
https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/geospatial-queries/. [Accessed: 22-Jun-
2021]
[36]
B. K. P. Horn, “Base Station Numbering Schemes.” [Online].
Available:
https://people.csail.mit.edu/bkph/cellular_repeater_numerology.shtml.
[Accessed: 28-Jun-2021]
[37]
3GPP, “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN); S1
Application Protocol (S1AP),” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP),
Technical Speciﬁcation (TS) 36.413, 2021 [Online]. Available: https://portal
.3gpp.org/desktopmodules/Speciﬁcations/SpeciﬁcationDetails.aspx?speciﬁc
ationId=2446
[38]
Netmanias, “LTE Identiﬁcation II: NE and Location Identiﬁers.” [Online].
Available: https://www.netmanias.com/en/?m=view&id=techdocs&no=10
431. [Accessed: 28-Jun-2021]
[39]
I. K. Adusei, K. Kyamakya, and K. Jobmann, “Mobile positioning technologies
in cellular networks: An evaluation of their performance metrics,” Proceedings
- Ieee Military Communications Conference Milcom, vol. 2, pp. 1239–1244,
2002, doi: 10.1109/MILCOM.2002.1179656.
[40]
Styrelsen for Dataforsyning og Eﬀektivisering, “Danmarks Højdemodel.” [On-
line]. Available: https://sdfe.dk/hent-data/danmarks-hoejdemodel. [Ac-
cessed: 29-Jun-2021]
59
==PAGE:65==
Appendix
60
==PAGE:66==
From the aerial photos, it seems that the coordinates from Mastedatabasen are oﬀ,
either that or the parsing is wrong. According to the last photo, the parsing is right
though, so the data in Mastedatabasen must be oﬀ.
The points in Mastedatabasen does not show cell towers where the antenna has been
split into multiple antennas, meaning that the antennas are not on the same pole.
Looking closely at the cell tower situated at Messinavej 22 it seems that two antennas
sit on one pole, and then another is situated a bit further down on the building,
which might be to combat interference between the two cell towers.
61
