==PAGE:1==
Non Gaussian Cluster States
Master Thesis
DTU Physics
QPIT
==PAGE:2==
Supervisors
Jonas Schou Neergaard Nielsen,
Senior Researcher,
QPIT,
DTU Fysik.
Ulrik Lund Andersen,
Professor,
QPIT,
DTU Fysik.
==PAGE:3==
Non Gaussian Cluster States
Master Thesis
July, 2021
By
Abhinav Verma
Credits:
35 ECTS
Period:
05­02­2021 till 24­07­2021
Cover photo:
Abhinav Verma, 2021
Department:
DTU Fysik, QPIT, Fysikvej, Building 307, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.fysik.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
This report sheds light on the study of non­Gaussian multi­mode entangled states as a
Master’s thesis. The study consists of a theoretical portion which investigates the different
methods of generation of non­Gaussianity in multi­mode entangled states by subtraction
of a single photon. The theoretical portion also studies and shows, in agreement with
previous research works, the dissipation of non­Gaussian features within a cluster state
by the use of Wigner function formalism. The study also undertakes investigation of non­
Gaussianity induced within smaller 6­mode models of cluster states. The idea of Hilbert­
Schmidt distance is used to quantify the degree of non­Gaussianity. Lastly, a method
of investigating the cause and extent of such a propagation is presented. However the
presentation is only suggestive and the description is incomplete in its ability to extract
exact solutions. The experimental end of the study consists of photon subtraction per­
formed on a Gaussian 2D cluster state and the results show an increase in variances in
the mode where the photon is subtracted and the neighbouring modes. It is also demon­
strated how excess Kurtosis, as the measure of non­Gaussianity, takes negative values at
the site of subtraction and at neighbouring sites and sharply decreases away from where
the non­Gaussian measures peak in agreement with the theoretical analysis developed.
However, unfortunately the experimental results suffer greatly due to losses and unfore­
seen interruptions in the experimental progress.
ii
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
The work concerning this thesis was accomplished at QPIT, DTU Fysik under the supervi­
sion of group leader Ulrik Lund Andersen and senior researcher Jonas Schou Neergaard
Nielsen. I would like to extend my immense gratitude to my supervisors for their constant
presence, guidance and discussions which helped me learn about new perspectives and
ideas, and for discovering any elusive mistakes I made and correcting them with keen
interest. I would also like to acknowledge their ever present encouragement towards ex­
cellence and towards eliciting my best efforts into the study, along with allowing me the
independence to explore the physics behind the project in order to understand it both
theoretically and experimentally. Lastly, they have been inspiring influences in terms of
professional goals in research.
I would like to acknowledge the guidance of Mikkel Larsen who taught me the underlying
fundamentals of the project and for his constant openness to discussions, doubts and
whimsical questions while being a great colleague and friend. I would like to acknowledge
Subhashish Barik for all the help and the enjoyable collaboration we underwent throughout
the duration of the project. Furthermore, I’d like to acknowledge the presence of Xueshi
Guo, Casper Breum, Lucas Nunes Faria, and Shuro Izumi for all the help and guidance
when I was stuck with the intricacies of the experiments.
Lastly, I would like to thank my mother for her constantly uplifting calls from afar throughout
my studies making sure of my mental tranquility, my father’s constant support for my
ambitions and dreams and my brother’s extremely encouraging spirit. Lastly, my deepest
gratitude go out to my friends who have been the closest thing I have to family in Denmark.
I have thoroughly enjoyed delving into the subject and I cannot contain the excitement in
sharing the things I have learnt and relished, and hence, I acknowledge all the readers
for finding the time to read my work.
Sincerely,
Abhinav Verma.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
4
2.1
Quantization of the Electromagnetic field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Squeezed Light . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
EPR states or Two Mode Squeezed Vacuum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Theoretical Outline
9
3.1
Wigner Function and Weyl Transform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Gaussian States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Theoretical analysis of some non­Gaussian multi­mode entangled States
11
4.1
Subtraction from Squeezed vacuum states. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Subtraction from EPR states. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Subtraction from an entire 6­mode cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.4
Time multiplexed Generation of non­Gaussian states.
. . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Wigner function analysis of some non­Gaussian multi­mode entangled states 21
5.1
Photon subtraction as a result of a POVM operator. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
Quantifying non­Gaussianity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.3
Subtraction from squeezed vacuum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5.4
Subtraction from EPR states. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.5
On the propagation of non­Gaussianity.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6
Experimental Setup
34
6.1
The setup for generation of a 2D cluster state.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.2
The photon subtraction channel.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
7
Experimental Methods and Data Analysis
39
7.1
Electronics and Modulations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
7.2
Data Acquisition and Measurements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
7.3
Understanding the generated state.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
7.4
Temporal Mode Functions.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
7.5
What to look for? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
8
Results, Discussions and Conclusion.
52
8.1
Results and Discussion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
8.2
Setbacks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
8.3
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A The Baker­Haussdorf Lemma and some related theorems.
63
B Non­Gaussianity from the photon number decomposition.
64
Non Gaussian Cluster States
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Gaussian Cluster states, as computational resources, have been shown to have a great
potential for applications in the field of quantum computation such as one way measure­
ment based quantum computing and can be generated on demand. However, to truly
achieve a quantum computational advantage [1,2] non­Gaussian features are indispens­
able. Such states embody exotic features, such as Wigner function negativity, which can
be exploited to great extents. This thesis focuses on the study and generation of such
non­Gaussian multimode entangled states which are results of a single photon being sub­
tracted from a Gaussian state.
As is well known, in quantum information theory, information is encoded into a quantum
state. Use of such quantum states as computational resources has been shown to have
inherent computational advantage over the use of their classical counterparts. The topic
of this thesis involves one such method of encoding information in a ”continuous­variable”
(CV) state where the idea of information being present in discrete packets is replaced with
pre­defined time bins of a continuously generated quantum state. Here forth, these time
bins will be referred to as temporal modes of the discussed state.
A Gaussian state is described to be a state with position and momentum quadrature
measurements being normally distributed. More importantly, Guassian states are closely
related to Unitary transforms which map Gaussian states to other Gaussian states. To
this end one ascribes an important definition to such states by considering their phase
space representations. According to Hudson’s theorem [3], any pure quantum state with
a positive Wigner function is necessarily a Gaussian state. An extension of this state to
mixed states is made by the Extended Hudson’s theorem [4]. This thesis concentrates
on the Wigner function in the realm of theoretical study and on the measured quadrature
statistics in the experimental realm to analyse states.
In contrast to the defining characteristics of Gaussian states, non Gaussian states are
defined analogously as having sub­Gaussian (flatter) or super­Gaussian (peakier) dis­
tributions in the measured statistics and show negativity in their Wigner functions which
is an exotic feature that one cannot obtain through purely Unitary or Gaussian Operations.
Gaussian states, as previously mentioned show a strong association to Gaussian trans­
formations which are essentially Gaussian to Gaussian maps. These unitary transforms
on the Hilbert space map to symplectic transformations in the phase space S of the first
and second moments which preserve the bilinear form Ωsuch that SΩST = Ω. This is
in fact a direct consequence of the commutation relations between the quadrature op­
erators being preserved through all the unitary operations. This equips Gaussian states
and their phase space representations a symplectic form such that any Gaussian state
which is characterized completely by a displacement and a positive semi­definite covari­
ance matrix can be described by a decomposition into a set of symplectic eigenvalues.
Such a decomposition is called the Williamson or normal mode decomposition of Gaus­
sian states[5].
On the contrary, a non­Gaussian state has no such symplectic form attached to it and
possibly has a different geometric structure the study of which is beyond the scope of this
Non Gaussian Cluster States
1
==PAGE:10==
thesis. However, an intuitive way to see it would be to account for an extra annihilation
(creation) operator if one considers photon subtraction (addition) as the cause of emer­
gent non­Gaussianity. This would have a large impact on the Wigner map of the state,
and as will be shown later, photon subtracted non­Gaussian states can be represented as
a sum of Gaussian Wigner functions with different covariance matrices which destroys the
notion of a preserved linear form or normal mode decomposition for a non­Gaussian state.
Lastly, multiple studies have shown how entanglement and the degree of correlations
show a curious enhancement when non­Gaussianity is induced in a Gaussian cluster
state [6,7]. This, coupled with the outlined curious questions above makes the study of
non­Gaussian cluster states of Light exciting.
Organization of the thesis
The study related to this thesis and the related work was carried out the Technical Univer­
sity of Denmark at the Department of Physics. Most of the theoretical study was carried
out in the beginning of the 5 months period within which the thesis was carried out. The
theoretical analysis consists of quantum optical computations to study scenarios where
photon subtraction is carried out to induce non­Gaussianity at different stages of a Gaus­
sian cluster state preparation.
The study is mainly divided into two parts. The first involves a theoretical study of dif­
ferent methods of generation of multimode entangled non­Gaussian states and the dif­
ferent properties such a state may have. This includes the study of propagation of non­
Gaussianity and limited exploration of the different possible ways of measurement of such
propagation.
The second part of the study focuses on the experimental generation and verification of
a non­Gaussian state through one of the studied techniques. This involves subtraction
of photons from a split­squeezed state and the analysis of the result. While there are
optimistic signs and a certain degree of agreement with the expectations one might set
from such a subtraction process, the results remain dubious and very prone to loss.
Background.
A basic background is presented to supplement the reader’s knowledge of the fundamen­
tal resources employed in the study.
Theoretical outline.
This section discusses various quantum optical tools, descriptions and basic states and
operator relations that will be used in the subsequent sections. This section should be
referred to for a quick pingback to formulae that will be readily employed.
Theoretical analysis of some non­Gaussian multi­mode entangled states.
First, a ”thought experiment” in space is studied to understand the effects of a non­
Gaussian centre and the propagation of non­Gaussianity away from this centre to six
modes. It will be shown that non­Gaussianity decomposes very quickly such as to only
effect two nearest neighbours from the centre as earlier demonstrated by Ra et al[8].
Next, this idea is extended to have a time multiplexed cluster with a non­Gaussian centre.
2
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:11==
Wigner function analysis of some non­Gaussian multi­mode entangled
states.
Phase space representations form the backbone of this study and while understanding
the resulting states in Hilbert spaces is one way to look at some of the quirk, the Wigner
functions are another way to truly appreciate the exotic properties non­Gaussian states
show. Furthermore, since most of the work in this study focuses on CV treatment of quan­
tum information, Wigner functions are far more handy for treatment and understanding.
Experimental setup.
This section marks the beginning of the discussion of the second part of the study where
experiments have been undertaken. The setup is discussed and the particulars of the
setup are outlined here. Most of the setup was taken over from a prior experiment with
the exception of an Optical Parametric Oscillator which was setup before the experiment
commenced.
Experimental methods and Data Analysis.
This section presents and describes the methods used during the experiment, the expec­
tations from the experiment methods and the data analysis methods employed in post
processing.
Results, Discussion and Conclusion.
Lastly, this section discusses the results, conclusions and setbacks to the discussed ex­
periments and study. The section also explores the possible reasons for the failure of the
experiment to provide any substantial proof of concept.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Background
2.1
Quantization of the Electromagnetic field
In quantum optics the electromagnetic field is quantized resulting in a Hamiltonian de­
scribing the harmonic oscillator, where the electric and magnetic fields play the role of
canonical position and momentum. Such quantum harmonic oscillator has been heavily
described in literature, and is one of the best well known physical system. The Hamilto­
nian operator is conveniently described by the non­Hermitian non­commuting annihilation
and creation operators ˆa and ˆa† which obey the commutation relation [ˆa, ˆa†]=1. Such a
quantization leads to the description of an electromagnetic field modelled by a harmonic
oscillator with a Hamiltonian given by:
ˆH = ℏω(ˆa†ˆa + 1
2)
(2.1)
where ω is the angular frequency of the electromagnetic field and the operator ˆn = ˆa†ˆa
is the number operator and obeys the eigenvalue equation ˆn |n⟩= n |n⟩. Clearly, the
eigenstates of the number operator are also the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian, since
the two operators commute, and are called Fock states or number states. This result
is easily extended to see that the Hamiltonian in (2.1) has eigenvalues given by En =
ℏω(n + 1
2). Fock states, {|n⟩}, are orthogonal and form a complete basis and are often
used to describe states in the so called Fock basis which spans the Hilbert space of the
states to be described. In particular, given a density operator ˆρ, the Fock basis may be
used to expand the state in a number state decomposition:
ˆρ =
∑
m,n
⟨m| ˆρ |n⟩|m⟩⟨n|
(2.2)
with the diagonal elements ˆρnn giving the photon number distribution of the state. The
Fock basis provides a convenient basis for analysis of photon subtraction and setting
expectations for the resulting states and their statistics.
The annihilation and creation operators have the following effects on the number states:
ˆa |n⟩= √n |n −1⟩, ˆa† |n⟩=
√
n + 1 |n + 1⟩
(2.3)
Two other very important operators of our use are the quadrature operators ˆq and ˆp which
describe the quadrature statistics of the electromagnetic field under test. These are given
by:
ˆq = (ˆa + ˆa†)
√
2
,
ˆp = (ˆa −ˆa†)
i
√
2
(2.4)
where we have set ℏ= 1 and the assumption will stand through the rest of the report.
For an n­mode state, if the quadrature operators are the given by ˆqi and pi for the ith mode,
one may define a vector of operators ξ = { ˆq1, ˆp1, ˆq2, ˆp2... ˆqn, ˆpn} such that [ξk, ξl] = iΩkl
where k, l ∈{1, 2, 3..., n} and
Ω=
( 0
1
−1
0
) ⊗
In
(2.5)
4
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:13==
Furthermore, one may construct the Heisenberg Uncertainty relation from quadrature op­
erators to state:
V ar(ˆx)V ar(ˆp) ≥1
4
(2.6)
Equation (2.4) may be verified easily by noting that the Variance of a number state is
given by V ar(ˆx) = V arˆp = n+ 1
2. The uncertainty takes a minimum value for the vacuum
state and is higher for higher photon number states. This fact will form the basis of un­
derstanding Variances in non­Gaussian states and signatures of non­Gaussianity in the
later chapters.
2.2
Squeezed Light
Contrary to the what the name might suggest, squeezed light refers to reduction in the
variance along one of the quadratures in exchange for an increased variance along the
conjugate quadrature. Such a transformation is brought to effect by a unitary operation of
the form S(r) = exp(r∗
2 ˆa2 −r
2ˆa†2) where the squeezing parameter r = |r|eiθ is a complex
number with a squeezing amplitude |r| and a rotation angle θ which affects squeezing
along an arbitrary direction θ.
Such an operation on a coherent state would cause similar changes to the variances of a
coherent state which is imminent if one notes that a coherent state is merely a displaced
vacuum. The focus in the subsequent sections would be on the effect of Squeezing on
vacuum. The action of the Squeezing operator on vacuum for the special case of θ = 0
results in the the following variances:
V ar(x) = 1
2exp(−2r); V ar(p) = 1
2exp(2r)
(2.7)
The Squeezing operator must not change the consequences of the uncertainty principle
since it’s unitary nature must not result in any changes in the canonical commutation
relations. This is evident in the fact that the product of the variances is still minimal for
vacuum. However, one would note that the ”noise” along the x­quadrature has lowered
by a factor exponential in r while this is traded off for an increase in the ”noise” along the
p­quadrature.
The energy of a squeezed vacuum state is larger than that of the vacuum state, and in
its photon number decomposition the squeezed vacuum state can be showed to consist
of a superposition of even number states |2n⟩. This even­ness is lost when a photon is
subtracted from it. A similar characteristic is shown for a two mode squeezed vacuum
(See Appendix B).
2.2.1
Optical Parametric Oscillators and generation of squeezed light.
While the mathematical picture is convenient, for all experimental purposes it is important
to detail the generation of quadrature squeezed light. In the study that has been carried
out, the source of squeezed light is an optical parametric oscillator (OPO) equipped with a
Type­0 crystal pumped with light at 775 nm while probes at 1550 nm are used for locking
the OPO into transmission.
The process called parametric down­conversion were the pump frequency 2ω is down­
converted into the signal frequency ω is brought about by a second order non­linear crystal
characterized by it’s susceptibility χ(2). The process can be described by the Hamiltonian:
ˆH = ωˆa†ˆa + 2ωˆb†ˆb + iχ(2)(ˆa2ˆb† −ˆa†2ˆb)
(2.8)
Non Gaussian Cluster States
5
==PAGE:14==
where the field operators ˆb and ˆa correspond to the pump and signal modes respectively.
If one assumes the pump to be a very strong coherent state |βexp(−2iωt)⟩the parametric
approximation may be employed wherein ˆb = βexp(−2iωt) and ˆb† = β∗exp(2iωt). In the
interaction picture the Hamiltonian transforms to:
ˆHint = iχ(2)(ˆa2β∗−ˆa†2β)
(2.9)
The Hamiltonian has the same form as the argument of the squeezing operator. Time
evolution under such a Hamiltonian simply results in the Squeezing operator with the
squeezing amplitude determined by the parameter 2tχ(2)β.
The OPO we consider pertaining to this thesis consists of a bow tie cavity (Fig 2.1) which
is doubly resonant at the frequency of the down­converted signal. Resonance in such
an optical ”oscillator” is true for the signal frequency while non­existent for the pump fre­
quency. This is achieved by simply using mirrors that are reflective for the frequency of
the signal and completely transparent at the pump’s frequency.
Figure 2.1: Design of a typical Bow­Tie OPO.
The OPO consists of three highly reflecting mirrors and one with a non zero transmission,
T, which is used to couple light out of the OPO. The down­converted light thus, oscillates
within the OPO with a small ”leakage” at the output coupler. Since, the cavity is resonant
the energy inside the OPO only keeps accumulating with time if and only if the accumu­
lation (by virtue of the driving pump) is larger than the total decay rate γ. Other losses,
L, within the cavity also account for decay in the resonant energy. If the decay due to
the output coupling mirror is given by γ1 and due to other losses by γ2, the relevant loss
expressions take the following form:
γ = γ1 + γ2, γ1 = 1 −
√
R
τcav
, γ2 = 1 −
√
L
τcav
(2.10)
Here, the round trip cavity time is denoted by τcav = lcav/c. As mentioned earlier, if the
OPO is pumped such that the input power is higher than the threshold of the OPO cavity,
the output will be equivalent to that of a coherent beam which is not of interest. The
threshold is therefore found and the OPO is operated below the threshold to generate
squeezing.
6
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.2: Amplification gain vs. Pump Power for the used OPO.
Figure (2.2) shows the Amplification gain of the OPO optically fitted to the theoretical
prediction corresponding to a threshold pump power of 842.2 mW.
2.3
EPR states or Two Mode Squeezed Vacuum.
EPR or Two mode squeezed vacua (TMSV) are essentially maximally entangle states that
can be viewed as a result of the action of a two mode operator on a two mode vacuum
state. Such an operator is given by the following expression:
Sab(r) = exp(r∗ˆaˆb −rˆa†ˆb†))
(2.11)
where, r has the same complex form and interpretation as previously discussed. However,
looking at the operator definition and realizing that there are evident correlations induced
in the two modes, the properties of TMSV are starkly different from those of a single mode
squeeed vacuum or two single mode squeezed vacua. Foremost is the characteristic of
entanglement that this state shows. In fact, EPR states are maximally entangled states.
For the case when θ = 0, variances show reduction (increase) but not in quadratures of
independent modes, rather, in a superposition of the two modes’ quadratures. This can
be succintly pointed out in the following expressions:
V ar( 1
√
2{ˆxa ± ˆxb}) = exp(±2r), V ar( 1
√
2{ˆpa ± ˆpb}) = exp(∓2r)
(2.12)
While this description is fairly convenient, there is yet another way of obtaining the EPR
state from two independent squeezing sources. Consider the following setup in Figure
2.3 such that two squeezing sources produce single mode squeezed vacua such that a
state S1(r)S2(−r) |0, 0⟩is generated.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.3: Generation of EPR states using two OPOs and conjugate squeezed beams.
The field operators corresponding to the two squeezed modes are given by ˆa1 and ˆa2.
One then allows these two modes to mix at a 50­50 beam splitter such that a unitary
transform corresponding to the beam splitter acts on the the state S1(r)S2(−r) |0, 0⟩. This
is equivalent to mixing the input modes and substituting for them in the expression of
the state with uncorrelated squeezed vaccua. A quick substitution after mixing the field
operators such that ˆa1 −→ˆa1+ˆa2
√
2
and ˆa2 −→−ˆa1+ˆa2
√
2
yeilds:
ˆUBeamSplitter ˆS1(r) ˆS2(−r) |0, 0⟩= ˆS12(r) |0, 0⟩
(2.13)
wherein the RHS corresponds to the resulting two mode state on the output of the beam
splitter. Thus, mixing squeezed stated such that the squeezing exists along conjugate
quadratures produces EPR states or Two mode squeezed vacua.
In the Fock basis, TMSV show clear signs of entanglement in the sense that these states
may be written in the following form:
S12(r) |0, 0⟩=
1
cosh(r)
n=∞
∑
n=0
(−1)nexp(inθ)(tanh(r))n |n, n⟩
(2.14)
Clearly, the state is not separable into a product of two states and the two modes show
that each of the modes has an equal number of photons. Thus photons are simultane­
ously created in both of the modes. Furthermore, a deeper analysis shows that the linear
correlation co­efficient defined as:
J(ˆn1, ˆn2) =
cov(ˆn1, ˆn2)
√
V ar(ˆn1)V ar(ˆn2)
(2.15)
takes the maximal value of 1 and is maximally entangled!
However, such a state is still Gaussian as one would find through the next chapter. Al­
though, subtracting a photon from one of the modes renders the state uneven as can be
observed from equation (2.13) or Appendix (B).
8
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:17==
3
Theoretical Outline
3.1
Wigner Function and Weyl Transform
Simply put, the Wigner function or Wigner map transforms an operator in the Hilbert space
in the Schrodinger picture to a function in phase space. By definition, the Wigner map of
a state ˆρ is:
W(x, p) =
1
2πℏ
∫∞
−∞
⟨x + y/2| ˆρ |x −y/2⟩eiyp/ℏdy
(3.1)
with the property that the Wigner function is normalized such that
∫∞
−∞
∫∞
−∞W(x, p)dxdp =
1. Furthermore, the Wigner function shows interesting properties for some exotic states.
To understand this consider the inner product ⟨ψa| |ψb⟩of two orthogonal states ψa, ψb in
Hilbert space, which amounts the following expression in the Wigner function formalism:
∫∞
−∞
∫∞
−∞
Wa(x, p)Wb(x, p)dxdp = 0
(3.2)
with the RHS being 0 due to orthogonality. If one considers, for instance, that the states
in consideration are number states the integral suggests that the Wigner function must
takes negative values in some regions of the phase space for the overlap to go to zero.
This negativity would serve as a signature for non­Gaussianity.
Lastly, an important and interesting property of the Wigner function that is useful for our
purposes is its transformation under transposition which transcribes to a local time inver­
sion in the phase space corresponding to the transposed mode. This can be concisely
written in the following way:
ˆρ −→ˆρT
::
W(x, p) −→W(x, −p)
(3.3)
Note that while transposition is a linear operation in the Hilbert space, it is antilinear (A
quality ascribed to time reversal symmetry transforms) in the phase space and such a
mirror reflection cannot be unitarily described in the Hilbert space. This property is often
used to test the inseparability of bi­modal states [20].
While the Wigner map maps operators from the Hilbert space onto functions in the phase
space, the Weyl transform maps functions in the phase space onto operators in Hilbert
space. The Weyl Transform is defined as follows:
ˆO =
1
(2π)2
∫∫∫∫
f(x, p)exp(ia(X −x) + ib(P −p))dxdpdadb
(3.4)
3.2
Gaussian States
Before introducing the idea of non­Gaussian states, it is important to understand the char­
acteristics of Gaussian states, their properties and representations.
The convention used throughout this report is the followed by Brask [9].We first define
a vector of position and momentum operators ˆξ = { ˆq1, ˆp1, ˆq2, ˆp2... ˆqn, ˆpn} and Gaussian
states are those states for which the Wigner function is a (multivariate) Gaussian func­
tion. Gaussian states are completely determined by the first and second moments of the
quadrature operators. That is, by the vector of expectation values ¯ξ =< ξi > and the
covariance matrix σ. We refer to ¯r as the displacement vector of the state. In terms of the
Non Gaussian Cluster States
9
==PAGE:18==
displacement vector and covariance matrix, the Wigner function of an n­mode Gaussian
state can be expressed as:
W(r) =
1
(2π)n√
Det(σ)
exp(−0.5(ξ −¯ξ)T σ−1(ξ −¯ξ))
(3.5)
where the covariance matrix is defined to consist of elements σkl defined as:
σkl =< {∆ξk, ∆ξl} >
(3.6)
where < . > denotes the expectation value and ∆ξk = ˆξk−< ξk >. Gaussian opera­
tions are those which take Gaussian states to Gaussian states, i.e. those which preserve
Gaussianity. Since Gaussian states are completely determined by ¯ξ and σ, Gaussian
operations are then determined by how they transform ¯ξ and σ. Unitary Gaussian oper­
ations correspond to those which can be generated by Hamiltonians which are (at most)
quadratic in the field creation and annihilation operators. These correspond exactly to
symplectic transformations S of the displacement vector and covariance matrix. They
map:
σ −→SσS†,
¯ξ −→S ¯ξ + d
(3.7)
where d is a 2n × 2n square matrix and the symplectic matrices S obey SΩS† = Ωwhere
is Ωis defined as in Equation (2.5) and is called the bilinear form which is preserved by
Gaussian operations which are Symplectic matrices in the phase space.
Understanding cluster states is fairly simple if one considers that the covariance matrix
defined in Equation (3.6) and used to find the Wigner function in Equation (3.5) is merely
an adjacency matrix which defines correlations and points out which modes are directly
correlated to others. This has been discussed in great depth by Menucucci et. al.[10].
The paper discusses the graphical representations of pure Gaussian states as complex
weighted graphs. The idea we adopt from [10] is to view non­Gaussian cluster states
as graphs too that are derived from CV pure Gaussian states where the weights would
change once photon subtractions are carried out on the one of the modes.
10
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:19==
4
Theoretical analysis of some
non­Gaussian multi­mode entangled
States
This section considers the theoretical analysis of non­Gaussian multi­mode entangled
states generated by photon subtraction from Gaussian pure states and other unitary op­
erations such as Squeezing and interaction on beam splitters. First, three ways of gener­
ating non­Gaussian states are considered in space and then a time multiplexed model is
developed. The resulting states are limited to 6 modes in this analysis but it can be easily
extended to consider an N­mode situation. This part of the analysis resorts to computa­
tions in the Fock basis.
4.1
Subtraction from Squeezed vacuum states.
One starts with 2n modes and a photon subtraction is carried out on one of the modes
before they are mixed on a beam splitter. We consider here two layers of beam splitters
and 6 interacting modes. However, the scheme may be extended to any number of modes
and the analysis may be carried out in an identical fashion.
Figure 4.1: The schematics for generation of a non­Gaussian multimode entangled state.
The photon is subtracted at the very beginning from a squeezed vacuum state.
The beam splitter transforms the input field operators ˆain,1 and ˆain,2 in the following man­
ner:
(ˆaout,1
ˆaout,2
)
=
(
√η
√1 −η
−√1 −η
√η
) (ˆain,1
ˆain,2
)
(4.1)
and for a balanced beam splitter, the η = 1
2. We consider photon subtraction with the field
operator ˆa1 on the corresponding Squeezed vacuum mode ˆS1 |0⟩. A subtraction results
in the state ˆa1 ˆS1 |0⟩. The unitary nature of the Squeezing operation allows us to write
ˆS1 ˆS†
1ˆa1 ˆS1 |0⟩. Going further, using a Bogoliubov transformation:
ˆS†
1ˆa1 ˆS1 = cosh(r)ˆa1 −sinh(r)ˆa†
1
(4.2)
Non Gaussian Cluster States
11
==PAGE:20==
Using the relation in Equation (4.2) the subtraction results in:
ˆS1(cosh(r)ˆa1 −sinh(r)ˆa†
1 |0⟩= −sinh(r) ˆS1ˆa†
1 |0⟩= −sinh(r)
N
ˆS1 |1⟩
(4.3)
This shows that upon subtraction one expects to see a squeezed single photon upto a
normalization factor N. This is optimistic, since a squeezed single photon has a Wigner
function that is clearly non­Gaussian as we would show in the next chapter. One now
realizes that the Beam Splitters being unitary transforms mix this non­Gaussian nature to
other mixing modes.
To see this in effect, we now consider the balanced beam splitter transform in equation
(4.1) and use this to mix the modes. This leads to the following transformations:
ˆa0 −→ˆa2 + ˆa3
√
2
, ˆa1 −→ˆa2 −ˆa3
√
2
(4.4)
Daggering the operators in Equation (4.4) and substituting for ˆa†
1 in Equation (4.3), we get:
|ψ⟩= C(r) ˆS2,3(ˆa†
2
⊗
I −I
⊗
ˆa†
3) |0, 0⟩2,3 = ˆS23(|1, 0⟩2,3 −|0, 1⟩2,3)
(4.5)
where ˆS23 is the two mode squeezing operator as defined in chapter 2 and C(r) is a con­
stant that normalizes the state and absorbs −sinh(r) from Equation (4.3). The presence
of this operator shows that there are correlations between the modes. Furthermore, look­
ing carefully at Equation (4.5) one realizes that the beam splitter essentially results in a
superposition such that the single photon could be in either of the output modes. This is
not an EPR state but it shows non­Gaussian Wigner functions.
While interesting things happen in modes 0 and 1 mixing at the beam splitter, the other
modes merely result in EPR states. For a system extending to 2N modes would simply
have N­1 EPR states interacting with one ”special” two mode state.
Figure 4.2: The action of the different BS layers is shown in this figure which results
in entangling of the modes. The dashed lines denote the modes that are expected to
undergo mixing at the next beam splitters. The red mode is where the photon has been
subtracted.
The second layer of beam splitters makes things a tad more interesting as more modes
mix with each other and the non­Gaussian nature propagates through the six­modes. We
again consider the transformation in Equation (4.4) and the general form of these trans­
formations in Equation (4.1) while keeping in mind that the beam splitters are balanced.
12
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:21==
Instead of transforming the 6­mode state one transforms the operators. Noting that the
state before the second layer is:
ˆS2”,3”
⊗
( ˆS2,3(ˆa†
2
⊗
I −I
⊗
ˆa†
3))
⊗ˆS2′,3′ |0...0⟩
(4.6)
where the six modes in figure 4.1 have been considered. The beam splitters mix the
modes and bring the following changes to the two mode operators:
ˆS2”,3”(r) −→ˆS2′−7,2′−6 = exp( r
√
2[ˆa2”ˆa7 −ˆa†
2”ˆa†
7 −ˆa2”ˆa6 + ˆa†
2”ˆa†
6])
(4.7)
ˆS2′,3′(r) −→ˆS3′−4,3′−5 = exp( r
√
2[ˆa4ˆa3′ −ˆa†
4ˆa†
3′ + ˆa5ˆa3′ −ˆa†
5ˆa†
3′])
(4.8)
ˆS2,3(r) −→ˆS4−6,5−6,4−7,5−7 = exp(r
2[ˆa6ˆa5−ˆa†
6ˆa†
5−ˆa6ˆa4+ˆa†
6ˆa†
4+ˆa7ˆa5−ˆa†
7ˆa†
5−ˆa7ˆa4+ˆa†
7ˆa†
4])
(4.9)
Lastly,
ˆa†
3 −→ˆa†
5 −ˆa†
4
√
2
, ˆa†
2 −→ˆa†
6 + ˆa†
7
√
2
(4.10)
The subscripts on the resulting operators denote correlated pairs of modes.
For ex­
ample, ˆSa−b,c−d denotes correlations between modes a and b, and c and d. Using the
transformations in Equations (4.7),(4.8),(4.9), and (4.10), noting that ˆS3′−4,3′−5 is unitary
and also noting that ˆa†
6 and ˆa†
7 commute with ˆS3′−4,3′−5, a notation is introduced­ η( ˆA) =
ˆS†
3′−4,3′−5 ˆA ˆS3′−4,3′−5 and the combined operator ˆSnG = ˆS2′−7,2′−6 ˆS4−6,5−6,4−7,5−7 ˆS3′−4,3′−5
to obtain the final state upto a normalization constant C1
|nG⟩= C1(r)(ˆSnGη(ˆa†
5) −ˆSnGη(ˆa†
4) −ˆSnGˆa†
6 −ˆSnGˆa†
7) |000000⟩
(4.11)
However, it must be noted that that the shortened notation introduced for the combined
operator doesn’t mean that the operators have been replaced by a single operator since
that would need the application of the disentangling theorem and the commutators then
must be included to get one operator that combines all the three operators (See Appendix
A). However, one can still estimate the correlations through the operators. These have
been shown in different colours in Figure 4.3.
The problem now remains to resolve the multi­mode transformation denoted by η(ˆa†
5)
and η(ˆa†
4). One now employs the Baker­Hausdorff Lemma to obtain the results of the
transformations. Writing ˆa4ˆa3′ −ˆa†
4ˆa†
3′ + ˆa5ˆa3′ −ˆa†
5ˆa†
3′ = ˆk in shorthand, we compute the
commutators to find:
[ˆk, ˆa†
5] = ˆa3′
(4.12)
and,
[ˆk, [ˆk, ˆa†
5]] = −ˆa†
4 −ˆa†
5
(4.13)
and so on. One then finds the following expansion:
η(ˆa†
5) = ˆa†
5 −r
√
2ˆa3′ −r2
2
ˆa†
5 + ˆa†
4
2!
−r3
√
23
ˆa3′
3! −r4
4
ˆa†
5 + ˆa†
4
4!
+ ...
(4.14)
and, similarly for η(ˆa†
4):
η(ˆa†
4) = ˆa†
4 −r
√
2ˆa3′ −r2
2
ˆa†
5 + ˆa†
4
2!
−r3
√
23
ˆa3′
3! −r4
4
ˆa†
5 + ˆa†
4
4!
+ ...
(4.15)
Non Gaussian Cluster States
13
==PAGE:22==
whereby one simplifies the expression in Equation (4.11) greatly by noting that the anni­
hilation operators simply result in 0 acting on the vacua to get:
|nG⟩= C1(r)(ˆSnGˆa†
5 −ˆSnGˆa†
4 −ˆSnGˆa†
6 −ˆSnGˆa†
7) |000000⟩
(4.16)
which is the resulting 6­mode state upto a normalization constant C1 as previously men­
tioned.
If one recovers the original form of
ˆ
SnG one may see where the correlations are and con­
struct the graph of the resulting state. Notice that the resulting state is in a superposition
such that there are single photons in four different sites and the operator
ˆ
SnG denotes
correlations.
Figure 4.3: The final state as a result of the subtraction and mixing.The correlations due
to the different operators in ˆSnG are shown in different colours and can be read off from the
definition of the operator. The modes in amber denote the sites where the single photons
are superposed.
Another layer of beam splitters results in further mixing and more correlations. However,
this will be omitted in this study and can be easily studied as an extension.
While a pure Gaussian cluster state can be represented by an undirected complex weighted
graph, Menicucci et.al.[10] have shown that this is a result of the symplectic nature of pure
Gaussian states. As will be shown in next chapter, non­Gaussian states can be seen as
the difference of two Gaussian Wigner functions. The symplectic nature cannot be as­
sumed which makes the description of non­Gaussian states as weighted graphs obscure.
While this would be an interesting topic to study, it is beyond the scope of this report.
4.2
Subtraction from EPR states.
Another interesting scenario to be considered is when the subtraction is carried out on
one of the modes of an EPR state. This has been depicted in the schematic in figure 4.4.
14
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.4:
The schematic for generation of a non­Gaussian multimode entangled
state.The photon is subtracted at the second step from an EPR state in contrast to the
first scenario.
An identical route of analysing and understanding this state shall be taken. Starting with
the definition of the state, one writes the state after the first layer of beam splitters as:
|EPR1⟩
⊗
|EPR2⟩
⊗
|EPR3⟩= ˆS5,6 ˆS1,2 ˆS3,4 |000000⟩
(4.17)
The state once the subtraction is carried out can be written as a result of an annihilation
operation on the 2nd mode and identity operators on the other modes. The resultant state
|ψ⟩is:
|ψ⟩= ˆa2 ˆS5,6 ˆS1,2 ˆS3,4 |000000⟩
(4.18)
It is simple to see that the annihilation operator ˆa2 must commute with ˆS5,6. Noting also
that the two mode Squeezing operators are unitary leaves us with the following relation:
|ψ⟩= ˆS5,6 ˆS1,2 ˆS†
1,2ˆa2 ˆS1,2 ˆS3,4 |000000⟩
(4.19)
One now uses the well know transformation that results from the application of the Baker­
Hausdorff Lemma with the TMS Operators, namely:
ˆS†
1,2ˆa2 ˆS1,2 = cosh(r)ˆa2 + sinh(r)ˆa†
1
(4.20)
Substituting Equation (4.20) in Equation (4.19), noting that both ˆa2 and ˆa†
1 commute with
ˆS3,4 and further noting that the operation of the annihilation operator on vacuum leads to
a vanishing result, we get the resultant state up to a normalizing constant N:
|ψ⟩sub = sinh(r)
N
ˆS5,6 ˆS1,2 ˆS3,4ˆa†
1 |000000⟩
(4.21)
We see that a single photon appears in one of the modes making the resulting state non­
Gaussian! It remains now to apply the beam splitter transform from the second layer and
study how the modes mix and the resulting multi­mode correlated state. Figure 4.5 shows
the expected correlations that will pop up around the photon subtracted mode.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4.5: The action of the different BS layers is shown in this figure which results in
entangling of the modes. The dashed lines denote modes that are expected to undergo
mixing at the next beam splitters while the solid lines show the BS actions that have
already taken place. The red mode is where the photon has been subtracted.
One now takes into account the beam splitter transform in Equation (4.1) and uses it for a
balanced beam splitter’s case to obtain the final 6 mode correlated state. The transform
results in the following tranformations:
ˆa6 −→ˆa6′ + ˆa1′
√
2
, ˆa1 −→ˆa6′ −ˆa1′
√
2
(4.22)
and similarly,
ˆa2 −→ˆa3′ + ˆa2′
√
2
, ˆa1 −→ˆa3′ −ˆa2′
√
2
(4.23)
Substituting the transformation noted in Equations (4.22) and (4.23) in Equation (4.21)
such that the operators transform, we get the following changes:
ˆS5,6(r) −→ˆS6′−5,1′−5 = exp[ r
√
2ˆa5ˆa6′ −ˆa†
5ˆa†
6′ + ˆa5ˆa1′ −ˆa†
5ˆa†
1′]
(4.24)
ˆS3,4(r) −→ˆS3′−4,2′−4 = exp[ r
√
2ˆa3′ˆa4 −ˆa†
3′ˆa†
4 −ˆa2′ˆa4 + ˆa†
2′ˆa†
4]
(4.25)
ˆS1,2(r) −→ˆS6′−3′,6′−2′,1′−2′,1′−3′ = exp[r
2(ˆa6′ˆa3′−ˆa†
6′ˆa†
3′−ˆa6′ˆa2′+ˆa†
6′ˆa†
2′+ˆa1′ˆa2′−ˆa†
1′ˆa†
2′−ˆa1′ˆa3′+ˆa†
1′ˆa†
1′)]
(4.26)
Lastly,
ˆa†
1 −→ˆa†
6′ −ˆa†
1′
√
2
(4.27)
Using these transformations and substituting them in equation (4.21) and using the short­
ened operator notation
ˆSnG = ˆS6′−5,1′−5 ˆS6′−3′,6′−2′,1′−2′,1′−3′ ˆS3′−4,2′−4
(4.28)
we get the final non­Gaussian state up to a constant C1(r) to be:
|nG⟩= C1(r)ˆSnG(ˆa†
6′ −ˆa†
1′) |000000⟩
(4.29)
Again, it must be noted that that the shortened notation doesn’t mean that the operators
have been combined since that would need the application of the disentangling theorem
16
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:25==
and the commutators then must be included to get one operator that combines all three
operators (Appendix A). However, one can still estimate the correlations through the op­
erators. These have been shown in different colours in Figure 4.6.
Again, we see a superposition of a single photon occupying two sites while the correlations
are given by the operator in Equation (4.28).
Figure 4.6: The final state as a result of the subtraction and mixing. The correlations due
to the different operators in ˆSnG are shown in different colours and can be read off from the
definition of the operator. The modes in amber denote the sites where the single photons
are superposed.
4.3
Subtraction from an entire 6­mode cluster
Lastly, we would like to see what are the effects of subtraction from a cluster state with
no further mixing due to beam splitters. Figure (4.7) shows the schematic of the process
involved.
Figure 4.7:
The schematic for generation of a non­Gaussian multimode entangled
state.The photon is subtracted at the third step from a cluster state in contrast to the
first and second scenarios.
To study the resulting state we construct the cluster state in the Fock basis as previously
done and then subtract a photon from the desired mode.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.8: The action of the different BS layers is shown in this figure which results in
entangling of the modes. The solid lines show the BS actions that have already taken
place. The red mode is where the photon has been subtracted.
Starting again at Equation (4.17) we know the state before the last layer of beam splitters.
Simply introducing the beam splitter transforms result in the following changes:
ˆS1,2′(r) −→ˆS1−2,1−3 = exp[ r
√
2ˆa1ˆa2 −ˆa†
1ˆa†
2 + ˆa1ˆa3 −ˆa†
1ˆa†
3]
(4.30)
ˆS5′,6(r) −→ˆS4−6,5−6 = exp[ r
√
2ˆa4ˆa6 −ˆa†
4ˆa†
6 −ˆa5ˆa6 + ˆa†
5ˆa†
6]
(4.31)
ˆS3′,4′(r) −→ˆS2−4,2−5,3−4,3−5 = exp[r
2(ˆa2ˆa4−ˆa†
2ˆa†
4+ˆa2ˆa5−ˆa†
2ˆa†
5−ˆa3ˆa4+ˆa†
3ˆa†
4−ˆa3ˆa5+ˆa†
3ˆa†
5)]
(4.32)
The state then becomes:
|ψ1⟩= ˆS1−2,1−3 ˆS2−4,2−5,3−4,3−5 ˆS4−6,5−6 |000000⟩
(4.33)
To subtract a photon, we again use the annihilation operator to write the subtracted state
as:
ˆa6 |ψ1⟩= ˆa6 ˆS1−2,1−3 ˆS2−4,2−5,3−4,3−5 ˆS4−6,5−6 |000000⟩
(4.34)
Noting that the operator ˆa6 commutes with both ˆS1−2,1−3 and ˆS2−4,2−5,3−4,3−5, and using
the unitary nature of ˆS4−6,5−6 we get:
ˆa6 |ψ1⟩= ˆS1−2,1−3 ˆS2−4,2−5,3−4,3−5 ˆS4−6,5−6 ˆS†
4−6,5−6ˆa6 ˆS4−6,5−6 |000000⟩
(4.35)
To find the solution for η(ˆa6) = ˆS†
4−6,5−6ˆa6 ˆS4−6,5−6 we use the Baker­Hausdorff Lemma
again. Setting ˆG = ˆa4ˆa6 −ˆa†
4ˆa†
6 −ˆa5ˆa6 + ˆa†
5ˆa†
6, the following commutators are obtained as
a starting point:
[ ˆG, ˆa6] = ˆa†
4−ˆa†
5, [ ˆG, [ ˆG, ˆa6]] = 2ˆa6, [ ˆG, [ ˆG, [ ˆG, ˆa6]]] = 2(ˆa†
4−ˆa†
5), [ ˆG, [ ˆG, [ ˆG, [ ˆG, ˆa6]]]] = 22ˆa6
(4.36)
and so on.
Using the shown commutators and employing them in the expansion of the Baker­Hausdorff
series, and again introducing ˆSn = ˆS1−2,1−3 ˆS2−4,2−5,3−4,3−5 ˆS4−6,5−6 for ease of notation,
leads to the following expression for the photon subtracted state up to a normalization
constant N:
ˆa6 |ψ1⟩= −1
2N
ˆSn[r + r3
3! + r5
5! + ...](ˆa†
4 −ˆa†
5) |000000⟩
(4.37)
18
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:27==
Noting that the series expansion in Equation (4.37) r is essentially sinh(r), taking it out
and absorbing all constant into a constant C1(r) gives us our resulting non Gaussian state
|nG⟩:
|nG⟩= C1(r)ˆSn(ˆa†
4 −ˆa†
5) |000000⟩
(4.38)
We see again how there are single photons at two sites superposed.
Figure 4.9: The final state as a result of the subtraction from the cluster. The correlations
due to the different operators in ˆSnG are shown in different colours and can be read off
from the definition of the operator. The modes in yellow denote the sites where the single
photons are superposed.
Also noteworthy is that there is a π radians’ relative phase difference in each of the super­
positions that have been derived as resulting non­Gaussian states. The presence of single
photons in the resulting states evidently induces non­Gaussianity in the states. However,
as the states get mixed we would expect the degree of non­Gaussianity to dissipate. For
these reasons, an analysis at the level of the Wigner functions of the reduced states of
these clusters is necessary to quantify the non­Gaussianity which is the subject of the
next chapter.
4.4
Time multiplexed Generation of non­Gaussian states.
It was demonstrated by Larsen et. al. [11] that deterministic generation of Gaussian CV
2D­cluster states can be accomplished by time multiplexing of time bin encoded qubits.
One may extend the idea of the theoretical analysis so far to suggest that the infinite
span of the beam splitter layers can simply be replaced by three layers each comprising
of single beam splitter while the input modes are continuous in time and interference
between different modes is achieved using delays. This scheme is shown in figure 4.10.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.10: The schematic for time multiplexing of time bin encoded qubits. The arrows
with the annihilation operators show the different places photon subtraction has been
studied so far. The figure also shows how the modes interact and BS interactions are
shown by solid lines between the modes after subsequent beam splitters.The three layers
are each comprising of BS1, BS2 and BS3 and the one assumes that going from left to
right one moves forward in time.
There are two spatial modes (referred to here as upper or lower) in the scheme and each
spatial mode has a continuous illumination from squeezing sources. One then defines
temporal modes. It facilitates the idea to think of each temporal mode as a pulse travelling
in time. However, this is not true. In reality, each spatial mode shown here has predefined
temporal modes with the mode lengths τ such that the continuous beam can be seen as a
seamless train of discrete sections of a time length. The delays, then, work in order to shift
the modes backwards by the delay length. Right after the first beam splitter one would
expect EPR states wherein all temporal modes in the lower spatial mode are delayed by
one temporal mode length. The next beam splitter interferes the nth mode in the upper
spatial mode with the (n+1)th mode in the lower spatial mode. This results in a 1D cluster
as shown.
Next, the delay of Nτ shifts all temporal modes in spatial mode B by N temporal modes
and thereafter the nth temporal mode in the upper spatial mode interacts with the (n+N)th
temporal modes and the (n + N + 1)th temporal modes in the lower spatial mode while
still keeping correlations with the last modes that were delayed. As time progresses,
one views these interactions to be continuous and limitless in time creating large photon
subtracted multimode entangled states on demand.
It may be noteworthy that the physics of the anyalsis wouldn’t really vary since we have
only gone from the space representation of the cluster state to a time representation. One
must however be careful in distinction between the spatial and temporal modes when
computing beam splitter interactions. The mathematical treatment of time multiplexed
non­Gaussian states is not explicitly a part of this study.
20
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:29==
5
Wigner function analysis of some
non­Gaussian multi­mode entangled
states
It is evident from the past chapter that an analysis in the Fock basis gives one a fairly good
idea of where and why non­Gaussianity might appear in a cluster state upon photon sub­
traction from an interacting mode. However, working in the Fock basis makes answering
questions such as the quantification of non­Gaussianity and the study of the propagation
of non­Gaussianity very difficult. One then resorts to the handy use of Wigner functions
for such an analysis.
5.1
Photon subtraction as a result of a POVM operator.
One first defines a positive operator value measurement (POVM) operator corresponding
to an on­off type detector. Such a detector, as the name suggests, is either on when it
detects a photon or more and off when it doesn’t and detects vacuum. The operator is
therefore defined as:
ˆΠon = ˆI −|0⟩⟨0|
(5.1)
Using the definition of the Wigner function, one obtains the Wigner function corresponding
to the on­off operator as:
Won(x, p) = WId −Wvacuum = 1
2π −1
πexp(−x2 −p2)
(5.2)
Defining first the vector of operators ˆξ = { ˆq1, ˆp1, ˆq2, ˆp2... ˆqn, ˆpn} to describe the phase space
corresponding to an N mode state. If one considers a state with the corresponding Wigner
function W(ˆξ), uses a beam splitter with very small reflection efficiency (typically of the
order of 0.01) into a mode described by χref = (qref, pref) and the detector detects along
this reflected mode, the Wigner function conditional on the detection of a photon, and
hence subtraction along the reflected mode is:
Wsub(ˆξ) =
∫∞
−∞
∫∞
−∞
W(S−1ˆξ)Won(qref, pref)dqrefdpref
(5.3)
The expression on the right hand side of Equation (5.3) is a consequence of the fact
that beam splitters are symplectic transforms and the beam splitter is represented by the
transformation matrix S. The Wigner function transforms due to a symplectic transform S
simply as:
W(ˆξ) −→W(S−1ˆξ)
(5.4)
and the integrals correspond to tracing the reflected mode out. The exact structure of the
transforms may be found in the review by Brask [9].
Non Gaussian Cluster States
21
==PAGE:30==
5.2
Quantifying non­Gaussianity.
Quantification of non­Gaussinity must be done in a careful manner since there exist Gaus­
sian states which might result in a fairly high non­Gaussianity if the measure for quantifi­
cation is not carefully chosen. An example is a coherent state with a randomized phase
or a scanning phase. A non­classical example would be a squeezed displaced vacuum
with a randomized or scanning phase.
Classical measures of non­Gaussianity would show non­Gaussianity for both the states.
However, they are as Gaussian as states get. This study thus chooses a measure of
Quantum non­Gaussianity as pointed out by Genoni and Paris[12].
In this study the measure of non­Gaussianity chosen is based on the Hilbert­Schmidt
distance of a non­Gaussian state from a reference Gaussian. One wants to quantify the
non­Gaussianity of a quantum state ρ in terms of its distinguishability from a reference
Gaussian state τ such that the mean and the standard deviations of the non­Gaussian
quantum state and that of the Gaussian are the same. To mathematically state this:
µ(ρ) = µ(τ), σ(ρ) = σ(τ)
(5.5)
The Hilbert­Schmidt distance between two state ρ1 and ρ2 is defined as:
DHS =
√
0.5(Tr[(ρ1 −ρ2)2]) =
√
µ(ρ1) + µ(ρ2) −2κ[µ(ρ1), µ(ρ2])
4
(5.6)
where, µ(ρ) is the purity of the state ρ usually given by Tr[ρ2] and κ[µ(ρ1), µ(ρ2)] denotes
the operlap between the states. One then defines a normalized degree of non­Gaussianity
as:
δA[ρ] = DHS(ρ, τ)
µ(ρ)
(5.7)
The degree of non­Gaussianity is related to the Wigner functions as follows:
δA[ρ] ∝
∫∞
−∞
dxndpndxn−1dpn−1...dxdp{Wρ(ξ) −Wτ(ξ)}2
(5.8)
This study uses the metric δA(ρ) as a measure of non­Gaussianity with a proportionality
constant of 1 for simplicity.
5.3
Subtraction from squeezed vacuum.
The Wigner function of a squeezed vacuum can be obtained by using the symplectic
transformation corresponding to squeezing Ssqz and transforming the covariance matrix,
σ, of the vacuum state as:
σ −→σsqz = SsqzσST
sqz
(5.9)
And further, symbolizing the beam splitter transforms in the two layers simply as S1 and
S2 and the beam splitter for subtraction from a mode qref, pref as Ssub respectively, the
resultant Wigner function is:
22
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:31==
W(σ, ˆξ) −→Wsub(ˆξ, qref, pref) = σsqz, S−1
2 S−1
1 S−1
subˆξ, qref, pref)
(5.10)
The resulting integral then takes the following expression:
Wsub,final(ˆξ) =
∫∞
−∞
∫∞
−∞
Wsub(ˆξ, qref, pref)Won(qref, pref)dqrefdpref
(5.11)
For the solutions of the resulting integrals, Wolfram Mathematica was used to numerically
perform the integral with the reflectance of the subtraction beam splitter set to 0.01 or 1%
and all the other beam splitters are assumed to be 50­50. The squeezing amplitude is set
to 1 for simplicity of calculations.
Starting with the first scenario discussed in section 4.1 and using the methodology de­
scribed in section 5.1 one obtains the resulting Wigner function of the 6­mode entangled
non­Gaussian state to be:
W(ξ) = −0.00130654 exp(−0.5
∑
µ
∑
ν
ΓI
µ,νξµξν) + 0.00128958 exp(−0.5
∑
α
∑
β
ΓII
α,βξαξβ)
(5.12)
where, ξ = { ˆx1, ˆp1, ˆx2, ˆx2... ˆxn, ˆpn}. Note that the resulting Wigner function is a linear
combination of two Wigner functions of Gaussian nature and ΓI and ΓII are the inverses
of the covariance matrices associated with the two Gaussians which form the Wigner
function of the non­Gaussian state.
One then finds it intriguing to question the nature of the Wigner function. It is evident that
when ξ = {x1, p1, x2, p2...xn, pn} = 0, the Wigner function takes a negative value! This is
what we have been aiming for. Clearly, the negativity of the Wigner function ensures non­
Gaussianity. Like it was discussed in the preceding section, the non­Gaussianity arises
because of a non­Gaussian photon subtracted vacuum mixes with the other modes. This
can be checked by looking the resulting state’s Wigner function right after subtraction of a
photon and it must be that of a squeezed single photon if Equation (4.3) truly represents
the reality. The obtained Wigner function is shown in figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Wigner function obtained upon subtraction of a photon from Squeezed vac­
uum.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
23
==PAGE:32==
While verifying Wigner function negativity is part of the quantification of the the result­
ing state, it is further necessary to see individual reduced states and their functions to
understand the propagation of non­Gaussianity to other modes. To quantify the degree
of non­Gaussianity the measure δA(ρ) will be used for the reduced density matrix. The
negativity of the Wigner function will be lost in this consideration. The reduced states are
constructed by considering the participating Gaussians, constructing the covariance ma­
trix and tracing out (omitting) the square matrix containing entries corresponding to all the
irrelevant modes. Then, Wigner functions are compared to a reference Gaussian that is
formed by statistically finding the mean and variances corresponding to the reduced state
Wigner function.
(a) Wigner function corresponding to reduced
states of modes 4, 5, 6 and 7. There is a clear
sign of non­Gaussianity as the peak cleaves
away.
(b) The reference Gaussian constructed from the
mean and variances computed from the non­
Gaussian Wigner function for the reduced states
for modes 4,5,6 and 7.
Figure 5.2: The figure shown the WIgner function for modes 4,5,6, and 7 and the reference
Gaussian constructed.
The reduced states corresponding to the states 4,5,6, and 7 show the same reduced
states and the same corresponding degree of non­Gaussianity. The quantities δA(ρ4) =
δA(ρ5) = δA(ρ6) = δA(ρ7) take the value of 0.0154. Referring again to [12] one realizes
that δA(ρ) is 0 iff ρ corresponds to a Gaussian since the measure is dependent on the dis­
tinguishability of a non­Gaussian state and a value of 0 would render the state completely
Gaussian.
24
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:33==
(a) Wigner function corresponding to reduced
states of modes 2’ and 3’. It may not be as ob­
vious as the first reduced state to find the non­
Gaussianity in this case and it becomes neces­
sary to compute measurable quantities that indi­
cate and quantify non­Gaussianity.
(b) The reference Gaussian constructed from the
mean and variances computed from the non­
Gaussian Wigner function for the reduced states
for modes 2’ and 3’.
Figure 5.3: The figure shown the Wigner function for modes 2’ and 3’ and the reference
Gaussian constructed.
Similarly, the reduced states corresponding to the states 2” and 3” show the same reduced
states and the same corresponding degree of non­Gaussianity. These reduced states
are very slightly sub­Gaussian and their non­Gaussinities are difficult to discern by eye.
However one can notice a heavier tail and a relatively flatter peak upon closer inspection.
The quantities δA(ρ2′) = δA(ρ3′) take the value of 0.00144.
For context, the picture of the entire cluster with the respective Wigner functions has been
shown in figure 5.4. It may be noteworthy that the predicted identical properties in the four
modes 4,5,6, and 7 and modes 2’ and 3’ have been reproduced by the Wigner function
analysis using an on/off type detector for the subtraction process.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.4: Wigner functions obtained along with the corresponding Wigner function for
each mode.
Table 5.1 presents the values of the non­Gaussian measure δA(ρj) for the reduced states.
j
δA(ρj)
2’
0.00144
6
0.0154
7
0.0154
4
0.0154
5
0.0154
3’
0.00144
Table 5.1: Variation of δA(ρj) for the jth reduced state of the multi­mode entangled state.
One may notice that the degree of non­Gaussianity shows a very quick drop from the sites
of maximum non­Gaussianity. The nearest neighbour shows some non­Gaussianity. For
a larger cluster, one may even expect to see some non­Gaussianity on the second nearest
neighbour but no further as shown by Ra et. al. [8]. The degree of non­Gaussianity would
be vanishingly small as one travels further from the sites of peak non­Gaussianity.
5.4
Subtraction from EPR states.
Again, looking at the scenario in section 4.2, one would first like to see the resulting Wigner
function due to subtraction from one of the modes of an EPR state. We set the transmis­
sion and reflection as in section 5.3 . Also, the squeezing amplitude is set to 2.
The resulting Wigner function of the 6 mode multi­mode entangled state comes to be:
W(ξ) = −1.0056 exp(−0.5
∑
µ
∑
ν
ΓI
µ,νξµξν) + 0.9877 exp(−0.5
∑
α
∑
β
ΓII
α,βξαξβ)
(5.13)
where, ξ = { ˆx1, ˆp1, ˆx2, ˆx2... ˆxn, ˆpn}. Note that the resulting Wigner function is a linear
combination of two Wigner functions of Gaussian nature and ΓI and ΓII are the inverses
26
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:35==
of the covariance matrices associated with the two Gaussians which form the Wigner
function of the non­Gaussian state.
Again, clearly at ξ = 0 the Wigner function goes on an takes a negative value. To under­
stand where the non­Gaussianity originates, one must look at the reduced state Wigner
functions of the two modes of the EPR state where the photon is subtracted from. The
reduced states are shown in figure 5.5:
(a) Wigner function corresponding to
reduced state of the first of the two
modes of the EPR states which the
photon is subtracted from.
(b) Wigner function corresponding to
reduced state of the second of the two
modes of the EPR states which the
photon is not subtracted from.
Figure 5.5: The figure shown the Wigner functions for the photon subtracted EPR state.
Quite clearly, the state is non­Gaussian and the mixing on the beam splitters from this
point forth induces non­Gaussianity in the mixing modes. Furthermore, following the same
process of investigation, one would find it interesting to see how the non­Gausianity mixes
and to what extent. For this, the interest lies yet again in the degree of non­Gaussianity
and what values δA(ρ) takes for each of the reduced states. The Wigner functions of the
reduced states are presented in the adjoining figures 5.6, 5.7 and 5.8.
(a) Wigner function corresponding to re­
duced states of modes 6’ and 1’. The flat­
ness near the top of the peak clearly shows
non­Gaussian features.
(b) The reference Gaussian constructed
from the mean and variances computed
from the non­Gaussian Wigner function for
the reduced states for modes 6’ and 1’.
Figure 5.6: The figure shown the Wigner function for modes 6’ and 1’ and the reference
Gaussian constructed.
The reduced states corresponding to the states 6’ and 1’ show the same reduced states
and the same corresponding degree of non­Gaussianity. The quantities δA(ρ6′) = δA(ρ1′)
take the value of 0.0959. Referring again to [12], one realizes that δA(ρ) is 0 iff ρ cor­
responds to a Gaussian since the measure is dependent on the distinguishability of a
non­Gaussian state and a value of 0 would render the state completely Gaussian.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) Wigner function corresponding to reduced
states of modes 2’, 3’ and 5. It may not be as
obvious as the first reduced state to find the non­
Gaussianity in this case, however, one may com­
pare the reduced state Wigner function to the
reference Gaussian and see a flatter peak cor­
responding to sub­Gaussian characteristics and
some heaviness in the tails.
(b) The reference Gaussian constructed from the
mean and variances computed from the non­
Gaussian Wigner function for the reduced states
for modes 2’, 3’ and 5.
Figure 5.7: The figure shown the Wigner function for modes 2’,3’ and 5 and the reference
Gaussian constructed.
The reduced states corresponding to the states 6’ and 1’ show the same reduced states
and the same corresponding degree of non­Gaussianity. The quantities δA(ρ2′) = δA(ρ3′) =
δA(ρ5) take the value of 0.00415. One may not that the degree of non­Gaussianity has
significantly dropped and this is seen in the nature of the Wigner function as it grows closer
to a Gaussian.
28
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:37==
(a) Wigner function corresponding to reduced
states of mode 4. It may not be as obvious as the
first reduced state to find the non­Gaussianity as
the state comes very very close to Gaussianity.
(b) The reference Gaussian constructed from the
mean and variances computed from the non­
Gaussian Wigner function for the reduced states
for mode 4.
Figure 5.8: The figure shown the WIgner function for mode 4 and the reference Gaussian
constructed.
Lastly, the reduced states corresponding to mode 4 shows the least corresponding degree
of non­Gaussianity. The quantity δA(ρ4) takes the value of 0.000571. One may note that
the degree of non­Gaussianity has further dropped and this is seen in the nature of the
Wigner function as it is almost similar in mean and variances to the reference Gaussian.
Yet again, to put things into context, figure 5.9 shows the Wigner function of the reduced
states in relation to the expected correlations shown in figure 4.6. And the adjoining
table 5.2 shows the corresponding values of δA(ρj) for the jth reduced state. It must be
evident that the degree of non­Gaussianity suffers a strong dissipation around the centres
of peak non­Gaussianity. Again in agreement with the results shown by Ra et. al.[8], the
two nearest neighbours see a fair level of non­Gaussianity relative to the peak sites while
it vanishes very quickly beyond that.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 5.9: Wigner functions obtained along with the corresponding Wigner function for
each mode.
j
δA(ρj)
5
0.00415
6’
0.0959
1’
0.0959
2’
0.00415
3’
0.00415
4
0.000571
Table 5.2: Variation of δA(ρj) for the jth reduced state of the multi­mode entangled state
due to subtraction from the EPR states.
A definite conclusion, in agreement with the results in [15], is that the non­Gaussianity
disappears far from the sites of subtraction and the states are essentially Gaussian as
one goes further than the two nearest neighbours from the site of subtraction.
This may have interesting consequences! Consider once again the models developed in
chapter 4. We have only considered 6 mode states. However, although the setup may
be extended infinitely to many modes, the non­Gaussianity would still only be contained
in the six modes and perhaps straggle to another neighbouring mode mode more that we
haven’t considered as a part of our 6­mode cluster. Beyond that, the multi­mode state
will continue to be Gaussian. One can see an entire non­Gaussian multi­mode entangled
state as a Gaussian state with localized non­Gaussianity within a couple of neighbouring
modes of the site of subtraction such that the degree of non­Gaussianity dissipates quickly.
5.5
On the propagation of non­Gaussianity.
This section describes a method based on Wigner functions to study and analyse the
propagation of non­Gaussianity induced in an N­mode Gaussian cluster state by photon
subtraction through the analysis and changes in the Wigner function through the covari­
30
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:39==
ance matrix. The subtraction is simulated by an on/off type detector. The analysis is
incomplete in the sense that is doesn’t go to the full extent of quantifying the truncation
in correlations but only elucidates the fundamental idea. Therefore, the section may also
be optional for the reader and has little to no bearing on the rest of the report.
Firstly, consider the result shown by Walschaers et. al. in their paper[15] where the Wigner
function for a photon subtracted cluster for a subset comprising of m modes is given by:
W(V )(β) = 1
2[(β, V −1
V Aj,V V −1
Vβ′) −Tr[V −1
V Aj,V ] + 2] exp(−1
2 (β, V −1
V β))
(2π)n√
Det(VV)
(5.14)
where, β is the vector of 2m quadratures corresponding to a point in the 2m­dimensional
phase space associated with the subset of m vertices V for which the Wigner function
is written. The matrices VV and Aj,V are both 2m dimensional. VV is covariance matrix
associated with the subset of vertices while Aj,V is the matrix that contains the information
about the subtraction induced on the jth vertex, and V is the covariance matrix associated
with the n­mode Gaussian cluster where the photon is subtracted from.
The authors go on to state that non­Gaussian decays in a manner such that it cannot be
seen farther than two nearest neighbours. Now the goal is to see how this would translate
in our Wigner function formalism with an On/Off detector.
Consider an N­mode Gaussian state. The Wigner function of the state is completely
described by the covariance matrix σ.
WG(ξ) =
1
(2π)n√
Det(σ)
exp{−1
2(ξT σ−1ξ)}
(5.15)
where, ξ = {ˆx1, ˆp1, ˆx2, ˆp2, ..., ˆxn, ˆpn}.
Now one assumes a beam splitter correspond­
ing to a symplectic transform Ssub with a very small reflectance mixes vacuum with one
of the modes k, in order to output a transmitted mode k and a reflected mode ξref =
(xref, pref). This gives one a new Wigner function with n + 1 modes such that ξ′ =
{ˆx1, ˆp1, ˆx2, ˆp2, ..., ˆxn, ˆpn, ˆxref, ˆpref}. The new Wigner function is simply:
WG(ξ, ξref) =
1
(2π)n√
Det(σ)
exp{−1
2((S−1
subξ′)T σ−1(S−1
subξ′))}
(5.16)
Figure 5.10: Schematic demonstrating subtraction induced by an on­off detector and an
almost perfectly transmitting beam splitter.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
31
==PAGE:40==
If the Gaussian state is a cluster state, one can extract an adjacency matrix out of it as
shown by Menucucci et. al. [10] given by Z = V + iU such that V and U are square n × n
matrices, U is symmetric and positive definite while V is symmetric but not necessarily
positive definite.
One then defines the matrix:
S(U,V) =
(
U−1
2
0
VU−1
2
U
1
2
)
(5.17)
So that the Wigner function may now be written as:
W(ξ′) =
1
πN exp[−(S−1
(U,V)ξ′)T (S−1
(U,V)ξ′)]
(5.18)
Referring to Equation (5.15) and using the same transformation for the subtraction beam
splitter of transmission η, the new Wigner function is:
W(ξ′) =
1
πN exp[−(S−1
(U,V)S−1
sub(η)ξ′)T (S−1
(U,V)S−1
sub(η)ξ′)]
(5.19)
Clearly, the new adjacency matrix can be extracted from Λ = S−1
(U,V)S−1
sub(η) and there
would be changes in the adjacency matrix to accommodate the new reflected modes. To
obtain the photon subtracted states, one uses the Wigner function of an on­off detector,
multiplies it with Equation (5.18), and traces out the reflected modes.
∫∫
1
2πN+1 exp(−ξ′T ΛT Λξ′)dxrefdpref−
∫∫
1
πN+1 exp(−ξ′T ΛT Λξ′)exp(−x2
ref−p2
ref)dxrefdpref
(5.20)
Denoting G = ΛT Λ = S−1 T
sub S−1 T
(U,V)S−1
(U,V)S−1
sub and the elements of the matrix G as Gµ,ν,
and also if the reflected modes are the last entries in the vector of quadratures, Equation
(5.19) can be written as:
∫∫
1
2πN+1 exp(−
∑
µ,ν
Gµ,νξ′
µξ′
ν)dxrefdpref−
∫∫
1
πN+1 exp(−
∑
µ=1,ν=1
G′
µ,νξ′
µξ′
ν)dxrefdpref
(5.21)
where G’ has the same structure as G except the 4 elements in the bottom right corner.
One may write this as:
G′ =
(G
0
0
K
)
, K =
(G(2N+1),(2N+1) + 1
G(2N+1),(2N+2)
G(2N+2),(2N+1)
G(2N+2),(2N+2) + 1
)
(5.22)
These are merely Gaussian integrals which can be easily computed. Ofcourse, there will
be changes to the constants to the two terms in the Wigner functions, more important are
the changes to the elements in the matrix G.
The 1D Gaussian integral, as in Brask[9], is given by:
∫
e−ax2+bx+cdx =
√π
ae
b2
4a+c
(5.23)
32
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:41==
If one assumes that all the other quadratures except the reflected ones are constant, the
integrand for the first term in the Wigner function is:
exp(−G(2N+1),(2N+1)ξ′2
(2N+1) −
∑
µ
ξ′
µξ′
(2N+1) −G(2N+2),(2N+2)ξ′2
(2N+2) −
∑
µ
ξ′
µξ′
(2N+2))
(5.24)
and the result is:
π
√G(2N+1),(2N+1)G(2N+2),(2N+2)
exp(
(∑
µ ξ′
µ)2
4G(2N+1),(2N+1)
+
(∑
µ ξ′
µ)2
4G(2N+2),(2N+2)
)
(5.25)
Just looking at Equation (5.24) and Equation (5.20) one can see that the entries in the
matrix Gµ,ν would change once the integral is computed when one realizes that the ex­
pansions
(∑
µ ξ′
µ)2
4G(2N+1),(2N+1) and
(∑
µ ξ′
µ)2
4G(2N+2),(2N+2) would change the correlations between the
reflected modes and the other modes as well as the variances.
Similarly, for the second term in the integral (5.20), the resulting integral is:
π
√
(G(2N+1),(2N+1) + 1)(G(2N+2),(2N+2) + 1)
exp(
(∑
µ ξ′
µ)2
4(G(2N+1),(2N+1) + 1)+
(∑
µ ξ′
µ)2
4(G(2N+2),(2N+2) + 1))
(5.26)
Since G = ΛT Λ = S−1 T
sub S−1 T
(U,V)S−1
(U,V)S−1
sub and G′ = Λ′T Λ′ = S′−1 T
sub S’−1 T
(U,V)S’−1
(U,V)S′−1
sub,
changes in the elements of G and G’ effect changes in the elements of S−1
(U,V)S−1
sub and
S’−1
(U,V)S′−1
sub. One then constructs, in the limit of vanishing reflectance or η −→1, the
covariance matrices σ, σ′ for the using from G and G’ respectively:
σ(U,V) = 1
2S(U,V)ST
(U,V),
σ′
(U,V) = 1
2S′
(U,V)S′T
(U,V)
(5.27)
The non­Gaussianity then depends on how the correlations have changed and how dif­
ferent the Wigner function­ which is a difference of the two Gaussians defined by σ and σ′
(up to some normalizing constants respectively)­ is from a Gaussian of the same variance.
Clearly, the non­Gaussianity must result from the truncations in the initial correlations due
to the new terms arising from the integrals computed. The coefficients of the expansion of
(∑
µ ξ′
µ)2 are kept track of, to know the extent of the truncations. One then easily extracts
the reduced state Wigner functions from the covariance matrices found and measures the
Hilbert Schmidt distance to see the decreasing trend in the propagation of non­Gaussianity
from the kth mode.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
33
==PAGE:42==
6
Experimental Setup
6.1
The setup for generation of a 2D cluster state.
It is imperative to start with the experimental setup that generates the Gaussian state
where the subtraction is implemented. The setup is adopted from the scheme presented
in their work by Larsen et. al. [11].
Figure 6.1: The schematic for the generation a 2D cluster state. The setup is meant to
generate a 2­Dimensional cluster state which is Gaussian and inseparable as shown by
Larsen et. al. [11]. The temporal modes are defined by an asymmetric shaped temporal
mode function within the 247 ns duration of temporal modes which filters out low frequency
noise and leads to less than 10−3 mode overlap between successively defined modes.
The two OPOs in figure 6.1 are operated well below the threshold to generate squeezed
vacuum states in spatial modes A and B respectively. The state from OPO­B is then
rotated by 90 degrees and interfered to generate an EPR state. Each spatial mode com­
prises of temporal modes indexed as ..., k−1, k, k+1, k+2, ... and so on. The delays shift
the modes leftwards (slowed down by a temporal mode duration as compared to spatial
mode A) in time in spatial mode B. The interference at the beam splitter ”BS2” interferes
the 1­delayed temporal modes in spatial mode B with the original modes in spatial mode
A leading to the generation of a 1­Dimensional cluster state as shown in figure 6.1. Lastly,
the N­times delays in spatial mode delay the temporal modes N times and the interference
then generates the 2­Dimensional cluster state shown coiled up.
To understand the setup including the subtraction process in detail the schematic including
the locks and the beam splitters along with their transmissions is presented in figure 6.2
and the discussion follows.
34
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:43==
Figure 6.2: The detailed setup for a 2D cluster state. The setup is meant to generate
a 2­Dimensional graph state and then subtract photons from the setup. The point of
subtraction is labelled by the line showing ”To­sub”. The detector initially used for locking
is now labelled L and will be used through a subtraction unit for phase locking.
The most important element in the functioning setup is the probe. The probe beams are
essentially coherent states which are not used for anything while measuring but they are
used extensively to lock the OPOs, all the different phase locks along the way and for the
final measurement of the quadratures. The modulation and phase locking schemes will
be discussed in the next chapter. A single probe beam at 1550 nm is first sent through
an AOM which shifts the beam up in frequency by 80MHz. This is seen in the first order
output of the AOM. Next, another AOM is used to down­shift the 1st order beam to the
original frequency. Both the AOMs are driven by a 70% duty cycle square wave, or here­
forthwith the Sample­Hold (SH) signal. This SH signal is also used to trigger all the phase
locks which are implemented on Red Pitaya FPGA boards. When the AOMs are not
driving, there is no probe sent into the setup and vice versa. Next, the original probe
coming out of the second AOM is split between the two OPOs. We will call these two
beams seed beams­ namely, SA and SB. A portion of each of the seed beams, which is
counter­propagating and is called a lock beam, is used to lock the corresponding OPO into
resonance. And the rest of the seed beam then transmits through the OPOs. The initial
probe beam is modulated through an EOM and this modulation is used to actively lock
the OPOs using the Pound­Drever­Hall scheme by using the lock beams and a detector
after the OPOs for active feedback and AC locks are implemented to lock to the peak of
the transmission. The SHG generates a beam at the Second Harmonic frequency or 775
nm wavelength which is used to generate squeezing in the OPOs. This beam will here­
forthwith be referred to as the Pump. However, to generate squeezing at a fixed phase,
the parametric gain must be locked to deamplification. For this purpose, the SA and SB are
scanned in phase to look at the oscillating parametric gain and are locked to the bottom
of the curve. Furthermore, a small modulation is added atop the scan with frequencies
fA and fB respectively. The addition of these modulations will become relevant when
discussing measurements.
Again, the parametric gain is locked to de­amplification using active feedback through 1%
tapping mirrors such that squeezing is fixed along a direction in phase space. This en­
sures the squeezing is along the x quadratures and the beams are modulated along the
p­quadrature. The spatial mode B then faces a π/2 phase rotation and locked there with
respect to spatial mode A. This is done by locking the phase to the middle of the inter­
ference fringe of the two probe beams such that there is a π/2 phase difference between
Non Gaussian Cluster States
35
==PAGE:44==
them. This generates EPR states upon mixing at the Beam splitters. Further, at both the
next two (1D and 2D levels) locks, the phase is locked to the middle of the interference
fringe such that the there is no phase difference between the interfering beams with ap­
propriate stabilization parameters (discussed in the next chapter) in order to generate the
2D cluster state.
Lastly, Homodyne detection is used to measure the quadratures. Since one would need
to read either the X, P or a linear combination of X and P quadratures, one must also have
active locking in order to phase lock the LO with respect to the two spatial mode signals.
This is also accomplished with a PDH style AC lock.
6.2
The photon subtraction channel.
Figure 6.3: The schematic for the subtraction unit. This setup will be used for implement­
ing the subtraction from the cluster state.
The subtraction unit shown in figure 6.4 is built in order to implement photon subtraction at
different points in the cluster state generation. Here, the subtraction is implemented such
that the photon is subtracted from one of the modes of an EPR state which is generated
right after the first beam splitter. Instead of being used directly for locking, the 1% tap
off after BS1 is fed into the subtraction unit. A superconducting single photon detector
(SSPD) is used to detect photons which relays a click to a monitor for count detection as
well as another signal to the scope trigger every time a photon is detected. This tapped
off beam is then coupled out into free space which is then fed to an AOM. This AOM is
driven by a signal which is the inverse of the SH signal with guard periods around the high
level. This is done in order to protect the SSPD from a very high intensity coherent beam
(the seed beam) falling on it. Note that when the sample hold signal is high, there is a
seed beam in circulation and a portion of this beam would fall onto the SSPD if the AOM
would also be simultaneously on. This is because the strong seed beam would be in the
1st order reflected beam from the AOM which is feed to the SSPD. Thus, when the SH
signal is high, the AOM should be off and all the light should be used for locking and when
the SH signal is low, the AOM should be on the light should go to the SSPD. Therefore,
36
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:45==
the SH signal is a 70% duty cycle square wave, and the AOM is driven by an inverted SH
signal with <30% duty cycle. The duty cycle is not exactly 30% because of the inclusion
of a guard band around the high part of the signal to avoid any overlap or residual seed
beam in the subtraction unit when the AOM turns on.
The diffracted beam is used for subtraction. However, it is important to reject all photons
which come from unwanted sources. The OPO’s output in the frequency range consists of
a number of repeating Lorentzians separated by a frequency range called the Free Spec­
tral Range (FSR). This is schematically shown in figure 6.4. To make sure that photons are
subtracted only from the frequency where the OPOs are generating squeezing, or at twice
the wavelength of the pump, a tunable filter cavity is used to reject all non­degenerate
photons that are generated. The filter cavity, on the other hand, has a broader magnitude
spectrum and can be tuned to only allow photons from the operating wavelength to be
subtracted. If the cavity gain bandwidth (FWHM) is tuned to be much narrower than the
twice the FSR of the OPO, the filter cavity only selects the relevant cavity mode.
Figure 6.4: The schematic elucidating the function of the filter cavity. The filter cavity’s
magnitude spectrum is first shown and then shown are the OPOs modes. The multipli­
cation of the the gain spectra allows the selection of relevant modes. The picture also
shows the expression for the FSR which must be much larger than the FWHM width of
the filter cavity spectrum in order to select at most a single resonant mode.
The DWDM is then used as a filter to the feed the light as an input to a Polarization con­
troller. The polarization controller is used in place here to ensure the correct polarization is
sent to the SSPD which is polarization sensitive. The output of the Polarization controller
is then fed to the SSPD where absorption by the SSPD results in a successful subtraction
event. The efficiencies of the individual elements of the subtraction unit are listed in table
6.1
But what happens when the AOM is off? In this case there is no diffracted beam and all
Non Gaussian Cluster States
37
==PAGE:46==
Element
Efficiency
Input Coupling
0.98
Polarization controller(1dB)
0.99
AOM (1st order diffraction)
0.61
Output coupling
0.88
Filter Cavity+DWDM
0.48
Total
0.249
Table 6.1: Efficiencies of various elements of the subtraction unit. Most of the loss in
efficiency occurs at the Filter Cavity and DWDM combination.
the light that comes from the seed beam in spatial mode A is fed to the detector which is
used for active locking at the EPR stage as if the photon subtraction unit weren’t present.
Unfortunately, due to unforeseen problems (a misaligned second OPO which couldn’t
eventually be phase matched to get optimal squeezing) in the experimental implementa­
tion, only one of the OPOs was able to be used to generate a non­Gaussian state. The
non­squeezing OPO would just be used as a source of vacuum and a relatively weak seed
beam for the purposes of locking. While this makes the experiment a bit less exciting in
terms of expectations, it makes the fundamental understanding easier to grasp. The ex­
periment we therefore consider here is the generation of non­Gaussianity with a single
squeezer. The experimental methods and the expectations from such an experiment are
discussed in the next chapter.
38
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:47==
7
Experimental Methods and Data
Analysis
7.1
Electronics and Modulations.
This section presents a discussion of the different methods and electronic implementa­
tions necessary for the experiment. It also includes some important considerations one
must take in order to extract the desired outcomes. The discussion begins with that of the
phase locking schemes and what one expects from the locks an how the locks are imple­
mented. The next section covers the details of Sample hold signal and the AOM chopping
signal and the reasons behind their use. The next section talks about how modulations
before the parametric gain locking, as described in chapter 6, are used for probing and
quadrature measurements. Furthermore, the methods for Data acquisition and quadra­
ture measurements are discussed. Lastly, a discussion of the generated state and the
underlying expectations from the state is made.
7.1.1
Active Locking with the PDH scheme.
The Pound­Drever­Hall technique is a widely used active feedback locking technique that
has been extensively used in this study to phase­lock the beams at different points in the
experiment. A schematic showing a concise representation of the underlying principle is
presented in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1: The schematic elucidating the working of a PDH style lock. The modulator is
in fact a phase modulator of the input beam, the mixer can be thought of as a ”product” of
the input signals, the detector is a photodetctor and the 1% tap­off is implemented using
a beam splitter.
The PDH lock is usually used on frequency stabilization of lasers in order to lock to the
resonance peak. However, we use this to lock to different points on the interference
pattern of two interfering beams. One of the incoming beams is phase modulated. This
allows one to see this beam as wiggling in phase which translates to wiggling along the
interference pattern. Now consider figure 7.2:
Non Gaussian Cluster States
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 7.2: This figure shows the modulation in phase along the X­axis and the intensity of
the lower half of the interference pattern along the Y axis. The lower peak is, for instance,
the point we would like to lock to.
Suppose one wants to lock the beams with a π phase difference between them so that
we lock to the bottom of the interference fringe. As the modulation is observed one sees
that the intensity changes either with the modulation (positive peak of the phase wiggle
corresponds to the maximum of the intensity wiggle), changes against it (positive peak of
the phase wiggle corresponds to the minimum of the intensity wiggle), or changes not at
all depending on on what side of the peak the centre of the modulation is.
These changes intensity due to the modulation are picked up by a detector through a 1%
beam splitter. However, there may be other frequencies present. How does one know
where to look? The mixer is what helps one look at the right frequency, since it is supplied
in input by the same frequency the modulator is run with. On the other hand the other input
to the mixer is the detector signal. Considering that sine waves are orthogonal, product
of two sine waves passes through to the output of the mixer if and only if they are same
frequency. One can see this process as a selection of the same frequency as that of the
LO in the input from the detector by the mixer.
One can then see the nature of the change of intensity all along the interference pattern
by simply moving the centre of the modulation all along the curve and generating a cor­
responding curve that simply tracks the nature of the change intensity with respect to the
modulation and the extent of the change (which basically depends on how steep the in­
terference curve is at a given point (see figure 7.2!) or the slope of the interference).The
output signal is called the error signal and it will be positive (if the intensity changes with
the modulation), negative (if the intensity changes against the modulation) or 0. Typically
this appears as a derivative of the direct signal at the detector if the phase of the beam
is continually scanned as described earlier regarding the involvement of the slope of the
direct signal.
The goal would then be to stay at the point such that the intensity doesn’t change with the
wiggle in phase and therefore the error signal to be zero. This is accomplished through a
PI feedback loop feeding into a phase controller that ensures staying locked at the peak.
The phase controller in our case is a fibre stretcher. This comprises of closely packed
loops of fibre carrying the beam in the un­modulated arm stretched by a piezo­electric
actuator. The detector output is used as an input to the Red Pitaya FPGA boards which
are used for locking. The boards carry an in­built mixer as well as PID controllers. The PI
(proportional and integral gains which are used as stabilization parameters for stabilizing
the phase) controls are then set by adjusting proportional and integral gains digitally on
the Red Pitayas that are used for locking through their outputs. These outputs are then
amplified using High Voltage Amplifiers and fed to the piezo­electric actuator stretching
40
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:49==
or relaxing the fibers for phase control.
However, one must then notice that one can lock to both the positive peak and the negative
peak using the same technique. How does one then pick where to lock? One way is to
simply change the phase at the phase controller by 180 degrees to move the centre of the
modulation after trying and noting that the lock is not appropriate. The other way is when
one uses the signs of P and I gains to either lock to the positive of the negative gain. It
is to be tried and observed with a positive P and I. If the beam locks inappropriately, the
signs are reversed to find that the beams are appropriately locked. The same idea is used
to lock to different points with the same intensity value but lying on two different (positive
and negative) slopes of a peak.
To this end, it is a worthwhile discussion to understand the effects of the signs of the
stabilization parameters. In phase space, a scanning probe beam can be seen as a
rotating coherent state with respect to the un­scanned beam which lies still. Being locked
perfectly in phase would then mean a constant phase of 0 degrees difference between
the two probe beams. As on moves the scanning probe beam clockwise or anticlockwise,
one increases the phase difference between the two probes thus gradually reducing the
detected intensity at the detector until one reaches the middle of the fringe (at + or ­90
degrees!). However, now if an increase in phase leads to an increase in intensity at the
detector it requires the PID controller to do something to remove this surge in the detector
response. This corresponds to negative P and I values and one is considered locked at
­90 degrees. However, if the converse process is followed, one locks to +90 degrees with
positive P and I stabilization parameters. This is how the EPR states are generated using
the phase locking after BS1.
The locks at BS2 and BS3 in figure 6.2 are similarly locked mid­fringe with negative P
and I gains but now there is no 90 degree phase rotation. The visibility recorded in the
three detectors after BS1, BS2 and BS3 respectively were 98%, >99.9%, and >99.9%
respectively. The high visibility ensures an equal amount of light falling into both the
spatial modes throughout the circuit.
Since the measurement of the quadratures depends on the modulations in the probes
that are added before the seed beams enter the OPOs, a very lossy second OPO makes
the locking of the detectors extremely difficult in order to measure the p quadrature. This
is due the modulation being extremely difficult to find despite large modulation depths.
Therefore, in the rest of the experiment, a DC lock is used to lock to + and ­ 90 degrees with
respect to the seed beams (see ”Probing with modulations” in this chapter) using positive
and negative P and I parameters respectively so one measures along the xA + pA and
xB −pB directions in phase space while completely disregarding the modulation. While
this may seem less exciting, this should not prevent the detection of non­Gaussianity in
either of the two spatial modes.
7.1.2
Sample­Hold Scheme and the AOM chopper.
At the core of the sample hold scheme is the idea of keeping the entire setup locked
through the seed beams for 70% of the time and hoping that nothing dramatic happens
during the 30% of the time and that everything still stays locked. An important source of
optimism is to realize that most of the changes in the phase or interference are brought
about by relatively slower drifts such as temperature and polarization drifts. If the sample
hold signal is chosen such that the 30% interval is much smaller than the typical time
lengths for the slow drifts to make considerable differences, the system should stay fairly
faithful through the measurements which are made in the 30% time interval. The Sample
Hold signal is therefore kept at a frequency of a 100Hz and is a square wave of 70% duty
Non Gaussian Cluster States
41
==PAGE:50==
cycle. Thus the locks stay on for a duration of 7 ms and switch off for a duration of 3 ms.
This is shown in figure 7.3.
Figure 7.3: This figure shows the Square waves corresponding to the Sample Hold signal
as well as the AOM chopper signal. The signals are 1.4V peak to peak and have the duty
cycles of 70% and 28% each. The frequencies of both waveforms are 100Hz each.
As discussed in the previous chapter, the AOM chopper is the signal that drives the AOMs
for subtraction when the SH signal is low. Thus the AOM chopper signal has a duty cycle
of 30%. However, the actual duty cycle is lower than 30% because of the presence of
some guard intervals between the SH going low and the AOM chopper going high.
As shown earlier, other than the purpose of protecting the SSPD the guard periods have
another functionality. To understand that idea, one sees that the rising edge and the falling
edge of the SH signal are very fast and cannot be followed by the rest of the elements of
the optical setup. This is seen in the transients and a slower decay in the detector signals
from the locks An example here is shown in the output of the Parametric gain detector.
The measurements would be erroneous and irregular if they recorded in the region where
the transients exist. One would then use the AOM chopper as one of the trigger signals
to record quadrature signals and avoid these transient effects.
42
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:51==
Figure 7.4: This figure shows the output from the Parametric gain detector. The green and
the red curve correspond to the gains of OPOA and OPOB respectively. The transient
peaks and the corresponding slow decay to stable values can be clearly seen. These
occur when the SH signal goes low or high in as fast a manner that cannot be followed
by the rest of the optical elements in the setup.
Such transients can also be seen in all the other locks and using the guard times makes
things fairly simple and convenient for measurements.
7.1.3
Probing with modulations.
To start with, it must be pointed out that it was discussed in chapter 6 that the probes are
modulated with frequencies fA and fB before the parametric gains are locked. The pur­
pose of these modulations is to keep track of the states and to help in the measurements
at the homodyne detectors.
To understand how the modulations mix one considers the Beam splitter transformations
in Equation (4.1) and uses these transformations to mix the quadratures throughout the
setup and along with the modulations.
The modulations can be seen as a wiggle of the coherent states the seed beams are in
phase space perpendicular to the quadrature being modulated. First, one sees how the
phase rotation by π/2 changes the quadratures. This is shown in figure 7.5.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 7.5
The quadratures transform as: x −→p and p −→−x. Thus, the modulations that were
initially both along the x­axis in the spatial modes for the coherent states changes to
modulation of the x in spatial mode A and modulation for p in spatial mode B. This is also
highlighted in figure 7.7 just before the EPR beam splitter.
Now, the modulated beams mix at the first beam splitter and the resulting quadratures
are shown in figure 7.6. Since x2 is not modulated and p1 is not modulated, the resulting
modulations are along +x in spatial modes A and B and along + and ­ p in spatial modes
A and B respectively. This is shown in figure 7.6.
Figure 7.6
The mixed modulations and the seed beams then can be drawn as shown in figure 7.7.
The resulting states would be where the DC part of the seed beams are, while the mod­
ulations are about the DC point and are drawn in red and blue corresponding to fA and
fB respectively. Vpzt is the voltage from the piezo­electric actuator that locks the DC part
of the probe to a certain point on the interference pattern. This point can be on either
side of a peak and the PDH style of locking is used to switch between the different sides
of the peak by changing the signs of the P and I gains such that the increase in Vpzt ei­
ther increases with the signal in the detector (positive slope of the interference pattern) or
against it (negative slope of the interference pattern).
Figure 7.7
The mixing at the beam splitter before the generation of a 1D cluster is shown in figure
7.8. The mixing is such that the modulations cancel out and it is obvious if one looks at the
computations in figure 7.9. Or intuitively, the +x and −x modulations cancel out leaving
the +p modulations in spatial mode A and similarly, the +p and −p modulations cancel
out leaving the +x modulations in spatial mode B.
44
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:53==
Figure 7.8
Lastly, at the last beam splitters, beams mix again as shown in figure 7.9 and the final
probes and modulations are shown in figure 7.10. The DC points are along −xA +pA and
xB +pB. Now, if one wants to measure the x axis, one demodulates the seed beams with
the frequency fA and for the p quadrature one would demodulate with the frequency fB at
the HD detectors which are also locked using the PDH style of AC locking and therefore
are capable of demodulation and detection.
For the purposes noted above the frequencies are set far above from each other at fA =
59 kHz and fB = 70 kHz.
Figure 7.9
Figure 7.10
7.2
Data Acquisition and Measurements.
Now that one has all the necessary signals and electronics in place, one decides the
methodology to take measurements and acquire data. The study used two trigger signals
to acquire data on a LeCroy Oscilloscope. The first is the click indicating the event of
a photon detection by the SSPD and the other is the rising edge of the AOM chopper
signal. The triggers are conditioned such that click must lie within the interval where the
AOM chopper is high. The acquisition is carried out over a duration of 50 microseconds.
This corresponds to 200 temporal modes considering each mode is 247 nanoseconds
long such that subtraction occurs in the middle of the entire trace. This is shown in figure
7.11.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
45
==PAGE:54==
Figure 7.11: The image shows the data acquisition through the traces on the Oscilloscope.
The AOM and SSPD trigger signals are present on Channel 4 and Channel 3 respectively
while the quadrature traces are collected on Channel 1 and 2 respectively from homodyne
detectors on spatial modes A and B respectively. The sampling rate for the acquisition is
set to 250 MSamples per second and the delay from the AOM rising edge ensure that the
acquisition is not made too close to the edge.
The data is acquired segment­wise such that 100 files each with a 100 continuous seg­
ments of traces are recorded, so that for each of the temporal modes one has 10000
quadrature segments recorded. This allows us to measure variances and statistical mea­
sures such as excess Kurtosis for the measurement of the degree of non­Gaussianity.
Another important factor in the measurements is the amount of true triggers vs. false
triggers from the SSPD. The ratio of True to Fake Triggers must be as high as possible
to avoid recording any states that are not due to a photon actually being subtracted. This
is done by maximizing the actual photon count to dark+false count ratio. In our case this
ratio is around 1.2%.
7.3
Understanding the generated state.
Before one discusses the results of the measurements, one must be sure of setting the
correct expectations from the experiments. Central to this is the knowledge of the gener­
ated state the measurements shall be done upon. In this case with only a single squeez­
ing source, the state in consideration is very different from that in the case of two working
squeezing sources. The seed beams in the two spatial modes are still used for locking
and modulations, however, the second source is only a source of vacuum. This results
in a squeezed state mixing with vacuum at the EPR Beam splitter. This still results in a
correlated state. However, it isn’t an EPR state.
One starts with a Squeezed state S(r) |0⟩in spatial mode A and vacuum in spatial mode
B and one considers the kth temporal mode in both the spatial modes. At the EPR beam
46
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:55==
splitter one expects to see ˆUBSSA,k |0, 0⟩. The resultant two mode correlated state is:
Sl
Ak,Bk = exp{r
4[(aA,k −aB,k)2 −(a†
A,k −a†
B,k)2]} |0, 0⟩
(7.1)
Evidently, the squeezing is lossy now (reduced by half) and both the spatial modes are
correlated. Note that aA,k −aB,k is in the correlations but aA,k + aB,k is not.
After the first delay, the resulting state operator is Sl
Ak,Bk+1, the next state is Sl
Ak+1,Bk+2
and the previous state is Sl
Ak−1,Bk and so on. The state in time then may be written is:
...Sl
Ak−1,BkSl
Ak,Bk+1Sl
Ak+1,Bk+2... |000...000⟩
(7.2)
On the next beam splitter, the kth mode in A interacts with the (k + 2)th mode in B, the
(k + 1)th mode in A interacts with the (k + 3)th mode in B and so on. In terms of the
exponential the resulting operator just before the mixing on the beam splitter is:
exp{r
4[
∞
∑
k=1
(aA,k −aB,k+1)2 −(a†
A,k −a†
B,k+1)2]} |000...000⟩
(7.3)
A subtraction in spatial mode A would lead to non­Gaussian features also observable in
the immediate neighbour as proposed from the developed theory in chapters 4 and 5.
So, a subtraction in A, k demands attention on B, (k + 1). Now due to the interaction at
the next beam splitter new correlations would pop up. This is because of the following
transformations:
ˆaA,k −→ˆaA,k −ˆaB,k+2
√
2
, ˆaB,k+2 −→ˆaA,k + ˆaB,k+2
√
2
(7.4)
and,
ˆaA,k+1 −→ˆaA,k+1 −ˆaB,k+3
√
2
, ˆaB,k+1 −→ˆaA,k−1 + ˆaB,k+1
√
2
(7.5)
for all values of k ∈{0, ..., ∞}.
Inserting the transformations in Equations (7.4) and (7.5) in Equation (7.3) one sees that
there is a transcendental addition of newer correlations creating the 1D state we ex­
pect. Due to the correlations the non­Gaussian features would again spread to the mixing
modes. However, the squeezing continues to drop. Again the operator transforms as:
exp{r
8[
∞
∑
k=1
(ˆaA,k −ˆaB,k+2 −ˆaA,k−1 −ˆaB,k+1)2 −(ˆa†
A,k −ˆa†
B,k+2 −ˆa†
A,k−1 −ˆa†
B,k+1)2]} (7.6)
Clearly, initially, only the kth modes were correlated, now the neighbouring modes are
correlated too! Firstly, we should expect some effects of subtraction in the kth temporal
mode in spatial mode A to be also visible in the (k + 1)th mode in spatial mode B and
effects of subtraction in the (k −1)th temporal mode in spatial mode A to be also visible
in the kth mode in spatial mode B and so on.
A similar addition of correlations should occur after the N­temporal length delays and
mixing up on the last beam splitter and further new correlations pop up like one would
expect from the original cluster. Another bout of mixing would leave one with 8 terms in
each of the parentheses in the exponential shown in Equation (7.6). For N=12, as the kth
Non Gaussian Cluster States
47
==PAGE:56==
mode in spatial mode A interacts with the (k +13)th mode in spatial mode B, the following
BS transformations take effect:
ˆaA,k −→ˆaA,k −ˆaB,k+13
√
2
, ˆaB,k+13 −→ˆaA,k + ˆaB,k+13
√
2
(7.7)
,
ˆaA,k−1 −→ˆaA,k−1 −ˆaB,k+12
√
2
, ˆaB,k −→ˆaA,k−13 + ˆaB,k
√
2
(7.8)
and,
ˆaB,k+1 −→ˆaA,k−12 + ˆaB,k+1
√
2
, ˆaB,k+2 −→ˆaA,k−11 + ˆaB,k+2
√
2
(7.9)
for all values of k ∈{0, ..., ∞}.
The resulting state operator acting on an n­mode vacuum is:
exp{ r
16[
∞
∑
k=1
(ˆaA,k −ˆaB,k+13 −ˆaA,k−11 −ˆaB,k+2 −ˆaA,k−1 + ˆaB,k+12 −ˆaA,k−12 −ˆaB,k+1)2
−(ˆa†
A,k −ˆa†
B,k+13 −ˆa†
A,k−11 −ˆa†
B,k+2 −ˆa†
A,k−1 + ˆa†
B,k+12 −ˆa†
A,k−12 −ˆa†
B,k+1)2]}
(7.10)
The correlations now can be easily ascertained from equation 7.10. However, not all of
them would be relevant. Noting that we can only see non­Gaussianity in the first two
neighbours, the relevant modes are (A, k) where the subtraction occurs, (B, k + 1) which
the correlated mode when the subtraction occurs, (B, k + 12) which is the second neigh­
bour through the correlated mode and (B, k + 13) which is the immediate neighbour of
the subtracted mode. The rest of the modes see vanishingly small to no non­Gaussianity.
The expectations for the experiment are set in the last section of this chapter.
7.4
Temporal Mode Functions.
The measurements are taken continuously at the homodyne detectors. The quadratures
are recorded continuously but what defines the temporal mode then? One way would be
to shape the amplitude of local oscillator. However, an easier way is to simply weigh the
raw data with a temporal mode function that defines a mode. The raw quadrature data
recorded, q(t), are defined by the temporal mode function fk(t) and the quadratures are
recorded by integrating the raw data weighted by the temporal mode function. This is
described succinctly as:
Qk =
∫
q(t)fk(t)dt
(7.11)
where Qk is the value of kth temporal mode’s quadrature extracted from the raw data
recorded.
Clearly, the choice of the temporal mode is crucial. First note that one would like to de­
scribe a state that is present in the temporal mode that is recorded conditioned on the
detection of a photon by the SSPD. If the temporal mode that is used to weigh the raw
data is not adequate the extracted quadrature values will not be adequate or in better
words optimal. The best results would be present in the temporal modes chosen are
such that they optimize the fidelity of the extracted quadrature with that of the condition­
ally prepared state. The fidelity can be measured by tomographic measures such as the
Wigner Function negativity. This was shown in [16] and [17].
48
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:57==
One first notes the following relation in the rotating frame about the centre frequency ω0:
ˆA(t) = ˆa(t)eiω0t = 1
2π
∫∞
∞
ˆA(Ω)e−iΩtdΩ
(7.12)
where, ˆA(Ω) = ˆa(ω0+Ω) where Ωis the frequency variable, and ˆa denotes the annihilation
operator which obeys [ˆa(ω0+Ω), ˆa†(ω0+Ω
′)] = 2πδ(Ω−Ω
′). Note that the time dependent
rotating annihilation operator is simply changed to the frequency domain version via a
Fourier transform and inversely by an inverse fourier transform.
To see what the temporal mode should look like one decomposes the 2­mode squeezing
operator in the frequency representation to the first order.
S1,2 |0, 0⟩= (I −
∫∞
−∞
r(Ω)
2
[ ˆA†
1(Ω) ˆA†
2(Ω)]dΩ) |0, 0⟩
(7.13)
Suppose a photon is detected in one of the modes (Let’s say mode 1, like it is in our
setup) at time t0. The state of this photon is ˆA†
1 |0⟩1. Because the first and all the other
higher order terms vanish due to the orthogonality of the Fock states, and the second
term would have a photon in mode 1 because of the mode 1 creation operator present,
the conditioned state, by projection, is then:
1 ⟨0| ˆA1(t1)S1,2 |0, 0⟩= 1
2π
∫∞
−∞
[r(Ω)
2
exp(iΩt0) ˆA†
2(Ω)]dΩ|0⟩2
(7.14)
and Fourier transforming A†
2(Ω) to the time domain we get:
1 ⟨0| ˆA1(t1)S1,2 |0, 0⟩= 1
4π
∫∞
−∞
∫∞
−∞
(r(Ω)exp(−iΩ(t −t0)) ˆA†
2(t)dΩdt) |0⟩2
(7.15)
One then defines a temporal mode function f(t) =
∫∞
−∞
r(Ω)
2π exp(−iΩ(t −t0))dΩwhich is
just a Fourier Transform from the frequency to the time domain centred at t = t0 and the
RHS of equation (7.3) can be re­written as:
1
2
∫∞
−∞
A†
2f(t)dt
(7.16)
or,
1
2
∫∞
−∞
x2f(t)dt + i
2
∫∞
−∞
p2f(t)dt
(7.17)
And voila! One thus finds their temporal mode function for the mode which the single
photon is created in! The temporal mode function is proportional to exp{−K|(t −t0)|} for
a constant K in the limit of low squeezing as r(Ω) approaches a Lorentzian as shown by
Lvovsky et al.[19]. This is a double sided exponential centred at t0. The constant K is
adjusted in order to optimize the width of the double sided exponential or the rate of the
decay of the exponential in order to maximize the fidelity of the detected state to that of
the desired state.
This is the temporal mode function we would be using for the rest of the analysis around
the time of the subtraction. Far from subtraction, the state should remain Gaussian and
one uses the same temporal mode function as the one used by Larsen in their PhD the­
sis[18] which is a Gaussian multiplied with a straight line making it an asymmetric curve
flipped about y=0.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 7.12: The image shows the temporal mode function derived in this section. Shown
is a temporal mode function such that the photon is subtracted at time t=0. For a time t1,
the centre of the curve shifts to t1
. The x­axis has units of time and y axis is arbitrary in units.
7.5
What to look for?
The sign to look for would be a spike in the variances measured in the quadrature mea­
surements. This is because, as shown in the theoretical exploration of the topic, the con­
ditionally prepared state due to the subtaction must have a single photon in superposed
in certain modes. This should already change the variances by an observable extent.
Furthermore, another thing to look for would be non­Gaussian characteristics in the prob­
ability distribution of the measured quadratures. The degree of the non­Gaussianity will
then be measured in terms of the Kurtosis of the distribution which is the fourth moment
of a distribution. A negative excess Kurtosis would clearly show non­Gaussianity while it
is 0 iff the distribution is Gaussian.
Non­Gaussianity should be visible in the mixing modes and spread up to two nearest
neighbours. When the subtraction occurs in one of the two correlated modes, the other
correlated mode would also show non­Gaussianity. This was shown in chapter 5.4 where
subtraction was carried out on one of the modes of an EPR state. So, the (A, kth) and the
(B, (k+1)th) modes (after the first delay) would be non­Gaussian before mixing begins at
BS2. The modes then mix at the next beam splitter such that the mixing modes may show
non­Gaussianity. This modes would be the (B, (k + 13)th) mode. But note that this mode
is also correlated to the (A, (k+12)th) mode. Thus, the features should also spread to the
(A, (k + 12)th) mode in spatial mode A but no further. These will be the prime contenders
for non­Gaussianity in the experiment as we will see in the next chapter.
Further due to the correlations, we expect to see spikes in variances on the subtracted kth
mode, the neighbouring (k +1)th mode, the (k +N)th mode and the (k +N +1)th modes.
One should, however, expect a decline in the kurtosis or the measure of non­Gaussianity
of the mentioned modes.
50
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:59==
Furthermore, a crucial factor is the loss in the system. If the losses are high, the non­
Gaussian features are quickly lost, and this has significantly affected the results in spatial
mode B in this study. The setbacks have been discussed in the next chapter.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
51
==PAGE:60==
8
Results, Discussions and Conclusion.
8.1
Results and Discussion.
This section discusses the results of the experiment carried out, and conclusions are made
concerning the experimental results. From the expectations that were set in the last chap­
ter, the first step would be to look for a spike in the variances. This is because the con­
ditioned preparation of the state leads to a single photon being in circulation through the
beam splitters and the setup. Preliminarily, one first extracts the quadratures measured
using the temporal mode function defined in section 7.4.
This is shown in figure 7.1. The first four temporal mode functions are shown along with
the recorded raw data.
Figure 8.1: The image shows the temporal mode function derived in 7.4 against recorded
raw data from the homodyne detectors. The first four temporal modes are shown along
with the shot noise time traces SA and SB from detectors A and B respectively.
The shot noise levels on the shown figure are clearly off balance. However, this can be
used as the shot noise levels when recording the quadratures and subtracting the shot
noise levels from the recorded raw values before extracting the quadratures from the raw
data and therefore this is not a big problem.
The local oscillator’s phase is controlled to measure along a certain desired direction in
phase space in the two spatial modes. The oscillator in the cases of spatial A and B is
locked to the DC point of the interference fringes with positive P and I values for mode A
and negative P and I values such that one is locked on the positive slope such that the
angle between the state and the LO is +90 degrees in spatial mode A and +90 degrees
52
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:61==
between the LO and the state in spatial mode B. Thus, one measures along the directions
of xA + pA in mode A and xB −pB in mode B. Next, one just changes the signs of P and
I and locks to the the directions xA −pA in mode A and xB + pB in mode B.
Figure 8.2 shows the variances in the extracted quadratures. There is indeed a spike
in the variances at temporal modes 100 and 112 in spatial mode A and 101 and 113 in
spatial mode B. This is an optimistic sign
Figure 8.2: The figure shows the variances in the recorded quadrature over 10000 traces
and 200 temporal modes with the subtraction on mode 100 of spatial mode A.
Figure 8.3 shows a zoomed in perspective of the variances.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 8.3: The figure shows the variances in the recorded quadrature over 10000 traces
and 200 temporal modes with the subtraction on mode 100 of spatial mode A­ Zoomed
in.
It is worthwhile discussing the structure of the spike in Variances. Firstly, one would ex­
pect to see some squeezing if the measurements were to be made along x and p quadra­
tures. However, since one is measuring along the diagonals, one cannot expect to see the
squeezing anymore since at the diagonals one gets closer to anti­squeezing. Next, note
that the subtraction occurs in spatial mode A at the 100th temporal mode. One should
expect that in the measurements considering spatial mode A. Furthermore the mode B is
delayed by one temporal mode length before BS2 is encountered. The subtraction occurs
in one of the modes of a split­squeezed state which is correlated too. Therefore, one sees
a similar spike in quadrature extracted for the 101st temporal mode. Now, at the BS2, the
kth mode in spatial mode A is further correlated to (k + 13)th mode in spatial mode B
which, in turn, is correlated to the (k +12)th mode in spatial mode A for N = 12. Now, this
would mean the variances should see an increase in the (k + 12)th and (k + 13)th mode
too. This is seen rather clearly in Figure 8.3.
While these spikes are re­assuring, these are not the signatures of non­Gaussianity. The
preferable measure would come from the reconstructed Wigner function of the reduced
states from the tomography of the temporal modes and then the computation of the Hilbert­
Schmidt distance. However, due to the time constraints and repeated failures in the exper­
iment’s progression, the tomography was not possible. Although relatively not as exciting,
there is another way to see non­Gaussian feature. This would be through studying the
distribution of the extracted quadratures and comparing it to that of a Gaussian.
The measure of non­Gaussianity in this case would be the excess kurtosis of the distri­
bution obtained. This is the fourth moment of a distribution and measures the heaviness
of the tails of the distribution with respect to a reference Gaussian. An excess kurtosis
of 0 corresponds to a Gaussian distribution while a negative or positive excess kurtosis
corresponds to non­Gaussian features in the distribution.
54
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:63==
Excess Kurtosis by Fisher’s definition is computed by:
Kexcess = µ4
σ4 −3
(8.1)
where, µ4 is the fourth moment of the distribution and σ is the standard deviation of the dis­
tribution calculated from the extracted quadratures. The definition is such that Gaussian
distributions have an excess kurtosis of 0.
It is then worth looking at the Kurtosis of the different temporal modes. The kurtosis in
this study is calculated by computing the variance and the mean of the quadrature distri­
bution for a given temporal mode and using Equation (8.1) to obtain the excess kurtosis.
This is shown in figure 8.4. There are evident negative spikes in the kurtosis around the
spots we expect the subtraction. One may also notice that there is almost no negative
excess kurtosis far away from the point of subtraction. The two nearest neighbours of the
subtraction mode show kurtosis and the kurtosis declines steadily away from the subtrac­
tion mode and completely disappears unless the modes considered are the nearest two
neighbours.
Figure 8.4: The figure shows the kurtosis corresponding to the recorded quadrature dis­
tributions over 10000 traces and 200 temporal modes with the subtraction on mode 100
of spatial mode A.
Figure 8.5 shows the measures of kurtosis for different temporal modes in spatial mode
B around the site of photon subtraction in spatial mode A at the 100th temporal mode.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 8.5: The figure shows the kurtosis corresponding to the recorded quadrature dis­
tributions over 10000 traces and 200 temporal modes with the subtraction on mode 100
of spatial mode B.
To highlight the contrast in the kurtosis, the kurtosis for states far away from the subtraction
is also displayed. One notices large dips in the kurtosis of the 100th mode and the 112th
mode in spatial mode A. While a similar trend is seen in modes 101st and 113th of spatial
mode B.
To verify this, one looks at the Variances in figure 8.3 and notes the spikes indicate ex­
actly where the kurtosis must dip. Furthermore, farther than 2 neighbours away from the
subtraction, the excess kurtosis is fairly low and indicates Gaussian characteristics.
It may be noticed that there is a sharp decrease in the kurtosis away from the subtraction.
Shown below are the histograms corresponding to the measurements of xA + pA and
xB + pB in figure 8.6 and figure 8.7. From the expectations that were set in section 7.5
and the rather rough predictions made in section 7.4, mode 112 in spatial mode A is the
second neighbour and should see a relatively smaller dip in excess kurtosis as compared
to mode 101 in spatial mode B and mode 113 in spatial mode B. This is also visible in
figures 8.4 and 8.5 if one considers spatial modes A and B separately and notes that
detector B was susceptible to heavy losses. This is discussed later in the chapter. The
relative decrease in excess Kurtosis in spatial mode A is much faster as compared to that
of spatial mode B.
Noting that the subtraction occurs at the 100th mode in spatial mode A, and the corre­
56
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:65==
(a) The probability distribution cor­
responding to the 100th temporal
mode in spatial mode A. The kurto­
sis is noted in the top right corner.
(b) The probability distribution cor­
responding to the 101st temporal
mode in spatial mode A. The kurto­
sis is noted in the top right corner.
Figure 8.6: The figure shows the distribution corresponding to the measurement of xA+pA
on spatial mode A and temporal modes 100, 101.
lations exist between A, k100, B, k101, A, k112, and A, k113 by virtue of the interactions at
the beam splitters, a non­Gaussian nature must be visible in atleast these modes. Non­
Gaussian nature in the distribution is clearly visible in temporal modes 100 and 112 of spa­
tial mode A and temporal modes 101 and 113 of spatial mode B. The temporal mode 101
in spatial mode A doesn’t show any non­Gaussianity since it is not a neighbour. However,
the mode at index 112 shows some degree of non­Gaussianity and it again disappears at
mode 113 as shown in figure 8.7.
(a) The probability distribution cor­
responding to the 112th temporal
mode in spatial mode A. The kurto­
sis is noted in the top right corner.
9
(b) The probability distribution cor­
responding to the 113th temporal
mode in spatial mode A. The kurto­
sis is noted in the top right corner.
Figure 8.7: The figure shows the distribution corresponding to the measurement of xA+pA
on spatial mode A and temporal modes 112, 113.
Similarly, in spatial mode B, one sees non­Gaussianity in temporal mode 101 and 113 but
almost nothing in temporal modes 100 and 112.
8.2
Setbacks.
One may also notice that the distributions, however hinting, are not the most convinc­
ing. Especially for spatial mode B the boundary seems very blurry between states that
are Gaussian and non­Gaussian. This is probably because of a very lossy detector on
spatial mode B and a lossy OPO. In their publication, Ra et. al. [8] have shown that the
Non Gaussian Cluster States
57
==PAGE:66==
(a) The probability distribution cor­
responding to the 100th temporal
mode in spatial mode B. The kurto­
sis is noted in the top right corner.
(b) The probability distribution cor­
responding to the 101st temporal
mode in spatial mode B. The kurto­
sis is noted in the top right corner.
Figure 8.8: The figure shows the distribution corresponding to the measurement of xB−pB
on spatial mode B and temporal modes 100, 101.
(a) The probability distribution cor­
responding to the 112th temporal
mode in spatial mode B. The kurto­
sis is noted in the top right corner.
9
(b) The probability distribution cor­
responding to the 113th temporal
mode in spatial mode B. The kurto­
sis is noted in the top right corner.
Figure 8.9: The figure shows the distribution corresponding to the measurement of xB−pB
on spatial mode B and temporal modes 112, 113.
non­Gaussianity of a reduced state is heavily influenced by losses. This can be compen­
sated for in post­processing by modelling losses a vacuum­mixing beam splitter with finite
transmission equal to the efficiency of the process that incurs loss. They have shown a
complete mismatch between expected non­Gaussianity and obtained non­Gaussianity in
case of no­optical loss correction in the experiment.
Shown in figure 8.10 are the power spectral densities recorded from detectors A and B.
The spectra are obtained by recording raw time traces far away from subtraction and fast
fourier transforming them to study their frequency responses to estimate the difference in
performance as compared to the original detector responses as shown by Larsen[18].
The spectra clearly show very different responses. If one considers the response of detec­
tor A reasonable (in agreement with Larsen[18]), the response of detector B is unusually
lossy and the amplitudes are significantly diminished which indicate a very lossy detector
and/or faulty electronics that couldn’t be repaired in time for a corrected and improved
result set.
Further more, figure 8.11 shows the gain­measurement of the OPO used as a source of
58
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:67==
(a) This power spectral density
curve was obtained from the mea­
surements on detector A.
(b) This power spectral density
curve was obtained from measure­
ments recorded on detector B.
Figure 8.10: The figure shows the recorded power spectral density of raw data after mea­
surements using a single squeezer.
squeezed light.
Figure 8.11: Amplification gain curve of the OPO measured right after the experiment.
The figure shows an increase in the threshold pump power of the OPO as compared to the
curve in figure 2.2. This is possibly because of a phase mismatch induced in the crystal
because of a change in temperature of the crystal which is controlled by a PID controller.
An attempt to correct the temperature was made in vain as the temperature showed large
oscillations upon committing large changes which seemed to show the adequate gain
levels.
The experiment was thus, prone to large losses that couldn’t be corrected in time.
In the experiment that was conducted as part of this study, there were no corrections for
optical losses that were made. In fact, much of the non­Gaussian characteristics would
be lost because of a lossy setup. Furthermore, the expected correlations would have also
Non Gaussian Cluster States
59
==PAGE:68==
suffered a reduction due to the said losses.
8.3
Conclusion
In conclusion, the study shows some theoretical models that were developed to investi­
gate and show certain characteristic non­Gaussian feautures and the inner workings that
manifest them in multi­mode entangled states. In particular, it was shown through the
Wigner function formalism along with some help from calculations in the Fock basis that
non­Gaussianity is highly dissipating and tends to localize, at best, to two neighbours.
This was also shown experimentally by measuring the excess kurtosis in a multi­mode
state generated using a single squeezing source.
The results seem to have small agreements, however, the experiment shows a rather
blurry result set with much left to question and doubt. For instance, the losses in the
setup and the experiment must be considered a root cause for unsatisfactory results and
the single squeezed state demands better understanding and modelling which wasn’t
planned. Lastly, an important factor to be considered is the accounting of losses while
post processing of acquired data in order to get the most optimal Wigner functions and
probability distributions. This would result in far better estimates of the measures of non­
Gaussianity.
As a prospect for future endeavours, such non­Gaussian features have been and would
continue to be extremely interesting prospects in terms of investigation. For instance,
these could allow one to implement non­Gaussian operations for a measurement based
quantum computer. Since non­Gaussianity is localized, as one would see as the cen­
tral theme of this study, one may construct large Gaussian clusters with localized non­
Gaussian sides and use both non­Gaussian and Gaussian features either close to the
site of subtraction or far away from it respectively.
These states could serve as effi­
cient resources towards universal quantum computing. As discussed in the ntrodcution,
a quantum advantage can only be reached with such non­Gaussian features and such an
investigation is worthwhile. Furthermore, the subtraction event from an EPR state would
have been more interesting to do. Also, subtractions further up in the cluster state would
be extremely interesting in terms of studying the fundamental nature of propagation of
non­Gaussianity.
60
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:69==
References
[1] Positive Wigner functions render classical simulation of quantum computation effi­
cient, Mari, A. & Eisert, J., Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 230503 (2012).
[2] Distilling Gaussian states with Gaussian operations is impossible, Eisert, J., Scheel,
S. & Plenio, M. B., Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 137903 (2002).
[3] When is the wigner quasi­probability density non­negative?, Rep. Math. Phys. 6, R.
L. Hudson, 249 (1974).
[4] Extending Hudson’s theorem to mixed quantum states, A. Mandilara, E. Karpov, and
N. J. Cerf,Phys. Rev. A 79, 062302 (2009.)
[5] Continuous variable quantum information: Gaussian states and beyond, Gerardo
Adesso, Sammy Ragy, and Antony R. Lee, Open Syst. Inf. Dyn. 21, 1440001 (2014).
[6] Akira Kitagawa, Masahiro Takeoka, Masahide Sasaki, and Anthony Chefles, Phys.
Rev. A 73, 042310, (2006).
[7] Computable genuine multimode entanglement measure:
Gaussian versus non­
Gaussian, Saptarshi Roy, Tamoghna Das, and Aditi Sen(De), Phys. Rev. A 102,
012421, (2020).
[8] Non­Gaussian quantum states of a multimode light field., Ra, YS., Dufour, A.,
Walschaers, M. et al, Nat. Phys. 16, 144–147 (2020).
[9] Gaussian states and operations – a quick reference,
Jonatan Bohr Brask,
arXiv:2102.05748v1 [quant­ph].
[10] Graphical calculus for Gaussian pure states,Nicolas C. Menicucci, Steven T. Flam­
mia, and Peter van Loock, Phys. Rev. A 83, 042335 (2011).
[11] Deterministic generation of a two­dimensional cluster state, Larsen et. al., Vol. 366,
Issue 6463, pp. 369­372, Science (2019).
[12] Quantifying non­Gaussianity for quantum information, Marco G. Genoni and Matteo
G. A. Paris, Phys. Rev. A 82, 052341 (2010).
[13] Introductory Quantum Optics, C. Gerry,Peter Knight, Cambridge University Press
(2012).
[14] Entanglement detection in the stabilizer formalism, Géza Tóth and Otfried Gühne,
Phys. Rev. A 72, 022340 (2005).
[15] Tailoring Non­Gaussian Continuous­Variable Graph States, Mattia Walschaers,
Supratik Sarkar, Valentina Parigi, and Nicolas Treps, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 220501
(2018).
[16] Non­Gaussian states and measurements for quantum information, Olivier Morin,
Quantum Physics [quant­ph], Université Pierre et Marie Curie ­ Paris VI (2013).
[17] Multimode theory of measurement­induced non­Gaussian operation on wideband
squeezed light: Analytical formula, Masahide Sasaki and Shigenari Suzuki, Phys.
Rev. A 73, 043807 (2006).
Non Gaussian Cluster States
61
==PAGE:70==
[18] Continuous variable cluster state computation, Mikkel Vilsbøll Larsen, DTU Physics.
(2021).
[19] Production and applications of non­Gaussian quantum states of light, A. I. Lvovsky,
Philippe Grangier, Alexei Ourjoumtsev, Valentina Parigi, Masahide Sasaki, Rosa
Tualle­Brouri, arXiv:2006.16985 [quant­ph].
[20] Peres­Horodecki Separability Criterion for Continuous Variable Systems, R. Simon,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2726 (2000)
62
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:71==
A
The Baker­Haussdorf Lemma and some
related theorems.
The Baker­Haussdorf Lemma has been consistently used in this text to obtain transfor­
mation properties of unitary operators. The Lemma is contained in the following transfor­
mation rule:
”Given two hermitian operators A and G on a Hilbert space H the following identity holds
ei ˆGλ ˆAe−i ˆGλ = ˆA + iλ[ ˆG, ˆA] + (iλ)2
2! [ ˆG, [ ˆG, ˆA]] + ... + (iλ)n
n! [ ˆG, ..., [ ˆG, ˆA]] + ...
(A.1)
”
Related to the Baker Haussdorf Lemma is the disentangling theorem which entails the
following relation between two operators ˆA and ˆB on a Hilbert space H such that bot ˆA
and ˆB commute with their commutators:
e
ˆ
Ae
ˆB = e
ˆ
A+ ˆB+ 1
2 [ ˆ
A, ˆB]
(A.2)
Non Gaussian Cluster States
63
==PAGE:72==
B
Non­Gaussianity from the photon
number decomposition.
One starts with the photon number decomposition of a two mode squeezed state in modes
numbered 3 and 4 given by:
|r2⟩=
∑
n
(−1)n tanhn(r)
cosh(r) |n⟩3 |n⟩4
(B.1)
Now consider a beam spliiter of transmission T and reflection R that diverts photons from
mode 3 onto an On/Off type detector. Such a beam splitter divides mode 3 three into
two beams randomly so that there is a binomial event that may be constructed out of the
photon number j directed towards the detector (mode 5) and the n−j along transmission
(mode 3). The division is written as:
|n⟩3 −→
∑
j
(−1)j√nCj0T
n−j
2 R
j
2 |n −j⟩3 |j⟩5
(B.2)
There is now a 3 mode Gaussian state in the picture given by:
|ψ⟩=
∑
n
j=∞
∑
j=1
(−1)n+j tanhn(r)
cosh(r)
√nCj0T
n−j
2 R
j
2 |n −j⟩3 |n⟩4 |j⟩5
(B.3)
Consider an on/off detector now g+iven by ˆΠ = I −|0⟩⟨0|. According to the Born rule
for measurements, a detection event by the on/off detector is considered a measurement
and the initial state given by ˆρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ| must collapse into the following two state:
ρnG−3,4 = Tr[ˆΠρ]
Pdetection
(B.4)
where, Pdetection is the probability of detection of atleast one photon by the on/off detector
given by:
Pdetection = Tr[(I3
⊗
I4
⊗ˆΠ)ρ]
(B.5)
Now if one denotes, αn = (−1)n tanhn(r)
cosh(r) and ϵj = (−1)j√nCj0T
n−j
2 R
j
2 , one may write the
state associated with the 3 mode Gaussian state as:
ρ =
∑
n,j,m,k
αnα∗
mϵjϵ∗
k |n −j⟩3 |n⟩4 |j⟩5 ⟨m −k|3 ⟨m|4 ⟨k|5
(B.6)
The trace is then equivalent to the operation:
Tr5[(I −|0⟩⟨0|)
∑
n,j,m,k
αnα∗
mϵjϵ∗
k |n −j⟩3 |n⟩4 |j⟩5 ⟨m −k|3 ⟨m|4 ⟨k|5]
(B.7)
64
Non Gaussian Cluster States
==PAGE:73==
where the trace is done over the 5th mode partially. The non­Gaussian state operator
then takes the form.
ρnG−3,4 =
1
Pdetection
∑
n,m
αnα∗
m|ϵj|2 |n −j⟩3 |n⟩4 ⟨m −j|3 ⟨m|4
(B.8)
up to the normalizing constant 1/Pdetection as shown in B.5. The second term in the trace
vanishes if one assumes that atleast one photon must be reflected from the beam splitter
with a finite reflectance.
For a single photon detector, B.8 takes a simpler form:
ρnG−3,4 =
1
Pdetection
∑
n,m
αnαm|ϵ1|2 |n −1⟩3 |n⟩4 ⟨m −1|3 ⟨m|4
(B.9)
and imposing the condition that the Trace of a density matrix must be 1, one reaches the
conclusion that m = n, thus yielding:
ρnG−3,4 =
1
Pdetection
∑
n
|αnϵ1|2 |n −1⟩3 |n⟩4 ⟨n −1|3 ⟨n|4
(B.10)
The state remains correlated and shows non­Gaussian statistics and would be generally
mixed if one decides to extract reduced states.
To obtain a non­Gaussian cluster from this non­Gaussian state by mixing on a beam
splitter, it only remains to use B.1 twice for different mode numbers to obtain two mode
squeezed vacua and interfering the desired modes on beam splitters as shown in chapter
4 and 5.
Non Gaussian Cluster States
65
==PAGE:74==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Fysikvej, Building 307
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.fysik.dtu.dk
