==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Quantitative stock market prediction
using Ita FinBert: A Model for Italian
Financial Text sentiment analysis
Ilaria Leoni (s182345)
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Title: Quantitative stock market prediction using Ita FinBert: A Model for Italian
Financial Text sentiment analysis
Author: Ilaria Leoni (s182345)
DTU Supervisor: Prof. Nina Lange
UCL Supervisor: Mr. Denis de Montigny
UCL Supervisor: Prof. Philip Treleaven
Project Period: February 1st, 2021 - July 16st, 2021
Education: Master of Science
ECTS: 32.5
Field: Mathematical Modelling and Computation
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This MSc thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a MSc degree in Mathematical Modelling and Computation focus
line Machine learning and signal processing.
Kongens Lyngby, July 16, 2021
Ilaria Leoni (s182345)
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge Professor Nina Lange, Professor Philip Treleaven and Mr
Denis De Montigny for being outstanding and inspiring supervisors.
Their insightful feedback pushed me to sharpen my knowledge and brought my work
to a higher level.
==PAGE:8==
To my family,
for the unconditional love and support.
==PAGE:9==
Abstract
The primary purpose of this thesis is to investigate the application of Natural Lan-
guage Processing and Machine Learning techniques to show the impact of the com-
pany’s reports on its short-term stock prices.
The inspection of a company report is essential and time-consuming. My study
is a deep investigation on the automation of this process, together with the bene-
fits of highlighting the predictability of a company stock return. In conclusion, the
implementation of the system will be integrated into the asset management real-life
application.
The system I propose is a novel method characterized by constructing an Ital-
ian Financial Phrase Bank, followed by the implementation of a Sentiment Analysis
model, Italian FinBert, combined with a Long Short Term Memory networks LSTM.
In the beginning, the focus of the investigation is centred on the automatic web
scraping of the reports and in the construction of the phrase bank.
The Italian
FinBert model is fine-tuned on the Italian Financial Phrase Bank. Furthermore, the
NLP and the LSTM models are trained and tested on the top Italian Stock Exchange
companies.
Contribution to Science
• Automated system to extract report and sensitive information form the Italian
stock exchange centralized storage system.
• Italian Financial Phrase Bank a collection of ∼4000 sentences annotated by
people with adequate background knowledge on financial markets.
• Fist redaction of the promising Italian FinBert model for predicting stock price
based on companies report and tweets.
• Evidence of the correlation between Italian Stock Exchange market notices of
a company and its short-term stock prediction.
• Profitable strategy using natural language processing and long short-term mem-
ory neural network for asset manager.
==PAGE:10==
viii
==PAGE:11==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
Abstract
vii
Contribution to Science
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
Contents
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Objectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Research Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background and Literature Review
5
2.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Data Sourcing and Description
13
3.1
Company Reports Web Scraping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
BIt Market Notice and sentences extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Yahoo Finance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Financial Phrase Bank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Sentiment classification model
33
4.1
Italian Bert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Italian FinBert . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5
Stock Movements Predictive Model
41
5.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
LSTM recurrent neural network for stock market . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
==PAGE:12==
x
Contents
6
Trading Strategy
57
6.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.2
Trading Strategy Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7
Conclusion
93
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
A
Bibliography
95
B
An Appendix
97
B.1
Programs for Web Scraping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
B.2
Programs for Ita FinBert
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
B.3
Programs for LSTM Stock Prediction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
105
B.4
Programs for Trading Strategy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
110
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
This chapter provides an overview of this thesis by discussing the motivation behind
the research problem, the objectives, contributions of this study and the structure of
this thesis.I first begin by briefly introducing the motivation behind my investigation
and its utility. The chapter then outlines the objectives and the scientific contributions
of this work. The final chapter concludes by outlining the thesis structure.
1.1
Research Motivation
Assets management is a key element studied in finance. The main objective of asset
management is to maximize the return through financial and investment strategies. It
is key for financial experts to design new methods that maximize profit given a set of
limits. Nowadays, researchers employ their financial expertise to examine electronic
financial information and data to generate the best accurate forecasting strategy. The
current standard used in financial practice is the manual reading and scoring of finan-
cial information. This task requires significant mental effort and resources. It results
imprecise, leading to neglect of some events which might be of some importance.
The development of automation derived from the advancement of Artificial Intelli-
gence in finance is transforming the way institution and hedge funds approach invest-
ments. Big Data and AI have been revolutionary technologies that improve capabili-
ties and reduce the dependence on human knowledge.
In my research, I aim to develop a quantitative stock trading strategy based on the
influence and the impact of financial reports and news on the Italian stock exchange.
Previous studies focused the attention on the United State stock market, studying
the impact of 10-Q reports on trading system performance [Chouliaras].
My investigation approaches the application of Natural language processing to deeply
understanding the sentiment of Italian price-sensitive information and afterwards pre-
dict stock return. The Commissione Nazionale per le Società e la Borsa (CONSOB)
is the public authority responsible for regulating the Italian financial markets. Com-
panies are obliged by CONSOB to disclose regularly financial information.
Price
Sensitive reports are companies announcements whose control must be regulated
because of the presence of inside information, that is, non-public information con-
cerning the company or its group. Therefore, Its publication has a big impact on
the company stock price.
A reasonable investor would use it for the purposes of
its investment decisions as it is capable of significantly affecting the price of finan-
==PAGE:14==
2
1 Introduction
cial instruments. 1INFO represents the first centralized storage system authorized
by Consob where companies registered are required to publish sensitive reports. The
analysis of these reports and news are monumental time-consuming tasks even for the
big edge founds. Building an automated system to analyze and interpret financial
text is a game-changer tool for asset management.
1.2
Research Objectives
The main objective of this research is to investigate a new strategy for stock return
predictions of companies by using information from reports and news. To achieve
this, a series of tasks have been carried out:
• Design of a robust, fast and eﬀicient Natural language processing
algorithm for sentiment analysis of financial text
The design of an Italian FinBert algorithm with these characteristics is the
principal goal of this project.
• Design of long short-term memory neural network for stock predic-
tion
A pivotal goal of this project is to construct a quantitative trading strategy
based on a combination of NLP and LSTM models.
• Development of a fully automated software pipeline
Design of a full stream starting from the web scraping and concluding with a
Backtesting assessment. Using the profitable trading strategy, Italian FinBert
combining with an LSTM network.
1.3
Research Experiments
The thesis is approached into multiple steps:
1. The first part aims to retrieve the price-sensitive report and news from 1INFO,
eMarket and Twitter. The dataset consists of reports and board members tweets
for Italian Stock Exchange companies. In addition, I obtain financial historical
information from the Yahoo Finance website.
2. In the second part, I conduct the modelling of the Italian FinBert guaranteed
by the construction of the Italian Financial Phrasebank.
3. In the last part, I develop a stock price forecasting model given the financial
sentiment data and historical information regarding the company price.
==PAGE:15==
1.4 Thesis Structure
3
1.4
Thesis Structure
The thesis structure is characterized by 7 chapters, the bulk of the work, and 2
appendices with supplementary contents. The topic of each chapter is summarized
in the following list.
• Chapter 2 gives information about the state of the art, describing the main
technical concepts and financial aspect needed for a thorough understanding of
the problem we tackle in this work.
• Chapter 3 provides the data sourcing and description.
The three datasets
utilized in this work are detailed, together with the process of web scraping and
data manipulation needed for the artificial intelligence approach I decided to
undertake.
• Chapter 4 consists of an illustration of the technical methods employed. The
starting point is a flowchart with a shallow presentation of all the steps carried
out, then each step is treated individually in a mathematical perspective.
• Chapter 5 presents the theory of artificial intelligence needed for building the
models. The scope of this chapter is to give an overview of the general methods
together with a mathematical justification for their use. At the same time, I
focus particularly on the concepts constituting the major building blocks for
our own network.
• Chapter 6 introduces a trading strategy simulated on the 2020-2021 period
based on the stock predictions of my model output. I then present the results
of the strategy that display the performance of my models under given assump-
tions.
• Chapter 7 presents the conclusions drawn from carrying out this project and
some ideas deemed interesting for future work.
• Appendix A contains the bibliography
• Appendix B contains the programs written to implement the web scraping,
the Italian FinBert, the stock prediction model and the trading strategy, written
in the Python programming language.
==PAGE:16==
4
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2
Background and
Literature Review
This chapter provides a description and explanation of the different concepts men-
tioned in this research work. Furthermore, I dive into an exploration of the related
work that inspired me.
2.1
Background
2.1.1
Machine Learning
Machine Learning is the field of artificial intelligence study which gives computers
the ability to learn without being explicitly programmed, as have been described by
Arthur Samuel in the early 60ies.
An American computer scientist Tom Mitchell
provides a more technical definition: ”A computer program is said to learn from ex-
perience E with respect to some class of tasks T and performance measure P, if its
performance at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with experience E.”
The machine learning algorithms gain their power from the input data and using
statistical analysis predict an output. These methods are extremely robust and pow-
erful for automating tasks or defining new relationships that would otherwise be very
diﬀicult for the human to infer due to the amount of knowledge and limitations of
the human brain. The Machine Learning prediction algorithms are categorized into
three types: supervised learning algorithms, unsupervised learning algorithms, and
reinforcement learning algorithms.
2.1.1.1
Supervised Learning
Supervised Learning is a data mining task of inferring a function that maps an input
to an output from labelled training data. It is an iterative process where the algorithm
maps from x to y using labelled training examples (x,y).
The Supervised learning problems are categorized into regression and classification
problems and include linear regression, logistic regression, and neural networks. In the
regression problems, the goal is to predict within a continuous output, meaning that
==PAGE:18==
6
2 Background and Literature Review
we are trying to map input variables to some continuous function. In a classification
problem, the goal is to predict results in a discrete output.
2.1.1.2
Unsupervised Learning
Unsupervised Learning is a data mining task of inferring a function that maps an
input to output from untagged data. It is an iterative process where the algorithm
maps from x to y untagged data examples (x,y).
The Unsupervised learning problems are categorized into clustering and association
problems and include K-means clustering, k-nearest neighbours, anomaly detection
and neural networks. In clustering problems, the goal is to group the objects into
clusters such that objects with the most similarities remain in a group. In an associ-
ation problem, the goal is used for finding the relationships between the set of items
that occurs together in the dataset.
2.1.1.3
Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning is a data mining task of inferring a function that maps an
input to output from untagged data. The goal is to take actions in an environment
in order to maximize the notion of cumulative reward. Indeed, the algorithm learns
by trial and error.
It tries out lots of combination and is rewarded or penalized
depending on whether its behaviours help or hinder it from reaching its objective.
2.1.2
Deep Learning
Deep Learning is a machine learning technique that achieves great power and flexi-
bility by representing the world as a nested hierarchy of concepts, with each concept
defined in relation to simpler concepts, and more abstract representations computed
in terms of less abstract ones. It solves problems by breaking the desired complicated
mapping into a series of nested simple mappings, each described by a different layer
of the model.
The input is presented as the visible layer because it contains the
variables that we are able to observe. Then is followed by a series of hidden layers
that extracts increasingly abstract features from the input. The key components of
neural networks are presented, namely feedforward networks.
2.1.3
Feedforward Neural Networks
Feedforward neural networks are the principal block for deep learning models. The
goal of a feedforward network is to approximate some function f ∗which can be for
instance a classifier y = f ∗(x) maps an input x to a category y. The feedforward
network defines the mapping as y = f ∗(x; θ) and learns the values of the parameters
θ that best approximate the function. The word feedforward is due to the absence
of feedback connections in which outputs of the model are fed back into itself. When
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Background
7
such feedback connections are present, the networks are defined as recurrent neural
networks. Feedforward neural networks are associated with a directed acyclic graph,
as the network, describing how the functions are composed together. For example,
if we have three functions f (1)f (2)f (3) connected in the network, they are connected
to form a chain:f(x) = f (3)(f (2)(f (1)(x))). Then, they are defined as f (1) the first
layer of the network, f (2) second layer of the network and f (3) the third layer of the
network. The total length of the network gives the depth of the model. The final
layer of the network is typically the output layer. The behaviour of the layers is not
specified, thus, the network decides what is the best configuration to stabilize on in
order to implement an optimal approximation of the f ∗. The intermediate layers are
called hidden layers since the training data does not show the desired output for each
of these layers. An example of deep neural networks architecture is shown in the
Figure 2.1 bellow.
Figure 2.1: Deep Neural Networks Architecture.
==PAGE:20==
8
2 Background and Literature Review
2.1.3.1
Recurrent Neural Networks
Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) are a special class of Neural Networks that allow
previous outputs to be shared as inputs while having hidden states, which therefore
allows them to remember information and learn it from the previous step.
They
are a network with loops insides allowing information to persist. In the Figure 2.2
below the recurrent cell is shown. It is possible to see here how the different time
inputs x0, x1, x2, ..., xt are related to the correspondent outputs of the recurrent cell
h0, h1, h2, ..., ht which also take into account the temporal relations.
Figure 2.2: Recurrent cell.
2.1.3.2
Long short-term memory
Long Short Term Memory networks (LSTMs) are a special form of RNNs. They a ca-
pable of learning long-term dependencies by using special units. LSTMs are explicitly
designed to avoid the long-term dependency problem. LSTM cells, being recurrent
units, take into account the information from the past inputs. Indeed, the most impor-
tant element of the LSTM is its memory cell, which is able to maintain information
in memory for a long period and its gates which can control which information is
entered. The structure of the network structure is shown in Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: LSTM network.
In the LSTM figure is visible how the inputs xt−1, xt, xt+1 go through a set of
operations summarized by the flowchart present within the LSTM cell and result
into the correspondent outputs ht−1, ht, ht+1. The key to LSTMs is the cell state,
It crosses the entire chain, with only some minor linear interactions.
The LSTM
does have the ability to remove or add information to the cell state. This process is
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Background
9
regulated by the called gates. The gates are made of a sigmoid neural net layer and
a pointwise multiplication operation. The sigmoid layer generates numbers between
zero and one, describing the percentage of each component that should be should be
completely kept. These components are shown in the Figure 2.4 bellow.
Figure 2.4: Cell state and sigmoid.
• Input gate It establishes the information to be added to the cell state. That
selection takes place by obtaining the output elements of a sigmoid applied
to the linearly transformed concatenation between previous outputs ht1 and
current inputs xt.
Figure 2.5: Input gate.
• Forget gate This component determines the information be deleted from the
cell state. It is achieved through the application of a sigmoid function to the
linearly transformed previous outputs and current inputs.
==PAGE:22==
10
2 Background and Literature Review
Figure 2.6: Forget gate.
• Cell state updating The cell state is updated, in a measure determined by the
input gate, with information from the current time-step inputs and the previous
time-step outputs. Information from the previous cell state is kept or deleted
according to the forget gate.
Figure 2.7: Cell state updating.
• Output gate It defines the information of the cell state relevant to output from
the LSTM cell. This selection takes place through the output of the element
by a sigmoid applied to a linear transformation of inputs and previous outputs
concatenated. The LSTM cell outputs are determined by a hyperbolic tangent
from the current step ht.
Figure 2.8: Output gate.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Background
11
2.1.4
Natural Language Processing
Natural Language Processing is a branch of computer science and artificial intelligence
studying the interaction between computers and human language. The ultimate goal
of NLP is to explore how computers can be used to understand and manipulates
natural language text or speech to perform multiple investigations.
It works by performing multiple linguistic analyses such as syntactic and semantic
analysis of the text to identify and extract natural language rules that are then
converted to a form that is understandable by the computer.
The NLP algorithm is used to identify and extract the natural language rules such
that the unstructured language data is converted into a computer-readable structure.
This is done by applying sentence segmentation and word tokenization.
2.1.4.1
Word Embeddings
Word embeddings are considered to be one of the key breakthroughs of the NLP
methods. It is an extremely useful tool for natural language processing technique
that allows words with similar meaning to have a similar representation. The word
embedding typically is presented in a form of a real-valued vector that encodes the
meaning of the word such that the words that are closer in the vector space are
expected to be similar in meaning.
2.1.4.2
Bert
Bert is a powerful natural language processing framework designed to help computers
understand the meaning of ambiguous language in the text by using surrounding
text to establish context.Bert stands for Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers. It is designed to pre-train deep bidirectional representations from the
unlabeled text.Bert is pre-trained on different NLP tasks and it excels at several
functions as for example the sentiment classification.
==PAGE:24==
12
2 Background and Literature Review
2.2
Literature Review
Nowadays, Internet is a large source of information and they are available on a con-
tinuous basis. Companies and company board members generate content available
publicly and easily reachable. This information and rumours have two important ad-
vantages: they are easy to reach and they express the user sentiment. Several studies
investigate the relationship between sentiment and market behaviour.
Since the early 2000s, studies demonstrated ”The market reacts immediately to
news about capital expenditure plans”. Since then, researchers conducted content
analysis experiment on the annual reports. They found reports as an opportunity
to communicate information about the management’s trustworthiness and financial
position. So they became an interesting object of investigation.
[Terlok] characterize the relationship between the content of media reports and
daily stock market activity focusing his investigation on the immediate influence of
the Wall Street Journals on U.S. stock market returns. He reaches a conclusion in the
paper that news media content can predict movements in broad indicators of stock
market activity. He constructs a simple measure of media pessimism. From there
he estimated the links between the measure and the stock market in basic vector
auto-regressions (VARs).
The research in this field come a long way and the manual approach and the
human scoring has been replaced by the automated approach. New techniques of
text processing broke new ground as automatic sentiment and sentiment analysis.
The revolution was with the introduction of machine learning algorithms for language
processing, know as NLP algorithms. These systems are able to analyze multilingual
textual corpora and attribute a sentiment level.
In 2011, [Loughran and Mcdonald’s] investigated the role of financial text for
stock return prediction. In order to achieve this goal, the authors designed a complex
approach. They started collecting 10-Ks reports on the New York Stock Exchange
then the selected documents were then parsed using the Bag-of-Words methods into
word counts and vectors of words.
They add to Fin-Neg five other word lists: positive (Fin-Pos), uncertainty (Fin-
Unc), litigious(Fin-Lit), strong modal words to express (MW-Strong) and weak modal
words(MW-Weak). The approach used for creating these lists consists of first exhaus-
tively examining them on a business and financial level. Then they consider the most
likely category of those appearing in at least 5% of the documents.
The tests were conducted to observe the impact of the created word lists on stock
return. The results obtained from this investigation was interesting and show the
importance of research on the financial textual analysis domain.
In 2019, [Araci] introduce a new algorithm for financial sentiment analysis, Fin-
BERT. A language model based on BERT to tackle NLP tasks in the financial domain.
My strategy would be combining all the previous studies [Tetlock] and [Loughran
and Mcdonald’s] ideas with the powerful recent technologies to attempt a new inves-
tigation on the Italian Stock Exchange to predict close price.
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3
Data Sourcing and
Description
In this chapter, I describe how I employed Web scraping to extract the company reports
and the Twitter API to get company and board members tweets. All these data were
parsed and transformed to be suitable for my analysis. Finally, I discussed stock prices
extraction using the Yahoo Finance API.
3.1
Company Reports Web Scraping
The Italian Companies and Exchange Commission (CONSOB) government authority
of Italy responsible for regulating the Italian securities market. The mission of the
authority is to protect investors, maintain fair, orderly, and eﬀicient markets, and
facilitate capital formation.
The Price Sensitive reports are the announcements that listed companies and the
subjects that control them must disseminate in the presence of inside information,
that is, non-public information concerning the listed company or its group and that
a reasonable investor it would use for the purposes of its investment decisions as it
is capable of significantly affecting the price of financial instruments. CONSOB in
agreement with the Italian stock exchange regulate the content of the price-sensitive
reports in order to ensure parity of information and to adopt any suspension mea-
sures. For the regulated information transmission and storage, the companies use
two diffusion systems eMarket STORAGE available at www.emarketstorage.com and
1INFO available at www.1info.it managed by Computershare S.p.A.
As I have decided to conduct our experiment on the current top companies of the
Italian Stock Exchange. The first step of my data extraction process consisted of
getting all the necessary information of these companies selected.
==PAGE:26==
14
3 Data Sourcing and Description
Some of the company information are stored in Table 3.1 bellow containing their
detail:
Symbol
Sector
Employees
City
Industry
Website
CNHI.MI
Industrials
64016
London
Farm e Heavy Construction Machinery
http://www.cnhindustrial.com
EXO.MI
Consumer Cyclical
263284
Amsterdam
Auto Manufacturers
http://www.exor.com
RACE.MI
Consumer Cyclical
4558
Maranello
Auto Manufacturers
http://www.ferrari.com
STLA.MI
Consumer Cyclical
204000
Lijnden
Auto Manufacturers
http://www.stellantis.com
UCG.MI
Financial Services
82003
Milan
Banks
http://www.unicreditgroup.eu
ENEL.MI
Utilities
66438
Rome
Utilities
http://www.enel.com
G.MI
Financial Services
72644
Trieste
Insurance
http://www.generali.com
STM.MI
Financial Services
72644
Trieste
Insurance
http://www.generali.com
Table 3.1: Companies overview.
Some of the financial information are stored in Table 3.2 bellow containing their
detail:
RegularMarketPrice
AnnualDividendYield
MarketVolume
BookValue
Beta
DividendRate
14,125
0,009577865
64016
1186611
1,727807
0,11
70,2
0,006080317
64016
201171
1,50628
0,43
172,95
0,0050086654
128286
10,509
0,904278
0,87
16,258
7263521
24,006
0,1
10,5
0,011435105
7296741
27,114
2,013653
0,12
8,056
0,043964144
14911285
3,2
0,829601
0,36
16,815
0,059958447
3195260
19,13
1,282905
1,01
30,65
0,007835455
952054
9,493
1,354997
0,14
Table 3.2: Companies financial overview.
In the section bellow a company summary has been carried out:
• CNH Industrial N.V. designs, produces, markets, sells, and finances agri-
cultural and construction equipment, trucks, commercial vehicles, buses, and
specialty vehicles in North America, Europe, South America, and internation-
ally. It operates through five segments: Agriculture, Construction, Commercial
and Specialty Vehicles, Powertrain, and Financial. The Agriculture segment
offers farm machinery and implements that include two-and four-wheel drive
tractors, crawler tractors, combines, cotton pickers, grape and sugar cane har-
vesters, hay and forage equipment, planting and seeding equipment, soil prepa-
ration and cultivation implements, and material handling equipment under the
New Holland Agriculture, Case IH, STEYR, Miller, Kongskilde,K-Line, and JF
brands. The Construction segment offers excavators, crawler dozers, graders,
wheel and backhoe loaders, and skid steer and compact track loaders under the
CASE Construction and New Holland Construction brands. The Commercial
and Specialty Vehicles segment provides light, medium, and heavy vehicles for
==PAGE:27==
3.1 Company Reports Web Scraping
15
the transportation and distribution of goods under the IVECO brand; com-
muter buses and city-buses under the IVECO BUS and Heuliez Bus brands;
quarry and mining equipment under the IVECO ASTRA brand; firefighting ve-
hicles under the Magirus brand; and vehicles for civil defense and peace-keeping
missions under the Iveco Defence Vehicles brand. The Powertrain segment of-
fers engines, transmission systems, and axles for on- and off-road applications,
as well as for marine and power generation under the FPT Industrial brand.
The Financial Services segment provides and administers retail financing to
customers for the purchase or lease of new and used industrial equipment or
vehicles, and other equipment; wholesale financing, which consists primarily of
floor plan financing; and trade receivables factoring services. The company is
based in London, the United Kingdom. The information regarding the board
members are stored in Tables 3.3 and 3.4 bellow containing their details:
CNH Industrial
Board
Name
Twitter
Chair
Suzanne Heywood
@SuzanneHeywood
Non-Executive Director
Léo W. Houle
Director
Howard W. Buffett
@hbuffett
Director
Tufan Erginbilgic
Director
Alessandro Nasi
Independent Director
Lorenzo Simonelli
@simonelli-l
Independent Director
Vagn Sørensen
Independent Director
Jacqueline A. Tammenoms Bakker
Independent Director
Jacques Theurilla
Table 3.3: CNH Industrial: Board of Directors.
Company account
Twitter
CNH Industrial
@CNHIndustrial
Table 3.4: CNH Industrial: Company account.
• Exor N.V., together with its subsidiaries, engages in the luxury goods, reinsur-
ance, automotive, agricultural equipment, construction equipment, commercial
vehicles, and professional football businesses. The company designs, engineers,
produces, and sells luxury performance sports cars under the Ferrari brand;
and reinsures agriculture, aviation/space, casualty, catastrophe, energy, engi-
neering, financial, marine, motor, multiline, and property risks, as well as pro-
vides mortality, longevity, accident and health, and alternative risk products.
It also offers automotive vehicles and mobility solutions under the Abarth, Alfa
Romeo, Chrysler, Citroen, Dodge, DS, Fiat, Fiat Professional, Jeep, Lancia,
Maserati, Mopar, Opel, Peugeot, Ram, and Vauxhall brands; and retail and
dealer financing, and rental services for the automotive sector, as well as sells
service parts. In addition, the company designs, produces, markets, sells, and
==PAGE:28==
16
3 Data Sourcing and Description
finances agricultural and construction equipment, trucks, commercial vehicles,
and buses; specialty vehicles for firefighting, defense, and other applications; en-
gines, transmissions, and axles for vehicles; and engines for marine and power
generation applications. Further, it manages professional football teams; pub-
lishes The Economist, La Repubblica and La Stampa, Il Secolo XIX, and other
newspapers and magazines; offers digital and advertising, and conference and
electronic services; and operates three national radio stations, including Ra-
dio Deejay. Additionally, the company provides furniture, homeware, apparel,
leather goods, jewelry, and accessories.
It operates in the Netherlands, the
United States, Brazil, Canada, Poland, Serbia, Turkey, Mexico, Argentina, the
Czech Republic, India, China, Australia, and South Africa. The company was
founded in 1899 and is headquartered in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Exor
N.V. is a subsidiary of Giovanni Agnelli B.V.The information regarding the
board members are stored in Table 3.5 bellow containing their details:
Exor
Board
Name
Twitter
Chief Executive Oﬀicer
John Elkann
@JohnElkann
Non-Executive Director
Alessandro Nasi
Director
Andrea Agnelli
Director
Joseph Y. Bae
Director
Melissa Bethell
Director
Marc Bolland
Director
Laurance Debroux
Director
Ginevra Elkann
@GinevraElkann
Director
António Horta-Osório
@AntnioHortaOsr1
Table 3.5: Exor: Board of Directors.
• Ferrari N.V., through its subsidiaries, designs, engineers, produces, and sells
luxury performance sports cars. The company offers sports, GT, and special
series cars; limited edition hypercars; one-off and track cars; and Icona cars. It
also provides racing cars; and spare parts and engines, as well as after sales,
repair, maintenance, and restoration services for cars. In addition, the com-
pany licenses its Ferrari brand to various producers and retailers of luxury and
lifestyle goods; Ferrari World, a theme park in Abu Dhabi, the United Arab
Emirates; and Ferrari Land Portaventura, a theme park in Europe. Further,
it provides direct or indirect finance and leasing services to retail clients and
dealers; manages race tracks, as well as owns and manages two museums in
Maranello and Modena, Italy; and develops and sells a line of apparel and
accessories through its monobrand stores.
As of December 31, 2020, it had
a total of 36 retail Ferrari stores, including 18 franchised stores and 18 owned
stores. The company also sells its products through a network of 168 authorized
dealers operating 188 points of sale worldwide, as well as through its Website,
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Company Reports Web Scraping
17
store.ferrari.com. Ferrari N.V. was founded in 1947 and is headquartered in
Maranello, Italy.The information regarding the board members are stored in
Tables 3.6 and 3.7 bellow containing their details:
Ferrari
Board
Name
Twitter
Chief Executive Oﬀicer
John Elkann
@JohnElkann
Director
Piero Ferrari
Director
Delphine Arnault
Director
Francesca Bellettini
Director
Eddy Cue
@cue
Director
Sergio Duca
Director
John Galantic
Director
Maria Patrizia Grieco
Director
Adam Keswick
Table 3.6: Ferrari: Board of Directors.
Company account
Twitter
Ferrari
@Ferrari
Scuderia Ferrari
@ScuderiaFerrari
Ferrari Races
@FerrariRaces
Ferrari Races
@FerrariRaces
AF Corse
@AFCorse
Table 3.7: Ferrari: Company account.
• Stellantis N.V., engages in the design, engineering, manufacture, distribution,
and sale of passenger vehicles, pickup trucks, SUVs, and light commercial vehi-
cles worldwide. It offers luxury, premium, and mainstream vehicles, as well as
financial services, and parts and services; and provides retail and dealer financ-
ing, leasing, and rental services. The company offers its products under the
Abarth, Alfa Romeo, Chrysler, Dodge, Fiat, Fiat Professional, Jeep, Maserati,
Opel, Ram, Free2Move, CitroÃ«n, DS Automobiles, Lancia, Mopar, Peugeot,
Vauxhall, and Leasys brands. The company sells its products directly, as well
as through distributors and dealers. Stellantis N.V. was founded in 1899 and is
based in Lijnden, the Netherlands.The information regarding the board mem-
bers are stored in Tables 3.8 and 3.9 bellow containing their details:
==PAGE:30==
18
3 Data Sourcing and Description
Stellantis
Board
Name
Twitter
Chief Executive Oﬀicer
Carlos Tavares
President
John Elkann
Vice president
Robert Peugeot
Independent director
Henri de Castries
Non-executive director
Andrea Agnelli
Non-executive director
Fiona Clare Cicconi
Non-executive director
Wan Ling Martello
Non-executive director
Jacques de Saint-Exupéry
Non-executive director
Kevin Scott
Financial director
Richard Palmer
Table 3.8: Stellantis: Board of Directors.
Company account
Twitter
Stellantis
@StellantisIT
Table 3.9: Stellantis: Company account.
• UniCredit S.p.A. operates as a commercial bank.
The company operates
through Commercial Banking Italy, Commercial Banking Germany, Commer-
cial Banking Austria, Corporate
Investment Banking, and Central Eastern
Europe segments.
It offers retail, corporate, and private banking services;
investment services; leasing and factoring services; transactional, investment,
and credit products and services; insurance solutions; and structured financ-
ing, hedging, and treasury solutions. The company also provides equity and
debt capital market, corporate finance and advisory, syndication, and leverage
buy-out services; and project and commodity, real estate, structured trade and
export, and acquisition finance services, as well as wealth management services.
In addition, it is involved in the structuring of products, such as FX, rates,
equities, and credit products; and provision of cash management, e-banking,
supply chain finance, global securities, and mobile banking services, as well as
trade finance products. The company operates in Italy, Other European coun-
tries, America, Asia, and internationally. The company was formerly known as
Unicredito Italiano S.p.A and changed its name to UniCredit S.p.A. UniCredit
S.p.A. was founded in 1870 and is headquartered in Milan, Italy.The informa-
tion regarding the board members are stored in Tables 3.10 and 3.11 bellow
containing their details:
==PAGE:31==
3.1 Company Reports Web Scraping
19
Unicredit
Board
Name
Twitter
Chief Executive Oﬀicer
Andrea Orcel
President
Cesare Bisoni
Vice President
Lamberto Andreotti
@LambertoAndreo
Advisor
Mohamed Hamad Al Mehairi
Advisor
Vincenzo Cariello
Advisor
Elena Carletti
@ElenaCarletti7
Advisor
Diego De Giorgi
@DDeGiorgi1970
Advisor
Stefano Micossi
@MicossiStefano
Advisor
Pietro Carlo Padoan
Advisor
Maria Pierdicchi
@MariaPierdicchi
Advisor
Francesca Tondi
Advisor
Alexander Wolfgring
Advisor
Gianpaolo Alessandro
@gp-alessandro
Advisor
Vasileios Gkionakis
@VasileiosGkion1
Chief Economist
Erik Fossing Nielsen
@ErikFossing
Table 3.10: Unicredit: Board of Directors.
Company account
Twitter
UniCredit
@UniCredit-PR
UniCredit Italia
@UniCredit-IT
Table 3.11: UniCredit: Company account.
• Enel S.p.A, together with its subsidiaries, operates in the electricity and gas
sectors worldwide. The company generates, transmits, distributes, purchases,
transports, and sells electricity; transports and markets natural gas; supplies
LNG; and designs, develops, constructs, operates, manages, and maintains gen-
eration plants and transmission grids. It offers electric vehicle charging solutions
to recharge vehicle at home or at the oﬀice; technological solutions for smart
homes, home automation, solar and photovoltaic systems, boilers, maintenance
services, lighting, etc.; public lighting and monitoring services for smart cities,
security systems, etc.; electric mobility services; and consulting and energy eﬀi-
ciency solutions. The company also provides infrastructure for the development
of grids, implementation of platform-based models, and exploiting technologi-
cal and digital services, as well as smart meters and grid services; and operates
in the wholesale energy market for electricity, gas, and other commodities, as
well as engages in engineering and construction, and operation and maintenance
activities. It operates renewable, wind, thermal, hydroelectric, nuclear, photo-
voltaic, and geothermal power plants. The company was founded in 1962 and is
headquartered in Rome, Italy. The information regarding the board members
are stored in Tables 3.12 and 3.13 bellow containing their details:
==PAGE:32==
20
3 Data Sourcing and Description
Enel
Board
Name
Twitter
Chief Executive Oﬀicer
Francesco Starace
@starax
President
Michele Crisostomo
Adviser
Cesare Calari
Adviser
Costanza Esclapon de Villeneuve
Adviser
Samuel Leupold
Adviser
Alberto Marchi
Adviser
Mariana Mazzucato
@MazzucatoM
Adviser
Mirella Pellegrini
Adviser
Anna Chiara Svelto
Secretary Chief Executive Oﬀicer
Silvia Alessandra Fappani
Table 3.12: Enel: Board of Directors.
Company account
Twitter
Enel Energia
@enelenergia
Enel Group
@EnelGroupIT
Enel X Italia
@EnelXItalia
Table 3.13: Enel: Company account.
• Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.,provides various insurance solutions.
The
company operates through four segments: Life; Non-Life; Asset Management;
and Holding and Other Business. It offers saving and protection insurance prod-
ucts for individuals and family; unit linked products with investment purposes;
and motor, liability, casualty, accident, health, and commercial and industrial
risks insurance products. The company also provides equity and fixed-income
funds, as well as alternative products; investment; and wealth management ser-
vices. It operates in Italy, France, Germany, Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary,
Slovakia, Serbia/Montenegro, Romania, Slovenia, Bulgaria, Croatia, Russia,
Spain, Switzerland, the Americas, Southern Europe, and Asia. The company
was formerly known as Assicurazioni Generali Austro-Italiche and changed its
name to Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A. in 1848. Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.
was founded in 1831 and is headquartered in Trieste, Italy. The information re-
garding the board members are stored in Tables 3.14 and 3.15 bellow containing
their details:
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Company Reports Web Scraping
21
Generali
Board
Name
Twitter
Chief Executive Oﬀicer
Philippe Donnet
President
Gabriele Galateri di Genola
Vice President
Francesco Gaetano Caltagirone
Vice President
Clemente Rebecchini
Advisor
Romolo Bardin
Advisor
Paolo di Benedetto
@DiBenedettoPa
Advisor
Alberta Figari
Advisor
Ines Mazzilli
Advisor
Antonella Mei-Pochtler
Advisor
Diva Moriani
Advisor
Lorenzo Pellicioli
Advisor
Roberto Perotti
Advisor
Sabrina Pucci
Table 3.14: Generali: Board of Directors.
Company account
Twitter
Generali Group
@GENERALI
Future Generali
@Future-Generali
Generali Italia
@GeneraliItalia
Table 3.15: Generali Italia: Company account.
• STMicroelectronics N.V., together with its subsidiaries, designs, develops,
manufactures, and markets semiconductor products in Europe, the Middle East,
Africa, the Americas, and the Asia Pacific. It operates through Automotive and
Discrete Group; Analog, MEMS and Sensors Group; and Microcontrollers and
Digital ICs Group segments.
The Automotive and Discrete Group segment
offers automotive integrated circuits (ICs); and discrete and power transistor
products. The Analog, MEMS and Sensors Group segment provides industrial
application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) and application-specific stan-
dard products (ASSPs); general purpose analog products; custom analog ICs;
wireless charging solutions; galvanic isolated gate drivers; low and high voltage
amplifiers, comparators, and current-sense amplifiers; MasterGaN, a solution
that integrates a silicon driver and GaN power transistors in a single package;
wireline and wireless connectivity ICs; touch screen controllers; micro-electro-
mechanical systems (MEMS) products, including sensors or actuators; and op-
tical sensing solutions. The Microcontrollers and Digital ICs Group segment
offers general purpose and secure microcontrollers; radio frequency (RF) and
electrically erasable programmable read-only memories; and RF, digital, and
mixed-signal ASICs. It also provides assembly and other services. The com-
pany sells its products through distributors and retailers, as well as through
sales representatives. STMicroelectronics N.V. was incorporated in 1987 and
==PAGE:34==
22
3 Data Sourcing and Description
is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland.The information regarding the board
members are stored in Tables 3.16 and 3.17 bellow containing their details:
STMicroelectronics
Board
Name
Twitter
Chairman of the Supervisory Board
Maurizio Tamagnini
Vice-Chairman of the Supervisory Board
Nicolas Dufourcq
@NicolasDufourcq
Supervisory Board
Janet G. Davidson
Supervisory Board
Heleen Kersten
Supervisory Board
Yann Delabrière
Supervisory Board
Lucia Morselli
Supervisory Board
Alessandro Rivera
Supervisory Board
Frederic Sanchez
Supervisory Board
Ana de Pro Gonzalo
Table 3.16: STMicroelectronics: Board of Directors.
Company account
Twitter
STMicroelectronics
@ST-World
Table 3.17: STMicroelectronics: Company account.
Next, for each company, I interact with the 1Info and eMarket websites to get
PDFs reports and save them in a local directory. I constructed a PDF Web Scraper
using the BeautifulSoup library. This tool is then used to parse and iterate through
the websites containing the full list of the reports. After scraping the reports, my next
target is to get access to the Twitter API to download the company board members
tweets. A Python script has been made to download all the tweets and transformed
them into a CSV file. It has been made to get access to the entire Twitter RESTful
API. I invoke the API method using the Tweepy library. The information regarding
the accounts is stored in the tables above.
==PAGE:35==
3.2 BIt Market Notice and sentences extraction
23
3.2
BIt Market Notice and sentences extraction
The Italian Stock Exchange, BIt, Market Notices are the complete set of institutional
information collected and disseminated by the Italian stock exchange. It is created to
merge the needs of data vendors, banks, law firms, media, consultants, researchers and
brokers. They are extremely interested in the analysis and research, enrichment of
data-selling products, dissemination of financial news. The Market Notices includes
all price sensitive information, sensitive information disseminated by the issuers of
listed financial instruments and the technical provisions of the Italian Stock Exchange.
The BIt Market Notices are produced and disseminated every day at approximately
3:00 pm, 6:00 pm, 8:30 pm and 11:30 pm. The topics covered by this reports are the
following:
• Approval of accounting data for the period
• Release of opinion of the auditing company
• Approval of management accounts and half-yearly reports
• Resignation and appointment of the members of the BoD and of the supervisory
bodies
• Dissemination of forecast data or quantitative objectives
• Acquisition or sale transaction
• Capital increases and / or issuance of convertible bonds
• Issue of bonds
• Transactions on own shares
• Mergers / demergers
To sum up, Market Notices, present critical quantitative and qualitative informa-
tion. Therefore, it can be assumed that they are extremely useful when it comes to
predicting stock prices. The market is sensitive to the response after the publishing
of them.
In the previous section, I described how the reports and tweets are scraped. In order
to get the Market Notices, I iterate through all of our tickers on the regulated infor-
mation transmission websites. At each iteration, using the web scraping the reports
are selected and automatically downloaded. At the same time, quantitative infor-
mation are extracted from the websites. On the other hand, to get the companies
tweets the process is similar. Using the Twitter RESTful API I iterate through the
user id shown in the section above. At each iteration, I get all the tweets and all
the related information.In total, I extracted 1245 reports and 18301 tweets in the
2017-2021 period. How they are distributed is shown in the Table 3.18 below.
==PAGE:36==
24
3 Data Sourcing and Description
Stock
Report
Tweet
CNH Industrial
139
Exor
74
Ferrari
157
3265
Stellantis
30
44
UniCredit
196
Enel
261
8507
Generali
282
6485
STMicroelectronics
106
Table 3.18: Companies datasets.
The format of the reports obtained is PDFs and the content is not always well
structured. It can be very diﬀicult to automatically extract the sentences from them.
It has been created a specific python module to pre convert the PDFs to text format.
A further elaboration has been applied and the txt content of each report has been
split into a collection of sentences. On the other hand for the tweets, the strategy
is simplified. It has been only a matter of cleaning the useless information from the
Twitter dataset obtained. A full overview of the procedures is shown the Figures
bellow 3.1 for the BIt Market Notices and in Figure 3.2 for the Tweets.
Figure 3.1: BIt Market Notices Extraction and Parsing.
==PAGE:37==
3.3 Yahoo Finance
25
Figure 3.2: Tweets Extraction and Parsing.
3.3
Yahoo Finance
In this section, my target is to get historical information on the stock prices of the
companies. The yfinance is a powerful tool for financial analysis that allows down-
loading historical market data from Yahoo! finance. I use Yahoo! Finance market
data downloader to get the daily historical stock prices of the companies of my in-
terest. Specifically, I extract the following information regarding the stock: Open,
High, Low, Close, Adj Close, Volume. An example of the dataset extracted is the one
shown in Figure 3.3 bellow.
Figure 3.3: Financial dataset.
==PAGE:38==
26
3 Data Sourcing and Description
Bellow for each company an open-high-low-close chart on the historical data is
shown. The OHLC chart is a financial instrument describing open, high, low and
close values over one unit of time. The lines represent the low and high values and
the horizontal segments represent the open and close values. Increasing items are
drawn in green whereas decreasing are drawn in red.
• CNH Industrial N.V.
Figure 3.4: OHLC chart - CNH.
• Exor N.V.
Figure 3.5: OHLC chart - Exor.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 Yahoo Finance
27
• Ferrari N.V.
Figure 3.6: OHLC chart - Ferrari.
• Stellantis N.V.
Figure 3.7: OHLC chart - Stellantis.
==PAGE:40==
28
3 Data Sourcing and Description
• Unicredit S.p.A.
Figure 3.8: OHLC chart - Unicredit.
• Enel S.p.A.
Figure 3.9: OHLC chart - Enel.
==PAGE:41==
3.3 Yahoo Finance
29
• Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.
Figure 3.10: OHLC chart - Generali.
• STMicroelectronics N.V.
Figure 3.11: OHLC chart - STMicroelectronics.
==PAGE:42==
30
3 Data Sourcing and Description
3.4
Financial Phrase Bank
One of the key arguments for the low utilization of AI techniques in financial senti-
ment analysis has been the lack of high-quality data for building prediction models.
To resolve the missing training data problem, researchers develop a collection of ap-
proximately 5000 financial and economic sentences with a polar sentiment [Malo]. The
corpus used is made out of English news on OMX Helsinki companies. The collection
of phrases was annotated on a 3-point scale by 16 people with adequate background
knowledge on financial markets form the Aalto University School of Business.
3.4.1
Italian Financial Phrase Bank
I constructed a polar sentiment dataset of sentences from financial news. The dataset
consists of 3764 sentences from the Italian language from finance and economic texts
categorised by sentiment. I decided to create this collection of data because annotated
collections are a scarce resource and many are reserved for proprietary use only. Listed
below I show the steps applied to achieve this goal:
1. Financial Phrase Bank [Malo] analysis and translation to Italian
2. Collection of sentences and annotation on a 3-point scale
The objective of the phrase level annotation task has been to classify into a posi-
tive, negative or neutral. The collection of sentences has been annotated on a 3-point
scale by people with adequate knowledge of the financial market: economists / finan-
cial market experts, pure Italian linguistics, lawyers, with financial expertise. The
annotators were demand to consider the sentences from the viewpoint of an investor.
Whether the sentences may have a positive, negative or neutral influence on the stock
price. In fact, sentences that have a sentiment not relevant from an economic or finan-
cial perspective are considered neutral. The Italian Financial Phrase Bank developed
has been annotated by an agreement rate of 6 annotators. Three of the annotators
were Italian linguistics, one economist and two lawyers, with financial expertise. In
the Table 3.19 and in Figure 3.3 bellow a description of the dataset distribution has
been made.
Sentiment
Counter
Neutral
2107
Positive
1166
Negative
491
Table 3.19: Italian Financial Phrase Bank overview.
==PAGE:43==
3.4 Financial Phrase Bank
31
Figure 3.12: Italian Financial Phrase Bank dataset head.
Figure 3.13: Italian Financial Phrase Bank sentiment distribution.
==PAGE:44==
32
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4
Sentiment
classification model
In this chapter, I first describe how I perform the Italian FinBert a pioneering model
for Italian Financial Text Sentiment Analysis.I also provide motivation for the model
choices by explaining the concepts and how they were tailored to my experiment.
4.1
Italian Bert
Bert stands for Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers. It is de-
signed to pre-train deep bidirectional representations from the unlabeled text. Suc-
cessively, the pre-trained BERT model can be fine-tuned to answer a specific task.
The first Italian BERT has been introduced by Marco Polignano [Poli19]. The Ital-
ian BERT, as AlBERTo has been trained on a collection of domain-generic tweets in
Italian extracted through API streams and freely usable for research purposes. The
model is based on the original one distributed through GitHub by [Devlin19]. The
Figure 4.1 below shows the BERT and AlBERTo learning strategy.
Figure 4.1: AlBERTo learning strategy.
==PAGE:46==
34
4 Sentiment classification model
The approach applied for the learning strategy is “masked learning”. It is applied
on a 12x Transformer Encoder, where, for each input, a percentage of terms is hidden
and then predicted for optimizing network weights in back-propagation. To be more
clear, a percentage of terms is hidden using the [MASK] token and then trained for
guessing it in order to optimize network weights in back-propagation [Devlin].BERT
uses context words to reconstruct the original text portion. In Figure 4.2 shows that
the probability estimation of the hidden word is calculated from the co-occurrences
of the context terms [Devlin]. AlBERTo has been evaluated on the task of sentiment
Figure 4.2: MASK learning strategy.
analysis for the Italian language. In particular, [(Barbieri16] investigated using the
SENTIPOLC data (SENTIment Polarity Classification) over the classification tasks.
The polarity Classification is “a system must decide whether a given message is of
positive, negative, neutral”; [Barbieri16].BERT is arguably one of the best and most
advanced word embedding tools and has achieved state-of-the-art performances in
multiple tasks including sentiment classification.
4.2
Italian FinBert
The pioneer Italian FinBERT is a pre-trained language model based on Italian BERT
devised to better approach NLP tasks in the financial domain. In the English lan-
guage, the pioneer of this study has been Dogu Araci [Ara19]. The model has been
created by further training Italian BERT in the financial domain on large corpora
of financial news and as a result, fine-tuning it for the financial sentiment classifica-
tion. In the following section, I carefully describe all the steps that lend me to the
implementation of the Italian FinBERT.
4.2.1
Dataset
The model has been trained on very large corpora and then with the addition of
suitable task-specific layers fine-tuned on the target dataset. In the case of the fi-
nancial sentiment analysis has been used the Italian Financial Phrase Bank fine-tune
the model. The dataset is composed of four thousand financial sentences made for
this specific case. I do not expect my model to perform well on assigning sentiment
in other test cases. Every sentence in the Phrase Bank has an associated sentiment
label annotated properly assigned by financial experts. The sentiment associated is
==PAGE:47==
4.2 Italian FinBert
35
on a 3 point scale: positive, neutral, negative.The dataset has been prepared as a
CVS file with two columns: one named text, with all the sentences, and the other
one named sentiment with the label reported in Figure 3.12
4.2.2
Pre-processing
In order to proceed with the implementation, some preprocessing operations have
been performed. Firstly, I convert all the labels to numerical values. I assigned 0
to negative, 1 to neutral and 2 to positive. Secondly, I clean up the sentences to
guarantee a smooth training and testing process. I removed all the special characters
and in the case of the tweets all the @mentions. I also removed useful information
such as email addresses and URLs. In the end, I prepare the input for the BERT using
Word-Piece Encoding. In summary, an input sentence using Word-Piece Encoding
for a classification task will go through the following steps before being fed into the
BERT model.
1. Breaking down of the sentence into tokens
2. Adding the [CLS] token at the beginning of the sentence
3. Adding the [SEP] token at the end of the sentence
4. Padding the sentence with [PAD] tokens so that the total length equals to the
maximum length
5. Converting each token into their corresponding IDs in the model
An example of the Word-Piece Encoding is shown below.For simplicity in the
example, I assume the maximum length is 14,while in the original model it is set to
be 256.
0. Original sentence:
Il valore del contratto ammonta a circa 11 milioni di euro
1. Tokenized sentence:
[’Il’, ’valore’, ’del’, ’contratto’, ’ammonta’, ’a’,’circa’,’11’,’milioni’,’di’,’euro’]
2. Adding [CLS] and [SEP] tokens:
[’[CLS]’,’Il’, ’valore’, ’del’, ’contratto’, ’ammonta’, ’a’, ’circa’,’11’,’milioni’,’di’,’euro’,’[SEP]’]
3. Padding:
[’[CLS]’,’Il’, ’valore’, ’del’, ’contratto’, ’ammonta’, ’a’, ’circa’,’11’,’milioni’,’di’,’euro’,’[SEP]’,’[PAD]’]
4. Converting to IDs:
[101, 2421, 112, 188, 3858, 1996, 3776, 106, 2560,460,102,156,288,0]
To perform this tokenization task I used the Huggingface preprocessing tool.
==PAGE:48==
36
4 Sentiment classification model
Figure 4.3: Visualization describing the models.
4.2.3
Training Setup
I developed my model using PyTorch a powerfull deep learning framework. PyTorch
is a Python machine learning package based on Torch, which is an open-source ma-
chine learning package with strong GPU acceleration. My first step has been to to
subclass PyTorch’s Dataset class. This object will later be used by our DataLoaders
to retrieve batches of samples that will be fed to the model while training. Fortu-
nally, the Huggingface library comes with a set of tools that allow us to fine-tune
their transformers. In the first part of the model I create a method that automati-
cally downloads a BERT checkpoint and mounts on top of it a sequence classifier for
us. Successivly,I load the model and the dataset and split it into training and test-
ing sets with a respective percentage of 80% and 20%. Finally, I called the training
procedure that exploits PyTorch’s Ignite framework to train and evaluate the model.
4.2.4
Hyperparameter tuning
I implemented parameter tuning to achieve good performance. Hugging Face Trans-
formers and Ray Tune provides a powerful integration. Ray Tune is a popular Python
library that helped with hyperparameter tuning. I started defining a hyperparameter
space and then I set up the grid search. The parameter used in the model implemen-
tation is shown in the Table 4.1 bellow:
==PAGE:49==
4.2 Italian FinBert
37
Parameters
Value
Batch size
16
Learning rate
5 · 10−5
Epochs
5
Table 4.1: Italian Financial Phrase Bank overview.
4.2.5
Evaluation Metrics
In this section, I performed the evaluation of the classification model. I use three
metrics: Accuracy, cross-entropy loss and macro F1 average. I decided to use these
metrics because my data are imbalanced, as it is shown in the Table 3.19. The macro
average computes the metric independently for each class and then take the average
of them. It gives a good measure of the classification performance. I reported all
metrics results in the Table 4.2 bellow.
Loss
Accuracy
Macro F1
Recall
0.552
0.879
0.866
0.865
Table 4.2: Evaluation metrics.
4.2.6
Examples
In this section, I present several examples where I apply the Italian FinBert model
to extract the sentiment of the sentences.
• Example 1:
”Dopo questo investimento, Arval diventerà il secondo più grande fornitore di
servizi di noleggio nel mercato Italiano.”
Prediction: [Negative: 0.948% | Neutral: 3.545% | Positive: 95.507 %]
• Example 2:
”Anche i tassi di cambio sfavorevoli hanno contribuito alla diminuzione delle
vendite nette ”, ha affermato il CEO John Elkann.”
Prediction: [Negative: 99.172% | Neutral: 0.549% | Positive: 0.279%]
• Example 3:
”Attualmente, il 95% dei ricavi di Stellantis è attribuito al mercato americano.”
Prediction: [Negative: 15.664% | Neutral: 82.269% | Positive: 2.067%]
==PAGE:50==
38
4 Sentiment classification model
4.2.7
Application
In the chapter above, I implemented the Italian BERT on the financial domain by
further pre-training it on a financial phrase bank and fine-tuning it for sentiment
analysis FinBERT. This implementation is the first application of Italian BERT for
finance and It is an extremely useful application for financial decisions. I decided to
use this model to extract and analyze the sentiment of company reports and tweets.
The Italian BERT is good for extracting explicit sentiments.
Ideally, It could be
further pre-trained on a good amount of company reports to achieve the company
implicit information.
4.2.8
Proof of concept
In this chapter, I present the results relative to the model’s performance. I started
showing an example of the model capabilities using a real application on the Intesa
Sanpaolo case.
In Figure 4.4 is shown the public statement released on the 17th of February 2020
at 11:36 p.m.
This is a price-sensitive, report of the board of directors of Intesa
Sanpaolo on the merging project with UBI Bank. The report has been downloaded
applying the Web scraping script that implements the rule to automatically download
it from the storage.
To carry out the sentiment evaluation, I applied the Italian
FinBert and the results are shown in the Table 4.3 The results highlight an extremely
positive sentiment report for the investor, we expect a fluctuation in the price trend
as expected in Figure 4.5. As expected the price changed and we can make profits
using a trading strategy.
Negative
Neutral
Positive
1.639%
0.987%
97.374%
Table 4.3: Sentiment summary table.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 Italian FinBert
39
Figure 4.4: Public statement- Intesa Sanpaolo.
Figure 4.5: Stock Market- Intesa Sanpaolo.
==PAGE:52==
40
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 5
Stock Movements
Predictive Model
In this chapter, I first describe how I perform the Neural Networks for the stock
predictive model. I also provide motivation for the model choices by explaining the
concepts and how they were tailored to my experiment.
5.1
Introduction
Stock prediction using market data analysis is a challenging topic to perform. The
stock market is very dynamic and complex in nature. In this investigation stock prices
and sentiment have been employed in the prediction processes. I combine technical
indicators from stock prices with sentiment reports and tweets. I built up a stock
prediction system using the following step:
1. Presenting numerical price data adjusted and attach the sentiment vectors via
sentiment analysis using Italian FinBert
2. Setup a fully connected neural network to make stock predictions
5.2
LSTM recurrent neural network for stock market
Long-Short-Term Memory Recurrent Neural Network is a deep learning algorithm.
The LSTM model is a powerful method for time-series forecasting.
The model I
develop is used to predict stock prices with a step of one and a look back defined.
The model constructed is shown in Figure 5.1
==PAGE:54==
42
5 Stock Movements Predictive Model
Figure 5.1: LSTM model trained with sentiment.
==PAGE:55==
5.2 LSTM recurrent neural network for stock market
43
5.2.1
Dataset
As a first step, I have to combine the financial data obtained from Yahoo Finance
with the sentiment reports and news vector. I use the company tickers and match for
every year and every stock with the appropriate sentiment report vector. Then, the
investigation consisted of preparing and correctly splitting the dataset for training and
testing. The prices before doing any analysis on historical data need to be adjusted.
The dataset is a combination of financial information and sentiments in the 2017-2021
period, in Figure 5.2 below an example.
Figure 5.2: Dataset LSTM.
==PAGE:56==
44
5 Stock Movements Predictive Model
Then, I proceed on splitting the dataset into two parts:
• Fillings between 2017-01-02 and 2020-01-02 period are used for training and
validation. I further split them into training and validation set according to the
80-20 ratio.
• Fillings after 2020-01-02 period are used for testing the performance of our
model.
5.2.2
Pre-processing
Firstly, I scale the dataset to achieve optimal performances I use Scikit Learn Min-
MaxScaler and I scale out the dataset to numbers between zero and one. Secondly,
the LSTMs expect the data to be in a specific format, in this case, a 3D array. I start
by creating data in 60 timesteps and converting it into an array using NumPy. Next,
we convert the data into a 3D dimension array with 60 timestamps and one feature
at each step.
5.2.3
Training Setup
I developed the LSTM model using Keras a powerful deep learning framework inter-
face for TensorFlow. My first step has been to import a couple of modules from Keras
in order to build the LSTM. This process would help to speed up the process. The
Sequential module imported is appropriate for initializing the neural network where
each layer has exactly one input tensor and one output tensor. The Dense module
imported is used to add a densely connected neural network layer. The LSTM mod-
ule imported is used for adding the Long Short-Term Memory layer to the model.
Then, the Dropout module is added to prevent overfitting. It adds dropout layers
that prevent overfitting by randomly selected neurons during the training.The LSTM
model has some characteristic arguments:
• Units: the dimensionality of the output space
• Return sequences: it determines whether to return the last output in the
output sequence or the full sequence
• Input shape: the shape of our training set
• Dropout value: it defines the percentage of layers to be dropped
• Optimizer: it defines the model optimizer to compile the model
• Loss: a model quantity to minimize during the training
• Epoch: number times the learning model work through the entire training
dataset
==PAGE:57==
5.2 LSTM recurrent neural network for stock market
45
• Batch size: it defines the number of rows from the dataset processed by the
model before it updates its weights
5.2.4
Hyperparameter tuning
I implemented parameter tuning to achieve best performance.
I started defining
the hyperparameter space and then I set up the grid search.The set of parameters
analyzed is the following: first additional layer, a second additional layer, third ad-
ditional layer, number neurons, number batch size, and dropout. All the possible
combinations are stored with the referred train and test accuracy. The dataset with
the parameters combination is stored and ordered by the decreasing order of test
accuracy. In conclusion, the parameters referring to the lowest value of test accuracy
would be selected for model implementation. The paramenter are shown in the Table
5.1 bellow:
Then, I compile the model using the popular adam optimizer and set the loss as the
Parameters
Value
First additional layer
False
Second additional layer
False
Third additional layer
False
Neurons number
128
Batch size number
64
Dropout
0.1
Table 5.1: LSTM hyperparameter.
mean squared error. This computes the mean of the squared errors. Next, I fit the
model to run on 1000 epochs with a batch size of 64 and setting the time step as 60.
==PAGE:58==
46
5 Stock Movements Predictive Model
1 Model: "sequential"
2 _________________________________________________________________
3 Layer (type)
Output Shape
Param #
4 =================================================================
5 lstm (LSTM)
(None, 60, 128)
69632
6 _________________________________________________________________
7 dropout (Dropout)
(None, 60, 128)
0
8 _________________________________________________________________
9 lstm_1 (LSTM)
(None, 128)
131584
10 _________________________________________________________________
11 dropout_1 (Dropout)
(None, 128)
0
12 _________________________________________________________________
13 dense (Dense)
(None, 1)
129
14 =================================================================
15 Total params: 201,345
16 Trainable params: 201,345
17 Non-trainable params: 0
18 _________________________________________________________________
Listing 5.1: LSTM model summary.
5.2.5
Model prediction
The deployed LSTM model is used for the time series forecasting problem. The LSTM
model is capable to predict the close price given the previously 60 past observations.
The input is a time series signal that is defined by observations taken sequentially in
time. In the Figure 5.3 bellow is shown prediction made over the 2020-01, 2021-03
period.
Figure 5.3: Prediction LSTM.
==PAGE:59==
5.2 LSTM recurrent neural network for stock market
47
5.2.6
Evaluation metrics
In this section I performed the evaluation of the LSTM model. I use the metrics
bellow to evaluate the performance of the model, this process has been done for each
company. The metrics used are as follows:
• Explained variance score: The explained variance score explains the disper-
sion of errors of a given dataset, and the formula is written as follows:
explained −variance(y, by) = 1 −V ar{yi −byi}
V ar{yi}
• Mean squared error: The mean square error is the average of the square of
the difference between the observed and predicted values of a variable.
MSE(y, by) = 1
n (yi −byi)2
• Coeﬀicient of determination: It represents the variation in the output de-
pendent attribute which is predictable from the input independent variables. It
is also known as the coeﬀicient of determination.
R2(y, by) = 1 −
Pn
i=0 (yi −byi)2
Pn
i=0 (yi −yi)2
• Mean absolute percentage error: It is a measure of the prediction accuracy
of a forecasting method in percentage.
MAPE(y, by) =
1
nsamples
nsamples−1
X
i=0
| yi −byi |
max (ϵ, | yi |)
==PAGE:60==
48
5 Stock Movements Predictive Model
I show in the following sections all the results of the metrics investigations. The
results for the CNH Industrial N.V.,it is reported in the Table 5.2 and Figure 5.4
bellow:
Metrics
Value
Explained variance score
0.9758
Mean squared error
0.1208
Coeﬀicient of determination
0.9742
Mean absolute percentage error
3%
Table 5.2: LSTM model - CNH Industrial N.V.
Figure 5.4: Prediction LSTM - CNH Industrial N.V.
The deviation from the target label shows the deterioration of a trained neural
network model. The prediction deviation is shown in Figure 5.5 below.
Figure 5.5: Deviation prediction LSTM- CNH Industrial N.V.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 LSTM recurrent neural network for stock market
49
The results for the Exor N.V.,it is reported in the Table 5.3 and Figure 5.6
bellow:
Metrics
Value
Explained variance score
0.9337
Mean squared error
4.9973
Coeﬀicient of determination
0.9297
Mean absolute percentage error
3%
Table 5.3: LSTM model - Exor N.V.
Figure 5.6: Prediction LSTM - Exor N.V.
The deviation from the target label shows the deterioration of a trained neural
network model. The prediction deviation is shown in Figure 5.7 below.
Figure 5.7: Deviation prediction LSTM- Exor N.V.
==PAGE:62==
50
5 Stock Movements Predictive Model
The results for the Ferrari N.V.,it is reported in the Table 5.4 and Figure 5.8
bellow:
Metrics
Value
Explained variance score
0.5836
Mean squared error
158.8698
Coeﬀicient of determination
-1.0869
Mean absolute percentage error
8%
Table 5.4: LSTM model - Ferrari N.V.
Figure 5.8: Prediction LSTM - Ferrari N.V.
The deviation from the target label shows the deterioration of a trained neural
network model. The prediction deviation is shown in Figure 5.9 below.
Figure 5.9: Deviation prediction LSTM- Ferrari N.V.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 LSTM recurrent neural network for stock market
51
The results for the Stellantis N.V.,it is reported in the Table 5.5 and Figure
5.10 bellow:
Metrics
Value
Explained variance score
0.9817
Mean squared error
0.1103
Coeﬀicient of determination
0.9811
Mean absolute percentage error
3%
Table 5.5: LSTM model - Stellantis N.V.
Figure 5.10: Prediction LSTM - Stellantis N.V.
The deviation from the target label shows the deterioration of a trained neural
network model. The prediction deviation is shown in Figure 5.11 below.
Figure 5.11: Deviation prediction LSTM- Stellantis N.V.
==PAGE:64==
52
5 Stock Movements Predictive Model
The results for the Unicredit S.p.A.,it is reported in the Table 5.6 and Figure
5.12 bellow:
Metrics
Value
Explained variance score
0.9548
Mean squared error
0.5170
Coeﬀicient of determination
0.7630
Mean absolute percentage error
7 %
Table 5.6: LSTM model - Unicredit S.p.A.
Figure 5.12: Prediction LSTM - Unicredit S.p.A.
The deviation from the target label shows the deterioration of a trained neural
network model. The prediction deviation is shown in Figure 5.13 below.
Figure 5.13: Deviation prediction LSTM- Unicredit S.p.A.
==PAGE:65==
5.2 LSTM recurrent neural network for stock market
53
The results for the Enel S.p.A.,it is reported in the Table 5.7 and Figure 5.14
bellow:
Metrics
Value
Explained variance score
0.7246
Mean squared error
0.3571
Coeﬀicient of determination
0.0848
Mean absolute percentage error
8 %
Table 5.7: LSTM model - Enel S.p.A.
Figure 5.14: Prediction LSTM - Enel S.p.A.
The deviation from the target label shows the deterioration of a trained neural
network model. The prediction deviation is shown in Figure 5.15 below.
Figure 5.15: Deviation prediction LSTM- Enel S.p.A.
==PAGE:66==
54
5 Stock Movements Predictive Model
The results for the Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.,it is reported in the Table
5.8 and Figure 5.16 bellow:
Metrics
Value
Explained variance score
0.9389
Mean squared error
0.2118
Coeﬀicient of determination
0.9250
Mean absolute percentage error
2 %
Table 5.8: LSTM model - Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.
Figure 5.16: Prediction LSTM - Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.
The deviation from the target label shows the deterioration of a trained neural
network model. The prediction deviation is shown in Figure 5.17 below.
Figure 5.17: Deviation prediction LSTM- Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 LSTM recurrent neural network for stock market
55
The results for the STMicroelectronics N.V.,it is reported in the Table 5.9 and
Figure 5.18 bellow:
Metrics
Value
Explained variance score
0.8353
Mean squared error
3.2943
Coeﬀicient of determination
0.7014
Mean absolute percentage error
5 %
Table 5.9: LSTM model - STMicroelectronics N.V.
Figure 5.18: Prediction LSTM - STMicroelectronics N.V.
The deviation from the target label shows the deterioration of a trained neural
network model. The prediction deviation is shown in Figure 5.19 below.
Figure 5.19: Deviation prediction LSTM- STMicroelectronics N.V.
==PAGE:68==
56
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Trading Strategy
In this chapter, I create a trading strategy based on the predictions for the years
2020-2021 in order to further evaluate the performance of the models developed.
6.1
Introduction
The task of market prediction is a powerful method for evaluating model performance.
Whether the system would be able to make profits or not. This systematic method is
called a trading strategy and it used for buying and selling in the securities markets.
The trading strategy is based on predefined rules and criteria.
6.2
Trading Strategy Description
In this section, I simulate the execution of trades using the prediction from the model
on the 2020-2021 period. The first step of my strategy is to predict the stock move-
ments in the different stocks.This method is also known as Backtesting. It assesses
the viability of a trading strategy or pricing model by discovering how it would have
played out retrospectively using historical data.
6.2.1
Assumption
The first step of my strategy is to predict the signs of the stock movements data
using the LSTM model prediction. The strategy signal will be defined as zero when
predicted next day return less than zero and one when predicted next day return
greater than zero.
Next, I simulate the profit or loss of a trade by fixing our trading strategy at
100000 euro. The position size, the number of units invested in a particular security,
by this investment strategy is set to 500. Then, I calculate the points in time at which
a position should be taken: entry equal to 1 or exit equal to -1.
==PAGE:70==
58
6 Trading Strategy
To delineate the trading strategy is based on these assumptions:
1. Set initial capital 100000 €
2. Set the share size 500
3. Set the signal to take a 500 share position
4. Set the points in time where a 500 share position is entry or exit
5. Find the portfolio holdings by multiplying share price by entry/exit positions
and get the cumulatively
6. Find the portfolio cash subtracting the initial capital by the portfolio holdings
to get the amount of liquid cash in the portfolio
7. Find the total portfolio value by adding the cash amount by the portfolio hold-
ings
8. Calculate the portfolio daily returns
9. Calculate the cumulative returns
6.2.2
Evaluation metrics
In this section I performed the trading strategy evaluation. I use the indicators bellow
to evaluate the Backtest.
• Cumulative return: It defines the total return on the investment over time.
• Batting average: It is a statistical technique used to measure the ability to
meet or beat an index.
• Gain/loss ratio: It is the profit on winning trades divided by the loss on
trades over a specified time period.
6.2.3
Results
In this section, I present two quantitative trading strategies. The first investigation is
regarding a Close to Close trading strategy. The second one uses the Moving Average
Crossover. The trading signal in the Close to Close has been determined taking into
account the next day return. On the other hand in the Moving Average Crossover
signal is created when the short moving average crosses the long moving average
trend.
The results for the CNH Industrial N.V., it has been shown below. Firstly, I
analyze the trading strategy with a visualization reporting the entry and exit. Sec-
ondly, I reported the portfolio value in the time period. Then after the strategies
implementation, I showed the evaluation metrics.
==PAGE:71==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
59
• Close and Close Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.1 bellow:
Figure 6.1: Trading signal - Close and Close Strategy - CNH Industrial N.V.
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.2 bellow:
Figure 6.2: Total portfolio - Close and Close Strategy - CNH Industrial N.V.
==PAGE:72==
60
6 Trading Strategy
In Table 6.1 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Close and Close
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
72
Batting average
0.444
Gain/loss ratio
2.343
Average gain
4.752
Average loss
-2.029
Max Return
27.311
Max Loss
-9.068
Total return over trades
86.17%
Table 6.1: Backtest Close and Close metrics- CNH Industrial N.V.
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
61
• Moving Averages Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.3 below where the red lines de-
scribed the short moving average over the smoothing terms of [3, 5, 8, 10, 12,
15] and long moving average over the smoothing terms of [30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 60]
in black:
Figure 6.3: Trading signal - Moving Averages Strategy - CNH Industrial N.V.
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.4 bellow:
Figure 6.4: Total portfolio value - Moving Averages Strategy - CNH Industrial N.V.
==PAGE:74==
62
6 Trading Strategy
In Table 6.2 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Moving Averages
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
10
Batting average
0.4
Gain/loss ratio
0.643
Average gain
3.401
Average loss
-5.292
Max Return
4.181
Max Loss
-13.381
Total return over trades
-17.93%
Table 6.2: Backtest Moving Averages metrics- CNH Industrial N.V.
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
63
The cumulative return is reported in the Figure 6.5 bellow:
Figure 6.5: Cumulative returns- CNH Industrial N.V.
In the Figure 6.6 bellow I show the volatility to study the stock dispersion by
time.
Figure 6.6: Volatility- CNH Industrial N.V.
==PAGE:76==
64
6 Trading Strategy
The results for the Exor N.V.,it has been shown below. Firstly, I analyze the
trading strategy with a visualization reporting the entry and exit. Secondly, I reported
the portfolio value in the time period. Then after the strategies implementation, I
showed the evaluation metrics.
• Close and Close Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.7 bellow:
Figure 6.7: Trading signal - Close and Close Strategy - Exor N.V.
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.8 bellow:
Figure 6.8: Total portfolio - Close and Close Strategy - Exor N.V.
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
65
In Table 6.3 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Close and Close
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
86
Batting average
0.302
Gain/loss ratio
1.923
Average gain
4.038
Average loss
-2.100
Max Return
13.273
Max Loss
-12.787
Total return over trades
-23.79%
Table 6.3: Backtest Close and Close metrics- Exor N.V.
• Moving Averages Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.9 below where the red lines de-
scribed the short moving average over the smoothing terms of [3, 5, 8, 10, 12,
15] and long moving average over the smoothing terms of [30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 60]
in black:
Figure 6.9: Trading signal - Moving Averages Strategy - Exor N.V.
==PAGE:78==
66
6 Trading Strategy
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.10 bellow:
Figure 6.10: Total portfolio value - Moving Averages Strategy - Exor N.V.
In Table 6.4 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Moving Averages
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
9
Batting average
0.222
Gain/loss ratio
2.418
Average gain
13.556
Average loss
-5.605
Max Return
15.612
Max Loss
-10.307
Total return over trades
-14.1%
Table 6.4: Backtest Moving Averages metrics- Exor N.V.
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
67
The cumulative return is reported in the Figure 6.11 bellow:
Figure 6.11: Cumulative returns- Exor N.V.
In the Figure 6.12 bellow I show the volatility to study the stock dispersion by
time.
Figure 6.12: Volatility- Exor N.V.
==PAGE:80==
68
6 Trading Strategy
The results for the Ferrari N.V.,it has been shown below. Firstly, I analyze the
trading strategy with a visualization reporting the entry and exit. Secondly, I reported
the portfolio value in the time period. Then after the strategies implementation, I
showed the evaluation metrics.
• Close and Close Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.13 bellow:
Figure 6.13: Trading signal - Close and Close Strategy - Ferrari N.V.
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.14 bellow:
Figure 6.14: Total portfolio - Close and Close Strategy - Ferrari N.V.
==PAGE:81==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
69
In Table 6.5 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Close and Close
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
78
Batting average
0.321
Gain/loss ratio
2.006
Average gain
2.514
Average loss
-1.253
Max Return
13.248
Max Loss
-7.649
Total return over trades
-5.83%
Table 6.5: Backtest Close and Close metrics- Ferrari N.V.
• Moving Averages Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.15 below where the red lines
described the short moving average over the smoothing terms of [3, 5, 8, 10, 12,
15] and long moving average over the smoothing terms of [30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 60]
in black:
Figure 6.15: Trading signal - Moving Averages Strategy - Ferrari N.V.
==PAGE:82==
70
6 Trading Strategy
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.16 bellow:
Figure 6.16: Total portfolio value - Moving Averages Strategy - Ferrari N.V.
In Table 6.6 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Moving Averages
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
9
Batting average
0.444
Gain/loss ratio
1.690
Average gain
3.825
Average loss
-2.264
Max Return
6.734
Max Loss
-3.961
Total return over trades
3.51%
Table 6.6: Backtest Moving Averages metrics- Ferrari N.V.
==PAGE:83==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
71
The cumulative return is reported in the Figure 6.17 bellow:
Figure 6.17: Cumulative returns- Ferrari N.V.
In the Figure 6.18 bellow I show the volatility to study the stock dispersion by
time.
Figure 6.18: Volatility- Ferrari N.V.
==PAGE:84==
72
6 Trading Strategy
The results for the Stellantis N.V.,it has been shown below. Firstly, I analyze the
trading strategy with a visualization reporting the entry and exit. Secondly, I reported
the portfolio value in the time period. Then after the strategies implementation, I
showed the evaluation metrics.
• Close and Close Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.19 bellow:
Figure 6.19: Trading signal - Close and Close Strategy - Stellantis N.V.
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.20 bellow:
Figure 6.20: Total portfolio - Close and Close Strategy - Stellantis N.V.
==PAGE:85==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
73
In Table 6.7 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Close and Close
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
78
Batting average
0.384
Gain/loss ratio
2.119
Average gain
4.254
Average loss
-2.007
Max Return
12.757
Max Loss
-17.864
Total return over trades
26.43%
Table 6.7: Backtest Close and Close metrics- Stellantis N.V.
• Moving Averages Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.21 below where the red lines
described the short moving average over the smoothing terms of [3, 5, 8, 10, 12,
15] and long moving average over the smoothing terms of [30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 60]
in black:
Figure 6.21: Trading signal - Moving Averages Strategy - Stellantis N.V.
==PAGE:86==
74
6 Trading Strategy
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.22 bellow:
Figure 6.22: Total portfolio value - Moving Averages Strategy - Stellantis N.V.
In Table 6.8 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Moving Averages
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
5
Batting average
0.6
Gain/loss ratio
23.695
Average gain
20.471
Average loss
-0.863
Max Return
48.782
Max Loss
-1.688
Total return over trades
65.01%
Table 6.8: Backtest Moving Averages metrics- Stellantis N.V.
==PAGE:87==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
75
The cumulative return is reported in the Figure 6.23 bellow:
Figure 6.23: Cumulative returns- Stellantis N.V.
In the Figure 6.24 bellow I show the volatility to study the stock dispersion by
time.
Figure 6.24: Volatility- Stellantis N.V.
==PAGE:88==
76
6 Trading Strategy
The results for the Unicredit S.p.A.,it has been shown below. Firstly, I analyze
the trading strategy with a visualization reporting the entry and exit. Secondly, I
reported the portfolio value in the time period. Then after the strategies implemen-
tation, I showed the evaluation metrics.
• Close and Close Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.25 bellow:
Figure 6.25: Trading signal - Close and Close Strategy - Unicredit S.p.A.
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.26 bellow:
Figure 6.26: Total portfolio - Close and Close Strategy - Unicredit S.p.A.
==PAGE:89==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
77
In Table 6.9 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Close and Close
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
75
Batting average
0.32
Gain/loss ratio
2.498
Average gain
5.169
Average loss
-2.069
Max Return
32.615
Max Loss
-17.259
Total return over trades
7.6%
Table 6.9: Backtest Close and Close metrics- Unicredit S.p.A.
• Moving Averages Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.27 below where the red lines
described the short moving average over the smoothing terms of [3, 5, 8, 10, 12,
15] and long moving average over the smoothing terms of [30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 60]
in black:
Figure 6.27: Trading signal - Moving Averages Strategy - Unicredit S.p.A.
==PAGE:90==
78
6 Trading Strategy
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.28 bellow:
Figure 6.28: Total portfolio value - Moving Averages Strategy - Unicredit S.p.A.
In Table 6.10 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Moving Averages
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
7
Batting average
0.142
Gain/loss ratio
1.726
Average gain
8.866
Average loss
-5.138
Max Return
8.866
Max Loss
-10.823
Total return over trades
-20.93%
Table 6.10: Backtest Moving Averages metrics- Unicredit S.p.A.
==PAGE:91==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
79
The cumulative return is reported in the Figure 6.29 bellow:
Figure 6.29: Cumulative returns- Unicredit S.p.A.
In the Figure 6.30 bellow I show the volatility to study the stock dispersion by
time.
Figure 6.30: Volatility- Unicredit S.p.A.
==PAGE:92==
80
6 Trading Strategy
The results for the Enel S.p.A.,it has been shown below. Firstly, I analyze the
trading strategy with a visualization reporting the entry and exit. Secondly, I reported
the portfolio value in the time period. Then after the strategies implementation, I
showed the evaluation metrics.
• Close and Close Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.31 bellow:
Figure 6.31: Trading signal - Close and Close Strategy - Enel S.p.A.
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.32 bellow:
Figure 6.32: Total portfolio - Close and Close Strategy - Enel S.p.A.
==PAGE:93==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
81
In Table 6.11 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Close and Close
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
78
Batting average
0.320
Gain/loss ratio
2.006
Average gain
2.514
Average loss
-1.253
Max Return
13.248
Max Loss
-7.649
Total return over trades
-5.83%
Table 6.11: Backtest Close and Close metrics- Enel S.p.A.
• Moving Averages Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.33 below where the red lines
described the short moving average over the smoothing terms of [3, 5, 8, 10, 12,
15] and long moving average over the smoothing terms of [30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 60]
in black:
Figure 6.33: Trading signal - Moving Averages Strategy - Enel S.p.A.
==PAGE:94==
82
6 Trading Strategy
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.34 bellow:
Figure 6.34: Total portfolio value - Moving Averages Strategy - Enel S.p.A.
In Table 6.12 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Moving Averages
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
9
Batting average
0.444
Gain/loss ratio
1.689
Average gain
3.825
Average loss
-2.263
Max Return
6.733
Max Loss
-3.962
Total return over trades
3.51%
Table 6.12: Backtest Moving Averages metrics- Enel S.p.A.
==PAGE:95==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
83
The cumulative return is reported in the Figure 6.35 bellow:
Figure 6.35: Cumulative returns- Enel S.p.A.
In the Figure 6.36 bellow I show the volatility to study the stock dispersion by
time.
Figure 6.36: Volatility- Enel S.p.A.
==PAGE:96==
84
6 Trading Strategy
The results for the Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.,it has been shown below.
Firstly, I analyze the trading strategy with a visualization reporting the entry and
exit. Secondly, I reported the portfolio value in the time period. Then after the
strategies implementation, I showed the evaluation metrics.
• Close and Close Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.37 bellow:
Figure 6.37: Trading signal - Close and Close Strategy - Assicurazioni Generali
S.p.A.
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.38 bellow:
Figure 6.38: Total portfolio - Close and Close Strategy - Assicurazioni Generali
S.p.A.
==PAGE:97==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
85
In Table 6.13 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Close and Close
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
74
Batting average
0.392
Gain/loss ratio
2.378
Average gain
2.792
Average loss
-1.174
Max Return
15.277
Max Loss
-6.421
Total return over trades
27.92%
Table 6.13: Backtest Close and Close metrics- Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.
• Moving Averages Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.39 below where the red lines
described the short moving average over the smoothing terms of [3, 5, 8, 10, 12,
15] and long moving average over the smoothing terms of [30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 60]
in black:
Figure 6.39: Trading signal - Moving Averages Strategy - Assicurazioni Generali
S.p.A.
==PAGE:98==
86
6 Trading Strategy
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.40 bellow:
Figure 6.40: Total portfolio value - Moving Averages Strategy - Assicurazioni Gen-
erali S.p.A.
In Table 6.14 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Moving Averages
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
6
Batting average
0.333
Gain/loss ratio
2.490
Average gain
10.542
Average loss
-4.232
Max Return
17.858
Max Loss
-6.864
Total return over trades
2.21%
Table 6.14: Backtest Moving Averages metrics- Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.
==PAGE:99==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
87
The cumulative return is reported in the Figure 6.41 bellow:
Figure 6.41: Cumulative returns- Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.
In the Figure 6.42 bellow I show the volatility to study the stock dispersion by
time.
Figure 6.42: Volatility- Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.
==PAGE:100==
88
6 Trading Strategy
The results for the STMicroelectronics N.V.,it has been shown below. Firstly,
I analyze the trading strategy with a visualization reporting the entry and exit. Sec-
ondly, I reported the portfolio value in the time period. Then after the strategies
implementation, I showed the evaluation metrics.
• Close and Close Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.43 bellow:
Figure 6.43: Trading signal - Close and Close Strategy - STMicroelectronics N.V.
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.44 bellow:
Figure 6.44: Total portfolio - Close and Close Strategy - STMicroelectronics N.V.
==PAGE:101==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
89
In Table 6.15 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Close and Close
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
72
Batting average
0.444
Gain/loss ratio
2.343
Average gain
4.752
Average loss
-2.029
Max Return
27.311
Max Loss
-9.068
Total return over trades
86.17%
Table 6.15: Backtest Close and Close metrics- STMicroelectronics N.V.
• Moving Averages Strategy
The trading signal is reported in the Figure 6.45 below where the red lines
described the short moving average over the smoothing terms of [3, 5, 8, 10, 12,
15] and long moving average over the smoothing terms of [30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 60]
in black:
Figure 6.45: Trading signal - Moving Averages Strategy - STMicroelectronics N.V.
==PAGE:102==
90
6 Trading Strategy
The total portfolio accumulation is reported in the Figure 6.46 bellow:
Figure 6.46: Total portfolio value - Moving Averages Strategy - STMicroelectronics
N.V.
In Table 6.16 I show the metrics results on the Backtest for the Moving Averages
Strategy:
Metrics
Value
Sample size trades
10
Batting average
0.4
Gain/loss ratio
0.6428
Average gain
3.401
Average loss
-5.291
Max Return
4.180
Max Loss
-13.381
Total return over trades
-17.93%
Table 6.16: Backtest Moving Averages metrics- STMicroelectronics N.V.
==PAGE:103==
6.2 Trading Strategy Description
91
The cumulative return is reported in the Figure 6.47 bellow:
Figure 6.47: Cumulative returns- STMicroelectronics N.V.
In the Figure 6.48 bellow I show the volatility to study the stock dispersion by
time.
Figure 6.48: Volatility- STMicroelectronics N.V.
==PAGE:104==
92
6 Trading Strategy
6.2.4
Combined results
In Table 6.17 I show the combined returns results on the stocks:
Stock
Annual return
CNH Industrial N.V
0.3876
Exor N.V.
0.1526
Ferrari N.V
0.1953
Stellantis N.V
0.4307
Unicredit S.p.A.
-0.0989
Enel S.p.A.
0.1953
Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A.
0.0212
STMicroelectronics N.V
0.3617
Table 6.17: Global return.
The annual return is important information to analyze the stock-market invest-
ment return over time.
In the Figure 6.49 bellow I show the volatility to compare the stocks dispersion
by time.
Figure 6.49: Global volatility.
The stock volatility studied is a measurement of the change in variance in the
stock returns over a 25 period of time. I compared the stock’s volatility to analyze
the risk. Generally, the higher the volatility, the riskier the investment in that stock.
==PAGE:105==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
In this chapter, I explain how my experiments and results tie to my thesis and give
some ideas that would be interesting to explore in the future.
In this thesis, the goal has been to state that it is possible to use textual analysis
to predict stock price and build an eﬀicient stock strategy. I have achieved these goals
implemented four important models:
1. Web scraping a tool for collecting BIt market report and company tweets
2. Italian FinBERT a pioneering model for Italian financial sentiment analysis
3. LSTM for stock market prediction a fully connected neural network to
make stock predictions combining sentiment
4. Backtesting a close to close trading strategy and moving averages to check
strategy the model performances
In the first chapters, I investigated the application of Natural Language Processing
and Machine Learning techniques to show the impact of the company’s reports and
tweets on its short-term stock prices. I constructed an automated system to access
the storage systems and I redacted the promising Italian FinBert model for stock
prediction price.
In the final chapter, I have simulated the performance of our model based on a close
to close trading strategy and moving averages strategy. In the major cases, the result
shows the close to close strategy has allowed us to make profits and fits better the
case. In a real-life environment, all the reports and news would be extracted during
the day and analyzed before the close market time. The Close to Close strategy would
be able to define a market choice during the day by analyzing the fillings.
This application is a profitable strategy constructed merging natural language
processing and long short-term memory neural network.
==PAGE:106==
94
7 Conclusion
7.1
Future work
Multiple ideas have been identified in order to further improve the model and new
scenarios can be explored:
• Experiment with more companies
Currently, I extracted 1245 report and 12050 tweets for 8 companies. It would
be possible to extend the investigation to a major number of companies, as
for example to the whole FTSE MIB best 40 traded companies in the Italian
Stock Exchange. Applying this strategy would definitely improve the results
and generalization power of our model.
• Development of a company sentiment classifier
I developed an Italian FinBERT based on an Italian Financial Phrase Bank. It
would be more effective to construct a Financial Phrase Bank based on a single
company case. The classifier would result to be more sensitive and accurate.
• Experiment in other markets
Extremely interesting is to apply this modelling to the start-up stock market.
These type of company are influenced by market sentiment.
It could be a
powerful tool for detecting startup business success.
• New trading strategy
A new trading strategy can be applied using the current filings and calculate the
trading signal on the sentiment level. An intraday trading can be implemented
to the buying and selling stocks within the same day.
==PAGE:107==
APPENDIX A
Bibliography
I Araci Dogu Tan FinBERT: Financial Sentiment Analysis with Pre-trained Lan-
guage Models
II Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville Deep Learning
III Eric Chamoun Advanced Machine Learning Analysis of 10-Qs for Stock Return
Prediction
IV Paul C. Tetlock Giving Content to Investor Sentiment: The Role of Media in
the Stock Market
V Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova BERT: Pre-
training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding
VI Xiaodong Li, Pangjing Wu, Wenpeng Wang Incorporating stock prices and news
sentiments for stock market prediction: A case of Hong Kong
VII Christopher Olah http://colah.github.io
VIII Matteo Accornero, Mirko Moscatelli Listening to the buzz: social media sentiment
and retail depositors’ trust
IX Yoshua Bengio Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from Over-
fitting
X Andreas Chouliaras The Pessimism Factor: SEC EDGAR Form 10-K Textual
Analysis and Stock Returns
XI Malo, P., Sinha, A., Takala, P., Korhonen, P. and Wallenius, J. Financial Phrase
Bank
XII Michele La Ferla Generating Trading Signals using Dual Moving Average Crossover
Strategy
XIII https://it.finance.yahoo.com
==PAGE:108==
96
==PAGE:109==
APPENDIX B
An Appendix
B.1
Programs for Web Scraping
1 from selenium import webdriver
2 import time
3 from webdriver.chrome import ChromeDriverManager
4 from selenium.common.exceptions import ElementClickInterceptedException
5
6 options = webdriver.ChromeOptions()
7 options.add_experimental_option('prefs', {
8
"download.default_directory": "C:/Users/ilarialeoni/Download",
9
"download.prompt_for_download": False,
10
"download.directory_upgrade": True,
11
"plugins.always_open_pdf_externally": True
12 })
13
14 driver = webdriver.Chrome(ChromeDriverManager(version="87.0.4280.88").install()
,chrome_options=options)
15 driver.get("https://www.1info.it/PORTALE1INFO")
16
17 time.sleep(15)
18 driver.find_element_by_partial_link_text('Continua').click()
19
20 i=0
21 while i<2:
22
file=driver.find_elements_by_xpath("//td[contains(@class,'downloadPdf')]")
23
time.sleep(10)
24
for i in range(0,2):
25
file[i].click()
26
time.sleep(10)
27
28
but=driver.find_elements_by_xpath("//a[contains(@class,'paginate_button
next')]")
29
driver.execute_script("window.scrollTo(0, 900);")
30
time.sleep(10)
31
but[0].click()
32
driver.execute_script("window.scrollTo(0, 1800);")
33
time.sleep(10)
34
but[1].click()
35
driver.execute_script("window.scrollTo(0, 2800);")
36
time.sleep(10)
37
but[2].click()
38
driver.execute_script("window.scrollTo(0, 5500);")
==PAGE:110==
98
B An Appendix
39
time.sleep(10)
40
but[3].click()
41
driver.execute_script("window.scrollTo(0, 0);")
42
43
i+=1
Listing B.1: Web Scraping.
B.2
Programs for Ita FinBert
1 from multiprocessing import cpu_count
2 import pandas as pd
3 import numpy as np
4 from multiprocessing import Pool
5 from transformers import AutoTokenizer
6 import spacy
7
8 spacy.cli.download("it_core_news_sm")
9
10 from google.colab import drive
11 drive.mount('/content/drive')
12
13 class DataProcessor:
14
15
def __init__(self, df, tokenizer, nlp, text_col='text', label_col='
sentiment', max_len=80):
16
17
self.df = df
18
self.nlp = nlp
19
self.label_col = label_col
20
self.text_col = text_col
21
self.max_len = max_len
22
self.tokenizer = tokenizer
23
24
def process(self, df_row):
25
26
27
doc = self.nlp(df_row[self.text_col])
28
29
doc = doc[:self.max_len]
30
31
input_ids = self.tokenizer.encode(doc.text, add_special_tokens=True)
32
33
34
size = len(input_ids)
35
36
if size > self.max_len:
37
input_ids = input_ids[:self.max_len]
38
size = len(input_ids)
39
40
if size < self.max_len:
41
input_ids += [self.tokenizer.pad_token_id] * (self.max_len - size)
==PAGE:111==
B.2 Programs for Ita FinBert
99
42
43
44
assert len(input_ids) == self.max_len
45
46
token_type_ids = [0] * size + [1] * (self.max_len - size) if size <
self.max_len else [0] * size
47
48
attention_mask = [1] * size + [0] * (self.max_len - size) if size <
self.max_len else [1] * size
49
50
label = df_row[self.label_col]
51
labels = 1 if label == 'neutral' else 2 if label == 'positive' else 0
52
53
return input_ids, attention_mask , token_type_ids , labels
54
55
def transform(self, df):
56
57
processed = []
58
for _, row in df.iterrows():
59
processed.append(self.process(row))
60
return pd.DataFrame(data=processed, columns=['input_ids', '
attention_mask', 'token_type_ids', 'labels'])
61
62
@staticmethod
63
def balance(df):
64
65
max_samples = min(df.sentiment.value_counts())
66
67
neg = df[df.sentiment == 'negative'].sample(n=max_samples)
68
neu = df[df.sentiment == 'neutral'].sample(n=max_samples)
69
pos = df[df.sentiment == 'positive'].sample(n=max_samples)
70
71
return pd.concat([pos, neu, neg]).sample(frac=1)
72
73
def run(self, save_path):
74
75
self.df = self.balance(self.df)
76
77
78
df_split = np.array_split(self.df, cpu_count())
79
80
pool = Pool(cpu_count())
81
82
df = pd.concat(pool.map(self.transform, df_split))
83
84
pool.close()
85
86
pool.join()
87
88
df.to_json(save_path, orient='values')
89
90
if __name__ == '__main__':
91
92
csv_path = '/Users/ilarialeoni/Downloads/FinBertIT/
ItalianFinancialPhraseBank.csv'
==PAGE:112==
100
B An Appendix
93
94
transformer_model_name =
'dbmdz/bert-base-italian-xxl-cased
'
95
96
spacy_model_name = 'it_core_news_sm'
97
98
df = pd.read_csv('/content/drive/My
Drive/FinBertIT/
ItalianFinancialPhraseBank.csv')
99
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(transformer_mo
del_name)
100
nlp = spacy.load(spacy_model_name)
101
102
processor = DataProcessor(
103
df=df,
104
tokenizer=tokenizer,
105
nlp=nlp,
106
text_col='text',
107
label_col='sentiment',
108
max_len=256
109
)
110
111
processor.run('/content/drive/My Drive/FinBertIT/file.json')
112
113
import torch
114
from torch.utils.data import Dataset
115
import json
116
117
118
class TweetDataset(Dataset):
119
def __init__(self, path, device):
120
self.device = device
121
122
123
with open(path, 'r') as fp:
124
self.data = json.load(fp)
125
126
def __len__(self):
127
return len(self.data)
128
129
def __getitem__(self, item):
130
131
ids, att, tokens, labels = list(map(lambda o: torch.tensor(o).to(self.
device), self.data[item]))
132
133
return ids.long(), att.float(), tokens.long(), labels.long()
134
135 import torch
136 from torch.utils.data import random_split
137 from transformers.optimization import AdamW
138 from ignite.engine import Engine, Events
139 from ignite.metrics import RunningAverage , Accuracy, Precision
140 from ignite.handlers import ModelCheckpoint , EarlyStopping
141 from torch.utils.data import DataLoader
142 from ignite.contrib.handlers import ProgressBar
143 from transformers import BertForSequenceClassification , AutoTokenizer
144 import os
==PAGE:113==
B.2 Programs for Ita FinBert
101
145
146 def train(model_name , model, epochs, train_dl, test_dl, optimizer, chkpt_dir):
147
def train_loop(engine, batch):
148
model.train()
149
150
optimizer.zero_grad()
151
152
input_ids, attention_mask , token_type_ids , labels = batch
153
154
155
output = model(
156
input_ids=input_ids,
157
attention_mask=attention_mask ,
158
token_type_ids=token_type_ids ,
159
labels=labels
160
)
161
162
163
loss = output[0]
164
165
loss.backward()
166
167
optimizer.step()
168
169
return loss.item()
170
171
def val_loop(engine, batch):
172
173
model.eval()
174
175
with torch.no_grad():
176
177
input_ids, attention_mask , token_type_ids , labels = batch
178
179
180
output = model(
181
input_ids=input_ids,
182
attention_mask=attention_mask ,
183
token_type_ids=token_type_ids ,
184
labels=labels
185
)
186
187
188
return output[1], labels
189
190
191
trainer = Engine(train_loop)
192
validator = Engine(val_loop)
193
194
195
Accuracy().attach(validator, "accuracy")
196
Precision().attach(validator, "precision")
197
198
199
def score_function(engine: Engine):
==PAGE:114==
102
B An Appendix
200
val_accuracy = engine.state.metrics['accuracy']
201
return -val_accuracy
202
203
early_stopping_handler = EarlyStopping(
204
patience=2,
205
score_function=score_function ,
206
trainer=trainer,
207
)
208
209
@trainer.on(Events.EPOCH_COMPLETED)
210
def log_validation_results(engine):
211
validator.run(test_dl)
212
print(
213
f"validation epoch: {engine.state.epoch} acc: {100 * validator.
state.metrics['accuracy']} prec:{100 * validator.state.metrics
['precision']}")
214
215
216
RunningAverage(output_transform=lambda x: x).attach(trainer, "loss")
217
ProgressBar(persist=True).attach(trainer, metric_names=['loss'])
218
219
checkpoint_handler = ModelCheckpoint(
220
chkpt_dir,
221
'checkpoint',
222
n_saved=epochs,
223
save_as_state_dict=True,
224
require_empty=False
225
)
226
227
def huggingface_save_handler():
228
# Create the dir
229
os.mkdir(os.path.join(chkpt_dir, 'huggingface'))
230
231
model.save_pretrained(save_directory=os.path.join(chkpt_dir, '
huggingface'))
232
AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_name).save_pretrained(os.path.join(
chkpt_dir, 'huggingface'))
233
234
trainer.add_event_handler(Events.EPOCH_COMPLETED , checkpoint_handler , {'
model': model})
235
trainer.add_event_handler(Events.COMPLETED, huggingface_save_handler)
236
validator.add_event_handler(Events.COMPLETED, early_stopping_handler)
237
238
239
trainer.run(train_dl, max_epochs=epochs)
240
241 if __name__ == '__main__':
242
243
model_name = 'dbmdz/bert-base-italian-xxl-cased'
244
245
model_chkpt_dir = '/content/drive/My Drive/FinBertIT/'
246
247
device = torch.device('cpu')
248
249
==PAGE:115==
B.2 Programs for Ita FinBert
103
250
model = BertForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained(
251
pretrained_model_name_or_path=model_name ,
252
num_labels=3,
# 3 classes: negative, neutral, positive
253
output_attentions=False,
254
output_hidden_states=False
255
).to(device)
256
257
258
batch_size = 16
259
260
261
lr = 5e-5
262
263
264
epochs = 5
265
266
dataset = TweetDataset('/content/drive/My Drive/FinBertIT/file.json', device)
267
268
size = len(dataset)
269
tr_size = int(size * 0.8)
270
ts_size = int(size - tr_size)
271
272
train_ds, test_ds = random_split(dataset, [tr_size, ts_size])
273
274
275
train_dl = DataLoader(train_ds, batch_size=batch_size, shuffle=True,
num_workers=2, pin_memory=True)
276
test_dl = DataLoader(test_ds, batch_size=batch_size, shuffle=True,
num_workers=2, pin_memory=True)
277
278
optimizer = AdamW(
279
model.parameters(),
280
lr=lr,
# Between 2e-5 and 5e-5 according to the authors of BERT
281
eps=1e-8
# Default value. Leave it like this unless you know why you
need to change it.
282
)
283
284
train(model_name , model, epochs, train_dl, test_dl, optimizer,
model_chkpt_dir)
285
286 import torch
287 from torch import nn
288 import os
289 from transformers import BertForSequenceClassification , AutoTokenizer
290
291 def extract_sentiment(model, tokenizer, text, device):
292
293
tensor = torch.tensor(tokenizer.encode(text, add_special_tokens=True)).
unsqueeze(0).long().to(device)
294
295
with torch.no_grad():
296
output = model(
297
input_ids=tensor
298
)
299
==PAGE:116==
104
B An Appendix
300
logits, = nn.functional.softmax(output[0], dim=1)
301
302
negative, neutral, positive = logits
303
304
print(
305
'Sentiment for "{}" : Negative: {:.3f}% | Neutral: {:.3f}% |
Positive: {:.3f}%'.format(
306
text,
307
negative.item() * 100.0,
308
neutral.item() * 100.0,
309
positive.item() * 100.0
310
)
311
)
312
313 def extract_sentiment3(model, tokenizer, text, device):
314
315
tensor = torch.tensor(tokenizer.encode(text, add_special_tokens=True)).
unsqueeze(0).long().to(device)
316
317
with torch.no_grad():
318
output = model(
319
input_ids=tensor
320
)
321
322
logits, = nn.functional.softmax(output[0], dim=1)
323
324
negative, neutral, positive = logits
325
sentiment_id=[ 'negative', 'neutral', 'positive']
326
sentiment=[negative.item() * 100.0,neutral.item() * 100.0,positive.item
() * 100.0]
327
return sentiment
328
329 if __name__ == '__main__':
330
331
path= '/content/drive/My Drive/FinBertIT/huggingface'
332
333
for k in f_name:
334
335
df = pd.read_csv('/content/drive/My Drive/CSV/'+k)
336
df=df.dropna()
337
df=df.reset_index(drop=True)
338
model = BertForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained(path)
339
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained(path)
340
341
device = torch.device('cpu')
342
343
model.to(device)
344
345
model.eval()
346
347
df['negative']=np.zeros(len(df))
348
df['neutral']=np.zeros(len(df))
349
df['positive']=np.zeros(len(df))
350
sent=[]
351
n=0
==PAGE:117==
B.3 Programs for LSTM Stock Prediction
105
352
while n <len(df):
353
text=df['Text'][n]
354
355
sent=extract_sentiment3(model, tokenizer, text, device)
356
df['negative'][n]=sent[0]
357
df['neutral'][n]=sent[1]
358
df['positive'][n]=sent[2]
359
360
n=n+1
361
362
df.to_csv('/content/drive/My Drive/CSV/sent_'+k)
Listing B.2: Ita FinBert.
B.3
Programs for LSTM Stock Prediction
1 import numpy as np
2 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
3 import pandas as pd
4 import seaborn as sns
5 import tensorflow as tf
6 from keras.models import Sequential
7 from keras.layers import Dense
8 from keras.layers import LSTM, GRU
9 from keras.layers import Dropout
10 from sklearn.preprocessing import MinMaxScaler
11 from keras.models import load_model
12 from keras.callbacks import EarlyStopping
13 from keras.callbacks import ModelCheckpoint
14 import itertools
15 import random
16 import os
17
18 from google.colab import drive
19 drive.mount('/content/drive')
20
21 data= pd.read_csv('/content/drive/My Drive/FinalDataset_exor.csv')
22 data=data.drop(columns='Unnamed: 0')
23
24 temp=data['Date']
25 tnt=[]
26 i=1
27 while i<len(temp):
28
tnt.append(temp.loc[i])
29
i=i+1
30
31 data = data[['Date','Close','High','Low','Open','Volume','Negative','Positive',
'Neutral']]
32 data=data.drop(columns='Date')
33
34 X_data=data[['Open', 'High', 'Low','Volume', 'Negative', 'Positive','Neutral']]
35 Y_data=data[['Close']]
==PAGE:118==
106
B An Appendix
36
37 scaler_x =MinMaxScaler(feature_range=(0, 1))
38 X = scaler_x.fit_transform(X_data)
39
40 scaler_y =MinMaxScaler(feature_range=(0, 1))
41 Y = scaler_y.fit_transform (Y_data)
42
43 def create_data(x,y, n_future, n_past, train_test_split_percentage ,
validation_split_percentage):
44
n_feature = x.shape[1]
45
x_data, y_data = [], []
46
47
for i in range(n_past, len(x) - n_future + 1):
48
x_data.append(x[i - n_past:i, 1:n_feature])
49
y_data.append(y[i + n_future - 1:i + n_future, ])
50
51
#split_training_test_starting_point = int(round(train_test_split_percentage
*len(x_data)))
52
#split_train_validation_starting_point = int(round(
split_training_test_starting_point*(1-validation_split_percentage)))
53
54
split_training_test_starting_point = 0
55
split_train_validation_starting_point = 698+30+30
56
57
58
x_train = x_data[:split_train_validation_starting_point]
59
y_train = y_data[:split_train_validation_starting_point]
60
61
# if you want to choose the validation set by yourself, uncomment the below
code.
62
#x_val = x_data[split_train_validation_starting_point:
split_training_test_starting_point]
63
#y_val =
x_data[split_train_validation_starting_point:
split_training_test_starting_point]
64
65
x_test = x_data[split_train_validation_starting_point:]
66
y_test = y_data[split_train_validation_starting_point:]
67
68
return np.array(x_train), np.array(x_test), np.array(y_train), np.array(
y_test)
69
70 X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test= create_data(X,Y, n_future=1, n_past=1,
train_test_split_percentage=0.8,
71
validation_split_percentage = 0)
72
73 def LSTM_HyperParameter_Tuning(config, x_train, y_train, x_test, y_test):
74
75
first_additional_layer , second_additional_layer , third_additional_layer ,
n_neurons, n_batch_size , dropout = config
76
possible_combinations = list(itertools.product(first_additional_layer ,
second_additional_layer , third_additional_layer ,
77
n_neurons, n_batch_size ,
dropout))
78
79
print(possible_combinations)
==PAGE:119==
B.3 Programs for LSTM Stock Prediction
107
80
print('\n')
81
82
hist = []
83
84
for i in range(0, len(possible_combinations)):
85
86
print(f'{i}th combination: \n')
87
print('
--------------------------------------------------------------------
')
88
89
first_additional_layer , second_additional_layer , third_additional_layer
, n_neurons, n_batch_size , dropout = possible_combinations[i]
90
91
# instantiating the model in the strategy scope creates the model on
the TPU
92
#with tpu_strategy.scope():
93
regressor = Sequential()
94
regressor.add(LSTM(units=n_neurons, return_sequences=True, input_shape
=(x_train.shape[1], x_train.shape[2])))
95
regressor.add(Dropout(dropout))
96
97
if first_additional_layer:
98
regressor.add(LSTM(units=n_neurons, return_sequences=True))
99
regressor.add(Dropout(dropout))
100
101
if second_additional_layer:
102
regressor.add(LSTM(units=n_neurons, return_sequences=True))
103
regressor.add(Dropout(dropout))
104
105
if third_additional_layer:
106
regressor.add(GRU(units=n_neurons, return_sequences=True))
107
regressor.add(Dropout(dropout))
108
109
regressor.add(LSTM(units=n_neurons, return_sequences=False))
110
regressor.add(Dropout(dropout))
111
regressor.add(Dense(units=1, activation='linear'))
112
regressor.compile(optimizer='adam', loss='mse')
113
114
es = EarlyStopping(monitor='val_loss', mode='min', verbose=1, patience
=20)
115
116
file_path = 'best_model.h5'
117
118
mc = ModelCheckpoint(file_path, monitor='val_loss', mode='min', verbose
=1, save_best_only=True)
119
120
121
regressor.fit(x_train, y_train, validation_split=0.3, epochs=1000,
batch_size=n_batch_size , callbacks=[es, mc], verbose=0)
122
123
# load the best model
124
# regressor = load_model('best_model.h5')
125
126
train_accuracy = regressor.evaluate(x_train, y_train, verbose=0)
==PAGE:120==
108
B An Appendix
127
test_accuracy = regressor.evaluate(x_test, y_test, verbose=0)
128
129
hist.append(list((first_additional_layer , second_additional_layer ,
third_additional_layer , n_neurons, n_batch_size , dropout,
130
train_accuracy , test_accuracy)))
131
132
print(f'{str(i)}-th combination = {possible_combinations[i]} \n train
accuracy: {train_accuracy} and test accuracy: {test_accuracy}')
133
134
print('
--------------------------------------------------------------------
')
135
print('
--------------------------------------------------------------------
')
136
print('
--------------------------------------------------------------------
')
137
print('
--------------------------------------------------------------------
')
138
139
return hist
140
141 config = [[False, True], [False, True], [False, True], [25,128, 256], [32, 64,
128], [0.1, 0.2, 0.3]]
142 #config = [[False, True], [False, True], [False, True], [25,128], [32,64],
[0.1, 0.2]]
143
144
145 # list of lists --> [[first_additional_layer], [second_additional_layer], [
third_additional_layer], [n_neurons], [n_batch_size], [dropout]]
146
147 hist = LSTM_HyperParameter_Tuning(config, X_train, y_train, X_test, y_test)
#
change x_train shape
148
149 hist = pd.DataFrame(hist)
150 hist = hist.sort_values(by=[7], ascending=True)
151 hist
152
153 first_additional_layer = False
154
second_additional_layer = False
155
third_additional_layer = False
156
#third_additional_layer = True
157
#n_neurons = 128
158
n_neurons = 256
159
n_batch_size = 64
160
#n_batch_size = 128
161
#dropout = 0.1
162
dropout = 0.1
163
164
regressor = Sequential()
165 regressor.add(LSTM(units=n_neurons, return_sequences=True, input_shape=(X_train
.shape[1], X_train.shape[2])))
166 regressor.add(Dropout(dropout))
==PAGE:121==
B.3 Programs for LSTM Stock Prediction
109
167
168 if first_additional_layer:
169
regressor.add(LSTM(units=n_neurons, return_sequences=True))
170
regressor.add(Dropout(dropout))
171
172 if second_additional_layer:
173
regressor.add(LSTM(units=n_neurons, return_sequences=True))
174
regressor.add(Dropout(dropout))
175
176 if third_additional_layer:
177
regressor.add(GRU(units=n_neurons, return_sequences=True))
178
regressor.add(Dropout(dropout))
179
180 regressor.add(LSTM(units=n_neurons, return_sequences=False))
181 regressor.add(Dropout(dropout))
182 regressor.add(Dense(units=1, activation='tanh'))
183 regressor.compile(optimizer='adam', loss='mse')
184
185 es = EarlyStopping(monitor='val_loss', mode='min', verbose=1, patience=20)
186
187 file_path = 'best_model.h5'
188
189 mc = ModelCheckpoint(file_path, monitor='val_loss', mode='min', verbose=1,
save_best_only=True)
190
191 regressor.fit(X_train, y_train, validation_split=0.3, epochs=1000, batch_size=
n_batch_size , callbacks=[es, mc], verbose=0)
192
193 regressor.evaluate(X_test, y_test)
194 y_pred = regressor.predict(X_test)
195
196 y_test= np.array (y_test).reshape ((len(y_test), 1))
197 y_pred= np.array (y_pred).reshape ((len(y_pred), 1))
198 y_train= np.array (y_train).reshape ((len(y_train), 1))
199
200 Y_final1=np.concatenate((y_train, y_pred), axis=0)
201 Y_final2=np.concatenate((y_train, y_test), axis=0)
202
203 Y_inv1=scaler_y.inverse_transform(Y_final1)
204 Y_inv2=scaler_y.inverse_transform(Y_final2)
205
206 y_test_inv=Y_inv1[698+30+30:]
207 y_pred_inv=Y_inv2[698+30+30:]
208
209 plt.figure(figsize=(16,8), dpi= 100, facecolor='w', edgecolor='k')
210
211 plt.plot(tnt[698+30+30:],y_test_inv, color='red', label = 'Real Close Price')
212 plt.plot(tnt[698+30+30:],y_pred_inv, color='green', label = 'Predicted Close
Price')
213 plt.xticks([0,40,80,120,160,200,240,280,320])
214 plt.legend(loc='best')
215 plt.xlabel('Time')
216 plt.ylabel('Price €')
217
218
==PAGE:122==
110
B An Appendix
219 plt.figure(figsize=(16,8), dpi= 100, facecolor='w', edgecolor='k')
220
221 plt.plot(tnt[698+30+30:],y_pred_inv-y_test_inv, color='blue', label = 'Real
close price deviation')
222 plt.title('Prediction deviation for stock price for Exor')
223 plt.xticks([0,40,80,120,160,200,240,280,320])
224 plt.legend(loc='best')
225 plt.xlabel('Time')
226 plt.ylabel('Deviation from label')
227
228 from sklearn import metrics
229
230 print(metrics.explained_variance_score(y_test_inv , y_pred_inv))
231 print(metrics.mean_squared_error(y_test_inv , y_pred_inv))
232 print(metrics.r2_score(y_test_inv, y_pred_inv))
233
234 def percentage_error(actual, predicted):
235
res = np.empty(actual.shape)
236
for j in range(actual.shape[0]):
237
if actual[j] != 0:
238
res[j] = (actual[j] - predicted[j]) / actual[j]
239
else:
240
res[j] = predicted[j] / np.mean(actual)
241
return res
242
243 def mean_absolute_percentage_error(y_true, y_pred):
244
return np.mean(np.abs(percentage_error(np.asarray(y_true), np.asarray(
y_pred)))) * 100
245
246 mean_absolute_percentage_error(y_test_inv, y_pred_inv)
247
248 dt_final = pd.DataFrame(np.zeros((len(y_pred),2)),
249
columns=['Data','Close'])
250 dt_final['Close']=y_pred_inv
251 dt_final['Data']=tnt[698+30+30:]
252
253 dt_final.to_csv('/content/drive/My Drive/Close_predExor_final.csv')
Listing B.3: LSTM Stock Prediction.
B.4
Programs for Trading Strategy
1 !pip install yfinance
2 !pip install hvplot
3
4 import numpy as np
5 import pandas as pd
6 import hvplot.pandas
7 from pathlib import Path
8 import yfinance as yf
9
10 from google.colab import drive
==PAGE:123==
B.4 Programs for Trading Strategy
111
11 drive.mount('/content/drive')
12
13 data= pd.read_csv('/content/drive/My Drive/Close_predSTM_final.csv')
14 data=data.drop(columns='Unnamed: 0')
15
16 data['Daily Returns']=data['Close'].pct_change()
17
18 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
19 plt.figure(figsize=(20,10))
20
21 # Define the minumum of periods to consider
22 min_periods = 25
23
24 # Calculate the volatility
25 vol = data['Daily Returns'].rolling(min_periods).std() * np.sqrt(min_periods)
26
27 # Plot the volatility
28 plt.plot(data['Data'],vol)
29
30 plt.xticks([20,40,60,80,100,120,140,160,180,200,220,240,260,280,300,320])
31 plt.title("Volatility signal")
32 plt.xlabel("Time")
33 plt.show()
34
35 """**Trading volume - Moving Average**"""
36
37 import pandas as pd
38 import numpy as np
39 import yfinance as yf
40 import datetime as dt
41 from pandas_datareader import data as pdr
42
43 df=pd.read_csv('/content/drive/My Drive/Close_predSTM_final.csv')
44 df=df.drop(columns='Unnamed: 0')
45
46 emasUsed=[3,5,8,10,12,15,30,35,40,45,50,60]
47 for x in emasUsed:
48
ema=x
49
df["Ema_"+str(ema)]=round(df.iloc[:,1].ewm(span=ema, adjust=False).mean(),2)
50
51 df["Signal"]=np.zeros(len(df))
52
53 pos=0
54 num=0
55 percentchange=[]
56
57 for i in df.index:
58
cnim=min(df["Ema_3"][i],df["Ema_5"][i],df["Ema_8"][i],df["Ema_10"][i],df["
Ema_12"][i],df["Ema_15"][i],)
59
cmax=max(df["Ema_30"][i],df["Ema_35"][i],df["Ema_40"][i],df["Ema_45"][i],df["
Ema_50"][i],df["Ema_60"][i],)
60
61
close=df.loc[i,"Close"]
62
63
if (cnim>cmax):
==PAGE:124==
112
B An Appendix
64
print("Red White Blue")
65
if (pos==0):
66
bp=close
67
pos=1
68
df.loc[i,"Signal"]=1.0
69
print("Buy now at "+ str(bp))
70
71
elif (cnim<cmax):
72
print("Blue White Red")
73
if (pos==1):
74
pos=0
75
sp=close
76
df.loc[i,"Signal"]=-1.0
77
print("Selling now at "+str(sp))
78
pc=(sp/bp-1)*100
79
percentchange.append(pc)
80
81
if (num==df["Close"].count()-1 and pos==1):
82
pos=0
83
sp=close
84
df.loc[i,"Signal"]=-1
85
print("Selling now at "+str(sp))
86
pc=(sp/bp-1)*100
87
percentchange.append(pc)
88
89
90
num+=1
91
92 print(percentchange)
93
94 gains=0
95 ng=0
96 losses=0
97 nl=0
98 totalR=1
99
100 for i in percentchange:
101
if (i>0):
102
gains+=i
103
ng+=1
104
else:
105
losses+=i
106
nl+=1
107
totalR=totalR*((i/100)+1)
108
109 totalR=round((totalR -1)*100,2)
110
111 if (ng>0):
112
avgGain=gains/ng
113
maxR=str(max(percentchange))
114 else:
115
avgGain=0
116
maxR="undefined"
117
118 if (nl>0):
==PAGE:125==
B.4 Programs for Trading Strategy
113
119
avgLoss=losses/nl
120
maxL=str(min(percentchange))
121
ratio=str(-avgGain/avgLoss)
122 else:
123
avgLoss=0
124
maxL="undefined"
125
ratio="inf"
126
127 if (ng>0 or nl>0):
128
battingAvg=ng/(ng+nl)
129 else:
130
battingAvg=0
131
132 print()
133 print("Results for stock going back to "+str(df.index[0])+", Sample size: "+str
(ng+nl)+" trades")
134 print("EMAs used: "+str(emasUsed))
135 print("Batting Avg: "+ str(battingAvg))
136 print("Gain/loss ratio: "+ ratio)
137 print("Average Gain: "+ str(avgGain))
138 print("Average Loss: "+ str(avgLoss))
139 print("Max Return: "+ maxR)
140 print("Max Loss: "+ maxL)
141 print("Total return over "+str(ng+nl)+ " trades: "+ str(totalR)+"%" )
142 print()
143
144 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
145 plt.figure(figsize=(20,10))
146
147 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Close']].values,'green')
148 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Ema_3']].values,'red')
149 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Ema_5']].values,'red')
150 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Ema_8']].values,'red')
151 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Ema_10']].values,'red')
152 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Ema_12']].values, 'red')
153 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Ema_15']].values, 'red')
154 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Ema_30']].values,'black')
155 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Ema_35']].values,'black')
156 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Ema_40']].values,'black')
157 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Ema_45']].values,'black')
158 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Ema_50']].values,'black')
159 plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Ema_60']].values,'black')
160 entry = plt.plot(df[df['Signal'] == -1.0]["Close"].index,df[df['Signal'] ==
-1.0]["Close"].values,'v', markersize=10, color='b', label='Entry')
161 exit = plt.plot(df[df['Signal'] == 1.0]["Close"].index,df[df['Signal'] == 1.0][
"Close"].values,'^', markersize=10, color='m', label='Exit')
162
163 plt.legend(framealpha=1, frameon=True)
164 plt.xticks([0,20,40,60,80,100,120,140,160,180,200,220,240,260,280,300])
165 plt.title("Trading signal")
166 plt.xlabel("Time")
167 plt.ylabel("Price €")
168 plt.show()
169
170 initial_capital = float(100000)
==PAGE:126==
114
B An Appendix
171 df['Position']=np.zeros(len(df))
172 df['Portfolio Holdings']=np.zeros(len(df))
173 df['Portfolio Cash']=np.zeros(len(df))
174 df['Portfolio Total']=np.zeros(len(df))
175 df['Portfolio Cumulative Returns']=np.zeros(len(df))
176
177 share_size = 500
178 df['Position'] = share_size * df['Signal']
179
180 df['Daily Returns']=df['Close'].pct_change()
181 df['Portfolio Holdings'] = df['Close'] * (df['Position']).cumsum()
182 df['Portfolio Cash'] = initial_capital - (df['Close'] * (df['Position'])).
cumsum()
183
184 df['Portfolio Total'] = df['Portfolio Cash'] + df['Portfolio Holdings']
185 df['Portfolio Cumulative Returns'] = (1 + df['Daily Returns']).cumprod() - 1
186
187 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
188 plt.figure(figsize=(20,10))
189
190 total_portfolio_value = plt.plot(df['Data'],df[['Portfolio Total']].values)
191
192 entry = plt.plot(df[df['Signal'] == 1.0]['Portfolio Total'].index,df[df['Signal
'] == 1.0]['Portfolio Total'].values,'^', markersize=10, color='m', label='
Entry')
193
194 exit = plt.plot(df[df['Signal'] == -1.0]['Portfolio Total'].index,df[df['Signal
'] == -1.0]['Portfolio Total'].values,'v', markersize=10, color='b', label=
'Exit')
195
196 plt.legend(framealpha=1, frameon=True)
197 plt.xticks([0,20,40,60,80,100,120,140,160,180,200,220,240,260,280])
198 plt.title("Total Portfolio")
199 plt.xlabel("Time")
200 plt.ylabel("Total Portfolio Value")
201 plt.show()
202
203 metrics = [
204
'Annual Return',
205
'Cumulative Returns',
206
'Annual Volatility',
207
'Sharpe Ratio',
208
'Sortino Ratio']
209 columns = ['Backtest']
210
211 portfolio_evaluation_df = pd.DataFrame(index=metrics, columns=columns)
212
213 # Calculate cumulative return
214 portfolio_evaluation_df.loc['Cumulative Returns'] = df['Portfolio Cumulative
Returns'][-1:].values
215 # Calculate annualized return
216 portfolio_evaluation_df.loc['Annual Return'] = (
217
df['Daily Returns'].mean() * 252
218 )
219 # Calculate annual volatility
==PAGE:127==
B.4 Programs for Trading Strategy
115
220 portfolio_evaluation_df.loc['Annual Volatility'] = (
221
df['Daily Returns'].std() * np.sqrt(252)
222 )
223 # Calculate Sharpe Ratio
224 portfolio_evaluation_df.loc['Sharpe Ratio'] = (
225
df['Daily Returns'].mean() * 252) / (
226
df['Daily Returns'].std() * np.sqrt(252)
227 )
228 # Calculate Downside Return
229 sortino_ratio_df = df[['Daily Returns']].copy()
230 sortino_ratio_df.loc[:,'Downside Returns'] = 0
231 target = 0
232 mask = sortino_ratio_df['Daily Returns'] < target
233 sortino_ratio_df.loc[mask, 'Downside Returns'] = sortino_ratio_df['Daily
Returns']**2
234 portfolio_evaluation_df
235 # Calculate Sortino Ratio
236 down_stdev = np.sqrt(sortino_ratio_df['Downside Returns'].mean()) * np.sqrt
(252)
237 expected_return = sortino_ratio_df['Daily Returns'].mean() * 252
238 sortino_ratio = expected_return/down_stdev
239 portfolio_evaluation_df.loc['Sortino Ratio'] = sortino_ratio
240 portfolio_evaluation_df.head()
241
242 """**Close to Close**"""
243
244 df1=pd.read_csv('/content/drive/My Drive/Close_predSTM_final.csv')
245 df1=df1.drop(columns='Unnamed: 0')
246
247 df1['Daily Returns']=df1['Close'].pct_change()
248
249 df1['Signal']= np.where(
250
df1['Daily Returns'] > 0, 1.0, 0.0
251 )
252
253 df1['Entry/Exit'] = df1['Signal'].diff()
254
255 import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
256 plt.figure(figsize=(20,10))
257
258 security_close = plt.plot(df1['Data'],df1['Close'])
259
260 exit = plt.scatter(df1[df1['Entry/Exit'] == -1.0]['Close'].index,df1[df1['Entry
/Exit'] == -1.0]['Close'].values, c='red',marker="o")
261
262 entry = plt.scatter(df1[df1['Entry/Exit'] == 1.0]['Close'].index,df1[df1['Entry
/Exit'] == 1.0]['Close'].values, c='black',marker="o")
263
264 plt.legend([entry,exit], ['Entry', 'Exit'])
265 plt.xticks([0,20,40,60,80,100,120,140,160,180,200,220,240,260,280])
266 plt.title("Trading signal")
267 plt.xlabel("Time")
268 plt.ylabel("Price €")
269 plt.show()
270
==PAGE:128==
116
B An Appendix
271 num1=0
272 percentchange1=[]
273
274 for i in df1.index:
275
276
close=df1.loc[i,"Close"]
277
278
if df1.loc[i,"Entry/Exit"]==1.0:
279
bp1=close
280
elif df1.loc[i,"Entry/Exit"]==-1.0:
281
sp1=close
282
pc1=(sp1/bp1-1)*100
283
percentchange1.append(pc1)
284
285
num1+=1
286
287 print(percentchange1)
288
289 gains1=0
290 ng1=0
291 losses1=0
292 nl1=0
293 totalR1=1
294
295 for i in percentchange1:
296
if (i>0):
297
gains1+=i
298
ng1+=1
299
else:
300
losses1+=i
301
nl1+=1
302
totalR1=totalR1*((i/100)+1)
303
304 totalR1=round((totalR1 -1)*100,2)
305
306 if (ng1>0):
307
avgGain1=gains1/ng1
308
maxR1=str(max(percentchange1))
309 else:
310
avgGain1=0
311
maxR1="undefined"
312
313 if (nl1>0):
314
avgLoss1=losses1/nl1
315
maxL1=str(min(percentchange1))
316
ratio1=str(-avgGain1/avgLoss1)
317 else:
318
avgLoss1=0
319
maxL1="undefined"
320
ratio1="inf"
321
322 if (ng1>0 or nl1>0):
323
battingAvg1=ng1/(ng1+nl1)
324 else:
325
battingAvg1=0
==PAGE:129==
B.4 Programs for Trading Strategy
117
326
327 print()
328 print("Results for stock going back to "+str(df1.index[0])+", Sample size: "+
str(ng1+nl1)+" trades")
329 print("Batting Avg: "+ str(battingAvg1))
330 print("Gain/loss ratio: "+ ratio1)
331 print("Average Gain: "+ str(avgGain1))
332 print("Average Loss: "+ str(avgLoss1))
333 print("Max Return: "+ maxR1)
334 print("Max Loss: "+ maxL1)
335 print("Total return over "+str(ng1+nl1)+ " trades: "+ str(totalR1)+"%" )
336 print()
337
338 initial_capital = float(100000)
339 df1['Position']=np.zeros(len(df1))
340 df1['Portfolio Holdings']=np.zeros(len(df1))
341 df1['Portfolio Cash']=np.zeros(len(df1))
342 df1['Portfolio Total']=np.zeros(len(df1))
343 df1['Portfolio Cumulative Returns']=np.zeros(len(df1))
344
345 share_size = 500
346 df1['Position'] = share_size * df1['Entry/Exit']
347
348 df1['Daily Returns']=df1['Close'].pct_change()
349 df1['Portfolio Holdings'] = df1['Close'] * (df1['Position']).cumsum()
350 df1['Portfolio Cash'] = initial_capital - (df1['Close'] * (df1['Position'])).
cumsum()
351
352 df1['Portfolio Total'] = df1['Portfolio Cash'] + df1['Portfolio Holdings']
353 df1['Portfolio Cumulative Returns'] = (1 + df1['Daily Returns']).cumprod() - 1
354
355 plt.figure(figsize=(20,10))
356
357 total_portfolio_value = plt.plot(df1['Data'],df1[['Portfolio Total']].values)
358
359 exit = plt.scatter(df1[df1['Entry/Exit'] == -1.0]['Portfolio Total'].index,df1[
df1['Entry/Exit'] == -1.0]['Portfolio Total'].values, c='red',marker="o")
360
361 entry = plt.scatter(df1[df1['Entry/Exit'] == 1.0]['Portfolio Total'].index,df1[
df1['Entry/Exit'] == 1.0]['Portfolio Total'].values, c='black',marker="o")
362
363 plt.legend([entry,exit], ['Entry', 'Exit'])
364 plt.xticks([0,20,40,60,80,100,120,140,160,180,200,220,240,260,280])
365 plt.title("Total Portfolio")
366 plt.xlabel("Time")
367 plt.ylabel("Total Portfolio Value")
368 plt.show()
369
370 metrics = [
371
'Annual Return',
372
'Cumulative Returns',
373
'Annual Volatility',
374
'Sharpe Ratio',
375
'Sortino Ratio']
376 columns = ['Backtest']
==PAGE:130==
118
B An Appendix
377
378 portfolio_evaluation_df1 = pd.DataFrame(index=metrics, columns=columns)
379
380 # Calculate cumulative return
381 portfolio_evaluation_df1.loc['Cumulative Returns'] = df1['Portfolio Cumulative
Returns'][-1:].values
382 # Calculate annualized return
383 portfolio_evaluation_df1.loc['Annual Return'] = (
384
df1['Daily Returns'].mean() * 252
385 )
386 # Calculate annual volatility
387 portfolio_evaluation_df1.loc['Annual Volatility'] = (
388
df1['Daily Returns'].std() * np.sqrt(252)
389 )
390 # Calculate Sharpe Ratio
391 portfolio_evaluation_df1.loc['Sharpe Ratio'] = (
392
df1['Daily Returns'].mean() * 252) / (
393
df1['Daily Returns'].std() * np.sqrt(252)
394 )
395 # Calculate Downside Return
396 sortino_ratio_df1 = df1[['Daily Returns']].copy()
397 sortino_ratio_df1.loc[:,'Downside Returns'] = 0
398 target1 = 0
399 mask1 = sortino_ratio_df1['Daily Returns'] < target1
400 sortino_ratio_df1.loc[mask, 'Downside Returns'] = sortino_ratio_df1['Daily
Returns']**2
401 portfolio_evaluation_df1
402 # Calculate Sortino Ratio
403 down_stdev1 = np.sqrt(sortino_ratio_df1['Downside Returns'].mean()) * np.sqrt
(252)
404 expected_return1 = sortino_ratio_df1['Daily Returns'].mean() * 252
405 sortino_ratio1 = expected_return1/down_stdev1
406 portfolio_evaluation_df1.loc['Sortino Ratio'] = sortino_ratio1
407 portfolio_evaluation_df1.head()
Listing B.4: Trading Strategy.
==PAGE:131==
==PAGE:132==
