==PAGE:1==
1 
 
Development of Complex Model 
Systems to Analyze Biopharmaceutical 
Transport In Vitro. 
 
 
 
MSc. Thesis submitted by Anjan Bhattarai (s192253) 
MSc. Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering 
 
Project Supervisor 
Casper Hempel  
Senior Researcher  
Department of Health Technology  
July 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
2 
 
Preface  
This thesis has been worked and prepared at Department of Health Technology, Technical University 
of Denmark (DTU), in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of Masters of Science in 
Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering. 
Throughout the project period, I have had privileged to work with scientifically delighted group and 
enormously facilitated laboratory. Special thanks and gratefulness goes to my supervisor, Mr. Casper 
Hempel for guiding me with every step of the project. Besides, I do not want to miss my opportunity 
to thank Madam Lotte Nielsen for safety and introductory tour, Mr. Gael Clergeaud Veiga for guidance 
with Dynamic Light Scattering device, Prof. Rodolphe Marie for guidance with Confocal Microscopy, 
Ms. Lien Thi Minh Nguyen for introductory guidance to cell culture laboratory and PhD student Ms. 
Katrine Jonsson for guidance with Nanoparticle Tracking Analyzer device. I would also like to thank 
the faculty and employees of Department of Health Technology, for providing peaceful and sound 
working environment throughout the project period. 
Lastly, I would like to remember my family for economical and emotional support they provided me 
throughout this education and project period. 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Health Technology 
 
 
 
 
Building 423, DTU 
 
 
 
 
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark  
 
 
 
 
Anjan Bhattarai 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:3==
3 
 
Abstract  
 
The popularity of protein and peptide drugs is increasing due to their well-understood roles, high 
specificity and advancement in biotechnology tools. However, delivering them by oral route is still an 
unaccomplished task. From digestive enzymes and mucus, to epithelium of the intestine, they all 
combine to form a difficult-to-overcome barrier to peptide drugs that are relatively larger than small 
molecules. Most oral formulations of biologics fail due to their inability to readily cross the epithelial 
barrier. In such scenario, establishment of a robust in vitro system to exercise biopharmaceutical 
permeability study is critical.  
 
This project is an attempt to design an in vitro model for uptake study of experimental 
peptides encapsulated within the nanoparticles called micelles. Major portion of the in vitro design is 
standard monolayer system of Caco-2 cells. Cells grown over a collagen matrix showed monolayer 
architecture with proper attachment and stability. Besides, formulated micelles showed proper size 
and stability. The monolayers grown within the wells of µ-slides represented experimental platforms 
for major assays. Image analysis and interpretation into pixel intensity values provide knowledge in 
fluorescence intensity change with time for different channels and stacks.  
 
Importantly, micellar formulation used for uptake and diffusion assays had diminishing 
effect on cells and the monolayer as a whole. Pixel intensity determination showed the green channel 
had very high level of intensity and needs both quantitative and technical adjustment within the 
microscope laser light. Besides, diffusion of fluorophore seems to occur through the monolayer to 
reach the matrix region to raise pixel intensity values in that region.  
Although uptake of peptide by the cells within the monolayer do not remain uncovered, 
through this study I have been able to verify the construction and usability of monolayer over matrix 
system to study diffusion and uptake. With few more attempts and use of less concentrated micellar 
formulation, uptake of encapsulated peptides can be demonstrated on the basis of fluorescent signals 
coming from labelled peptides. Optimum micelle concentration can show their permeation enhancing 
potential and lipids within the lipidated peptides can interact with cell membrane proteins to develop 
a sturdy system to analyze peptide uptake by both  transcellular and paracellular transport 
mechanisms.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
4 
 
Table of Contents  
 
 
 
1        Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………………….9 
1.1 
Oral delivery of Peptide Drugs: Barriers …………………………………………………..10 
1.1.1     Structure of small intestine…………………………………………………………..11 
1.2 
Improvement of Oral Delivery of Peptides: Strategies ……………………………..12 
1.2.1     Permeation Enhancers………………………………………………………………….12 
1.2.2     Enzyme Inhibitors………………………………………………………………………...13 
1.2.3     Bioadhesive Systems…………………………………………………………………….13 
1.2.4     Prodrug Approach………………………………………………………………………..14 
1.2.5     Lipidation (Fatty Acid Conjugation)……………………………………………….14 
1.2.6    Other Approaches………………………………………………………………………...14 
1.3 
2D and 3D Cell Culture ……………………………………………………………………………..15 
1.4 
Caco-2 Cell Culture: an in vitro model……………………………………………………….16 
1.5 
Spheroids and Organoids ………………………………………………………………………….17 
1.6 
Micelles …………………………………………………………………………………………………….18 
2 
Prior Work…………………………………………………………………………………………..…19 
2.1 
Prediction of intestinal drug permeability using Caco-2 Cells…………………….19 
2.2 
Controlling Epithelial Polarity…………………………………………………………………….19 
2.3 
Permeation Enhancer Potential of micellar systems…………………………………..20 
3 
Objectives ……………………………………………………………………………………………..21 
4 
Theoretical Framework ………………………………………………………………………….23 
4.1 
Collagen…………………………………………………………………………………………………….23 
4.2 
IBIDI Technologies…………………………………………………………………………………….23 
4.2.1     IBIDI µ-Slide 8 well bottom…………………………………………………………..23 
4.2.2     IBIDI µ-Slide III 3D Perfusion…………………………………………………………24 
4.2.3     IBIDI Pump System……………………………………………………………………….24 
4.3     Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery………………………………………………………………..25 
4.4     Cholesterol……………………………………………………………………………………………….25 
4.5     Dyes, fluorescent dyes and peptides………………………………………………………..26 
           4.5.1     Cell Tracker Blue …………………………………………………………………………26 
           4.5.2     Tetramethylrhodamine (TRITC)…………………………………………………...26 
           4.5.3     Fluorescien Isothicyanate-dextran (FITC-dextran)……………………….27 
           4.5.4     Cell Counting Kit- 8 (CCK-8) dye…………………………………………………..27 
           4.5.5     Salmon calcitonin…………………………………………………………………….....28 
4.6     Instruments and Devices………………………………………………………………………….28 
           4.6.1     Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS)……………………………………………………28 
4.6.2     Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA)………………………………………….29 
4.6.3    Spark Multi-mode Microplate Reader………………………………………….30 
4.6.4     Confocal Microscopy………………………………………………………………… .30 
4.6.4.1     Nikon Spinning Disc Confocal Microscope (SDCM)……..31 
           4.6.5     Nucleocounter……………………………………………………………………………32 
5        Methodology………………………………………………………………………………………..33 
5.1     Cell Cultivation and passaging…………………………………………………………………33 
           5.1.1     Materials and Reagents………………………………………………………………33 
==PAGE:5==
5 
 
           5.1.2     Passaging Caco-2 cells………………………………………………………………….33 
           5.1.3     Freezing Caco-2 cells ……………………………………………………………………33 
           5.1.4     Cultivation of Caco-2 cells on IBIDI µ-Slide 8 Well…………………………34 
           5.1.5     Cultivation of Caco-2 cells on IBIDI µ-Slide III 3D Perfusion Chip…..34 
5.2       Cell Staining and Imaging………………………………………………………………………..34 
           5.2.1     Staining and Imaging of cells on IBIDI 8 well Slide after fixation……34 
                         5.2.1.1     Materials and Reagents…………………………………………………34 
                         5.2.1.2     Method………………………………………………………………………….34 
           5.2.2     Staining and Live cell Imaging of cells on 8 well and chip………………35 
                         5.2.2.1     Materials and Reagents…………………………………………………35 
                         5.2.2.2     Method…………………………………………………………………………35 
5.3     Micelles Preparation…………………………………………………………………………………36 
           5.3.1     Materials ……………………………………………………………………………………..36 
           5.3.2     Method………………………………………………………………………………………..36 
5.4     Size Determination of Micelles………………………………………………………………….37 
           5.4.1     DLS Measurement ……………………………………………………………………….37 
                         5.4.1.1     Materials ………………………………………………………………………37 
                         5.4.1.2     Method………………………………………………………………………….37 
           5.4.2     Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) ……………………………………………37 
                         5.4.2.1     Materials and Reagents …………………………………………………37 
                         5.4.2.2     Method………………………………………………………………………….37 
5.5     Cell Viability/Cytotoxicity Assay…………………………………………………………………38 
           5.5.1     Materials ……………………………………………………………………………………..38 
           5.5.2     Method…………………………………………………………………………………………38 
5.6      Dextran Diffusion Assay…………………………………………………………………………….39 
            5.6.1     Materials and Reagents ……………………………………………………………….39 
            5.6.2     Method…………………………………………………………………………………………39 
5.7      In vitro uptake study …………………………………………………………………………………40 
            5.7.1     Materials and Reagents ……………………………………………………………….40 
            5.7.2     Method…………………………………………………………………………………………40 
6          Results and Discussion……………………………………………………………………………..41 
6.1      Passaging and freezing of cells…………………………………………………………………..41 
6.2      Cultivation of cells on IBIDI µ-Slide 8 well………………………………………………….42 
            6.2.1     Staining and imaging of cells on IBIDI µ-Slide 8 well……………………..42 
            6.2.2     Imaging of cells on IBIDI µ-Slide after fixation………………………………43 
6.3      Cultivation of cells on IBIDI µ-slide III 3D perfusion chip……………………………44 
6.4      Preparation and characterization of micelles……………………………………………46 
            6.4.1     Batch I micelles…………………………………………………………………………….46 
                          6.4.1.1     Stability assessment………………………………………………………46 
 
6.4.1.2     Effect of peptide encapsulation upon size……………………..47 
 
6.4.1.3     Effect of sonication upon size of micelles………………………48 
           6.4.2      Batch II micelles……………………………………………………………………………49 
 
6.4.2.1     Stability assessment……………………………………………………..49 
 
6.4.2.2     Effect of centrifugation on size of micelles……………………50 
 
6.4.2.3     Effect of sonication on size of micelles………………………….50 
           6.4.3      Batch III micelles…………………………………………………………………………..51 
 
6.4.3.1     Stability assessment………………………………………………………51 
 
6.4.3.2     Effect of peptide encapsulation on size of micelles………..52 
==PAGE:6==
6 
 
           6.4.4     Characterization of micelles by Nanoparticle Tracking Analyzer……….53 
6.5      Cell viability/Cytotoxicity assay ……………………………………………………………………54 
6.6      Dextran diffusion assay ……….………………………………………………………………………56 
6.7      In vitro uptake study ……………………………………………………………………………………73 
7         Conclusion ……………………………………………………………………………………………….75 
7.1      Achievements and accomplishments ………………………………………………………….75 
7.2      Pros and cons of the model …………………………………………………………………………75 
7.3      Findings and inferences……………………………………………………………………………….76 
7.4      Areas of improvement and future perspectives ………………………………………….77 
8          Bibliography…………………………………………………………………………………………….78 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
7 
 
List of figures, pictures, images and tables  
 
1.1     Structure and function of mucus layer 
1.2     Gastrointestinal barrier to oral peptide delivery 
1.3     Structure of small intestine 
1.4     Theory of semaglutide absorption 
1.5     Attachment and consolidation phase of mucoadhesive polymer  
1.6     Enhanced cellular uptake by lipidation   
1.7     Cellular uptake increment with increase in lipid chain 
1.8     Simplified sketch of 2D and 3D cell culture 
1.9     Comparison between 2D and 3D cell culture systems 
1.10   Spheroids and organoids 
1.11    Self-assembly of amphiphiles into micelles 
2.1     Generation of apical out enteroids 
4.1     Cell monolayer on collagen hydrogel 
4.2     µ-Slide III 3D perfusion 
4.3     µ-Slide 8 well 
4.4     Technical features of a perfusion chip 
4.5     IBIDI pump system 
4.6     Micelles and reverse micelles 
4.7     Structure of sodium taurocholate 
4.8     Structure of cholesterol 
4.9     Transition of micelles into vesicles 
4.11    Chemical structure of TRITC 
4.12    Attachment of FITC to dextran 
4.13    Structure of WST and WST-8 formazan 
4.14    Calcitonin in conjugation with palmitic acid 
4.15    DLS setup 
4.16     Schematic setup of nanoparticle tracking analyzer 
4.17     Microplate reader device 
4.18    Confocal setup 
4.19    Schematic drawing of spinning disc confocal microscope 
4.21    Nucleocounter device 
5.1     Experimental setup on IBIDI 8 well for imaging of fixated cells 
5.2     Experimental setup on 96 well plate for cytotoxicity study 
5.3     Experimental setup on IBIDI 8 well for dextran diffusion assay 
5.4     Experimental setup on IBIDI 8 well for peptide uptake study 
6.1     Cell characterization data from nucleocounter 
6.2     Newly seeded T75 flask after split 
6.3     Mr. frosty container 
6.4     Permanent storage of cryovials at -150֯C 
6.5     Cells stained and imaged for different fluorophores a) Brightfield b) Cell tracker blue c) TRITC 
6.6     Permeabilized and impermeabilized cells 
6.7     Cultivation of cells on IBIDI µ-slide perfusion chip under flow system 
6.8     Growth pattern of cells on perfusion chip well  
6.9     Cells on perfusion chip stained and imaged for different fluorophores 
==PAGE:8==
8 
 
6.11     Graphical representation of changes in size of micelles (Batch I) 
6.12     Graphical representation of changes in size of micelles upon peptide encapsulation 
6.13     Graphical representation of effect of sonication on size of micelles 
6.14     Stability assessment on batch II micelles 
6.15     Effect of centrifugation on micellar sizes  
6.16     Effect of sonication on micellar sizes  
6.17     Stability assessment for batch III micelles 
6.18     Difference in sizes of micelles due to peptide encapsulation 
6.19     Size distribution in zetasizer software 
6.21     Micelles characterization by Nanoparticle Tracking Analyzer 
6.22     Comparison between sizes of micelles obtained by DLS and NTA 
6.23     Color change obtained in 96 well plate after addition of cck-8 dye 
6.24     Percentage of viable cells for different concentrations of micelles (Chol+TA) 
6.25     Percentage of viable cells for different concentrations of micelles (Chol+TA+OA) 
6.26     Combination of confocal images to show monolayer disruption by micelles 
6.27     Pixel intensity changes for all four channels (On the cells) 
6.28     Pixel intensity changes for all four channels (Below the cells) 
6.29     Pixel intensity changes for all four channels (Above the cells) 
6.31     Simplified graph to compare pixel intensity change for different channels 
6.32     Pixel intensities for ten different regions of interest before addition of FITC-d (on the cells) 
6.33     Pixel intensity change for all channels (on the cells) 
6.34     Pixel intensities for ten different regions of interest before addition of FITC-d (above the cells) 
6.35     Pixel intensity change for all channels (above the cells) 
6.36     Pixel intensity value for ten different regions of interest before adding FITC-d (below the cells) 
6.37     Pixel intensity change over time for all channels and below the cells 
6.38     Pixel intensity change for all channels and all three stacks  
6.39     Same population of cells in different foci before adding micelles 
6.41     Same population of cells for different foci after addition of peptides encapsulated micelles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
9 
 
Chapter 1  
 
Introduction: 
 
It has become possible to treat many different systemic conditions by protein and peptide drugs due 
to their well-understood physiologic roles and functions. Their usability and availability has also 
increased due to advancements in tools of biotechnology such as molecular biology, hybridoma 
technology, recombinant DNA technology and solid phase peptide synthesis. However, delivering 
orally taken peptides to their sites of action is still a challenge.1 Biologics are more effective and safer 
than small molecules because of their higher specificity to targets. Their complex structure provides 
them this specificity along with other important properties such as reduced toxicity and side-effects. 
In recent years, approval rate of biologics is significantly higher than small molecules.2 Popularity of 
biopharmaceuticals is due to their versatility. They have been able to manage various chronic diseases 
such as diabetes, malignant tumors and some infectious diseases. They can be hormones, enzymes 
and immunomodulators. Some examples of peptides as therapeutic agents are cyclosporine, tuftsin, 
muramyl dipeptide and thymic peptide analogues etc. With already more than 30 biopharmaceuticals 
approved by Food and Drug Administration (FDA), they possess excellent future possibilities in drug 
market.3 
  Small molecules differ from biologics in many aspects, and most prominent one is their 
physicochemical properties, which not only affect their pharmocological aspects such as 
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, mechanism of action etc. but also creates variation in their 
safety and efficacy profile. Small molecules are simple in comparison to biologics. They can be 
manufactured by chemical synthesis and have molecular mass of around 1000 g/mol or 1 kilodalton 
(kDa).4 
 Biologics are amino acid based molecules with sizes ranging from few kilodalton 
peptides (1 to 10 kDa) to much larger proteins (>10 kDa). Also, biologics have longer half-life and more 
limited volume of distribution as a result of their different uptake mechanism by cells such as 
phagocytosis, receptor mediated endocytosis, fluid phase pinocytosis, convective transport etc. 
Furthermore, nearly all small molecules are eliminated by non-targeted organs by cytochrome P450 
metabolism, renal clearance or in bile. In contrast to this, elimination of biologics depend on their 
binding efficiency to their targets. First, they are broken down into amino acids most of which are 
recycled by the body and rest of them are secreted into bile or and excreted with feces or filtered into 
urine for elimination. Moreover, biopharmaceuticals require rigorous quality control to avoid errors 
in manufacturing such as unintended methylation, glycosylation, phosphorylation, structural changes 
etc.4 
Despite of significant growth in market and interest of pharmaceutical companies, 
biologics face many challenges that are not shared to small molecules. In comparison to small 
molecules biologics less readily cross the biological epithelium and therefore are more prone to 
degradation by digestive enzymes.  As a result, most of the biopharmaceuticals are administered by 
either subcutaneous or intravenous route. Following such routes of administration increases cost and 
decreases patient compliance.2 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
10 
 
1.1 
Oral delivery of Peptide drugs: Barriers 
 
The major routes of drug administration and delivery are intramuscular (IM), intravenous (IV), 
intradermal (ID), intranasal (IN) and oral. Other routes such as ocular delivery developed for localized 
site-specific delivery also exists. Each delivery method faces some specific barriers and this creates a 
need for use of delivery devices for protection, targeted delivery and efficacy of drugs. Much liked by 
researchers of academia and industries, oral route is unique for sustained and controllable delivery, 
ease of administration, feasibility for solid formulations and patient compliance. However, absorption 
of oral drugs is more complex in comparison to other routes. For instance, they need to be soluble in 
order to be absorbed, and can follow any of the four different pathways of absorption: transcellular, 
paracellular, carrier-mediated and facilitated transport. 5  
There are both physical and biochemical barriers that an administered drug has to 
overcome in the gastrointestinal tract in order to be absorbed and become available for therapeutic 
effect. Mucus layer is the hydrogel layer composed of large glycoproteins that act as the first physical 
barrier to the absorption of molecules in the gastrointestinal tract. Their physiological role is to 
lubricate the passage, avoid mechanical damage to the epithelium and prevent pathogens to reach 
the cells. Their thickness in the human intestine can be up to 200 µm and contain mucins and some 
enzymes able to break proteins, sugars and proteins. These enzymes can be the degrading agent to 
the peptides taken orally.6   
 
Figure 1.1: Structure and function of mucus layer, attachment of particles in outer 
and inner mucus layer and drug delivery vehicle on the outer mucus.5 
 
Mucus is composed of outer loosely adherent layer and inner firmly adherent layer. 
Thicker outer layer might act as a barrier against transition of released drugs to the submucosal 
tissue. Studied and proposed by researchers Marie Boegh and Hanne Mørck Nielsen, mucus is the 
main obstacle against the bioavailability of oral drugs. On the other hand, role of narrower inner 
mucus layer to enhance uptake efficiency of drugs is known fact. This generates a dual nature of 
mucus layer in absorption of orally delivered drugs.5 Figure below shows overall barrier to an orally 
delivered drug in gastrointestinal tract.  
      
 
          Figure 1.2: Gastrointestinal barrier to oral peptide delivery6 
==PAGE:11==
11 
 
The major physical barrier to the absorption of molecules is the intestinal epithelium 
composed of a single layer of columnar cells. Composed of variety of cells such as enterocytes, goblet 
cells and Paneth cells, their phospholipid bilayer make them semi-permeable, hindering transcellular 
pathway of drug absorption. Similarly, tight junctions composed of group of transmembrane and 
cytosolic proteins are present between the adjacent cells. They have tiny pores rendering it selectively 
permeable to certain small hydrophilic molecules such as ions and nutrients. These tight junctions 
have gate function to control the diffusion of solutes through the paracellular pathway.1 More 
precisely, epithelial cells are linked by adherence and tight junction complexes composed of E-
cadherin, claudins, junctional adhesion molecules and occludins to form a non-penetrable barrier. This 
establishes the epithelial layer as guardian of gut barrier integrity.7  
High level of proteolytic enzymes present in the lumen of intestine, secreted by 
pancreas and mucosal cells constitute the main biochemical barrier. In addition, border of epithelial 
cells contain around fifteen degrading enzymes equally contributing to the degradation of 
administered biomolecules.3 Some examples of highly expressed peptidases in the microvilli of brush 
border membrane of enterocytes include dipeptidyl-peptidases 3 and 4 (DPP3, DPP4), glutamyl 
aminopeptidase, membrane metallo-endopeptidase, transmembrane protease serine 15.6 
 
1.1.1 
Structure of Small Intestine  
 
Small Intestine is the region of gastrointestinal tract, where majority of digestion process occurs in 
symbiosis with billions of microbes present within the lumen. The lumen is lined by a single layer of 
epithelial cells that act as a protective barrier from direct exposure to food antigens and harmful 
microbes. Underlined by stroma containing mesenchymal cells, nerve cells and vasculature, this layer 
of cells are made up of finger-like protrusions (villi) and pockets (crypts).8 
 
                         Figure 1.3: structure of the small intestine8 
 
Villi region is the residence for absorptive enterocytes, goblet cells and secretory 
enteroendocrine cells whereas, proliferating stem cells and Paneth cells reside within the crypts. 
Supportive growth factors for epithelial cells such as WNTs, R-spondins and BMP antagonists are 
secreted by underlying myofibroblasts (mesenchymal cells). 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:12==
12 
 
1.2      Improvement of Oral Delivery of peptides: Strategies 
 
In ideal conditions, an oral drug delivery system should be able to 
a) maintain the integrity of protein molecules until it reaches the site of absorption 
b) release the drug at target absorption site and  
c) preserve the drug molecules at gastrointestinal site irrespective of transitory constraints.9 
Because, less than 1% of the orally administered peptides becomes bioavailable in general 
conditions, researchers have been continuously struggling to improve the absorption and oral delivery 
of peptides through numerous strategies. Some frequently tried and optimized strategies are use of 
permeation enhancers, protease inhibitors, mucoadhesive polymers, polymeric nanoparticles, 
liposomal formulation, structure modification etc.3 
 
1.2.1     Permeation enhancers 
 
These are compounds able to disrupt the intestinal barrier temporarily without significant damage, 
thus allowing them to penetrate and reach blood/lymph circulation. Some examples of such 
compounds are salicylates, fatty acids, bile salts, surfactants, chelating agents, polymers etc. In order 
to improve drug transport, they exhibit various mechanisms of action in gut such as change in 
membrane fluidity, decrease in mucus viscosity, leakage of proteins through membranes, opening of 
tight junctions etc. However, there are cases of severe epithelial damage caused by use of such 
compounds. Furthermore, most proposed permeation enhancers still lack clinical data in human.1 
 
Permeation enhancers should be safe and non-toxic, pharmacologically and chemically 
inert, non-irritant and non-allergenic. Selection of permeation enhancers depend upon 
physicochemical properties of the peptide and the protein drugs. The enhancers show synergistic 
activity in combination compared to the individual enhancer. An example of such combination is 
mixture of sodium salicylate and peanut oil. Chelators support paracellular opening by forming 
complex with calcium ions to allow passage for proteins. Similarly, potential of mixed micellar systems 
to enhance the fluidity of mucosal membrane and subsequent increase in insulin absorption has been 
examined.9 Interestingly, Novo Nordisk has been able to use Salcaprozate Sodium (SNAC) as a 
permeation enhancer for once a day oral formulation of semaglutide, a GLP-1 agonist, in order to 
manage diabetes. In a Phase II randomized control trial, daily administration of oral semaglutide (2.5-
40mg) was able to lower Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) by 0.7% to 1.9% in patients. The once a day oral 
tablet consists of 14 mg of semaglutide co-formulated with 300 mg of SNAC.10 When tablet erodes in 
the stomach, highly concentrated SNAC gets released and neutralize the pH and inactivate pepsin. 
Also, SNAC induces semaglutide monomer production and increases the membrane fluidity of 
epithelium thereby allowing trancellular passage of semaglutide into the systemic circulation.11 
       
 
                            Figure 1.4: Theory of Semaglutide absorption, advocated by Novo Nordisk.11 
==PAGE:13==
13 
 
1.2.2     Enzyme Inhibitors 
 
Some protease inhibitors have been successfully used to improve the oral delivery of peptides and 
proteins. For instance, puromycin and thiorphan have been co-administered with metkaphamid to 
effectively reduce its enzymatic degradation in lumen.1 In addition, recent studies focus on inhibitors 
trypsin and chymotrypsin such as aprotinin, bestanin, amastatin, boroleucine etc. Oral Insulin delivery 
has been confirmed to improve by co-administration with enzyme inhibitors due to its protection 
against luminal enzymes. Enzyme inhibitors work either by local modulation of pH or binding to 
enzymes inhibiting their activity. Despite of protective behavior, these inhibitors are unable to support 
passage of drugs through the biological membrane barrier.3 
 
Widely used for peptide delivery, naturally occurring inhibitors such as aprotonin are 
comparatively non-toxic. They are susceptible to enzymatic degradation in gut and therefore need to 
be administered in large amount to reduce the protease activity. Prolonged and continuous use of 
these inhibitors can result in high toxicity and also affect the absorption of other proteins. Reduced 
digestion of food materials due to non-site specific activity of these compounds causing altered 
intestinal metabolic pattern in GI tract and cell membrane is the major drawback of such inhibitors.9 
 
1.2.3     Bioadhesive systems 
 
These systems are characterized by adhesion of drug carrier system (usually a polymer) to mucosa in 
the gastrointestinal tract. Some examples of such systems are polyacrylates, alginates, derivatives of 
cellulose and chitosan, able to form hydrogen bonds and ionic interactions with biological surface.1 
The adhesion results from attractive force between the polymer and the biological surface. Whole 
process of mucoadhesion can have two distinct stages: the adhesion phase between the polymer and 
the mucosa, during which the polymer diffuse and dilate, and the consolidation phase due to different 
adhesion forces that develops. While in direct contact with the mucosal surface, these systems 
effectively release drug substances directly to the absorptive surface. Furthermore, they are able to 
localize the effect of enzyme inhibitors, control the release of molecules and enhance the duration of 
drug exposure to the absorptive site.3 
 
 
 
Figure 1.5: Attachment and consolidation phase of mucoadhesive polymer3 
==PAGE:14==
14 
 
1.2.4     Prodrug Approach 
 
This approach is based on the chemical modification of original molecule into inactive substance, 
which later on gets triggered by enzymes or other factors in the gastrointestinal tract. Hydrophilic 
molecules like proteins and peptides need some lipophilic features to cross the lipid bilayer of 
epithelial cells and this has been achieved by chemical alteration of reactive amino acids such as lysine 
and cysteine to finally result in improved drug absorption, enhanced stability and reduced 
immunogenicity. Therapeutic peptides and proteins can be modified by direct conjugation reaction 
such as acetylation, C-amidation, N-pyroglutamate conjugation, Pegylation, glycosylation etc. 
Prodrugs can also be achieved by methods such as d-amino acid substitution, olefenic substitution, 
dehydro amino acid substitution, retro inversion modification, thiomethylene modification etc.3 
 
1.2.5     Lipidation (Fatty acid conjugation) 
 
Conjugation of fatty acid group to the biomolecule confer them new properties including improved 
ability to cross the lipid bilayers of epithelial barrier. Addition of lipophilic entity is mainly achieved by 
acylation reaction and improves drug effectiveness and metabolic stability. While reversible lipidation 
of peptides has been recently achieved, palmitate and myristate are two main fatty acids commonly 
used for conjugation.  
Lipid groups increase the affinity of peptide to the cell membrane and therefore are 
more likely to pass through it. This helps to achieve higher cellular uptake. Furthermore, increasing 
the lipid length has resulted in increased cellular uptake. Lipidation also increases the half-life of a 
protein drug. Many of the lipidated therapeutics have been FDA approved and more in development 
phase. However, it can be concluded that lipidation is an underutilized post-translational modification, 
that is even able to result in reduced immunogenicity and improved potency of biopharmaceuticals.2 
 
          
 
Figure 1.6: Cellular uptake of peptides enhanced by          Figure 1.7: Increment in cellular uptake of  
i) 
Flip flop mechanism 
 
    lipidated peptides with increase 
ii) 
Endocytosis2 
 
 
    in length of lipid chain.2 
 
1.2.6     Other Approaches 
 
Other approaches include mimetic peptide approach, protein polymer conjugation, lipid based drug 
delivery system, liposomal encapsulation, solid lipid nanoparticles, polymeric nanoparticles etc.  
 
==PAGE:15==
15 
 
1.3     Two Dimensional (2D) and Three Dimensional (3D) Cell  
           Culture    
                                                                                                                       
Most drugs fail during phase II and Phase III clinical trials due to issues with efficacy and safety. Such 
drug attenuation during development is due to poor preclinical studies and weaknesses in in vitro 
models. Therefore, more robust preclinical studies and accurate in vitro data are the main areas for 
improving success rates of drugs.  
2D cell culture is the culture of cells on a flat surface optimized for attachment and 
growth. Such type of culture is traditional method, however is still in use. This type of culture of cells 
on flat surface is useful to study drug response and mechanism of drug action. Cells grown as a 
monolayer are still in use for high-throughput screening. Two dimensional cell culture conditions 
varies among cell types. Commercially obtained sterile culture medium, usually Minimum Essential 
Medium (MEM) is supplemented with serum and antibiotics for culturing mammalian cell lines. 
Many different cell lines are cultured two dimensionally to study different aspects of 
pharmacokinetics such as absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion and toxicity of drug 
candidates. Although generally accepted and useful, this type of 2D cell culture does not represent 
the natural microenvironment of cells based on the fact that their attachment to the surface and 
growth kinetics they follow are unnatural. Despite having a big role in preclinical studies, data 
obtained from 2D cell culture systems do not seem to  completely translate into phenomena 
happening in in vivo condition.12 
Conventional 2D cultures fail to properly mimic the in vivo conditions because these 
methods do not have control over cell shape which affects cellular bioactivities. Cells in our body are 
performing their bioactivities in response to stimuli from highly complex three dimensional 
microenvironment. Cellular behaviors are governed by factors such as cell-cell interactions, cell-ECM 
distributions etc. These complexities remain incomplete in most 2D cultures. However, cells in 2D 
cultures have equal access to nutrients and growth factors present within the medium. This helps to 
gain homogenous pattern of growth and proliferation. Furthermore, the 2D systems still remain 
attractive to researchers due to their simplicity, efficiency and low cost of maintenance.13 
3D cell culture systems better mimic the in vivo conditions and successfully overcome 
the limitations of 2D culture system. Under this system, living cells are cultured within micro 
assembled devices with a purpose of mimicking microarchitecture of a tissue or an organ. Three 
dimensional cell culture can be scaffold based or non-scaffold based. Scaffold based systems contain 
extracellular matrix (ECM) providing a platform for cells to aggregate, proliferate, migrate and 
differentiate. Biocompatible materials such as collagen, fibrin, hyaluronic acid etc. are used as the 
scaffold material and differs within different cell types. Their sole aim is to support cell adhesion, 
survival, and provide nutrition. Whereas, non-scaffold based methods are popular for forming cell 
aggregates such as spheroids which are either self-assembled or forced. Methods of forming 
spheroids such as hanging drop, low adhesion plates etc. are examples of non-scaffold based three 
dimensional cell culture.12  
 
   
            Figure 1.8: Simplified sketch of 2D and 3D cell culture 
==PAGE:16==
16 
 
 
It is clear that three dimensional cell cultures are better in recapitulating physiology and therefore 
boosting preclinical studies than conventional two dimensional cell culture systems. However, there 
are some areas of ease and convenience within 2D systems, which cannot be avoided from this 
discussion. Table below compares 2D cultures with 3D cultures on various aspects and their 
relevance to in vivo conditions as well.  
 
Aspects 
2D culture system 
3D culture system 
Culture Quality 
High performance 
Reproducibility and simplicity 
Long-term culture 
Fair performance 
Difficult to interpret  
Difficult to carry out 
In vivo imitation 
Do not mimic the natural 
microenvironment and tissue 
structure 
Better mimics the original 
tissues and organs 
Cell Interactions  
Lack cell-cell, cell-extracellular 
environment interactions 
Proper cell-cell, cell-
extracellular environment 
interactions 
Cellular characteristics 
Altered morphology and way 
of division 
 
Preserved morphology and 
way of division 
Access to nutrients 
Equal and unlimited access to 
oxygen, metabolites, nutrients 
and signaling molecules 
Variable access to oxygen, 
nutrients, metabolites and 
signaling molecules 
Cost of Maintenance 
Cheap, commercially available 
tests and media 
More expensive, fewer 
commercially available tests 
Table 1.9: Comparison between 2D and 3D Cell culture systems.14 
There are both advantages and disadvantages of both systems in different aspects and parameters 
that determines comparative relevance to the in vivo condition.  
 
1.4     Caco-2 cell culture: an In vitro model 
 
An in vitro model facilitates the study of complex in vivo phenomena in a simplified way. They 
provide well-controlled and reproducible platform for cell-based assays. Their area of application is 
wide including toxicology, drug testing, tissue engineering, pharmaceutics and nutraceutics. 
Although empowered by use of in vivo model for study of intestinal phenomena, many processes 
and applications are not controllable in such models. Furthermore, legislative boundaries on animal 
use such 3R principle (Reduce, Replace and Refine) diverts the research mode towards in vitro 
models.15  
Caco-2 cells are human colon cancer cells most widely used as in vitro model to study absorption of 
drug candidates. In culture conditions, caco-2 cells form a monolayer on the surface with tight 
junctions between cells. Properties of caco-2 cells match to the intestinal epithelial cells in terms of 
physiology, microvillus structure and enzyme secretion. They also express proteins involved in the 
transport of drug molecules and therefore represent a drug absorption model.12 For permeability 
assays, static transwell monolayer cultures are the most widely used systems.16 
For a compound to have a good oral absorption profile, it should have good solubility and 
permeability properties. Permeability assays for compounds using Caco-2 cells have been widely 
practiced in pharmaceutical companies. Different labs have used them differently with some 
modifications and cells grown on different labs express different transporter protein on them.17 
==PAGE:17==
17 
 
As Caco-2 cells form a monolayer usually after 7 days of seeding, they start 
differentiating which continues for 21 days and form tight junctions. The tight junctions form 
between cells from 5 to 20 postconfluence days. Also in this time period, cells start growing their 
microvilli in both length and density. After postconfluent period of 30 days, the cells have 
morphological polarity and brush border hydrolases comparable to those of mature intestinal 
enterocytes. Overall, Caco-2 cells in culture can have three distinct phases: homogeneously 
undifferentiated, heterogeneously differentiated (0-20 day postconfluence) and homogeneously 
polarized and differentiated (>30 day).  In fact, they have unusually high degree of differentiating 
ability in simple medium supplemented with serum. They have been already utilized to study drug 
transport from all four routes: transcellular, paracellular, carrier mediated and transcytosis.18 Several 
studies have been successfully conducted in past to ensure that Caco-2 monolayer can predict the 
permeability of drug compounds although with some inconsistencies in experimental conditions 
such as pH, ionic composition of medium, shaking rate, additives etc. Such monolayer of cells do not 
have mucin layer as well and therefore membrane transport can be critically affected by pH of the 
culture medium.19 Caco-2 cells have also been found to be useful in forming 3D spheroids to be used 
for permeability assays.20  
 
1.5     Spheroids and Organoids 
Spheroid model is a type of a three dimensional cell culture, simple to practice and mimics in vivo 
conditions quite well during drug efficacy assays. They are considered better in mimicking in vivo 
conditions because of their cytokine expression, cell signaling molecules and drug responses. They 
form by self-assembly when cells are seeded in an ultra low attachment plates. Apart from intestinal 
spheroids generated from Lgr5+ intestinal stem cells, hepatocyte spheroids from liver cells and many 
types of cancer spheroids have already been designed and studied for drug delivery and 
absorption.20 
In 1950s and 1960s, organoids were understood as intracellular organelles and in 
some cases to describe tumor formation. Later in 2009, the term “organoid” was reintroduced to 
describe the structures formed from culture of intestinal epithelial cells in matrigel in presence of 
growth factors such as Epidermal Growth Factors (EGF), Noggin and R-spondin1. However, it is 
focused that organoids should develop from stem cells or progenitor cells, consist multiple organ 
specific cell types, self-organise into 3D structures and acquire some organ specific functions. 
Architecture of intestinal organoids vary from spherical spheroids to budding organoids with distinct 
localization of differentiated cell types. Cells in such structures have polarity, with inward apical 
membrane and outward basal membrane, effectively forming an intact barrier due to tight junctions 
between the cells.8 Following figure shows different types of organoids:  
 
 
Spheroid               Budding organoid           Organoid with mesenchyme 
 Figure 1.10: Spheroids and organoids (brown enterocytes, turquois intestinal 
stem  cells, pink paneth cells, purple enteroendocrine cells and green goblet cells)8 
==PAGE:18==
18 
 
Spheroids and organoids can provide complex and dynamic microenvironment that cells need to 
grow. In addition, they also support cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions, which lack in two 
dimensional cell cultures.  
 
1.6     Micelles:  
Micelles are colloidal aggregates formed from amphiphilic compounds in aqueous solution. They are 
useful in delivery of hydrophobic drugs by encapsulation in the hydrophobic core and usually given 
by intravenous administration. Below critical micellar concentrations amphiphiles exist as monomers 
and as the concentrations increases they aggregate to shield the hydrophobic moiety from aqueous 
medium. Thus, micelles have hydrophilic surface with hydrophobic core useful to encapsulate drug 
molecules. Micelles may have different shape and most of them are spherical with size of 5-20 nm in 
diameter.21 
 
Aggregation of micelles is due to fact that molecules tend to stably exist in its lowest 
potential energy required. When both water loving and water hating parts are exposed to solvent 
such as water, conflict arises within the molecule and get obliged to orient themselves in a way that 
their hydrophobic parts are projected away from the water. Apart from critical micellar 
concentration (CMC), temperature also plays some role in self-assembly of amphiphiles to form 
micelles. The minimum temperature required for surfactants to start self-assemble and form 
micelles is known as Kraft temperature. Below the Kraft temperature, micelles cannot form even at 
higher concentrations of amphiphilic compounds.   Therefore, as a collective system, self-assembly 
process starts above CMC and Kraft temperature.22 
Sodium cholate and Sodium Taurocholate are micelle forming low molecular weight 
bile salts. Mixed micellar systems from sodium cholate were found to increase oral bioavailability of 
poorly soluble drug Silybin by 150% in dogs.21 Not only as a drug carrier, but there has been some 
studies on potential of bile salt micelles on enhancing transfer of solutes across the gastrointestinal 
membrane.  
 
                                          Figure 1.11: Self-assembly of amphiphiles into micelles22 
 
 
==PAGE:19==
19 
 
Chapter 2 
 
Prior Work: 
 
There has been numerous studies on oral delivery of peptide and protein drugs as well as micellar 
systems as a tool to deliver encapsulated drugs. In addition, researchers have found out a need for 
3D cell culture system for pharmacokinetic studies after extensive use and realization of drawbacks 
within the traditional 2D cell culture models. All advanced studies and in vitro modelling that are 
being done today for drug transport studies are results of continuous research that started many 
years ago. Some important works, findings and discoveries relevant to this project done in the past 
are described as follows:  
2.1     Prediction of intestinal drug permeability using Caco-2 cells:  
Caco-2 cell monolayer is the gold standard for in vitro model to study drug absorption. Under normal 
culture conditions, Caco-2 cells divide to form monolayer of mature cells with tight junctions 
between the adjacent cells. This supports their usability as an in vitro model to study 
pharmacokinetic parameters. A study done by researchers of Setsunan University, Japan describes 
development of monolayer of Caco-2 cells on Transwell cell culture chambers and utilization of the 
monolayer to study apical to basolateral permeability of drugs. They applied drugs to the apical 
medium and collected aliquots of medium from basolateral side and then apical to basolateral 
permeability was determined by calculating apparent permeability coefficient Papp by given 
equation:                   𝑃𝑎𝑝𝑝=
𝑑𝑄
𝑑𝑡×
1
𝐴𝐶𝑜   
 
Where dQ/dt is the rate of appearance of drugs on basolateral side 
 
Co is the initial drug concentration on apical side and 
 
A is the surface area of monolayer (cm2). 
Their study also included analysis of concentration of radiolabeled compounds in 
sample solutions using Liquid scintillation counter and reverse phase HPLC method for unlabeled 
compounds. Checking for Transepithelial Electrical Resistance (TEER) of the monolayer before and 
after the experiment supported data acquisition even more in their study.19 
 
 
2.2     Controlling Epithelial Polarity: 
 
With direct interaction to the luminal contents, apical compartment of the epithelial cells of the 
intestine functions to absorb nutrients and drug molecules. Similarly, basolateral surface of the 
epithelial cells remain attached to the underlying basement membrane and works to transport 
nutrients from lumen to the bloodstream. Based on this theory, human intestinal organoids have 
been developed recently as models of human gastrointestinal tract. These organoids are spheroids 
made up of different types of differentiated intestinal cell types used for study of drug transport, 
efficacy and microbial interactions. Cultivated from surgical specimens of intestinal stem cells of 
==PAGE:20==
20 
 
crypt region, these enteroids develop within few days comprising of only epithelial cells. However, it 
is still challenging to use this architecture for drug transport studies due to the fact that apical 
surface remains enclosed facing the lumen of the closed spheroid system.23 
As a replacement technique to slow and labor intensive microinjection technique into 
the lumen of spheroids, study done by a group of researchers at department of pediatrics, Stanford 
University, propose a method to alter the polarity of the enteroids from basal out to the apical out 
enabling access to the apical epithelium. This needed removal of enteroids from basement 
membrane without dissociating them and then culture them in suspension in low attachment plates. 
After few days in suspension culture, changes in morphology of spheroids with reversed polarity can 
be confirmed by dissection microscope or by modulation contrast microscope. Furthermore, the 
study utilized confocal microscopy to quantify the apical out, basal out and mixed polarity enteroids.  
 
 
                   Figure 2.1: Schematic representation for generation of Apical out enteroids.23 
Thus generated apical out enteroids exhibit strong epithelial barrier integrity. This was 
confirmed using dextran diffusion assay for which enteroids were incubated with 4kda fluorescein 
isothiocyanate dextran (FITC-dextran) followed by fluorescence confocal microscopy. The result 
showed that apical-out enteroids completely excluded the FITC-D and those treated with EDTA, the 
chelating agent showed diffused FITC-dextran in intercellular spaces and the center of the 
spheroids.23  
 
2.3    Permeation enhancer potential of micellar systems 
This study uses Caco-2 cell culture model to study absorption enhancement potential of micellar 
systems of Sodium Cholate (NaC) and Sodium Taurocholate (NaTC). Also, simple bile salt micelles 
were compared to mixed micelles of bile salt and linoleic acid for enhancement potential. 
Mechanism of enhancement and relative toxicities were analysed by tests such as TEER, MTT assays 
and transmission electron microscope (TEM).24 
This study validates that Caco-2 cell monolayer on transwell can be utilized to study transport of 
different markers along with membrane integrity testing of the layer by TEER measurement before 
and after the experiment. Calculation of apparent permeability coefficient (Papp) for marker 
molecules furthermore help to predict and compare the permeability of compounds. MTT assay 
used in this study based on dehydrogenase activity also inspires us to use similar cell viability assay 
in our experiment. The study produced promising results with micellar systems of NaTC on cells. The 
monolayer recovered after exposure to 20mM simple micelles of NaTC, which was also in agreement 
with previous studies.24 
 
 
==PAGE:21==
21 
 
Chapter 3  
 
Objectives of the project  
 
The main purpose of this project to design and establish an in vitro model system for 
biopharmaceutical uptake study. For this, the first and foremost thing to achieve is culture of 
relevant cell type in culture condition. Thereafter, application of biologics of interest to the cells in 
free or encapsulated form is another important task that follows. Finally, analysis of uptake is aimed 
by confocal microscopy.  
Caco-2 cells in monolayer, have served as robust in vitro model in several 
pharmacokinetic studies for several years. Adhered together with tight junctions between the cells, 
monolayer is useful in separately studying transcellular and paracellular uptake of compounds. 
Although already shown by many studies that Caco-2 monolayer permeability assay can predict oral 
absorption of drugs in vivo, this project further aims to establish an in vitro model for 
biopharmaceutical uptake study encapsulated within a nanoparticle system. Besides, learning 
objectives of the cell culture system within this project include handling of cells, passaging, 
optimizing the culture conditions in terms of number of cells to be seeded or amount of collagen to 
be added, freezing and thawing of Caco-2 cells etc. Minor things such as preparation of media, 
dissociation of cells while passaging, cultivating them on new wells and chips for research purposes 
are equally important goals of the project. All in all, important milestone of the project with cell 
cultivation section is to achieve a perfect monolayer of Caco-2 cells with proper membrane integrity 
and related features to be used for study of uptake of peptides and later on be imaged using 
confocal microscopy for analysis.  
The project further aims to explore the potential of micelles, the nanoparticles to 
encapsulate and deliver the peptide drugs through intestinal epithelial barrier through in vitro 
absorption and permeability study on Caco-2 monolayer formed on wells. Therefore, preparing 
micelles from low molecular weight amphiphilic bile salt and utilizing them to encapsulate peptides 
are other practical learning objectives. Furthermore, we aim to characterize them before use and 
even alter or optimize the formulation. Alternatively, potential of bile salt micelles as an absorption 
enhancer will be analysed in this study.  
Apart from these, the project looks for practicing a different type of cell culture 
technique, which utilizes µ-Slide III 3D perfusion chip to cultivate cells under flow conditions. Getting 
cells to divide and grow on such platform will be an achievement for us. Monolayer formed on the 
wells can be utilized for transport assays and imaging after staining with fluorescent dyes. In other 
words, live cell imaging is achievable with this type of system with careful handling and optimum 
growth conditions.  
Conclusively, the project is designed in order to achieve practical training and 
understanding of different techniques ranging from cell culture to nanoparticles and imaging. These 
different tools and techniques, as a whole are supposed to give a meaningful outcome in the end. An 
in vitro model demonstrating a proper transport of peptide of interest will declare success to the 
project. Using two different peptides with conjugated lipids of varying length will help us to predict 
==PAGE:22==
22 
 
uptake enhancement by lipidation in comparative way. The fluorophore labelled to peptides will 
provide signals after uptake which later will be translated and analysed with Imagej software. 
Besides, it is undeniable that learning how to use available devices and techniques such as Dynamic 
Light Scattering (DLS), Tecan Plate Reader, Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) and related 
softwares to translate our results and also as a part of laboratory skills are other secondary targets 
of the project.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:23==
23 
 
Chapter 4  
 
Theoretical Framework 
 
Although regarded as traditional, monolayer systems increasingly find their use in research and 
development due to their features such as simplicity, scale-up capability and assay compatibility. In 
addition, monolayer in transwell systems provide access to both apical and basal sides of the 
epithelium and to the adjacent fluid reservoirs making it possible to test for food, microorganisms 
and drug molecules. Monolayer of cells generally grow over a scaffold that supports cell attachment 
and proliferation. Thus developed monolayers display features such as polarized morphology 
(luminal/basal), brush border proteins and tight junctions. The contiguous impermeable layer can 
support variety of physiological assays such as barrier function, cytotoxicity, ion transport etc.25 
4.1     Collagen scaffold 
Collagen is the most abundantly found protein in human body that forms a scaffold to provide 
strength and structure. Secreted by cells of connective tissue, they are found in extracellular matrix. 
This natural polymer is highly used as scaffold in the cell culture because of their adhesive 
properties, high cell viability and controlled proliferation. The physical and chemical properties of 
the collagen scaffold often shapes the characteristics of cells.12 
 
                                             
 
 
Figure 4.1: self-renewing monolayer of cells on the collagen hydrogel25 
4.2     IBIDI Technologies  
IBIDI technologies include variety of µ-Slides and µ-Dishes designed and produced for culture of cells 
and high-end microscopic analysis. Their bottom is made up of glass.  
4.2.1 
IBIDI µ-slide 8 well bottom 
The µ-slide 8 well glass bottom consists of identical eight square fields where cells can be cultivated 
and imaged using microscope. Some important applications of this well are immunofluorescence, 
live cell imaging and microscopy.26 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
24 
 
4.2.2.     IBIDI µ-slide III 3D Perfusion 
 
 
This particular µ-slide is an array of six wells for cultivating cells in which two of the wells are 
connected by a channel. Long term cell culture is achievable in this system with channels connected 
to a pump for perfusing the wells.27  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                              
 
Figure 4.2: µ-slide III 3D Perfusion27                                                  Figure 4.3: µ-Slide 8 Well26 
         
        
 
                 Figure 4.4: Technical Features of Perfusion Chip27 
4.2.3     IBIDI Pump System 
IBIDI Pump System is an advanced platform for cultivation of cells under continuous flow of media. 
This system tends to ideally simulate various physiological conditions. For instance, cultivation of 
endothelial cells in pump system for simulation of blood vessels. This system facilitates live cell 
imaging, immunofluorescence, defined shear stress and 3D cell culture.28     
 
 
Figure 4.5: IBIDI Pump System28 
 
==PAGE:25==
25 
 
4.3     Nanoparticles for Drug Delivery 
Technological advances in past few years have shifted conventional dosage forms of medicines such 
as suspensions, powder, tablets and capsules to nano-enabled dosage forms or nanomedicines. 
Nanomedicines are composed of nanoparticles in solid or liquid matrix. The scientific phenomenon 
that gives rise to most of the nanoparticle formation is self-assembly which implies controlled 
precipitation in aqueous media. For example, polar lipids self assemble into micelles and liposomes 
and so do the amphiphilic polymers into polymeric vesicles and micelles.21 
Micelles form from relatively hydrophilic amphiphiles and are useful to encapsulate 
hydrophobic drugs within their hydrophobic core.  Their formation in aqueous media can be 
spontaneous or requires some energy in the form of vortexing or sonication. Micelles prepared in non-
aqueous media are reverse micelles where orientation of amphiphiles is inverted.21 Besides, micelles 
from bile salts are also able to act as permeation enhancers. However, their enhancing potential 
comes with some toxicity to the cells. Nevertheless, micellar systems of Sodium Taurocholate (NaTC) 
are regarded as safe enhancers without significant membrane damage 
                 
 
Figure 4.6: Micelles and Reverse Micelles               Figure 4.7: Structure of Sodium Taurocholate                                         
 
 
 
 
     (NaTC)      
4.4     Cholesterol:  
Cholesterol is an important component of cell membrane that stabilizes the bilayer with its action of 
buffering of fluidity and rigidity. Nanotechnology uses cholesterol to stabilize liposomes. Cholesterol 
establishes liposomes as an effective drug carrier system by reducing the permeability of phospholipid 
bilayer to ions and small polar molecules as well as blocks proteins to penetrate and create disorder 
in the bilayer.21 
              
 
Figure 4.8: Structure of Cholesterol21                             Figure 4.9: Cholesterol aided transition of   
                                                                                                                      micelles into vesicles 
==PAGE:26==
26 
 
In lipid nanocarriers, cholesterol intercalates between the phospholipid bilayer so that 
non-polar rings remain embedded in the hydrophobic core. This restricts the mobility of the 
phospholipids at higher temperatures and increases fluidity by preventing packing at lower 
temperature. Finally, encapsulation efficiency of the system gets improved by cholesterol. Cholesterol 
are not soluble in water and therefore in micelles, they remain in the hydrophobic region and makes 
them more rigid.21 One of the study even shows that micelles from cationic gemini surfactant 
(Tetramethylene-1,4-bis(dimethyltetradecylammonium bromide)) transit to more rigid vesicles with 
better drug encapsulation efficiency with the aid of cholesterol.29 
 
4.5     Dyes, fluorescent dyes and peptides 
Fluorescent dyes used in staining of cells in various experiments are made up of fluorophore. A 
fluorophore is a chemical compound that is able to re-emit light upon light excitation. Such 
compounds are composed of several aromatic groups. They can be planar or cyclic molecules. To play 
their role as a marker for bioactive agents such as proteins, antibodies, nucleic acids etc. these dyes 
covalently bond to the macromolecules. Analytical method such as fluorescent imaging utilizes these 
dyes to stain tissues and cells.30 
4.5.1     Cell Tracker Blue 
Also known as 7–amino -4-chloromethylcoumarin, cell tracker blue is a fluorescent dye that can 
easily pass through cell membrane. Once it is inside the cells, it gets transformed into cell 
membrane-impermeant reaction products. The dye can get transferred to daughter cells but not to 
the adjacent ones. The dye is able to provide fluorescence for at least 72 hours. Good properties of 
the dye are nontoxic, well retained in cells and brightly fluorescent at physiological pH. Furthermore, 
the excitation/emission spectra of this dye are suitable to multiplex with green and red fluorescent 
dyes. Long term staining) of cells (about 3 days) require 5-25 µM of the dye and shorter experiments 
need less dye (0.5 – 5 µM).31  
       Molecular weight = 209.6317,  Molecular formula = C10H8NO2Cl                                          
            
 
                 Figure 4.11: Chemical structure of 7-amino-4-chloromethylcoumarin (cell tracker blue)32 
4.5.2     Tetramethylrhodamine (TRITC)  
TRITC is a bright orange fluorescent dye which can be excited using 561 nm laser. Also known as 5/6-
tetramethyl-rhodamine isothiocyanate, TRITC is a derivative of rhodamine dye reliable in labeling of 
proteins and antibodies. The dye is functionalized with isothiocyanate reactive group (—N=C=S) at 
one of the hydrogen atom which makes it reactive toward primary amine groups of proteins and 
peptides.33 
==PAGE:27==
27 
 
 
         Figure 4.12: Chemical Structure of TRITC33 
4.5.3     Fluorescein isothicyanate- dextran (FITC-dextrans) 
Fluorescien isothiocynate- dextran are polysaccharides labeled with fluorescein isothicyanate. These 
are exogenous substances that can used to study peptide and protein permeabilization. 
Commercially available FITC-dextrans can be 4 to 70 kDa. They negligibly bind to plasma membrane 
and have high sensitivity of fluorescence detection.34 
Also studied in mice, concentration of 4kDa FITC-dextran in plasma gives the measure of paracellular 
permeability.35 The hydroxyl groups of dextrans are conjugated with FITC. The excitation maximum 
and emission maximum of FITC-dextran are 490 and 520 nm respectively. Apart from cell 
permeability study, it can also be used to study plant cell wall porosity.36  
 
Figure 4.12: Attachment of FITC to free hydroxyl group of dextran (anhydroglucose polymer)  
4.5.4     Cell Counting Kit -8 (CCK-8) dye 
The cck-8 dye utilizes water soluble tetrazolium salt named WST-8 [2-(2-methoxy-4-nitrophenyl)-3-
(4-nitrophenyl)-5-(2,4- disulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium to produce a water soluble formazan dye upon 
reduction. The non-radioactive is useful in determining viable cells in cytotoxicity assays. 
Dehydrogenases present in the cells reduce WST-8 to an orange colored product called formazan. 
Higher is the amount of formazan produced, greater is the number of viable cells.37 
==PAGE:28==
28 
 
                     
 
 
Figure 4.13: Structure of WST-8 and WST-8 formazan37 
4.5.5     Experimental peptide (salmon calcitonin) 
Calcitonin is a 32 amino acid peptide hormone widely used for medical purposes. Salmon calcitonin 
has higher potency than human calcitonin and finds its wide utility in therapeutic agent for bone 
disease. Commercially available in an injectable form and nasal spray, a new oral formulation has 
also been recently developed after combination with caprylic acid derivative to survive the intestinal 
degradation.38 
 
Lipid conjugation enhances the deliverability of peptides. The lipid moiety help 
proteins to interact with its binding sites in the cell membrane. It also increases the enzymatic 
stability of the peptide. Calcitonin has been lipidized by reversible aqueous lipidization (REAL) 
method to gain enhanced stability and potency. After oral administration, such reversible conjugates 
showed regeneration of parent drug.39 
 
Figure 4.14: Schematic diagram showing Calcitonin in conjugation with Palmitic acid.  
The lysine derivative of palmitic acid is mixed by stirring with tris(2-carboxylethyl)-
phosphine to get the conjugate.39 
 
4.6     Instruments and Devices 
Wide range of instruments and devices are used for this project. Each device used has interesting 
scientific background and mechanism of action. Details of some of the major instruments used and 
their applicability are explained as follows:  
4.6.1     Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS) 
This is the most common method of particle size measurement of nanometer range particles. This 
technique is based on the Brownian motion of the particles. In dispersed phase, particles are 
constantly moving in random directions and colliding to solvent molecules. The collision releases 
some energy responsible for particle movement. Smaller particles are affected more with this energy 
transfer and therefore are moving at higher speeds than smaller particles.  
==PAGE:29==
29 
 
 
The instrument setup consists of a single frequency laser directed to the sample 
within a cuvette. The incident laser light gets scattered in all directions after striking the particles in 
the sample. The scattered light signal is detected at certain angle and over time. The DLS measures 
the speed of the particles undergoing brownian motion. Brownian motion velocity defines 
translational diffusion coefficient (D) and finally this value is converted into particle size by Stokes-
Einstein equation40:  
dH = kT / 3ηπ D where  
dH means hydrodynamic diameter 
 
T = Absolute temperature 
k= Boltzmanns Constant 
 
 
η = Solvent viscosity 
D = Diffusion coefficient  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.15: DLS setup40 
 
4.6.2     Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA):  
This is similar technique used for sizing of nanoparticles. In this technique, the sample is illuminated 
by a laser beam and light sensitive CCD or CMOS camera arranged at 90֯ angle to the irradiation 
plane is used to record scattered lights from particles under Brownian motion. Such an arrangement 
is able to detect and track brownian motion of 10 to 1000 nm particles.  This system is able to track 
individual particles and obtain their hydrodynamic sizes. This technique is considered a multi-
parametric tool as it can used to characterize nanoparticles based on size, concentration, zeta 
potential and fluorescence on same sample.41 
 
 
 
Figure 4.16: Schematic setup of Nanoparticle Tracking Analyzer41 
==PAGE:30==
30 
 
4.6.3     Spark Multi-mode Microplate Reader (Tecan) 
According to the information available in brochure of Tecan Microplate Reader, the product 
manufacturing company, the microplate reader has high-speed monochromator for absorbance 
measurements. The device is able to provide all in one solution for ELISA, DNA/Protein quantification 
and fast spectral scanning. The device has unique Fusion Optics for fluorescence which allows any 
combinations of filters or monochromators on both excitation and emission side for all 
measurements. The instrument has full control over temperature and atmospheric condition of the 
sample making it suitable for enzyme sensitive assays as well.42 
                   
 
                 Picture 4.17:  Tecan Microplate Reader Device in laboratory (Building 423, DTU) 
The computer connected to the computer uses a software called Spark Control to obtain and excel 
the data.  
4.6.4         Confocal Microscopy:  
Confocal microscope is useful in acquiring high-resolution images of biological samples. The 
microscope is unique from traditional microscopes for acquiring images without any out-of-focus 
lights. This makes it possible to view only stained epitopes of the sample without any background 
noises. Useful for in-depth study of biological tissues in bioscience research, the microscope can be 
employed for imaging multiple fluorescent stains, localization and co-localization of proteins, 3D 
visualizations, semi-quantitative analysis of protein expressions and live cell imaging.43 
 
Marvin Minsky hypothesized that putting a hole in the path of light can remove out-
of-focus lights. The confocal microscope acquires point-scanned images by the help of such small 
holes (pinholes) of the same size as the point spread function in the conjugate plane to the focal 
plane.  
         
 
Figure 4.18: Schematic diagram showing Confocal setup43 
==PAGE:31==
31 
 
(a) Simplified diagram of Confocal Microscope setup 
(b) Simplified diagram showing point by point scanning (Yellow dots indicate 
the laser light scanning the sample) 
This microscope, owing to point by point scanning of specimen by pinholes, acquires image without 
any out-of-focus light. This concludes that the system divides the sample into a grid of small points, 
which is visited by the laser. Detectors for confocal microscope are extremely sensitive 
photomultiplier tubes.43 
4.6.4.1     Nikon Spinning Disc Confocal Microscope (SDCM) 
Nikon Spinning Disc Confocal Microscope is a variant of confocal microscope, which is well suited for 
real time imaging of living cells. Structurally, the microscope consists of confocal scanning unit 
containing the light source (laser or fluorescence lamp), a rotating disc with thousands of pinholes 
and a CCD camera. The pinholes in the rotating disc are arranged in such a pattern that they cover 
every position of an image while the disc rotates.  
 
In this microscope, laser light creates an even field of illumination on a section of the 
disc. Most of the lights do not pass through the disc and those that pass through the pinholes form a 
set of minibeams that sweep the field of image while the disc rotates. Same pinhole plays a role of 
both excitation and emission aperture while each minibeam in itself has common focus.44 
 
 
 
 
 
       Figure 4.19: Schematic drawing of multi-beam SDCM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
32 
 
4.6.5     Nucleocounter  
Nucleocounter is a high precision instrument for counting cells in a given sample of cell suspension. 
It can also be used to count aggregated cells and cells within the microcarriers. 
                  
 
 
Picture 4.21: Nucleocounter in the cell laboratory (Building 423, DTU) 
The nucleocounter instrument within the cell laboratory, DTU building 423, is NucleoCounter NC-200 
contains optimized analysis settings. The device is an all in one solution for cell counting and cell 
viability determination. According to the information in the official website of the product, the 
system needs a Via1 cassette for sample handling, which is disposable and volume-calibrated to 
ensure accurate counting. Some advantages of this system include no requirement of pipettes, toxic 
chemicals and minimal clean-up.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:33==
33 
 
Chapter 5  
 
Methodology  
 
This project is a sum of variety of activities and experiments done at different time points and 
combined to get a meaningful outcome in the end. Laboratory works range from preparing micelles 
to cultivation of cells in cell lab and staining them prior to confocal microscopy for analysis. Every 
activity performed was based on previous scientific study with well-established theory and 
reasonable argument. Published scientific papers were followed for generating ideas and methods.  
5.1     Cell cultivation and Passaging 
5.1.1     Materials and Reagents: 
For all types of cell culture related laboratory works, following reagents and materials were used: 
Dulbecco Phosphate Buffer Saline (DPBS) purchased from Sigma Aldrich  
Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) Eagle with Earle´s salts, non-essential amino acids and sodium 
bicarbonate without L-glutamine purchased from Sigma Aldrich 
Collagen I Bovine was obtained from Gibco (Life Technologies) 
IBIDI µ-Slide 8 Well and IBIDI µ-Slide III 3D Perfusion Chip Purchased from IBIDI Company, Germany 
 
5.1.2    Passaging Caco-2 cells 
Splitting (passaging) Caco-2 cells on T75 flask was the first thing to learn in this project. A T75 flask 
with already cultured Caco-2 cells was checked for confluency on light microscope at cell laboratory 
room and splitting was performed for confluency greater than 90% under aseptic conditions within a 
Laminar Air Flow (LAF) bench. For this, the old medium was aspirated and washing with 10 ml of 
phosphate buffer solution (PBS) was done. This was followed by addition of 2ml of Trypsin/EDTA 
solution. As cells were dissociated by the action of Trypsin/EDTA (confirmed by microscopy), dilution 
with 10 ml media was followed by centrifugation for 3 minutes. The obtained pellet of cells was 
resuspended by 3 ml of fresh pre-warmed media and a new T75 flask containing 15 ml of fresh pre-
warmed media was seeded with 500 µl of cell suspension making 1:6 split ratio. Small aliquot of cell 
suspension (500 µl) was allocated in an eppendorf tube for characterization of cells by Nucleo-
counter for size, viability percentage and count (cells/ml). Finally, the flask seeded with cells was 
incubated in incubator with 37֯C temperature and 5% CO2. 
5.1.3     Freezing Caco-2 cells  
Freezing of cells was performed only once, for which cells were first trypsinized and centrifuged as 
usual. However, resuspension of pellet was done by correct volume of cold freezing medium with 5% 
Dimethyl Sulfoxide (DMSO). Cells were properly tricherated to get single cell suspension and then 
counted using nucelo-counter for concentration and viability percentage. Six cryovials were  added 
with half ml of cell solution in each. Immediately, the vials were transferred into Mr. Frosty 
container to ensure that cell solution decreases in temperature by 1֯C each minute. After freezing 
overnight at -80֯C, the cells in the frozen form were permanently stored in -150֯C freezer.   
 
==PAGE:34==
34 
 
5.1.4     Cultivation of Caco-2 cells on IBIDI µ-Slide 8 well  
Cells on IBIDI µ-slide 8 well plate are supposed to form a monolayer of cells after few days of 
incubation. This is a very useful set-up for studying drug transport and metabolism. Cac0-2 cells on 
IBIDI 8 well plates were cultivated numerous times throughout the project period for different 
experiments and analysis. The general procedure for cultivation include coating of the µ-slide with 
collagen. For this, the wells were added with 200ul of collagen (diluted 50 times PBS) and then 
incubated for 30 minutes. 80-90% confluent T75 flask was splitted. In that process, the cell pellet 
after centrifugation was resuspended with 3 ml of fresh pre-warmed media and 500 µl of it was 
allocated in an eppendorf tube for cell counting. After cell counting, calculation was done to seed 
required number of cells to the wells. The coated wells were then washed three times with PBS and 
cells were seeded making total volume of 200 µl per well. Incubation was done in the incubator 
providing 37֯C temperature and 5% Co2 condition.   
 
5.1.5     Cultivation of Caco-2 Cells on IBIDI µ-Slide III 3D Perfusion Chip 
Similar to above mentioned procedure, the wells of Perfusion Chip were coated with 50x Collagen 
and then incubated for 30 minutes. Under aseptic conditions of Laminar Air Flow bench, Cells on a 
T75 flask were trypsinized and counted as usual. Then, the wells were seeded with 10 µl of cell 
suspension and covered with lid before incubation for 2 hours period in order to allow cells to attach 
to the matrix properly. After the incubation period, protection foil from the slide was removed and 
sealed with a transparent coverslip. Syringes of 3 ml and 1 ml volumes were used to perfuse the 
system by connecting them to the Luer adapters. 2 ml of fresh pre-warmed media was added to 
each syringe and let it flow to respective syringe on the other side to ensure the flow. Finally, the 
setup was incubated at 37֯C and 5% Co2 condition in the incubator. Everyday, medium from one 
syringe was manually pipetted to the corresponding syringe on other side to further ensure the flow. 
Likewise, new medium was changed with old one every 2-3 days to keep the cells fresh and dividing. 
5.2     Cell staining and Imaging: 
Cells cultivated on all kinds of chips and wells were stained before imaging. Most of the cells were 
stained with fluorescent dyes and performed live cell imaging while only for a time, cells were fixed 
and observed.  
5.2.1     Staining and Imaging of cells on IBIDI 8 well after fixation  
5.2.1.1     Materials and Reagents:  
Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS) 
 
Lectins (WGA, WL, SNA, WEA) 
Formaldehyde 
 
 
Hoechst 
Phalloidin 
 
 
 
Triton X-100 
 
5.2.1.2     Method:      
As cells formed confluent monolayer on wells of IBIDI 8 slide, the cells were washed with PBS and then 
fixed by adding with few drops of formaldehyde on each slide. As cells got fixed, they were washed 
again and added with Triton X-100 diluted in PBS to only four of the wells so that remaining four wells 
on upper row are Triton X negative and then incubated for 5 minutes. Then, four different vials of dyes 
each containing both Phalloidin (12.5 µl) and Hoechst (12.5 µl) and only one type of lectin (each at 5 
µg/ml concentration) from WGA, WL, SNA and WEA types were prepared. This was followed by 
==PAGE:35==
35 
 
addition of 200 µl of dye mixture to each well and incubation at room temperature for 20 minutes. 
Then, they were washed with PBS twice and observed by confocal microscope.  
 
Triton-x positive  
 
 
Triton-x negative 
 
           Table 5.1: Experimental setup on IBIDI 8 well for imaging of fixated cells.  
 
5.2.2     Staining and Live Cell Imaging of cells on IBIDI slides (8 well and chip) 
Every slide and chip cultivated with cells were maintained fresh and dividing by providing them fresh 
medium every 2-3 days interval. As cells formed confluent monolayer, they were stained and observed 
by confocal microscope. However, different dyes were tried for live cell imaging than those for fixated 
cells.  
5.2.2.1     Materials and Reagents  
Cell Tracker Blue (CTB) 500 times dilution in DMEM 
TetramethylRhodamine-Isothiocyanate (TRITC)  
Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS) 
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (-Phenol Red)  
 
5.2.2.2     Method  
 
Cell Tracker blue solution was prepared first by diluting it 500 times in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle 
Medium (DMEM).  For cells on IBIDI 8 well slide, after getting rid of old medium from wells, they were 
washed with PBS for three times. After adding 200 µl of Cell Tracker Blue solution the slide was 
incubated for 30 minutes in the incubator. Following incubation, cells were again washed with PBS 
three times and given 200 µl of fresh new medium (DMEM), making them ready for live cell imaging 
on confocal microscope. Staining of cells by TRITC is based on the activity that 2µM of TRITC is added 
to collagen used for coating the wells. Therefore, cells were already stained with this fluorescent dye 
in the process of cell cultivation.  
 
Procedure for staining cells on IBIDI chip slightly differs because of its complexity and 
flow system maintenance. As confluent monolayer of cells were formed on wells, old media were 
pipetted out from syringes and supplied with PBS to the same syringes for washing by flow. After 
washing, the syringes were supplied with Cell Tracker Blue solution and let the flow occur through the 
wells without forming any bubbles. This was followed by incubation for 30 minutes. Washing with PBS 
was performed again and supplied with fresh colorless media (DMEM) making the cells ready for 
imaging.  
 
 
 
 
(Phallodin + Hoechst) 
 
 
WGA 
(Phallodin + Hoechst) 
 
 
WL 
(Phallodin + Hoechst) 
 
 
SNA 
 (Phallodin + Hoechst) 
        
 
WEA 
(Phallodin + Hoechst) 
 
 
WGA 
(Phallodin + Hoechst) 
 
 
WL 
(Phallodin + Hoechst) 
 
                         
SNA 
(Phallodin + Hoechst) 
 
 
WEA 
==PAGE:36==
36 
 
5.3     Micelles preparation 
Micelles for our experiments were prepared from micelle forming bile salt with Cholesterol. However, 
a lipid composition was also introduced in some formulations. Some micelles were encapsulated with 
experimental peptides. Altogether, three different batches and four different formulations of micelles 
were prepared throughout the project period. Thus, prepared micelles were stored in refrigerator at 
-4֯C. 
5.3.1     Materials: 
Bile Salt: Sodium Taurocholate purchased from EMD Millipore Corp. USA 
Cholesterol purchased from 
Lipid: Oleic Acid, a viscous liquid form 
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) 
Peptides: experimental peptides CUH067 and CUH049 
These two peptides are salmon calcitonin with fluorophore (FITC) and a linker on the N-terminus 
with two lipid chains. CUH067 has shorter lipid chain (C4/C4) while CUN049 has longer peptide chain 
(C16/C16) 
5.3.2     Method 
First batch of micelles preparation was performed in DMEM as aqueous solution, which included 
four different formulations as follows: 
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid in DMEM 
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid with CUH067 in DMEM 
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid + Oleic Acid in DMEM 
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid + Oleic Acid with CUH049 in DMEM 
 
Calculation was done before weighing the components to obtain 25 mM 
concentration of Taurocholic Acid and 15 µM concentration of Cholesterol for micelle preparation. 
For micelle composition Cholesterol+ Taurocholic Acid in DMEM, 129 mg of Taurocholic Acid and 
0.058 mg of Cholesterol were weighed and mixed with 10 ml DMEM in a vial. The mixture was then 
shaken well and vortexed for few minutes to allow compositions to self-assemble into micelles.  
 
For all formulations, same mass of Taurocholic Acid and Cholesterol were used to 
have uniformity in the final product. For formulations using Oleic Acid and Peptides, the individual 
components were weighed, mixed and vortexed. More precisely, 0.204 mg of CUH067, 0.22 mg of 
CUH049 and 1.6 µl of Oleic Acid were calculated, weighed and added before vortexing the solution.  
 
Second batch of micelles were prepared using different amount of individual 
compositions for same volume of aqueous solution (10 ml). However, Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS) 
was used as solvent this time. We tried 10-fold increase in amount of Taurocholic Acid and 20-fold 
increase in amounts of Cholesterol and Oleic Acid while keeping the amount of peptides to be 
encapsulated constant. In that scenario, weights of individual compositions taken were 1290 mg of 
Taurocholic Acid, 1.14 mg of Cholesterol and 32 µl of Oleic Acid in 10 ml of PBS. Such increment was 
an attempt to obtain micelles of proper size and concentration. Although, only two formulations 
were prepared for this batch, variability was generated by sonication step for some of them at the 
end of the micelles preparation process. So the formulations prepared were as follows:  
==PAGE:37==
37 
 
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid (with sonication) 
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid (without Sonication) 
 
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid + Oleic Acid (with Sonication) 
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid + Oleic Acid (without Sonication) 
 
The third batch of micelles prepared were just the repetition of what was done in the 
second batch. However, Oleic Acid as a composition was excluded this time. Instead, micelles with 
peptide encapsulation (CUH067 & CUH049) were attempted on this batch. Therefore, formulations 
prepared can be listed as follows: 
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid  
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid with CUH067 
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid with CUH049 
 
5.4    Size determination of micelles 
Prepared micelle samples were studied for their sizes mainly by Dynamic Light Scattering 
instrument. However, few samples was also tested for size by Nanoparticle Tracking Analyzer (NTA) 
device to compare the results with that from DLS.  
5.4.1     DLS Measurement  
5.4.1.1     Materials: 
Prepared micelle samples 
Dynamic Light Scattering, Malvern  
Polystyrene Cuvettes 
 
5.4.1.2     Method: 
All prepared micelle samples were characterized for their sizes using Malvern Dynamic Light 
Scattering instrument. For each batch, micelles were followed for a period of week for stability and 
changes in sizes. For size measurement, Dynamic Light Scattering instrument present in the 
laboratory was used for which 200 µl of micelle sample was taken in a polysterene cuvette and 
diluted with 1000 µl of PBS. However, earlier samples, 600 µl of sample was diluted with 600 µl of 
PBS. After proper mixing and avoiding any bubbles, measurement of sizes for each sample was done 
in triplicates using the instrument and the Malvern Zeta-sizer software. The obtained sizes values 
were used to plot graphs for comparison and data presentation.  
5.4.2     Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) 
Few samples from third batch and a first batch sample were analyzed for size and fluorescence by 
NTA device. In doing so, following materials and method were followed: 
5.4.2.1     Materials and Reagents  
Micelle samples 
Zetaview Particle Tracking Analyzer device  
 
==PAGE:38==
38 
 
5.4.2.2     Method 
Firstly, pump (water) was started for 30 seconds until few particles were detected. Then the pump 
was turned off and front of the cell was rinsed by injecting 5 ml of milliQ water.  Measurement 
sample was prepared by dilution of the micelle in the ratio 1:1000. 500µl of the sample was injected 
into the cell of the device by the help of a 1ml syringe while making sure that no air is let to pass in 
with the sample. Zetaview software in the adjacent computer was used to command the device to 
measure size and fluoroscence measurement. Video acquisition command was used to visually 
detect and observe individual particles on the screen of computer. The process was repeated for 
each sample used for measurement. After the experiments, pump was turned on again to rinse the 
system by milliQ water. 15 ml of air was injected into the cell and then the system was shut down.  
 
5.5     Cell Viability Assay/Cytotoxicity  
 
Prepared micelles were tested for their toxicity against Caco-2 cells over time and concentration. 
 
5.5.1     Materials and Reagents 
 
96 well plate with cultivated monolayers    
(Phosphate Buffer Saline (PBS) 
Micelle samples (Chol +TA and Chol +TA+OA) 
(DMEM) Dulbeccos Modified Eagle Medium (-phenol red)  
Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) dye purchased from Sigma Life Science 
Tecan multi mode microplate reader 
 
5.5.2     Method 
 
 For this experiment, a 96 well plate was cultivated with Caco-2 cells until they form a monolayer. 
The second batch of micelles of 250 mM concentration was used to prepare different concentrations 
as follows: 80 mM, 40mM, 20mM, 10mM, 5mM, 2.5mM and 1.25 mM of micelles in DMEM (-Phenol 
Red). After a PBS wash, half of the plate was added with micelles of different concentrations in 
triplicates while leaving the remaining half untouched and wells with no micelles addition as Control 
(C). Two different micelle formulations used to study their comparative toxic profiles were as 
follows:  
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid (TA) 
Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid (TA) + Oleic Acid (OA) 
The table below represents the experimental setup for 96 well plate for cytotoxicity assay 
 
C 
C 
C 
80 
80 
80 
40 
40 
40 
20 
20 
20 
Chol+TA 
C 
C 
C 
80 
80 
80 
40 
40 
40 
20 
20 
20 
Chol+TA+OA 
10 
10 
10 
5 
5 
5 
2.5  
2.5 
2.5 
1.25 1.25 1.25 Chol +TA 
10 
10 
10 
5 
5 
5 
2.5  
2.5  
2.5  
1.25 1.25 1.25 Chol+TA+OA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          Table 5.2: Experimental setup on 96 well plate for cytotoxicity study 
 (Numbers represent concentration of added micelles in mM and C represents control) 
==PAGE:39==
39 
 
 
After an hour, the remaining wells were also washed and added with different concentrations of 
micelles as in the first half. This step was to generate a time difference of one hour for addition of 
micelles and study the effect of such time difference upon toxicity to the cells. After another hour of 
incubation, each well was added with 10 µl of CCK-8 dye.  Further, the plate was incubated for 1.5 
hours and then Tecan Multimode Microplate Reader was used to get absorbance values for each 
well. From absorbance values obtained, viability percentage was calculated for each well by using 
the formula 
 
 
Viability % = 
𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑜𝑟𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑜𝑏𝑡𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑒𝑑
𝑀𝑒𝑎𝑛 𝐴𝑏𝑠𝑜𝑟𝑏𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑜𝑓 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑙× 100 
Then, a graph was plotted with Viability percentage on Y-axis and Concentration of micelles on X-axis 
to determine the optimum concentration of micelles to the cells.  
 
5.6     Dextran Diffusion Assay  
  
Dextran diffusion assay was an experimental method to assess and demonstrate the permeation 
enhancing potential of micelles made from bile salts. The assay was also aimed to check the barrier 
integrity of the monolayer on the basis of diffusion of fluorescein Isothicyanate – Dextran (4kDa) 
from apical side of the cells to the basal or to the matrix region. Two different conditions were 
created within the assay to have a comparative platform regarding diffusion of the test substance.  
 
5.6.1     Materials and Reagents  
Caco-2 monolayer on IBIDI 8 well 
 
Cell Tracker Blue (CTB) dye 
Fluorescein Isothicyanate-Dextran (4kDa) 
Micelles (Chol +TA) 
Confocal Microscope 
 
5.6.2     Method 
 
 For dextran diffusion assay, Caco-2 cells on an IBIDI 8 well µ-Slide were cultured and grown to 
monolayer on collagen added with tetramethylrhodamine (TRITC). Cells were first stained with cell 
tracker blue (CTB) dye and then live imaged to get static images on confocal microscope. For this, 
every image of cells taken, three different foci – on the cells, above the cells and below the cells 
were imaged and recorded for each well. In other words, images were taken for different stacks. 
After the completion of static imaging for different foci, four of the wells were added with micelles 
(formulation Cholesterol + Taurocholic Acid) and FITC-dextran (4kDa) and remaining four wells with 
only FITC-dextran. The wells with only FITC-dextran were controls or reference wells for comparison. 
As determined earlier by cell viability assay, micelle concentration was calculated and added to make 
it 10 mM in the resulting medium solution of the cell culture well. For this each well had to be added 
with 8.33 µl of micelles (stock) solution and 2.1 µl of FITC-d. Pipetting was done to the wells of the 
slide present on microscope stage, carefully to avoid any movement of the position of the slide. The 
setup on 8 well for diffusion assay can be shown as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              Table 5.3: setup for dextran diffusion assay on IBIDI 8 well µ-slide 
Only 
FITC-d 
Only  
FITC-d 
Only  
FITC-d 
Only 
FITC-d 
Micelles 
+ FITC-d 
Micelles 
+ FITC-d 
Micelles 
+ FITC-d 
Micelles 
+ FITC-d 
==PAGE:40==
40 
 
After the additions mentioned above, multiple loops of images were taken for each well and all foci. 
NIS software within the computer connected to confocal microscope was used to assign the stacks, 
positions, fluorophore channels and loops. This experiment was repeated for two more times but 
with lesser (four) number of wells on later experiments. All obtained images for different 
experiments and different foci (stack) were evaluated for pixel intensity change over time, using 
ImageJ software.  
 
 
5.7     In vitro Uptake study 
 
The uptake study constitutes the main experiments for this study. The assay was aimed to study the 
uptake of experimental peptides encapsulated within the micelles. Similar to dextran diffusion assay, 
the study was performed on monolayer of Caco-2 cells grown over a matrix, incubated with peptides 
within the micelles and live imaged with confocal microscope. Using two different peptides that vary 
in chain length could provide an insight on how and to what extent uptake gets affected by the 
length of conjugated lipid chain. 
 
5.7.1     Materials and Reagents 
 
Caco-2 monolayer on IBIDI 8 well 
Micelle samples (Chol + TA with CUH067 and Chol+TA with CUH049) 
Confocal microscope 
 
5.7.2     Method 
 
A monolayer of caco-2 cells grown on IBIDI 8 well µ-slide was washed and stained with cell tracker 
blue (CTB). This was followed by static imaging of cells on each well. Images were taken for three 
different foci (positions) of cells: on the cells, above the cells and below the cells. Then, the wells 
were added with micelle formulation Chol+TA with CUH067 peptide and Chol+TA with CUH049 
peptide. This assay was run in parallel to dextran diffusion assay which utilized four of the eight 
wells. Therefore, remaining four wells were used for uptake study of peptides such that two wells 
were used for peptide CUH067 and remaining two for peptide CUH049. The experimental setup can 
be demonstrated as follows:  
 
Micelles with 
CUH067 
Micelles with 
CUH067 
Micelles with 
CUH049 
Micelles with 
CUH049 
Used for Dextran 
Diffusion Assay 
 
 
 
 
                              Table 5.4: Experimental setup on µ-slide 8 well for peptide uptake study  
 
 
As previously determined by cell viability assay, micelle concentration used was 
10mM in order to have cells living and dividing while studying them for uptake. As wells were 
pipetted with micelles encapsulating peptides, they were then instantly imaged for altogether of 30 
loops and all three stacks: above, on and below the cells. Series of images were recorded and 
analysed by imagej software for uptake determination.  
==PAGE:41==
41 
 
Chapter 6  
 
Results and Discussion 
 
For all experiments, minor and important ones, obtained results were observed, analyzed, noted and 
used for optimization. From passaging to the cultivation of cells on chips, obtained results and data 
provided some areas of improvement to the next steps. More importantly, results from most of the 
experiments formed a basis for other experiments while some results were helpful to obtain 
comparative data. Graphs and charts were plotted based on obtained numerical values, which 
helped to present data in vivid manner. Furthermore, the obtained results provided an insight to 
conclusive picture of the whole project. Obtained results for performed experiments and activities 
are presented below: 
 
6.1     Passaging and freezing of cells 
 
Splitting of cells was very vital as every slide and chip seeded with cells needed a confluent T75 flask 
to be split before. Careful handling and aseptic rules led proper passaging of cells. The split ratio of 
1:6 yielded cells to divide and achieve confluency of 80-90% in 5-6 days. A consistency was observed 
in results obtained for all T75 flasks split, in terms of confluency, viability and cell count number. 
Changing of medium every 2-3 days to the cells on flasks showed proper growth and division. Cell 
count, viability and diameter of cells for first few splits given by nucleo-counter are as follows: 
 
Passage number 
Cell count (cells/ml) 
Viability % 
Diameter (µm) 
P60 
6 × 105 
97.9 
14.8 
P61 
6.38 × 105 
98.2 
16 
P62 
1.43 × 105 
91.3 
15.9 
P63 
1.94 × 106 
98.4 
14.4 
P64 
9.85 × 105 
95.4 
14.6 
P65 
9.54 × 105 
92.6 
14.6 
Table 6.1: Cell characterization data for first few splits by Nucleo-Counter instrument 
Cell count showed slight variation based on number of days waited for the split. For instance, Cells 
split on fourth days show slightly higher number of count in comparison to that split on fifth day.  
 
                                     
 
 
   Picture 6.2: Newly seeded T75 flask after a split 
==PAGE:42==
42 
 
Similarly, freezing of cells was successfully achieved. Cryovials containing cells were 
frozen within Mr. Frosty container at -80֯C and then permanently stored in liquid nitrogen tank.  
 
   
                    
 
                           
Picture 6.3: Mr. Frosty container with cryovials          Picture 6.4: Cryovials transferred to -150֯ freezer 
               to be stored at -80֯C overnight 
                      after overnight storage at -80֯c 
 
6.2     Cultivation of cells on IBIDI µ-Slide 8 Well 
 
Cells were successfully cultivated on 8 well slide. Confluent monolayers were formed on wells after 
few days of seeding the cells. To be more precise, number of attempts revealed confluent 
monolayer of cells on 8 well slide after 4-5 days of seeding around 30,000 to 40,000 cells per well. 
Visual inspection with light microscopy showed cells were attached to adjacent cells and to the 
matrix quite firmly. This confirmed that monolayer was ready to be stained and observed with 
confocal microscope and other related experiments. 
 
6.2.1     Staining and Imaging of cells on IBIDI µ-Slide 8 Well  
 
Thus, formed monolayers were stained with fluorescent dyes and imaged using confocal 
microscope. Cells showed quite good fluorescent signals after excitation with their respective laser 
lights. Some of the Images with respective fluorophores are as follows:  
 
 
 
a)   Brightfield mode                         b) Cell Tracker Blue (405 nm)         c) TRITC (561 nm) 
Image 6.5: Same populations of cells on 8 well slide stained and imaged for different fluorophores 
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
43 
 
6.2.2     Imaging of cells on IBIDI µ-Slide after fixation 
 
Performed as a preliminary study, fixated cells on µ-slide yielded a good quality image for all dyes 
except Hoechst. For some reason we could not obtain proper staining of nucleic acid by this dye. 
Here are some obtained images for remaining (phallodin and lectin staining) 
 
 
a) Cells permeabilized with Triton-x 100           b) Cells without permeabilization 
 
Images 6.6: Comparison between permeabilized and impermeabilized  cellular images stained with 
Phallodin, Hoechst and lectin (wheat germ agglutinin). WGA (Wheat germ agglutinin) is a 
carbohydrate binding lectin that stains the cell membrane.  
 
 
 
a) Cells permeabilized with Triton X-100          b)    Cells without permeabilization 
Images 6.7: Comparison between permeabilized and unpermeabilized cells stained with Phallodin, 
Hoechst and lectin (WGA). These two images compares staining extent of phallodin.  
==PAGE:44==
44 
 
 
The images show that there is some difference of staining extent between 
permeabilized cells and impermeabilized cells. As seen in the images for green channel, the 
permeabilized cells have green stain all over the cells and only outer membranes of impermeabilized 
cells are stained green. This explains that due to permeabilization, the lectin applied should have 
entered the cells and stained all carbohydrates within the cells while only being able to stain 
membrane carbohydrates in impermeabilized cells. Similarly, images for red channel (phallodin 
staining) show that permeabilized cells have a bit more color (stain) in intracellular regions causing 
slightly blurry effect on the image, while impermeabilized cells have better staining of cytoskeleton.  
 
 
 6.3     Cultivation of cells on IBIDI µ-Slide III 3D Perfusion 
Chip 
 
Cells were successfully cultivated and grown on perfusion chip. First few attempts were difficult and 
used just for learning purpose because of the complexity of the system. It was a difficult task to have 
cells properly attached to the matrix and have them grow under the flow system. However, increasing 
cell attachment period to 2 hours showed its effect and we could have proper cell-matrix attachment 
within the wells before the perfusion setup.  
 
 
Picture 6.7:  Cultivation of cells on IBIDI µ-Slide III Perfusion Chip under flow system 
 
Within the wells, it was observed that cells grew at higher density on the rim and then gradually move 
towards the center. It required a long culture period (minimum 10 days) to have fully confluent well. 
Growth pattern of cells on perfusion well is shown by the light microscope image below: 
==PAGE:45==
45 
 
               
 
                Picture 6.8: Light microscope image for growth pattern of Caco-2 cells on well (perfusion 
chip) 
Staining and imaging of thus formed monolayers on wells of perfusion chip yielded good quality 
images. Some of them are as follows:  
  
 
a) Brightfield mode               b)   Cell Tracker Blue (405 nm)                      c)    TRITC (561 nm) 
Image 6.9: same population of cells on perfusion chip stained and imaged for different fluorophores  
 
Image analysis showed that monolayer cultures on perfusion chip under flow system have no 
difference to those on IBIDI 8 well. However, it required longer period for cells to form monolayer on 
perfusion chip. Nevertheless, this implies that perfusion chip system is more useful to have long-term 
culture of cells within the monolayer architecture.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:46==
46 
 
6.4     Preparation and Characterization of Micelles 
 
Applied technique of self-assembly of components in aqueous solution was able to yield micelles of 
targeted compositions and varied sizes. Different batches and formulations of micelles were tested 
for their sizes and stability. Here are some useful and relevant results for different batches and 
formulations followed:  
 
6.4.1     Batch I micelles:  
 
Of four of the total formulations for batch I micelles, two of them encapsulated peptides (CUH067 
and CUH049) only one type in a formulation.  
 
6.4.1.1     Stability Assessment  
 
Stability assessment on micelles were done by regular measurement of their sizes for a period of a 
week by DLS size determination device, which yielded some data, graphically presented below:  
 
 
 
Figure: Graphical representation of changes in size of different micellar formulations (Batch I) 
 
Data for stability assessment for batch I micelles show that most of the micelles are 
stable throughout the storage period. Most of the micellar formulations have very less deviation in 
their sizes, however one of the formulations containing oleic acid (OA) and encapsulated with 
experimental peptide (CUH049) reduced in size from around 800 nm to few nanometers in the first 
half and then rise in the size in the second half of the measurement period. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
29-Mar
30-Mar
31-Mar
1-Apr
2-Apr
Size (nm)
Days
Size (Micelles)
Chol + TA
Chol + TA + OA
Chol+TA with CUH67
Chol+TA+OA with CUH49
==PAGE:47==
47 
 
6.4.1.2 Effect of peptide encapsulation upon size 
 
Similarly, prepared micelles with peptide encapsulation were compared to those without 
encapsulation, graph for which is presented below:  
 
   
 
 
Figures 6.12: Graphical representation to show change in size of micelles upon peptide 
encapsulation 
 
It is seen from the graphs that peptide encapsulation has some effect upon size of 
micelles. With experimental peptide CUH067, it seems the peptide encapsulation has reducing effect 
upon the size of micelles whereas with CUH049, the peptide encapsulation has augmenting effect on 
the size of micelles. This variation might be due to the lipid composition in two of the micelles and 
also the use of two different peptides.  
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
29-Mar
30-Mar
31-Mar
1-Apr
2-Apr
Size (nm)
Date
Change in size of micelles upon peptide (CUH067) 
encapsulation
Chol + TA
Chol + TA with CUH67
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
29-Mar
30-Mar
31-Mar
1-Apr
2-Apr
Size (nm)
Date
Change in size of micelles upon peptide (CUH049) 
encapsulation
Chol+TA+OA
Chol+TA+OA with CUH49
==PAGE:48==
48 
 
6.4.1.3     Effect of sonication upon size of micelles 
 
In order to understand what effects or changes can sonication step have on the sizes of micelles, 
prepared micelles were tested for their sizes before and after sonication.  
 
 
Figures 6.13: Graphical representation to show effect of sonication step on size of micelles 
 
Sonication step has shown different pattern of effect on different formulations of 
micelles. In some micellar formulations, sonication step has helped to increase the size of micelles 
while sizes of some formulations are decreasing after sonication. However, the difference in sizes 
before and after sonication does not seem to be much and can be counted as negligible in some 
cases.  
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
30-Mar
31-Mar
1-Apr
2-Apr
Size (nm)
Date
a. Difference in size of Micelles: 
(Cholesterol + TA)
Before Sonication
After Sonication
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
30-Mar
31-Mar
1-Apr
2-Apr
Size (nm)
Date
b. Difference in sizes of Micelles:
(Cholesterol+TA+OA)
Before Sonication
After Sonication
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
30-Mar
31-Mar
1-Apr
2-Apr
sIze (nm)
Date
c. Difference in size of micelles:
(Cholesterol + TA with CUH067)
Before Sonication
After Sonication
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
30-Mar
31-Mar
1-Apr
2-Apr
Size (nm)
Date
d. Difference in sizes of Micelles:
Cholesterol+TA+OA with CUH49
Before Sonication
After Sonication
==PAGE:49==
49 
 
 
6.4.2     Batch II Micelles 
 
Batch II micelles prepared with increased concentration of compositions (20x Oleic Acid, Cholesterol 
and 10x Sodium Taurocholate) managed to form micelles of proper sizes and comparatively reduced 
from those of first batch. Also, the aqueous solution used as matrix for micelles was phosphate buffer 
saline (PBS) unlike medium in the first batch. Size measurement of the micelles for a period of week 
were helpful to make stability assessment and different comparisons as follows: 
 
6.4.2.1     Stability Assessment  
 
 
 
Figure 6.14: Stability assessment on batch II micelles for a period of week based on their sizes 
 
It is clear from the graph that all formulations of micelles have some kind of fluctuations in their sizes 
over a period of week. The formulation Chol+TA (sonicated) has shown a higher nm size on the second 
day which eventually drops after. Similarly, formulation Chol+TA seems to have some changes in size 
after second day of measurement and then level out on later days. However, the change in size of 
micelles with days is not so much in general. The graph plotted is the result of mean sizes of three 
different measurements and not the exact individual reading. Moreover, it was observed during the 
individual measurement of samples that probably some non-micellar components of sizes around 
5000 nm were detected and mean values are also affected by such large sized particles bending the 
size from actual size.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
8-Apr
9-Apr
10-Apr
11-Apr
12-Apr
13-Apr
14-Apr
Size (nm)
Days
Size (Micelles)
Chol+TA
Chol+TA (Sonicated)
Chol+TA+OA
Chol+TA+OA (Sonicated)
==PAGE:50==
50 
 
 
6.4.2.2    Effect of centrifugation on sizes of micelles 
 
Centrifugation step was performed to micelles in order to get rid of the unwanted large particles and 
bring accuracy in readings of individual sizes. The mean readings were used to plot the graph as 
follows:  
 
Figure 6.15: Graphical representation to show effect of centrifugation on micellar sizes (Batch II) 
 
Centrifugation step has a huge impact on sizes of micelles. But this does not imply that micelles got 
their sizes reduced due to centrifugation. Instead, it was visible during the DLS measurement that 
large unwanted particles of sizes around 5000 nm were almost eliminated after centrifugation and 
this should have affected the individual readings of the samples.  
 
6.4.2.3     Effect of Sonication on sizes of micelles 
 
As each micellar formulation prepared in this batch were either with or without sonication step, 
comparisons were made to see if sonication step has some effect on their sizes.  
 
 
 
 
Figures 6.16: Effect of Sonication step on sizes of micelles (Batch II) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
Chol + TA
Chol + TA (Sonicated)
Chol+TA+OA
Chol+TA+OA (Sonicated)
Size (nm)
Micelles types
Comparison Between sizes of micelles before and after 
centrifugation
Before centrifugation
After Centrifugation
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
8-Apr 9-Apr 10-Apr11-Apr12-Apr13-Apr14-Apr
Size (nm)
Days
Sizes of Micelles (Chol+TA) 
Before and After Sonication
Before Sonication
After Sonication
0
20
40
60
80
Size (nm)
Days
Sizes of Micelles 
(Chol+TA+OA) before and 
after sonication 
Before Sonication
After Sonication
==PAGE:51==
51 
 
 
With Chol + TA formulation, sonicated samples seem to have larger sizes in early days 
of measurements, which converses on later days. However, with Chol + TA + OA formulation, effect 
of sonication on sizes of micelles in negligible.  
 
6.4.3     Batch III micelles 
 
For micelles with peptide encapsulations were prepared on this batch, it was critical to assess the 
effect of encapsulation on their sizes.  
 
6.4.3.1     Stability Assessment  
 
Stability assessment remains an inevitable task for micellar formulations in all batches. Result for this 
batch regarding their stability is as follows:  
 
 
 
Figure 6.17: Stability assessment for Batch III micelles based on sizes done over a period of week  
 
It is visible that micelles with peptide encapsulation have smaller sizes and one without peptides seem 
to have larger size. The graph was plotted based on mean size of three individual readings and 
furthermore, the readings are also affected by size of large unwanted particles of around 5000 nm.  It 
was visible during the measurement that around 60-80% of the micelles were of size 2.5 – 3 nm, 10 – 
15 % of micelles were of around 200 – 300 nm and remaining were large particles of around 5000 nm. 
Not only for this batch but, this was also the same case for second batch of micelles, as they were 
prepared with same formulation, composition and amount.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
27-May
28-May
29-May
30-May
31-May
1-Jun
2-Jun
Size (nm)
Days
Chol+TA
Chol+TA+CUH067
Chol+TA+CUH049
==PAGE:52==
52 
 
6.4.3.2     Effect of peptide encapsulation on sizes of micelles 
 
Similar to other batches, the micelles were tested for their change in size due to encapsulation.  
A graph was plotted based on size measurement obtained on each day to show the difference in size 
they have due to encapsulation.   
 
 
 
Figure 6.18: Graphical representation of difference in sizes of micelles due to peptide encapsulation 
 
It can be seen from the graphical data that encapsulated peptides have reduced sizes in most of the 
measurements while some readings tend to equalize. More precisely, individual measurements 
showed majority of micelles (70 -80 %), regardless of encapsulation, were sizes of around 2.5 – 3 nm, 
10 to 15% of micelles were of around 200 – 300 nm and remaining were large sized unwanted 
particles of around 5000 nm.  
 
Picture 6.19: Detailed size distribution in a micelle sample displayed by Zetasizer software of DLS 
during measurement. The percentage and peaks shown applies for all batch II and III micelle 
samples.  
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
27-May
28-May
29-May
30-May
31-May
1-Jun
2-Jun
Size (nm)
Days
Effect of peptide encapsulation upon size
Without Petides
With CUH067 encapsulation
With CUH049 encapsulation
==PAGE:53==
53 
 
6.4.4     Characterization of micelles by Nanoparticle Tracking Analyzer 
 
Some samples from third batch of micelles that were used for characterization by nanoparticle 
tracking analyzer, did not give a meaningful result. Those particles were not detected and it matches 
to the device protocol that particles less than 10 nm are not detectable by the system. This confirms 
that micelles in third batch were smaller with size of around 2.5 nm as given by DLS device. For a 
sample of first batch micelles, for which size was rechecked with nanoparticle tracking analyzer, 
following result was obtained:  
 
 
Picture 6.21: Result for micelle characterization by Nanoparticle Tracking Analyzer (NTA). This is an 
original document for result of particle characterization produced by Zetaview ( version 8.05.11) 
software. The formulation used for this analysis was Chol + TA with CUH067 encapsulation (Batch I) 
 
From the result obtained from nanoparticle tracking analyzer, it is seen that original 
concentration of micelles was 7.8 × 109 particles/ml. Among all the detected particles by the system, 
21.9 % were of size (diameter) 96.6 nm, 24.9 % of the particles were of size 129 nm and remaining 
==PAGE:54==
54 
 
53.3% of particles were of size 188 nm.  Comparing this data with those obtained from Dynamic 
Light Scattering test, following result was obtained: 
Result from DLS 
Result from NTA 
29.33 (Day1 measurement) 
96.6 nm (21.9%) 
32.35 (Day2 measurement) 
129 nm (24.9 %) 
50.05 (Day3 measurement) 
188 nm (53.3 %) 
175.6 (Day4 measurement) 
 
 
Table 6.22: Comparison between results (size) obtained from DLS and NTA. Same sample (Chol +TA + 
CUH067) was tested by these two different techniques for size determination and then compared.  
 
There seems to have some difference in size measurement data between these two techniques. For 
instance, NTA results show that smallest particle size in the sample is 96.6 nm while DLS results show 
even smaller particles of size 29.33 nm are present. However, larger particles shown by NTA (188nm) 
almost matches to given by DLS (175.6 nm).  
 
6.5     Cell Viability/Cytotoxicity Assay  
 
For CCK-8 dye was used as a means to study cytotoxic effect of micelles over cells, color change 
observed within the wells of the 96 well plate is as follows:  
 
 
Picture 6.23: color change observed in wells of 96 well plate after incubation with CCK-8 dye  
The dark color generated represents the wells with living cells. Darker the color of well after 
incubation, higher is the number of living cells in those wells.  
 
The color change observed after incubation distinguishes the wells with living cells on them from wells 
with dead cells. The tetrazolium salt (WST-8) has been reduced by the dehydrogenases in living cells 
to give a colored product called formazon. If we compare this color change observation with 
experimental setup, it is clear that wells to which higher concentrations of micelles such as 80mM, 40 
mM and 20 mM were applied have dead cells and hence no color change. While, wells applied with 
lower concentrations of micelles such 10mm, 5 mM, 2.5 mM and 1.25 mM have color changes in them 
==PAGE:55==
55 
 
defining presence of living cells in them. Furthermore, the absorbance values obtained for all wells 
were converted into percentage viability and mean value of which was used to plot a graph against 
concentration as follows:  
 
 
 
Figure 6.24: Percentage of viable cells for different concentrations of micelles (Chol+TA) applied on 
time difference of an hour 
From graph, it is clearly visible that cells have been able to withstand the toxic effects of micelles (Chol 
+ TA) when applied in lower concentrations of 10 mM and below. In other words, lower concentrations 
of micelles are fairly toxic to cells and therefore qualify for use in further tests. Whereas, 
concentrations of micelles of 20mM and above are highly toxic to cells reducing the viability 
percentage to around 10%. Furthermore, there seems not much difference in toxicity with time 
difference of one hour.  
 
 
 
Figure 6.25: Percentage of viable cells for different concentrations of micelles (Chol+ TA+OA) applied 
on time difference of an hour  
It is found that the micelle formulation Chol+TA+OA is slightly more toxic to cells compared to those 
without Oleic acid (OA). Concentration above 20 mM has been toxic to cells on both cases but 
formulation with OA is still a bit more diminishing to cells as can be seen on graph.  
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Viability Percentage 
Concentration (mM)
Cell Viability (%) for Chol+TA
X̅ Viability% (2 Hrs) 
X̅ Viability% (1 Hr) 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
20
40
60
80
100
Viablity percentage 
Concentration (mM)
Cell Viability (%) for Chol+TA+OA
X̅ Viability% (2Hrs)
X̅ Viability% (1Hr)
==PAGE:56==
56 
 
6.6     Dextran Diffusion Assay 
 
The pattern and extent of diffusion of test substance relied on image analysis by using Imagej 
software. Image analysis revealed that wells where micelles and FITC-D were combinely added had 
dissociation of cells. The intact monolayer before the addition had been destroyed and matrix region 
was exposed. Images revealed that just within the first few minutes of addition of micelles and FITC-
dextran, the monolayer had loosen its integrity and only few cells were existing. The loops of images 
showed in a movie like pattern that those existing cells were somehow losing their structure with time. 
A comparative format of Images for before and after addition of micelles and FITC-Dextran are shown 
below.  
 
a.Monolayer of cells before addition of                      b. Disrupted monolayer soon after the addition  
micelles & FITC-d (Brightfield channel)  
                  of micelles and FITC-d (Brightfield channel)
 
 
 
c. Monolayer of cells before addition of micelles      d. Disrupted monolayer soon after the addition 
oand FITC-d (Blue Channel)                                                   of micelles and FITC-d (Blue Channel) 
 
Images 6.26: Combination of confocal Images to show the monolayer disruption effect of micelles. 
These are same images taken and shown in two different channels.  
==PAGE:57==
57 
 
As other test wells were added with only FITC-dextran (excluding micelles), monolayers were not 
destroyed and it was possible to use Region of Interest (ROI) Manager function in Imagej software to 
select specific regions of cells and find out the change in pixel intensity with time. Pixel intensities 
were determined for all three stacks (on the cells, above the cells and below the cells) and four 
different channels which include brightfield, blue (CTB), red (TRITC) and green (FITC-D).  
 
     
 
a) Pixel Intensity change for green channel (on the cells) 
 
     
 
b) Pixel Intensity change for red channel (on the cells) 
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change with time for Green channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
102
104
106
108
110
112
114
116
118
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel intensity 
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change with time for Red Channel  
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
==PAGE:58==
58 
 
      
 
c) Pixel Intensity change for Blue channel (On the cells) 
 
 
       
 
d) Pixel Intensity change for Brightfield channel (On the cells) 
 
Figures 6.27: Pixel Intensity changes for all four channels (On the cells) 
 
 
 
114
116
118
120
122
124
126
128
130
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change with time (Blue Channel)
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
780
800
820
840
860
880
900
920
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Channel 5+F114:P131
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change With time (Brightfield)
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
==PAGE:59==
59 
 
Similarly, change in pixel intensity values were also determined for other foci of the cells, which are 
as follows: 
 
       
 
a) Pixel intensity values for green channel (Below the cells) 
 
 
 
       
 
b) Pixel Intensity change for Red channel (Below the cells) 
 
 
 
 
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change with time for Green channel 
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change with time for Red Channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
==PAGE:60==
60 
 
        
 
c) Pixel Intensity Change for Blue Channel (Below the cells) 
 
 
        
 
d) Pixel Intensity Change for Brightfield channel (Below the cells) 
 
 
Figures 6.28: Pixel intensity changes for all four channels (below the cells) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change with time for Blue channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
780
800
820
840
860
880
900
920
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change with time for Brighfield 
channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
==PAGE:61==
61 
 
Pixel intensity values for “above the cells” position are as follows: 
 
   
 
a) Pixel Intensity change for Green channel (Above the cells) 
 
 
 
  
 
b) Pixel Intensity change for Red channel (Above the cells) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change with time for Green channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
103.5
104
104.5
105
105.5
106
106.5
107
107.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity
Time (Hours)
Pixel Intensity Change with time for Red Channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
==PAGE:62==
62 
 
    
 
c) Pixel Intensity change for Blue channel (Above the cells)  
 
 
   
 
d) Pixel Intensity change for Brightfield channel (Above the cells) 
 
Figures 6.29: Pixel intensity changes for all four channels (Above the cells) 
From graphical representations, it is seen that pixel intensity values for green channel is comparatively 
very high than other channels. As pixel intensity correlates to fluorescence intensity, it can be deduced 
that fluorescence intensity for green channel is higher. Such high intensity value is unwanted and 
potentially due to high concentration of FITC-D. Intensity values for brightfield channel is almost 
constant in every case. This is due to the fact that this channel does not depend upon fluorophore and 
hence no bleaching occurs. But some other channels are having decline in the intensity and which 
could be due to the bleaching phenomena.  
 
There are some exceptions such as intensity values for blue channel in every focus is 
increasing after certain period of time. This could be due to another dye such as FITC-d providing 
energy to excite these dye and fluoresce further in a process called Fluorescence resonance energy 
transfer (FRET). Red signal is seen to be decreasing with time for on the cells position while it is 
increasing for below the cells position. The possible reason for this could be due to passage of FITC-D 
to the matrix region (below the cells) with time and providing energy for red dye to excite.  
115
120
125
130
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change with time for Blue Channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
750
800
850
900
950
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change with time for Brightfield 
Channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
==PAGE:63==
63 
 
 
For simplification of data, median values for pixel intensity of each channel and each focus were 
determined and presented as follows: 
       
 
a) Pixel intensity change for channels (on the cells) 
  
 
b) Pixel intensity change for channels (below the cells) 
 
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change for all channels
(On the cells)
Green
Red
Blue
Brightfield
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change for all channels 
(Below the cells)
Green
Red
Blue
Brighfield
==PAGE:64==
64 
 
 
      Figures 6.31: Simplified graph to compare pixel intensity change for different channels  
 
      From these graphs, it is seen that intensity value for green channel for below the cells position is 
smaller than those of remaining positions. This is due to cells blocking the passage of FITC-d to the 
collagen matrix and upper layer of matrix itself contributes to this as well. Furthermore, it is observed 
that the signal increases after certain period of time and this should be due to the passage of FITC-d 
to the matrix through various means and accumulating there to give some signal. 
 
 
Since the experiment was repeated for few more times with improvements and 
optimizations,  results were obtained and analysed. It was observed that monolayers were again 
disrupted by the application of micelles. However, wells on which only FITC-dextran (no micelles) was 
added, yielded some quality data to interpret. Furthermore, this experiment was optimized to include 
images and pixel intensities for wells before they were added with FITC-D. After the additions images 
were taken and later evaluated for change in pixel intensity values for different channels which are as 
follows: 
Change in intensities for each channel were determined which are as follow:  
 
Channels 
Reg1 
Reg2 
Reg3 
Reg4 
Reg5 
Reg6 
Reg7 
Reg8 
Reg9 Reg10 
Green 
108 
108 
110 
109 
111 
110 
112 
112 
110 
111 
Red 
146 
148 
156 
156 
172 
172 
167 
205 
152 
174 
Blue 
169 
179 
186 
188 
227 
199 
225 
252 
162 
190 
Brightfield 
984 
993 
1002 
995 
981 
992 
942 
932 
962 
917 
 
Table 6.32: Pixel Intensities for ten different regions of interest of cells before addition of FITC-
dextran 
 
 
 
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Pixel Intensity 
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change for all channels
(Above the cells)
Green
Red
Blue
Brighfield
==PAGE:65==
65 
 
Similarly, after adding FITC-D, the regions of interests were evaluated for pixel intensities on the 
cells, which are as follows:  
 
a) Pixel Intensity change for Green Channel (on the cells) 
 
 
b) Pixel Intensity change for Red Channel (on the cells) 
 
 
 
 
 
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
40000
45000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity
Time
Pixel Intensity Change (Green Channel)
Region 1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change (Red Channel)
Region 1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
==PAGE:66==
66 
 
 
c) Pixel Intensity change for Blue Channel (on the cells) 
 
 
 
d) Pixel Intensity change for Brightfield Channel (on the cells) 
 
Figures 6.33: Graphical representation for pixel intensity change for different channels (on the cells)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change for Blue Channel
Region 1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
840
860
880
900
920
940
960
980
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change for Brightfield Channel
Region 1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
==PAGE:67==
67 
 
 
Similarly, here are the graphical data for pixel intensity change for each channel after adding FITC-D 
above the cells:  
Reg1 
Reg2 
Reg3 
Reg4 
Reg5 
Reg6 
Reg7 
Reg8 
Reg9 
Reg10 
Green 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
104 
105 
104 
104 
104 
Red 
102 
102 
103 
103 
103 
103 
103 
104 
103 
103 
Blue 
134 
133 
144 
139 
143 
139 
144 
140 
135 
137 
Brightfield 
1001 
988 
1014 
989 
974 
985 
941 
917 
964 
913 
 
Table 6.34: Pixel intensity for ten different regions of interest before adding FITC-D and above the 
cells 
 
 
 
a) Pixel Intensity change for Green Channel (above the cells) 
 
 
 
b) Pixel Intensity Change for Red Channel (above the cells)  
 
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity 
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change for Green Channel 
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change Test 488 Channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
==PAGE:68==
68 
 
 
 
c) Pixel Intensity change for Blue channel (above the cells)  
 
 
 
d) Pixel Intensity change for Brighfield channel (above the cells) 
 
 
Figures 6.35: Graphical Representations for pixel intensity change over time for all channels and 
above the cells 
 
Similarly, here are the tables and graphical data for pixel intensity change for below the cells 
position:  
 
Channels 
Reg1 
Reg2 
Reg3 
Reg4 
Reg5 
Reg6 
Reg7 
Reg8 
Reg9 
Reg10 
Green 
103 
103 
103 
103 
103 
103 
103 
103 
103 
103 
Red 
103 
103 
103 
103 
103 
104 
103 
104 
103 
103 
Blue 
124 
124 
128 
127 
129 
127 
128 
128 
125 
124 
Brightfield 
970 
994 
1000 
997 
974 
980 
950 
943 
960 
917 
 
Table 6.36: Pixel intensities value for ten different regions of interest before adding FITC-d and 
below the cells position.  
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity 
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change for Blue Channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
800
850
900
950
1000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity 
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change for Brightfield Channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
==PAGE:69==
69 
 
 
 
 
a) Pixel intensity change for Green channel (below the cells)  
 
 
 
 
a) Pixel Intensity change for Red channel (below the  cells)  
 
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change for Green channel 
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
102.5
103
103.5
104
104.5
105
105.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change for Red channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
==PAGE:70==
70 
 
 
b) Pixel Intensity change for Blue channel (below the cells)  
 
 
 
c) Pixel Intensity change for Brightfield channel  
 
Figures 6.37: Graphical representations pixel Intensity change over time for different channels and 
below the cells 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity 
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change for Blue channel
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
840
860
880
900
920
940
960
980
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity 
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity change for Brightfield channel 
Region1
Region2
Region3
Region4
Region5
Region6
Region7
Region8
Region9
Region10
==PAGE:71==
71 
 
For simplification of data, median values were determined for each colored channel and then graphs 
were plotted to compare pixel intensities between each channel. The plotted graphs are as follows:  
 
 
 
 
a) Comparison between pixel intensity change for all channels and on the cells position 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Comparison between pixel intensity change for all channels and Below the cells position 
 
 
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change with time for all channels 
(On the cells) 
Green
Red
Blue
Brightfield
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes)
Pixel Intensity Change with time for all Channels 
(Below the cells)
Green
Red
Blue
Brightfield
==PAGE:72==
72 
 
 
c) Comparison between pixel intensity change for all channels and Above the cells position 
 
Figures 6.38: Graphical representations of pixel intensity change with time for all channels and all 
three stacks (on the cells, above and below the cells) 
 
Pixel intensity value correlates to the fluorescent signals. Information from graphs 
above show that pixel intensities for all fluorophores have decreased with time. With an exception, 
green channel has higher value of intensity than other channels. This might be due to the high 
concentration of green fluorophore FITC-D in the slide. If we compare the pixel intensities of green 
channel for three different stacks, i.e. on the cells, below the cells and above the cells, intensity is 
maximum above the cells with initial values of around 60,000 units. This value is lower in case of 
“below the cells” position with around 22000 units while for “on the cells” position, this value is 
somewhere between the two upper and lower stacks. Pixel intensity values for green channel in some 
thousands of numbers were not expected and we attempted to have it reduced by settings within the 
microscope. However, the order of intensity values obtained for different stacks meets the 
expectations. FITC-d pipetted to the wells with monolayer under imaging should have higher 
concentration of the fluorophore above the cells. Consequently, this value should be lesser on the 
cells and least below the cells, which matches to the variation in pixel intensities we discovered in our 
experiment.  
 
 
Graphical data show that pixel intensity for most of the channels in all stacks are in 
decreasing order. There are number of reasons for this type of phenomena. One potential reason 
could be due to bleaching of fluorophore. Photochemical alteration might have occurred to 
fluorophore, rendering them unable to fluoresce. This happens due to cleavage of covalent bonds or 
reactions of fluorophore with surrounding molecules.45 Finally, this causes reduction in fluorophore 
signal and hence the pixel intensity reduces in the resulting images. Specially, with Green channel, the 
dye in the beginning should have undergone bleaching thereby causing abrupt reduction in the 
intensity. As more dye got diffused with time among the cells and below the cells in the matrix region, 
fluorescence signal should have stabilized itself.  
An inevitable marking in the obtained result is intensity level of all brightfield channels 
remain constant with time while all other channels have some degree of decrement. This observation 
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pixel Intensity
Time (Minutes
Pixel Intensity Change for all channels 
(Above the cells)
Green
Red
Blue
Brightfield
==PAGE:73==
73 
 
further clarify that channels with fluorophores are being affected by bleaching phenomena. Because, 
brightfield channel does not depend on any fluorophore, bleaching has no effect to this channel.  
 
 
6.7     In vitro uptake study  
 
Cells showed significant quality of fluorescent signal for all three foci before addition of peptides. 
Some of the images for three different foci of cells before addition of peptides are as follows:  
 
 
a)  On the cells                           b)  below the cells                          c) above the cells                                                      
Picture: Same population of cells in different foci (Brightfield mode) before adding micelles 
 
 
a) On the cells                            b)   Below the cells                         c) Above the cells  
Images 6.39: Same population of cells in different foci (Blue channel) before adding micelles  
 
Images were then acquired for same cells and same channels after adding the micelles encapsulated 
with peptides. The images were supposed be the landmark for peptide uptake analysis. Some of the 
images taken after the addition are as follows: 
==PAGE:74==
74 
 
 
a) On the cells                            b) Below the cells                              c) Above the cells 
Images 6.41: Same population of cells for different foci after addition of peptide encapsulated 
micelles 
From images above, we can deduce that monolayer of cells have been destroyed after 
the addition. Micelles should have been responsible for this. Permeation enhancer potential of bile 
salts is a known fact and it is also an unavoidable fact that micelles we prepared have some level of 
toxicity. Based on cytotoxicity study we performed, 10 mM of micelles should not have so much 
toxicity to the cells but result obtained here shows the cells are adversely affected by the addition. 
Although we were able to image exactly same region of cells for before and after addition, we could 
not go for image analysis through region of interest (ROI) manager within the imagej software because 
of the disrupted and continuously dislocating cells. Consequently,the fluorescence signal that were 
supposed to be measured from cells after uptake of FITC labelled lipidated peptides could not be 
performed because of monolayer disruption.  
However, these results further demonstrate that micellar formulations from bile salts 
have some effect to the cells and the monolayer architecture. Also, peptides within the micelles might 
have been responsible to increase the toxicity level of micelles to the cells to cause the monolayer 
disruption.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:75==
75 
 
Chapter 7  
 
Conclusion  
 
To develop and establish an in vitro model based on conventional two-dimensional culture system 
was a challenging task. Although widely used as a standard model for drug permeability assay, this 
project based on Caco-2 monolayer system, runs taking into account that two dimensional cell culture 
systems do not completely recapitulate the physiological intestinal condition.  The Findings and 
observations have led us to the conclusion that cells grown over an extracellular matrix are able to 
function as a novel and robust in vitro model to study biopharmaceutical uptake.  
 
7.1     Achievements and Accomplishments  
 
 
The major achievement of the project is to have a monolayer of cells grown over the collagen matrix 
usable to study absorption of experimental peptides. In addition, utilizing modern products of IBIDI 
technologies to cultivate and grow monolayer of cells was vital to run important experiments of the 
project. Although Caco-2 cell based monolayers cannot provide information about metabolic phase 
following absorption, are still useful in studying pharmacokinetic parameters.46 Other important 
attempts of the project are to design and prepare micellar formulation for drug delivery. Besides use 
of cholesterol to stabilize the formulation and encapsulate peptides within such nanocarriers are other 
important deeds.  
 
While static transwell cultures of Caco-2 cells are the most widely accepted in vitro 
model for intestinal permeability assays, attempt to design and validate a matrix supported monolayer 
as in vitro model defines the novelty of our project. Besides, image analysis for transport study 
supports cost-efficient and feasible working conditions. Growth and division of cells on µ-slide 
platforms were achieved as per the expectations. However, having cells to divide and grow to 
monolayers on 3D perfusion chips were quite challenging and required a lot of effort and patience. 
The system in itself is complex due to requirement for flow of media. Besides, obtaining micelles of 
proper size and stability was a tricky yet essential. An attempt to encapsulate peptides in such 
nanoparticles confirms the gain of some important goals of the project.  
 
7.2     Pros and cons of the model 
 
The model I worked with is simple and based on easily available resources. Commercially available 
and easily accessible resources were used to perform experiments. For instance, the cell culture µ-
slides used are from IBIDI technologies that come in numerous designs and sizes. In other words, there 
was always numerous options to choose for materials and methodology. Caco-2 cell monolayer has a 
long history of serving absorption studies in academia and industries, which helped to simply the tasks 
and sub-tasks in my project. Other benefits of such cellular platform are ease of handling, 
reproducible, cost efficient and less time consuming. The assays that utilized the monolayers of IBIDI 
wells came with the facility of multiplexing. For instance, different wells of the same slide were usable 
for both dextran diffusion assay and peptide uptake assay at the same time.  
 
There are some drawbacks related to this system as well. The major one is the 
uncertainty of the final outcome. Since, monolayer on transwell plate is the validated and widely used 
in vitro design for permeability assays, having one on collagen matrix to demonstrate uptake denotes 
==PAGE:76==
76 
 
unpredictable portion of the project. Besides, micellar sizes and encapsulation were other uncertain 
areas of the project. Similarly, the use confocal microscope required good amount of technical 
knowledge and experience. There were always risks of having the objectives lens crushed or some 
other parts of the microscope being ruined in case of improper handling. Besides, health hazards of 
laser lights is unavoidable. Although the microscope yields high resolution and high quality 
multispectral images, phototoxicity and photobleaching can occur due to too much light. This might 
create errors in image acquisition, quality and analysis. Besides, live cell imaging requires very much 
careful handling and temperature and Co2 control. There were also issues with some part of the 
monolayer being removed while washing steps. Besides, bubbles created within the wells of chip 
under flow system often created disturbances in flow of media and final imaging.  
 
7.3     Findings and Inferences  
 
Caco-2 cells form the main constituent of this project. Through this project, it is deduced that Caco-2 
cells do not require so much stringent conditions to grow but basic needs include aseptic conditions, 
temperature of 37֯C and 5% Co2 condition. Furthermore, cells can grow and divide to get confluent on 
medium supplemented with non-essential amino acids and bovine serum on the surface of T75 flask. 
It is an important deduction that good quality monolayer on µ-slides for experimental purpose can be 
obtained when 60-70% confluent T75 flask is split to get cells for seeding. Above that confluence level, 
monolayers might have improper attachment to the matrix within the well. They might also form 
clumps and become unusable for staining.  
 
Different formulations of micelles can be generated with easily accessible commercial 
products. The bile salt such as taurocholic acid, form micelles by self-assembly when vortexed or 
sonicated and cholesterol can be co-administered to stabilize them. Furthermore, lipid such as oleic 
acid can be introduced to create variation in formulation. Although different in formulation, micelles 
with oleic acid do not show much difference in sizes to those without oleic acid. When stored in fridge 
(-4֯C), the micelles do not lose their structure and remain stable for longer period of time. Effect of 
sonication and peptide encapsulation has shown different changes in size of micelles in different 
formulations while centrifugation seems to remove the unwanted large particles from the micelle 
mixture. Furthermore, performed a couple of times in this project, 20 fold increment in amount of 
cholesterol and 10 fold taurocholic acid (TA) yields micelles of proper sizes. Individual readings show 
majority of micelle sizes were less than 5 nm. Another important findings about micelles is their 
toxicity to the cells. Results from cytotoxicity assay reveal that micelles of 20 mM and higher 
concentrations are highly toxic to cells. Furthermore, the application of 10 mM micelles to cells on 
dextran diffusion and peptide uptake assays show disrupted monolayer signifying need of even lesser 
concentration for optimum experiment.  
 
Results from dextran diffusion assay demonstrate that there is a difference in outcome 
for application of FITC-d alone and in combination with micelles. Wells where micelles were applied 
have their monolayer structure disappearing gradually suggesting concentration of micelles applied 
should be reduced. With wells where only FITC-d were used, have shown pixel intensity changes with 
time. With fluorophore channels, the intensity seems decreasing with time suggesting bleaching 
effect. While some fluorophore channels have increment in signal after a certain period, which might 
be due to the phenomenon called Fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET). In this process, 
energy from one fluorophore is transferred to nearby fluorophore to cause excitation and emission. 
The pixel intensity value of Green channel after FITC-d addition is very high compared to other 
channels suggesting the applied concentration is higher than required or need of laser light control 
for the channel. Also, intensity of green channel is found lower in below the cells position and then 
==PAGE:77==
77 
 
tends to level out or slightly increase with time suggesting slow passage of the green dye to the matrix 
region with time.  
 
At the heart of this project lies the peptide uptake study. The results demonstrate 
that micelles applied have again acted little more than their permeation enhancing effect. This effect 
might also be due to peptide encapsulated micelles being more toxic than the blank micellar 
formulations. However, with some improvements and optimizations regarding micellar 
concentration the confocal imaging of three different foci of images can be useful for peptide uptake 
analysis. Measuring fluorescence intensity change for different positions of an experimental 
monolayer over the matrix will be qualitative enough to predict the uptake of peptides. 
 
7.4     Areas of improvement and Future perspectives 
 
There are numerous experiments and activities that can be improved and optimized within this 
project. One important thing will be to characterize all micelle samples for their sizes by 
Nanoparticle tracking analyzer to get more accurate information. The device can also be helpful in 
determining the fluorescence of the particles due to encapsulation of peptide that is fluorescently 
labelled. In addition, determination of encapsulation efficiency of the particles will help for further 
tests.  
 
Although determined by cytotoxicity assay, the molar concentration of micelles used 
proved slightly more diminishing and toxic to cells during dextran diffusion and peptide uptake 
assays. Therefore, it will be fruitful to perform cytotoxicity assay for micelles having peptides in them 
as well. Furthermore, lower concentrations such as 2.5mM or 1.25 mM of micelles can be tested for 
these assays. Similarly, amount of FITC-d used could be reduced in order to avoid high intensity 
value. The project almost hit its target but last few assays needs to be improved and revised for final 
success. The latter assays of dextran diffusion and peptide uptake with optimizations will validate 
the final in vitro model outcome of this project.  
Other things that can be included to further standardize and improve the project 
could be co-culture of absorptive Caco-2 cells with mucus secreting H29-MTX cells. Some 
researchers are working on to develop a triple culture based in vitro permeability assay which 
includes, caco-2 cells, goblet cells and M cells for mucus can impact mobility of nanoparticle and M 
cells are involved in uptake. If I were given more time and resources, I would try to first grow Caco-2 
cells to monolayer and then keep it for 21 days to have proper tight junctions between the cells. I 
would also wait for 30 days of postconfluent period allowing cells to gain enterocyte like 
morphology, brush border structure and enzymes. And then I would perform the assays followed in 
this project. I also have interests in developing spheroids and organoids form intestinal stem cells, 
characterize and utilize them for uptake study.  
The project although small, forms the base for major biopharmaceutical uptake study. 
The remarks and findings of the study can be helpful for biopharmaceutical companies to design and 
practice preclinical studies for their drug candidates under development. They can follow this cost-
efficient monolayer on collagen system to test their molecules for uptake. Besides, the system can 
also be explored for permeation enhancer potential of test compounds and membrane integrity 
barrier of the monolayer.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
78 
 
Chapter 8  
 
Bibliography 
1. 
Hamman, J. H., Enslin, G. M. & Kotzé, A. F. Oral delivery of peptide drugs: Barriers and 
developments. BioDrugs 19, 165–177 (2005). 
2. 
Menacho-Melgar, R., Decker, J. S., Hennigan, J. N. & Lynch, M. D. A review of lipidation in the 
development of advanced protein and peptide therapeutics. J. Control. Release 295, 1–12 
(2019). 
3. 
Ibrahim, Y. H. E. Y., Regdon, G., Hamedelniel, E. I. & Sovány, T. Review of recently used 
techniques and materials to improve the efficiency of orally administered proteins/peptides. 
DARU, J. Pharm. Sci. 28, 403–416 (2020). 
4. 
Small Molecules vs Biologics | Drug Development Differences. 
https://www.nuventra.com/resources/blog/small-molecules-versus-biologics/. 
5. 
Homayun, B., Lin, X. & Choi, H. J. Challenges and recent progress in oral drug delivery systems 
for biopharmaceuticals. Pharmaceutics 11, (2019). 
6. 
Lundquist, P. & Artursson, P. Oral absorption of peptides and nanoparticles across the human 
intestine: Opportunities, limitations and studies in human tissues. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 106, 
256–276 (2016). 
7. 
Zhang, K., Hornef, M. W. & Dupont, A. The intestinal epithelium as guardian of gut barrier 
integrity. Cell. Microbiol. 17, 1561–1569 (2015). 
8. 
Antfolk, M. & Jensen, K. B. A bioengineering perspective on modelling the intestinal epithelial 
physiology in vitro. Nat. Commun. 11, (2020). 
9. 
Renukuntla, J., Vadlapudi, A. D., Patel, A., Boddu, S. H. S. & Mitra, A. K. Approaches for 
enhancing oral bioavailability of peptides and proteins. Int. J. Pharm. 447, 75–93 (2013). 
10. 
Maher, S., Brayden, D. J., Casettari, L. & Illum, L. Application of permeation enhancers in oral 
delivery of macromolecules: An update. Pharmaceutics 11, 1–23 (2019). 
11. 
Twarog, C. et al. Intestinal permeation enhancers for oral delivery of macromolecules: A 
comparison between salcaprozate sodium (SNAC) and sodium caprate (c10). Pharmaceutics 
11, 1–21 (2019). 
12. 
Ruano, P. et al. We are IntechOpen , the world ’ s leading publisher of Open Access books 
Built by scientists , for scientists TOP 1 %. Intech 13 (2016). 
13. 
Duval, K. et al. Modeling physiological events in 2D vs. 3D cell culture. Physiology 32, 266–277 
(2017). 
14. 
Kapałczyńska, M. et al. 2D and 3D cell cultures – a comparison of different. Arch. Med. Sci. 14, 
910–919 (2016). 
15. 
Costa, J. & Ahluwalia, A. Advances and Current Challenges in Intestinal in vitro Model 
Engineering: A Digest. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 7, 1–14 (2019). 
16. 
Youhanna, S. & Lauschke, V. M. The Past, Present and Future of Intestinal In Vitro Cell 
Systems for Drug Absorption Studies. J. Pharm. Sci. 110, 50–65 (2021). 
17. 
Peng, Y., Yadava, P., Heikkinen, A. T., Parrott, N. & Railkar, A. Applications of a 7-day Caco-2 
cell model in drug discovery and development. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 56, 120–130 (2014). 
18. 
Smetanová, L., Stětinová, V., Svoboda, Z. & Kvetina, J. Caco-2 cells, biopharmaceutics 
classification system (BCS) and biowaiver. Acta Medica (Hradec Kralove) 54, 3–8 (2011). 
19. 
Yamashita, S. et al. Optimized conditions for prediction of intestinal drug permeability using 
Caco-2 cells. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 10, 195–204 (2000). 
20. 
Lee, J. B. et al. A novel in vitro permeability assay using three-dimensional cell culture system. 
J. Biotechnol. 205, 93–100 (2015). 
21. 
Uchegbu, I. F., Cheng, W. P., Schätzlein, A. G. & Lalatsa, A. Fundamentals of pharmaceutical 
nanoscience. Fundamentals of Pharmaceutical Nanoscience (2013). doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-
9164-4. 
==PAGE:79==
79 
 
22. 
Saadah, N., Yusof, M. & Ashokkumar, M. Handbook of Ultrasonics and Sonochemistry. 
Handbook of Ultrasonics and Sonochemistry (2016). doi:10.1007/978-981-287-470-2. 
23. 
Co, J. Y. et al. Controlling Epithelial Polarity: A Human Enteroid Model for Host-Pathogen 
Interactions. Cell Rep. 26, 2509-2520.e4 (2019). 
24. 
Meaney, C. M. & O’Driscoll, C. M. A comparison of the permeation enhancement potential of 
simple bile salt and mixed bile salt:fatty acid micellar systems using the CaCo-2 cell culture 
model. Int. J. Pharm. 207, 21–30 (2000). 
25. 
Dutton, J. S., Hinman, S. S., Kim, R., Wang, Y. & Allbritton, N. L. Primary Cell-Derived Intestinal 
Models: Recapitulating Physiology. Trends Biotechnol. 37, 744–760 (2019). 
26. 
µ-Slide 8 Well Glass Bottom | Chamber Slide for TIRF | ibidi. https://ibidi.com/chambered-
coverslips/183--slide-8-well-glass-bottom.html. 
27. 
µ-Slide III 3D Perfusion | 3D Cell & Tissue Culture | ibidi. https://ibidi.com/channel-slides/53--
slide-iii-3d-perfusion.html. 
28. 
ibidi Pump System | Perform Cell-Based Flow Assays. https://ibidi.com/perfusion-
system/112-ibidi-pump-system.html. 
29. 
Mondal, S., Pan, A., Das, S., Moulik, S. P. & Ghosh, S. The cholesterol aided micelle to vesicle 
transition of a cationic gemini surfactant (14-4-14) in aqueous medium. RSC Adv. 6, 26019–
26025 (2016). 
30. 
Fluorophore - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluorophore. 
31. 
Invitrogen / Thermo Fischer Scientific. CellTracker Protocol. 1–5 (2014). 
32. 
CellTrackerTM Blue CMAC Dye. 
https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/C2110#/C2110. 
33. 
TRITC (5/6-tetramethyl-rhodamine isothiocyanate), mixed isomer. 
https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/46112#/46112. 
34. 
Natarajan, R., Northrop, N. & Yamamoto, B. Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-dextran 
extravasation as a measure of blood-brain barrier permeability. Curr. Protoc. Neurosci. 2017, 
9.58.1-9.58.15 (2017). 
35. 
Woting, A. & Blaut, M. Small intestinal permeability and gut-transit time determined with low 
and high molecular weight fluorescein isothiocyanate-dextrans in C3H mice. Nutrients 10, 4–
10 (2018). 
36. 
Fluorescein Isothiocyanate-Dextran. https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/DK/en/technical-
documents/technical-article/cell-culture-and-cell-culture-analysis/cell-based-
assays/fluorescein-isothiocyanate-dextran. 
37. 
Dojindo Laboratories, . Technical Manual - Cell Counting Kit-8. 8, 1–2 (2016). 
38. 
Chesnut, C. H. et al. Salmon calcitonin: A review of current and future therapeutic indications. 
Osteoporos. Int. 19, 479–491 (2008). 
39. 
Cheng, W., Satyanarayanajois, S. & Lim, L. Aqueous-Soluble , Non-Reversible Lipid Conjugate 
of Salmon Calcitonin : Synthesis , Characterization and In Vivo Activity. 24, (2007). 
40. 
Sandhu, R., Singh, N., Dhankhar, J., Kama, G. & Sharma, R. Dynamic light scattering (DLS) 
technique, principle, theoretical considerations and applications. Nanotechnological Biochem. 
Tech. Assess. Qual. Saf. Milk Milk Prod. 135–137 (2018). 
41. 
ParticleMetrix. Technical Note – Nanoparticle Tracking. (2018). 
42. 
BioTek. Multi-Mode Microplate Reader Operator’s Guide. (2008). 
43. 
Renshaw, S. Immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry. Immunohistochemistry: 
Essential Methods (2017). doi:10.1002/9781118717769.ch3. 
44. 
Gräf, R., Rietdorf, J. & Zimmermann, T. Live cell spinning disk microscopy. Adv. Biochem. Eng. 
Biotechnol. 95, 57–75 (2005). 
45. 
Photobleaching - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photobleaching. 
46. 
Biganzoli, E., Cavenaghi, L. A., Rossi, R., Brunati, M. C. & Nolli, M. L. Use of a Caco-2 cell 
culture model for the characterization of intestinal absorption of antibiotics. Farmaco 54, 
594–599 (1999). 
==PAGE:80==
80 
 
Resources on the Internet  
 
This is a list of internet resources used in writing of this thesis. The addresses are valid by the time of 
the writing (July 2021) which might change in time.  
 
Small Molecules vs Biologics | Drug Development Differences. 
https://www.nuventra.com/resources/blog/small-molecules-versus-biologics/ 
 
µ-Slide 8 Well Glass Bottom | Chamber Slide for TIRF | ibidi.  
https://ibidi.com/chambered-coverslips/183--slide-8-well-glass-bottom.html 
 
µ-Slide III 3D Perfusion | 3D Cell & Tissue Culture | ibidi.  
https://ibidi.com/channel-slides/53--slide-iii-3d-perfusion.html 
 
ibidi Pump System | Perform Cell-Based Flow Assays.  
https://ibidi.com/perfusion-system/112-ibidi-pump-system.html 
 
             Fluorophore - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fluorophore. 
 
https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/C2110#/C2110. 
 
 
TRITC (5/6-tetramethyl-rhodamine isothiocyanate), mixed isomer. 
https://www.thermofisher.com/order/catalog/product/46112#/46112. 
 
Photobleaching - Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photobleaching. 
 
Fluorescein Isothiocyanate-Dextran. 
 https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/DK/en/technical-documents/technical-article/cell-culture-
and-cell-culture-analysis/cell-based-assays/fluorescein-isothiocyanate-dextran. 
