==PAGE:1==
Online Discovery and Model-to-Model
Comparison of DCR Models from
Event Streams
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Modern information systems have become vital and an integral part of most modern
organizations. The opportunities the systems bring are countless if exploited. But
everything changes over time- including processes. Process mapping is a crucial tool
to comprehend processes and assist actors in completing certain steps in a process.
But as processes certainly adapt over time so should their maps.
The process maps, understood by process models, are increasingly used in govern-
mental case management1. Since especially governmental case management requires
some ﬂexibility in handling each case as an individual but still need to complying cer-
tain rules, the declarative process modeling language, Dynamic Condition Response
(DCR) graphs is the preferred tool in these types of organizations. However, the con-
tinuous development of new laws and changes to existing, make it diﬃcult to deﬁne
standardized process models without use of reﬁnement.
The aim of this thesis is to develop an artifact, that is able to exploit the extensive
event stream of process executions, recorded within an organization - primarily fo-
cusing on governmental case management. The thesis will contribute to the area of
process mining by investigating whether it is feasible to create an algorithm capable
of discovering a DCR process model based on an event stream complying a speciﬁc
process description and additionally compare the discovered model with prior models
to analyze the process evolution. The algorithm will use an intermediate process ab-
straction to leverage the most important insights of the event streams to discover the
DCR. Finally, to follow the saying ”Two heads are better than one”, the algorithm
will be developed in the mindset of feature extensibility.
To pursue this artifact the research was conducted in accordance with the Design
Science Research Methodology, where the current literature within relevant areas
1https://dcrsolutions.net/case/oget-kvalitet-og-gladere-sagsbehandlere-i-syddjurs-kommune/
==PAGE:4==
ii
such as process mining from event streams (so called online process mining), current
state-of-the-art DCR model discovery algorithms, and relation mining were investi-
gated. Throughout the research recurring meetings were held in the research team
to discuss new ﬁndings and blocking matters.
The design and development of the artifact was conducted within the agile paradigm
where the algorithm was reﬁned through continuous integrations, justiﬁed by empir-
ical experiments and evaluations, that incrementally integrated objectives identiﬁed
to reach the goal and support the answering of the research goals.
The research and the conducted experiments revealed that it was indeed possible
to discover DCR constraints from an online setting. The improvements the artifact
has undergone throughout the design phase reﬂect the enormous potentials of the
algorithm, by adding only minor level of complexity. The artifact managed to recreate
a simple reference model to a satisfying degree in an oﬄine setting, and managed
to get even closer to the model in an online setting using a simple stream mining
algorithm. Furthermore, when compared to a state-of-the-art oﬄine DCR process
model discover algorithm, the artifact managed to discover models as close to the
reference model as the other algorithm in an oﬄinee setting, and revealed a clear
superiority in an online setting, which is crucial to the goal of the research, namely,
to develop an algorithm capable of discovering a process model from an event stream.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulﬁllment of the requirements for
acquiring a M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering.
The goal of the thesis was to develop a state-of-the-art online DCR process discovery
algorithm mining constraints from an intermediate process abstraction created from
an event stream. The intention of the framework is to integrate it into Beamline,
such that it can assist researchers and DCR experts in discovering and, furthermore,
analyzing event streams through the platform.
Additionally the hope is that the
algorithm eventually will be of such quality that it can be used as an organizational
tool supporting process actors in an online setting
This report goes through the stages of how the research has been conducted, while
providing a description of each stage. It also includes the background and former
research that has been used to acquire the required knowledge base. The product of
the research, the DCR mining framework, will be described from both a conceptual
and more technical approach before it is evaluated using data collected from real life
scenarios.
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit, 16-July-2021
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincerest gratitude to my supervisors Andrea Burattin and
Hugo López for the exceptional guidance and collaboration over the course of the
thesis. Our weekly meetings have been a crucial factor in the achievements obtained
in this research, where you have contributed with interesting ideas, challenged my
ﬁndings and provided guidelines on the next step of the research. Thank you a lot for
always being available and for sharing insights and helpful advises. That is deeply
appreciated.
Additionally, my deepest gratitude goes to Andrea Burattin once again, who has
since the ﬁrst course of my Masters program been of great guidance and source of
knowledge. He has supported and intensiﬁed my great interest in process mining
and has throughout the time of my Masters program held multiple special courses
which allowed me to research in exciting areas within process mining, especially
online process mining, which have resulted in a published article [HSB20] and the
promising analytical platform for real time process mining, Beamline2. It has been
very inspiring to witness his passion for process mining and the passion to educate
others, which is something I can take with me, not only in on my academic journey
but also in my professional career. Thank you!
Lastly, I would like to thank my family and friends, who showed patience and support
for the past 6 months.
2https://beamline.github.io/dashboard/#/
==PAGE:7==
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
4
2.1
Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Model Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.2
Conformance Checking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.1.3
Enhancement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.4
Performance evaluation of process models . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.5
Process model types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.6
Event Streams
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.7
Dynamic Condition Response Graphs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2
Beamline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3
Domain
18
3.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2
Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.1
Online process model discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.2
DCR Process model discover: DisCoveR . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.3
Relations mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:9==
CONTENTS
vii
4
Methodology
25
4.1
Identify Problem & Motivate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2
Deﬁne Objectives of a solution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3
Design and Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4
Demonstration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.5
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.6
Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Design and Development
31
5.1
Conceptual
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.1.1
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.2
Iterative artifact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.1.3
Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.1.4
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
5.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5.2.1
Patterns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
5.2.2
StreamMiner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.2.3
Relation Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2.4
Framework/Miner
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.2.5
Testing Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5.2.6
Architectural design - Class diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Results and Evaluation
59
6.1
Data Selection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.2
Algorithmic Correctness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2.1
Proof of mining capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.2.2
Benchmarking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.2.3
Validity of similarity metric . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
6.3
Online capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
6.3.1
Benchmarking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
6.4
Framework vs. DisCoveR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.5
Research question fulﬁllment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.5.1
Fulﬁllment of requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
7
Conclusion
90
A Appendix A - Project Plan
93
Bibliography
105
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
We see processes everywhere we look. The common description of a process is a series
of steps sequentially performed by an actor or group of actors to achieve a concrete
goal. In organizations business processes lay ground to the basis of the business- how
the organization, a certain department or even aperson acts in a given situation in
order to provide the fundamental values of the business.
With today’s modern information systems, it is possible to track the execution of
these processes down to great details. An important tool to conceptualize these pro-
cesses and thus help provide clear guidelines to the actors of the given process, is by
mapping them to process models. The process model is usually created by a person,
who is considered to be familiar with the given process but also possesses knowledge
of the rules and structure of a process model or by an algorithm that leverage the
information from the previously recorded process executions.
A business process is a subject of change. Imagine if a new set of laws were published
regarding the unemployment beneﬁts from the government. The process modeling
expert would in worst case need to reestablish such process description, thus model,
before the model again could provide clear guidelines of how to act in a given step of
an unemployment beneﬁt process.
What if the model adapted itself to be able to provide guidelines including the new
laws using the decisions made by experienced employees who did not need the sup-
port provided by the model? And what if, the new model was able to be structural
compared to old models in order to provide insights about the process changes?
==PAGE:11==
2
A process model is just a concept capturing the activities and the internal ﬂow of a
process. The speciﬁc syntax of how the control ﬂow is implicit and strictly depending
on the type of model.
Previous research conducted by T. Hildebrandt and R. Mukkamala [HM10] suggests
that deﬁning the control ﬂow implicitly as a set of constraints or rules, a so called
declarative approach, rather than explicitly as restricted execution possibilities, an
imperative approach, is of substantial advantage in many areas due to its ﬂexibility,
especially in the area of case management and ad hoc business processes. On the
basis of this research, they introduce the process model Dynamic Condition Response
Graphs (DCR Graphs) as a declarative process model.
With the emerging usage of process mapping within- and the increasing collection
of registered data from organizations, it is currently being more common to algo-
rithmically create the process models using prior knowledge in context of previously
recorded process executions - the art of process model discovery.
The initial family of process model discovery techniques strictly base their ﬁndings
on knowledge only from complete, steady-state, collections of events, which mean
the requirement of a process execution to be considered in such algorithm is that it
has to be terminated - meaning it is not possible if the process has not reached a
steady-state/terminated. This requirement indeed presents considerable obstacles in
the organizations in which processes are constantly happening and evolving. There
have been conducted some research to address the hamper of applying process model
discovery techniques in realistic circumstances, where process changes such as con-
cept drifts need to be considered. Maggi et al. [MBCS13] presented in 2013 a novel
framework to discover process models from a continuous stream of process executions
rather than a complete collection of these. The act of performing process mining from
a continuous stream of process executions is referred to as the art of online process
mining. In 2019, Zelst, S, in his PhD thesis [van19b], contributed to the area of online
process mining, with a number of online process mining techniques, which has been
of considerable inspiration to this thesis.
Considering the aforementioned scenario of evolving processes in many business ar-
eas, especially within case management and ad hoc processes, The advantages DCR
oﬀer in capturing these processes, and the state of which the research of DCR Graphs
is currently in, where techniques of process model discovery is only able to comply to
steady-state sets of process executions, it may be concluded, that there is a consider-
able potential in conducting research within the untouched area of online discovery of
DCR models using concepts and ideas from existing online process model discovery
techniques. In addition, being able to compare the new discovered to models to de-
tect changes, and quantify the credibility of the discovered model from similarities to
previous models will provide great value both in practice and as proof to the research
as well.
==PAGE:12==
3
When dealing with live streams of events a natural obstacle is memory and compu-
tational limitations of a system. To address this the thesis will produce a technique
that is capable of leveraging the information of a model instead of from the stream
itself as it is speculated that an intermediate model comprehend the information of
the processes in an informal format by constituting an appropriate trade-oﬀbetween
the importance of the information arriving in the stream and the importance of re-
stricting the memory use.
Furthermore, as the research conducted is only considered a stepping stone to a po-
tentially ground breaking research, the state-of-the-art framework will be developed
supporting the concept of collaboration and extension, such that the research can
continue and the framework can keep improving even after the timeframe of this the-
sis.
The paper of the thesis is written to comprehend and boil down the research, which
essentially followed the Design Science Research Methodology.
To begin, in Chapter 2 the prior litterateur, the background of which forms the foun-
dation of the research, is described. The chapter goes through the general concepts
behind both process mining in section 2.1, event streams in section 2.1.6, Dynamic
Condition Response Graphs in section 2.1.7, and Beamline in section 2.2 which is the
intended platform, the artifact of the research essentially will be integrated into.
The following chapter, chapter 3, then emphasizes why the area of the research is
chosen, and what motivates to conduct the research within that speciﬁc area, sec-
tion 3.1. Furthermore, some prior research related to the area of interest is described
in section 3.2.
Lastly it states what questions, that the chosen research seeks to answer in section 3.3.
Chapter 4 will go through how the research was conducting in accordance with the
Design Science Research Methodology.
The following chapter, chapter 5, is the chapter which conceptually explains the
design decisions and the requirements, section 5.1.1 to the developed algorithms de-
scirbed in section 5.1.3. The artifact will be described on a more implementative note
in section 5.2.
The next chapter, chapter 6 will proof the correctness of the artifact and, from an
empirical perspective, answer the research questions.
Finally, chapter 7, will conclude the research and in addition, describe some value cre-
ating and optimizing features and ideas to improve the research and the appurtenant
artifact.
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 2
Background
2.1
Process Mining
Process mining is a relatively new and strongly emerging ﬁeld within computer sci-
ence, that creates the missing link between data science and process science using
a wide and growing portfolio of techniques from both ﬁelds. Ideally the outcome of
such practice is to project a structured model capturing trends and patterns from a
set of realistic process executions to reveal insights, such as limitations and aspects
of optimization for the speciﬁc process [AW04].
In today’s society modern and complex information systems allow an organizations
to record data on even the simplest process execution within the organization, to help
improve the eﬃciency and essentially the organization as a whole. The recording can
be the simple case of a manual activity such signing a paper, pressing a button to
more complex automated activities such as sending an auto generated invoice or reg-
istration of a new customer - these are in process mining all under the same category
- an activity. The act of executing such activity creates an event. In the context of
process mining, an event should at least hold the following information [Fer20]:
• Case id: Identiﬁes the process instance that the execution of the activity belongs
to. The events within a process instance is sometimes referred to as a trace.
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Process Mining
5
• Activity name: Identiﬁes the executed activity.
• Timestamp: Identiﬁes the time of execution.
A more formal deﬁnition, is given as [BCMS15a]:
Deﬁnition 2.1 (event, Event Universe) - An event e, is a triple e=(c,a,t) ∈
CxAxT which describes an occurrence of activity a, in case c at a time t, where
A is the set of all activities, C is the set of all case identiﬁers, and T is the set of
timestamps possible. The set of all possible events, Event Universe, is indicated as
E ∈(CxAxT )
A process can be deﬁned as an ordered set of activity executions, events, and is
formally described as:
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Process) - A process p is a an ordered list of events en ∈I, where
n ∈N+ and I is the process instance. Such list is also referred to as a trace.
The list p = ⟨e1, e2, ..., en⟩is ordered by the execution time t of the given activity a,
such that e1 = ⟨ae1, te1⟩and te1 ≤te2 ≤ten.
Capturing the events within an organization can be a crucial factor in order to under-
stand and analyze a process, business process, within the organization. The business
processes within an organization, if looked upon as a collection, are a clear indications
of how the organization works in general [AS04].
The massive amount of independent events recorded within the organization is typi-
cally gathered in a structured collection allowing analysis using process mining tech-
niques. These collections are often referred to as event logs. An example of such is
seen in Table 2.1
Event #
Case id
Activity Name
Timestamp
1
Case 1
Act1
01-01-2000 00:01
2
Case 2
Act1
01-01-2000 01:00
3
Case 3
Act1
01-01-2000 14:01
4
Case 1
Act2
01-01-2000 14:10
5
Case 1
Act3
01-01-2000 17:01
6
Case 3
Act2
01-01-2000 22:01
7
Case 2
Act3
01-01-2000 22:01
Table 2.1: Example of event log
A process model captures the behavior of a process, typically reﬂected in the event
log originating from the given process, and describes it in an graphical way following
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Process Mining
6
a common type of notation and standards, e.g. BPMN 2.01 or Petri nets, which
formalization is described by Dennis J.B. [Den11]. The process model thus, provides
a comprehensive understanding of a process, that enables a more conceptual under-
standing and allow analysis of the given process.
A general concept within process model is patterns. Some of the most common and
simple patterns are described and graphical demonstrated using BPMN in table 2.2
1urlhttps://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Process Mining
7
Figure
Name
Rules
Constraints
Explained
a
b
Sequence
a →b
a must have exactly 1 outgoing arc
b must have exactly 1 ingoing arc
Execution of a leads to enabling of b
a
c
b
xor-split
a →b
b →c
b#c
a must have min 2 outgoing arcs
b must have exactly 1 ingoing arc
c must have exactly 1 ingoing arc
From state a either b or c can be executed.
b
a
c
xor-join
a →c
b →c
a#b
a must have exactly 1 outgoing arc
b must have exactly 1 outgoing arc
c must have minimum 2 ingoing arcs
a and b must not both be executed if
c is not executed between
If in state a/b c can be executed
but b/a cannot be executed in between
a
b
c
and-split
a →b
a →c
b ∥c
a must have min 2 outgoing arcs
b must have exactly 1 ingoing arc
c must have exactly 1 ingoing arc
b and c are enabled both
If a is executed both b and c are enabled
b
a
c
and-join
a →c
b →c
a ∥b
a must have exactly 1 outgoing arc
b must have exactly 1 outgoing arc
c must have minimum 2 ingoing arcs
a and b must both be executed to enable c
Both a and b have to be executed to enable c
Table 2.2: Simple patterns in process mining
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Process Mining
8
Event log
Model Discovery
Model
Event log
Conformance Checking
Model
Diagnostics
Event log
Enhancement
Model
New model
Figure 2.1: Input and output of the 3 central process mining techniques
The portfolio of techniques within process mining, can be projected into 3 cate-
gories [TFVK19]:
2.1.1
Model Discovery
An important ground pillar in process mining is the model discovery. Techniques
falling into this category uses the observed behavior described in an event log to
produce a process model without any kind of an additional information. The process
of model discovery is depicted as the top model in Figure 2.1. Those process mining
techniques that do not fall into this category depends on a process model in order
to function. Model discovery techniques are especially useful in those organizations,
where processes are not yet identiﬁed, and those where processes tend to adapt over
time.
2.1.2
Conformance Checking
The second type of process mining categories is conformance checking. Techniques
belonging to this category takes in an event log and the related process model and
produces a diagnostic (see middle depiction in ﬁgure 2.1) of how well the event log
or the process model conforms with the reference model, meaning how well a given
event log or model captures the ground truth.
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Process Mining
9
2.1.3
Enhancement
The third family of techniques is enhancement techniques, that, as the name indi-
cated, transforms an existing model using evidence obtained in the log- meaning it
requires an event log and a model, into a modiﬁed model, see bottom depiction ﬁg-
ure 2.1. The enhancement analysis is, clearly, used for optimization potential, and
typically identiﬁes bottleneck or noise in process sequences, that can be eliminated2.
2.1.4
Performance evaluation of process models
The goal of process discovery is to automatically create process models that describe
an organization’s processes considering the recording of such [BD12].
Some of the metrics, that quantiﬁes the quality of a process model and its ability to
capture a process, are described by Aalst, Will in Process mining: Data Science in
Action [vdA16]:
• Fitness: How well the model can reproduce the behavior described in the event
log. Typically referred to as ability to replay event log
• Precision: How well the model disallows behavior completely unrelated to what
is seen in the event log. Typically referred to as avoiding underﬁtting.
• Generalization: How well the model generalize the behavior seen in the event
log. Typically referred to as avoiding overﬁtting.
• Simplicity: How simple the process is
When talking about a proper evaluation of a process model, there is no superior
objective or metric.
The quality is often strictly related to the objective of the
process mining itself and is typically a trade-oﬀbetween multiple metrics.
2.1.5
Process model types
Process modeling is as described earlier the act of capturing the behavior of a given
process in a graphical representative fashion, where the model type typically is chosen
for the purpose of the analytical and general use. The most common types are as men-
tioned BPMN and Petri nets, which are both imperative modeling languages. These
2https://lanalabs.com/en/glossary/model-enhancement/
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Process Mining
10
types of modeling languages explicitly deﬁnes the ﬁnite set allowed ﬂows - which in
a more loose terminology means the model deﬁnes what scenarios that are allowed.
This set is called the control-ﬂow, and an example of a scenario in the control-ﬂow
could be denoting a sequential occurrence of events a, b, and c as: a →b →c.
The variability of a log increases drastically if processes are not stable.
As a di-
rect consequence of this changeability and increasing process executions, traditional
process mining techniques tend to produce models with a massive amount of pos-
sible execution paths represented. These models will at some point be unreadable
for even expert analysts, and in some cases where concept drifts prohibit previous
behavior even be conceptually misleading. To overcome this issue, the behavior of a
process can be represented through declarative process models. These languages do
not constrain the model to a set of allowed behavior, but rather restricts the scenario
universe by deﬁning constraints that has to be satisﬁed throughout the process. This
means that the execution of activities is deﬁned by constraints, and the model allows
all scenarios that do not violate these constraints. In comparison to the imperative
’closed’ models, the declarative, constraint-based models, tend to oﬀer more ﬂexibility
for concept drifts and process execution [Pes08].
2.1.5.1
Directly-Follows Graphs
A fundamental concept of process discovery is the Directly-Follows Graph, which is
a simpliﬁed way of capturing and presenting the internal direct relation between 2
activities.
The idea of a DFG is to map the activities as they appear in a log or stream but
only in context with theevrnts from the respective process execution - each activity is
represented by a node, and each relation between 2 activities from the same process
execution - that is if an event, b, precedes another event a - is mapped as a a,
having an outgoing arc into node b. Typically the arc holds a number representing
the frequency of appearance of such relation- Meaning if the combination of event
a preceding event b has appeared 3 times, the directed edge going from node a to
node b is tagged with the number 3. Most commercial process mining tools, such
as ProM3, uses DFGs as a ﬁrst means to explore data, as it is a very simple and
understandable representation [van19a].
Several work done with Directly-Follows Graphs suggest diﬀerent ways to construct
a DFG based on a variety of thresholds, however in the scope of this thesis, a simple
construction algorithm was used:
1. Input: Event log L and parameter τvar.
3https://www.promtools.org/doku.php
==PAGE:20==
2.1 Process Mining
11
Act1
Act2
Act3
a)
2
1
1
b)
Act1
Act2
2
Figure 2.2: Visual Representation of DFG graph created from event log in table
2.1. Figure a represents the event log without any threshold, and ﬁgure
b shows the graph using of frequency at threshold = 2.
2. For each trace in the log map the relation, if it does not exist in the DFG, where
the ﬁrst activity in a trace acts as a starting node, and the last activity in a
trace acts a an ending node. If it does exist, increment the relation frequency.
3. if a relation frequency is below the threshold τvar remove the directed edge from
the graph.
A representation of the directly-follows graph based on the sequence from table 2.1
is seen in ﬁgure 2.2
However, some suggests that the naive use of DFGs as discovery tools may cause
several issues and misinterpretations, like Aalst in his publication A practitioner’s
guide to process mining: Limitations of the directly-follows graph[van19a], points out
that one may be mislead in terms of the behavior of the model if simplifying using
the frequency-based threshold, due to "invisible gaps".
2.1.6
Event Streams
An event stream is loosely speaking a constant ﬂow of data events. The events are
typically generated from connected devices, such as sensors etc. In general, a stream
of data events sorted by some attribute can be described as a sequence of data. A
==PAGE:21==
2.1 Process Mining
12
sequence can formally be described as [BCMS15a]:
Deﬁnition 2.3 (Sequence) - Given a ﬁnite set N+
n = 1, 2, .., n and a target set A,
we call sequence σ the function σ : N+
n A. It is possible to say that σ maps index
values to the corresponding elements in A. For simplicity, we consider a sequence
through its string interpretation: σ =< s1, ..., sn >, where si = σ(i) and si ∈A.
On the basis of such, and considering Deﬁnition 2.1 and 2.3, it is possible to derive
the deﬁnition of an event stream as:
Deﬁnition 2.4 (Event Stream) Given the event universe E, a sequence of events
S : N+ is called an event stream.
The concept of event streams introduces an overshadowing issue in context of pro-
cess mining, namely the lack of data awareness. In general, for event streams it is
theoretically impossible to see complete traces as one can only be certain of the given
sequence of events/trace as a preﬁx, suﬃx or substring of the entire trace. Data
streams can potentially be an inﬁnite sequence of data. In this thesis, it is assumed
that all events with no exceptions arrive at the time speciﬁed in the timestamp, with
case id and activity name existing in the event universe, as deﬁned in Deﬁnition 2.1.
Under these assumptions it is possible to project the incoming event into their re-
spective traces, relating to the belonging trace, where the sorting attribute is time.
E.g. it is possible from the event log given in table 2.1, derive the following sequence
of events in a time-based order as:
σ : ⟨⟨Case1, Act1, t1⟩, ⟨Case2, Act1, t2⟩, ⟨Case3, Act1, t3⟩, ⟨Case1, Act2, t4⟩,
⟨Case1, Act3, t5⟩, ⟨Case3, Act2, t6⟩, ⟨Case2, Act3, t7⟩⟩
Which can be further reduced to:
1. Case1 : ⟨Act1, Act2, Act3⟩
2. Case2 : ⟨Act1, Act3⟩
3. Case3 : ⟨Act1, Act2⟩
From an analytic perspective, dealing with inﬁnite amount of events typically holds a
critical potential of running out of memory, or not being able to compute in real time,
thus a number of stream mining approaches, typically under the categories data- and
task-based, have been developed to extract a ﬁnite representation of the stream as it
has appeared up until the given time. In this thesis, only one onlinne stream mining
approach is used, the sliding window algorithm (apart from the inﬁnite memory
approach), which simply put forms a ﬁxed window over the data series. A further
description of the sliding window algorithm, will be provided in section 5.1.3.3.
==PAGE:22==
2.1 Process Mining
13
2.1.7
Dynamic Condition Response Graphs
The Dynamic Condition Response (DCR) is a constraint-based graphical process
notation from the declarative paradigm ﬁrst described in the work by the founding
farthers Hildebrandt and Mukkamala in 2011 [HM10]. The foundation of a DCR
graph is based on a set of activities with 3 predicates: executed, pending and included
and a variety of constraints relating 2 activities, a source activity and a sink activity.
These constraints are instantiated from patterns of templates, that conceptualize rules
and properties. The rules and properties of the existing constraints are described in
table 2.3 where also the respective graphical notation appear.
As mentioned an activity is associated with 3 unary predicates:
• Executed: An activity is said to be executed, if an event with the given activity
name has occurred in the process instance.
• Pending: An activity is pending, if it is required to be executed in a process
instance in order to ﬁnish the process. E.g. if a document is required to be
signed before the delivery is sealed, the activity representing Sign document is
pending.
• Included: An activity is included if the activity is included in the process in-
stance. Further it is excluded if it is not included.
.
In the work by Back et al [BSHM20], they formally introduce a DCR Graph as an ex-
tension of the original structure described by Hildebrandt and Mukkamala in [HM10]
as a tuple consisting of:
g = (E, m, A,
−→, −→, +, %, l)
(2.1)
where:
• E is a set of events.
• m ∈M(g) = 2E ×2E ×2E is the marking M(g) is the set of all markings, where
m = (Ex, Pe, In).
• A is the set of activities.
•
−→∈E × E is the response relation.
• −→
∈E × E is the condition relation.
==PAGE:23==
2.1 Process Mining
14
• + is the includes relation.
• % is the excludes relation.
• + ∩% = ∅.
• l : E −→A is a labelling function mapping every event to an activity.
The constraints given in table 2.3 are those currently existing in the DCR Universe4.//
The rules of the constraints describe scenarios, that will make the DCR Graph for-
bidden, if violated.
In the work by Back et al [BSHM20], they also, formally introduce the execution
semantics, where the following must be fulﬁlled to be able to legally execute an ac-
tivity, a:
• a must be included, i.e. a ∈In
• if any condition relation exist s.t a′ →
a, then all such a′ must have been
executed, or excluded, i.e. a′ ∈Ex or a′ ∈InC
Furthermore, if these hold true, the execution of activity a, changes the marking, m:
• If any response relations exists s.t. a −→a′ then all such a′ become pending:
a′ ∈Pe
• If any exclude relation exists s.t. a −→%a′ then any included a′ will become
excluded: a ∈Ex
• if any include relations exists s.t. a −→+a′ then any excluded a′ will become
included: a ∈In
The above descriptions are below given in a more comprehensive manner:
Consider, for example, the response constraint. As described, the rule is that if A
occurs, B must eventually occur. In DCR for traces, a DCR Graph is said to be
accepting, if Pe ∩In = ∅, where Pe is the set of pending activities in the process
instance, and In is the set of included activities in the process instance. Therefore the
constraint is satisﬁed, and the process instance accepting in traces like t1 = ⟨A, B, C⟩,
t2 = ⟨A, C, A, B⟩, t3 = ⟨C, B⟩, and t4 = ⟨A, B, A, B⟩but not in t5 = ⟨A, B, A, C⟩as
the second execution of A is not followed by an execution B, leaving B ∈Pe.
In DCR a constraint is said to be activated in a trace, if the occurrence of an event
4https://documentation.dcr.design/documentation/introduction-to-business-rules/
==PAGE:24==
2.1 Process Mining
15
Notation
Textural
Constraint
Rules
-
Precondition
B can only occur if ﬁrst
A has occurred and A is not pending
or if A becomes excluded
−→
Condition
B can only occur if ﬁrst A has occurred
or if A becomes excluded
-
Milestone
B can occur initially, but if A becomes
pending, B cannot occur until A
is not pending or A becomes excluded
−→
Response
B has to occur at least once after
occurrence of A if B is included upon
occurrence of A
(B becomes pending upon occurrence of A)
-
No-response
B does not have to occur, if A occurs.
If B is pending, B becomes not pending
upon occurrence of A or B
−→+
Include
On occurrence of A
B becomes included (executable)
−→%
Exclude
On occurrence of A
B becomes not-included (non-executable).
B cannot occur if ﬁrst A has occurred.
-
Spawn
Occurrence of A creates new instance of
subactivity B
Table 2.3: Graphical notation and formalization of DCR Constraints
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Beamline
16
makes the constraint relevant- meaning if there exists a succession constraint, such
as a response between A and B, then the constraint is activated only if the event A
occurs in the trace.
In general, as a rule of thumb only source events can be the activation of a constraint.
In the example above, the occurrence of the event A changes the marking of B, thus
the event A activates the constraint response. In t1 and t2 the response constraint is
activated once and leads to a fulﬁllment, in t3 the response constraint is never acti-
vated and thus not fulﬁlled, while 2 activations in t4 leads to fulﬁllments. In t5 the
ﬁrst activation of a response leads to a fulﬁllment, while the second activation leads
to a violation as the subsequent occurrence of B never appears. A trace is said to
be forbidden, if the occurrence of an event violates a constraint. Consider, again the
traces t1, t2, t3, t4 and t5 and the constraint A −→B. In the given scenario, initially,
only activity A and C are enabled, due to the rules of the condition constraint. To
enable activity B, activity A must be executed or excluded. In trace t1, t2, t4 and
t5 the activation of the condition constraint enables activity B, such that B can be
executed. In t3 the condition constraint is never activated, thus the trace violates the
condition constraint, and the trace is set to forbidden.
Dynamic Condition Response Graphs are developed in collaboration between a re-
search group from the IT University of Denmark lead by Thomas Hildebrandt5 and
Exformatics A/S6, which in 2018 led to the founding of DCR Solutions A/S7. In
Denmark DCR is integrated in the tools used in multiple departments of the public
sector, where the notation supports their work ﬂow in case management, oﬀering
immediate simulation, enactment and analysis.
The DCR notation language contains a considerable lower amount of constraints than
other languages using declarative process models, however, the DCR language still
reaches the same expressiveness, according to Schönig and Jablonskis comparison of
declarative process modeling languages[SJ15].
2.2
Beamline
Beamline8 is a state-of-the-art web-based framework, that supports research of real
time process mining. Beamline allow scientists and other interested to create their
own study space, where they can analyze streams of data and conduct experiments
from a process mining oriented perspective.
The framework allows users to load self-developed plug ins (algorithms)- so called
5https://di.ku.dk/english/staff/?pure=en/persons/350259
6https://www.exformatics.com/
7https://dcrsolutions.net/
8https://beamline.github.io/dashboard/#/
==PAGE:26==
2.2 Beamline
17
miners - and connect to real-time event streams. The user is then able to create
instances of the available miners to analyze a desired stream of events.
The framework currently only supports miners developed in Java, and communi-
cates with the miners through REST. The framework supports both client/server
communication but also publish/subscription, which is well suited for event-based
algorithms.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Domain
3.1
Motivation
Business processes are constantly changing and being able to create and continuously
adapt discovered models is vital for the analysis of the system behavior. The con-
tinuous changing processes and, in some cases, the fast and massive data occurrence
in organizations, makes it diﬃcult to use traditional process mining techniques to
discover and analyze processes. To overcome these challenges, there have over the
years been conducted research in processing the process executions as they arrive in
data streams, so called online process mining.
Most declarative process discovery techniques today, though, require several iter-
ations on an event log to discover a related process model[BCMS15b], why these
techniques are not applicable to the above challenge, to mine a process model in an
online setting.
The purpose of this research is primarily to investigate, whether it is feasible to
construct an useful declarative model by leveraging insights from an intermediate
process abstraction constructed from a data stream to capture the behavior of a
business process.
In order to succeed, one must ﬁrst realize that working with data stream introduces
challenges:
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Related Work
19
• Trace unawareness: One cannot be certain of the given state of the event stream
as it could be the preﬁx, substring or suﬃx of the given process instance. Some
work done within the ﬁeld of online process mining assumes data awareness by
marking the start and end events in the process instance[NCB+20].
• Inﬁnite data streams: It is not hard to imagine a data stream continuously
submitting massive amounts of data, which potentially could result in inﬁnite
traces. This could be the recording of activities in an extremely busy store.
The scope of the thesis is to develop physical piece of software dealing with
realistic scenarios, thus one cannot neglect the natural limitations in hardware
such as limited budget of memory and computational power.
3.2
Related Work
As recent years have brought an increasing interest in business organization and pro-
cess modeling, there have been conducted interesting and groundbreaking research
in many ﬁelds within business process management and process models in general.
As this thesis seek to investigate the discovery of a declarative process model, DCR
graph, in an online environment, and create a novel framework addressing the issues
above, a thorough investigation of the novel work of the areas, that this research will
include was conducted and include:
1. Existing online process model discovery algorithms (section 3.2.1)
2. Existing DCR model process discovery algorithms (section 3.2.2).
3. Existing Relations mining algorithms (section 3.2.3
3.2.1
Online process model discovery
The ground theme of the thesis is the model discovery from a real-time, continuous
event stream. This technique diﬀers in many ways from the traditional model dis-
covery from complete event logs, and the inﬁnite data stream and trace-unawareness
make it challenging to process the data in real time. Thus, the challenge of dealing
with streams of events are recognized as relevant challenge in the Process Mining
Manifesto[vdAAdM+12]. Most existing techniques of online model discovery require
several iterations on event logs. To address this issue Burattin et al.[BCMS15b] intro-
duced a novel framework for discovery of declarative process models from real time
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Related Work
20
event streams. The model is expressed using the Declare notation. In general Declare
is a lot similar to the Dynamic Condition Response notation language. Declare com-
bines formal semantics, expressed as LTL-based constraints, with graphical notations
to present a declarative process model. Each constraint is captured in templates.
In the work, they conduct performance experiments with 3 diﬀerent stream mining
algorithms - also known as frequency counting algorithms, Sliding Window, Lossy
Counting, Lossy counting with Budget. This is done to ensure a low memory usage
throughout the discovery phase, even though the event stream is inﬁnite. The algo-
rithms ﬁlter out infrequent behavior and captures so-called concept drifts.
The discovery of the declare models happens at runtime using an algorithm that
replays the incoming event through so-called replayers. The replayers are based on
constraint templates- meaning each constraint (they chose to discover in the work) is
presented in a replayer. Their work points out the drawbacks of event-based streams:
Event-based streams are streams, where the event only holds information of their
respective case id, activity name and timestamp. This excludes the possibility to
handle the events in traces, which means completed traces cannot be removed for
memory management, and makes it impossible to determine whether constraints are
satisﬁed or violated. In contrast, in trace-based streams events hold information on
which trace it is belonging to. In conclusion, Burattin et al determines the Lossy
counting with Budget to be the most eﬀective and accurate way of handling event
streams. Moreover, the trace-based support outperforms the event-based. However,
the trace-based support is not possible in most event streams without making strong
assumptions about start and end events.
In 2020, an extension of the work presented above was published by Navarin et al
[NCB+20]. This work addresses the lack of data awareness from [BCMS15b].
The introduction of data awareness is implemented by extending the declarative
process modeling language Declare by deﬁning data conditions. An example of such
would be if an event is received and a certain condition holds after receiving the
event, then some other event must eventually appear. The proposed approach is done
using a set of algorithms to analyze the stream of data and classify their constraint
activation. The classiﬁcation problem uses a Hoeﬀding tree for each of the Declare
templates to identify what condition that needs to be set up and hold for a speciﬁc
constraint to be fulﬁlled[NCB+20].
3.2.2
DCR Process model discover: DisCoveR
The current research conducted within Dynamic Condition Response Graphs has only
been in the context of oﬄine process mining - as a consequence of this only oﬄine
discovery algorithms exist in the research area of DCR. In the work done by C.O.
Back et al [BSHM20], a DCR discovery algorithm, DisCoveR, is presented,which ef-
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Related Work
21
ﬁciently and accurately mines DCR Graphs from event logs. They present in their
work an accuracy of 96,2% with a linear time complexity. The algorithm participated
in the Process Discovery Contest 20191, where it managed to secure a second place.
Moreover, this discovery algorithm is implemented in a framework as a model rec-
ommendation tool in a platform provided by DCR Solutions A/S. The algorithm is
an extension of the ParNek algorithm introduced by Nekrasaite et al.[NPBS19].
The ParkNek algorithm used in [NPBS19] and [BSHM20] follows an explicit min-
ing procedure of to identify the patterns in the event log. The algorithm refers to
templates from Declare, and proceeds as follows:
1. A set of candidate relations for four relation patterns is constructed
2. Additional excludes are added based on predecessor and successor relations
3. Additional excludes and includes are added based on not chain succession rela-
tions
4. Redundant excludes relations are removed
5. Redundant condition and response relations are removed via transitive reduc-
tion
6. Further condition relations are discovered using a limited replay strategy
7. Another transitive reduction iteration is performed for conditions
The DisCoveR algorithm, however, diﬀerentiates from ParNek in some aspects.
DisCoveR outperforms Parnek using a highly eﬃcient implementation of DCR
graphs mapping to bit vectors, where each activity corresponds to a particular in-
dex of the vector. The data structure allows very fast replays of logs. Additionally,
DisCoveR goes under a looser licensing than ParNek, why this algorithm can be
used in industrial solutions. DCR Solutions A/S oﬀers its own analytical tool in a
process mining platform2 to subscribers, which also have been used heavily and been
of great help in this thesis.
As a conclusion, by the time the work by Back et al.[BSHM20] was published in May
2020, it outperformed all currently public declarative miners using standard mea-
sures of machine learning. Furthermore, DisCoveR achieved a run-time in order of
magnitude 1 faster than the state-of-the-art Debois DCR miner and an order of 2
faster than the state-of-the-art Declare discovery algorithm [BSHM20].
1https://icpmconference.org/2019/process-discovery-contest
2https://www.dcrgraphs.net/
==PAGE:31==
3.2 Related Work
22
Another important research conducted within the area of online process mining is the
work done by Zelst, B, in his PhD thesis [van19b]. Throughout the thesis, Zelst pro-
poses process mining techniques applicable to process discovery, conformance check-
ing and process enhancement from event streams.
What is most relevant in the scope of this research, is the contributions within data
storage - which in this thesis is referred to as stream mining - and process discovery.
On the notion of the data storage Zelst compare 2 data storage techniques to tem-
porarily store events emitted onto an event stream- the sliding window approach and
the preﬁx tree [van19b]. Zelst concludes, that he is able to improve the quality of
online process mining analysis using these approaches [van19b]. Regarding the online
process discovery, Zelst’s suggest that to avoid data redundancy mining directly from
the event stream through the data store, an intermediate step going from the event
stream to the process model has to be applied. This is done by translating the event
data into an intermediate data structure before leveraging the insights of this model
into creating the process model. This approach is inspired by the idea of analyz-
ing precedence relations, which is used by the Alpha algorithm and the Inductive
miner(explained in the next section) [van19b] .
Zelst concludes, that the model created as an intermediate step, using the Inductive
Miner to create a steady state-based process, is capable of capturing process behavior
from the time of the creation, which can be used to create the ﬁnal process model.
3.2.3
Relations mining
3.2.3.1
Inductive miner
In the ﬁeld of process discovery the inductive miner guarantees to preserve ﬁtness and
aims to maximize precision of an event log- meaning the discovered model captures
the complete behavior of the analyzed log. The inductive miner, created by Sander
Leemans[LFVDA14], reaches its strong claims by generating a so-called process tree,
which is a notation to represent a block-structured process model, from a directly
follows abstraction.
Basically the process tree consist of a root node, inner nodes representing operators
and leaves representing activities.
The algorithm identiﬁes certain behavior by repeatedly splitting up the log using
diﬀerent patterns. More precisely, the inductive miner is in fact a set of techniques,
but the underlying principal behind it is to capture the behavior of an event log
using the 4 operators: sequential composition, exclusive choice, parallel composition,
and redo loop. The inductive miner implements parameter functions to capture these
operators through multiple recursions on a log.
The parameter functions are cut detection, log splitting, base cases and fall throughs.
The most interesting in the scope of the thesis is the cut detection, where the principle
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Research Questions
23
is to consider the DFG abstraction. Here the inductive miner "cuts" the DFG into
smaller parts, focusing on each node (event) with its incoming and outgoing edges
and looks for the footprints of the operations. The order the operators are sought for
in the cut function is done in an hierarchical way where the ﬁrst priority is exclusive
choice then sequential composition, parallel composition, and last redo loop.
This thesis, like Zelst’s, is inspired by the concept of searching for patterns within a
directly follows abstraction, that indicates certain behavior.
3.3
Research Questions
With the opportunities that the recording of processes within an organization bring
in terms of the massive income of data from streams, both in terms of amount and
velocity, and the emerging need of capturing continuous adapting processes, as well
as being able to compare these changes to prior processes, combined with the research
gap experienced within the context of DCR graphs, it is clear that an interesting and
potentially groundbreaking novel work can be conducted within the ﬁeld of online
DCR model discovery.
The emerging research within process mining have led to outstanding process discov-
ery techniques, which may beneﬁt and accelerate the intended research.
Considering the identiﬁed gaps of the former and leading research within the area
of DCR process discovery the following artifact has been identiﬁed as a great value
creating artifact to address these gaps:
A framework allowing a user to capture the behavior from an event stream adding an
extra step in the process discovery, in which an intermediate process abstraction is
constructed, such that a DCR process model is mined through leveraging insights from
a novel process model. The framework shall provide clear insights and strong analyt-
ical opportunities about the stream and the general behavior and tendencies, as well
as trustworthy comparison to prior models in order to follow tendencies and changes
of the process. Furthermore, the framework shall be able to extend the complexity by
allowing researchers and developers to extend the logic behind the pattern mining as
well as the stream mining.
On this basis, the following research questions are deﬁned to address this artifact:
Q1: Is it feasible to discover a DCR model from an intermediate process represen-
tation of the online event stream?
Q2: Is it feasible to capture the structure of a human-made reference model by min-
ing a DCR model from an undiscovered event stream complying the behavior
of the given process?
Q3: Will the online discovered DCR model be able to compete with the state-
of-the-art DCR discovery algorithm, DisCoveR, by revealing equal or better
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Research Questions
24
performance in terms of structural identiﬁcation of the reference model both in
an online as well as oﬄine setting?
==PAGE:34==
Chapter 4
Methodology
To step into undiscovered territory, can be a vague road to accomplish the desired
objective. This idea also holds in the context of conducting design science research.
The nature of this thesis is to conduct research in a untouched ﬁeld, namely an online
DCR discovery tool. When conducting such research, to stay on track and ensure
not to drift away from the general idea, it is generally a good idea to create some
ground rules or follow a reference model - a methodology.
In the work done by Peﬀers et al. [PTRC07], they argue that the methodology that
serves as a commonly accepted framework for design science research is the Design
Science Research Methodology (DSRM). They consider the methodology as a model
capable of producing an artifact that successfully addresses an identiﬁed undiscovered
problem by incorporating the principle, practices, and methods required. They base
this on the 3 main objectives: consistency with prior literature, provision of nominal
process model for the research and provision of a model for presenting and evaluating
the ﬁndings of the research.
Peﬀers et al. [PTRC07] propose the DSRM through 6 steps, in a predeﬁned order
proceeding as following:
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Identify Problem & Motivate
26
4.1
Identify Problem & Motivate
The initial step of the methodology is to identify a problem, in which further re-
search can be justiﬁed, and how a potential cutting edge artifact can add value. The
identiﬁed problem for this research is related to the increasing demand for an online
approach to discover DCR models and the needs to catch potential concept drifts as
they appear in a high intensity stream.
The concluding product to address this issue, is as identiﬁed in section 3.3, an online
analytical tool for discovering and comparing DCR models.
Further details of the speciﬁc problem and the motivation behind such research is
described in chapter 1.
4.2
Deﬁne Objectives of a solution
This step is the step addressing the acknowledged work contribution to the area of
the research. The proposed solution to the problem is already identiﬁed, and in this
step the solution is conceptualized through a number of identiﬁed objectives.
The purpose of this step is to ensure a strong knowledge base before entering the
design and development phase. Furthermore, it is to identify the gaps in the existing
state-of-the-art research. Exploiting the leverage of current cutting edge techniques,
can provide a general foundation for the conducted research.
Chapter 2 provides a comprehensive understanding of the general ﬁeld, that the
research is conducted within, namely process mining (section 2.1), event streams
(section 2.1.6), and Dynamic Condition Response Graphs (section 2.1.7).
The 3 ﬁelds- where the latter, DCR Graphs, is indeed an area within process mining
but still of such great impact to the reseach that it is kept as an individual section-
complement the combined knowledge base, that is required to comprehend the prob-
lem detected earlier.
The existing work mentioned in section 3.2 constitutes the
state-of-the-art research conducted in ﬁelds, that can somehow relate to the objec-
tive of the research.
The research within online process model discovery conducted by Burattin et al.[BCMS15b]
(section 3.2.1), concludes important insights within the area of online process min-
ing. However, the work diﬀerentiate in ways, that makes it unrelatable to the iden-
tiﬁed problem in this research. Burattin uses a diﬀerent constraint-based notation
language, and identiﬁes the constraints directly from the stream mining approach,
instead of the identiﬁed approach where the process insights is based on a ground
model, the DFG.
The current state-of-the-art DCR process discovery algorithm, DisCoveR by Back et
==PAGE:36==
4.2 Deﬁne Objectives of a solution
27
al. [BSHM20], discussed in section 3.2.2, is important in the sense, that the templates
and procedures of identifying DCR constraints, is strongly relatable to this research.
The DisCoveR algorithm is only used in oﬄine settings, and considered one of the
best discovery algorithms, within the area of constraint-bases process models. Thus
the artifact created in this thesis must be held up against the performance of the
DisCoveR.
The work described in section 3.2.3, relates to the theory behind the inductive miner
by Leemans et al. [LFVDA14]. The underlying concept and the proceeding of the
inductive miner, is what relates to the research since capturing the behavior of a log
based on diﬀerent templates and observations is strongly relatable to this research,
also discuss last part of the section 3.2.3.
Securing the foundation of the knowledge the research lies upon from previous lit-
erature, it becomes easier to grasp the research.
An important step, which was conducted in an early stage of the research, was iden-
tifying comprehensive objectives, that each could contribute to the proposed state-
of-the-art artifact. The following objectives were identiﬁed as an indicator for further
and more in-depth feature identiﬁcation methods:
O1: Build simple framework to discover and compare DCR models
O2: Identify DCR patterns/footprints from a non-complex process model - Initially
DFG
O3: implement DCR patterns in a catalogue
O4: Use inductive miner-based approach to hierarchically search for the patterns in
the DCR
O5: Represent the discovered models in a graphical way on Beamline
O6: Introduce stream mining algorithms to deal with concept drifts and infrequent
behavior
O7: Be able to mine in run-time
O8: Store models eﬃciently
O9: Use state-of-the-art algorithms to structural compare models
O10: Use existing oﬄine automated process discovery techniques to generate models
for performance experiments
==PAGE:37==
4.3 Design and Development
28
4.3
Design and Development
The inevitable limitation of a research is the time-constraint. Thus, this step is crucial
to the level of success of the artifact.
With the overall research goal in place, and with the supporting solution objectives
described above, the long-term goal is known. However, as time is of the essence,
also short-termed goals are required in order ensure the research is going the right
way.
During the design and development phase, the favored development methodology was
agile software development. The following practices were followed to stay in the agile
paradigm:
• Iterative and continuously deliveries: In line with the ﬁrst principle of the
Agile Manifesto1, the artifact was built in multiple iterations, emphasized as
3 main architectural iterations. Furthermore, the features of the artifact were
incrementally added. This is further discussed in the beginning of section 5.1.2
• MoSCoW Prioritization: In line with the second principle of the agile man-
ifesto, in an early stage of the research, the overall solution objectives deﬁned
above (section 4.2), were divided into smaller and achievable tasks.
In this
procedure the Moscow prioritization method was to emphasize the distribute
and prioritize the features in order to at least reach an artifact, that supports
the requirements of the research. The further process and the classiﬁcation is
described in section 5.1.1.
• Gantt chart: In line with the third principle of the agile manifesto to make
sure, to adhere to the fundamental deadlines, a Gantt chart was constructed
as a part of the project plan. The Gantt chart is found in the project plan in
appendix A.
• Weekly stand-up meetings: In accordance with principle 4 of the Agile
Manifesto, a weekly meeting was set up with the the research supervisors. The
general agenda of these meetings was structured as:
1. What have I done since last time?
2. What do I intend to work on until next time?
3. What issues are blocking
In distinction to regular stand-up meetings these meetings were only conducted
once a week. Thus the meeting was of a more formal setting, where a slidedeck
was prepared as the general meeting structure. On these meeting new ideas
were discussed.
1https://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html
==PAGE:38==
4.4 Demonstration
29
The general structure of the meetings ﬁtted the DSRM in a way that the ﬁrst
meetings were to identify the problem and deﬁne the solution. Then further in
the research the discussion was more around the design and development. The
last part was about the evaluation and how to communicate the research.
A thorough description of the Design and Development of the artifact is de-
scribed in chapter 5.
4.4
Demonstration
The demonstration of the abilities of the artifact is showed and described in chap-
ter 6.
Throughout the design and development phase, an excessive amount of demonstra-
tions has been performed by testing on diﬀerent realistic data sets.
The models
created from the demonstrations have further been visualized using the upload and
visualize feature from the process mining tool provided by DCR Solutions A/S.
4.5
Evaluation
The evaluation of the artifact and thus the research has been conducted thoroughly
throughout the design and development phase. Using empirical evaluations the value
of a new feature was evaluated to be either accepted or rejected. To evaluate the
performance the discovered model has been undergoing 2 tests:
1. How similar is the model to the reference model, which the event log have
used can the discover algorithm mine. The performance metric is the Jaccard
similarity.
2. How well does the discovered model capture the behavior of the log/stream.
For this evaluation, a transition system has been developed to replay the log
on the discovered model again to simulate real world processes.
The evaluation of the artifact will be discussed in chapter 6
==PAGE:39==
4.6 Communication
30
4.6
Communication
The research is concluded by this dissertation, which will be publicly available on
DTU FindIt. The artifact will be available at the github repository2, and the in-
tention, in extension to the thesis, is that additional research will be conducted and
concluded in a research paper describing the ﬁndings achieved in the research.
2https://github.com/beamline/dcr-miners
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 5
Design and Development
In the following sections of chapter 5, the creation of the online DCR discovery
framework will be discussed. The ﬁrst part of the chapter is the conceptual overview
of the framework. This section will hold a description of the requirements of the
framework, the general iterative process of the development of the artifact, important
algorithms and the assumptions that the framework lies upon. The second part of
the chapter will go over the implementative solution of the artifact. The section is
based on, and will include, the core elements of a system documentation in a real
world project.
5.1
Conceptual
The development phase of a research can be cruel to many developers, as if the
intention of the research or the capabilities of an artifact is not strict enough, one
tends to get lost. Especially approaching the development phase in from an agile
point of view, with frequent stand−up meetings, continuously delivery, and dividing
large features and objectives down to smaller tasks, can lead to potential pivoting of
concept or overengineered problems where the fundamentals of the research is lost.
Thus it is commonly practice to set up clear requirements of the intended product.
==PAGE:41==
5.1 Conceptual
32
5.1.1
Requirements
Setting up requirements to an artifact can be addressed in multiple way in software
engineering. One could argue that the informality and user-pointed feature, that a
user story as: "As a user, I want to extract a DCR graph from a stream of data, such
that I can gain insights about the process behind" brings, does not entirely comprehend
the speciﬁc functionality of which is required of the product. Furthermore, visualizing
the critical features of the framework from a user’s point of view using use case
diagrams, can be too simple when trying to map an artifact of a certain degree
of complexity. Thus to increase the complexity of the requirements and to avoid
getting lost in tons of ideas and overengineered features, the MoSCoW Prioritization
product plan1 was created in the beginning of the project for functional requirements
of the framework. The speciﬁc idea of compiling such list of requirements is to map
the wanted requirements and then distribute those into prioritization categories. The
table 5.1 have columns each representing a prioritization category from the MoSCoW
analysis:
• Must have: these requirements are identiﬁed to be crucial to the framework in
order to succeed in answering the research questions. The features appointed
in this category are what constitute the Minimum Viable Product (MVP) of
the research.
• Should have: Features that are not necessarily a part of the foundation of the
framework, but deﬁnitely will add a signiﬁcant value to the framework.
• Could have: This category usually holds initiatives that have a small impact
if they are left out.
• Will not have: Features that will not be prioritized in the given period.
5.1.1.1
Functional requirements
Functional requirements, identiﬁed in table 5.1, are those that are required by the
system to reach the actual objectives, which were identiﬁed as the thesis goals as
mentioned in section 4.2, thus the requirements are formulated from the framework’s
point of view. These deﬁne the wanted features.
1https://www.productplan.com/glossary/moscow-prioritization/
==PAGE:42==
5.1 Conceptual
33
Must Have
Should have
Could have
Will not have
FR1: Ability to identify at least 4
simple patterns
FR7: DCR graph as File
FR10: Ability to identify
Complex patterns
FR12: Integrate to Beamline
FR2:
A stream mining algorithm
for online mining
FR8: Ability to ﬁlter
out infrequencies
FR11: Complex stream
mining algorithms for online
mining
FR13: Automatically compare
newly retrieved and old models to
retrieve the most similar
FR3: Oﬀer user customizability
w.r.t pattern mining, stream
mining and unfrequent event
ﬁltering
FR9: State-of-the-art
model-to-model comparison
method
FR14: Repository of old models for
searching
and downloading
FR4: Simple model-to-model
comparison method
FR15:
Rate old models’ in
similarity to a newly discovered
FR5:
A data storage structure
for oﬄine comparison
FR16: Ability to represent the
DCR model graphically
FR6:
A hierarchical mining
approach for patterns
Table 5.1: Functional requirements of the framework identiﬁed in the beginning of the project to encapsulate the wanted
features of the framework
==PAGE:43==
5.1 Conceptual
34
Of the thesis goals given in section 4.2, the ones that were identiﬁed to provide the
essential needs to obtain the artifact to support the research, namely a framework to
mine DCR constraints from a stream capable of addressing process changes, which
challenges the performance of a state-of-the-art oﬄine DCR miner. The essential
requirements of such tool were identiﬁed an early state of the research and are the
ones deﬁning the MVP:
O1, O2, and O3 addresses the actual framework and the general construction of
such. To support this, it is identiﬁed, that an algorithm is to be implemented that is
able to recognize simple constraints (See FR1) from a stream of events (See FR2)
and which oﬀers some user-customization features (See FR3). Furthermore, the min-
ing of the patterns, O4, happens according to a speciﬁc hierarchical procedure FR6.
O8 and O10 are required to ensure the algorithm is capable of detecting process
changes by comparing with prior models and further the ability to hold the model’s
performance up against state-of-the-art process discovers (FR4 and FR5).
The Should have’s identiﬁed in 5.1 are those, that are not of crucial value to reach-
ing the objectives but deﬁnitely add value to its performing.
FR7 is derived to support the feature to store a models O8. The feature itself does
not increase the performance of the product, but it adds value, as the framework will
allow the user to download models and the algorithm will be able to reuse discov-
ered models for evaluations instead of mining new once, and allows visualization in a
process mining platform supporting upload of DCR graphs (in this thesis, the DCR
Solutions platform2 is used). Also it allows analysis and comparison between previ-
ously mined models and new ones to show algorithm improvement or deterioration.
It is determined that the framework would gain precision from being able to detect
concept drifts and infrequent behavior. However, as the framework already uses a
stream mining algorithm and considering the natural project limitation of a time-
constraint, implementing a state of the art frequency counting algorithm, O6 has
been down prioritized. However, since the framework should still be able to ﬁlter out
infrequent behavior from the stream, why a simple infrequency ﬁltering feature sup-
ported by the implemented stream mining algorithm is derived(FR8). An improved
model-to-model comparison feature would allow important insights on the change of
a process over time, by comparing the newly discovered model and previously discov-
ered O9, supported by the deduction of FR9. However, this feature is not a crucial
part of the research as a simple structural comparison method is identiﬁed as being
enough to identify the changes in a process from comparing with a reference model,
why it is not a part of the MVP.
The identiﬁed Could have’s are only to add complexity to the framework, where
FR10 increases the mining complexity. The idea of having such functional require-
2https://www.dcrgraphs.net/
==PAGE:44==
5.1 Conceptual
35
ment, will make sure, that the important non-functional requirement of pattern scal-
ability is upheld, which will be addressed shortly in the description of non-functional
requirements.
Furthmore, as brieﬂy discussed a more complex stream mining al-
gorithm such as afrequency counting algorithm, O6, does not add crucial values to
the framework, since the stream mining algorithm from FR2 is already a must have.
However again keeping the idea of such implementation if time allows (FR11) suggest
implementing FR2 in a way such that it supports multiple stream mining algorithms
and thus supports the idea of the scalability of the system once again.
The features that are identiﬁed in the Will not have category are those, that sup-
port the integration (FR12) with the platform process mining Beamline3 and process
analysis in the platform, including real time process model comparison between the
newly discovered and old ones (FR13, FR14, FR15) and visualization of a discov-
ered DCR model (FR16). One can argue, that these features are important to the
use of the framework, but for the scope of answering the research questions, they
are not relevant. Furthermore, the user-friendly feature to graphically represent the
model is still possible through the analytical tool provided by DCR solutions with
the earlier download-feature as discussed through FR7.
5.1.1.2
Non-functional requirements
Non-functional requirements, identiﬁed below, should provide a comprehensive un-
derstanding of which requirements that are to the underlying system behind the
wanted framework:
Performance
NFR1: The framework shall be able to consume all events of a high intensive stream
both in the sense of the volume of data and arrival velocity
NFR2: The framework shall be able to create DCR models at run-time
NFR3: The framework shall be able to compare models at run-time
NFR4: The framework shall be able to run all combinations of (implemented) conﬁg-
urations
Capacity
3https://beamline.github.io/dashboard/#/
==PAGE:45==
5.1 Conceptual
36
NFR5: The framework shall oﬀer the opportunity to Extend the pattern catalogue
of which the algorithm identiﬁes from the underlying system in the sense to
increase the framework’s performance and mining complexity
NFR6: The framework shall oﬀer the opportunity to add multiple stream mining algo-
rithms to the underlying system
NFR7: The framework shall oﬀer the opportunity to add multiple model comparison
algorithms to the underlying system
Compatibility
NFR8: The framework shall be able to integrate into Beamline
Availability
NFR9: The framework shall be able to respond to all user requests intended the frame-
work
5.1.2
Iterative artifact
As described in chapter 4 the design and development phase was conducted in multi-
ple iteration in order to create the best artifact as time allowed. Zooming out on an
architectural perspective, the design and development phase had 3 major iterations:
1. First iteration: A proof of concept algorithm was created to ensure the ability
to extract enough information from an underlying model, in this case the DFG
to actually discover a model, that is able to capture the behavior of the event
stream. The pseudocode of the presentation of the implemented artifact from
an early meeting is seen in ﬁgure 5.1.
The algorithm identiﬁed 4 very basic patters, namely the Immediate Condi-
tion and Immediate Response, which in later iterations went to replace the
traditional condition and response patterns, to heavily decrease the number of
constraints mined. In addition it mined an early version of the Sequence pat-
tern, which in this version was a combination of the Immediate Condition and
Immediate Response. The last pattern was a Direct Loop, which existed if 2
activities, a and b both precedes each other in the DFG.
==PAGE:46==
5.1 Conceptual
37
PatternDetection(DFG)
model = []
x = threshold
relations = DFG.getRaltionsAboveThreshold(x)
For each relation in relations:
if ( srcFO < tarFO):
model.add(ImmCond(src,tar)
immCon = true
if(srcInd < tarInd):
model.add(ImmResp(src,tar)
immResp = true
if (immCond & immResp):
model.add(seq(src,tar))
model.remove(immCond(src,tar))
model.remove(immResp(src,tar))
if (relations.contains( reciprocal( relation ) ) & src != tar):
model.add(DirLoop(src,tar))
Figure 5.1: Pseudo code of ﬁrst iteration of the framework - the proof of concept
2. Second iteration: A priority lattice based framework, which supports the
extensibility of new patterns. Each pattern is implemented as its own algorithm
and is given a priority based on the order of mining. Using the example in the
ﬁrst iteration, the Immediate Condition, Immediate Response, and Direct Loop
would have assigned the value 0 as they do not depend on any other patterns,
the Sequence would have the value 1 assigned since it depends on patterns mined
with value 0. However, the concept of ordering based on lattice and numbers
becomes extremely unfeasible as the amount of patterns increase- especially
when supporting the extensibility of pattern algorithms in an open community.
This concern lead to the third iteration of architectural design.
3. Third iteration: The third and current architectural design mines the pat-
terns based on dependencies of the wanted miners. A further description of this
concept is given in the next section 5.1.3.1.
5.1.3
Algorithms
For space limitation, the following section cannot describe all the algorithms cover-
ing the entire framework, thus it will describe the conceptual algorithms behind the
framework that are constructed in regards to the scope of the research. The algo-
rithms used to support the developed ones, will be mentioned and referenced but not
explained nor showed in further details.
==PAGE:47==
5.1 Conceptual
38
5.1.3.1
The Online Discovery Framework
The most essential algorithm constructed in the context of this thesis is the general
discovery framework, also called the meta algorithm, which is given in algorithm1.
The algorithm is a framework that holds the overall discovery logic. Algorithm 1 takes
the DFG and a set of user speciﬁed DCR patterns, which will populate the ﬁnal DCR
model, denoted as M in algorithm1, as input, and outputs the ﬁnal DCR model only
holding the user-speciﬁed constraints. The algorithm consist of iterations over the
set of wanted patterns to perform dependency mining (Seen in line 7 of algorithm 1)
and ﬁnally over the total set of mined constraints to reject the constraints that are
not wanted in the ﬁnal DCR model (line 20-24) and it proceeds as follows:
1. First all directly follow relations from the DFG is added to the Union Relation
Set, denoted U, (line 7).
2. A dependency queue, DP is constructed (line 9) from an n-ary tree post order
traversal, where the tree is constructed from the DCR pattern and its depen-
dency patterns for each of the wanted DCR patterns (line 8).
3. Each pattern in the queue, that is not mined already, e.g. does not exist in
the list of visited patterns, MT (line 11), will be mined from detecting speciﬁc
behavior based on the templates of the given pattern, where the output of such
pattern algorithm is a set of tuples, R (line 13) holding the activity-pair of the
constraint as well as the corresponding constraint. An example of such tuple
is (s, t, CONDITION) seen in algorithm 2. The pattern that were just mined
will be added to the visited patterns, MT (line 12).
4. Finally the discovered DCR constraints will be added to the union relation set
(line 20), such that they can be used in other patterns if needed.
5. A ﬁnal projection of the DCR model will happen projecting those DCR con-
straints, which were chosen by the user.
The post order traversal is implemented as an iterative postorder traversal of an n-
ary tree4, where the dependencies of a pattern, the root, are seen as leaves. The
construction of such queue is depicted in ﬁgure 5.2. The given example depicts a
dependency queue construction of the pattern C1. The pattern itself depends on
constraints that are mined from the pattern C2, C3, and C4, where C2 depends on
C5, C3 depends on C2 and C6, and C4 does have any dependencies. The patterns
that are to be mined given this example are mined in the following order: C5 →
C2 →C7 →C3 →C4 →C1. Lastly, the projection of the DCR model, would then
only show constraints created from C1 meaning: The output, CT , is the set of all
4https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/iterative-postorder-traversal-of-n-ary-tree/
==PAGE:48==
5.1 Conceptual
39
mined constraints from CA, which only are discovered from the set of patterns, T:
CT = {c | c ∈T ∩CA}
C1
C2
C5
C3
C2
C7
C4
Output: [C5,C2,C2,C7,C3 ,C4,C1]
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure 5.2: Depiction of a postorder traversal of a n-ary tree
Algorithm 1: Online Discovery Framework
input : DFG : DFG; P : Set of DCR Patterns
1 U ←∅;
// Union relation set holding Directly follows and DCR
relations
2
M ←Initially empty DCR model ;
3 R ←∅;
// Set of Tuples of DCR constraint relation
4
DP ←∅;
// Set of DCR Patterns to mine
5
MT ←∅;
// Visited DCR patterns
6
7 U.add(DFG.relations);
8 foreach DCR pattern p ∈P do
9
DP ←postOrderTraversal(p);
10
foreach DCR pattern dp ∈DP do
11
if dp ̸∈MT then
12
MT.add(dp);
13
R ←dp.mine(U);
14
U.add(R);
15
end
16
end
17 end
18 foreach DCR relation m ∈U do
19
if m.type ∈P then
20
M.add(m);
21
end
22 end
output: M
==PAGE:49==
5.1 Conceptual
40
This meta algorithm, is what constructs the DCR model, and is thus only executed
upon explicitly activation. The execution of the meta algorithm is what is expected
to be at run-time in order to make the identiﬁed performance non-functional require-
ments.
There are a few limitations and assumption connected to the meta algorithm at the
moment:
• The algorithm is imposing a deterministic approach in the implication of the
algorithm, meaning if a pattern depends on another pattern, and that pattern
is not mined initially, the output of the originating pattern will not be the same
as if the depending pattern was mined ﬁrst.
• The second assumption, is that there does not exist any co-dependencies, as this
would neglect the deterministic approach. To avoid co-dependencies, a pattern,
pa, can be split up in 2 patterns, p1, p2 such that the templates depending on
another pattern pb can be mined after the depending pattern, : pa−> p1 + p2
where pb →p1 and p2 →pb s.t. the order of mining would be 1 : p1, 2 : pb, 3 : p2.
• The current version of the framework expects the user to be familiar with the
patterns instead of the framework just being able to recognize which patterns
to mine based on an input of DCR constraints.
5.1.3.2
Extended DFG
The DFG serves as the input of the meta algorithm upon user activation, but also the
conceptual foundation of the DCR model. The DFG mining algorithm constructed is
basically an extension of a DFG as it also holds information on each activity- referred
to as activity decoration. The general idea of the extended DFG is to act as a data
structure, and is split up in 2 parts:
• The conceptual and well known DFG as described in section 2.1.5.1.
• The second part, which makes it an extension of the typical DFG, is the infor-
mation it holds for each activity appearing in the DFG- referred to as activity
decoration. This information is required since a DFG holds no information of
execution order, which is strictly required in the context of a DCR model.
The activity decoration consist of 3 attributes, namely average ﬁrst occurrence, av-
erage index and number of trace appearances.
==PAGE:50==
5.1 Conceptual
41
A
B
C
D
E
F
F
A
B
C
D
A
B
E
D
E
D
C
B
B
E
Case 1:
Case 2:
Case 3:
Case 4:
time
Figure 5.3: Depiction of an event stream sorted by time of observation and mapped
into belonging case
The average decorations indicates the position in a list of a speciﬁc happening, where
the index of the ﬁrst element in the list is 0, and the index of the last is the total
number of elements in the list minus 1.
The average ﬁrst occurrence indicates the position of which a speciﬁc activity is ob-
served for the ﬁrst time in a case. The average index decoration indicates, where
in a case, the execution of the activity is usually observed. The number of trace
appearances indicates how many cases the activity appears in. Considering the event
stream depicted in ﬁgure 5.3, each event is mapped into their respective case and
sorted by the observation time. This speciﬁc scenario would introduce 4 lists:
C1: < A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I >
C2: < A, B, C, D >
C3: < A, B, E, D, E >
C4: < D, C, B, B, E >
The corresponding activity decoration is seen in table 5.2.
5.1.3.3
Stream Mining Algorithm
The stream mining algorithm is the algorithm of the system, which constantly runs as
it listens to incoming events and manipulate the framework memory on consumption
==PAGE:51==
5.1 Conceptual
42
Activity name
Average ﬁrst occurrence
Average index
# trace appearances
A
0
0
3
B
1.25
1.6
5
C
1.66
1.66
3
D
2.5
2.5
4
E
3.333
3.5
4
F
5
5.5
2
Table 5.2: Activity decoration calculated from ﬁgure 5.3
of those.. The ability to modify the data storage in run-time is thus a crucial factor.
This algorithm continuously updates the data structure, the DFG as it consumes
events from the stream when the framework is instantiated. As one of the requirement
to the framework was that it should be able to work with multiple stream mining
algorithms, this algorithm is not explicit, but the user can decide the desired one
from a catalogue of implemented stream mining algorithms upon instantiation of the
framework.
In the current version of the framework 2 stream mining algorithms are implemented;
One for oﬄine testing purposes and one for the online respectively:
• Inﬁnite memory stream miner: This stream mining algorithm neglects the
limitation of massive data storage. Basically, the mining algorithm manipulates
the data collection, DFG, each time it consumes an event and stores all events
for inﬁnite time. The stream mining algorithm is implemented to construct a
data storage that can relate to an oﬄine mining approach and is used to compare
mining compatibilities to state-of-the-art oﬄine process discovery techniques
• Sliding window stream miner: The algorithm is used to create the data
storage in an online setting. This stream mining algorithm is implemented to
simulate a real-life scenario. The general idea behind the algorithm is that ev-
ery trace that exists in the stream has its own ordered ﬁnite queue. If an event
belonging to an unseen process qxecution appears, a new queue is created for
the given case. For each event the miner consumes, it does one of the following:
– If the queue has not reached its maximum capacity, it enqueues the event
and updates the DFG accordingly, namely add the new observation to the
set of DFG relations if it does not exist. If it exists it simply increments
the relation frequency. Furthermore, it updates the activity decoration of
the given activity.
– If the queue is full it ﬁrst dequeues the top activity of the queue (FIFO
- ﬁrst in, ﬁrst out), updates the DFG and all activity decorations, and
==PAGE:52==
5.1 Conceptual
43
then enqueues the observed event and updates the DFG and the related
activity decoration.
5.1.3.4
Pattern mining algorithms
The mining algorithms are algorithms constructed for proof of concept. Each of the
patterns, described in the algorithms 2, 3, and 4, identify templates from the DFG
relations and instantiate constraints relations. In the context of this thesis a pattern
is conceptualized by understanding it as an algorithm, a pattern, that instantiates
DCR relations, based on diﬀerent rules conﬁgurations, templates. An example of
such is the simple pattern Condition, explained below. This pattern instantiates the
atomic condition constraint based on 2 templates.
The concept of the execution of such algorithm identifying patterns in a set of rela-
tions is referred to as mining.
The current version of the framework is implemented mining 4 templates to match
the current state-of-the-art oﬄine DCR discovery algorithm, namely Condition, Re-
sponse, Exclude and Include.
The rules applying to the templates are constructed in accordance with the state-of-
the-art DCR discovery miner given in [BSHM20].
Condition mining
This pattern mines the atomic DCR condition and identiﬁes this constraint as de-
scribed in algorithm 2.
The algorithm is called upon the execution of mine(U) as shown in algorithm 1 line
13.
The algorithm initially extracts all the Directly follows relations from the DFG to a
list of tuples holding the the source and the target of the directly follows relation (line
1). The structure holding the DF relations, is a set of tuples given in deﬁnition 5.1:
Deﬁnition 5.1 (Set of tuples of DF relations) - R : ⟨r1, r2, ..., rn⟩where ri :
⟨as, at⟩for 1 ≤i ≤n, in which the source activity as (directly) precedes at in the
same trace as, ar ∈σ s.t. r = indexs + 1.
Additionally, an empty set of tuples, C, which is expected to hold all identiﬁed DCR
relations - in this case conditions - is deﬁned (line 2).
A tuple that holds a DCR constraint is given as the source, the target and the DCR
relation. Formally, a set of tuples of DCR constraints is given in deﬁnition 5.2.
Deﬁnition 5.2 (Set of tuples of DCR relations) -
C is the set of DCR relation tuples C : ⟨P1, P2, ..., Pn⟩, where the tuple Pi : ⟨bs, bt, c⟩
==PAGE:53==
5.1 Conceptual
44
for 1 ≤i ≤n consist of activities in the universe of the corresponding DFG: bs, bt ∈
ER, and the constraint is in the universe of DCR constraints as speciﬁed in table 2.3,
c ∈EDCR. Furthermore bs is seen as the source activity, and bt as the target activity
of the DCR relation.
The algorithm, algorithm 2, iterates over each of the Directly Follow (DF) relations in
R (line 3), meaning the pattern restricts the number of constraints to only immediate
relations, where an immediate relation is when an event directly precedes another in
the same case.
For each iteration it checks if the below described templates are
satisﬁed (line 4 and 5).
1. The average ﬁrst occurrence of the source, denoted s.avgFO, is less than the
average ﬁrst occurrence of the target, denoted t.avgFO (line 4). This rule indi-
cates that the execution of the source activity should occur before the execution
of the target activity.
2. The number of trace appearances of the source, denoted s.numTraceAppearance,
is greater or equal to the number of trace appearances of the target, de-
noted t.numTraceAppearance (also seen in line 5).
Conceptually, keeping
in mind that if any condition relations exist s.t a →
a′, then all such a
must have been executed or excluded in order to execute a′, i.e.
a ∈Ex
or a ∈InC, means that a condition constraint is able to exists even though
s.numTraceAppearance < t.numTraceAppearance, if the source, s, is the tar-
get of an exclude relation.
However through experiments it was concluded,
that the framework with the current complexity level is not able to depend on
excludes to identify conditions, thus, this exception of rule is neglected. This
statement is proven in chapter 6.
If both templates hold the condition between the source and the target activity exists,
and the DCR relation is added to the set of DCR relations E, with the tuple type
corresponding to deﬁnition 5.2 (Shown in line 6), which essentially will act as the
output of the function:
Initially this condition constraint was mined looking at all possible activity relations-
meaning this pattern was investigated on each combination of distinct pair of activi-
ties existing in the stream universe.
An example of such is formally given as:
Given a sequence of events σ : ⟨e0, e1, ..., en⟩and a pattern of the afore-mentioned
templates P : ⟨T1, T2⟩, there exists condition between each distinct pair of acitivies
that satisfy the template (ei, ej) ∈P and i ̸= j and 0 ≤i ≤n and 0 ≤j ≤n
The iterative implementation method and continuously empirical evaluation of per-
formance, however, lead to the conclusion that the most eﬃcient condition identifying
==PAGE:54==
5.1 Conceptual
45
procedure was only looking at direct relations, meaning only activity pairs, that exist
in the set of DFG relations. This conclusion will be proven in chapter 6.
Algorithm 2: Condition Relation Miner
input : U : Union Relation Set;
1 R ←U.getDfRelations() ; // Set of tuples of all DF relations from the
DFG
2
C ←∅; // empty set of tuples holding the source, target and their
corresponding DCR constraint
3
foreach DF relation (s,t) ∈R do
4
if s.avgFO < t.avgFO then
5
if s.numTraceAppearance ≥t.numTraceAppearance then
6
C.add(s,t,CONDITION);
7
end
8
end
9 end
output: C
Response mining
Again, this is a fairly simple pattern identifying the atomic DCR response relation,
which follows the proceeding as described in algorithm 3. The constraint restricts
the behavior of the stream such that the target of a response, must eventually occur
if the source has occurred. The pattern consist of one template, which is satisﬁed,
if the source activity of the response relation has a lower average index, denoted
s.avgInd, on line 4, than the target’s average index, denoted t.avgInd. This means
the source activity precedes the target activity. Again each DF relation from the DFG
is matched up against a response constraint (loop from line 3). Finally, the identiﬁed
response constraints in the set of constraints, C, are returned. Ideally, the response
constraint require that the total number of observations of the target activity should
be the same as for the source activity in case there is no relations excluding the
source, in order for the case to be accepting - unless the target is excluded. This is
such that an activity (target) is not left pending after a case has ended. However,
this check is not possible in an online setting, as the ending of a case is not deﬁned
==PAGE:55==
5.1 Conceptual
46
nor whether the case is accepting as states as an issue of streams in section 2.1.6.
Algorithm 3: Response Relation Mining
input : U : Union Relation Set;
1 R ←U.getDfRelations() ; // Set of tuples of all DF relations from the
DFG
2
C ←∅; // empty set of tuples holding the source, target and their
corresponding DCR constraint
3
foreach DF relation (s,t) ∈R do
4
if s.avgInd < s.avgInd then
5
C.add(s,t,RESPONSE)
6
end
7 end
output: C
Exclude and Include mining
This pattern is a more complex algorithm identifying the exclude and include re-
lations based on 4 templates from the Declare universe[BSHM20], namely atMo-
stOne,AlternatePrecedence,ChainPrecendence, and NotChainSuccession. The exclude
and include mining algorithm is described in algorithm 4 and it proceeds by execution
of the following functions to identify Exclude and Include relations:
1. selfExcludes: all unique activities observed from the DFG (line 1 function
selfExclude) are checked if they satisfy the atMostOne template- meaning if
they occur at most once in all traces, they are added to the set of tuples holding
DCR constraints as deﬁned in deﬁnition 5.2 (line 4-5 function selfExclude). If
a self exclusion relation exists, a →%a is added to the set of DCR constraints.
2. precedence: checks precedence relations - meaning only relations where ac-
tivity a precedes b, are checked. These relations are found looking for another
pattern, a sequence, where a sequence is given as the relation between a source
and a target activity, in which the source has both a lower average ﬁrst occur-
rence and a lower average index than the target. Due to the use of the sequence
relation, the algorithm 4 depends on the pattern mining the sequence relations.
To ensure only directly preceding relations are checked, the sequence pattern is
only retrieved from DF relations (as seen line 1 function precedence).
For each identiﬁed sequence relation the precedence function checks 2 tem-
plates, the alternate precedence (line 4 function precedence) and the precedence
not successor (line 8 function precedence).
The alternate precedence is also prioritized in DisCoveR [BSHM20] in favor of
chain precedence from ParNek [NPBS19], since the alternate precedence sub-
sumes the chain precedence, and yet oﬀer less restriction. The general consensus
is in order for an alternate precedence pattern to exist, then For the target to
==PAGE:56==
5.1 Conceptual
47
occur, the source must occur exactly once prior meaning the total number of
occurrences of the source, denoted source.frequency in line 4, must equal the
total occurrences of the target, denoted target.frequency in line 4. If such
pattern exists, an include relation from the source to the target is added to the
set of constraints , source →+target, (line 6) and a self exclude of the target
(line 5) is added, target →%target.
The second template (line 8), precedence not successor, adds the relation of the
target excluding the source, target →%source (line 9) if there exists an activ-
ity source, which precede but never succeed another activity target, and if no
relation exists such that source →%source (line 8). The union relation set is
checked in case previous patterns has identiﬁed a self exclude of the source ac-
tivity and the temporarily set of constraints is checked in case the selfExclude
from line 4 of the algorthm 4 has identiﬁed such relation.
The identiﬁed constraints in the set M is returned and added to the overall set
of constraints to be returned in algorithm 4.
The DCR miner has a natural limitation to identifying cyclic behavior of a pro-
cess, thus it is less straightforward to identify whether an activity is observed
to precede but never succeed another activity, why the strong assumption of
the sequence is established. Thus if a sequence relation between a source and a
target activity exists, it is assumed, the source precedes but never succeeds the
target.
3. notChainSuccession: is the third template in algorithm 4. This procedure
identiﬁes 2 underlying templates, namely NotChainSuccession, and Between,
and is the most computational heavy of the exclude and include searches, with
a runtime of O(n3), where n is the number of unique activities. Initially, the
method uses an adjacency matrix created on the DFG relations (line 1 function
notChainSuccession) to ﬁnd all distinct pair of activities, source and sink,
where sink does not immediately succeeds source, which is then stored in the
set S (line 2). For each of such pair (line 5), an exclude between source and
sink is added to the set of output constraints such that source →%sink
(line 8). However, if sink succeeds some activity, denoted u, at some point in
the sequence - σ :< ..., source, u1, ..., un, sink > this is, if there exist a path
from source to sink in the DFG (which in the function notChainSuccession
is returned from the call getEventsBetween and stored in the set of events B
line 6), then the intermediate relations, those activities, ui, between source and
sink, will re-include sink, thus for all 1 ≤i ≤n an include between ui and
sink is added to set of constraints to be returned (line 10): ui →+sink. The
path between source and sink is found using a DFS algorithm.
4. removeRedundant: is the last template of the pattern presented in algo-
rithm 4. The fundamental is, if a always precedes b - those relations, sequences,
exist in S in line 4 of the function removeRedundant - and if a relation exists
such that a →%c (line 9), then b →%c is redundant unless there exist a
relation u →+c (line 11), where u ∈U and U is the set of activities between
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Conceptual
48
a)
b)
Figure 5.4: The result of a transitive reduction procedure on graph a is shown in
graph b. Both graph has the same transitive closure.
between a and b (deﬁned in line 7). If this rule holds, and the relation b →%c
exists, then relation b →%c is removed (line 12). Finally, the output is the
updated set of constraints, which will update the constraints to be returned in
algorithm, 4 (line 10).
Again we rely on the assumption that a sequence between the source and target
exists if the source always precedes the target.
Transitive Reduction
A last manipulation of the DCR model is the transitive reduction. According to Back
et al. in their work with DisCoveR [BSHM20], the condition and response relations
satisfy the transitive property. That is, if there exist a condition/response, such that
a →
b and another condition/response such that b →
c, then the relation a →
c
is excessive. The transitive reduction does not decrease the transitive closure of the
model, however it decreases number of constraints signiﬁcantly. A visual illustration
of a transitive closure is seen in ﬁgure 5.4. In version of the framework, the transitive
reduction algorithm is implemented such that the input of the algorithm is the type
of relation, which is to be be reduced.
5.1.3.5
Jaccard Similarity Coeﬃcient - Model-to-model similarity
An objective of this thesis was to introduce a proper model-to-model similarity
method, which could observe and justify changes in an event stream by compar-
ing the discovered model to previously mined models.
The comparison of models, as discussed in the paper from Kunze et al [KWW11a]
can amongst other, be as a structural similarity, which leverage the maximum com-
mon sub-graph or the graph edit distance or a behavioral similarity, which as an
example can be deﬁned comparing the behavior expressed by the models’ respective
transitions systems.
An important feature of the framework is the ability to be computationally light-
meaning it is important to restrict the computation time of the features of the frame-
==PAGE:58==
5.1 Conceptual
49
Algorithm 4: Exclude and Include Relation Mining
input : Union relation set: U
output: C
1 R ←U.getDfRelations() ; // Set of tuples of all DF relations from the
DFG
2
C ←∅; // empty set of tuples holding the source, target and their
corresponding DCR constraint
3
4 C.add( selfExclude(R) ) ;
// Method to mine self excludes
5
6 C.add( precedence(U,C) ) ; // Method to mine includes and excludes from
precedence
7
8 C.add( notChainSuccession(R) ) ;
// Method to mine includes and
excludes from lack of chain successions
9
10 C ←removeRedundantExcludes(R,C) is ;
// Method to remove redundant
excludes from C
11
12 Function selfExclude(R):
1
A ←R.getUniqueActivities() ;
2
M ←∅;
// empty set of tuples holding the source, target and
their corresponding DCR constraint
3
foreach Activity a ∈A do
4
if a.appearsMostOnce() then
5
C.add(a,a,EXCLUDE)
6
end
7
end
8 return M
9
10 Function precedence(U,C):
1
S ←U.getAllSequencePatternsFromDFG() ;
2
M ←∅;
// empty set of tuples holding the source, target and
their corresponding DCR constraint
3
foreach Sequence tuple (source,target) ∈S do
// Alternate Precedence
4
if source.frequency = target.frequency then
5
M.add(target,target,EXCLUDE);
6
M.add(source,target,INCLUDE);
7
end
// Precedence not successor
8
if (source,source,EXCLUDE) ̸∈U and (source,source,EXCLUDE) ̸∈C
then
9
M.add(b,a,EXCLUDE);
10
end
11
end
12 return M
13
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Conceptual
50
1 Function notChainSuccession(R):
1
AM ←R.getAdjacencyMatrix() ;
2
S ←AM.getNotSuccessing() ;
// Set of tuples (s,t) of all s that
do not success t
3
M ←∅;
// empty set of tuples holding the source, target and
their corresponding DCR constraint
4
5
foreach not succenssion Tuple (source,sink) ∈S do
6
B ←AM.getEventsBetween(source, sink) ;
// Set of events
between source and sink in DFG
7
8
M.add(source,sink,EXCLUDE)
9
foreach Activity a in B do
10
M.add(a,sink,INCLUDE)
11
end
12
end
13 return M
14
15 Function removeRedundant(U,R,C)
1
E ←U.getExcludes ∪C.getExcludes() ;
// Set of tuples of exclude
relations (s,t) from the union relation set and the
constrainted mined from the 3 previous templates
2
I ←C.getIncludes() ;
// Set of tuples of exclude relations (s,t)
3
AM ←E.getAdjacencyMatrix() ;
// Adjencency matrix from exclude
relations
4
S ←R.getAllSequencePatterns() ;
// Set of tuples of sequence
relations (s,t)
5
6
foreach Sequence tuple (a,b) ∈S do
7
U ←E.getEventsBetween(a, b) ;
// Set of relations between
source and target in DCR Excludes
8
foreach Activity c ∈A do
9
if (a, c) ∈E and (b, c) ∈E then
10
foreach activity between ∈U do
11
if (between,c) ̸∈I then
12
C.remove(b,c)
13
end
14
end
15
end
16
end
17
end
18
return C
==PAGE:60==
5.1 Conceptual
51
work, why it has been neglected to compare models on a behavioral spectrum.
The framework has been implemented with a feature to compare the structural prop-
erties of 2 models using the Jaccard similarity coeﬃcient.
Essentially, the Jaccard similarity coeﬃcient introduced by Jaccard, P, [Jac12], yields
the symmetric overlap of 2 sets, SX and SY :
J( ¯X, ¯U) = SX ∩SY
SX ∪SY
(5.1)
which conceptually expresses the relation of the shared properties over the overall
properties.
In the context of this thesis, a set, SX, is the set of DCR relations, where the deﬁni-
tion of such relation is given in deﬁnition 5.2, and a property is shared between SX
and another set of DCR relations, SY if the DCR relation exist in both SX and SY :
A DCR relation is structurally shared if the DCR relation in a set, SX: (as, at, c1) ∈
SX and a DCR relation in another set (bs, bt, c2) ∈SY are equal, s.t. as = bs and
at = bt and c1 = c2
A clear advantage of the Jaccard similarity method is the fact, that the similarity cal-
culation is highly eﬃcient, as the time complexity of the Jaccard similarity coeﬃcient
is O(mn) where m is the number of properties in the set SX and n is the number of
properties in the set SY . Moreover, the scaling of the computation is linear, as the
properties of the reference model is considered constant, thus only n changes. On the
other hand, the Jaccard similarity is not capable of capturing behavioral similarity,
like the aforementioned transition system comparison method. In this thesis it has
not been investigated how other comparison approaches, such as behavioral similarity
methods, but prior literature, also by Kunze et al [KWW11b], suggests that existing
behavioral similarity methods do not scale well, thus computationally heavy, why the
Jaccard similarity coeﬃcient has been chosen in the context of this thesis. However,
the work from Kunze et al [KWW11b] is from 2011, why it would be an interesting
investigation for later work to compare state-of-the-art comparison methods.
5.1.4
Assumptions
When operating the framework, some clear assumptions on the event streams are
identiﬁed and must hold true:
• There exist an event stream S, such that the set of events e1, ..., en ∈S ∧
S ∈E, where E is a ﬁnite event universe originated according to a speciﬁc
process/model.
This assumption is crucial in regards to other assumptions:
that memory is of a ﬁnite size and that noise (or completely unrelated events)
is not considered
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Implementation
52
• The sequence, σ, of which events, ei, arrive from the data stream, S, comply
with the time order of the execution of the activities. Here it is also assumed
that the generated, tg
ei and observed timestamp,to
ei, are equal. Formally:
For all events in a given sequence: ∀e ∈σ where σ ∈S it holds that i <
i + 1 ∧tg
ei < tg
ei+1 ∧to
ei < to
ei+1 ∧tg
ei = to
ei
• The events in a stream is observable and contains at least the information given
in the deﬁnition of an event deﬁnition 2.1
• Event noise is neglected meaning, all events in a process appear and are true
to the process model
• As mentioned co-dependencies are neglected, meaning no patterns creates a
cyclic dependency tree s.t. two patterns cannot depend on each other (e.g. if
T1 →T2, then T2 ̸→T1).
• The implication of the algorithm is approached deterministically.
Furthermore, in the scope of this research it is not given, that the events arriving
in the stream holds information on the trace end, why a trace is assumed accepting,
until the current trace has been violated the model, e.g. the constraints deﬁning the
rules of execution.
5.2
Implementation
This section presents the technical implementation of some of the most important
parts of the framework.
Furthermore, it presents a architectural overview of the
system using UML class diagrams.
The framework is implemented in Java 14, using standard libraries.
As the intention of the framework in the long term is to be publicly available through
Beamline, the framework itself is implemented using a Miner skeleton. The miner
skeleton represents an overall structure of how the algorithm should be designed. It
consists of a unique miner ID, a name, a description, a set of conﬁguration parameters,
and a set of view parameters. The conﬁguration parameters are parameters that
are chosen by the user upon instantiation of the miner. In the context of the DCR
process discovery miner, this could be which patterns to mine or which stream mining
algorithm it is set up with.
The view parameters is again another conﬁguration
parameter chosen by the user upon instantiation. It will typically be a list of which
diﬀerent implemented views of the miner can be chosen from. In the context of the
DCR process discovery miner, this could be a graphical or textural representation of
the model, as well as an XML format.
==PAGE:62==
5.2 Implementation
53
02/07/2021
Pattern.vpd
<<Interface>>
RelationalPattern
-dependencies : List<String>
-name : String
+populateConstraint()
Condition
Response
Sequence
CommonExcludeInclude
Exclude
Include
<<use>>
<<use>>
Visual Paradigm Online Diagrams Academic Partner Program
Visual Paradigm Online 
Figure 5.5: Class diagram of patterns currently implemented in the framework
5.2.1
Patterns
The patterns that are implemented in the current version of the framework and the
general structure of the implementation is seen in ﬁgure 5.5.
The general architecture of the a pattern is reusing the idea of a shared skeleton. The
skeleton, PatternRelation, consist of a name of the pattern, and a list of dependency
patterns. This list is used in the creation of the mining execution logic described
in the conceptual description of the framework. Furthermore, all patterns share the
method populateConstraint() that is the method, the meta algorithm calls, when it
instantiates the mining of the given pattern.
This shared pattern increase supports the objective of an extensibility in the context
of patterns. It provides an unambiguous design pattern, that a researcher easily can
follow to extend the complexity of the framework.
The mining of the excludes and include, instantiates the common logic of the ex-
clude and includes since these constraints are mined in the same pattern, Com-
monExcluceInclude. A limitation of this version of the framework, is if multiple DCR
constraints are mined through the same pattern (as the example with exclude and
includes), the pattern mining algorithm will be instantiated and run multiple times,
which is unnecessary time usage.
==PAGE:63==
5.2 Implementation
54
<<Interface>>
StreamMiner
+observeEvent()
SlidingWindow
UnlimitedMemory
Figure 5.6: Class diagram of the StreamMiner package currently implemented in
the framework
ExtendedDFG
ActivityDecoration
RelationDecoration
UnionRelationSet
<<enumeration>>
Patterns
DcrModel
<<instantiate>>
<<instantiate>>
Figure 5.7: Class diagram of the classes holding the logic for the DFG and DCR
model currently implemented in the framework
5.2.2
StreamMiner
The stream mining algorithms implemented in the framework is again using the idea
of a common design pattern, referring to the structure of the StreamMiner interface.
The structure is depicted as an UML diagram in ﬁgure 5.6. Each implemented stream
mining algorithm will hold the methods required by the framework and the internal
logic and data structure. The manipulation of the DFG will then be controlled by
the stream miner itself.
==PAGE:64==
5.2 Implementation
55
5.2.3
Relation Structure
The structure that holds the relation abstraction can be categorized in 3 classes and
the implementative design is depicted in ﬁgure 5.7:
5.2.3.1
ExtendedDFG
As discussed in the conceptual design, this class is responsible for the intermediate
DFG abstraction. This data structure holds the information of each DFG relation and
each individual activity in the event stream, that is used to mine the DCR relations.
The ExtendedDFG class is manipulated only by the StreamMiner, and used only by
the UnionRelationSet.
5.2.3.2
DcrModel
DcrModel is the resulting relation structure. The DcrModel is populated with rela-
tions which consist of tuples of a source, a target, and the DCR relation as given in
deﬁnition 5.2
The source and the target are strings describing their respective activity name and the
relation is an enumerate type of a DCR relation. Currently the framework supports,
but not at the stage able to mine, all DCR relations5. In addition, the Sequence
relation is added to the DCR constraints, which as described is a pattern describing
A always preceding B. The annotation of a sequence pattern as a DCR constraint is
decidedly incorrect, and only annotated as a DCR constraint in lack of the ability to
store relations patterns that are neither a DFG nor a DCR relation in the implemen-
tation, but instead of instantiating a search of ’always precedence’ relations in each
template, that uses this pattern, the pattern is instantiated once to make the mining
process more eﬃcient.
The DcrModel is the class which holds the data, that is used to instantiate the user-
desired ’view’.
5.2.3.3
UnionRelationSet
The UnionRelationSet is the union of the DFG and DCR relations. This data struc-
ture serves as the data for the patterns, meaning each pattern obtain insights on
5https://documentation.dcr.design/documentation/introduction-to-business-rules/
==PAGE:65==
5.2 Implementation
56
the activity decoration, the DF-, and the DCR relations, and manipulate with the
DCR relations through this class. Essentially, the union set has 1 data structure
inspired by each of the individual data storage classes, 1 for storing DFG relations
and 1 for storing the DCR relations. The stored structure of the DF relations and
the DCR relations are given in deﬁnition 5.1 and deﬁnition 5.2. Finally, the DCR
constraints, that are wanted for analysis by the user is projected from this data class
to the DcrModel class.
5.2.4
Framework/Miner
The framework is essentially, as described, the meta algorithm. As the artifact is
assumed to be integrated with Beamline at some point, it is developed as an extension
of the miner skeleton, AbstractMiner.
The meta algorithm is responsible for instantiation of the crucial parts of the system
including the chosen stream mining algorithm, which is responsible for manipulation
of the underlying DFG, instantiation of the pattern mining algorithms, that are
required to suﬃciently mine the user’s requested DCR model, and instantiation of
the user-chosen miner view(s).
A technical execution of this framework, from its point of view proceeds as follows:
1. Instantiation of framework: A user instantiates the framework with a set
of conﬁguration parameters, including the desired set of constraints in the com-
pleted DCR model and the desired stream mining algorithm. Upon this instan-
tiation the user simultaneously connects an event stream to the instantiation
of the framework.
2. Consumption of event: When an event is consumed by the framework the
information of the event, including name of activity and case id, is passed on to
the stream mining algorithm. This algorithm is responsible for manipulating
the DFG to capture the event.
3. User presentation: The framework will initially be instantiated as an un-
derlying background process, consuming events and further activate the stream
mining algorithm, but upon request of a user activation, the framework will
create the view of which the user has requested by ﬁrst activating the mining of
the wished DCR model eventually leading to the instantiation of a view from
the mined DCR model.
This procedure will when run successfully produce a visual representation of the
desired DCR model created from the steady-state of the data from the events stream
at the moment of request.
==PAGE:66==
5.2 Implementation
57
5.2.5
Testing Software
The testing software is intentionally to demonstrate and evaluate of the artifact in the
light of the research, thus not all of the features in this implementation is intended to
use in Beamline except for the model comparison class which is an important feature
to reach the objectives of the thesis.
The implementation conceptually consists of 3 parts:
• Model comparison: The most essential part of the testing software is the
model comparison implementation. This is a part of the initial objectives men-
tioned in section 4.2, and constitutes the framework’s ability to do model-to-
model comparison. The current version of the framework supports a jaccard
similarity based approach in which the constraints of 2 models are compared.
The algorithm can either operate with 2 XML ﬁles- 1 constituting the model to
analyze, and 1 the reference model, or a DCR model and a XML ﬁle constitut-
ing the reference model. Besides the Jaccard similarity, the model comparison
class also yields the precision, recall and F1 score of the comparison.
• Transition system: This implementation is implemented primarily for eval-
uation purposes.
This implementation creates a transition system based on
the DCR model and the rules of execution deﬁned in the DisCoveR publica-
tion [BSHM20]. The transition system delivers the logic for the other perfor-
mance evaluating implementation, the conformance checking logic.
• Conformance checking: The implementation holds the logic of the second
performance measure, the conformance checking. The conformance checking
logic uses the instantiated transition system to replay a given log. The replay
of the log on the transition system will eventually yield the ﬁtness and precision
of the model to the log.
5.2.6
Architectural design - Class diagram
The class diagram depicted in ﬁgure 5.8 shows the architectural system design as a
whole, and the dependencies and interaction between the diﬀerent parts of the system.
The diﬀerent packages depicted as yellow underlying boxes corresponds one-to-one
with the code structure.
==PAGE:67==
5.2 Implementation
58
StreamMiners
<<Interface>>
StreamMiner
+observeEvent()
Testing software
Relations
ExtendedDFG
Patterns
Miner
<<Interface>>
Pattern
-dependencies : List<String>
-name : String
+populateConstraint()
Condition
Response
Sequence
CommonExcludeInclude
Exclude
Include
ActivityDecoration
RelationDecoration
UnionRelationSet
<<enumeration>>
Patterns
DcrModel
View
DcrModelXml
DcrModelView
Condition
Response
Exclude
Include
Milestone
Spawn
DcrActivity
DcrModelJson
DcrModelTextural
TransitiveReduction
ConformanceTesting
TransitionSystem
ModelComparison
SlidingWindow
UnlimitedMemory
<<use>>
<<use>>
<<instantiate>>
<<instantiate>>
<<instantiate>>
<<instantiate>>
<<instantiate>>
<<use>>
<<use>>
<<instantiate>>
<<use>>
<<use>> <<use>>
<<instantiate>>
<<instantiate>>
<<instantiate>>
<<instantiate>>
<<instantiate>>
Visual Paradigm Online Academic Partner Program
Visual Paradigm Online Academic Partner Program
==PAGE:68==
Chapter 6
Results and Evaluation
The following chapter is dedicated to experimentally prove that the artifact of the
research, from here referred to as the framework, is capable of realizing the expecta-
tions. First a brief introduction to the test data used in the empirical experiments
for benchmarking and proof of correctness is provided. Hereafter, the actual min-
ing capabilities of the diﬀerent patterns are demonstrated on a synthetic event log.
Furthermore, an evaluation of the artifact will be described based on performance
in terms of benchmark test emphasizing model similarities to the reference model
from the given data set and a brief discussion on the conformance checking of the
discovered model. Next, the quality of the framework and its capabilities to discover
models online will be presented, in which it again will be compared to the reference
model. In addition the performance of the framework will be compared to the per-
formance of the state-of-the-art oﬄine DCR process discovery algorithm DisCoveR.
To conclude the chapter, a short summary of the ﬁndings and achievements will be
discussed.
All auxiliary material such as dataset referenced in the thesis, as well as all results,
and process models is archived in the open source library Zenodo [Sta21]1.
The performance metrics described in table 6.1 will be used in the following chapter.
1https://zenodo.org/record/5095219#.YO2fthMzZUI
==PAGE:69==
60
Metric
Formula
Explanation
Jaccard similarity
A ∩B
A ∪B
The Jaccard similarity coeﬃcient measures the similarity of
constraints from the model A and model B by comparing the shared
constraints with the all constraints from both A and B, as discussed in
section 5.1.3.5
Model precision
TP
TP + FP
Model precision measures how many of the constraints from the mined
model, A, that actually exist in the reference model, B:
TP: constraint ∈A ∩B, FP: constraint ∈A and constraint ̸∈B
Model Recall
TP
TP + FN
Model recall is a measure of how many of the constraints from
the reference model, B, that actually is detected by the mined model, A:
FN: constraint ̸∈A and constraint ∈B
F1 score
2 · ModelPrecision · ModelRecall
ModelPrecision + ModelRecall
The F1-score is the measure of the mined model’s, A, accuracy on
the reference model, B
Fitness
ReplayableTraces
TotalTraces
The ﬁtness measure is a quality measure of the appropriateness of a
DCR graph for a given log, deﬁned in the work by Debois et al.[DHLU17].
The replay ﬁtness is basically the ability of the DCR model to replay
the log. It constitutes the algorithm’s capability to capture the behavior
of a given event stream.
Log Precision
∑
s∈V isitedStates ExecutedActivities
∑
s∈V isitedStates ExecutableActivities
Again, described by Debois et al.[DHLU17], as a tally of the amount of
behavioral options unused by the log. Conceptually this means that it
determines for each visited state, how many enabled activities there exist
that are actually executed.
The ∑
s∈V isitedStates ExecutedActivities is only incremented the ﬁrst
time an activity is seen executed in the given state.
However, Debois et al. discuss the usefulness of this metric, as the
importance of ﬂexibility of the declarative model overshadows the idea
of having a very close model, which also emphasize one of the advantage
of the declarative model over the imperative.
Table 6.1: Formula and description of the performance metrics used in empirical evaluations
==PAGE:70==
6.1 Data Selection
61
6.1
Data Selection
Among the data used throughout the research to conduct empirical experiments
with real world scenarios is a collection of realistic business process models and their
corresponding event logs. The dataset consisting of 37 process descriptions has been
collected for validation purposes in work done by López et al. [LSNM21]. The dataset
contains diﬀerent scenarios such as 4 entries of BPM Academic Initiative, 31 descrip-
tions from interviews and observations done by business process management students
at a Danish university, and 2 process excerpts from the Danish Consolidation Act on
Social Services.
These process models from the datasets consist of real world scenarios, in which
highly competent actors have shared their knowledge.
The simulations used as the foundation for the process discovery in the performed
experiments, are complementary to the original dataset. However, they are created
complying with the rules given of their respective process description/model.
The fact that the processes are human-made from experts with background knowl-
edge might be reﬂected in the process models, where external knowledge, not reﬂected
in the process executions, is added to the models. This is done to provide models ad-
ditional knowledge to provide with clear guidelines, however compensating the force
of the declarative models - the ﬂexibility. Furthermore, since the discovery of models
in this thesis is based on the event log, it might underapproximate the ability to
recreate the reference model.
In addition to these process models the description of an Annotation process, gath-
ered as a part of a technical report made by H. López [Ló], was used to emphasize
mining capabilities of atomic response and condition DCR constraints.
For the speciﬁc process model, process simulations were gathered by constructing
realistic scenarios of process executions (traces) in the analytic tool DcrGraphs2. A
limitation of the event logs,worth mentioning, from the work by López et al. [LSNM21]
as well as the simulations constructed in regards to the thesis, is the low amount of
process executions pr event log. Typically the more process executions the more ac-
curate models, however, the most important feature when choosing the data set was
the ability to show realistic executions, since the model discovery is not expected to
be able to capture unrealistic process executions.
However, to be able to test the framework on larger datasets, and for experiments
such as testing the stream mining settings, a large event log from the application pro-
cess from Dreyer’s Foundation application management system has been used. The
data set from Dreyer’s Foundation is presented as a case study in the work by Debois
et al. [DHSM14]. The data set is used without domain knowledge, which constitutes
a risk to potentially over/underapproximate the reality of the process. To be able
to rightfully evaluate the performance of the framework on this dataset, a further
knowledge about when changes were made to the model is needed- which would give
2https://www.dcrgraphs.net/
==PAGE:71==
6.1 Data Selection
62
the opportunity to evaluate the impact of changes in the process. However, this is is
postponed for future work.
The following provides a description of the data on a more technical note:
• Procurement process: A complex model describing a procurement process,
using 4 diﬀerent types of constraints to prove the framework’s ability to capture
diﬀerent types of constraints. The speciﬁcation of the event logs is given as:
– Shortest trace: 6
– Longest trace: 10
– Number traces: 6
– Average trace length: 7
• Annotation process: A complex model in the sense that the model contains
subprocesses which the framework is not currently capable of capturing.
A
subprocess is a way of grouping activities, and rules are applied diﬀerently than
regular models. The process model consists of responses and conditions, and
preconditions which the framework is not yet capable of identifying. The fairly
simple collection of constraints will ideally will evidence mining capabilities
of these DCR constraints, where it is expected the framework will mine the
preconditions as conditions as they are very similar. The speciﬁcation of the
event log is given as:
– Shortest trace: 9
– longest trace: 15
– Number traces: 13
– Average trace length: 12
• Computer Repair Service: a simple model only containing 2 constraints,
which simulates the process of a computer service repair. The process simu-
lations were not gathered from the work by Lopez et al. [LSNM21], why the
DCR analytic tool again was used to simulate process executions complying
with the provided process description/model. The usage of this process is to
demonstrate the ability to recreate a simple process model. Thus the summary
of the event log:
– Shortest trace: 6
– longest trace: 11
– Number traces: 4
– Average trace length: 8
==PAGE:72==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
63
• Dreyer’s Fond Application Management: A complex model including
subprocess, conditions, responses, excludes, includes and milestones.
The data set for now will eventually be used to test the computation time for
large datasets.
– Shortest trace: 1
– longest trace: 33
– Number traces: 594
– Average trace length: 10
6.2
Algorithmic Correctness
6.2.1
Proof of mining capabilities
The initial evaluation of the artifact will for simplicity be a demonstration of the
mining capabilities using a synthetic stream.
Consider the simple stream of events of 4 cases and 4 distinct activity names arrive
in a sequential order as:
ES1: c1 :< A, B, C >, c2 :< A, D, D, C >, c3 :< A, C, D, B >, c4 :< A, B, C >.
The order of arrival of the events for each case is strictly ordered and follows the
above sequence, however, in the perspective of the event stream the sequence does
not matter- e.g. case 1, c1 can be complete before case 2, c2 has even started.
The ﬁrst example, an instantiation of the framework was set up by mining condition
and response constraints on the above event stream, ES1, presenting the DCR model
in an text view. The execution of the mining is assumed to happen after all events
in each case are consumed, and the experiment yields the constraints as presented in
table 6.2:
Proven in table 6.2 is that the framework is perfectly capable of mining the existing
condition constraints observed in the event stream. The DCR model identiﬁes a con-
dition from A to B, A to C and from A to D since there is a DF relation between
all these. There is no condition relation between B and C, due to the inconsistency
of ﬁrst occurrence in the sequences, even though the event B precedes C in both c1
and c4.
The response relations are naively identiﬁed only considering the average index of
the activities. As a result of this, the responses between A and B, A and C, and A
and D are correctly identiﬁed. However, assuming all cases have ended in the event
stream both the response from B to C and from D to C do not exists even though
they are identiﬁed, since they both leave a pending state at the end of the event
==PAGE:73==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
64
Without Transitive Reduction
With Transitive Reduction
D →C
D →C
A →D
A →D
A →B
A →B
A →C
B →C
B →C
A →B
A →B
A →C
A →C
A →D
A →D
Table 6.2: Table of mined condition and response constraints from a simple syn-
thetic event stream
Self Exclusion & Precedence
NotChainSuccesssion
All
A →+C
C →+B
A →+C
A →%A
C →+D
C →+D
B →%B
C →%A
D →+B
C →%C
B →%A
A →%A
C →%D
D →%A
B →%B
B →%D
C →%C
B →%D
C →%B
C →%D
Table 6.3: Table of mined constraints using diﬀerent templates of the ExcludeAnd-
Include pattern
stream. In the scope of this research, it is not assumed that there is any indication
of whether a case has ended, and thus it is not considered a drastic value decreasing
ﬁnding. Running the miner with the transitive reduction on the response, it shows
that the reduction works as intended, removing the redundant response relation be-
tween A →C realizing there exist the relations A →B and B →C.
The second proof of concept is to emphasize the mining capabilities of the 2 ﬁrst ex-
clude and include templates self exclusion and precedence discussed in section 5.1.3.4.
As before the same event stream is considered. The resulting constraints are shown
in the ﬁrst column table 6.3.
The mining in this example partially corresponds to the rules behind the templates.
The self-excludes of A and B are mined due to the fact that they only appear once in
each case. Furthermore, the ﬁrst rule of the precedence, the alternating precedence,
==PAGE:74==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
65
identiﬁes the include between A and C, since A always precedes C, as well they are
executed an equal amount of times. This adds the include relation between A and C
and the self exclude of C. However, the second rule of the pattern, precedence not
successor, identiﬁes an exclude to exist between C and D, since D occurs multiple
times in a case. This observation is untrue due to the fact that there exists a sequence
c3 in which C precedes D, but is not caught since the preceding is based on averages.
This is a major downside to the approach of the discovery algorithm, however as the
amount of events in a case increase, the precision of average indexing is assumed to
be more reliable.
The third template in the exclude and include pattern, as described in section 5.1.3.4
mines a number of exclude and include relations based on the Declare template
NotChainSuccession.
Using the same event stream as for the other experiments, ES1, on the third template
suggests the excludes and includes seen in the second column of table 6.3.
The template identiﬁes a number of excludes and includes based on every pair of
distinct activities. First it iterates over each pair just for the identiﬁcation of the
exclude and additionally, runs a depth ﬁrst search algorithm to realize includes based
on activities between the identiﬁed exclude relation. The template is thus considered
very computational heavy and ineﬃcient. Furthermore, as the number of distinct ac-
tivities increases, the possible computation time increases on the order of n3, where
n is the total number of distinct activities. In addition it potentially adds a massive
amount of constraints. Considering the mined constraints, neglecting computational
and constraint eﬃciency, the template seems to identify correct constraints such as
when C excludes B, D includes B.
Considering the mined constraints using all templates in the ExcludeAndInclude pat-
tern (represented in the third column in table6.3), it immediately reveals inconsisten-
cies and ﬂaws, as the resulting collecting of excludes and includes holds C →%D and
C →+D, which means that the execution of activity C both includes and excludes
activity D, which is not a possible scenario.
In terms of an external validity point, this inconsistency indicates lack of prioritiza-
tion between the templates, as the precedence template mines the C →%D and the
NotChainSuccession mines the C →+D by adding includes between events occurring
between the activities instatiating the exclude.
As also emphasized in the discussion from the results of only mining self exclusions
and precedence templates shown in the 1st column in table 6.3, these relations exist
based on averages, where the NotChainSuccession relation mines based on actual
placement in the DFG, which is more trustworthy. Thus, it might increase the cor-
rectness of the mining to look into inconsistencies and which templates that should
be overruling. In the example case, it is clear that NotChainSuccession is superior to
Precedence.
==PAGE:75==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
66
The removal of the redundant excludes, removed 3 relations, which is 25% of the
mined relations, implies the template is able to reduce the number of constraints
drastically.
6.2.2
Benchmarking
The following section will address how well the framework captures the reference
model.
On an analytical note, the reference models are made by experts based on realistic
scenarios, thus the identiﬁed constraints will not always reﬂect the data set but may
be inﬂuenced by common sense from real world scenarios.
The framework is created such that for empirical evaluations, all diﬀerent combina-
tions of patterns as well as internal templates are tested on a dataset, to extract the
best possible combination. One combination of such pattern and internal templates
is referred to as a setting of the framework. The version of the framework is capable
of creating 659 diﬀerent settings. The results of the experiments are also found in
the published dataset [Sta21]
In the plots in which diﬀerent framework settings are tested up against the refer-
ence model, as seen in ﬁgure 6.2, the numbers next to a constraint constitutes which
template, that is used in the speciﬁc pattern, aligned with the numbering from the
conceptual description of the patterns from section 5.1.3.4. Furthermore, the number
next to "TransitiveReduction", suggests which constraint, that has been reduced:
1. Condition
2. Response
3. Exclude
4. Include
For test purposes the transitive reduction is tested on all constraints.
An example of a framework setting could look like the following:
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-;TransitiveReduction-4.
This constitutes a framework setting, where both templates in the condition pattern,
the response, the self exclude and the precendence from the ExcludeAndInclude pat-
tern, and the transitive reduction of existing include constraints are applied.
In order to oﬀer the best setting for the proof of concept, there will be no memory
restrictions and it is assumed that the mining of the patterns will take place only
==PAGE:76==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
67
Receive order
request in
ServiceNow
!
Purchaser
Place order
Purchaser
Contact Vendor
Purchaser
Deliver Item(s)
Purchaser
Close order in
ServiceNow
Purchaser
Check delivery
status
Purchaser
Registration
Purchaser
Check item value
Purchaser
Check stock
Purchaser
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
+
▼
+
▼
+
▼
+
▼
+
▼
+
▼
+
▼
+
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
(a) Human-made Reference model
Check item value
Check stock
Place order
Receive order
request in
ServiceNow
Check delivery
status
Deliver Item(s)
Close order in
ServiceNow
Registration
Contact Vendor
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
(b) Process model discovered by framework
with optimal setting
Figure 6.1: Process models based on Procurement Process
after the entire dataset has been digested.
6.2.2.1
Procurement Process - Complex model
The ﬁrst evaluation is to mine a DCR model from a set of events originating from 4
process executions of a procurement process complying with the model presented in
ﬁgure 6.1a.
As seen on the reference model, which is graphical represented in ﬁgure 6.1a, it
constitutes a very restricted model both using conditions, responses, excludes and
includes.
Figure 6.2, shows the result of the evaluation, where it is seen that the framework
is capable of producing a model, which captures half of the constraints seen in the
reference model, but with a high precision. The exact performance metrics are:
• Jaccard similarity index: 0.460
• F1-score: 0.630
• Model precision: 0.821
• Model recall: 0.511
• Log ﬁtness 1
==PAGE:77==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
68
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;
n1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-4
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-2
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction1-2
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-2
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-2-4
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude3-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction1
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction1-4
Condition1-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-4
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-;TransitiveReduction-4
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-;TransitiveReduction-4
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-;TransitiveReduction-2-4
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-4-;TransitiveReduction-4
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-4-;TransitiveReduction-4
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-;TransitiveReduction-4
Condition1-;Response;
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-;
Model-to-Model comparison
jaccard
F1
Figure 6.2: Jaccard Similarity and F1 score on Discovered models mined on diﬀer-
ent framework plotted. Threshold of similarity = 0.3 is held to ﬁlter
out model conﬁgurations far from the ground truth
The setting of the framework includes both templates in the condition constraint, the
response constraint, and the self exclude template in the exclude and include pattern.
From the metrics it is fair to conclude that the model is within an acceptable range
of accuracy to the reference model, 46%, again considering the fact that the human-
made reference model may tend to be inﬂuenced by real world factors. Reﬂecting on
the metrics from the model precision and model recall, the model yield a relatively
high F1-score of 0.630. Breaking down the F1 to extract the knowledge, it is seen from
the high precision of 0.821, that framework captures the ground truth constraints to
a high degree, but the fact that only half of the constraints are discovered, (as recall
yields 0.511 and thus drastically decreases the overall score) shows that the model is
simply not good enough in discovering the patterns from the reference model. Thus
improving the complexity of constraint discovering will add improvement value to
the framework.
Especially considering the model in fact already reveals a ﬁtness
of 1, meaning it is capable of replaying the log to perfect degree. Looking at the
graphical diﬀerences in ﬁgure 6.1b and ﬁgure 6.1a it indicates that the identiﬁcation
of exclude and includes needs improvements. This is backed up by the fact that only
one template in the ExcludeAndInclude pattern is used, namely the self exclude.
This is also a good explanation of the low recall since the reference model consist of
a large number of excludes and includes.
Considering the reference model in ﬁgure 6.1a and the framework model in ﬁgure 6.1b,
it is quite obvious that the model constitutes a large number of excludes and includes.
Investigating why the optimal model from the framework does not use more templates
identifying more excludes and includes reﬂext the following:
Looking for a setting that holds more templates identifying excludes and includes,
==PAGE:78==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
69
the setting which discover a model closest to the ground truth is:
Condition1−2−; Response; ExcludeAndInclude1−3−; TransitiveReduction−3−4
This setting mines both templates of the condition, the response template, the self
exclude, the NotChainSuccession, and transitive reduces excludes and includes. The
setting obtains the following score:
• Jaccard similarity index: 0.358
• F1-score: 0.528
• Model precision: 0.704
• Model recall: 0.422
• Log ﬁtness: 1
The score reveals that the model is still able to replay the log, but it suﬀers an
approximately 10% drop in both model precision and recall. The drop in recall means
that the model detects less constraints from the reference model. This indicates, that
some of the excludes discovered by the self exclude template might get reduced with
the transitive reduction of exclude.
Looking at the score from the same setting
without using transitive reduction, the following is obtained:
• Jaccard similarity index: 0.300
• F1-score: 0.463
• Model precision: 0.322
• Model recall: 0.822
• Log ﬁtness: 1
The model from the setting:
Condition1−2−; Response; ExcludeAndInclude1−3; is highly capable of identifying
the constraints that actually exist in the reference model, achieving a recall score of
82,2%.
However the downside of the NotChainSuccession, is emphasized in this
setting. The model’s precision decreases with 53% from the optimal model, which
is the result from the heavily addition of wrong identiﬁed constraints. In fact the
number of identiﬁed constraints increase by 310% from 28 to 115. On a behavioral
note however, the signiﬁcant increase in constraints does not aﬀect the behavioral
aspect of the model, as the model is still able to replay the model. From this, it is quite
obvious, that the NotChainSuccession needs improvements. Especially, in regards
==PAGE:79==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
70
to restricting the identiﬁcation of patterns. Moreover, the fact that the transitive
reduction removes some correctly identiﬁed constraints but still keeps the log ﬁtness
to 1, reveals that this parameter tends to be more suited for an experiment testing
ability to capture behavior rather than capturing the reference model. Considering
the optimal setting including the precedence template without transitive reduction
is a setting as:
Condition1−; Response; ExcludeAndInclude1 −2 −4;
which achieves:
• Jaccard similarity index: 0.292
• F1-score: 0.452
• Model precision: 0.354
• Model recall: 0.622
• Log ﬁtness: 0.956
Again, this setting shows an increase in recall but a great decrease in precision com-
pared to the optimal model. Even the log ﬁtness drops. Looking at the precision of
the model, given the fact that the model "only" identiﬁes 79 constraints compared
to the aforementioned 115, the model still achieves a precision almost as bad as the
model with the NotChainSuccession template and a much lower recall, which means
that in general the precedence template is of less quality than the NotChainSucces-
sion, and the previous assumption that the superior template is NotChainSuccession
over precedence is backed up. However, it is clear that they both need great improve-
ments to provide reliable enough results to be considered in real life scenarios.
As elaborated previously, the framework and its pattern have throughout the imple-
mentation been continuously improved through short iterations and empirical evalu-
ation. This evaluation emphasizes 2 important improvements made on the constraint
pattern, worth emphasizing:
• Initially, the templates of the pattern were checked on all distinct pair of ac-
tivities in the event log, where the improved version only checks immediate
relations (extracted from the DFG). Investigating the prior pattern version,
evidences that the improvement increased the performance drastically. Discov-
ering a model with the same framework setting but the old condition pattern
yields the following scores:
– Jaccard similarity index: 0.338
==PAGE:80==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
71
– F1-score: 0.506
– Model precision: 0.523
– Model recall: 0.511
– Log ﬁtness 0.956
The score reveals that the old condition mining pattern adds a massive amount
of extra conditions, which are not included in the reference model, as seen in
the drop of precision by almost more than 30%.
Furthermore, the number of identiﬁed constraints increase by 50% from 28 to
42. Thus the pattern improvement deﬁnitely display characteristics of improve-
ments to the overall performance of the model discovery framework.
• Another discussed subject (discussed in section 5.1.3.4 on the topic of the con-
dition algorithm) is the second template of the condition, in which the iden-
tiﬁcation of condition should be rejected, if the source activity is not a target
in an exclude constraints and does not appear in as many traces as the target
of the condition constraint. The neglection of this rule is based on the exclude
patterns not being complex enough to rely on, which is demonstrated testing
the same framework setting as the aforementioned, where the f1-score decreases
by 3% but the ﬁtness decreases to 66%.
6.2.2.2
Annotation Process - Complex Model
Another experiment was conducted on a log created using the analytical tool from
DCR Solutions. The process model is depicted in ﬁgure 6.3a and consists of precon-
ditions, responses and conditions, and a subprocess. As mentioned some rules apply
diﬀerently in subprocesses. e.g. If a and b are part of a subprocess, pa and there
exists relations such that c →a and c →b then the relation set can be reduced to
c →pa. Thus discovering a model from an event complying from such a model will
reveal how the framework deals with increased complexity and especially reduction
of constraints. The optimal discovered model is graphically presented in ﬁgure 6.3b.
The performance of a sampling of the models obtained from running the empirical
tests on all possible framework settings is shown in ﬁgure 6.4, and as expected reveals
that the optimal framework setting is by discovering both templates of the Condition
pattern and the Response pattern.
The performance metrics of this conﬁguration are:
• Jaccard similarity index: 0.458
• F1-score: 0.628
==PAGE:81==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
72
(a) Human-made Reference model
4. Open the
Process
Highlighter
Send the
Annotation logs,
usability surveys
and comments to
lopez@di.ku.dk
determine whether
the paragraph
content is of tech
remove
ambiguities from
events
activity attribution
by relating events
to roles
Enrich event
annotations
identifying the
actors
1. Open your
“annotation log”
file
2. Create a new
DCR graph in
dcrgraphs.net.
3. Share the graph
with the DCR
team.
remove the
ambiguities
7. Identify
activities, events,
rights and obligat
Perform label
transformation
Copy model url to
Excel
share the public
url of the process
Evaluate usability
of the guideline
and the tool
Activity18
Enrich relation
annotations
Identify relations
save your graph
as a major
revision
revise the graph to
detect any
inconsistencies
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
(b) Process model discovered by framework
with optimal setting
Figure 6.3: Process models based on an Annotation Process
• Model precision: 0.529
• Model recall: 0.771
The performance metric is a little misleading, considering the actual model captures
the ground truth to some degree. The jaccard similarity and the model precision
(and therefore the F1-score) suﬀers from 2 parameters, the inability to describe pre-
conditions, which is, as seen in the model in ﬁgure 6.3b, identiﬁed as conditions,
and the inability to capture subprocesses, which will result in a substantial addition
of constraints, that is possible in the reference model but not presented. Reﬂect-
ing on the discovered model, and the comparison metrics such as Jaccard similarity
and precision, it is again clear that the naively response mining approach tends to
over-constraint the model. However, as seen on the recall metric, the model does
contain most constraints from the ground truth, which is also seen on both models
in ﬁgure 6.3.
Considering the graphical notation of the discovered graph in ﬁgure 6.3b reveals a
disadvantage of the patterns as they are currently implemented. In the process the
activities Evaluate usability of the guidelines and the tool and Copy model url to Excel
have to be executed in order to execute Send the Annotation logs, usability surveys
and comments to lopez@di.ku.dk. The concept in which an activity a and b must be
executed before an activity c can happen is referred to as an And-Join. The activities,
==PAGE:82==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
73
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
Condition1-2-;Response;
ludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-…
on1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-…
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-…
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-2
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-…
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-…
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-…
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-3-…
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-3-4-…
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction1
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-…
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-…
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-…
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-;
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-4
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-4-…
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-;TransitiveReduction-…
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-3-…
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-3-4-…
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-2
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-2-3
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-2-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude3-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-3-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-;Response;TransitiveReduction1
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-…
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-4
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude2-;TransitiveReduction-…
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude3-4-…
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-4-…
Condition1-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction1-2
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-…
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-…
Condition1-2-;TransitiveReduction1
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction1
Condition1-2-;Response;ExcludeAndInclude1-…
Model-to-Model comparison
jaccard
F1
Figure 6.4: Jaccard Similarity and F1-score to the reference model on Discovered
models mined from diﬀerent framework settings of the Annotation pro-
cess. Threshold of similarity = 0.3 is held to ﬁlter out model conﬁgu-
rations far from the ground truth.
a and b will typically be executed sequentially in an inconsistent order, which the
framework tends to identify as false condition and response constraints between them
where the source is based on the tendencies of which activity that is executed ﬁrst,
as seen between Evaluate usability of the guidelines and the tool and Copy model url
to Excel in ﬁgure 6.3b. This condition restricts the process execution inconveniently
as it fails to capture this inconsistency from And-Joins and only allow the actor to
execute the activities in a strict order.
6.2.2.3
Computer Repair Service - Simple model
The last experiment to proof the mining capabilities of the framework is the discovery
of a log originating from the workﬂow of a computer repair service, which is modelled
as depicted in ﬁgure 6.5a.
The model is the simplest of the 3 benchmarking models, and consist of only DCR
condition and exclude relations. The event log is again created using the analytical
tool from DCR Solutions.
The performance metric Jaccard similarity coeﬃcient
and the F1-score from a sampling of models discovered from settings is showed in
ﬁgure 6.6. The sampling is based on those models that are closest to the ground
truth. The models yielding the highest Jaccard similarity and F1-score are settings
in which only template 1 of the condition parameter is discovered. The following
metrics are revealed:
==PAGE:83==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
74
brings in a
defective
computer
customer
checks the defect
computer repair service (CRS)
hands out a repair
cost calculation
computer repair service (CRS)
receives cost
calculation
customer
the costs are
acceptable
customer
the costs are not
acceptable
customer
takes her
computer home
unrepaired
customer
check and repair
the hardware
computer repair service (CRS)
checks and
conﬁgures the
software
computer repair service (CRS)
proper system
functionality is
tested
computer repair service (CRS)
an error is
detected
computer repair service (CRS)
another arbitrary
repair activity is
executed
computer repair service (CRS)
the repair is
ﬁnished
computer repair service (CRS)
no errors are
detected
computer repair service (CRS)
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
(a) Human-made Reference model
receives cost
calculation
the costs are
acceptable
another arbitrary
repair activity is
executed
the costs are not
acceptable
takes her
computer home
unrepaired
an error is
detected
brings in a
defective
computer
hands out a repair
cost calculation
checks the defect
check and repair
the hardware
checks and
configures the
software
proper system
functionality is
tested
no errors are
detected
the repair is
finished
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
(b) Process model discovered by framework
with optimal setting
Figure 6.5: Process models based on a computer repair service
• Jaccard similarity index: 0.560
• F1-score: 0.7179
• Model precision: 0.933
• Model recall: 0.583
• Log ﬁtness: 0.882
The metrics reveals, that the discovered model is capable of capturing the ground
truth to a high degree, since the accuracy (F1-score) of 72%, where 92% of the
identiﬁed constraints are true (only 1 misclassiﬁed), is considered satisfying. The
Jaccard similarity, however, suﬀers from the fact that the excludes are not sought
for. Considering the discovered conditions in the model represented in ﬁgure 6.5b,
they all exist in the reference model except for the condition from No errors detected
to another arbitrary repair activity is executed, which is also reﬂected in the high
precision. The false identiﬁed condition is the result from missing excludes between
An error detected and No errors detected, since it is possible to activate another
arbitrary repair activity is executed even though An error detected has not been
activated but No errors detected has. However, one can question the level of reality
of this execution order, since the logic behind executing another repair if no errors has
been identiﬁed before one can ﬁnish the repair is not logic and thus questionable. The
==PAGE:84==
6.2 Algorithmic Correctness
75
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
Condition1-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-;TransitiveReduction1
Condition1-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction1-4
Condition1-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;
Condition1-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction1
Condition1-2-;
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;TransitiveReduction1
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-4
Condition1-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction1-4
Condition1-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction1-4
Condition1-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction1
Condition1-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction1-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction1
Model-to-Model comparison
jaccard
F1
Figure 6.6: Jaccard Similarity and F1-score to the reference model on Discovered
models mined from diﬀerent framework settings of the Computer repair
service process. Threshold of similarity = 0.5 is held to ﬁlter out model
conﬁgurations far from the ground truth.
log ﬁtness of 0.882 also suﬀers from this misidentiﬁcation, due to the false AND-Join
it results in- meaning both No errors detected and Error detected has to be executed
in order to end the repair.
In any case, this ﬁnding leads to the conclusion of another improvement in close
relation to another previously addressed - the identiﬁcation of XOR-splits. The XOR-
split projects the execution of either one activity or another but not both. The pattern
should be implemented with excludes between the activities involved in the split. In
this example, an XOR-split between No errors detected and Error detected and The
costs are not acceptable and The costs are acceptable is seen in ﬁgure 6.5a.
6.2.3
Validity of similarity metric
As emphasized in section 5.1.3.3 the chosen similarity metric is well suited for the
purpose of the framework due to the high eﬃciency. One can argue that the fact that
the metric is behavioral inaccurate should be a deal breaker, since the advantage
of a declarative model is ﬂexibility, meaning it is not about capturing the explicit
constraints within the model but the ability to capture the allowed behavior.
However, the framework’s usage of the model comparison is not to demonstrate a
behavioral comparison, but what consequences a drift in the behavior of a stream
has on a model, meaning the comparison method should be able to compare to a
==PAGE:85==
6.3 Online capabilities
76
structural similar model and not for behavioral purposes. The Jaccard coeﬃcient is
perfectly capable of quantifying how close a discovered model is to a reference model,
which is also shown in above experiments.
6.3
Online capabilities
The mining capabilities of the framework in an online setting is heavily depending
on the complexity and ability to describe the tendencies of the stream as a whole.
As discussed, the best case scenario, would suggest inﬁnite memory with the abil-
ity to ﬁlter out old tendencies (that is concept drifts) and infrequent behavior, such
that the framework has a much greater "knowledge base" to reveal its ﬁndings upon.
However, this is not reality, thus in this version of the framework the simple stream
mining algorithm sliding window has been implemented. The frameworks abilities to
discover a process model from a running stream was evaluated by having multiple
frameworks running simultaneously with diﬀerent sizes of the ’window’ parameter in
the sliding window algorithm. The performance metric of each framework was then
extracted every x events occurring in the system, where x was deﬁned depending on
the total size of the event stream. Because this research is undiscovered, it is diﬃ-
cult to perform fair evaluations on a ground truth since there is no reference model
that is created towards use in an online setting. The experiment is- due to no bet-
ter alternatives- performed on the same test data as in section 6.2 with the optimal
frameworks (the framework setting yielding Jaccard similarity index to the ground
truth from the given event log) and compared to the reference model as before. To
deliver some kind of comparison to a realistic discovery algorithm, the state-of-the-art
DisCoveR has been used to mine models, using the steady-state data collection from
the stream mining algorithm at the evaluation points used for the framework mining.
The data collection, the results and the models for each of the given intervals in the
following experiments are also found in the published dataset [Sta21] A signiﬁcant
drawback to the stream mining algorithm is the inabilities to remember further back
than what the window size allow. The short term memory might result in neglecting
potentially important patterns of the behavior from the past, if they do no reoccur.
Thus the performance of the sliding window algorithm strongly depends on a con-
tinuous stream of process executions. The key to obtain comprehensive knowledge
of the behavior of a stream using the stream mining Sliding Window algorithm, is
the continuous arrival of these patterns in either existing traces or new traces with
diﬀerent execution times - If all traces were executed at the same time, having the
same behavior pattern, with the same execution time, the event stream knowledge
base would only, depending on the window size, be based directly on the preﬁx, sub-
string, or suﬃx of the entire event stream.
In the context of these experiments to avoid decreasing the event stream knowledge,
the "velocity"/execution time of which the events arrive diﬀers from trace to trace,
==PAGE:86==
6.3 Online capabilities
77
such that the events from the ﬁrst trace arrives every iteration (for simplicity one can
think of it as every second). The events from the second trace arrives every second
iteration. This pattern continues up until the ﬁfth trace and then it restarts such
that the events belonging to every ﬁfth trace occur every ﬁfth iteration and events
belonging to every sixth occur every iteration once again.
6.3.1
Benchmarking
An interesting aspect of evaluation is to consider if the act of discovering the process
models with only limited knowledge due to event stream mining is capable of reaching
the same benchmark scores as in section 6.2.
6.3.1.1
Procurement Process
The Jaccard similarity to the ground truth model from the Procurement Process is
plotted in ﬁgure 6.7. The plot compares how close to the reference model, the frame-
work with 6 diﬀerent stream mining conﬁgurations can get (window size 5,7,9,11,13,
and 15). The plot also constitutes 2 similarity measures between models created by
DisCoveR and the reference mode. As proclaimed the event log fed to the DisCoveR
holds the same event content as the framework models are mined from at the given
state of the event stream.
Additionally ﬁgure 6.7 contains a reference line illustrating the Jaccard similarity
coeﬃcient reached with the full event set from the experiment on the same data set
in section 6.2.2. The framework pattern setting is conﬁgured as the same, which
achieved the highest performance in the previous experiment with the Procurement
Process in section 6.2.2 (mining both templates of the condition pattern, the response
pattern, and the self exclude template of the ExcludeandInclude pattern).
As mentioned in the section 6.1 the trace length span from 6-10 events, which is clear
from the plots, as the models using window size 11,13, and 15 all achieve the same
results, since the window has not been ﬁlled up, meaning it holds all events, e.g.
complete knowledge. However, an interesting observation is the fact the framework
with these window sizes at some point after 35 observations discover a model that
outperforms the model discovered after having captured the entire event log. This
indicates that some events appearing late even contradict the behavior of the rest or
the model somehow can overload on information, since the Jaccard similarity is seen
decreasing again.
The importance of a continuous stream is underlined in this experiment considering
the increase in ground truth similarity by the framework using window size 5 from
==PAGE:87==
6.3 Online capabilities
78
0
0,05
0,1
0,15
0,2
0,25
0,3
0,35
0,4
0,45
0,5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Jaccard  Similarity
Observed events
Model-to-Model similarity from stream
full log framework
framework W 5
framework W  7
framework W 9
framework W 11
framework W 13
framework W 15
discover W 5
discover W 15
Figure 6.7: Jaccard similarity to the reference model from discovered models at
diﬀerent steady-states of the event stream from the framework with op-
timal framework setting, as well as the DisCoveR from the Procurement
Process data set.
25-30 observed events, as seen in ﬁgure 6.7. At this point the stream mining algo-
rithm both holds a fair amount of events from the beginning of a process as well as
from the termination of such. This emphasizes the need of varying execution times
in order to use the sliding window approach.
Although it is not a completely fair comparison, in an online setting, as seen in
ﬁgure 6.7 the framework is clearly superior to the DisCoveR in reproducing the ground
truth model with restricted event stream information.
6.3.1.2
Annotation Process
Figure 6.8 is a plot of the metrics from the similarity evaluation continuously mea-
sured throughout the experiment comparing the models discovered by the framework
with the optimal setting as found in section 6.2.2.2 (both templates of condition pat-
tern and the response pattern).
The experiment reveals that the highest Jaccard similarity index (0.568) reached in
the experiment is reached after 130 observed events with a window size of 7 as seen in
ﬁgure 6.8. Like in the previous experiment the optimum is reached close to -but not
at- the end of the event stream. The graphical notation of the model at optimum is
shown in ﬁgure 6.9. The early optimum outperforming the oﬄine framework is due
to the fact that the stream mining algorithm holds the optimal amount of data to
describe traces as preﬁx, suﬃx and substrings (beginning of traces, endings of traces
==PAGE:88==
6.3 Online capabilities
79
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Jaccard Similarity
Observed events
Model-to-Model similarity from stream
Full log Framework
framework W 5
framework W 7
framework W 9
framework W 11
framework W 13
framework W 15
discover W 7
Figure 6.8: Jaccard similarity to the reference model from discovered models at
diﬀerent steady-states of the event stream from the framework with op-
timal framework setting, as well as the DisCoveR from the Annotation
Process data set
and the middle activity of traces).
The fact that the discovered model using a stream mining algorithm with window
size 7 is closer to the ground truth than the model created from a fully available
dataset, reveals that the framework is actually highly capable of capturing process
behavior from an event log. Comparing the model graphically shown in ﬁgure 6.9
with the previous displayed model in ﬁgure 6.3b, reveals the improvement of the Jac-
card originates from the reduction of responses. Considering the DisCoveR’s ability
to reproduce the reference model, as plotted in ﬁgure 6.8, is it again proven, that it is
signiﬁcantly lower than the framework’s. DisCoveR is, outperforming the framework
with the same window size up until 80 observed events but hereafter the framework’s
similarity increases signiﬁcantly while DisCoveR’s decreases. The Jaccard coeﬃcient
optimum is for DisCoveR also reached at 130, which emphasizes the claim of that
the steady-state event log after 130 observed events holds the optimal amount of
information from the full event stream.
The claim that the framework is capable of discovering from an online setting, is
again backed up by the fact that the framework’s capability of structural reproduc-
ing the referencing model does not suﬀer when discovering from a stream using both
window size 7, 11 13, and 15. The models actually show improvements in capturing
the reference compared to the model obtained from the full event log (depicted in
ﬁgure 6.8 as the brown reference line).
The model created from the sliding window algorithm with window size 7 starts out-
performing after 120 observations but again decreases under the oﬄine similarity as
the window size is so restricted, that the model will not know about the beginning
==PAGE:89==
6.3 Online capabilities
80
4. Open the
Process
Highlighter
Send the
Annotation logs,
usability surveys
and comments to
lopez@di.ku.dk
remove
ambiguities from
events
determine whether
the paragraph
content is of tech
activity attribution
by relating events
to roles
identifying the
actors
Enrich event
annotations
1. Open your
“annotation log”
file
2. Create a new
DCR graph in
dcrgraphs.net.
3. Share the graph
with the DCR
team.
remove the
ambiguities
7. Identify
activities, events,
rights and obligat
Perform label
transformation
Copy model url to
Excel
share the public
url of the process
Evaluate usability
of the guideline
and the tool
collect sentences
not corresponding
to guidelines in a
word document
and describe their
problems
Enrich relation
annotations
Identify relations
save your graph
as a major
revision
revise the graph to
detect any
inconsistencies
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
Figure 6.9: Discovered model from online stream using sliding window algorithm
with window size 7
of the process.
The models created with window size 15 starts outperforming the oﬄine framework
after 130 observation, and essentially equals at the point, in which there is no diﬀer-
ence between the data sets.
6.3.1.3
Dreyers Fond Application Management
The Dreyer’s Fond application management process is as seen in ﬁgure 6.10 a highly
complex process model with many constraints and subprocesses.
The process model consist of 46 activities and 76 constraints. The level of complexity
of either the framework or DisCoveR is not high enough to capture the ﬂow in the
reference model, where a lot of the constraints go from subprocess to subprocess. The
framework is at the moment only capable of capturing activity to activity constraints
why only the internal ﬂows within a subprocess can be captured.
Furthermore, as discussed, because the domain knowledge is not known it is not
certain, how the respective event log reﬂects the model. Thus the precision of the
framework will not be investigated in the context of justifying the framework in this
thesis.
The experiment is set up using a framework setting mining both condition templates
in the condition pattern, the response pattern, and the self exclusion in the Exclude-
AndInclude pattern.
==PAGE:90==
6.3 Online capabilities
81
Application
Board meeting
Afvist
Approved
End report
Payou
Ready
Board review
Receive
New
Nesting
Abort application
Caseworker
DL_DCREventTaskPerso...
Caseworker
DL_WFCaseTypePhase
Approve - send to
board
Caseworker
DL_DCREventTaskPerso...
Reject
Caseworker
DL_DCREventTaskPerso...
DL_WFCaseTypePhase
Fill out Application
Applicant
DL_DCREventAutomatic
DL_WFCaseTypePhase
Lawyer Review
Lawyer
DF_Stemme
Architect Review
Architect
DF_Stemme
Review
Reviewer 3
DF_Stemme
Review
Reviewer 4
DF_Stemme
DL_WFCaseTypePhase
Register Decision
Caseworker
DF_Stemme
DL_WFCaseTypeNesting
Reject application
Caseworker
DL_DCREventTaskPerso...
Approve
application
Caseworker
DL_DCREventTaskPerso...
Meeting in
progress
DBTrigger
DL_DCREventDBTrigger
Inform applicant
that board reviews
the application
Caseworker
DL_DCREventTaskPerso...
Pre-approve
application
Caseworker
DL_DCREventTaskPerso...
Execute
pre-decision
Automatic
DL_DCREventAutomatic
Caseworker
DL_WFCaseTypePhase
First payment
Automatic
DF_Udbetaling
Undo payment
Caseworker
DL_DCREventDBTrigger
DL_WFCaseTypePhase
Receive end
report
Caseworker
DL_DCREventTaskPerso...
Completed
DL_WFCaseTypePhase
DL_WFCaseTypePhase
Inform applicant
about application
Caseworker
DL_DCREventTaskPerso...
Applicant send
documentation for
payment
Caseworker
DL_DCREventTaskPerso...
Account number
changed
DBTrigger
DL_DCREventDBTrigger
Approve changed
account number
Accountant
DL_DCREventTaskPerso...
Round approved
DBTrigger
DL_DCREventDBTrigger
Round Ends
DBTrigger
DL_DCREventDBTrigger
Change phase to
review
Automatic
DL_DCREventAutomatic
Change phase to
Board meeting
Automatic
DL_DCREventAutomatic
Change phase to
Complete
Automatic
DL_DCREventAutomatic
Change Phase to
End Report
Automatic
DL_DCREventAutomatic
Change Phase to
Payout
Automatic
DL_DCREventAutomatic
Change phase to
Approved
Automatic
DL_DCREventAutomatic
Payment
completed
DBTrigger
DL_DCREventDBTrigger
Set to
Pre-approved
Automatic
DL_DCREventAutomatic
DL_WFCaseTypePhase
Ansøger
informeret
Caseworker
DL_DCREventTaskPerso...
Change phase to
Abort
Automatic
DL_DCREventAutomatic
Anonymiser data
Automatic
▼
▼
▼
▼
[ UddelingPulje=2 ]
▼
[ UddelingPulje=1 ]
▼
▼
[ UddelingPulje=2 ]
▼
[ UddelingPulje=1 ]
▼
[ UddelingPulje=2 ]
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
3d
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
▼
1w
+
▼
+
▼
+
▼
+
▼
+
▼
+
▼
+
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
%
▼
◇
▼
◇
▼
Figure 6.10: Reference model of the Dreyer’s Fond Application Management pro-
cess
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
# identified patterns
Observed events
Patterns identified observed over time
W5
W10
W15
W20
Figure 6.11: The number of identiﬁed constraints over the number observed events
from the Dreyer’s Fond application management process event log
diﬀerent sliding window settings
==PAGE:91==
6.3 Online capabilities
82
0
2000000
4000000
6000000
8000000
10000000
12000000
14000000
16000000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Nano seconds
Observed events
Computation time
W5
W10
W15
W20
Figure 6.12: Computation time of the framework mining over the number observed
events from the Dreyer’s Fond application management process event
log diﬀerent sliding window settings
As seen in ﬁgure 6.11 the framework’s constraint detection stabilizes around 70 iden-
tiﬁed constraints with 31 identiﬁed activities for both window size 10, 15, and 20,
where window size 10 has a minor drop shortly after having observed 6000 events,
which suggests the window size does not have to be more than 15. In comparison
the DisCoveR manages - in an oﬄine setting - to identify 63 constraints over 31 ac-
tivities. Considering the fact that both the framework and DisCoveR fail to identify
15 activities, and the Jaccard similarity to the reference model after consuming the
whole event log is for the framework 2.5% (optimum with window size 5 after 4660
observation: 4.2%) and for DisCoveR 0% conﬁrms the claim that the event log does
not make a valid basis of the justiﬁcation of the framework. For the entire exper-
iment (with all models created by the framework) the median value of the time it
took to compare the discovered model to the reference was 1.8 ms with an average
of 2.3 ms, as reported in the results data sheet for this experiment, found in [Sta21].
However, the framework does not identify enough constraints to be able to support
the mathematical claim, that the time complexity of the Jaccard computation scales
in linear time in this scenario.
The experiments were conducted on a Macbook Pro from 2016, with 2,9 GHz Dual-
Core Intel Core i5 and 8 GB memory using IntelliJ. Running the framework yields the
computation times represented in ﬁgure 6.12. The computation time represents the
time it takes to mine the DCR model from the extended DFG, as the computation
time of construction and manipulation of such is constant (after the initialization
part) as seen in ﬁgure 6.13, which deﬁnitely not aﬀects the performance of the artifact.
Even with the spikes of the computation times represented in ﬁgure 6.12 which can
be due to some background processes, it is safe to conclude, that the framework is
deﬁnitely able to perform in run-time even on larger data sets only computing a few
==PAGE:92==
6.4 Framework vs. DisCoveR
83
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
600000
700000
800000
900000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
Nano seconds
Observed events
Time to modify DFG 
Series1
Figure 6.13: Computation time to construct and manipulate DFG
milliseconds, as the sliding window algorithm keeps the memory usage constant.
6.4
Framework vs. DisCoveR
To conclude the research as novel work, the artifact developed must be able to out-
perform a current state-of-the-art discovery algorithm. In this context it appears
diﬃcult since there does not exist any research in the context of DCR mining in an
online setting.
In the previous section, section 6.3, it was shown that the artifact is considerably
superior in an online settings from the performance showed in ﬁgure 6.7 and ﬁg-
ure 6.8. However, as mentioned it might not be considered completely fair, since the
DiScoVeR is developed assuming the mining will be on a complete event log.
Thus to make the comparioson a little more fair and compare the framework’s per-
formance is compared to the DisCoveR algorithm, which is integrated into DCR
Solution’s analytical tool, in an oﬄine setting. The conclusion of this experiment
will eventually seek to answer the third research question. The DisCoveR algorithm
used in the analytical tool is currently only capable of discovering conditions and
responses, why the framework must only mine constraints and responses in order to
deliver a fair comparison experiment. To use a data set originating from a process
model that does not rely too much on any excludes and includes, the computer repair
service set discussed in section 6.2.2 seem obvious. Again the full event log is digested
before discovering the model.This time when analyzing the framework settings for the
speciﬁc task, the optimal framework setting is one capable of identifying illegal traces
and has a ﬁtness of 1. The optimals settings are showed in ﬁgure 6.14.
As mentioned the only fair comparison to the DisCoveR is a model only consisting of
conditions and responses, why the optimal framework setting is a model consisting of
both parameters of the condition pattern. Using the framework setting the metrics
==PAGE:93==
6.4 Framework vs. DisCoveR
84
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
0,9
1
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude3-4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude3-4-;
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude3-4-;TransitiveReduction1
Condition1-2-;
Condition1-2-;TransitiveReduction1
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction1
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude3-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-3-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude3-4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-3-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-3-4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-3-4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude3-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-3-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude3-4-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-3-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-4-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-4-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-3-4-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-3-4-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction1-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude3-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-3-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-3-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-3-4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-3-4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude1-2-3-4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-4-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-4-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-4-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-;TransitiveReduction-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-;TransitiveReduction1-3
Condition1-2-;ExcludeAndInclude2-;TransitiveReduction-3-4
Precision
Figure 6.14: The graph is showing a sampling of the best framework settings in re-
gards to log precision on the Computer repair service service. Thresh-
old of sampling: all illegal traces are identiﬁed and all log ﬁtness are
1
==PAGE:94==
6.5 Research question fulﬁllment
85
Metric
DCR miner
DisCoveR
Log ﬁtness
1
1
Log precision
0.659
0.731
Illegal traces
TP/FP/FN
2/0/0
2/0/0
Jaccard similarity
to reference model
0.542
0.351
F1-score
0.703
0.520
Log Recall
0.542
0.542
Log Precision
1
0.500
Table 6.4: Oﬄine comparison of developed DCR miner and state-of-the-art DCR
process model discovery algorithm DisCoveR
given in table 6.4 are obtained.
Reﬂecting on the results in table 6.4 it shows that DisCoveR implemented in the
platform provided by DCR Solution is capable of mining a model (from here referred
to as DisCoveR model), that can capture the correct behavior of an event log created
on the basis of a computer repair service. The same is the DCR model discovered by
the developed framework (from here referred to as framework model). Both models
are able to replay the entire set of traces from the event log. Furthermore they are
capable of identifying 2 illegal traces (TP), added to the data set after the model
discovery. Additionally, none of the models misidentify any traces as illegal (FP) and
do not leave any illegal traces out (FN). The DisCoveR model reaches approx. 7%
higher log precision than the framework model, however as discussed the actual log
precision of a DCR model is questionable due to the ability to serve as a ﬂexible
model.
When it comes to replicating the ground truth model, it is clear that the framework
model is superior by outperforming in all comparison metrics except for recall. The
fact that the log precision from the DisCoveR is only 50% means that the algorithm
tends to overconstraint its models. As it has been a clear objective to create a frame-
work that is capable of capturing a reference model to a high degree, the superiority
of the model similarity suggests the objectives are met.
6.5
Research question fulﬁllment
As described section 3.3 3 research questions were identiﬁed in order to conceptualize
the objectives of the research. The purpose of this paper, and especially this chapter
==PAGE:95==
6.5 Research question fulﬁllment
86
Requirement
Reasoning
FR1 (MVP)
At the moment 4 patterns are implemented in the framework.
The correctness is proved in section 6.2.1
FR2 (MVP)
The stream mining algorithm implemented into the framework is the
Sliding Window algorithm.
The proof of the capabilities that it provides in terms of online DCR mining
is emphasized in section 6.3
FR3 (MVP)
The user is able to choose which patterns to mine and which stream
mining algorithm to use
FR4 (MVP)
Two models can be compared using the Jaccard similarity coeﬃcient.
This is heavily used in the evaluation of the framework.
FR5 (MVP)
The data structure of the DCR is implemented such that it easily can
be compared to any DCR models
FR6 (MVP)
The framework and the patterns are implemented such that if a pattern
is depending on another pattern those patterns are
executed ﬁrst through a postorder traversal of n-ary tree
FR7
The DCR graph can be extracted as a XML ﬁle and a JSON ﬁle.
FR8
The extended DFG algorithm is implemented such that the relation below
a certain threshold will be ﬁltered out.
Table 6.5: Fulﬁllment of function requirements
was to describe if and how these objectives were realized. In the following section,
a more accurate and boiled down description is given of how the objectives were
fulﬁlled.
6.5.1
Fulﬁllment of requirements
As a part of the early planning phase of the research, the requirements identiﬁed
in section 5.1.1 were identiﬁed to support the achievement of the superior research
questions. The 2 tables (table 6.5 and table 6.6) summarize which requirements that
have been fulﬁlled in the research.
6.5.1.1
Q1 - DCR Model Discovery
Based on the proof of concepts and the empirical evaluations and similarity compar-
ison to realistic human-made process models discussed in section 6.2, it is acknowl-
edged that it is indeed feasible to discover a DCR model from an intermediate process
abstraction, the extended DFG, created from the event stream. The artifact of this
==PAGE:96==
6.5 Research question fulﬁllment
87
Requirement
Reasoning
NFR1
The computation time of the construction and manipulation
of the DFG is proven to be constant as presented in ﬁgure 6.13
NFR2
The mining of the DCR constraints is proven to be executed at
run-time using a stream mining algorithm as presented in ﬁgure 6.13
NFR3
The implemented comparison method Jaccard similarity
Coeﬃcient showed a median value of 1.8 ms as reported
in section 6.3.1.3, which concludes the comparison method to
be able to compare at run-time
NFR4
Through the framework setting testing performed in multiple
of the conducted experiments, it is proved that the framework
is capable of running all possible conﬁgurations
NFR5, NFR6, NFR7
As emphasized in 5.2 the framework is implemented such that it
supports the addition of new patterns, stream mining algorithms
and model comparison techniques, if they are developed to
follow guidelines of the skeleton
NFR8
The framework is as emphasized in 5.2 implemented in such way that
it is able to integrate into Beamline
NFR9
The framework is implemented in a way that it runs a separate
thread handling the incoming events such that it is
always available to the user.
Table 6.6: Fulﬁllment of non-functional requirement and a reasoning
==PAGE:97==
6.5 Research question fulﬁllment
88
research proves and oﬀers such feature.
6.5.1.2
Q2 - Online Capabilities
In general, the framework’s the ability to discover a DCR model is as stated strongly
dependent on the used stream mining algorithm, why it was a concern, that the
framework was not implemented with a more complex stream mining algorithm than
the sliding window. Furthermore, the fact that there was no existing reference model
discovered from the online setting but only the human-made reference model was
expected to miscredit the justiﬁcation of the quality of the research and the imple-
mented framework.
The lack of an online discovered model to compare to forced the usage of the Dis-
CoveR, thus important to conclude that the comparison is not totally fair but an
embossing mark of the qualities of the framework.
From the online experiments, the artifact showed great potentials in capturing the
relations from the reference model. The results gained from the empirical tests, that
was conducted in an online setting, showed that the model in an online setting at
some points even come closer to the ground truth, than the model created from the
complete event log. Furthermore, the level of superiority the mining abilities of the
framework showed in contrast to DisCoveR in an online setting reveals the true po-
tentials of the framework. Thus it is safe to conclude that the framework deﬁnitely
has succeeded in answering the second research question of being able to discover a
process model from an online setting that captures, to some extent, the human made
reference model.
In addition to the benchmark tests performed on a reference model, models from the
artifact of the research were also compared to models created from the DisCoveR in
section 6.3, where it is clear that the framework is superior in an online setting, by
at some points discovers a model, which is up to 35% closer to the reference model,
than the model created from DisCoveR with the same stream mining settings.
6.5.1.3
Q3 - State-of-the-art performance
As stated in order for the research to be acceptable fulﬁlled, the developed artifact
needs to outperform the state-of-the-art artifacts already existing.
As there does
not exist any online DCR process discovery algorithm it provides a good indication
whether the research is superior to compare the algorithm to the state-of-the-art of-
ﬂine DCR process discovery algorithms. This is done in an oﬄine setting via the
experiment described in section 6.4, where the model mined by the framework is
compared to the model created by the DisCoveR algorithm provided in the DCR
solution tool. The experiment reveals that the model created by the framework is
==PAGE:98==
6.5 Research question fulﬁllment
89
able to capture the behavior from a log as well as the DisCover. Furthermore, the
framework even discovers a model a lot closer to the reference model than the Dis-
Cover Model, why it is concluded that research question 3 has been fulﬁlled.
==PAGE:99==
Chapter 7
Conclusion
In this thesis, it was investigated whether it was feasible to discover a DCR process
model from an intermediate directly-follows process abstraction, an extended DFG,
constructed from an event stream conducted.
The research conducted upon such matter was chosen due to the ground breaking
potentials of being able to comprehend continuous and possibly fast event streams
of simulations of processes. These potentials do not only support the experts and
researchers in creating models by oﬀering trustworthy models that provide guidelines
of the process mapping, but also to automate the discovery to be able to generate
models that comply with the current steady-state of the process behavior, in order
to provide useful comparisons of models to quicker identify process changes, as con-
cept drifts, and in general discover models that can be used by users of a given process.
The contribution of this research is an artifact, a software system, referred to as a
framework that has been developed comprised of independent components such as
pattern discover algorithms, stream mining algorithms and model-to-model compar-
ison algorithms. The pattern discover algorithms and the stream mining algorithms
are both developed in accordance with the given superior skeleton, which deﬁnes the
common rules of the given component. This is strictly done to support the deep
intentions of the framework, which is inspired by the phrase "Two heads are better
than one"- namely to build an open source DCR analytical system, where DCR ex-
perts can collaborate by individually adding complexity in terms of either patterns,
==PAGE:100==
91
stream miners or comparison algorithms to ultimately end up with the perfect ana-
lytical tool for stream analysis and process modeling using DCR. Furthermore, the
framework itself is build on a template that easily supports the integration into the
state-of-the-art online process mining tool Beamline.
The research has been conducted using the DSRM approach, where the road from
an undiscovered idea to a working artifact was closely conformed with the 6 steps of
the model, starting from the problem identiﬁcation, where meetings went by full of
brainstorming and discussions of existing literature and which acknowledged research
that would provide value to the idea. This step was followed by deﬁning the objec-
tives where a broad and vague idea was boiled down to actual objectives to realize
the idea. This stage was a natural stepping stone to the design and development.
This was the stage, where the list of objectives were realized from an agile approach.
The empirical software engineering approach supported every decision by providing
clear measures of improvement or the opposite through a number of conducted ex-
periments. The empirical approach was the perfect setup for the discussions during
frequent meetings, which would lead to further fuzzy ideas and uprising (or devas-
tating) conclusions from continuous integration.
The continuous integration has ended up with an artifact- a product to underline the
conducted research- which shows considerable potentials in terms of the completely
untouched area of online DCR model discovery, even proving that the capabilities of
the mined models essentially can recreate a human-made model to a high degree, even
performing better under online circumstances than under oﬄine. The conducted ex-
periments have also evidenced that the artifact is a fair competitor to the state-of-the-
art DCR process model discovery algorithm DisCoveR, when it comes to capturing
the behavior of an oﬄine complete event log. In an online setting the artifact showed
a substantial superiority. However, the exciting ﬁndings and the capabilities of the
framework are only a milestone to what can be accomplished continuing the research.
As for now, the solution is capable of achieving the objectives of this research, which
were identiﬁed as realistic goals. However to get to the ﬁnal long term goal some
further work is required.
Business processes can be of much greater complexity than the data set chosen for the
experiments. The data set is chosen to show the capabilities of the framework, why
the framework is not yet completely capable of supporting real usage. An example of
a much more complex example is a process model which holds DCR constraints that
the framework is not able to identify such as milestones, preconditions, and spawns.
Adding subprocesses and And-splits/joins and XOR-splits/join, which heavily de-
pends on improved identiﬁcation of excludes, will just increase the complexity even
==PAGE:101==
92
further.
Extending the framework with patterns able to detect this level of complexity will
deﬁnitely increase the value added to real world usage of the framework.
Moreover, throughout the research, there has been a trade of validity since there has
been imposed a deterministic approach in the implication of the algorithm. At the
state of the research, it is not investigated how the framework would be performing in
a non-deterministic environment, which would be an important discovery for future
work.
The purpose of the framework was an integration into Beamline, which is considered
fairly easy, as the framework itself is developed as a plugin to the Beamline engine.
However, some of the requirements, which have been left out of the scope of the
thesis, are those requirements that deal with the capturing of model changes and
concept drifts in real time. These requirements were identiﬁed as a database model
capable of storing previous models, which eﬃciently would be compared to the new
discovered model. The features to save and rate previous models to the new would
add value to the usage of the framework as a tool to detect such process drifts.
This thesis has not compared diﬀerent model comparison algorithms, due to time
constraints, however an interesting next step of the research would be to evaluate dif-
ferent comparison strategies, both state-of-the-art structural and behavioral methods.
The performance of the artifact strongly depends on the intermediate model, from
which the DCR model is constructed from.
In a DFG model, it is not possible to diﬀerentiate relations from traces, meaning if
there in a trace exists the relation a →b and in another trace exists another trace b →
c, there will exist a relation in the DFG such that a →b →c. This relation imposes
some non-existing relations, and is the reason why the most trustworthy patterns,
at the moment, only mines from directly follow relations. However introducing a
more complex directly follows abstraction such as identifying single-enter single-exit
regions, might enhance the model discovery.
In general there are very interesting features and potentials to the add to the research
area and to the created artifact to trach an extend of the framework, which can be
used in realistic scenarios and ﬁll the gap of an online DCR analytical tool, where
those mentioned are just tiny improvements. However the framework to the extend
of the current version reveals the great potentials of what an algorithm is capable
of extracting from an event stream and succeeds in answering the research questions
and completes the main objectives of this research.
==PAGE:102==
Appendix A
Appendix A - Project Plan
==PAGE:103==
Online Discovery and Model-to-Model Comparison
of DCR Models from Event Streams using Beamline
s165498
January 2021
1
94
==PAGE:104==
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit, s165498
Thesis Project Planning
1
Project description
Business processes are constantly changing and being able to create and
continuously adapt discovered models is vital for the analysis of the system
behavior. In most cases, these changes happen in real time and for processes
that are not yet complete, why the model discovery has to happen in an on-
line setting adapting from event streams.
A state-of-the-art framework for mining real-time, continuous event streams
is currently implemented expressing the set of valid constraints using the
declarative process modeling language, Declare.
This project addresses to create and implement a similar framework using
the expressive language, DCR, Dynamic condition response, to mine and
continuously adapt business process models. Furthermore, the framework
will eventually be able to use the newly discovered DCR model to compare it
with previous versions of the model to analyze the relations and evolution of
the given process behavior. The framework is to be implemented in Beam-
line, a state-of-the-art software framework supporting online process mining.
2
Related work
As recent years have brought an increasing interest in business organization
and process modelling, there have been done some interesting research in
many ﬁelds within business process management and process models in gen-
eral.
The work of this thesis will ﬁnd inspiration from some novel work from dif-
ferent ﬁelds within business process management and event handling.
Typically within BPM, process models are commonly expressed as impera-
tive models, where ”everything is illegal except the actions explicitly allowed
by the process”, however this way of describing models captures the compli-
ance rules and business constrains poorly. To address this issue, declarative
models were introduced. They capture everything, that is illegal and let
everything else be allowed.
2.1
Online Process Model discovery
The ground theme of the thesis is the model discovery from a real-time,
continuous event stream.
This technique diﬀers in many ways from the
traditional model discovery from complete event logs, and the inﬁnite data
stream and trace-unawareness makes it challenging to process the data in
95
==PAGE:105==
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit, s165498
Thesis Project Planning
real time. Thus, the challenge of dealing with streams of events are recog-
nized as relevant challenge in the Process Mining Manifesto[1]. Most existing
techniques of online model discovery require several iterations on event logs.
To address this issue Burattin et al.[2] introduced a novel framework for
discovery of declarative process models from real time event streams.
The model is expressed using the Declare notation. Declare combines formal
semantics, expressed as LTL-based constraints, with graphical notations to
present a declarative process model. Each constraint is captured in a so-
called template
In the work, they conduct performance experiments with 3 diﬀerent stream
mining algorithms - also known as frequency counting algorithms, Sliding
Window, Lossy Counting, Lossy counting with Budget. This is done to en-
sure a low memory usage throughout the discovery phase, even though the
event stream is inﬁnite. The algorithms ﬁlter out infrequent behavior and
captures so-called concept drifts.
The discovery of the declare models happens at runtime using an al-
gorithm that replays the incoming event through so-called replayers. The
replayers are based on constraint templates- meaning each constraint (they
chose to discover in the work) is presented in a replayer. Their work points
out the drawbacks of event-based streams: Event-based streams are streams,
where the event only holds information of their respective case id, activity
name and timestamp. This excludes the possibility to handle the events
in traces, which means completed traces cannot be removed for memory
management, and makes it impossible to determine whether constraints are
satisﬁed or violated. In contrast, in trace-based streams events hold informa-
tion on which trace it is belonging to. In conclusion, Buratti et al determines
the Lossy counting with Budget to be the most eﬀective and accurate way
of handling event streams. Moreover, the trace-based support outperforms
the event-based. However, the trace-based support is not possible in most
event streams without making strong assumptions.
In 2020, an extension of the work presented above was published by
Navarin et al [3]. This work addresses the lack of data awareness from [2].
The introduction of data awareness is implemented by extending the declar-
ative process modeling language Declare by deﬁning data conditions. An
example of such would be if an event is received and a certain condition
holds after receiving the event, then some other event must eventually ap-
pear. The proposed approach is done using a set of algorithms to analyze
the stream of data and classify their constraint activation. The classiﬁcation
problem uses a Hoeﬀding tree for each of the Declare templates to identify
what condition that needs to be set up and hold for a speciﬁc constraint to
be fulﬁlled.
96
==PAGE:106==
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit, s165498
Thesis Project Planning
2.2
Dynamic Condition Response
Dynamic Condition Response (DCR) is a constraint-based graphical process
notation, which, like Declare, is a way of expressing a set of events through
declarative process models. DCR can be represented as DCR graphs, where
the idea behind aim to provide ﬂexible process support using constraints
between transactions capturing the compliance and business rules.
The DCR is, like Declare, a collection of rules, which describes the relation-
ship between activities. This collection is including a variety of relations
which includes but not limits to Conditions, Responses, Inclusions and Ex-
clusions. Even though, the DCR modeling language contains a considerably
smaller amount of rules than Declare, it reaches the same expressiveness, ac-
cording to Sch¨onig and Jablonski’s comparison of declarative process mod-
eling languages [4]. DCR mining is today only possible in a oﬄine setting-
meaning a discovery process is run on a complete event logs. In the work
done by C.O. Black et al [5], a discovery algorithm, DisCoveR, is presented,
which eﬃciently and accurately mines DCR Graphs from event logs. They
present in their work an accuracy of 96,2% with a linear time complex-
ity. Moreover, this discovery algorithm is implemented in a framework as a
model recommendation tool.
The DisCoveR algorithm is an extension of the ParNek algorithm, which
discovers relations based on a number of steps. DisCoveR represents the
relations and markings of the DCR Graphs in a bit vector format to im-
prove performance. However, the DisCoveR algorithm is not applicable to
an online setting, due to the way the relations are recognized.
2.3
Beamline
Beamline1is a state-of-the-art web-based framework, that supports research
of online process mining. Beamline allow scientists and other interested to
create their own study space, where they can analyze streams of data and
conduct experiments from a process mining oriented perspective.
The framework allows users to load self-developed miners (algorithms), and
connect to real-time event streams. The user is then able to create instances
of the available miners to analyze a desired stream.
The framework currently only supports miners developed in Java, and com-
municates with the miners through REST. The framework supports both
client/server communication but also publish/subscription, which is well
suited for event-based algorithms.
1https://beamline.github.io/dashboard//
97
==PAGE:107==
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit, s165498
Thesis Project Planning
2.4
Relation mining
2.4.1
Directly-Follows Graph
A fundamental concept of process discovery is the Directly-Follows Graph,
which is a simpliﬁed way of capturing and presenting the relation between
events. The Directly-Follows Graph basically associate related events by
drawing a directed edges between associated nodes (events).
Typically
the edge holds a number representing the frequency of appearance of such
relation- Meaning if the combination of event A precedes event B has ap-
peared 3 times, the edge going from node A to node B is tagged with the
number 3.
It is normal practice to deal with complexity of processes by removing rela-
tions (edges), that does not meet the frequency threshold.
A DFG miner exists in the state-of-the-art framework Beamline, express-
ing a stream of events in a graphical representation.
2.4.2
Inductive miner
In the ﬁeld of process discovery the inductive miner guarantees to preserve
ﬁtness and aims to maximize precision of en event log- meaning the dis-
covered model captures the complete behavior of the analyzed log.
The
inductive miner, created by Sander Leemans, reaches its strong claims by
generating a so-called process tree, which is a notation to represent a block-
structured process model. Basically the process tree consist of a root node,
inner nodes representing operators and leaves representing activities.
More precisely, the inductive miner is in fact a set of techniques, but the un-
derlying principal behind it is to capture the behavior of an event log using
the 4 operators: sequential composition, exclusive choice, parallel composi-
tion, and redo loop. The inductive miner implements parameter functions
to capture these operators through multiple recursions on a log.
The parameter functions are cut detection, log splitting, base cases and fall
throughs.
The most interesting in the scope of my thesis is the cut de-
tection, where the principle is to consider the DFG abstraction. Here the
inductive miner ”cuts” the DFG into smaller parts, focusing on each node
(event) with its incoming and outgoing edges and looks for the footprints of
the operations. The order the operators are sought for in the cut function is
done in an hierarchical way where the ﬁrst priority is exclusive choice then
sequential composition, parallel composition, and last redo loop.
2.5
Model comparison
Today, there has been done research in eﬃciently comparing process mod-
els. The paper [6] published by Skobtsov and Kalenkova, compares BPMN
98
==PAGE:108==
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit, s165498
Thesis Project Planning
models using techniques for ﬁnding the minimal graph edit distance using
adapted heuristic algorithms. The minimal graph edit distance can be de-
ﬁned as the minimal number of steps, it takes to transform one graph to
another. The heuristic algorithms used in this work are greedy search, Tabu
search, Simulated Annealing, Ants, and A∗. In general, all the heuristic
algorithms, were capable of comparing large BPMN models. However, the
tabu search algorithm yielded best accuracy in the majority of the cases.
3
Research Objectives
Studying the current state-of-the-art of online process mining, it is clear,
that the ﬁeld of study can improve.
Even though, there already exists
techniques of online process discovery using declarative process modeling
language Declare, it is interesting to investigate if it possible to increase
the research within DCR to facilitate process management from a real time
event stream. In order to reach a groundbreaking research, the following
objectives are set to be completed:
• Process discovery from a live inﬁnite event stream represented by a
DCR model
• Present the discovered DCR model in a user-friendly graphical nota-
tion on the online process mining platform Beamline
• Compare newly discovered DCR models with outdated models
• Compare online discovered models to models discovered by the state-
of-the-art oﬄine discovery algorithm, based on the same set of event.
4
Thesis goals
To support the achievement of the research objectives, the following steps
has to be investigated and reached:
4.1
Model discovery
The web-based process mining tool Beamline is currently supporting the
discovery of a DFG from a real time event stream. I have identiﬁed DFG as
a good candidate to deﬁne footprints to capture the rules of DCR. By taking
this approach, it is possible to believe, the strategy behind the inductive
miner or similar miners, especially the cut detection, can reﬂect the process
of identifying patterns by looking for footprints in the DFG.
Even though, DFG is identiﬁed as a good candidate to express the footprints,
it might turn out, that DFG lacks complexity to fully capture the desired
patterns. Thus, the use of DFG to express the footprints is not settled.
99
==PAGE:109==
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit, s165498
Thesis Project Planning
I intend to create a catalogue of patterns, which a user has the option to
mine. The order of which the patterns are mined will essentially work in
a hierarchical way like for the cut function in the inductive miner.
The
hierarchical mining will essentially look for bigger patterns in the DFG, and
if those are not being manifested, the patterns will decrease until a pattern
is recognized.
It will also be a priority to implement a state-of-the-art frequency count-
ing algorithm to deal with concept drifts and infrequent behavior. The user
will furthermore be able to get a user-friendly graphical representation of
the model on Beamline. A strict requirement of the product is the time com-
plexity of the model discovery. The run time of the discovery process has to
match the time complexity in existing online process discovery frameworks.
4.2
Model comparison
In order to store models and compare the newly discovered models with
the outdated models, it is crucial to store the models in the most eﬃcient
way. I intend to continue the research to conclude whether the structure of
the model from [5], using bit vectors, is the most eﬃcient structure to use
for storing and comparing models. Moreover, the complexity of the model
comparison technique will incrementally increase and be evaluated in order
to reach the most accurate and eﬃcient. The intention is to start with a
simple comparison technique, i.e. Jaccard index to compare the constraints
in previous models to the new. Then I will introduce more complex com-
parison methods, i.e. the heuristic approaches used in [6].
The state-of-the-art DCR mining framework needs to be compared to ex-
isting solutions. Even though, these solutions are not capable of performing
online discovery, it is important, that the mined models from the frame-
work are similar to models discovered using the state-of-the-art miners, like
DisCoVeR [5], which is publicly available2.
4.3
Software development management
I intend to use an agile approach, when implementing the software. The
development process will be split up into sprints, in which the above objec-
tives are reﬂected.
The ﬁrst sprint will involve the creation of a framework, that holds the foun-
dation of the DCR Graph discovery. Then the sprints will incrementally
increase the complexity of the framework. i.e. what patterns the framework
is capable of recognizing, how well it handles concept drifts and infrequent
behavior, and how eﬃcient the model comparison is.
2https://www.dcrgraphs.net/
100
==PAGE:110==
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit, s165498
Thesis Project Planning
4.4
Summary
In general, the above objectives can be boiled down to the following:
• Build simple framework to discover and compare DCR models
• Identify DCR patttherns/footprints from a ground basis - Initially
DFG
• implement DCR patterns in a catalogue
• Use inductive miner-based approach to hierarchically search for the
patterns in the DCR
• Represent the discovered models in a graphical way on Beamline
• Introduce frequency counting algorithms to deal with concept drifts
and infrequent behavior
• Reach a time complexity matching state-of-the-art online model dis-
covery algorithms
• Store models eﬃciently
• Use state-of-the-art algorithms to compare constraint patterns
• Use existing automated oﬄine process discovery techniques to generate
models for performance experiments
• Agile development management
5
Risk assessment
The following table is an assessment of the potential risks.
6
Project management
As mentioned, the project management will be done using an agile software
development approach, where the product evolves using iterative develop-
ment. My supervisors and I will have weekly meetings, that will have the
same structure as so-called stand-up meeting, where the following agenda
will be discussed:
• What have I done since last time
• What am I planning to do until next meeting
• What obstacles do I expect to run into
101
==PAGE:111==
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit, s165498
Thesis Project Planning
No
Risk event
Mitigations
Likelihood
Impact
1
Unable to extract constraints/patterns
Pivot from DFG as basis
Small
5
2
Not able to populate catalogue of patterns
Recognize patterns beforehand
Small
4
3
Messy/non-reﬂective report
-Start writing early
-Create skeleton of report with notes of
what each section should include
-Get feedback from supervisors
-On weekly meeting follow structure of
the project plan – at the end put it into
word format
-Keep it short as possible but complete
High
5
4
Unable to compare models eﬃciently
Start with simple, improve incrementally
Medium
3
5
Unable to reach optimal performance
Test performance after each sprint
Small
4
The Gannt seen in ﬁgure 1, only 2 implementation periods are described.
Sprint 1 is the most essential, as this sprint implements the basic framework
of the product, that is to be integrated in Beamline. The second unspeciﬁed
implementation phase, sprints, is the period in which multiple sprints will
take place. The product will here evolve incrementally. During this period,
the weekly meetings will also include practices from Scrum meetings. Each
period between meetings will act as sprints, where the framework is improved
and tested, and my supervisors will act as guiding project scrum masters.
We will discuss, what is possible for the next sprint phase. Besides the agile
project management, some important milestones have been acknowledged
in order to maintain the project deadline. The milestones are seen in the
Gannt chart in ﬁgure 1.
• Project plan: 02.24.2021
• Initial requirements & analysis: 03.15.2021
• Code freeze: 05.25.2021
• Performance experiments: 06.01.2021
• 1st edition of thesis: 06.15.2021
• Final edition of thesis: 07.09.2021
The writing of the report will essentially be done throughout the entire
period. Typically a chapter relating to a speciﬁc sprint or achievement will
be written in parallel. Furthermore
102
==PAGE:112==
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit, s165498
Thesis Project Planning
Figure 1: Estimated Gannt chart of thesis project
103
==PAGE:113==
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit, s165498
Thesis Project Planning
References
[1] W. van der Aalst, A. Adriansyah, A. K. A. de Medeiros, F. Arcieri,
T. Baier, T. Blickle, J. C. Bose, P. van den Brand, R. Brandtjen, J. Buijs,
A. Burattin, J. Carmona, M. Castellanos, J. Claes, J. Cook, N. Costan-
tini, F. Curbera, E. Damiani, M. de Leoni, P. Delias, B. F. van Don-
gen, M. Dumas, S. Dustdar, D. Fahland, D. R. Ferreira, W. Gaaloul,
F. van Geﬀen, S. Goel, C. G¨unther, A. Guzzo, P. Harmon, A. ter Hof-
stede, J. Hoogland, J. E. Ingvaldsen, K. Kato, R. Kuhn, A. Kumar,
M. La Rosa, F. Maggi, D. Malerba, R. S. Mans, A. Manuel, M. Mc-
Creesh, P. Mello, J. Mendling, M. Montali, H. R. Motahari-Nezhad,
M. zur Muehlen, J. Munoz-Gama, L. Pontieri, J. Ribeiro, A. Rozinat,
H. Seguel P´erez, R. Seguel P´erez, M. Sep´ulveda, J. Sinur, P. Soﬀer,
M. Song, A. Sperduti, G. Stilo, C. Stoel, K. Swenson, M. Talamo,
W. Tan, C. Turner, J. Vanthienen, G. Varvaressos, E. Verbeek, M. Ver-
donk, R. Vigo, J. Wang, B. Weber, M. Weidlich, T. Weijters, L. Wen,
M. Westergaard, and M. Wynn, “Process mining manifesto,” in Business
Process Management Workshops, F. Daniel, K. Barkaoui, and S. Dust-
dar, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp.
169–194.
[2] A. Burattin, M. Cimitile, F. M. Maggi, and A. Sperduti, “Online dis-
covery of declarative process models from event streams,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Services Computing, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 833–846, Nov 2015.
[3] N. Navarin, M. Cambiaso, A. Burattin, F. M. Maggi, L. Oneto, and
A. Sperduti, “Towards online discovery of data-aware declarative process
models from event streams,” in 2020 International Joint Conference on
Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2020, pp. 1–8.
[4] S. Sch¨onig and S. Jablonski, “Comparing declarative process modelling
languages from the organisational perspective,” vol. 256, 08 2015.
[5] C. O. Back, T. Slaats, T. T. Hildebrandt, and M. Marquard, “Discover:
Accurate eﬃcient discovery of declarative process models,” 2020.
[6] A. Skobtsov and A. Kalenkova, “Eﬃcient algorithms for ﬁnding diﬀer-
ences between process models,” in 2019 Ivannikov Ispras Open Confer-
ence (ISPRAS), 2019, pp. 60–66.
104
==PAGE:114==
Bibliography
[AS04]
Ruth Aguilar-Savén. Business process modelling: Review and frame-
work. International Journal of Production Economics, 90:129–149, 07
2004.
[AW04]
Wil Aalst and A. Weijters. Process mining: A research agenda. Com-
puters in Industry, 53:231–244, 06 2004.
[BCMS15a]
Andrea Burattin, Marta Cimitile, Fabrizio M. Maggi, and Alessandro
Sperduti. Online discovery of declarative process models from event
streams. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 8(6):833–846,
2015.
[BCMS15b]
Andrea Burattin, Marta Cimitile, Fabrizio M. Maggi, and Alessandro
Sperduti. Online discovery of declarative process models from event
streams. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, 8(6):833–846,
2015.
[BD12]
J. C. A. M. Buijs and B. F. Van Dongen.
On the role of ﬁtness,
precision, generalization and simplicity in process discovery. In OTM
Federated Conferences, 20th International Conference on Cooperative
Information Systems (CoopIS 2012), volume 7565 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 305–322. SpringerVerlag, 2012.
[BSHM20]
Christoﬀer Olling Back, Tijs Slaats, Thomas Troels Hildebrandt, and
Morten Marquard. Discover: Accurate eﬃcient discovery of declara-
tive process models, 2020.
[Den11]
Jack B. Dennis. Petri Nets, pages 1525–1530. Springer US, Boston,
MA, 2011.
==PAGE:115==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
106
[DHLU17]
Søren Debois, Thomas T. Hildebrandt, Paw Høvsgaard Laursen, and
Kenneth Ry Ulrik.
Declarative process mining for dcr graphs.
In
Proceedings of the Symposium on Applied Computing, SAC ’17, page
759764, New York, NY, USA, 2017. Association for Computing Ma-
chinery.
[DHSM14]
Søren Debois, Thomas Hildebrandt, Tijs Slaats, and Morten Mar-
quard. A case for declarative process modelling: Agile development
of a grant application system.
In 2014 IEEE 18th International
Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference Workshops and
Demonstrations, pages 126–133, 2014.
[Fer20]
Diogo Ferreira. Event Logs, pages 1–13. 02 2020.
[HM10]
Thomas Hildebrandt and Raghava Rao Mukkamala.
Declarative
event-based workﬂow as distributed dynamic condition response
graphs. In Declarative Event-Based Workﬂow as Distributed Dynamic
Condition Response Graphs, Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical
Computer Science, pages 59–73. Open Publishing Association, 2010.
[HSB20]
Alexander Holstrup, Lasse Starklit, and Andrea Burattin. Analysis
of information-seeking conversations with process mining.
In 2020
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pages
1–8, 2020.
[Jac12]
Paul Jaccard. The distribution of the ﬂora in the alpine zone.1. New
Phytologist, 11(2):37–50, 1912.
[KWW11a]
Matthias Kunze, Matthias Weidlich, and Mathias Weske. Behavioral
similarity a proper metric. pages 166–181, 01 2011.
[KWW11b]
Matthias Kunze, Matthias Weidlich, and Mathias Weske.
m3 - a
behavioral similarity metric for business processes. volume 705, pages
89–95, 01 2011.
[LFVDA14]
Sander JJ Leemans, Dirk Fahland, and Wil MP Van Der Aalst. Pro-
cess and deviation exploration with inductive visual miner.
BPM
(Demos), 1295(8), 2014.
[LSNM21]
H. A. López, R. Strømsted, Jean-Marie Niyodusenga, and Morten
Marquard. Declarative process discovery: Linking process and textual
views. In CAiSE Forum, 2021.
[Ló]
H. A. López. Extraction of processes from laws: Annotation guide-
lines. Technical report, DCR Solutions.
==PAGE:116==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
107
[MBCS13]
Fabrizio Maria Maggi, Andrea Burattin, Marta Cimitile, and Alessan-
dro Sperduti.
Online process discovery to detect concept drifts in
ltl-based declarative process models.
In Robert Meersman, Hervé
Panetto, Tharam Dillon, Johann Eder, Zohra Bellahsene, Norbert
Ritter, Pieter De Leenheer, and Deijing Dou, editors, On the Move to
Meaningful Internet Systems: OTM 2013 Conferences, pages 94–111,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[NCB+20]
Nicolò Navarin, Matteo Cambiaso, Andrea Burattin, Fabrizio M.
Maggi, Luca Oneto, and Alessandro Sperduti. Towards online dis-
covery of data-aware declarative process models from event streams.
In 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN),
pages 1–8, 2020.
[NPBS19]
Viktorija Nekrasaite, Andrew Tristan Parli, Christoﬀer Olling Back,
and Tijs Slaats. Discovering responsibilities with dynamic condition
response graphs.
In Paolo Giorgini and Barbara Weber, editors,
Advanced Information Systems Engineering, pages 595–610, Cham,
2019. Springer International Publishing.
[Pes08]
M. Pesic. Constraint-based workﬂow management systems : shifting
control to users. PhD thesis, Industrial Engineering and Innovation
Sciences, 2008. Proefschrift.
[PTRC07]
Ken Peﬀers, Tuure Tuunanen, Marcus A. Rothenberger, and Samir
Chatterjee.
A design science research methodology for informa-
tion systems research. Journal of Management Information Systems,
24(3):45–77, 2007.
[SJ15]
Stefan Schönig and Stefan Jablonski. Comparing declarative process
modelling languages from the organisational perspective. volume 256,
08 2015.
[Sta21]
Lasse Helm Trige Starklit.
Data for thesis: Online Discovery and
Model-to- Model Comparison of DCR Models from Event Streams,
July 2021.
[TFVK19]
Adithya Thaduri, Stephen Famurewa, A. Verma, and Uday Kumar.
Process Mining for Maintenance Decision Support: Performance and
Safety Management, pages 279–293. 01 2019.
[van19a]
Wil M.P. van der Aalst.
A practitioners guide to process mining:
Limitations of the directly-follows graph. Procedia Computer Science,
164:321–328, 2019. CENTERIS 2019 - International Conference on
ENTERprise Information Systems / ProjMAN 2019 - International
Conference on Project MANagement / HCist 2019 - International
==PAGE:117==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
108
Conference on Health and Social Care Information Systems and Tech-
nologies, CENTERIS/ProjMAN/HCist 2019.
[van19b]
S.J. van Zelst. Process mining with streaming data. PhD thesis, Math-
ematics and Computer Science, March 2019. Proefschrift.
[vdA16]
Wil van der Aalst. Process Mining: Data Science in Action. Springer
Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2nd edition, 2016.
[vdAAdM+12] Wil van der Aalst, Arya Adriansyah, Ana Karla Alves de Medeiros,
Franco Arcieri, Thomas Baier, Tobias Blickle, Jagadeesh Chandra
Bose, Peter van den Brand, Ronald Brandtjen, Joos Buijs, Andrea
Burattin, Josep Carmona, Malu Castellanos, Jan Claes, Jonathan
Cook, Nicola Costantini, Francisco Curbera, Ernesto Damiani, Mas-
similiano de Leoni, Pavlos Delias, Boudewijn F. van Dongen, Mar-
lon Dumas, Schahram Dustdar, Dirk Fahland, Diogo R. Ferreira,
Walid Gaaloul, Frank van Geﬀen, Sukriti Goel, Christian Günther,
Antonella Guzzo, Paul Harmon, Arthur ter Hofstede, John Hoog-
land, Jon Espen Ingvaldsen, Koki Kato, Rudolf Kuhn, Akhil Ku-
mar, Marcello La Rosa, Fabrizio Maggi, Donato Malerba, Ronny S.
Mans, Alberto Manuel, Martin McCreesh, Paola Mello, Jan Mendling,
Marco Montali, Hamid R. Motahari-Nezhad, Michael zur Muehlen,
Jorge Munoz-Gama, Luigi Pontieri, Joel Ribeiro, Anne Rozinat, Hugo
Seguel Pérez, Ricardo Seguel Pérez, Marcos Sepúlveda, Jim Sinur,
Pnina Soﬀer, Minseok Song, Alessandro Sperduti, Giovanni Stilo,
Casper Stoel, Keith Swenson, Maurizio Talamo, Wei Tan, Chris
Turner, Jan Vanthienen, George Varvaressos, Eric Verbeek, Marc
Verdonk, Roberto Vigo, Jianmin Wang, Barbara Weber, Matthias
Weidlich, Ton Weijters, Lijie Wen, Michael Westergaard, and Moe
Wynn. Process mining manifesto. In Florian Daniel, Kamel Barkaoui,
and Schahram Dustdar, editors, Business Process Management Work-
shops, pages 169–194, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012. Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg.
