==PAGE:1==
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS
Radio Occultation Measurements
Master’s Thesis
Author: Björn Bergsson ­ s192715
Supervisors: Per Knudsen (DTU) & Stig Syndergaard (DMI)
DTU Space
National Space Institute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
Master’s Thesis
July, 2021
By
Björn Bergsson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Illustration by the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research.
Published by:
DTU, National Space Institute, Elektrovej, building 327 and 328, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared from February to July 2021 at the National Space Institute,
at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU) in cooperation with the Danish Meteorolog­
ical Institute (DMI) in partial fulfilment for a Master of Science (MSc) degree in Earth and
Space Physics and Engineering.
Björn Bergsson ­ s192715
Signature
Date
ii
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
In this thesis, algorithms were developed and used to analyse over 7 TB of radio occulta­
tion data from the COSMIC­1 mission, with the goal of learning more about ionospheric
scintillations. More knowledge of this phenomenon can benefit ionospheric and space
weather research, as well as help efforts in improving global navigation and mitigating
errors in atmospheric parameter retrieval. The data set used in the study is amongst the
biggest in the literature, where a High Performance Computer was used to carry out the
required calculations. The large amount of data allowed for the production of maps and
plots of unprecedented resolution. Furthermore, data cleaning criteria were developed to
rid the data of unreliable measurements, which allowed for more reliable statistics. Two
different methods were used to quantify the scintillations. One method is based on the S4
scintillation index which is commonly used, and the other method is based on a sophisti­
cated algorithm that has some important advantages over other methods, but has never
been used on such a big data set in previous studies. The algorithm does a good job of
observing irregularities found in the ionospheric sporadic­E layer, which are sometimes
referred to as Es. In this study, along with seeing common Es characteristics known from
previous studies, some observations that have not been reported before in the literature
are made. It is commonly known that the Es occurrence varies with the local time of day,
where the greatest occurrence happens roughly around morning times and evening times.
By analysing the large amount of data, the most significant new observations made were
that in the spring and fall seasons the Es occurrence during the morning is relatively lower
than the Es occurrence during the evening, and that the evening Es seems to be more
tilted with respect to the local horizon than the morning Es, especially during more solar
activity.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Per Knudsen, Professor of geodesy, DTU.
Per is the DTU supervisor of this project. He has followed the progress of the project and
has been in charge of all the administrative tasks relating to it.
Stig Syndergaard, Scientist, Ph.D., DMI.
Stig Syndergaard is the DMI supervisor of this project. His research area includes remote
sensing of the atmosphere and ionosphere using the radio occultation method. It was
Stig who came up with the project idea, and he has been to every meeting and guided
the direction of the project. On top of that, he has given me some valuable feedback
throughout the writing process. Stig has shared his extensive knowledge on the subject
and I have learned a lot from talking with him.
iv
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
GNSS Radio Occultation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.1.1
History of GNSS­RO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
COSMIC­1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
COSMIC­1 Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
Previous Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Theory
9
2.1
Ionospheric Irregularities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.1
Sporadic­E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.1.2
Wind Shear Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.1.3
F­layer Irregularities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
2.2
Signal Propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Methods
17
3.1
Amplitude Scintillation Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Sporadic­E Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
COSMIC­1 Data Cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.3.1
Refining Es Statistics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.4
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4
Results and Discussion
35
4.1
Height and Thickness Distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2
Spatial Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.3
Local Time
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.4
Solar Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.5
Morning and Evening Es . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.5.1
Further Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
4.6
Summary of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
4.7
Future Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
5
Conclusion
63
Bibliography
65
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
A powerful remote sensing technique that goes under the name GNSS Radio Occultation
has been developed in the past decades for Earth studies and observations with the use
of Earth orbiting satellites. The method is widely used as a data gathering tool for mete­
orology, as atmospheric parameters can be retrieved from the measurements, but it also
proves useful in studying the ionosphere and space weather. Generally, GNSS signals
can be corrected for the frequency dependent effects of the ionospheric electron density
by transmitting at two different frequencies, but when irregularities and electron density
variations in the ionosphere are present, the signal undergoes rapid fluctuations which
are termed scintillations. The dual­frequency approach can not correct for these, and the
ionospheric scintillations often cause large errors or prevent the retrieval of atmospheric
parameters. Furthermore, severe scintillations can result in the signal being lost, which
can affect the accuracy of global navigation systems. This can negatively impact vast
amount of users and industries that utilize space­based navigation systems in various ap­
plications such as civil aviation, construction, and precision agriculture, but is especially
dangerous for systems that rely on the use of autonomous navigation [32]. Studying the
characteristics of the scintillations does therefore not only benefit ionospheric and space
weather research, but can also help efforts in improving global navigation and mitigating
the errors in atmospheric parameter retrieval.
In this thesis, over 7 TB of COSMIC­1 satellite data from the years 2007­2019 was an­
alyzed using algorithms that were developed and implemented in MATLAB [19]. The
vast amounts of calculations required for the big data analysis were carried out using a
High Performance Computing (HPC) system. The objective of the study is to research
scintillations in GPS signals that result from ionospheric irregularities, using the largest
available data set which allows the production of global maps and plots in unprecedented
resolution. The morphology and climatology is studied as global occurrence maps of the
scintillations are made, along with other plots showing their dependence on local time of
day, seasons, and solar activity.
This first chapter gives the reader an introduction to the GNSS Radio Occultation method
and the COSMIC­1 mission along with its data. The second chapter explores the theories
behind the formation of ionospheric irregularities and the signal propagation through them.
The third chapter describes the advantages and limitations of the methods used to detect
and quantify scintillations in the COSMIC­1 data, along with describing the developed
data cleaning criteria to reduce the impact of failed measurements in the statistics. In
the fourth chapter the results of the analysis are presented and discussed, where some
important observations are made that have not been reported in previous studies before.
Furthermore, some future studies are proposed. Finally, in the fifth chapter the work and
the most significant observations are summarized.
1.1
GNSS Radio Occultation
Global Navigation Satellite System Radio Occultation (GNSS­RO) is a satellite remote
sensing technique that records measurements using two satellites, a transmitting one
and a receiving one. It exploits the signals transmitted by navigation satellites which orbit
the planet at a high altitude (typically about 20.000 km). A transmitted signal is received
by another satellite in Low­Earth Orbit (LEO), as it either rises above or sets behind the
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
1
==PAGE:10==
Earth, as seen from the GNSS satellite. In that sense, the Earth and its atmosphere
occults the satellites line of sight, hence the name Radio Occultation.
Figure 1.1: Simple illustration of the GNSS­RO geometry. As the LEO satellite sets behind
or rises above the Earth, a vertical profile is recorded from the signal of the GNSS satellite.
Credit: UCAR [5].
On its way from the transmitting satellite to the receiving one, the signal travels through the
ionosphere and the neutral atmosphere. From the recorded data, information about their
physical properties can be deduced. Figure 1.1 illustrates the geometry of the technique.
In the case of a setting occultation, the signal travels through more atmosphere with time,
but in the case of a rising occultation, the signal travels through less atmosphere with
time. In either case, a vertical profile of measurements is obtained. The technique is very
powerful and can be used to study the ionosphere as well as the atmosphere, where it is
largely used to retrieve atmospheric parameters for improved weather forecasting. One
obvious advantage of RO is the vast spatial coverage it can provide, compared to other
common methods f.ex. deploying a weather balloon to retrieve atmospheric parameters
or using stationary ionosondes for ionospheric measurements.
In this thesis we use the most advanced and extensive RO data set to date, recorded by
the COSMIC­1 satellite constellation. It consisted of six receiving satellites in LEO and
they exploited the signals transmitted by the GPS constellation, a network of 32 navigation
satellites. The multiple transmitting and receiving satellites allowed for a great spatial
coverage on a global scale. Figure 1.2 demonstrates the global coverage of the RO
technique obtained with COSMIC­1. The mission lasted from 2006­2020, and based on its
success, a follow­up mission named COSMIC­2 was launched in 2019 and is operational
to date.
2
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.2: Comparison of the spatial coverage obtained with RO and weather balloons.
Green dots mark the measurements from six COSMIC­1 satellites obtained over one day.
The red dots mark the location of weather balloon launch sites, where each site deploys
a balloon every 12 hours at 00:00 and 12:00 UTC time. Credit: UCAR [5].
1.1.1
History of GNSS­RO
Radio occultation was first developed in the 1960’s with the purpose of probing atmo­
spheres of other planetary bodies in our Solar system. In 1965, the first ever RO mea­
surement was made when the Mariner 4 spacecraft flew by the planet Mars. As it passed
behind the planet as seen from Earth, its transmitted signals traveled through the thin Mar­
tian atmosphere and were recorded by receivers on Earth, making it the first RO measure­
ment in history. Moments later, the spacecraft appeared from the other side of Mars, and
the first rising occultation was recorded [10]. RO measurements were later conducted for
other planets in our solar systems, such as Venus, Jupiter, and Saturn, along with some
of their moons, but its use for Earth observation wasn’t realized until the 1980’s. It was
the coming of the GPS constellation that made the idea practical by providing many signal
sources in orbit around Earth. In 1995 the GPS Meteorological Experiment (GPS/MET)
was launched, and successfully demonstrated the potential of using RO to observe Earth’s
atmosphere. Since then, several satellite missions have made RO measurements, such
as CHAMP, GRACE, and MetOp, but the COSMIC­1 mission, launched in 2006, was the
first dedicated constellation for demonstrating the operational use of GNSS­RO data in
weather forecasting.
1.2
COSMIC­1
The first Constellation Observing System for Meteorology, Ionosphere, and Climate (COSMIC­
1) is a joint U.S.­Taiwanese project that was launched in April 2006. It consisted of 6 LEO
satellites that received signals transmitted from the GPS network, a total of 32 navigation
satellites. The constellation was operated from April 2006 until its official decommission
on May 1st 2020, and in its earlier years it provided about 2000 RO measurements each
day. The COSMIC­1 RO profiles go from near Earth’s surface and to the height of the
COSMIC­1 satellites at 800 kilometers above Earth. Furthermore, the satellites were
distributed equally in local time around the Earth, so a uniform sampling coverage was
acquired. However, as the LEO satellites and sensors gradually malfunctioned, the sam­
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
3
==PAGE:12==
pling decreased, and uniform sampling was not quite obtained after 2016 [35]. For the
years 2019­2020, only one COSMIC­1 satellite was remaining, so the acquired data is
significantly sparser in those years. Figure 1.3 shows how the COSMIC­1 data coverage
evolved with the years.
Figure 1.3: Time evolution of the COSMIC­1 data coverage in local time (top) and latitude
(bottom), showing how the constellation provided full coverage until the later years, as
satellites and sensors gradually failed.
1.2.1
COSMIC­1 Data
The COSMIC­1 data products are managed by the University Corporation for Atmospheric
Research (UCAR) and are available online on their website [26]. The available data is
extensive and includes information about the satellite attitude and orbit (level 1a), excess
phase profiles for the atmosphere and ionosphere along with other auxiliary data (level
1b), and derived products such as atmospheric temperature, pressure, and electron den­
sity profiles (level 2).
Out of the available data from April 2006 to April 2020, only data covering full years is
used in this thesis i.e. from and including years 2007­2019. Furthermore, the data used
is the level 1b atmospheric excess phase (atmPhs), which amongst other contains global
data that describes the measurement such as occultation start and stop time, and profile
data that are a function of a time step, such as LEO and GPS satellite coordinates, and
the measured signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) on the L1 channel modulated by C/A code (data
variable termed caL1Snr). This data is sampled at 50 Hz, but it extends only up to about
130 km. This is good for probing the ionospheric E­layer at high temporal resolution,
4
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:13==
but it is the ionospheric excess phase (ionPhs) data that reaches heights up to 800 km,
although that data is only sampled at 1 Hz. The GPS satellites transmit signals at two
frequencies, L1 at 1.57542 GHz and L2 at 1.2276 GHz, but here only the L1 SNR is used
because L2 data is less reliable due to weaker SNR amplitudes [29].
The profile data is stored as data arrays in a NetCDF format [30], where one NetCDF file
containing multiple data arrays exists for each measurement. Each element in an array
corresponds to a given time step of the measurement (sampled at 50 Hz). The SNR time
profiles were converted to height profiles and their geographic coordinates were obtained
by adapting routines1 found in the FORTRAN programmed Radio Occultation Process­
ing Package (ROPP) Utilites module [28], a software package that is meant to aid users
in processing of RO data. The ROPP is maintained by the Radio Occultation Meteorol­
ogy Satellite Application Facility (ROM SAF), an international consortium responsible for
processing of RO data from various missions, and whose leading member is the Dan­
ish Meteorological Institute (DMI) [27]. Figure 1.4 shows a typical SNR profile, both as
a function of time as given in the data, and as a function of height as derived. We ob­
serve that the profiles seem reversed. That is because this was a setting occultation, so
measurements at earlier times correspond to greater heights.
Figure 1.4:
Typical caL1Snr profile shown as a function of time and height.
The
filestamp C001.2009.013.01.34.G02 shows that it was COSMIC Flight Module 1 (C001)
that recorded a GPS PRN 2 (G02) signal, at year 2009, day 13, at time 01:34. Latitude
and longitude of the profile are shown (referred to the occultation point, defined here at 30
km tangent height), along with the maximum S4 index of the profile, which is a measure
of scintillations and is described in section 3.1.
1eci2ecf_nosofa.f90 for transforming Earth­centered inertial (ECI) satellite coordinates, as given in the
COSMIC­1 data, to Earth­centered Earth­fixed (ECEF). Then tangent_point.f90, occ_point.f90, and im­
pact_parameter.f90 were adapted for deriving latitude, longitude, and height from the ECEF coordinates.
Vector subroutines from vectors.f90 were also used.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
5
==PAGE:14==
During a RO measurement, the vertical scanning of the atmosphere is about 2 km/s [35],
so the spatial resolution of the data sampled at 50 Hz is about 40 meters in the vertical
direction. Height is associated with each timestep of a RO measurement as was demon­
strated in figure 1.4. Commonly, as well as in this thesis, the height, latitude, and longitude
of each time­step in a RO measurement are geo­referenced to the tangent point, which is
the point along the signal path that is closest to Earth’s surface (denoted by the WGS­84
ellipsoid). In this thesis, the height is calculated as the straight­line­tangent height, mean­
ing the point closest to the Earth is on a straight line from the LEO satellite to the GPS
satellite, and atmospheric bending of the signal path is not taken into account. This is
usually very accurate for tangent heights above 30 km, but below that height where the
neutral atmosphere is thicker, atmospheric bending has more effects. Despite the great
vertical resolution, the horizontal resolution is much worse and can be over 2000 km at
tangent heights of 30 km [35], as will be explained in section 3.4.
1.3
Previous Studies
A number of studies have been conducted that research ionospheric scintillations with the
use of radio occultation, and have been made with data from different satellites such as
CHAMP, GRACE, MetOp, and COSMIC­1. Here, knowledge from previous studies about
irregularities in the sporadic­E layer, sometimes referred to as Es, and the F­layer are
summarized2.
An early study from 2005 that used a few months of data from the CHAMP satellite pro­
vided new information about the Es morphology [34]. It was found that Es varies with
seasons and is strongly enhanced during the summer at mid­latitudes, and is now there­
fore commonly referred to as a summer phenomenon. Furthermore, the Es was mostly
found at altitudes of around 90­120 km. Also, during summer, a semi­diurnal variation was
observed with peak Es occurrence in the morning around 10:00 and in the evening around
20:00, but they decrease in height with local time. Many other studies using data from
different satellites have also reached the same conclusions [35], [4], [9]. Furthermore,
previous studies have discovered features in spatial distribution such as the occurrence
is greatest at mid­latitudes, and the longitudinal Es distribution follows the structure of the
magnetic equator but with almost no Es occurrence at the magnetic equator itself, during
all seasons. Also, an occurrence depression has been observed over the South­Africa
region [9] [3] [20]. These were first observed in the 2008 paper by Arras et. al. [4] that
used a multi­satellite data set from CHAMP, GRACE, and COSMIC­1. Using such large
amount of data that spanned a whole year enabled the derivation of global maps of higher
spatial resolution than previously possible. That provided good observations of the global
Es distribution and the influence of Earth’s magnetic field became visible for the first time.
Today, these observed Es dependencies on seasons and local time along with the spatial
distribution are generally acknowledged, as they have been confirmed by many studies.
The Es dependence on solar activity has also been investigated in a number of papers,
both using radio occultation data and stationary ionosonde measurements. In a study on
Es at low magnetic latitudes 5° to 15° that used COSMIC­1 data from years 2007­2017
[20], no obvious dependence on solar activity was found. In that paper, they stated it was
in agreement with previous results, and as an example pointed out a research that used
ionosonde data to observe Es, where in the data from a station situated in Rome (41.8°
N, 12.5° E) for years 1976­2007, no significant dependence on solar activity was found
[25]. Regardless, another study [18] also using 33 years of ionosonde data from Rome but
implementing more refined analysis stated from their observations that the daytime Es was
2The nature of scintillations, Es, and F­layer irregularities are further described in Theory, chapter 2.
6
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:15==
positively correlated with solar activity. However, yet another study using global network
of ionosonde data [36] concluded that the yearly occurrence of the Es is slightly positively
correlated with solar activity in the daytime and negatively correlated at night. Niu et. al.
[21] studied Es intensity at middle and low latitudes using COSMIC­1 data from years
2007­2012. They stated, that it was difficult to find a specific pattern between Es intensity
and solar activity due to the complex distribution and possible error of the data, but both
positive and negative correlations were found between Es intensity and solar activity,
where this correlation also showed complex magnetic latitude dependency. However,
Wu et. al. [35] analysed data from the years 2008­2020 from the MetOp satellites that
sample in local times 08­11 and 20­23, similar to the times of the Es occurrence peaks
in the morning and evening, and found anti­correlation with solar activity at mid­latitudes
for the morning Es. Any correlation with solar activity of the evening Es at mid­latitudes
was not as clear. To summarize, positive, negative, and no correlation of Es with solar
activity have all been reported in different studies, many of which use different estimators
to measure Es and analyse at different locations and times. From the existing literature,
it seems that the Es dependence on solar activity is complex, and this issue is still under
debate.
Studies have also been conducted that focus on F­layer scintillations. Lung­Chih Tsai
et. al. [29] studied F­layer scintillations using COSMIC­1 1 Hz data from years 2006­
2014, that reaches higher tangent heights of up to 800 km, and analysed chosen regions
of high scintillation occurrence. Generally, scintillations at the equator and low latitudes
are not observed during the day but start to appear in the evening and extend through the
night, with peak occurrence around 23 local time. Furthermore, out of the three equatorial
regions analysed, located over Central Pacific, South­America, and Africa, correlation with
solar activity was observed for the the Central Pacific and Africa region, but not for the
South­America region. For mid­latitude regions over Europe and Japan sea, scintillations
were uniformly distributed in local time and did not show any correlation with solar activity.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
7
==PAGE:16==
8
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:17==
2
Theory
This chapter gives the reader an introduction to the ionosphere and the nature of the ir­
regularities within it, that are the subject of this study. First, a basic description of the
ionosphere is provided and its most significant layers are distinguished. Then, irregu­
larities within the different ionospheric layers are described and some popular theories
of their formation are mentioned. Finally, the effects on signal propagation through the
ionosphere and its irregularities are discussed.
2.1
Ionospheric Irregularities
The ionosphere is a plasma envelope around the Earth that ranges from roughly 90 ­
1000 km in height, although its extent is not strictly defined. It is an extremely complex
system that varies significantly with height, latitude and longitude, local time, seasons,
and solar­ and geomagnetic activity. However, in spite of the spatial and temporal varia­
tions, the ionosphere is generally categorized into different layers, depending on electron
density. The different amount of electron density in the layers is a result of the interaction
of cosmic­ and solar radiation with the neutral atmosphere, and the different recombina­
tion rates found at the different heights. The ionosphere permanently exists as collisions
between neutral particles and newly ionized ions are too infrequent for a rapid recom­
bination to occur. The two major layers of the ionosphere are the E­layer and F­layer.
The E­layer is found at heights from roughly 90­150 km, and is formed mostly as soft x­
rays of wavelengths 1­10 nm and ultra­violet radiation of 100­150 nm from the sun ionize
molecular oxygen. The F­layer is at heights above 150 km and is formed mostly due to
extreme UV radiation of 10­100 nm that ionizes atomic oxygen, the most dominant atmo­
spheric constituent at those heights [7]. Figure 2.1 shows a simple illustration of the major
ionospheric layers, where electron densities can reach up to 105/cm3 in the E­layer and
106/cm3 in the F­layer.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 2.1: Simple illustration of day and night vertical electron density profiles at mid­
latitude, whose peaks determine the major ionospheric layers. From [7].
However, the ionosphere is not completely uniform, and structures of irregularities in elec­
tron densities are found within the sphere.
2.1.1
Sporadic­E
The sporadic­E layer is a term for irregularities found in the E­layer, usually at heights
about 90­120 km. The irregularities are sometimes referred to as Es clouds, or simply
Es. Despite numerous studies there is still some uncertainty about the structure of the
sporadic­E layer, but most commonly the layer is considered to be composed of separate
Es clouds that are horizontally elongated structures of vertical thickness up to a few km
with much greater electron density than their surroundings [38]. The occurrence of these
structures are dependent on many factors, such as latitude and longitude, local time,
seasons, and likely solar activity.
Several theories exist on the formation of the Es, such as plasma instability [13], ion con­
vergence caused by neutral wind shear [9], and particle precipitation [35]. However, none
of these different processes can describe the formation of Es everywhere on the globe,
but rather only apply to Es formed in a certain region. For example, particle precipitation
is said likely to be one of the processes responsible for polar scintillations [35]. However,
the most established process is the Wind Shear Theory, which does a good job of de­
scribing Es that forms at mid­latitudes, but does not provide a good description of Es at
equatorial or high latitudes. Clearly, Es irregularities generated by these different physi­
cal processes might be expected to have different properties and vary differently in space
and time.
10
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:19==
2.1.2
Wind Shear Theory
The classical Wind Shear Theory suggests that the Es forms when plasma is compressed
into horizontally extended but vertically thin layers, as it moves vertically due to neutral
wind shear. The vertical ion velocity wi induced by the neutral wind is given by [9]:
wi = r cos I
1 + r2 V + cos I sin I
1 + r2
U
(2.1)
where I is the magnetic inclination angle, defined positive when pointing downward, and
r = νi/ωi is the ratio of the ion­neutral collision frequency and the ion gyrofrequency. Fur­
thermore, V is the zonal component (positive eastward) and U is the meridional compo­
nent (positive northward) of the neutral wind. We note from the equation that for a vertical
ion velocity to be induced, the magnetic dip angle has to fulfill the criterion I ̸= 90°, and
at mid­latitude I = 45° the vertical ion velocity can be strong, where for a given neutral
wind profile this angle results in a maximum of the meridional term in the equation. How­
ever, as also seen from the equation, the meridional and zonal winds affect ion motion
as weighted by the ratio r. It is generally believed that the zonal wind is more efficient in
causing ion motions at altitudes below about 130 km, as there the ratio r is greater than
one [34].
A favorable wind profile for Es layer formation in the Northern Hemisphere will have a
negative zonal wind shear, that is, a westward wind above and an eastward wind below
the Es layer, but for the meridional wind a positive shear is required, that is, northward
wind above that moves the ions down along the magnetic field lines, and southern wind
below that moves the ions up along the magnetic field lines. Furthermore, the wind profile
required for convergence of the plasma needs to accelerate the ions toward the middle
of the Es, that is, dwi/dz < 0 has to apply within the wind shear zone. This leads to the
condition rdV /dz + sin IdU/dz < 0 that has to be fulfilled. It has been found that the Es
occurrence at mid­latitudes 30° to 60° correlates well with the neutral wind shear estimated
from the Horizontal Wind Model (HWM07), but at low latitudes and over the equator the
correlation is not that large [9].
The wind shear mechanism is not very effective for the molecular oxygen ions which make
up the greater part of the total ion content of the E­layer, because these have a lifetime
less than the timescale required for the neutral wind to form the Es layer, which typically is
from about several minutes to a few hours [9]. Instead, the process is effective for atomic
metal ions, mainly Fe+ and Mg+, that are produced as a by­product of meteor entry [1].
These are thought to have very long lifetimes in the E­region because the recombination
reaction for the atomic ions, for example:
Fe+ + e →Fe + hν
is very slow compared to the dissociative recombination of molecular oxygen ions [1].
From in­situ measurements using a sounding rocket, these metallic ions have been found
to be concentrated in the height range 85­115 km, similar to the Es layer height range,
and with a maximum concentration of about 3­5·104 cm−3 [17]. Furthermore, the latitudinal
distribution of the Fe+ column abundance shows hemispheric asymmetry in middle to high
latitudes, with a maximum in the summer and a minimum in the winter [9], which could
explain the higher Es occurrence during summer.
Although this simple model seems to describe Es at mid­latitudes well, it is not a flaw­
less description as it does not consider potential influences from other variables, such as
electric fields and the eastward component of the geomagnetic field [34].
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
11
==PAGE:20==
2.1.3
F­layer Irregularities
At greater altitudes than the E­layer, different irregularity structures are found that result
from different processes in the F­layer. Two of the major forms of F­layer ionospheric
irregularities are termed spread­F and Equatorial Plasma Bubbles (EPB) [35].
Spread­F is a historic name where the F refers to the ionospheric F­layer and spread
refers to spreading in the reflected signal from a ground­based ionosonde, which is a sign
of electron density irregularities. The spreading occurs as the signal from the ionosonde
is reflected back from a range of different heights in the ionosphere, resulting in a received
echo that is diffused, instead of a well defined echo in the case of uniform electron density
[22]. This observed type of spreading was historically the earliest indication of plasma
density irregularities in the F­layer [14], [37]. The occurrence of spread­F irregularities is
more concentrated at equatorial and polar latitudes than at mid­latitudes. Furthermore,
spread­F is mostly an evening and night­time phenomenon, where day­time occurrences
are more rare [22].
Equatorial plasma bubbles are a type of strong ionospheric irregularities that develop after
sunset [16], [24]. It happens as the solar radiation goes away and higher recombination
rates in the lower ionosphere cause a steep vertical electron density gradient to develop
from the bottom side of the F­layer. This situation can be described with Rayleight­Taylor
instability, in which a heavier fluid is situated above a lighter fluid. Such density con­
trast leads to mixing of the two layers by forming of bubbles. Figure 2.2 shows a simple
schematic of the situation, where in the ionospheric case the lighter fluid is the lower
density plasma. Initial small oscillations at the boundary grow in place and push the
lighter medium upward. This process results in irregularities of electron density deple­
tions, whose structures can vary from meters to kilometers. Furthermore, these structures
are mostly found in the equatorial region, hence the name equatorial plasma bubbles [24].
Figure 2.2: Simple illustration showing the formation of equatorial plasma bubbles due to
Rayleigh­Taylor instability. Adapted from [16].
12
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:21==
However, a lot of other processes exist that are contributing to ionospheric irregularities.
For example, natural phenomena such as seismic waves from large earthquakes (M > 7),
volcanic eruptions, thunderstorms, and tsunamis can be responsible for some ionospheric
disturbances that are induced by the pressure waves produced by these events, where
the effects are noticed specifically at higher altitudes (250–350 km) [24].
2.2
Signal Propagation
When electromagnetic signals propagate through the atmosphere and the ionosphere
they are affected by the refractive index, which determines how much a signal path is
bent as it enters a different medium. As the refractive index of air is very close to one,
the difference between the index in the air and vacuum is of more interest, that is, n −1.
Because that quantity is very small, the refractivity N = (n−1)·106 is defined for practical
purposes and is conventionally used. It is related to geophysical quantities by:
N = (n −1) · 106 = 77.6P
T + 3.73 · 105 PW
T 2 −4.03 · 107 ne
f2
(2.2)
In this equation, P is the total pressure and PW is the water vapor partial pressure, both
in hectopascals. The temperature T is in Kelvin, the electron density ne is in m−3, and
the signal frequency f is in hertz [34].
Generally, when the signal is passing through the ionosphere, at tangent heights greater
than about 60 km, the contribution from the atmosphere is small and the first two terms on
the right hand side of equation 2.2 can be neglected. Then, measurements of the refrac­
tive index directly correspond to the ionospheric electron density [12]. Furthermore, when
using the measurements to retrieve atmospheric parameters, the frequency dependent
effects of the ionosphere can be corrected for by recording two signals (L1 and L2) of two
different frequencies, as they get refracted slightly differently.
Signal propagation gets affected in a number of ways by the refractivity. Because the
refraction causes a bending of the signal path, the signal can even be recorded when
the LEO receiver is a bit behind the Earth. However, vertical gradients in the refractivity
cause the transmitted signal to focus or defocus, which increases or reduces signal power
at the receiver antenna. At tangent heights lower than about 30 km, the signal gets more
defocused with increasing pressure as the vertical refractivity gradient increases, which
causes the received signal power to gradually decrease with lowering altitudes [34]. Fur­
thermore, when a signal travels through a type of electron density irregularity it can be
subjected to scintillations, that is, rapid fluctuations that can happen both in amplitude
and/or phase. Scintillations can cause error in atmospheric parameter retrieval or even
prevent it. Furthermore, much scintillations can cause a receiver to lose the tracking of
the signal altogether, termed loss of lock. Examples of scintillations in the COSMIC­1
data are found in chapter 3.
Following the theory of optics, significant signal refraction only occurs for irregularities
about the size or larger than the cross­section of the first Fresnel zone [8]. When the
irregularity sizes are comparable or smaller than the first Fresnel zone, diffraction effects
and scattering of the signal split the primary ray into many different rays, resulting in am­
plitude and phase scintillations at GPS frequencies [29]. The first Fresnel zone is defined
as an ellipsoid about the line­of­sight between a transmitting antenna and a receiving an­
tenna. For all points on the ellipsoid, the path from the transmitting antenna, to any point
on the ellipsoid, and to the receiving antenna, has a length that is half a wavelength longer
than the line­of­sight distance between the antennas [8].
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
13
==PAGE:22==
The size of the first Fresnel zone can be described mathematically by [8]:
DF =
√
λL
(2.3)
where λ is the wavelength of the transmitted signal and L is the distance between the
irregularity and the LEO receiver. For COSMIC­1 RO measurements with the L1­band
signal at E­layer tangent heights, the size of the Fresnel zone is typically about 1 km [38].
In the F­layer at altitudes 150­500 km, the size can be about 700 meters [29]. Because the
ionospheric irregularities are associated with a wide range of scales and structures, the
induced scintillations have a large impact on both satellite­satellite and ground­satellite
links [35].
However, when the signal propagates through an Es cloud, a type of U­shape structure is
observed in the COSMIC­measured amplitude. Along with being observed, the U­shape
has also been demonstrated by modelling the signal propagation through the E­layer ir­
regularities. In their 2010 paper [38], Zeng and Sokolovskiy successfully modelled the
Es effects on signal propagation based on a simple Es model of horizontally elongated
clouds with a vertical electron density gradient increasing towards the middle. Further­
more, the clouds could be tilted by an angle w.r.t. the local horizon. In their modelling,
the U­shape arose due to the refraction the signal underwent when traveling through the
aligned Es. This occurs as the signal bends in the direction of the refractivity gradients,
as further demonstrated in figure 2.3. Therefore, an incoming signal gets defocused in
the central part of the Es cloud but focused near the edges as it meets with the direct
rays. As a result, scintillations above and below the Es cloud arise in the measurement
due to the interference of direct and refracted radio waves, termed as multipath interfer­
ence, but attenuation of the signal occurs within the Es due to defocusing. As they further
showed, the disturbance a signal is subjected to is dependent on the angle it penetrates
the Es cloud, as maximum disturbance arises when the Es is parallel to the signal path,
and decreases quickly the more mis­aligned an Es is [35], [38]. At low tangent heights
however, where the signal penetrates the ionosphere far away from the tangent point, it is
only sensitive to disturbances from Es that are tilted w.r.t. their local horizon, because at
that location far from the tangent point, they are the ones parallel to the signal path. The
geometry of the multipath situation is shown in figure 2.4, but examples of the U­shape
structures observed in the COSMIC­1 amplitude are further demonstrated in section 3.2.
14
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.3: Simple illustration of an Es cloud in the background electron density, showing
the electron density gradients and the resulting refractivity gradients as the refractivity
is negatively dependent on the electron density, as eq. 2.2 shows. The bending of the
signal path happens in the direction of the increasing refractivity, as demonstrated for a
signal propagating from left to right. For the middle ray, no bending occurs as there are
no gradients across its path. Illustration created with BioRender.com.
Figure 2.4: Simple illustration of the multipath effect that happens when a signal travels
through an aligned Es cloud. In this example, the Es cloud is located at some distance
away from the tangent point, but results in multipath interference as it is tilted w.r.t. its
local horizon. Illustration created with BioRender.com.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:25==
3
Methods
A number of methods exist that measure ionospheric scintillations in radio signals. In this
study, two different methods that each detect and measure scintillations were used for the
analysis of the COSMIC­1 profiles. One method is a well established approach, based on
the S4 index, and does a good job quantifying the disturbances that a signal undergoes
as it travels through the ionosphere. The other method, based on an algorithm specifi­
cally designed to detect the well­known U­shape structures that arise in the data due to
irregularities in the sporadic­E layer, allows one to separate Es disturbances from the F­
layer disturbances. Furthermore, the profiles were only analyzed above 30 km tangent
height to avoid effects from the neutral atmosphere, which become more significant as
the atmosphere gets thicker.
In this chapter, description of the S4 index and the detection algorithm are first provided,
and their statistics are compared. Then, methods that were incorporated in cleaning the
data from bad measurements and detections are presented. Finally, some limitations to
the RO measurement technique and the detection algorithm are discussed.
3.1
Amplitude Scintillation Index
The amplitude scintillation index, S4, is the most commonly used estimator of ionospheric
scintillations in radio signals. The index is defined as the standard deviation of the re­
ceived signal intensity divided by the mean signal intensity over a given time interval,
mathematically described by:
S4 =
√
⟨I2⟩−⟨I⟩2
⟨I⟩2
(3.1)
where the intensity, I = A2, is the amplitude of the SNR squared. In our calculations, ⟨I⟩
denotes the 1­second running mean, and the S4 index is thus defined as 1­second scintil­
lations. For convenience, scintillation strength may be classified into three categories.
S4 < 0.3 denotes weak scintillations, where GPS signals are unlikely to be affected,
0.3 ≤S4 ≤0.6 denotes moderate scintillations, and S4 > 0.6 denotes strong scintilla­
tions, [31]. Measurements with scintillations belonging in the last category can be greatly
affected, resulting in loss of lock of the signal or errors in atmospheric parameter retrieval.
Figure 3.1 shows examples of two profiles, where one of them suffers strong scintillations,
and how their corresponding S4 profiles quantify the scintillations.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.1: Examples of two SNR profiles with weak (left) and strong (right) scintillations,
along with their S4 profiles that quantify the amplitude scintillations.
As the S4 varies over a profile, to produce maps showing the S4 index it is necessary to
either specify the percentage of profiles where a certain threshold value is exceeded, or to
specify a condition that decides what S4 value to extract. In this study, two different map
types based on the S4 index are produced. S4 occurrence rate maps were defined as the
percentage of measurements in each resolution bin where the maximum S4 value in a
profile (denoted here as ˆS4) exceeds 0.3, i.e. when ˆS4 > 0.3. Furthermore, S4 amplitude
maps were defined by the condition of extracting the ˆS4 value of each profile, and map
values are the average of ˆS4 in each resolution bin.
At the tangent heights the 50 Hz COSMIC­1 data covers, i.e. below 130 km, the signal
travels through both the F­layer (150­800 km) and the E­layer (90­150 km) of the iono­
sphere, and the scintillations quantified by the S4 index can not distinguish between those
layers as the origin of irregularities along the signal path is not known. However, with the
use of another method it is possible to extract scintillations that most likely originate in the
sporadic­E layer.
3.2
Sporadic­E Detection
The typical signature of a sporadic­E presented in the COSMIC data is well known, as
it takes a U­shape form in the SNR. Figure 3.2 shows examples of how these U­shape
structures manifest in the COSMIC SNR profiles.
As figure 3.2 demonstrates, U­shape structures in the data can be observed at all tangent
heights, although they are most commonly found at E­layer heights of around 100 km.
However, some Es characteristics can be inferred from the tangent heights. Observing
signatures of Es in the data at a low tangent height means the Es cloud is far away from
the tangent point, since at tangent heights lower than the E­layer the signal traverses the
E­layer twice, before and after reaching the tangent point. Furthermore, to produce any
significant scintillation effect, it needs to be aligned with the signal path, inferring that Es
clouds detected at low tangent heights are tilted with respect to the local horizon. This
tilt required is typically a few degrees, where f.ex. at tangent height 75 km the Es cloud
would need to be tilted by about 5° to be aligned with the signal propagation direction,
18
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:27==
and at 50 km tangent height the tilt would need to be about 7°. This can be determined
from simple geometrical considerations. So, observing most of the Es at tangent heights
around 100 km indicates that Es clouds are usually horizontal w.r.t. the local horizon.
Figure 3.2: Examples of sporadic­E scintillations in the COSMIC­1 data, appearing as a
U­shape structure in the SNR.
Various methods have been used to study the ionospheric E­layer using COSMIC data
([3], [6], [9], [11], [20]). Many of them incorporate the S4 index to some degree as well as
phase scintillations. However, the main method used for statistical analysis in this study
is the U­shape algorithm developed by Zeng and Sokolovskiy in their 2010 paper [38].
They also modelled how a GPS signal propagates through a region of increased electron
density in the ionosphere as described in section 2.2, resulting in the typically observed
U­shape structures.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
19
==PAGE:28==
The objective of the algorithm is to detect such U­shapes in the COSMIC SNR profiles.
The algorithm evaluates the amplitude A of the 50 Hz L1 C/A signal. It first analyses how
deep the U­shape is in the SNR height profile, by comparing a 1 km running mean in the
SNR amplitude (A1km) and a 20 km running mean (A20km) that smooth the data by differ­
ent amounts and denote small scale and large scale variations in the SNR, respectively.
Furthermore, the U­shape needs to be relatively flat in the bottom, so the algorithm com­
pares the fluctuations in the bottom of the U­shape with the fluctuations on each side of
the U­shape. The algorithm makes a detection if the following criteria are met:
1. A1km < 0.6 · A20km
• In this case, the interval (h1, h2) is defined where A1km < 0.95 · A20km and is
associated with the thickness of the cloud.
2. The standard deviation of the amplitude A calculated in 1 km interval at the center
of (h1, h2) (or over the whole interval (h1, h2) if h2 ­ h1 < 1 km) is smaller than the
standard deviation of A at both sides of the U­shape structure, that is in the intervals
(h1, h1 −1 km) and (h2, h2 + 1 km), and at least three times smaller than any one of
them.
Figure 3.3 demonstrates how the U­shape algorithm detects Es in the COSMIC­1 data.
When the small­scale mean A1km goes below 60% of the large­scale mean i.e. when
A1km < 0.6·A20km, the U­shape is defined as deep enough to be due to Es. The algorithm
then further proceeds in comparing the standard deviation of the intervals mentioned in
criterion 2 above, to estimate the flatness in the bottom of the U­shape. Changing the pa­
rameters of the algorithm of course affects the total number of detections made. However,
changing the parameters within reasonable limits based on modelled U­shape structures
has been tested and does not significantly affect the distributions in latitude, local time,
and height, but the distribution of thickness is more affected [38], further explained in sec­
tion 3.4. Figure 3.4 shows an example of the typical Es distributions obtained with the
algorithm, where the latitude, local time, height, and thickness are consistent with well
known Es characteristics from previous studies.
20
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:29==
Figure 3.3: Examples of how the U­shape algorithm detects Es in the COSMIC­1 profiles.
This is shown for profiles of single detection (top and bottom) and two detections (middle).
The estimated heights and thicknesses of the detections are labelled above each profile,
in units of km.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.4: Es detection statistics for February 2009 based on the U­shape algorithm
implemented in this study.
Using the U­shape algorithm to detect Es carries some advantages, such as with each
detection the associated height and thickness are derived, as well as the latitude, longi­
tude, and local time of the measurement that are associated with the detected Es. Other
methods do not have an estimation for the Es thickness, and the heights are not associ­
ated with a definite detection, but rather the scintillations can be evaluated at a specific
height.
Furthermore, the U­shape algorithm is more selective than other methods, that is, detec­
tions are only made on the U­shape scintillations that most likely originate in the sporadic­
E layer, and do not include more random scintillations from the F­layer and other E­layer
scintillations. In that way, although the signal travels through all ionospheric layers, the
algorithm does a good job of separating the sporadic­E layer scintillations from the F­layer
scintillations. This is opposed to the S4 index that detects Es but also F­layer scintillations,
hence estimates higher scintillation occurrence compared to the U­shape algorithm. How­
ever, from the plots and maps produced in this study, same patterns or phenomena are
usually observed for both these methods. The main difference is the occurrence rate
magnitude, where higher occurrence percentages are observed with the S4 index com­
pared to the U­shape algorithm, but this indicates that both methods are reasonable for
Es climate research. This has also been noted in previous studies discussing more Es
detection methods [29]. In this study, scintillations measured with the U­shape algorithm
are sometimes referred to as Es scintillations, and those measured with the S4 index
are referred to as S4 scintillations. Es and S4 occurrence are also used for occurrences
measured with the different estimators.
22
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:31==
To see the typical difference in occurrence percentages, figure 3.5 shows the statistics of
detected Es and S4 in all the COSMIC­1 RO measurements from years 2007­2019. Every
profile that is detected with the U­shape algorithm has enough scintillations to be counted
in the S4 statistics, so it never happens that only Es is detected in a profile. We see the
selectiveness of the U­shape algorithm, as S4 occurrence is detected in about 35% of the
profiles, but Es only in about 8% of the profiles. Furthermore, in about 65% of the profiles
neither the estimator makes a detection, which is the case for a quality profile of low or
no scintillations.
Figure 3.5: Detection statistics for all the COSMIC­1 L1 SNR data from years 2007­2019.
Columns show the percentage of the total recorded profiles that had Es detected with the
U­shape algorithm or scintillations detected with S4, only detected with one estimator Es
or S4, and profiles detected with both or neither estimator.
3.3
COSMIC­1 Data Cleaning
Despite being considered high­quality data, the COSMIC­1 data is not perfect. In this the­
sis, using the COSMIC­1 data from 2007­2019, 7.306.185 profiles were analyzed. How­
ever, applying data cleaning criteria, 715.859 of the profiles were excluded, that is 9.8%.
Consequently, the resulting statistics in the study are based off of 6.590.326 profiles taken
over 13 years. Here, we review some common types of profiles that are unreliable to in­
clude in the statistics, and describe the data cleaning criteria that are applied to exclude
those profiles.
Some of the more common low­quality measurements included profiles with very low
SNR (often around 10­20 V/V) and profiles that were only recorded at tangent heights
lower than 30 km. The low­height profiles can even record a signal at negative straight­
line­tangent heights, as the signal gets refracted and bends when it travels through the
atmosphere. However, at altitudes above 30 km the bending is small and the straight­
line­tangent height is an accurate representation. Figure 3.6 shows an example of typical
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
23
==PAGE:32==
types of low­quality profiles. These profiles are not reliable for analysis of the ionosphere
and including them would lead to misrepresented scintillation statistics.
(a) Low SNR profile.
(b) Low tangent height profile.
Figure 3.6: Examples of two common types of profiles that are unreliable for analysis.
Furthermore, another type of common profiles are ones that have suffered a loss of lock
on the GPS signal. The L1 signal at heights above 10 km is tracked in a phase­locked
loop (PLL) mode, which can fail in the presence of strong ionospheric scintillations [2].
However, before losing the lock these profiles can either be valid profiles with high SNR
or they can be low SNR profiles that then experience loss of lock due to less amount of
scintillations. Figure 3.7 shows an example of both valid and low SNR loss of lock profiles.
To get the right portrayal of the scintillation statistics, the valid loss of lock profiles should
be included, as the measurement has high SNR and the scintillations causing the loss
of lock should be included in the statistics, but the low SNR loss of lock profiles are less
reliable measurements and should be excluded. However, loss of lock can also happen
not due to scintillations but due to some other reasons, f.ex. one reason could be if
the receiver is mis­pointed and looses its line­of­sight to the GPS, but the reasons are
not always known. Then, loss of lock appears as a sudden drop in the SNR without
scintillations being present. Figure 3.8a shows an example of a non­scintillating loss of
lock profile. To obtain the best statistics these profiles should be included, but only where
their SNR is high, so the low SNR part of the profile should be excluded.
24
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:33==
(a) Valid loss of lock profile.
(b) Low SNR loss of lock profile
Figure 3.7: Examples of both valid and low SNR profiles that have suffered loss of lock
due to scintillations.
Yet another type of common profiles that are excluded are what we here term borderline
profiles. They usually look like valid measurements but they exist at all levels of SNR
and it is the chosen SNR threshold that directly affects which profiles are included in the
statistics, that is, those profiles are on the border of being accepted but somewhere a SNR
quality threshold needs to be placed. The threshold is incorporated because when the
signal is low the internal noise is relatively higher, which could lead to false sensing of S4.
They are therefore excluded from the scintillation statistics. Figure 3.8b shows a typical
borderline profile that gets excluded using our SNR quality threshold criterion described
below.
(a) Non­scintillating loss of lock profile.
(b) Borderline profile
Figure 3.8: Example of a non­scintillating loss of lock profile due to some reasons not
always known, and a borderline profile whose mean SNR is just below the decided SNR
quality threshold.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
25
==PAGE:34==
Out of all the excluded profiles, the very low SNR profiles (fig. 3.6a) are the most common.
This can be observed in figure 3.9 which shows as an example a histogram of the mean
SNR at heights ranging from 60­80 km for the excluded profiles in February 2009.
Figure 3.9: Normalized histogram of the mean SNR between 60­80 km for the excluded
profiles in February 2009. Most common type of excluded profiles are very low SNR
profiles, about 40% of all the excluded profiles.
In order to rid the data of the unusable and unreliable types of profiles listed above, data­
cleaning criteria were established based on the large scale mean in the SNR amplitude
(20 km running mean, denoted as A20km), so reliable profiles are evaluated based on their
general SNR level and not the small scale scintillations. The criteria are summarized here:
1. Profiles only at tangent heights below 30 km are excluded.
2. Profiles where the maximum A20km is below 200 V/V are excluded.
3. Profiles with a mean A20km below 300 V/V are excluded, where the mean is only
calculated where A20km is higher than 200 V/V.
The first criterion rids the data of all measurements only recorded at heights below 30 km
i.e. unusable for our study of the ionosphere. The second criterion immediately rids the
data of obvious bad profiles, that is, very low SNR profiles with SNR of only about 10­20
V/V that are quite common (figure 3.6a), and other low SNR profiles in general.
The third criterion was developed for the loss of lock profiles. By only evaluating the mean
where it is above 200 V/V, it excludes the low SNR part of the profile i.e. where the signal
has already been lost, but evaluates the higher SNR part of the profile to determine if
it is reliable or not, that is, with large scale mean above 300 V/V or not. In this sense,
the valid loss of lock profile in figure 3.7a and the non­scintillating loss of lock profile in
figure 3.8a are included (where the maximum S4 is of course only evaluated at SNR above
200 V/V) but the low SNR loss of lock profile in figure 3.7b is excluded. Using only the
SNR above 200 V/V when calculating the mean allows us to include valid measurements
26
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:35==
with high enough SNR, because if the mean was to be calculated over the whole profile,
including where the mean SNR is below 200 V/V, the profiles that lost their lock early in
the measurement would be excluded even though they were valid measurements in the
beginning, as the low SNR part would weigh more in the mean. Also, the third criterion
assesses the borderline profiles, where those that lie around the 300 V/V level need to
have a mean A20km greater than 300 V/V to be included. Our choice of quality threshold
directly affects how many of those are included. More could be included by choosing a
lower than 300 V/V threshold. A 200 V/V threshold was also tried, which included a few
hundred more profiles for February 2009 data, but of course all of low SNR nature, and it
was decided not to include too many low SNR profiles. A further analysis entailed looking
at the distribution of the mean SNR of the profiles. Figure 3.10 shows the distribution
of the mean SNR of the COSMIC­1 50 Hz profiles that were not excluded by the data
cleaning criteria. It is seen that most profiles have a mean SNR of about 750 V/V. The
choice of 300 V/V was justified by the distribution, where only a small part of the tail is
being cut. A bigger threshold of 400 V/V would cut a more significant part of the tail.
Figure 3.10: Distributions of the mean SNR (L1 C/A signal) of the COSMIC­1 profiles from
2007­2019 that were not excluded by the data cleaning criteria.
3.3.1
Refining Es Statistics
On top of the data cleaning criteria established for the RO profiles, two conditions were
set for the Es detections that leads to refined statistics. The first condition was a thresh­
old of 300 V/V that was applied to the Es detections, so that detections made at heights
where the large scale mean was below 300 V/V were discarded. This was done to reduce
mis­detections that commonly occur in loss of lock profiles. Additionally, a quite common
phenomenon that occurred when the U­shape algorithm was applied to the data is that
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
27
==PAGE:36==
it made two or more detections at the same height and same thickness. Those detec­
tions were termed multi­detections and they were reduced to single­detections, which is
the second condition applied. The nature of mis­detections and multi­detections will be
described here.
Figure 3.11 shows a typical loss of lock profile where the U­shape algorithm makes a
mis­detection. This happens because the large scale mean drops slower relative to the 1
km mean in the presence of a sharp drop in the SNR. Obviously, these kind of detections
are not due to a physical Es, but due to the loss of lock in the measurement. What these
detections have in common is that they usually have unreasonably large thicknesses and
are made in the low SNR part of the profile, and can be eliminated by applying a SNR
threshold to the Es detection as a quality parameter.
Figure 3.11: An example of a profile where the U­shape algorithm makes a mis­detection.
It happens at around 110 km height, where the 1 km mean goes below 60% of the large
scale mean due to the sharp drop of the loss of lock profile. At the height of the detection,
the large scale mean is below the quality threshold 300 V/V and the detection is therefore
discarded.
First, different quality parameters were tried when retrieving the Es statistics, such as 200
V/V and 400 V/V thresholds, meaning that a detected Es is discarded if the large scale
mean at the height where the detection was made is lower than the threshold. It was found
that the 200 V/V threshold included a whole lot of mis­detections (that commonly stems
from loss of lock profiles or low and irregular SNR profiles), 300 V/V got rid of the majority
of mis­detections, and 400 V/V got rid of practically all of them. This is observed from the
thickness distribution resulting from the different thresholds, shown in figure 3.12, where
it is easy to observe the mis­detections at higher thicknesses.
28
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:37==
Figure 3.12: Comparison of different thresholds used to cut Es mis­detections. If a detec­
tion is made at a height where the large scale mean is below the threshold, it is discarded.
Here, the 200 V/V includes many mis­detections, the 300 V/V gets rid of the majority of
them, and 400 V/V practically eliminates them all, however eliminating a whole lot of valid
detections as well, as seen from the difference of the total number of detections using 300
V/V and 400 V/V threshold.
In February 2009, 5556 Es detections were made with the 200 V/V threshold, but many
mis­detections were included. With the 300 V/V threshold, 5433 and only 2 mis­detections
were made at around 10 km thickness. The 400 V/V practically got rid of all the mis­
detections, but 5146 Es were detected, almost 300 less than with the 300 V/V. This large
difference means that for every mis­detection the 400 V/V threshold is getting rid of, it
is excluding much more valid Es detections. Thus, having 400 V/V threshold we miss
some profiles with valid Es, and having 200 V/V threshold is not enough to clean the data
properly, it includes more detections of low quality. Of course, choosing the threshold
entails a trade­off in including valid Es detections and excluding mis­detections, but from
these analysis it was concluded that 300 V/V is an appropriate level.
However, the multi­detections were discovered by looking at the peaks at high thicknesses
in figure 3.12. In the middle panel, there is a detection at 10.5 km thickness where a five­
fold detection is made. Figure 3.13 shows the profile resulting in this five­fold detection.
It happens as the small scale mean fluctuates around 60% of the large scale mean, and
as it goes above and below again, more detections are made with the same thickness of
(h1, h2) where A1km < 0.95 · A20km. Four obvious fluctuations are seen, best observed on
the zoom­in on the right. The fifth one is harder to see as it is very small, at height about
61.5 km. The neighboring depression around 80 km height does not have any detections
at all, as there the large scale mean is below 300 V/V, as opposed to the detections at 61
km height where the large scale mean in the middle of the interval is just over 300 V/V.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
29
==PAGE:38==
(a) Unusal profile of five­fold detection.
(b) Zoom in on the detections.
Figure 3.13: An example of a rare profile with a five­fold detection at height about 61 km.
The multi­detections were investigated thoroughly. It turns out they are not occurring due
to two physical Es clouds being very close together, but only because of the small scale
fluctuations in A1km around the 0.6 · A20km. In February 2009, out of 5433 Es detections,
207 had multi­detections. Most of them were double detections, and figure 3.14 shows a
typical example of this.
(a) Two­fold detection profile.
(b) Zoom in.
Figure 3.14: A typical multi­detection profile, where two detections are made because of
the small fluctuation in A1km.
Based on the above analysis, all multi­detections were reduced to single­detections, which
results in more accurate Es statistics. Figure 3.15 shows a comparison of the Es statistics
before and after refining them, that is, after applying the mis­detection threshold of 300
V/V and reducing multi­detections to single detections. We notice on figure 3.15b that
the peak at about 10 km thickness which stemmed from the five­fold profile in figure 3.13
30
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:39==
has been reduced. Nevertheless, it is still a single detection, and this is one of very few
profiles that make it through the criteria. However, vast amount of the profiles are good
measurements, and it can be seen by observing the Es statistics for all years 2007­2019
in figure 4.1 where no peak is seen at higher thicknesses, so the uncommon profiles are
very few compared to the total number of profiles and they do not affect the distributions
after the refining criteria have been applied.
(a) Before.
(b) After.
Figure 3.15: Es statistics for February 2009, before and after refining the Es statistics by
applying the mis­detection threshold of 300 V/V and reducing multi­detections.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
31
==PAGE:40==
3.4
Limitations
Although the GNSS­RO technique has many advantages over stationary ground­based
measurements, the method is subjected to some limitations. One of its biggest limita­
tions is the low horizontal resolution. At E­layer tangent heights, the signal travels a long
distance through the ionosphere, and at tangent heights lower than the E­layer, the sig­
nal penetrates the ionosphere two times, once before it reaches the tangent point and
again when traveling from the tangent point. Thus, at lower tangent heights, the distance
from the tangent point to the outer edge of the ionosphere is greater than at higher tan­
gent heights. When a disturbance in the signal is observed at a certain height, it could
have occurred either on the near or far side of the tangent point but the origin along the
signal path is unknown. Because of this ambiguity, the disturbance origin is in practice
geo­referenced to the tangent point, and at low tangent heights of 30 km the horizontal
resolution can reach about 2000 km [35]. However, when observing U­shaped Es sig­
natures typically seen at tangent heights of about 100 km, the distance from the tangent
point to the outer edge of the sporadic­E layer is shorter than at lower tangent heights,
and the horizontal resolution is closer to a few hundred km.
The U­shape algorithm used to detect the Es is also subjected to some limitations. As
previously mentioned, the algorithm has some tunable parameters. Changing their value
slightly would result in greater or fewer detections, possibly of different thicknesses. Ex­
amples of such parameters is the 60% number, as U­shape is detected when the A1km
goes below 60% of A20km, and the 95% number, as the thickness of a detection is defined
where A1km < 0.95·A20km. However, based on testing and as explained in the 2010 paper
by Zeng and Sokolovskiy [38], changing these parameters within reasonable limits based
on modelled structures still results in similar distribution in latitude, local time and height.
However, the distribution in thickness is more affected, especially for lower thicknesses
below the peak thickness value. There, the structure of the distribution is affected by the
A1km smoothing window which was chosen to match the first Fresnel zone of about 1 km
for the GPS observations from LEO. When the thickness of the Es cloud is comparable
or larger than the first Fresnel zone, the extension of the region of reduced amplitude in
the U­shape signature is consistent with the thickness and can be used for estimating the
Es cloud thickness. When the cloud thickness reduces below about 1 km, the extension
of the region of reduced amplitude does not reduce but remains at about 1 km due to
diffraction [38]. Thus, reducing the smoothing window beyond the first Fresnel zone, the
thickness distribution would be affected by diffraction effects. In any case, the derived
distribution may not reliably reproduce the true distribution of the thicknesses below 1 km.
Another limiting factor of the measurements is the vertical extension of the COSMIC­1 50
Hz data, which does not cover the whole E­layer, and on average the maximum profile
height reaches about 122 km. This is lower compared to some previous RO missions,
such as CHAMP and GRACE with a profile height of about 140 km [9]. The vertical
extension of the profiles is demonstrated in figure 3.16, which shows the distribution of
maximum profile heights of the 50 Hz data for all the non­excluded profiles. Because the
maximum profile height does not cover the full E­layer, the detection of Es above the peak
occurrence of 122 km might be lower, which could possibly lead to an error in the height
distribution of the detected Es.
32
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.16: Histogram showing the maximum profile heights of 50 Hz COSMIC­1 profiles
from years 2007­2019 that were not excluded by the data clean­up. Most of the profiles
reach heights of about 120­122 km, where the peak occurrence is 122 km.
Finally, one limitation has to do with the scintillation estimators chosen, as they do not
manage to clearly separate E­layer and F­layer scintillations. Although the U­shape al­
gorithm does a good job of extracting events that are expected to occur in the sporadic­E
layer, it misses scintillations in the E­layer that do not produce U­shape. On the other
hand, the S4 index quantifies all ionospheric scintillations, but does not distinguish be­
tween scintillations originating in the F­layer, Es scintillations that produce U­shape, or
other scintillations that occur in the E­layer but are not U­shaped. Therefore, using this
data and these estimators, E­layer and F­layer scintillations can not be fully separated.
However, valuable information can be gained from using both the estimators, both about
the nature of the Es and the ionospheric scintillations in general.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:43==
4
Results and Discussion
In this thesis, the goal is to investigate the nature of ionospheric scintillations by analysing
a large set of COSMIC­1 data. The following results are based on data from the years
2007­2019 using both the S4 index and the U­shape algorithm, and where the data has
been cleaned with the criteria described in chapter 3. After presenting and discussing
results, the findings are summarized in section 4.6. Lastly, in section 4.7, some interesting
future studies are proposed.
4.1
Height and Thickness Distribution
The U­shape algorithm estimated the height and thickness of every Es detection, and the
resulting distributions for all years 2007­2019 are shown in figure 4.1. From the height
distribution, we observe that the peak is just over 100 km and detections are not really
made above 120 km. The E­layer is generally considered up to heights 150 km, but this
indicates that the sporadic­E, with its peak at just over 100 km and extending up to about
120 km, is not directly coupled with the E­layer. Furthermore, we see that the vertical
extension of the profiles, talked about as a limiting factor in section 3.4, does not seem
to limit the observations. This is seen by looking at the Es height distribution in figure
4.1, where there are almost no detections found above 120 km. This indicates that the
maximum profile heights do not affect the distribution significantly, as if physical Es would
be above height 120 km at least some detections would be made with the profiles that
have maximum height above that.
The distribution in thickness is split according to detections above and below 80 km height,
meaning it differs between horizontal clouds and tilted clouds, as the clouds below 80 km
need to be tilted w.r.t. the local horizon to be aligned with the signal propagation direc­
tion and capable of producing any U­shape signature. From the thickness distributions,
we observe that the position of the maximums is at about 1.5 km. That is consistent
with previous Es thickness estimates of 0.6–2 km [33]. Furthermore, the difference in
the distributions at thicknesses greater than the peak may indicate that on average the
tilted clouds are of smaller thickness than the horizontal clouds, like concluded in paper
[38] based on same approach with less data. However, it more likely rather indicates
that the clouds at lower tangent heights are more commonly not directly aligned with the
propagation direction, producing smaller U­shape effects.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.1: Distributions of Es in height and thickness for all COSMIC­1 data from years
2007­2019. (Bin size 1 km in height and 0.1 km in thickness).
4.2
Spatial Distribution
Global maps were made to observe scintillation distribution in latitude and longitude. This
was done for both statistics from the S4 index and Es detected with the U­shape algo­
rithm. Figure 4.2 shows the global Es occurrence. From the figure, we observe that the
Es is distributed mainly at mid­latitudes and the occurrence is very low at the geomag­
netic equator. Furthermore, its longitudinal distribution follows the shape of the magnetic
equator, underlining that the formation of Es has some dependence on the geomagnetic
field.
36
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.2: Global map of Es occurrence rate for years 2007­2019. As described in
chapter 3, the occurrence rate is defined by the number of measurements that had Es
detection divided by the total number of measurements, within each bin. The magnetic
equator is also plotted (defined here as the coordinates where the magnetic dip angle at
60 km altitude is zero). Resolution 1° × 1°.
To better investigate seasonal dependence of the Es, global maps were made for each
season, where they are defined as the northern hemisphere seasons, winter (Dec­Jan­
Feb), spring (Mar­Apr­May), summer (Jun­Jul­Aug), and fall (Sep­Oct­Nov). Figure 4.3
shows the Es distribution for the four seasons, with data from years 2007­2019 (to get
complete statistics for winter 2007, data from December 2006 was also included). Sea­
sonal dependence is obviously observed, where higher occurrence rates are found during
the summer season on each hemisphere, with lower occurrence rates in the spring and
fall. Es is therefore said to be a summer phenomenon, and this indicates its dependence
on solar radiation. What is more surprising is the different longitudinal distributions during
summer in each hemisphere. At longitudes from about 30° W ­ 180° W, the occurrence
rate is much greater in the SH summer than in the NH summer. In similar fashion, at other
longitudes 30° W ­ 180° E, the occurrence rate is greater in the NH summer. An obvious re­
gion of lower occurrence, seen from both the Es map for the whole years in figure 4.2 and
even more illuminating from the seasonal maps in figure 4.3, is found around South Africa
during the SH summer. In an attempt to explain this, data of various phenomena, such as
wind­ and precipitation maps, were investigated to see if any correlation was found with
this occurrence depression. However, a likely explanation was found when looking at the
geomagnetic field components, shown in figure 4.4. In the region of lower occurrence
over South Africa, we observe a lower horizontal field strength component and a steeper
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
37
==PAGE:46==
inclination angle, i.e. the field is more vertical in that region. When looking at the total field
strength, we observe the South Atlantic Anomaly, which is not spatially aligned with the
region of lower occurrence. Hence, what is affecting the lower occurrence is the greater
vertical direction of the geomagnetic field, but not the total field strength.
The same conclusion was also suggested in [4] when investigating the lower occurrence
in the South Africa region. However, other research [9] has stated that this theory is in­
consistent, as the geomagnetic components are similar over the region south of Australia
but Es occurrence is still observed there. One should keep in mind though, that the region
south of Australia is where the south magnetic pole is located. There, different processes,
such as particle precipitation, are controlling the formation of Es. Therefore, we conclude
that the steeper inclination angle of the geomagnetic field in the South Africa region is
likely responsible for the lower Es occurrence there, which is induced by the wind shear
mechanism that is dependent on the magnetic inclination angle as was seen in equation
2.1.
Figure 4.3: Global maps of Es occurrence rates divided into seasons, with data from
2007­2019. Resolution 1° × 1°.
38
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.4: Maps showing the geomagnetic field components at 100 km altitude. Hor­
izontal field strength [nT] (top­left), dip angle [°] (top­right), and total field strength [nT]
(bottom). Data from the World Magnetic Model 2015 [23].
Along with the maps made with the Es statistics, two types of maps were made with the
S4 index. The occurrence rate maps are defined as the number of measurements that
had ˆS4 > 0.3 divided by the total number of measurements in each bin, and the amplitude
maps are defined as the sum of the maximum S4 of each measurement divided by the
total number of measurements in each bin (i.e. the mean of the ˆS4 in each bin). The
maps were produced for each season, and figure 4.5 shows the global maps in S4 occur­
rence and amplitude for the winter and summer seasons. From the maps, we see that the
amplitude is very spatially correlated with the occurrence, so where we observe higher
occurrence we observe higher amplitude. Furthermore, very similar spatial distribution
is observed in these maps as in the Es maps in figure 4.3, and the nature of the longi­
tudinal variations along with the lower occurrence observed over South Africa in the SH
summer is also revealed. These observations bring credibility to the statement in section
3.2, that various Es estimation methods exist that are reasonable and can be applied to
Es climate research, where the difference is mostly in the magnitude of the different esti­
mators. The only difference between Es and the S4 occurrence maps here is that the S4
maps show more occurrence over the winter hemisphere at latitudes close to the equator.
This indicates that those scintillations come from the F­layer, whose irregularities are usu­
ally concentrated around the equator f.ex. the equatorial plasma bubbles as described in
2.1.3.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 4.5: Global maps of S4 occurrence (above) and amplitude (below) for the winter
and summer seasons with data from 2007­2019. Resolution 1° × 1°.
4.3
Local Time
The evolution of scintillations over a day can be observed by looking at how they change
with local time. Figure 4.6 shows Es and S4 occurrence maps along with S4 amplitude,
binned into latitude and local time. Again, the different measures show the same phe­
nomena, namely, that we observe semi­diurnal variation in Es. Greater Es is observed
during two local time intervals, in the morning from about 08­14 and in the evening from
about 16­23. The morning peak in both hemispheres seems to be at higher latitudes than
the evening peak, which is closer to the equator. Furthermore, Es is observed at the north
pole but not the south, starting in the evening around 20:00 and extending into the night.
40
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.6: Maps of latitude vs. local time for Es occurrence (left), S4 occurrence (middle),
and S4 amplitude (right), with data from 2007­2019. Resolution 1° × 15 min.
To further investigate the local time dependence, the data from 2007­2019 was split into
seasons and the corresponding Es occurrence plots for the winter and summer seasons
are shown in figure 4.7. By splitting the maps into seasons, we observe semi­diurnal
variations in the summer hemisphere, as previously noticed, but diurnal variation in the
winter hemisphere, appearing after time 16:00 like the start of the evening peak. The win­
ter hemisphere peak is though closer to the equator. Lastly, the peaks seem to vary with
latitude as the day proceeds, where the morning peak seems to decrease in latitude with
time, and the evening peak does the opposite as it forms at lower latitudes and increases
in latitude with time. This is more clearly observed in the NH summer. Therefore, it seems
that the maximum Es activity migrates with the position of the sun, as the sun rises earlier
and sets later at higher latitudes during summer.
Figure 4.7: Maps of latitude vs. local time for Es occurrence in the summer and winter
seasons with data from 2007­2019. Resolution 1° × 15 min.
To see whether the height of the Es changes with local time, the Es detections were binned
in a height vs. local time map, seen in figure 4.8. From the map, we observe the two peaks
in local time as previously seen in the latitude vs. local time maps. The peaks are at a
height of about 100 km as expected. However, we can observe that for each peak the
activity starts at a higher altitude, and then decreases with local time. Furthermore, there
seems to be more activity in the evening than in the morning peak. To further investigate
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
41
==PAGE:50==
this, the map was split into seasons, which is shown in figure 4.9. Here we observe
that during summer and winter, the number of detections are similar in the morning and
evening peak, but during spring and fall seasons the morning peak is much less active
compared to the evening peak (this is also observed in the latitude vs. local time maps
for the spring and fall seasons, not shown here). Finally, the fact that the peaks decrease
in height with local time does not seem to have any seasonal dependence.
Figure 4.8: Distribution of Es in height and local time. The scale is normalized, so the
value for the bin that has the maximum number of events is one. Resolution 1 km × 15
min.
42
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.9: Distribution of Es in height and local time, divided into seasons with data from
2007­2019. Normalized with the same number as in figure 4.8. Resolution 1 km × 15
min.
4.4
Solar Activity
To investigate the scinitillations dependence on solar activity, monthly mean time series
of the Es and S4 occurrence along with S4 amplitude was constructed over the years
2007­2019. As an indicator of solar activity, data of the monthly mean sunspot number
was retrieved from SILSO [15], the World Data Center for the production, preservation and
dissemination of the international sunspot number. The data is shown in figure 4.10, along
with the smoothed 12 month mean, which is the one used as an estimator of solar activity
when comparing to the data. From the figure we see during which years the activity was
low and high. In December 2008 and December 2019 solar minimum occurred, while the
last solar maximum happened in April 2014.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.10: The monthly mean sunspot number along with the 12 month running mean
which is the estimator used here to denote solar activity. (SILSO [15] data, Royal Obser­
vatory of Belgium, Brussel).
Figure 4.11 shows the variation of the three scintillation estimators with solar activity. They
all show a slight anti­correlation with solar activity in the mid­latitudes, although it is seen
more clearly from the Es occurrence. As it is easier to see the anti­correlation on the Es
occurrence map, it might indicate that only Es is anti­correlated but not the other irregular­
ities in the E­layer and F­layer that S4 also observes, so the Es anti­correlation affects the
S4 maps statistically less. However, from these maps, any equatorial or polar scintillation
dependence on solar activity can not be reliably inferred. Although the maps extend to
the end of 2019, we observe some data gaps in the later years. This is due to the reduced
sampling since the year 2016, as explained in figure 1.3.
44
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:53==
Figure 4.11: The three estimators, Es occurrence (top), S4 occurrence (middle), and
S4 amplitude (bottom), shown in a monthly mean time series for years 2007­2019. The
superimposed white line is the scaled running mean sunspot number which denotes the
solar activity over the years.
Having used the U­shape algorithm on all the COSMIC­1 data from years 2007­2019
allowed for further investigation of the behaviour of Es with solar activity, as the algo­
rithm additionally estimates the height and thickness of every detection as explained in
chapter 3. For this, time series of monthly mean Es thickness and height were created
and are shown in figure 4.12. Looking at the upper panel of the figure, we notice only
slight seasonal variations where the thickness seems to be greater during NH winter (SH
summer). However, we see no obvious dependence on solar activity. Worth to note is
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
45
==PAGE:54==
the low Es thickness value in September 2019. This is a result of poor statistics due to
the sparse data collected in the later years, as was demonstrated in figure 1.3, and that
month there was only measurement from one day. Therefore, for the later years where
sampling is low, the results are not as reliable. Looking at the lower panel of figure 4.12
showing the variation in height we clearly observe seasonal variations, where the height is
lower during winters and summers. However, considerable dependence on solar activity
is observed, where there is less seasonal dependence during more solar activity. These
findings on the Es thickness and height variations with seasons and solar activity have
not been reported in previous studies before. However, the seasonal variations in height
with maximums in spring and fall likely reflects the lower activity in the morning peak at
those seasons as observed in figure 4.9. Because the evening peak is on average higher
in altitude than the morning peak, as also seen in figure 4.9, the average height becomes
greater during the spring and fall months when there is less activity in the lower­altitude
morning peak.
Figure 4.12: Time series of monthly mean Es thickness (above) and height (below). Yel­
low patches mark summer months (Jun, Jul, Aug) and blue patches mark winter months
(Dec,Jan,Feb). Red line on the lower plot is the scaled 12 month running mean SN num­
ber, denoting solar activity.
To investigate further, time series of monthly mean latitude, longitude, and local time of
the Es detections were also created, shown in figure 4.13. Looking at the top panel, we
observe that the monthly mean is positive during summers, meaning on average more
events are happening at the Northern hemisphere during summer. The opposite is for
winter, where more events are happening at the Southern hemisphere i.e. when there is
summer there. This shows that Es is a summer phenomenon, which is already known.
Observing the middle panel, we see on average more events at the eastern half of the
globe (positive longitudes) during summer and more at the western half during winter. This
describes the different longitudinal distribution during northern and southern hemisphere
summers, also observed from the seasonal global maps in figures 4.3 and 4.5. The bottom
panel shows that during summer and winter, the average local time is lower than during
the spring and fall. This indicates that there is relatively less Es in the morning during the
spring and fall, compared to in the evening. These effects were also observed in figure
4.9 where Es was shown in height and local time divided into seasons. All the monthly
mean time series in figure 4.13 thus do not contribute to new information but do support
46
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:55==
previously observed Es phenomena with a different approach. However, the figure reveals
that solar activity does not seem to affect Es latitude, longitude, nor local time.
Figure 4.13: Time series of monthly mean Es latitude (top), longitude (middle), and local
time (bottom).
4.5
Morning and Evening Es
After observing some different behaviour in the morning and evening peaks, such as rel­
atively lower occurrence in the morning peak during spring and fall (figure 4.9), we further
investigate the difference between Es at two different local time periods. The local times
were selected by observing the two occurrence peaks in figure 4.8, where the morning
peak extends from about 8­18 and the evening peak is mostly concentrated between 16­
24. However, defining local time periods to study the peaks separately, results for the
morning peak are based off of local times 8­12, when there is no activity from the evening
peak, and times 19­23 for the evening peak, the part of the peak where the activity from
the morning peak has ceased.
Figure 4.14 shows the statistics of Es divided into the two local time periods. The distribu­
tions are very similar for the two Es. However, dividing the thickness distribution into upper
and lower heights, as seen in figure 4.15, we have very similar distribution and mean in
the morning and evening Es at heights above 80 km, but some difference is observed at
heights below 80 km. There, relatively more detections are made at lower heights in the
evening Es, and they are thicker than the low height detections in the morning Es, with
the mean of 1.95 km, similar to the mean of detections above 80 km. The morning Es
however generally has smaller thickness at lower heights, with a mean of 1.58 km. This
could indicate that the Es is more tilted w.r.t. the local horizon in the evening, produc­
ing U­shape structures of greater thickness due to the greater alignment with the signal
propagation direction.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.14: Height (left) and thickness (right) distributions of morning and evening Es.
Figure 4.15: Thickness distributions divided into height below and above 80 km, for the
morning (left) and evening (right) Es.
To investigate the spatial distribution of the morning and evening Es, global maps were
made for those local time periods, for both Es and S4 occurrence as shown in figure
4.16. From the maps, the lower occurrence rate over South Africa is evident from both
estimators, and what’s more, the rate seems to be lower in the evening compared to in the
morning. Furthermore, activity is observed over the magnetic poles only during evening,
and here the activity is also clearly observed over the south magnetic pole, located at
about 64°S and 136°E. Because the south magnetic pole is located at such a low latitude
compared to the north magnetic pole at 84°N, its effects are not observed clearly from
other maps such as in figure 4.6, due to them being superimposed on other mid­latitude
Es.
48
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:57==
Figure 4.16: Global maps of morning and evening Es, estimated both with the U­shape
algorithm (above) and S4 (below). Data from 2007­2019. Resolution 1° × 1°.
The global maps were then further divided into seasons as well, and figures 4.17 and
4.18 shows the winter and summer seasons for the morning and evening scintillations,
respectively. In the winter maps, where Es is mostly found in the southern hemisphere, the
lower occurrence rate in the evening over South Africa is observed more clearly. However,
the greater absence there in the evening could be interpreted in another way, because
in the morning we observe greater occurrence at all longitudes at around latitude ∼60°
S, although mostly over South America. This is observed in the global maps in figure
4.16 but also more evident in the winter and summer maps in figures 4.17 and 4.18. The
relatively lower occurrence over South Africa in the evening could therefore be not due to
less Es in that region in the evening but due to more Es in the morning over all ∼60° S
longitudes. However, in either case, the occurrence there is lower in the evening than in
the morning.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
49
==PAGE:58==
Finally, a difference in the Es and S4 estimators is observed in the winter and summer
season maps in figures 4.17 and 4.18. There, we see that the evening scintillations extend
more over to the winter hemisphere than in the morning, but that is only evident in the S4
maps, indicating it is not a characteristic of Es but rather a F­layer phenomenon. Those
observed scintillations are likely caused by the equatorial plasma bubbles that form in the
F­layer after sunset, as described in section 2.1.3.
Figure 4.17: Global maps of morning and evening Es during winter, estimated both with
the U­shape algorithm (above) and S4 (below). Data from 2007­2019. Resolution 1° × 1°.
50
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:59==
Figure 4.18: Global maps of morning and evening Es during summer, estimated both with
the U­shape algorithm (above) and S4 (below). Data from 2007­2019. Resolution 1° × 1°.
Now, the morning and evening Es were investigated separately w.r.t. solar activity. Fig­
ure 4.19 shows the Es occurrence split into the morning (8­12) and evening (19­23) local
times. Furthermore, it shows a difference map defined as morning occurrence minus
evening occurrence, to better observe the differences between the two local times. Ob­
serving the difference map, we see positive summertime values at mid­latitudes during
low solar activity. This could be explained by the fact that the occurrence is higher in the
morning peak than in the evening peak during low solar activity, because the morning
peak is anti­correlated with solar activity, but the occurrence in the evening peak does not
seem to be affected by solar activity at mid­latitudes. However, in the years of high solar
activity, we observe more negative values in the difference map, which is a result of lower
occurrences in the morning due to its anti­correlation with solar activity. Furthermore,
negative values are observed at the north pole, showing that Es is active there during
evening but not the morning, as was also seen from the global maps in figure 4.16. The
amount of activity there seems to be independent of solar activity. Signature of the polar
Es is also vaguely observed over the south magnetic pole, where negative values are
found around latitude 64° S, but it is harder to observe because the low latitude placing of
the south magnetic pole makes its effects superimposed on other mid­latitude Es.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.19: The Es occurrence shown in a monthly mean time series for years 2007­
2019, split into morning (top) and evening (middle) local times. The bottom map shows
the difference between the morning and evening local times. Map smoothed with 3 × 3
box filter to better observe the patterns. Resolution 1° × 1 month.
Figure 4.20 shows the same type of maps but for S4 occurrence. Here, we again observe
positive values in the difference map during summer at mid­latitudes due to the more ac­
tive morning times, however, the morning seems to have more activity at those latitudes
during high solar activity as well, so the S4 estimator does not really sense the Es depen­
dence on solar activity as it might statistically have less influence, as mentioned in section
4.4 when describing figure 4.11. Looking at latitudes closer to the equator, we see nega­
tive values that correspond to more activity at evening times, which is correlated with solar
52
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:61==
activity as is evident in the middle panel of figure 4.20. However, such a big difference
at equatorial latitudes is not observed with the Es estimator, so this is likely the result
of a F­layer phenomenon. Furthermore, as it is found in winter hemispheres as is seen
in the difference map, its characteristics matches with the observed phenomenon from
the global­seasonal morning and evening maps in figures 4.17 and 4.18, where spatially,
the evening scintillations extend more over to the winter hemisphere than the morning
scintillations, only observed with the S4 index. This is suspected to be the same F­layer
phenomenon.
Figure 4.20: The S4 occurrence shown in a monthly mean time series for years 2007­
2019, split into morning (top) and evening (middle) local times. The bottom map shows
the difference between the morning and evening local times. Map smoothed with 3 × 3
box filter to better observe the patterns. Resolution 1° × 1 month.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
53
==PAGE:62==
Now, after exploring the morning and evening spatial distribution and changes in occur­
rence with solar activity, we investigate if the morphology of Es changes with solar activity.
For this, time series of the monthly mean of the Es thickness and height are constructed,
now dividing the Es in the two morning (8­12) and evening (19­23) local times. Figures
4.21 and 4.22 show the resulting time series for Es height and thickness, respectively.
From the two figures, the following can be inferred:
• General:
– The morning Es is generally higher in altitude and of less thickness than the
evening Es.
• Solar Activity:
– Morning Es is very little affected by solar activity, both in height and thickness.
– Evening Es height and thickness is greatly affected with solar activity, where
more seasonal variations are observed during high solar activity, but altitude is
generally lower and thickness is greater compared to solar minimum.
• Seasonal Variations:
– Morning Es height peaks in spring and fall, with minimums in summer and
winter, where the height is generally lower in summers than winters.
– Morning Es thickness peaks in winter and smaller peak in summer.
– Evening Es is opposite to the morning Es. Height peaks in summer and winter,
thickness peaks in spring and fall. However, this opposition is only clearly
observed during high solar activity.
From these observations we see that the solar activity greatly affects the process that
causes the evening Es, but not the morning Es. Furthermore, the evening Es process is
affected by the solar activity in such a way that the local extrema of its height and thickness
opposes those of the morning Es. Also, for both the morning and evening Es, during those
seasons it is higher in altitude, it is of lower thickness and vice versa. However, these
findings are further investigated in section 4.5.1.
54
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.21: Time series of monthly mean morning (blue curve) and evening (black curve)
Es height. Yellow patches mark summer months (Jun, Jul, Aug) and blue patches mark
winter months (Dec,Jan,Feb). Red line on the lower plot is the scaled 12 month running
mean SN number, denoting solar activity. A 3 month running mean has been applied to
the time series to better observe the changes with seasons.
Figure 4.22: Time series of monthly mean morning and evening Es thickness. A 3 month
running mean has been applied to the time series to better observe the changes with
seasons.
Time series of monthly mean latitude, longitude, and height were also constructed for
the morning and evening Es and is shown in figure 4.23. Looking at the latitude and
longitude in the top and middle panel, respectively, we observe that on average during
the winters the morning Es has a lower minimum than the evening Es, meaning more
morning Es is found in the south­western hemisphere compared to the evening Es. This
was also confirmed when investigating the spatial distribution on the global maps of the
morning and evening Es in figures 4.16 ­ 4.18, where especially over South America higher
occurrences were observed in the morning. The bottom panel in figure 4.23 showing time
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
55
==PAGE:64==
series of local time just shows that the morning and evening Es is distributed the same
within their respective local time windows 8­12 and 19­23, independent of the solar activity.
Figure 4.23: Time series of monthly mean morning and evening Es latitude, longitude,
and local time. A 3 month running mean has been applied to the time series to better
observe the changes with seasons.
Lastly, because of the different behaviour of the evening Es with solar activity, it was
decided to look at the thickness and height distribution of the evening Es in times of low
and high solar activity. This is shown in figure 4.24. From the figure we see that the
evening Es at lower heights differ more with solar activity, that is, their thickness is greater
with more solar activity, but the thickness of the higher altitude clouds is similar regardless
of solar activity. This could infer that during solar maximum, evening Es is more tilted,
which would explain its generally lower monthly mean height during high solar activity in
figure 4.21 and generally greater monthly mean thickness during high solar activity, as
observed in 4.22.
56
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.24: Evening Es thickness distribution split into heights above and below 80 km,
for years 2007­2008­2009 during solar minimum (left) and 2012­2013­2014 during solar
maximum (right).
4.5.1
Further Investigation
These previous morning and evening Es results were based on Es observed during the
two local time intervals 8­12 and 19­23, that were chosen to isolate the occurrence peaks
observed in figure 4.8. However, to further investigate the two Es occurrence peaks, it is
possible to isolate them even better by imposing limits in both local time and height. By
including more Es in each of the peaks, better statistics are obtained. The investigation
was continued, with the peaks defined by new local time and height limits, found by ob­
serving figure 4.8. A later peak is now defined from the local time interval 16­23 and at
height above 95 km, and an earlier peak is now defined from local time 8­13 above 80
km height and from local time 13­19 between height 80­90 km. Figure 4.25 shows the
monthly mean time series of the earlier and later Es height and thickness, which have now
changed a bit from previous morning and evening analysis in figures 4.21 and 4.22, as we
are excluding Es below 80 km altitude. Now, we observe that the earlier Es is generally
lower in altitude and of less thickness than the later Es. Compared to figure 4.21, where
the morning Es was observed at mean altitude of about 100 km which was higher than the
evening Es at the mean altitude of about 96 km, we now see that the earlier Es is about
102 km (compared to 100 km morning Es), but the height of the later Es is at a mean
altitude of about 105 km (compared to evening Es 96 km). This is most likely observed
because the Es below 80 km is excluded in the earlier and later Es, but in the previous
morning and evening comparison in figure 4.21, the evening Es below 80 km was drag­
ging the mean evening altitude down, because more Es below 80 km is detected in the
evening compared to in the morning, as figure 4.15 showed.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
57
==PAGE:66==
Also observed from figure 4.25, the height and thickness of the earlier and later Es do not
seem to vary with solar activity. Also, the earlier Es varies the same with seasons as the
morning Es, but the later Es varies differently compared to the evening Es, where the later
Es does not show much seasonal variations in height but thickness peaks in summer and
winter like the morning and earlier Es. From what we can observe, the earlier Es has not
changed much from the morning Es in average height, and it varies the same with solar
activity and seasons as the morning Es, that is, when Es below 80 km was also included.
However, the later Es has changed behaviour. It therefore seems that the evening Es
below 80 km is affected by solar activity.
Figure 4.25: Time series of monthly mean earlier and later Es height (above) and thick­
ness (below) based on the peaks defined with local time and height limits. A 3 month
running mean has been applied.
In figure 4.26 we quickly observe the difference between Es above and below 80 km.
Here, we clearly observe that the dependency on seasons and solar activity is small for
the higher altitude Es, but significant seasonal and solar activity dependence is observed
for the low­altitude Es.
58
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:67==
Figure 4.26: Time series of monthly mean Es height and thickness at altitudes above and
below 80 km. A 3 month running mean has been applied.
To further investigate this, the Es below 80 km can be split into the morning (8­12) and
evening (19­23) local times, which is shown in figure 4.27. Here we observe that the
evening Es is lower in altitude and greater in thickness during more solar activity, and
the seasonal variations are greater during more solar activity. Monthly means that are
lower in altitude and higher in thickness indicate that the evening Es is more tilted w.r.t.
the local horizon, as they are better aligned with the signal propagation direction which
in turns produces U­shapes of greater thickness and allows for more detections at lower
altitudes. This matches the observation that we detect more evening Es than morning Es
at lower altitudes (figure 4.15), and the observation made in figure 4.24 that the greater
solar activity affects the evening Es, making it more tilted with respect to the local horizon.
It is clear that these observations open up some possibilities for further research. For
example, it was only the evening Es that was found more tilted with more solar activity,
and as seen in figures 4.16 and 4.19, the Es was only found over the poles during evening.
Therefore, it might be that the solar activity only affects the process causing polar Es
and not the mid­latitude Es, and it would be interesting to investigate the solar activity
dependence for Es found in different regions. This could maybe provide information about
the reverse seasonal behaviour of the evening Es thickness below 80 km, that is, why we
observe higher thickness in summer and winter for the Es above 80 km (figure 4.25), but
higher thickness in spring and fall for the evening Es below 80 km (figure 4.27). One
possible explanation might be if the polar Es is generally more tilted, it would result in
greater average thickness being observed below 80 km during spring and fall because
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
59
==PAGE:68==
there is less mid­latitude Es during those seasons as seen on global maps in figure 4.3.
Figure 4.27: Time series of monthly mean morning and evening Es height and thickness
at altitudes below 80km. A 3 month running mean has been applied.
4.6
Summary of Results
In this section, the main results of the analysis are summarized in a simple and convenient
layout.
From section 4.1 Height and Thickness Distribution, we conclude that:
• Es is mostly found around 100 km height (figure 4.1).
• The sporadic­E layer is not directly coupled with the E­layer, as it extends only up
to about 120 km (figure 4.1).
• Es clouds are about 1.5 km thick on average, where the clouds below 80 km are
on average of less thickness as they are not directly aligned with the propagation
direction (figure 4.1).
From section 4.2 Spatial Distribution, we conclude that:
• Es forms mainly at mid­latitudes, with more occurrence during summer (figure 4.3).
• Es distribution follows the shape of the geomagnetic equator in longitude, but dif­
ferent longitudinal distribution is observed during SH summer (more at 30° W ­ 180°
W) compared to NH summer (more at 30° W ­ 180° E) (figure 4.3). This has been
observed in previous studies [20] but the reason behind this is not known.
60
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:69==
• Occurrence depression over South Africa is likely explained by the more vertically
aligned geomagnetic field over the region (figure 4.3 and 4.4).
• Using the S4 estimator, we observe that the S4 occurrence rate and amplitude are
spatially correlated with each other, and also with the Es distribution (figure 4.3 and
4.5). They give the same information about the Es distribution.
From section 4.3 Local Time, we conclude that:
• Semi­diurnal variation is found for the Es during summer, with occurrence peaks in
the morning and in the evening, but the variation is diurnal in winter, appearing at
similar times as the summer evening peak (figure 4.7).
• Morning peak forms at higher latitudes and decreases in latitude with time. Evening
peak forms at lower latitudes and increases in latitude with time (figure 4.7) In other
words, maximum Es activity seems to migrate with the position of the sun.
• In both morning and evening peaks, activity starts at higher altitudes and decreases
with time, independent of seasons (figure 4.9).
• During spring and fall, the morning peak has relatively lower activity than the evening
peak. This has not been reported before in previous studies (figure 4.9).
From section 4.4 Solar Activity, we conclude that:
• At mid­latitudes, slight anti­correlation in Es occurrence with solar activity is ob­
served (figure 4.11). In section 4.5 it is then found that only the morning Es occur­
rence seems to be anti­correlated with solar activity, but it is not clearly seen for the
evening Es (figure 4.19).
• Seasonal variations and solar activity dependence is observed for Es height and
thickness (figure 4.12). This has not been reported before and is investigated further
in section 4.5.1.
From section 4.5 Morning and Evening Es, we present observations not reported before:
• Evening Es could be more tilted w.r.t. local horizon compared to the morning Es
(figure 4.15). Furthermore, high solar activity seems to induce greater tilt in the
evening Es (figure 4.24 and section 4.5.1).
• Es is observed over both magnetic poles but only in the evening, not the morning
(figure 4.16).
• The occurrence rate is lower over South Africa in the evening compared to in the
morning.
• The earlier Es (morning Es above 80 km) is generally lower in altitude and of less
thickness than the later Es (evening Es above 80 km) (figure 4.25).
• The thickness and height of the earlier and later Es do not seem to be affected by
solar activity (figure 4.25).
Many of the results presented here are Es characteristics that have been observed in
previous studies and are generally known. However, some important new observations
have been made. The most significant ones are that the morning Es occurrence is rela­
tively less than the evening Es occurrence during spring and fall, and that the evening Es
seems to be more tilted than the morning Es, especially during more solar activity.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
61
==PAGE:70==
4.7
Future Studies
To further investigate the ionospheric scintillations in the COSMIC­1 data, several inter­
esting follow­up studies could be made.
First, it would be interesting to further investigate the Es behaviour. As a first step, global
maps and monthly mean time series of the earlier and later Es occurrence could be made,
which might allow for better statistics and thus better observations of how Es occurrence
changes with solar activity. Furthermore, the dependence on solar activity could be better
investigated by calculating the correlation coefficient to quantify it. Then, the seasonal and
solar activity dependence for Es in different regions such as mid­latitude and high­latitude
could be studied.
In this study, the atmPhs data was used which reaches tangent heights of about 130
km. Another interesting study would be to make similar global maps of scintillations using
the ionPhs data which extends up to 800 km height. In that way, by using the data at
tangent heights above the E­layer, F­layer scintillations could be separated from E­layer
scintillations. This would allow for a direct comparison of scintillations in two layers by
comparing with Es, derived in this study with the U­shape algorithm, that separates the
sporadic­E layer.
Another thing that could be interesting to investigate is how much the viewing geome­
try of the satellite constellation affects the global maps. In particular, to see whether the
suspected F­layer phenomenon observed in the winter evenings (on the global maps in
figures 4.17 and 4.18, and in the time series in figure 4.20) is observed with data from other
satellite constellation, such as COSMIC­2. The COSMIC­1 and COSMIC­2 constellations
have very different orbital inclination angles (COSMIC­1 has 72°, COSMIC­2 has 24°) and
altitudes (COSMIC­1 at 810 km, COSMIC­2 at 715 km), and because of this their LOS
direction to the GPS signal sources are different. The LOS from COSMIC­1 is more in
the meridional direction, whereas the LOS from COSMIC­2 is more in the zonal direction
[35]. Because of this, the horizontal spatial error induced by the geo­registration approxi­
mation is greater in the meridional direction for COSMIC­1 and the observed scintillations
have a wider latitudinal distribution. Furthermore, COSMIC­1 could be more subjected to
disturbances in the F­layer, that are in nature aligned with the geomagnetic field, because
of the meridionally dominated LOS.
Finally, it would be interesting to look into a method called back­propagation [2] to see if
it could be applied to the measurements used in this study. This method has the ability to
trace the irregularity that caused scintillations back to its origin along the signal path. That
would allow for much better horizontal resolution, and thus more accurate global maps.
62
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:71==
5
Conclusion
In this thesis, algorithms were developed and used to analyse over 7 TB of COSMIC­
1 Radio Occultation data from the years 2007­2019, with the purpose of learning more
about ionospheric irregularities that can cause scintillations in a recorded signal.
The large data set utilized in the study is amongst the largest data sets seen in the lit­
erature, where High Performance Computing system was used to perform the required
calculations. This allowed for the production of maps and plots in unprecedented reso­
lution. Furthermore, prior to the calculations, the data was cleaned using sophisticated
data­cleaning criteria that were developed and implemented to rid the data of faulty and
unreliable measurements (described in section 3.3). This allowed for even better scintilla­
tion statistics. The unreliable measurements were more common than thought, and 9.8%
of more than 7 million measurements was rid of in the data cleaning process.
Two different estimators were used to quantify the scintillations. The S4 index, which can
not distinguish between scintillations that originate from different layers, and the Es esti­
mator, which quantifies scintillations originating in the sporadic­E layer and was derived
with the U­shape algorithm developed by Zeng and Sokolovskiy [38]. The scintillations in
the data were investigated with the production of global maps and other plots that showed
their dependence on local time, seasons, and solar activity. All the Es characteristics that
are generally known from the literature were observed. Additionally, it was found that
during spring and fall, the Es occurrence is relatively lower in the morning compared to in
the evening.
Furthermore, this is the first study that uses the U­shape algorithm on such a big data
set. The U­shape algorithm has the advantage over other Es detection methods that it
estimates the height and thickness of the Es clouds causing the scintillations. Therefore,
using this algorithm on a data set spanning more than a full solar cycle, the dependency
of the Es characteristics on solar activity could be investigated. It was observed that
the height and thickness of Es measured at tangent heights above 80 km did not show
dependency on solar activity. However, height and thickness of the evening Es measured
below 80 km showed significant seasonal variations and dependency on solar activity,
where more solar activity resulted in lower average altitude and greater average thickness.
This indicates that the evening Es is more tilted w.r.t. the local horizon during times of more
solar activity. These results have not been reported before and they open up possibilities
for further research. In particular, it would be interesting to study if the Es varies differently
with solar activity in different regions, that is, if for example polar Es is more affected than
mid­latitude Es. This is inspired by the observations made in this study, where only the
tilt of the evening Es was found to increase with solar activity, as well as it was only the
evening Es that was active over the poles, which might indicate that it is only the polar Es
that is being affected by solar activity.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:73==
Bibliography
[1]
Dong L. Wu et. al. “Recent work on mid­latitude and equatorial sporadic­E”. In:
Journal of Atmospheric and Terrestrial Physics 51(5) (1989), pp. 401–424. DOI:
doi:10.1016/0021-9169(89)90122-0.
[2]
S. V. Sokolovskiy et. al. “Use of the L2C signal for inversions of GPS radio occul­
tation data in the neutral atmosphere”. In: GPS Solutions 18 (2014), pp. 405–416.
DOI: DOI10.1007/s10291-013-0340-x.
[3]
C. Arras and J. Wickert. “Estimation of ionospheric sporadic E intensities from GPS
radio occultation measurements”. In: Journal of Atmospheric and Solar­Terrestrial
Physics 171 (2018), pp. 60–63. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jastp.2017.08.006.
[4]
C. Arras et al. “A global climatology of ionospheric irregularities derived from GPS
radio occultation”. In: Geophysical Research Letters 35.L14809 (2008). DOI: doi:
10.1029/2008GL034158.
[5]
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR). Global Navigation Satel­
lite System Radio Occultation (GNSS­RO). Retrieved on March 4th 2021 from https:
//www.cosmic.ucar.edu/what-we-do/gnss-radio-occultation.
[6]
Yu B. et al. “Derivation of global ionospheric Sporadic E critical frequency (foEs)
data from the amplitude variations in GPS/GNSS radio occultations.” In: R. Soc.
Open Sci. 7.200320 (2020). DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsos.200320.
[7]
Wolfgang Baumjohann and Rudolf A. Treumann. Basic Space Plasma Physics. Im­
perial College Press, London, 2012. ISBN: 978­1­84816­894­7.
[8]
Michael S. Braasch. “Multipath”. In: Springer Handbook of Global Navigation Satel­
lite Systems. Ed. by Peter J.G. Teunissen and Oliver Montenbruck. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2017, pp. 443–468. ISBN: 978­3­319­42928­1. DOI: 10.
1007/978-3-319-42928-1_15. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-42928-1_15.
[9]
Y. H. Chu et al. “Morphology of sporadic E layer retrieved from COSMIC GPS radio
occultation measurements: Wind shear theory examination”. In: J. Geophys. Res.
Space Physics 119 (2014), pp. 2117–2136. DOI: doi:10.1002/2013JA019437.
[10]
GeoOptics. Home Page. Retrieved on April 28th 2021 from https://geooptics.com/
data/radio-occultation/.
[11]
Joshua Y. Gooch et al. “Global ionosonde and GPS radio occultation sporadic­E
intensity and height comparison”. In: Journal of Atmospheric and Solar­Terrestrial
Physics 199.105200 (2020). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jastp.2020.105200.
[12]
G.A. Hajj et al. “A technical description of atmospheric sounding by GPS occul­
tation”. In: Journal of Atmospheric and Solar­Terrestrial Physics 64.4 (2002). Jet
Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Mail Stop 238­600, 4800
Oak Grove Dr., Pasadena, CA 91109, USA, pp. 451–469. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/S1364-6826(01)00114-6.
[13]
Thomas Hobiger and Norbert Jakowski. “Atmospheric Signal Propagation”. In: Springer
Handbook of Global Navigation Satellite Systems. Ed. by Peter J.G. Teunissen and
Oliver Montenbruck. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 165–193.
ISBN: 978­3­319­42928­1. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-42928-1_6. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-42928-1_6.
[14]
D. Hysell, M. Larsen, and D. et. al. Fritts. “Major upwelling and overturning in the
mid­latitude F region ionosphere”. In: Nat Commun 9.3326 (2018). DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-05809-x.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
65
==PAGE:74==
[15]
SILSO ­ Sunspot Index and Long­term Solar Observations. Home Page. Retrieved
on March 1st 2021 from http://www.sidc.be/silso/home.
[16]
Michael C. Kelley. The Earth’s Ionosphere ­ Plasma Physics and Electrodynamics.
Academic Press, 2009. ISBN: 9780120884254.
[17]
E. Kopp. “On the abundance of metal ions in the lower ionosphere”. In: Journal of
Geophysical Research 102 (1997), pp. 9667–9674. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1029/
97JA00384.
[18]
Pezzopane M., Pignalberi A., and Pietrella M. “On the influence of solar activity on
the mid­latitude sporadic E layer”. In: J. Space Weather Space Clim 5.A31 (2015).
DOI: doi.org/10.1051/swsc/2015031.
[19]
MATLAB version 9.6.0.1135713 (R2019a). The Mathworks, Inc. Natick, Massachusetts,
2019.
[20]
J. Niu. “Difference in the sporadic E layer occurrence ratio between the southern and
northern low magnetic latitude regions as observed by COSMIC radio occultation
data”. In: Space Weather 19.e2020SW002635 (2021). DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1029/2020SW002635.
[21]
J. Niu et al. “Morphology of ionospheric sporadic￿E layer intensity based on COS­
MIC occultation data in the mid and low latitude region”. In: Journal of Geophysical
Research: Space Physics (2019). DOI: doi:10.1029/2019ja026828.
[22]
Electronic Notes. Spread F Radio Propagation. Retrieved on June 22nd 2021 from
https : / / www . electronics - notes . com / articles / antennas - propagation / ionospheric /
spread-f-propagation.php.
[23]
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). World Magnetic
Model 2015. https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/news/world-magnetic-model-out-cycle-
release. 2019.
[24]
Dibyashakti Panda et al. “Effects of Rayleigh­Taylor instability and Ionospheric plasma
bubbles on the Global Navigation Satellite System signal”. In: Journal of Asian Earth
Sciences 170 (Nov. 2018). DOI: 10.1016/j.jseaes.2018.11.006.
[25]
M. Pietrella and C. Bianchi. “Occurrence of sporadic­E layer over the ionospheric
station of Rome: Analysis of data for thirty­two years”. In: Advances in Space Re­
search 44.1 (2009), pp. 72–81. ISSN: 0273­1177. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j . asr . 2009 . 03 . 006. URL: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0273117709001793.
[26]
UCAR COSMIC Program. COSMIC­1 Data Products. Apr. 28, 2021. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.5065/ZD80-KD74.
[27]
ROM­SAF. Home Page. Retrieved on May 2 2021 from https://www.romsaf.org/
index.php.
[28]
ROM­SAF. The Radio Occultation Processing Package (ROPP) Utilities Module
User Guide. Version 10.0, 30 September 2020, SAF/ROM/METO/UG/ROPP/008.
Accessed from https://www.romsaf.org/ropp/index.php.
[29]
Lung­Chih Tsai, Shin­Yi Su, and Chao­Han Liu. “Global morphology of ionospheric
F­layer scintillations using FS3/COSMIC GPS radio occultation data”. In: GPS So­
lutions 21 (2017), pp. 1037–1048. DOI: DOI10.1007/s10291-016-0591-4.
[30]
Unidata. Network Common Data Form (NetCDF) [software]. Boulder, CO: UCAR/U­
nidata. (http://doi.org/10.5065/D6H70CW6). 2012.
[31]
International Telecommunication Union. Ionospheric propagation data and predic­
tion methods required for the design of satellite networks and systems. Recommen­
dation ITU­R P.531­14. P­series, Radiowave propagation. URL: https://www.itu.
int/dms_pubrec/itu-r/rec/p/R-REC-P.531-14-201908-I!!PDF-E.pdf. 2019.
66
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:75==
[32]
Bruno César Vani and Alison de Oliveira Moraes. “Chapter 13 ­ Monitoring iono­
spheric scintillations with GNSS in South America: scope, results, and challenges”.
In: GPS and GNSS Technology in Geosciences. Ed. by George p. Petropoulos and
Prashant K. Srivastava. Elsevier, 2021, pp. 255–280. ISBN: 978­0­12­818617­6.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-818617-6.00012-3. URL: https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128186176000123.
[33]
J. D. Whitehead. “Recent work on mid­latitude and equatorial sporadic­E”. In: Jour­
nul of Atmospheric and Terrestrial Physics 51.5 (1989), pp. 401–424. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0021-9169(89)90122-0.
[34]
J. D. Whitehead. “Sporadic E morphology from GPS­CHAMP radio occultation”. In:
Journal of Geophysical Research 110.A01306 (2005). DOI: doi:10.1029/2004JA010701.
[35]
Dong L. Wu. “Ionospheric S4 Scintillations from GNSS Radio Occultation (RO) at
Slant Path”. In: Remote Sensing 12 (2020), p. 2373. DOI: doi:10.3390/rs12152373.
[36]
Zuo Xiao­Min and Wan Wei­Xing. “The Correlation Between Sporadic­E Layers and
Solar Activities”. In: Chinese Journal of Geophysics 45.6 (2002), pp. 803–809. DOI:
doi:10.1002/cjg2.295.
[37]
T. Yokoyama and C. Stolle. “Low and Midlatitude Ionospheric Plasma Density Irreg­
ularities and Their Effects on Geomagnetic Field”. In: Space Sci Rev 206.495–519
(2017). DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-016-0295-7.
[38]
Z. Zeng and S. Sokolovskiy. “Effect of sporadic E clouds on GPS radio occul­
tation signals”. In: Geophys. Res. Lett. 37, L18817 (2010). DOI: doi : 10 . 1029 /
2010GL044561.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
67
==PAGE:76==
68
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
==PAGE:77==
Code Appendix
All the code used in this project was developed and implemented in MATLAB [19]. The
programs can be accessed via the link: https://github.com/s192715/BBMScThesisCode.
The main program is MScThesisMainScript.m, which calls the algorithm MscThesisScript­
Combination.m. Together they analyse all profiles in the given input data, which typically
was one month at a time, and output variables such as if S4 or Es scintillations are present
in a profile, maximum S4 in a profile, all variables describing each Es detection such as
thickness and height, and variables describing each measurement such as time and ge­
ographical coordinates. Variables are outputted in a .mat file. Furthermore, the script
CombineMonthlyData.m was used to combine the output variables from MScThesisMain­
Script.m to form longer time series than one month. Finally, some accessory scripts are
included that served minor purposes such as making specific plots, but they have been
heavily edited throughout the process and should not be run as stand­alone scripts.
Mapping Ionospheric Scintillations in GNSS Radio Occultation Measurements
69
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, building 327 and 328
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk
