==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
Department of 
Wind Energy 
Master Report 
 
 
 
The aerodynamic impact of vortex generators implemented 
on an airfoil 
 
 
Kristian Ebstrup Jacobsen 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0462 
July 2021 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
Author: Kristian Ebstrup Jacobsen 
Title: The aerodynamic impact of vortex generators implemented on an 
airfoil 
DTU Wind Energy-M-0462 
July 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DTU Wind Energy is a department of the Technical University of Denmark 
with a unique integration of research, education, innovation and public/private 
sector consulting in the field of wind energy. Our activities develop new 
opportunities and technology for the global and Danish exploitation of wind 
energy. Research focuses on key technical-scientific fields, which are central 
for the development, innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education at the education. 
Project period:  
January – July 2021 
 
ECTS: 35 
 
Education: Master of Science 
 
 
Supervisor: 
 
Martin O. L. Hansen 
DTU Wind Energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Remarks: 
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark. 
 
 
 
 
 
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind Energy 
Frederiksborgvej 399 
4000 Roskilde 
Denmark 
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk 
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Passive vortex generators are small devices which have well-documented lift enhancement
and stall delaying properties when installed upon airfoils. In this thesis, the aerodynamic
impact of a ship-inspired vortex generator at Re = 5.0 × 106 on a DU-08-W-210 airfoil
is investigated using computational ﬂuid dynamics. The vortex generator is installed
at 40 % chord position on a simple base plate. The steady solver is used to solve a 3D
incompressible ﬂow, with the k-ω RANS turbulence model used to enable accurate resolving
of the boundary sub-layers. The γ-Reθ transition model is used to improve the prediction
of lift and drag. Both a clean airfoil and an airfoil equipped with a vortex generator is
examined. The XY Z ﬂow domain size is 15c × 10c × 0.0215c, set-up to examine a 0.0215c
wide span-wise segment of an inﬁnitely long wing. This corresponds to a span-wise
spacing of 0.043c between vortex generators. The simulation is validated by comparison
to proprietary wind tunnel data, showing good agreement with the experimental data
for angles of attack below stall. A sensitivity analysis shows a low sensitivity to mesh
reﬁnements and simultaneous ﬂow domain size increases in the XY dimensions. The clean
airfoil simulations are found to be less accurate than for the vortex generator equipped
airfoil. The vortex generator is found to delay stall by 2.0°, which is in total agreement
with experimental data, and enhance lift by 3.6 %, compared to 7.6 % for the experimental
data. The generator’s drag penalty is predicted to be in the range of 0.1 % to 1.0 %,
compared to 2.7 % for the experimental data. Points of separation and transition are
examined at varying angles of attack, and the mechanisms behind the stall behaviour of
the vortex generator equipped airfoil are discussed. The optimal span-wise spacing of
vortex generators is predicted to be between 0.043c and 0.044c.
i
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgement
First and foremost, I would like to thank my loving wife, who supported me unconditionally
through the process of writing this thesis, in spite of many months of COVID-mandated
rubbing of elbows in our small study. I owe her much.
I would like to thank my supervisor, Martin O. L. Hansen, for the enlightening discussions
regarding the results and the structure of the thesis.
I would like to thank DTU for making their high performance cluster available to students,
enabling me to perform a large quantity of costly simulations which would not have been
feasible on my private hardware.
And ﬁnally, I would like to thank LM Wind Power and Power Curve for allowing me a
sneak-peak of their wind tunnel data, such that I might validate my simulations. Without
them, my work would be reduced to baseless speculation.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.1
Regarding vortex generators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2.2
Regarding airfoils . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.3
Regarding computational ﬂuid dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2.4
Summary of examined literature
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Objective of the thesis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2
Aerodynamics and boundary layers
9
2.1
Basic airfoil aerodynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Boundary-layer transition and separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Models and their implementation
15
3.1
Governing equations and numerical schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Flow models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
Turbulence models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.2
Transition models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.3
Mesh methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3.1
Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3.2
Flow-region and meshing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.3
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4
Validation
29
4.1
Experimental set-up and data series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Mesh validations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.1
Residuals and wall-y+
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.2.2
Aerodynamic characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.3
Pressure distributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5
Sensitivity analysis
41
5.1
Mesh reﬁnement
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Flow region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.3
Turbulence and transition models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
iv
==PAGE:7==
5.3.1
RANS models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.4
Similarity parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.5
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Results
55
6.1
Aerodynamic enhancements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.1.1
Characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
6.1.2
Pressure and skin friction distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6.1.3
Velocity ﬁelds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
6.2
Resistance to leading-edge roughness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
6.3
Optimal span-wise distance between VGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
7
Conclusion
69
7.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A Derivation of the Reynolds-Averaged incompressible Navier-Stokes momen-
tum equation
75
B Distributions
77
B.1
cf(x) distributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
B.2
cp(x) distributions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
Bibliography
85
v
==PAGE:8==
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
„Little by little, one travels far.
— Spanish proverb
While the development of new, state-of-the-art designs and improvement of existing designs
have always been driven by intrinsic curiosity, many ﬁelds of study feel both the proverbial
and literal heat of climate change, presenting itself as a strong extrinsic drive for new
research. Within the time period of 1991 to 2010, the number of climate change papers
increased by a factor of ten, doubled every 5 to 6 years; an extraordinarily high rate of
growth compared to total volume of publications, which between 1980 and 2012 showed
a doubling approximately every 24 years (Haunschild et al., 2016).
This increasing academic interest in climate change coincides with a rapid growth in global
cumulative power capacity of wind energy, with 93 GW of new installations in 2020 alone
bringing the global capacity up to 743 GW, a 14 % increase in a single year (Global Wind
Energy Council, 2021). Subsequently, signiﬁcant gains are expected to be found even in
incremental design improvements and optimizations.
Vortex generators (VGs) represent such an optimization, being relatively simple shapes
with potentially signiﬁcant aerodynamic gains. The ability to accurately predict the impact
of such VGs installed upon airfoils using Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) will allow
easier analysis and evaluation of VG designs and placement optimizations.
1.1 Motivation
In the aerodynamic design process, two characteristics of a particular airfoil design are
usually the key indicators of an airfoils performance: The lift coefﬁcient cl, and the drag
coefﬁcient cd - and speciﬁcally their relative sizes, or the so called lift-over-drag coefﬁcient
cl/cd. While the different applications of aerodynamic design utilize lift for different
purposes (e.g. propulsion in sailing, lift in aeronautical design, energy production in wind
turbines), this difference is simply a question of changing the airfoil orientation to ensure
that the generated lift force points in the direction of interest.
1
==PAGE:10==
In this process, boundary layer separation remains a persistent problem in need of con-
sideration, as it can incur a heavy lift penalty and drag increase. This separation has
been of particular interest in aeronautics due to the high angles of attack encountered
during several ﬂight phases (e.g. take-off, landing, and maneuvering), but is also an issue
observed at the tip of wind turbine blades. To help combat boundary-layer separation,
Taylor proposed in 1947 that simple plates protruding normal to the airfoil surface and
oriented at an angle of incidence with the local ﬂow could be used as passive ﬂow control
devices by generating stream-wise vortices which transports energy into the boundary
layer (H. D. Taylor, 1947). These vortex generators could help delay boundary-layer
separation, and could, for example, extend the operational range of an aerodynamic device
(e.g. by delaying boundary-layer separation at wind turbine blade tips, or by lowering the
stall speed for planes).
In 1988, Rao and Kariya found evidence which suggests that by submerging vortex gener-
ators in the boundary layer, a more precise control of the ﬂow can be achieved, leading
to less parasitic drag (Rao and Kariya, 1988). These ﬁndings were later corroborated by
Lin in 1999, where it was found that the sub-boundary-layer vortex generators’ efﬁciency
were due to a reduction in wasted momentum, as the device-induced streamwise vorticity
had almost completely dissipated downstream of the baseline separation point (J. C. Lin,
1999), rather than the vortices continuing downstream. As a consequence, the placement
of the micro-vortex generators with respect to separation point became important to obtain
optimal efﬁciency.
However, predicting the lift enhancements and drag penalties of vortex generators using
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) can be quite difﬁcult, especially for more complicated
designs and when ﬂow separation occurs.
It is non-trivial to accurately predict the
lift and drag coefﬁcients of airfoils, and the computationally cheap steady Reynolds-
Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) and unsteady RANS models have signiﬁcant difﬁculties
with accurately predicting the stall angle (M. Lin and Sarlak, 2016). As a result, for angles
of attack approaching stall, accurate lift and drag predictions require signiﬁcantly more
expensive models, such as a Direct Eddy Simulation (DES), to properly resolve the complex
ﬂow structures which occur during stall (Im and Zha, 2014).
Thus, this project sets out to investigate to which extent one can optimize the process of
obtaining accurate predictions of aerodynamic characteristics of an airfoil with installed
vortex generators using CFD. Before a proper problem deﬁnition, however, a literature
review would be prudent, and is presented in the following section.
2
Chapter 1
Introduction
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Literature review
The investigated literature mainly concerns itself with the experimental exploration and
understanding of ﬂow control, and the numerical prediction of the effects gained by
implementing ﬂow control devices. The former lays the foundation upon which the latter
builds, and both are important to consider before moving on. Hence, a cursory overview
of relevant literature pertaining to vortex generators, airfoils, and CFD is presented in this
section.
1.2.1 Regarding vortex generators
As a starting point, J.C. Lin published in 2002 a thorough review of research made on
sub-boundary-layer low-proﬁle vortex generators with 0.1 ≤h/δ ≤0.5, where h is the
height of the vortex generator and δ is the boundary-layer thickness (J. C. Lin, 2002). The
research efforts highlighted in the review found that such low-proﬁle VGs are best used
for ﬂows with a ﬁxed point of separation, as the efﬁcacy of the VGs depends more heavily
on the placement compared to more conventional VGs with h/δ ∼1.0. This inﬂexibility
comes with the beneﬁt of a lower parasitic drag compared to the larger, conventional VGs,
while retaining the ability to control the ﬂow and delay boundary-layer separation. This is
achieved by producing streamwise vortices just strong enough to overcome the baseline
separation, without persisting unnecessarily downstream of the point of separation. The
low-proﬁle VGs notably require to be placed relatively close (less than 100h upstream) to
the point of separation. For low-speed adverse pressure gradient ﬂows, it is demonstrated
that very small VGs with device height of 0.1-0.2δ can be very effective in controlling the
ﬂow, yet need to be placed even closer (between 5h and 30h upstream) to the point of
separation. The precise nature of the low-proﬁle VGs make them a logical complement
to the conventional VGs, allowing the same lift enhancements and ﬂow control at a
comparably lower drag cost when the baseline separation is relatively ﬁxed, and the VGs
can be placed close here-to.
The optimization of passive VGs was experimentally examined by Godard and Stanislas in
2006, as the ﬁrst of a three-part examination of passive and active ﬂow control devices,
with the second (co-authored by Foucaut) and third part concerning respectively slotted
and round jets (Godard and Stanislas, 2006a, Godard, Foucaut, et al., 2006, and Godard
and Stanislas, 2006b).
The experimental set-up used a bump designed to replicate
moderate angles of attack, such that near-stall conditions were obtained, but without the
boundary-layer fully separating to avoid the ﬂow becoming three-dimensional. A detailed
parametric examination was conducted, examining the sensitivity to shape, conﬁguration
(counter-rotating versus co-rotating), skew angle, VG aspect ratio (l/h, where l is the
length of the VG and h is the height), transverse aspect ratio (λ/L, where λ is distance
1.2
Literature review
3
==PAGE:12==
between the leading edges of two adjacent VGs, and L is the distance between the trailing
edges), optimal streamwise position, and height. In summary, (shape) triangular VGs
yielded a 20 % improvement over rectangular ones, (conﬁguration) a counter-rotating
conﬁguration outperformed the co-rotating conﬁguration with an average difference of
100 %, (skew angle) a sensitivity to skew angle was observed, with an optimal value of
around 18°, (VG aspect ratio) low sensitivity to the VG aspect ratio was observed, with a
recommended minimum value of l/h = 2.0, (transverse aspect ratio) a convergence of
λ/L towards 2.5 was observed, (optimal streamwise position) the optimal streamwise
position was found to be 57h, reported as the distance between the trailing edge of the
VG and the point of minimum skin friction coefﬁcient Cf,min, (height) and the sensitivity
to device height h was found, as a monotonous increase in performance was observed in
the examined range (h/δ ∈[0.2; 0.46]), but with a notable comment that the curve was
expected to level off for h/δ larger than 0.5.
1.2.2 Regarding airfoils
In 2003, Timmer and van Rooij published a paper which summarized designs and results
regarding the wind turbine dedicated airfoil designs developed by Delft University of
Technology (Timmer and Van Rooij, 2003). These designs were made with RFOIL (a
modiﬁed version of XFOIL), and were designed to be a more appropriate airfoil for wind
turbine blade design compared to already existing designs, such as the NACA family. The
intent was to help mitigate performance degradation due to premature boundary layer
transition, which occurred due to the linear upscaling of the NACA airfoils for the blade
design towards the root. The design of the DU airfoil family is primarily driven by a low
sensitivity to leading edge roughness (LER) by ensuring that the boundary-layer transition
location is near the leading edge, such that premature transition will not signiﬁcantly
impact the aerodynamic characteristics. The impact of simple, triangular plate VGs placed
at 20 % chord position was examined, showing a 27 % increase in maximum lift coefﬁcient,
going from 1.55 to 1.97, and an increase in the stall angle from ∼12° to ∼16°, but came at
the expected cost of increased drag. Most notably, the VGs were shown to strongly reduce
sensitivity to LER, as adding zigzag tape at 5 % chord position (which simulates LER by
triggering premature boundary-layer transition) did not reduce lift, nor did it lower the
stall angle. It only increased drag.
A more in-depth examination of LER was performed by Bak et al. in 2016, where the
airfoil polars were obtained using CFD for a NACA633-418 airfoil with varying types of
LER damage, and subsequently investigated the impact of the damage on annual energy
production (AEP) of a Vestas V52 wind turbine using a Blade Element Momentum (BEM)
code called HAWTOPT (Bak et al., 2016). Two observations are of particular interest. First,
the CFD analysis suggested that the assumption of a fully turbulent ﬂow (i.e. the use
of zigzag tape to trip a premature boundary-layer transition) does not fully capture the
4
Chapter 1
Introduction
==PAGE:13==
aerodynamic degradation incurred by grooves and bumps in surface. Second, the loss in
AEP due to LER damages were found to reduce with an increase in average wind speed on
sites, with losses estimated to be between 1 % and 4 % for low-speed sites, and 0.5 % to
3 % for high-speed sites.
1.2.3 Regarding computational ﬂuid dynamics
The k-ω turbulence model ﬁrst published by Wilcox in 1988 (David C. Wilcox, 1988)
and later revised in 2008 (David C Wilcox, 2008) is often used in industrial aerospace
simulations, and remarked upon by Menter in 1994 as the model of choice in regards
to the sublayer of the boundary layer in his published revision of the model (Menter,
1994). Menter called his revision the k-ω SST (Shear Stress Transport) turbulence model,
which eliminated a strong freestream condition sensitivity in the k-ω turbulence model
by effectively using the k-ϵ model in the freestream, and the k-ω model in the boundary
layer. This particularly improved the prediction of adverse pressure gradient ﬂows. In
2016, Matyushenko and Garbaruk proposed a parametric adjustment to the k-ω SST model
by showing that reducing the a1 parameter from the standard value of 0.31 to a value of
0.28 resulted in a better agreement with experimental data in a wide range of angles of
attack (α ∈[0°; 30°]), improving both the predicted maximum lift and predicted point of
separation (Matyushenko and Garbaruk, 2016).
A comparative study by Bensow et al. published in 2006 examined the accuracy of the
RANS (in particular using the k-ϵ turbulence model), Large Eddy Simulation (LES), and
Detached Eddy Simulation (DES) (Bensow et al., 2006). Two cases were examined: The
ﬂow over a 3D surface mounted hill of height h at Re= 130 000, and the ﬂow around an
axisymmetric hull at Re= 12 × 106. In both cases, the y+ values are reported to be y+ = 1
and y+ = 2 for the RANS model in the ﬁrst and second case respectively, while LES and
DES models have y+ = 10.0 in both cases. Results from the ﬁrst case show that all models
are capable of accurately predicting the lowest pressure and highest velocity at the top of
the hill; however, the RANS (and to a lesser degree, the DES) model fails with regards to
predicting the ﬁner ﬂow structures, while the LES performs the best. Namely, the RANS
and DES overpredicts the recirculation zone downstream of the hilltop. The RANS fails to
predict the stream-wise, cross-stream, and span-wise velocities near the centerline in a
plane normal to the freeﬂow direction located at 3.69h downstream of the hilltop, while
the LES performs the best and the DES is very sensitive to the length of the inﬂow region
(the smaller, the better it performs). In the second case, it is demonstrated that while
the LES and DES performs the best, the RANS performs adequately. Most notably, the
time-averaged aspect of the RANS smoothen some bumps in the skin friction coefﬁcient
along the hull, which are captured by the LES and DES. A ﬁnal remark is made that the
DES results could likely be improved by a reﬁnement of the near-wall mesh.
1.2
Literature review
5
==PAGE:14==
In 2014, Im and Zha simulated the ﬂow past a NACA0012 airfoil in the stall regime, making
the comparison at an angle of attack of 45°, with the predictions validated by experimental
data. They demonstrated that signiﬁcantly more accurate results could be obtained using
a Delayed Detached Eddy Simulation (DDES) turbulence model compared to an unsteady
RANS model (Im and Zha, 2014). The unsteady RANS is found to overpredict drag and lift
by 22.6 % and 28.1 % respectively, while the DDES had an error of less than 3 % and 7 %
on drag and lift respectively. For the DDES, of the two meshes used in the simulation, the
coarse mesh yielded slightly smaller errors. Additionally, an analysis of the DDES model’s
sensitivity to time-step size was examined on the ﬁner mesh. Time is non-dimensionalised,
with the simulated time being deﬁned as T = c/U∞, where c is the airfoil chord and
U∞is the freeﬂow velocity, and the simulation runs for T = 200. Two non-dimensional
physical time steps are examined using the ﬁner mesh, ∆= 0.02 and ∆= 0.01 (similarly
non-dimensionalised in units of c/U∞). The smaller time step allows the capture of greater
detail in ﬂow ﬂuctuations, but yields only a minor improvement in the prediction error on
the mean lift and mean drag observed, at the cost of the simulation steps being doubled.
1.2.4 Summary of examined literature
To highlight the most important results, the main sentiments from the examined literature
will brieﬂy be collectively summarized here to help inform the thesis:
• Regarding vortex generators, the literature demonstrates obvious advantages to the
implementation of VGs on airfoils, including lift enhancement, delaying stall, and
reducing the negative impact of premature boundary-layer transition on the aerody-
namic characteristics of an airfoil. These advantages come at the cost of an increase
in drag, which in cases of ﬁxed points of separation can be reduced by lowering the
device height.
• Regarding airfoils, the DU airfoil family is speciﬁcally designed to be less sensitive to
LER, compared to the NACA airfoil family. When combined with simple, triangular
plate VGs, it is demonstrated that the impact of premature transition triggered by
zigzag tape is limited to an increase in drag, with lift and stall angle being virtually
unchanged. However, CFD simulations suggest that zigzag tape induced boundary-
layer transition is insufﬁcient in capturing the aerodynamic degradation due to
surface grooves and bumps.
• Regarding computational ﬂuid dynamics, it is shown that adjusting the a1 parameter
of the k-ω SST turbulence model can improve the agreement with experimental data
when using the RANS model. However, the literature also demonstrates that the
RANS, while fast, has difﬁculties accurately simulating complex ﬂows, including near-
stall and active stall ﬂows. In these cases, LES and DES will provide demonstrably
better results, with the disadvantage of higher computational costs.
6
Chapter 1
Introduction
==PAGE:15==
1.3 Objective of the thesis
The literature reports obvious advantages offered by passive vortex generators, but these
advantages carry a drag penalty. This thesis aims to use commerical CFD software to
develop and investigate a CFD approach, which enables one to answer the following
question:
Using CFD with a RANS turbulence model, what are the predicted enhance-
ments and penalties incurred by equipping an airfoil with a passive vortex
generator, and how do the predictions compare to experimental data?
This question is effectively the problem formulation for this thesis. Accurate predictions
are expected to be achievable using LES and DES models, per the literature reviewed in the
previous section, but these models have a large computational cost compared to the RANS
model. Thus, the underlying intent of the stated problem formulation is to investigate how
far the RANS model can be pushed in terms of accuracy, and whether it, if at all, has the
ability to make accurate predictions pertaining to the impact of vortex generators. Before
the CFD simulations are used to make proper predictions, the modelling will be validated,
and its sensitivity to changes in key parameters will be investigated to ensure a converged
and saturated simulation.
The choice in ﬂow models, airfoil and vortex generator geometry, ﬂow domain and ﬂow
parameters are all motivated by the available experimental data. This allows a proper
assessment of the accuracy of the predictions by setting up the simulation with the same
geometry and Reynolds number as the experimental data.
The experimental data is obtained from wind tunnel measurements made as part of a
cooperative research project by DTU Wind Energy, LM Wind Power, and Power Curve. The
data is proprietary, but was kindly made available for the purpose of this thesis. It contains
polars for the DU-08-W-210 airfoil in a clean set-up, in a tripped set-up, and in a set-up
with a particular vortex generator. The Reynolds number is 5 × 106 for all the data.
1.3
Objective of the thesis
7
==PAGE:16==
==PAGE:17==
2
Aerodynamics and boundary layers
This chapter brieﬂy presents the most important elements of airfoil aerodynamics, and
the phenomena of boundary layer transition and separation. The knowledge presented is,
unless stated otherwise, based on chapter 2 of Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines, third edition,
by Hansen (Hansen, 2015) and chapter 10 of Fluid Mechanics, sixth edition, by Kundu
et al. (Kundu et al., 2015), with the former being the basis of the airfoil aerodynamics
section, and the latter the basis of the boundary layer section.
2.1 Basic airfoil aerodynamics
Fig. 2.1.: An illustration of an airfoil, and the most important characteristics and forces. Depicted
are the chord c, angle of attack α, inﬂow velocity U∞, aerodynamic force F and its
components, lift L and drag D. The moment M is also depicted, and is non-zero when
the aerodynamic force is not centered on the airfoil’s center of mass.
An airfoil represents the cross-section of a wing, and generally has recognizable characteris-
tics such as a rounded leading edge and a sharp trailing edge. The straight line connecting
the center of curvature on leading edge to the center of curvature on the trailing edge
is called the chord, c. The angle between the chord and the incoming free stream ﬂow
is called the angle of attack, α. The line passing midway between the upper and lower
surfaces is called the camber line, and the maximum distance between the camber line and
9
==PAGE:18==
the chord line is called the camber. The chord and angle of attack are the most relevant
of these characteristics for the purpose of this thesis, as they allow the evaluation of an
airfoil’s aerodynamic performance. When submerged in a ﬂow, the airfoil will experience
a net aerodynamic force, which is composed of a component normal to the ﬂow, called lift
L and a component parallel to the ﬂow, called drag D. An illustration of a generic airfoil
is depicted in Fig. 2.1. The aerodynamic performance of an airfoil is primarily stated
as normalized lift and drag, the lift coefﬁcient cl and the drag coefﬁcient cd, which are
deﬁned as:
cl =
L
0.5ρU2∞A,
and
cd =
D
0.5ρU2∞A,
(2.1)
where ρ is the density of the ﬂuid, U∞is the free stream velocity, and A = c · w is the
planform area, where w is the width of the foil. In two dimensions, the width is simply set
to 1. When quantifying the aerodynamic performance of an airfoil, cl and cd are often key
properties to examine, and together with the lift-over-drag ratio, cl/cd, are often reported
as polars, which most often show cl as a function of cd or as a function of α.
Fig. 2.2.: An illustration of streamlines bending past an airfoil. Streamlines bend due to the
presence of pressure gradients. This is used to intuitively identify the upper surface
of the airfoil as the low pressure "suction" side, as the streamlines bend towards this
side, while the lower surface is identiﬁed as the high pressure "pressure" side, as the
streamlines bend away from it. The overall deﬂection of the ﬂow downwards generates
the lift.
10
Chapter 2
Aerodynamics and boundary layers
==PAGE:19==
Drag forces result from stress and pressure distributions on the surface of the foil, and are
respectively called friction drag and pressure drag. The lift force occur almost exclusively
due to a pressure difference between the upper and lower surfaces of the foil, called the
suction and pressure sides respectively. The physical explanation for lift can be found in
how the airfoil deﬂects the streamlines downwards, which according to Newton’s Third
Law will incur an equal upwards-pointing force on the airfoil. This bending of streamlines
is illustrated in Fig. 2.2. The upwards-pointing force arises from a pressure difference,
which can be inferred from the bending of the streamlines. The streamline bending occurs
due to a pressure gradient acting as a centripetal force on the ﬂow, and is proportional to
the curvature 1/r of the streamline:
∂p
∂r = ρU2
∞
r
(2.2)
As there is atmospheric pressure p0 far from the airfoil, the pressure gradient implies a low
pressure on the suction side, and a high pressure on the pressure side, as Eq. 2.2 shows
that δp/δr is positive in the direction pointing from the center of curvature towards the
streamline, resulting in the intuitive conclusion that streamlines bend towards areas of
low pressure (Hansen, 2015).
2.2 Boundary-layer transition and separation
The Reynolds number Re is a dimensionless property which describes the ratio of inertial
forces to viscous forces in a ﬂow, and is commonly deﬁned as (Sommerfeld, 1908):
Re = LU∞
ν
,
(2.3)
where U∞is the free stream velocity, L is a characteristic length (where L = c when
studying airfoils), and ν is the kinematic viscosity of the ﬂuid. The Reynolds number
is indicative of whether a ﬂow is in a laminar or turbulent ﬂow regime, with laminar
ﬂows occurring at low Re, and turbulent ﬂows occurring at high Re. This distinction also
applies to boundary layers, with a notable difference in the Reynolds number being a local
property in a boundary layer rather than a global one. Adopting a conforming coordinate
system where x increases along the surface of the boundary, and y increases normal to
said surface, the local Re number in a boundary layer can be deﬁned as:
Rex = xU∞
ν
,
(2.4)
where the characteristic length is deﬁned by x, the distance to the leading edge. This
local Reynolds number, which increases as one moves downstream of the leading edge,
enables the possibility of a boundary layer transitioning from laminar to turbulent ﬂow if
2.2
Boundary-layer transition and separation
11
==PAGE:20==
Rex becomes larger than a critical Reynolds number, Recr. For a ﬂat plate, this transitional,
critical Reynolds number is:
Recr ∼106
(ﬂat plate).
(2.5)
Recr is dependent on the geometry of the surface, and decreased by surface roughness (of
which leading edge roughness is of particular concern for e.g. wind turbine blades, and
can lead to premature transition (Bak et al., 2016)).
An illustration of a boundary layer forming on the suction side of an airfoil is depicted
in Fig. 2.3. Here the conforming coordinate system is shown, as well as the boundary
layer thickness, δ, which is often deﬁned as δ99, which is speciﬁed as the normal distance
from the wall where the stream-wise velocity has grown to 0.99Ue, where Ue is the local
free-stream speed.
Fig. 2.3.: An illustration of the boundary layer formed on an airfoil. The boundary layer’s conform-
ing coordinate system is depicted. U∞is the freestream velocity, U(x)e is the boundary
layer edge velocity, and δ is the boundary layer thickness. The thickness of the boundary
layer is greatly exaggerated.
Transition is an issue worth considering, as laminar and turbulent boundary layers differ
in many important ways. The thickness of a turbulent boundary layer grows faster than a
laminar boundary layer, and has increased frictional drag due to the turbulent ﬂuctuations
creating more wall-normal transport of momentum. This increased frictional drag also
makes the turbulent boundary layer less sensitive to boundary-layer separation, which
occurs due to the presence of an adverse pressure gradient in the boundary layer.
A pressure gradient is said to be adverse when dp/dx > 0, and favorable when dp/dx <
0. Boundary-layer separation occurs when an adverse pressure gradient present in a
boundary layer is strong enough to reverse the direction of the ﬂow. To help build a basic
understanding of boundary-layer separation, the steady stream-wise boundary-layer-ﬂow
12
Chapter 2
Aerodynamics and boundary layers
==PAGE:21==
Fig. 2.4.: An illustration of boundary layer separation occurring due to the inﬂuence of an adverse
pressure gradient.
momentum equation (which itself is a simpliﬁed version of the Navier-Stokes momentum
equation) is presented as follows:
u∂u
∂x + v∂u
∂y = −1
ρ
∂p
∂x + ν ∂2u
∂y2 ,
(2.6)
where the position vector and its components are given by x = [x, y, z], and similarly the
velocity vector is given by v = [u, v, w]. Due to the no-slip condition, Eq. (2.6) can be
simpliﬁed when applying it to the boundary surface, where v = 0:
µ

∂2u/∂y2
surface = ∂p/∂x
(2.7)
In an accelerating ﬂow, the pressure gradient is negative, which leads to the following
expression for the proﬁle curvature, ∂2u/∂y2,

∂2u/∂y2
surface < 0
(accelerating),
(2.8)
while in a decelerating ﬂow, the pressure gradient is positive, similarly yielding

∂2u/∂y2
surface > 0
(decelerating).
(2.9)
In both the accelerating and decelerating ﬂow, the velocity proﬁle has to blend smoothly
with the external proﬁle. Consequently, ∂u/∂y has to decrease with increasing y until the
edge of the boundary layer, where ∂u/∂y = 0. This naturally leads to ∂2u/∂y2 < 0 at the
boundary-layer edge, which together with Eq. (2.8) shows that in an accelerating ﬂow, the
2.2
Boundary-layer transition and separation
13
==PAGE:22==
proﬁle curvature has the same sign at the surface and the boundary-layer edge. Using the
same reasoning for the decelerating ﬂow, it can be seen that the proﬁle curvature will have
opposite signs at the surface and the edge. Put differently, the curvature must switch sign
somewhere in the boundary layer, and the point where this happens is called the point of
inﬂection.
The existence of a point of inﬂection is a condition for boundary layer separation, but it is
not proof. In an adverse pressure gradient, the boundary-layer ﬂow slows down, thickens,
and develops a point of inﬂection. If the adverse pressure gradient is strong enough, or
persists over a long enough distance, a reversal of the wall-adjacent ﬂow occurs. The
point where the forward and reverse ﬂows collide is called the local stagnation point,
or the separation point S. The ﬂow structure at S is characterized by streamlines from
approaching from either side, and subsequently being transported away from the wall. As
the surface shear stress switches signs across S, an assumption of ﬂow continuity requires
that a separation point can be identiﬁed by a point on the surface with zero surface shear
stress:
(∂u/∂y)surface = 0
(separation).
(2.10)
Notably, for airfoils, boundary-layer separation is associated with an increase in form drag
and a decrease in generated lift due to the pressure drop in the separated region. In other
words, it carries with it a signiﬁcant loss of aerodynamic performance. This loss is also
referred to as "stall". In airfoil design, the slender, "streamlined" shapes ensure that the
adverse pressure gradient on the trailing edge is small enough that the boundary layer
stays attached along the entire length of the foil at low to moderate angles of attack, and
the separation is limited to the trailing edge. The angle at which stall occurs is noticeably
close to the angle where maximum lift is found, as the drop in performance is due to the
point of separation jumps from the trailing edge towards the leading edge. In other words,
the angle of attack becomes too steep, such that the adverse pressure gradient becomes
too strong, which leads to separation upstream from the trailing edge.
As mentioned earlier in this section, a turbulent boundary layer is more resistant to
separation due to an increase in transport of momentum towards the fall, delaying a ﬂow
reversal. While a laminar boundary layer will transition if a surface is long enough, the
point of transition, xcr, might be further downstream than the laminar point of separation,
Slaminar. In this case, a prudent strategy would be to "trip" the boundary layer slightly
upstream from Slaminar, such that the heavy loss of performance from separation is avoided,
at a lower friction drag penalty arising from the transition into the turbulent regime
(Kundu et al., 2015).
14
Chapter 2
Aerodynamics and boundary layers
==PAGE:23==
3
Models and their implementation
This section presents the methodology behind the simulations performed in this thesis.
To this end, the underlying geometry of the airfoil, vortex generator, and base plate,
the choices made in regards to used ﬂow models, and the set-up of the used meshes,
are presented and reasoned. When referring to a particular model option or choice in
STAR-CCM+, it will be typeset as follows: "STAR-CCM+ Model Option". This is done to
help distinguish between general theory and speciﬁc STAR-CCM+ vernacular.
All simulations are carried out using Simcenter STAR-CCM+ 2020.3.1 (15.06.008-R8),
with the results extracted to and treated in MATLAB R2019a Update 3. All CAD-related
work has been performed using SOLIDWORKS 2020. The simulations were computed
using the LSF 10 High Performance Cluster (HPC) made available to all students through
DTU’s Computing Center (DCC).
The asymptotic convergence of cl and cd towards a constant value or a constant cycle is
used as the stopping criterion for all simulations.
3.1 Governing equations and numerical schemes
A numerical approach is a brute-force method of solving a set of equations, and is arguably
a less elegant approach than an analytical one. However, analytically solvable ﬂows are
rare, and often limited to simple case studies such as Poiseuille and Couette ﬂows, due to
the complexity of continuity mechanics and ﬂow dynamics. STAR-CCM+ is commercial
CFD simulation software developed by Siemens PLM Software, and as mentioned is used
in this thesis for all ﬂow simulation purposes.
The governing equations for ﬂuid dynamics are the equations arising from the principle of
conservation of mass, momentum, and energy. In the case of the ﬂow past an airfoil, the
relevant governing equations are the conservation of mass, expressed using index notation
in its differential form as:
∂ρ
∂t + ∂
∂xi
(ρui) = 0,
(3.1)
15
==PAGE:24==
while the conservation of momentum for Newtonian ﬂuids, assuming small temperature
differences within the ﬂow, is expressed by the following form of the Navier-Stokes
equation:
ρ
∂uj
∂t + ui
∂uj
∂xi

= −∂p
∂xj
+ ρgj + µ∂2uj
∂x2
i
+

µv + 1
3µ
 ∂
∂xj
∂um
∂xm
,
(3.2)
where ρ is the density of the ﬂuid, t is time, p is pressure, gi, xi, and ui are the i-th
component of respectively the body force vector g, the position vector x, and the velocity
vector u. For incompressible ﬂuids, the velocity ﬁeld has no divergence, ∂um/∂xm = 0,
which simpliﬁes the conservation of mass to:
∂ρ
∂t = 0,
(3.3)
and the Navier-Stokes equation to:
ρ
∂uj
∂t + ui
∂uj
∂xi

= −∂p
∂xj
+ ρgj + µ∂2uj
∂x2
i
.
(3.4)
It is generally considered valid to make the assumption of incompressibility for a Mach
number M less than 0.3, where M = 0.3 corresponds to a ∼10 % departure from a
truly incompressible ﬂow (Kundu et al., 2015). In air, assuming the speed of sound is
343 m s−1, this upper limit roughly corresponds to the requirement that the ﬂow velocity is
U < 100 m s−1.
Before the governing equations for a ﬂow ﬁeld can even be attempted to be numerically
solved, it is necessary to discretize the continuous ﬂow ﬁeld. For most types of ﬂow,
STAR-CCM+ uses the numerical scheme of Finite Volume Discretization (or Finite Volume
Method) to obtain discretized expressions of the governing equations in time and space
to allow solving the ﬂow ﬁeld in discretized space, deﬁned by the computational mesh
(Siemens PLM Software, 2020). While numerically solving the Navier-Stokes equation
directly for turbulent ﬂows is possible (a method called Direct Numerical Simulation),
this is rarely feasible due to being very computationally expensive, and is mostly used for
research purposes (Moin and Mahesh, 1998). Instead, different turbulence models have
been developed to help approximate turbulence in a ﬂow. The choice of turbulence models
is discussed in the next section.
16
Chapter 3
Models and their implementation
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Flow models
As stated in section 1.3, the objective of the thesis is to accurately predict the aerodynamic
characteristics of a DU-08-W-210 airfoil at Re= 5 × 106. Using the deﬁnition from Eq.
(2.3), the Reynolds number for an airfoil is given by:
Re = ρcU∞
µ
,
(3.5)
where ρ is the air density, U∞is the freestream velocity, and µ is the dynamic viscosity.
Assuming an air density of ρ = 1.225 kg m−3, chord c = 1.0 m and dynamic viscosity
µ = 1.81 × 10−5 Pa s, Re = 5.0 × 106 corresponds to freestream velocity U∞= 74 m s−1,
which is less than the upper limit of U = 100 m s−1 required for the incompressibilty
assumption. As such, the ﬂow will be modelled as Constant Density, as it is called in
STAR-CCM+. Additionally, the Segregated Flow solver will be used, as it is argued to be
sufﬁcient for low Mach-number cases.
To ease the normalization of results, a decision is made to take advantage of the similarity
parameter, Re, and set ρ = 1.0 kg m−3, U∞= [1.0, 0.0, 0.0] m s−1, and c = 1.0 m. This
allows Re to be deﬁned by µ alone, as Eq. (3.5) is simpliﬁed and can be rewritten to:
µ = ρcU∞
Re
=⇒
µ = 2.0 × 10−7 Pa s.
(3.6)
Consequently, the evaluation of cl and cd is made easier as Eq. (2.1) simpliﬁes to respec-
tively cl = 2L/w and cd = 2D/w, where w is the width of airfoil as set-up in the simulation.
As long as non-dimensionalisation is performed properly, results from simulations with
the same Re number are expected to be similar, however it is possible that the similarity
principle does not hold in the stall regime.
As the Re number is high, the ﬂow regime is set to Turbulent. Resolving the turbulence
by direct numerical simulation in the Navier-Stokes equation is not reasonable, and thus
a turbulence model must be chosen. As there are multiple turbulence models to choose
from, and the best choice is not necessarily self-evident, the next section is dedicated to a
brief summary of the turbulence models, where the different models excel, and why the
k-ω turbulence model is ultimately chosen.
3.2.1 Turbulence models
Of the turbulence models available in STAR-CCM+, most of them build on the Reynolds-
averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) equations. The RANS equations are time-averaged variants
of the instantaneous Navier-Stokes equations, which use Reynolds decomposition (ﬁrst
3.2
Flow models
17
==PAGE:26==
suggested by Reynolds, 1895) to separate any ﬂow variable (e.g. ui) into a composition of
their mean value, ¯ui, and a ﬂuctuating component, u′
i:
ui = ¯ui + u′
i.
(3.7)
All ﬂow ﬁeld variables, i.e. velocity, pressure, density, and temperature, are decomposed
to obtain the RANS equations by substituting the decompositions into any Navier-Stokes
equation. A notable property of the ﬂuctuations are that the mean value of the ﬂuctations
are equal zero, u′i = 0, which is used to obtain the RANS equations. For an airfoil in
an incompressible ﬂow, the most relevant equation to consider is the RANS momentum
equation. It is obtained by splitting the instantaneous ﬂow quantities in Eq. (3.4) into
their decompositions, and time-averaging the resulting equation. The algebraic exercise
ultimately yields (with the full derivation presented in Appendix A):
ρ
∂uj
∂t + ui
∂uj
∂xi

= ρgj + ∂
∂xi
h
−pδij + 2µSij −ρu′
ju′
i
i
,
(3.8)
where the mean rate of strain tensor, Sij, is given by:
Sij = 1
2
 
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
!
.
(3.9)
However, Reynolds averaging introduces the problem of closure, as the derivation of the
RANS equations yield an extra stress term, the Reynolds stress tensor, compared to the
instantaneous Navier-Stokes. The Reynolds stress tensor, Rij, has historically been deﬁned
as (Crowe et al., 2012):
Rij ≡u′
iu′
j,
(3.10)
which evidently represents stress arising from the turbulence. The new term makes the
RANS equations impossible to directly solve, as there are more variables than equations -
the equations are not "closed". (Kundu et al., 2015, Siemens PLM Software, 2020).
To resolve the closure problem, generally three different methods are considered. The
ﬁrst, direct numerical simulation (DNS), resolves the problem by directly solving the
time-dependent equations of motion and subsequently Reynolds-averaging to obtain the
mean-ﬂow quantities, which can be inserted into the RANS equations and reduce the
amount of variables such that the RANS equations become solvable. The second, RANS
closure modelling, "close" the RANS equations by modelling the Reynolds stress correlations
as a function of mean-velocity quantities. Finally, the third, called large eddy simulation
(LES), works as a compromise between the two other methods, as the large scales of
turbulence are numerically resolved akin to DNS, while the smaller scales are modelled.
The RANS models will be focused on for the remainder of this section.
18
Chapter 3
Models and their implementation
==PAGE:27==
Of the four main RANS turbulence models that STAR-CCM+ has implemented, three of
them are so-called eddy viscosity models, which assume that the Reynolds stress behaves
as a shear stress by introducing the concept of turbulent eddy viscosity, µt, and thus can
be modelled using mean ﬂow quantities. The most common model is the Boussinesq
approximation, where u′
iu′
j is given by:
u′
iu′
j = 2
3kδij −νT
 
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
!
,
(3.11)
where νT = µT /ρ is the turbulent kinematic eddy viscosity, and k is the turbulent kinetic
energy. The models differ in how they approach the issue of modelling νT , but all solve
additional transport equations to obtain scalar quantities which allows the computation
of the modelled νT , and are often classiﬁed by the amount of extra equations which are
solved. The three models in question are the one-equation Spalart-Allmaras turbulence
model (Spalart and Allmaras, 1994), the two-equation k-ϵ turbulence model (Jones and
Launder, 1972), and the two-equation k-ω turbulence model (David C. Wilcox, 1988).
The Spalart-Allmaras turbulence model was developed for aerodynamic ﬂow, and it deﬁnes
the turbulent eddy viscosity as νt = fv1˜v, where the modiﬁed diffusivity ˜v is determined
by solving a transport equation. fv1 is a damping function. In the original paper, Spalart
and Allmaras presents the model with results from a Samuel-Joubert ﬂow (Samuel and
Joubert, 1974), where the results suggest that the model has a mild tendency to under-
predict the shape factor and thickness in boundary layers subject to an adverse pressure
gradient. Otherwise, the model produces decent results for ﬂows past a wing. The model
is also able to fully resolve the entire boundary layer, which allows it to be applied to ﬁne
computational meshes.
The k-ϵ turbulence model, as the name implies, solves transport equations for the turbulent
kinetic energy k and the turbulent dissipation rate ε, which are subsequently used to
calculate νt = CµfµkT, where Cµ is a model coefﬁcient, fµ is a damping function, and T
is the turbulent time scale, which is obtained from k and ε. It has seen wide industrial
application, but is unlikely to be sufﬁciently accurate for the purpose of predicting an
airfoil’s aerodynamic characteristics, as it does not fully resolve the boundary layer, but
rather employs wall functions. Improvements to the model have been introduced (and
included in STAR-CCM+), such as the two-layer approach which allows the model to be
applied in all boundary sub-layers. However, it is still expected to be a non-ideal model for
the thesis’ objective.
The k-ω turbulence model solves transport equations for k and the speciﬁc dissipation rate
ω (where ω ∝ε/k) to calculate νt = kT, where T is the turbulent time scale obtained
using ω. It has an advantage over the k-ε model in an improved performance for boundary
layers under adverse pressure gradients, and even more importantly, it can be applied
3.2
Flow models
19
==PAGE:28==
throughout the boundary sub-layers without need for modiﬁcations akin to the two-layer
approach. A major disadvantage of the k-ω model is its sensitivity to inlet boundary
conditions for internal ﬂows, but the shear-stress-transport (SST) modiﬁcation introduced
by Menter adressed this issue, effectively blending the k-ε models and k-ω models such
that the former is used in the far-ﬁeld, and the latter in the near-wall region. (Menter,
1994, Siemens PLM Software, 2020).
Of the three models, the k-ω turbulence model is chosen as the baseline model. Both the
Spalart-Allmaras model and k-ω models would be expected to produce decent results, and
are designed with aerodynamics in mind, with both models being presented with validation
rooted in ﬂows similar to those over wings. However, with Menter’s SST modiﬁcation,
the k-ω turbulence model seems to be the more accurate of the two (Meana-Fernández
et al., 2019), and has the added beneﬁt of supporting transition models in STAR-CCM+.
Finally, recent research shows that modifying the a1 parameter from 0.31 to 0.28 improves
the predictions of airfoil characteristics near stall at high Re (Matyushenko and Garbaruk,
2016).
To summarize, the K-Omega Turbulence model with the SST (Menter) K-Omega modiﬁ-
cation is chosen. The a1 parameter is set to a1 = 0.28.
3.2.2 Transition models
Transition models are used together with turbulence models to predict the onset of
transition from laminar to turbulent boundary layer. This is necessary as turbulence
models as a rule are developed to predict fully turbulent ﬂows, and not transitioning
ﬂows.
In STAR-CCM+, the Turbulence Suppression model is an option which allows simple
modelling of transition. As the name implies, it models transition by suppressing turbulence
in an user-speciﬁed region. This type of transition modelling is computationally cheap,
and useful for replicating the "tripping" of the boundary layer, which is often done in
experimental set-ups to simulate the performance of an airfoil subject to LER. However,
the model has a disadvantage, as it requires the point of transition to be speciﬁed, and
hence known.
The γ-Reθ transition model (Gamma-ReTheta Transition Model), on the other hand,
offers true predictive capabilities (Menter et al., 2006).
The model is based on the
intermittency concept, where an intermittency value γ ranging from 0 to 1 is used to
indicate how turbulent a cell is, with γ = 0 corresponding to a fully laminar ﬂow, and
γ = 1 to a fully turbulent ﬂow. It uses a transport equation for γ, which is coupled to
the SST k-γ turbulence model, as a way of controlling where to turn on the turbulence
20
Chapter 3
Models and their implementation
==PAGE:29==
production term. Two empirical correlations, Reθc which indicates the critical Reynolds
number where intermittency starts to increase, and Flength which controls the length of the
transitional region, were proprietary in the original paper, and has thus been calibrated by
STAR-CCM+ according to the forms suggested by Suluksna et al. (Suluksna et al., 2009).
These are given as:
Reθc = min
h
0.615Reθt + 61.5, Reθt
i
(3.12)
Flength = min
h
0.5 + exp

7.168 −0.01773Reθt

, 300
i
,
(3.13)
where Reθt is a ﬁnal empirical correlation, which similarly has been calibrated by STAR-
CCM+ in their internal "Suluksna-Juntasaro" calibration to be deﬁned relative to the
turbulence intensity Tu (Siemens PLM Software, 2020):
Reθt =



(1173.51 −589.428Tu + 0.2196/Tu2)
Tu ≤1.3
331.5(Tu −0.5658)−0.671
Tu > 1.3
(3.14)
Reθt represents the transition onset momentum thickness Reynolds number in the free-
stream. The transport equation for the transition momentum thickness Reynolds number
transports the free-stream value into the boundary layer by effectively shutting off the
source term when in the boundary layer using a blending function. However, the blending
function relies on a user-deﬁned ﬁeld function to determine what is the free-stream, and
what is the boundary layer. Similar to the intermittency value, this function needs to
take the value 0 in the boundary layer, and the value 1 in the free-stream. STAR-CCM+
suggests setting up a ﬁeld function as:
$WallDistance > 0.005?1:0,
(3.15)
which effectively says that the boundary layer everywhere is thinner than 5 mm. The
thickness can of course be adjusted as required. As will become apparent in the next
section, the vortex generator to be examined will have a height h = 0.65 %c, corresponding
to 6.5 mm. Making an assumption based on the reviewed literature regarding vortex
generators, it is expected that h ∼δ. As δ grows as one moves downstream, the free-
stream edge is set to a semi-reasoned, semi-arbitrary 10 mm:
$WallDistance > 0.01?1:0.
(3.16)
3.3 Mesh methodology
With the physics models established, the computational mesh needs to be deﬁned. The
chosen turbulence model force the need for a mesh ﬁne enough to be able to resolve the
viscous sub-layer, which means that it is required that wall-y+ < 1. A notable concern is,
3.3
Mesh methodology
21
==PAGE:30==
that the wall-y+ requirement becomes more difﬁcult to meet for higher Re numbers, and
the relatively high Re of Re= 5 × 106 examined in this thesis imposes some restrictions in
the three-dimensional meshes required to simulate the three-dimensional VGs.
In this section, the geometry of interest is ﬁrst introduced, depicting the DU-08-W-210
airfoil, a base plate for VG installation, and the VG which are to be examined in different
conﬁgurations. Subsequently, three different computational meshes will be presented,
each obtained using a different approach to reﬁnement.
3.3.1 Geometry
The simulations in this thesis all use a DU-08-W-210 airfoil, the geometry of which is
shown in Fig. 3.1 (both with and without installed vortex generator). DU-08-W-210 is a
newer variant from the DU family of wind turbine blade airfoils described by Timmer and
van Rooij, which are designed to be less sensitive to LER (Timmer and Van Rooij, 2003).
A CAD model of the DU-08-W-210 design was supplied by the thesis supervisor, Martin
Hansen, and the choice was wholly motivated by the fact that the experimental set-up,
from which the validation data is obtained, uses a DU-08-W-210 airfoil. The trailing edge
is notably rounded, as can be seen in Fig. 3.1, and connects the upper and lower surfaces
with a 0.003c diameter circle.
To help the installation of the vortex generator on the airfoil, a base plate was designed
by the author. It is shown with most relevant details in Fig. 3.2. A base plate was
deemed necessary due to the curvature of the airfoil’s upper surface, as the VG could
not be attached directly on the surface without problematic openings in the geometry
between the bottom of the VG and the surface of the airfoil. As an alternative to the base
plate, lowering the VG until these openings disappeared was considered. However, such a
solution would leave part of the VG "submerged" in the airfoil, effectively changing the
VG geometry by removing the submerged part from the simulated ﬂow region. Instead,
a non-intrusive base plate was designed, with a ﬂat surface for mounting, and rounded
edges to minimize the impact of the base plate on the ﬂow.
The vortex generator used in the simulations is a so-called "VG Ship", named for its
resemblance to a ship’s bow. Similar to the airfoil, the choice of VG is wholly motivated by
the experimental set-up using that particular type of VG. The CAD model was obtained
from the thesis supervisor. It is shown in Fig. 3.3. The VG height, h, is deﬁned as the
normal distance airfoil surface to the (front) tip of the VG. As such, the base plate height
is included as part of the VG height. Unless otherwise stated, h = 0.66 %c, and the VG is
placed such that the front tip is located at 0.4c on the suction side.
Moving forward, a "Clean" geometry case refers to a simulation of only the DU-08-W-210
airfoil, while a "full" or "VG" geometry case refers to a simulation with all three elements
(airfoil, base plate, and VG).
22
Chapter 3
Models and their implementation
==PAGE:31==
 1,00c 
 1,00c 
 0,40c 
 0,0056c 
 0,04c 
 
0,003c 
c
c
DU-08-W-210, Clean
DU-08-W-210, VG
Fig. 3.1.: The geometry of the DU-08-W-210 airfoil, depicted (left) as a clean airfoil, and (right)
with the base plate and VG installed. A ﬁner depiction of the base plate is shown in Fig.
3.2, and of the VG in Fig. 3.3. The vortex generator is here installed such that the front
is located at 0.4c. The height of the vortex generator is 0.0056c with respect to the base
plate surface, which itself has a height of 0.001c, yielding a total VG height of 0.0066c,
or 0.66 %c.
Fig. 3.2.: The geometry of the base plate, onto which the vortex generator will be installed. All
measurements are given in units of the airfoil chord, c. When installed upon an airfoil,
the base plate should have a height of 0.001c, such that the bottom of the rounded edges
makes contact with the airfoil surface. The extra height of the plate is made to help
avoid any gaps in the CAD model when mounting on the airfoil. It was made by the
author using SOLIDWORKS, and designed to be as simple as possible.
Front
Back
Side
Fig. 3.3.: The geometry of the vortex generator, called "VG Ship" due to its ship-like shape. It was
obtained from the thesis supervisor, Martin Hansen. Measurements for the proportions
are not given, but the VG will be linearly scaled in all directions to obtain the desired VG
height h, deﬁned as the normal distance from the airfoil surface to the tip at the front.
3.3
Mesh methodology
23
==PAGE:32==
3.3.2 Flow-region and meshing
STAR-CCM+ utilizes an unstructured meshing procedure to generate meshes, and support
tetrahedral, polyhedral, and trimmed volume meshers. The polyhedral and trimmed
volume meshers produce the most accurate results of the three, and by implementing a
prism layer mesher to help control the mesh in the near-wall region, it is possible to ensure
wall-y+ values less than 1. As such, the Polyhedral Mesher will be used, together with
the Prism Layer Mesher.
The geometry is imported into STAR-CCM+, with the base-plate and VG existing as
separate shapes allowing them to be moved and removed as needed. Two coordinate
systems are deﬁned: A chord-aligned coordinate system for the airfoil, aligned such that
positive x-direction points along the chord, and a ﬂow-aligned coordinate system, which is
the chord-aligned coordinate system rotated around the z-axis corresponding to the angle
of attack α. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.4.
Flow-aligned coordinate system (20 deg. angle of attack)
Chord-aligned coordinate system (20 deg. angle of attack)
Fig. 3.4.: The (top) chord-aligned and (bottom) ﬂow-aligned coordinate systems illustrated on
the airfoil. The coordinate systems are shown with angle of attack α = 20°. The dashed
line represents the chordline.
The ﬂow region is deﬁned in the chord-aligned system as a 1.5Lx × 2Ly × Lz block, where
Lx = 10c is the normal distance from the leading edge to the outlet, Ly = 5c is the normal
distance from the chordline to the top (or bottom) of the ﬂow domain, and Lz = w is
airfoil span (see Fig. 3.8 for an illustration). α does not change the ﬂow region, which
means that as α increases, the up- and downstream regions are effectively changed. The
simulation could be sensitive to this change if the ﬂow region is too small, and there
are valid concerns in this regard: The ﬂow region is considered small when compared
to typical domain sizes in literature, which are about 35c × 25c (Meana-Fernández et al.,
24
Chapter 3
Models and their implementation
==PAGE:33==
2019). While not ideal, it was deemed necessary as the 3D simulations require a signiﬁcant
increase in the mesh cell count compared to 2D simulations. Moving on, the corners of the
ﬂow region are placed such that the geometry is halved along the only plane of symmetry,
which helps by halving the computational mesh. It is expected to have little to no impact
on the predictions, as the streamwise vortices are expected to be most important in that
regard. However, the more intricate 3D ﬂow structures will likely not be captured when
examining such a narrow span Lz. The span will be set to Lz = 0.0215c except when the
subject of parametric study, as it corresponds to the span between two vortex generators
in the experimental data.
A Boolean Subtract operation is used to generate the ﬁnal ﬂow domain to be meshed
by subtracting the relevant geometry (airfoil, base plate, VG) from the ﬂow region. The
end result is ﬂow domain with an airfoil-shaped hole in the middle. This set-up effectively
simulates a slice of width Lz of an airfoil with inﬁnite span, where 2Lz corresponds to
the spanwise distance λVG between two adjacent VGs. As a result, the geometry is set-up
with only a single VG. Symmetry planes are used to simulate the neighbouring VGs. The
boundary conditions are explained in further detail in section 3.3.3.
Using the aforementioned ﬂow region, three different meshes are created, named mesh
A, mesh B, and mesh C. They differ in the types of reﬁnement control employed in the
meshing operation. The main driver for the mesh reﬁnement is the necessity for a fully
resolved boundary layer. Thus, all presented meshes fulﬁl the requirement of wall-y+ < 1
at Re= 5 × 106.
The three meshes each represent an iterative step in the development of a mesh which
allows obtaining accurate results, with mesh A and B culminating in mesh C. All three
meshes have an unreﬁned cell Base Size of 1.0c and a Minimum Surface Size of 10 %
of base size. The narrow span Lz = 0.0215c forces cells in the unreﬁned mesh regions to
be sized corresponding to the minimum surface size, making it the effective far-region cell
size, while the base size is reduced to a universal scale factor. The controls employed are
detailed in the following list. Note that all sizes are reported as percentage relative to base
size, and all meshes use an increased Surface Curvature, with mesh A increasing from
36 to 120 points per circle and mesh B and C increasing from 36 to 72, to ensure that the
curvatures in the geometry are properly captured by the mesh.
• Mesh A is reﬁned solely using Surface Control applied on the airfoil, baseplate,
and VG surfaces.
The Target Surface Size is set to 0.8 %, and the Minimum
Surface Size is set to 0.001 %. The prism layer is set-up with 50 layers with 1.1
stretching and a Prism Layer Total Thickness of 0.8 %. The increased surface
curvature was not applied to the trailing edge, which made it necessary to disable
the prism layer as the prism layer mesher is unable to handle the resulting rough
trailing edge. Wake Refinement is applied on the airfoil surface, reﬁning the mesh
3.3
Mesh methodology
25
==PAGE:34==
in its wake up to a a Distance of 2.0c downstream by forcing an Isotropic Size
of 1.0 %. The resulting mesh is shown in Fig. 3.5.
• Mesh B uses primarily Volume Control to reﬁne the mesh, using two levels of
reﬁnement. The ﬁrst level is a coarser reﬁnement applied to a 1.1c × 0.39c × Lz
block placed around the airfoil with a set cell size of 0.8 %, and the second level
is a ﬁner reﬁnement applied to a cylinder with radius r = 0.5Lz placed at 40 %
chord position on the suction side and stretching 0.4c downstream slightly above
the airfoil surface. A Minimum Surface Size of 0.01 % is applied to all surfaces to
ensure proper meshing. The prism layer is set-up with 20 layers with 1.3 stretching
and a Prism Layer Total Thickness of 0.3 %. The increased surface curvature is
also applied to the trailing edge, which allows the prism layer to be generated there.
No wake reﬁnement applied. The resulting mesh, with the volumetric control shapes,
is shown in Fig. 3.6.
• Mesh C combines the wake reﬁnement from mesh A and with the volumetric control
from mesh B. The meshing parameters are identical to mesh B, but the control
cylinder is adjusted by increasing radius to r = 1.0Lz and aligning it better with the
wall. The wake reﬁnement is adjusted by setting Distance to 10.0c, but decreasing
Isotropic Size to 5.0 %. The resulting mesh, with the volumetric control shapes,
is shown in Fig. 3.7.
An overview of the resulting cell count and computational costs for the different mesh types
in both the Clean and VG geometry cases is presented in Table 3.1. It is apparent that the
inclusion of VGs in the geometry severely increases the complexity of the computational
mesh. For mesh A, the cell count increases by a factor of 76, resulting in a signiﬁcant
memory usage of 55 GB. However, this increase is due to the Minimum Surface Size being
set to 0.001 %, as the VG geometry is meshed at an unnecessarily high resolution. Reducing
it to 0.01 %, as with mesh B and C, will reduce the resolution to a sustainable level.
Additionally, the Clean case for mesh B has its cylindrical volume control disabled, due to
the consideration that the extra reﬁnement on the suction side was unnecessary without
the VG. For mesh C, the cylindrical volume control was kept on, as it was reasoned to help
resolve the turbulent boundary layer and improve the prediction of characteristics.
Clean
VG
Mesh Type
A
B
C
A
B
C
Cell count
[103]
192
273
2 673
14 766
2 119
3 634
Memory usage
[GB]
6
7
18
55
15
22
File size
[MB]
106
134
1 318
5 813
1 001
1 709
Tab. 3.1.: An overview of the cell count and computational costs for the different mesh types.
Note that Mesh Type B in the Clean case has its cylindrical volume control disabled.
26
Chapter 3
Models and their implementation
==PAGE:35==
Fig. 3.5.: The polyhedral mesh generated using mesh A with full geometry, presented along a
XY-plane located at z = 0. The trailing edge is improperly meshed as it was set-up with
the default surface curvature of 36 pts. per circle. Example shown at α = 0°.
Fig. 3.6.: The polyhedral mesh generated using mesh B with full geometry, presented along a
XY-plane located at z = 0. The two levels of volumetric control are readily apparent; the
ﬁrst level is deﬁned as a block around the airfoil, and the second as a cylinder placed on
the suction side at 40 % chord position. Example shown at α = 0°.
Fig. 3.7.: The polyhedral mesh generated using mesh C with full geometry, presented along a
XY-plane located at z = 0. It improves upon Mesh B by introducing a longer, less
ﬁne wake reﬁnement than Mesh A, and increasing the cylinder radius such that its
reﬁnement applies all the way to the airfoil surface along its entire length. Example
shown at α = 20°.
3.3
Mesh methodology
27
==PAGE:36==
3.3.3 Boundary conditions
A ﬁnal consideration to make before the simulations are ready for computation is the
boundary conditions.
Four different types of boundary conditions are used: Wall,
Symmetry Plane, Velocity Inlet, and Pressure Outlet. The ﬂow-ﬁeld velocity is ini-
tialized as stagnant, u = [0, 0, 0] m/s.
• Wall. The airfoil, base plate, and VG surfaces are assigned as solid walls with no-slip
conditions.
• Symmetry Plane. Two symmetry planes are deﬁned: The Z-normal plane at z = 0
and the Z-normal plane at z = Lz. These symmetry planes allow the simulation of a
3D segment of an inﬁnitely long wing.
• Velocity Inlet. The upstream, upper (y+) and lower (y-) boundaries of the ﬂow
domain are assigned as velocity inlets. The inlet velocity is set to u = [1, 0, 0] m/s in
the ﬂow-aligned coordinate system.
• Pressure Outlet. The downstream boundary is set as a pressure outlet with a gauge
pressure of 0 Pa.
The boundary conditions are illustrated in Fig. 3.8. The ﬂow domain has been scaled
down to allow an "easier-to-read" illustration.
2Ly
Lz
1.5Lx
Fig. 3.8.: A representation of the boundary conditions. The ﬂow domain is not to scale. Red
(upstream, upper, and lower boundaries) indicates a velocity inlet, blue (at z = 0 and
z = Lz) a symmetry plane, grey (airfoil surface) a wall, and brown (downstream) a
pressure outlet.
28
Chapter 3
Models and their implementation
==PAGE:37==
4
Validation
In this chapter, a validation of the chosen ﬂow models (described in section 3.2) applied
to the three proposed computational meshes (described in section 3.3) is performed.
The validation is based on proprietary wind tunnel data obtained from a cooperative
research project between DTU Wind Energy, LM Wind Power, and Power Curve through
private correspondence. Before the validation, the wind-tunnel set-up and extent of the
experimental data is presented.
The validation will consist of a cursory examination of the continuity residuals and wall-y+
values as a check on the soundness of the methodology, and an evaluation of the prediction
accuracy. The accuracy of simulations using the different mesh types will be evaluated in
the range α ∈[0, 17]°. The evaluation of "accuracy" is based on the prediction of cl and
cd, supported by validations of the prediction of pressure coefﬁcient cp. The best model
will in the following chapter be subject to a sensitivity analysis regarding mesh reﬁnement,
turbulence models, and the assumption of constant density ﬂow.
4.1 Experimental set-up and data series
The rectangular wind tunnel in the experimental set-up has a length of 7 m, width of
1.35 m, and height of 2.7 m. A Cartesian coordinate system similar to the ﬂow-aligned
coordinate system is deﬁned with the length as X, height as Y , and width as Z. Here,
x = 0 corresponds to the start of the wind tunnel, while y = 0 and z = 0 corresponds to
the middle of the wind tunnel in their respective dimensions. Positive y points up, while
positive z points to the right when looking in positive x direction.
Series
Legend
U∞[m/s]
ρ [kg/m3]
Re [-]
α range [°]
N [-]
Clean
Exp-Clean
83.6
1.212
5.06 × 106
[−15.15, 16.11]
52
Tripped
Exp-Trip
83.6
1.212
5.06 × 106
[−15.15, 16.11]
52
VG
Exp-VG
83.6
1.212
5.06 × 106
[−4.11, 16.11]
46
Tab. 4.1.: An overview of the experimental data series and the most important parameters. N
denotes amount of data points in the given range.
29
==PAGE:38==
The airfoil chord is 0.9 m and the airfoil span is 1.35 m. The turn table centre is located at
x = 3.0 m, with the airfoil pitch axis located on the chordline at 0.35c, such that at α = 0°,
the leading edge would be located at x = [2.685, 0, 0] m.
An incoming ﬂow speed of 83.6 m s−1 is used, with a reported Re= 5.06 × 106.
In the pre-stall regime, the drag is estimated using a wake rake, with the pitot tube oriﬁces
located at x = 5.0 m, while in the near-stall and stall regimes, drag is estimated from
pressure measurements on the airfoil surface. Lift is estimated from airfoil pressure in all
regimes. The wake rake covers the range z ∈[−0.35, 0.35] m.
Three series of experimental data were made available: A series with a clean airfoil,
α ∈[−15.15, 16.11]°, a series with an airfoil with zig-zag tape of 0.5 mm placed at 5.0 %c
to trip the boundary layer, α ∈[−15.15, 16.11]°, and a series for an airfoil with VGs (of the
type VGShip) with height h = 0.65 %c, positioned at 40.0 %c, and with a spanwise distance
of 4.3 %c between the VGs, α ∈[−4.11, 16.11]°.
A summary of the series and their experimental parameters are found in Table 4.1. The
experimental results are assumed to be accurate to allow the validation.
4.2 Mesh validations
The three different mesh types (A, B, and C) are compared to the experimental data series
to help identify the most accurate one. The types are simulated in the range α ∈[0, 17]°,
where types A and B have NAB = 11 points, unevenly distributed in the range with 8
points located in α ∈[9, 17], while type C has NC = 18 points, evenly distributed in the
range. Every simulation runs to convergence, with convergence deﬁned as when cl and cd
Mesh
Legend
U∞[m/s]
ρ [kg/m3]
Re [-]
α range [°]
N [-]
Clean case
Mesh A
Mesh A
1.0
1.0
5.0 × 106
[0, 17]
11
Mesh B
Mesh B
1.0
1.0
5.0 × 106
[0, 17]
11
Mesh C
Mesh C
1.0
1.0
5.0 × 106
[0, 17]
18
VG case
Mesh A
Mesh A
1.0
1.0
5.0 × 106
[0, 17]
11
Mesh B
Mesh B
1.0
1.0
5.0 × 106
[0, 17]
11
Mesh C
Mesh C
1.0
1.0
5.0 × 106
[0, 17]
18
Tab. 4.2.: An overview of the mesh validation simulations and the most important parameters. N
denotes amount of data points in the given range.
30
Chapter 4
Validation
==PAGE:39==
either becoming steady, or oscillating with a ﬁxed frequency. In all cases, it was deemed
that 3000 iterations were sufﬁcient to reach convergence. The reported cl and cd are taken
as the mean of the last 100 iterations.
Two cases are examined for all three types: A case with a clean airfoil geometry, and a
case with an airfoil geometry with a VG. The complete spanwise symmetry of the clean
case allows 2D simulations, but in spite of this it has been kept as a 3D simulation with
the same ﬂow region as the VG case to keep the cases as consistent as possible such that
any differences between the two can be argued to be due to the VG. The examined span
is Lz = 0.00215c, which corresponds to λVG = 0.043c. The ﬂow modelling is set-up as
described in section 3.2, where the similarity principle is used, forcing Re= 5.0 × 106 by
setting U∞= 1.0 m s−1, ρ = 1.0 kg m−3, and µ = 2.0 × 10−7 Pa s.
4.2.1 Residuals and wall-y+
Before presenting the predicted aerodynamic characteristics, the continuity residuals and
wall-y+ are brieﬂy presented and examined for α = 3.0° and α = 15.0°.
In Fig. 4.1, the residuals are shown for the three mesh types in the clean case. The
residuals show a convergence for all meshes at α = 3.0° (Fig. 4.1a), but for α = 15.0°
(Fig. 4.1b), meshes A and C show some difﬁculty in converging, with mesh A seemingly
converging to ∼10−2, while the residuals for mesh C start to grow after ∼2 × 103. Mesh
B, which exhibit the worst residuals for α = 3.0°, show the greatest rate of convergence
for α = 15.0°.
Fig. 4.2 shows the residuals for the three mesh types in the VG case. Here, a similar change
in the rate of convergence is observed for mesh A going from α = 3° to α = 15°, but mesh
B and mesh C are noticeably less impacted.
The residuals are obviously sensitive to the angle of attack, which is to be expected, as
the ﬂow structures are more complex and less unidirectional in the stall region. However,
it is possibly also due to (or exacerbated by) the ﬂow region being too small (a concern
ﬁrst raised in section 3.2), where a change in angle of attack also changes the size of
downstream region.
The requirement of wall-y+ < 1 is shown in Fig. 4.3, with the VG case being the only one
presented, as the clean case is identical to the VG case’s wall-y+ < 1 proﬁle, except in the
vicinity of the base plate and VG at ∼0.4c chord position. It can be seen that most parts of
the airfoil are within the required wall-y+, with the edges of the base plate being obvious
outliers. The trailing edge in mesh A is a similar outlier, but this issue is ﬁxed in mesh B
4.2
Mesh validations
31
==PAGE:40==
(a) Continuity residual for the clean case at α = 3.0°.
(b) Continuity residual for the clean case at α = 15.0°.
Fig. 4.1.: Residuals obtained from the validation simulations for a clean airfoil at (a) α = 3.0° and
(b) α = 15.0°. Mesh A and C show signiﬁcantly worse residuals for α = 15.0°, with mesh
C even diverging, while mesh B shows improved residuals.
by allowing the formation of prism layers around the trailing edge by reﬁnement of the
curvature.
4.2.2 Aerodynamic characteristics
The aerodynamic characteristics cl and cd obtained for the three different mesh types in
the clean case are shown together with the "Clean" experimental data series in Fig. 4.4,
with the relative errors as function of the angle of attack in Fig. 4.5, and similarly for the
VG case in Fig.4.6 and Fig. 4.7, respectively. The relative error is computed as:
ϵCL = ∆cl/cl,exp,
(4.1)
where ∆cl = cl −cl,exp, and cl can be exchanged with any property of interest. To calculate
the relative error of cl and cd, the experimental values are linearly interpolated to the
simulated angles of attack. The accuracy of the predictions discussed in the following are
summarized in Table 4.3.
Examining the clean case
In the clean case, Fig. 4.4a shows that all three mesh types make accurate predictions
for cl before stall, α ∈[0, 10]°, but fail to predict the sharp decrease in lift due to stall,
which occurs past measured maximum lift cl,max = 1.5972 at α = 11.17°, with mesh B and
C predicting a softer stall at α ∼14° (with predicted cl,max = 1.8244 and cl,max = 1.6970,
respectively), and mesh A showing no apparent stall, instead predicting cl,max = 1.6927 at
32
Chapter 4
Validation
==PAGE:41==
(a) Continuity residual for the VG case at α = 3.0°.
(b) Continuity residual for the VG case at α = 15.0°.
Fig. 4.2.: Residuals obtained from the validation simulations for an airfoil with VG at (a) α = 3.0°
and (b) α = 15.0°. Mesh A shows considerably worse residuals for α = 15.0°, while
mesh B and C are not noticeably impacted.
(a) Wall-y+ for the VG case at α = 3.0°.
(b) Wall-y+ for the VG case at α = 15.0°.
Fig. 4.3.: Wall-y+ values obtained from simulations for an airfoil with VG at (a) α = 3.0° and
(b) α = 15.0°. The wall-y+ values in the clean case is identical to the values in the VG
case, except in the immediate vicinity of the base plate and VG on the suction side. The
smear-like effect arises due to the wall-y+ values being plotted for all near-wall cells on
the airfoil surface cells.
4.2
Mesh validations
33
==PAGE:42==
Source
cl,max
ϵCL,max
αmax
∆αmax
|ϵCL|
|ϵCD|
Clean case
Experimental
1.5972
N/A
11.2°
N/A
N/A
N/A
Mesh A
1.6927
5.98 %
17.0°
+5.8°
3.3 %
13.1 %
Mesh B
1.8244
14.22 %
14.0°
+2.8°
3.0 %
18.6 %
Mesh C
1.6970
6.25 %
14.0°
+2.8°
1.7 %
11.7 %
VG case
Experimental
1.9009
N/A
13.2°
N/A
N/A
N/A
Mesh A
1.8067
- 4.96 %
15.0°
+1.8°
5.4 %
4.6 %
Mesh B
1.9175
0.87 %
14.0°
+0.8°
2.1 %
9.0 %
Mesh C
1.9586
3.04 %
15.0°
+1.8°
1.0 %
7.1 %
Tab. 4.3.: An overview of the aerodynamic characteristics obtained from the mesh validation
series. ϵ denotes the relative error, ∆αmax denotes the absolute error of αmax, |ϵ| denotes
the absolute mean relative error, and is computed in the pre-stall regions, deﬁned as
α ∈[0, 11]° for the clean case, and α ∈[0, 13]° in the VG case.
α = 17°, which is at the edge of the examined range. Mesh C has the best performance in
this regard, but still overestimates cl,max by 6.25 %, and the stall angle by ∼3°.
A similar observation is made for cd, shown in Fig.
4.4b, with all meshes showing
acceptable predictions for α ∈[0, 10]°, but all models noticeably overestimate the drag in
the range α ∈[5, 10]°. Additionally, none of the meshes are able to capture the signiﬁcant
drag penalty associated with stall.
The relative errors ϵ in the predictions of cl and cd are directly shown in Fig. 4.5, with
both properties showing the signiﬁcant decrease in prediction accuracy in the stall regime.
To evaluate the accuracy across multiple angles of attack, the absolute mean of the relative
error, deﬁned as:
|ϵ| = 1
n
n
X
i=1
|ϵi|,
(4.2)
is used. The absolute mean, rather than an arithmetic mean, is used to avoid errors with
opposite signs cancelling each-other out, and thus giving an overly optimistic impression
of the predictions.
The absolute mean of the relative error differs greatly depending on whether the stall
regime is included (α ∈[0, 17]°), or excluded (α ∈[0, 11]°). With the stall regime included,
mesh A wrongly estimates cl by 15.9 % on average, mesh B by 20.3 %, and mesh C by
10.3 %, while excluded, the absolute mean of the relative error for cl falls to 3.3 %, to 3.0 %,
and to 1.7 % for mesh A, B, and C respectively.
34
Chapter 4
Validation
==PAGE:43==
(a) Predicted cl from simulations on a clean airfoil for
varying α.
(b) Predicted cd from simulations on a clean airfoil
for varying α.
Fig. 4.4.: Predictions obtained from validation simulations for a clean airfoil. The three different
mesh types are represented. (a) shows predicted cl, while (b) shows predicted cd, both
for α ∈[0, 17] °. All meshes produce satisfactory predictions for α < 10°, but fail to
predict the performance loss both in the near-stall and stall regime.
(a) Relative error of predicted cl compared to experi-
mental cl,exp for a clean airfoil.
(b) Relative error of predicted cd compared to experi-
mental cd,exp for a clean airfoil.
Fig. 4.5.: Relative error of predictions compared to experimental values for a clean airfoil. The
relative error ϵ is deﬁned as ϵ = ∆cl/cl,exp, where ∆cl = cl −cl,exp. The three different
mesh types are represented. (a) shows the relative error of predicted cl, while (b) shows
the relative error predicted cd, both for α ∈[0, 15] °.
4.2
Mesh validations
35
==PAGE:44==
For cd, a similar exercise ﬁnds that when including the stall regime, mesh A wrongly
estimates cd by 24.4 % on average, mesh B by 32.3 %, and mesh C by 18.9 %. While
excluding, the absolute mean of the relative error falls to 13.1 %, to 18.6 %, and to 11.7 %
for mesh A, B, and C respectively.
To summarize the clean case, mesh C performs the best on average, with a 1.7 % and
11.7 % absolute mean relative error on respectively the predicted cl and cd outside of the
stall regime, while cl,max is overestimated by 6.25 % and the stall angle by ∼3°.
Examining the VG case
In the VG case, Fig. 4.6a shows that mesh types B and C make markedly more accurate
predictions for cl than type A before stall, α ∈[0, 14]°, but, similar to the clean case, fail
to predict the sharp decrease in lift when separation occurs. The measured maximum lift
cl,max = 1.9009 is found at α = 13.21°, with mesh B predicting maximum lift cl,max = 1.9175
at α = 14°, while mesh C predicts cl,max = 1.9586 at at α = 15°. Mesh B additionally
exhibits a harder stall than mesh C, while mesh A shows no apparent stall (as with the
clean case), instead predicting cl,max = 1.8067 at α = 15°, with higher α not yielding
appreciably smaller cl. Mesh B has the best performance in this regard, overestimating
cl,max by 0.87 %, and the stall angle by ∼1°.
The predictions for cd, shown in Fig. 4.6b, show an acceptable accuracy with all mesh types
for α ∈[0, 10]°. A similar behaviour to the clean case is observed, with the drag prediction
error growing as α →6°, after which it falls slightly. While the meshes are unable to
capture the signiﬁcant drag penalty associated with stall, mesh B seem to accurately predict
the experimental drag in stall beginning at α = 17°.
The relative errors ϵ of cl and cd are shown in Fig. 4.7. As with the clean case, the inclusion
or exclusion of the stall regime greatly impacts the absolute mean relative error. With the
stall regime included, α ∈[0; 15], mesh A wrongly estimates cl by 13.3 % on average, mesh
B by 12.5 %, and mesh C by 8.0 %, while excluded, α ∈[0; 13], the absolute mean of the
relative error for cl falls to 5.4 %, to 2.1 %, and to 1.0 % for mesh A, B, and C respectively.
For cd, the absolute mean relative error on the prediction of cd when including the stall
regime is 15.2 %, 18.3 %, and 13.6 % for mesh A, B, and C respectively. While excluding,
the absolute mean relative error falls to 4.6 %, to 9.0 %, and to 7.1 % for mesh A, B, and C
respectively.
While mesh B seems to predict stall better than mesh C, the latter shows a better prediction
across the whole range, including the clean case. Subsequently, mesh C is chosen as the
mesh type going forward.
36
Chapter 4
Validation
==PAGE:45==
(a) Predicted cl from simulations on an airfoil with
VG for varying α.
(b) Predicted cd from simulations on an airfoil with
VG for varying α.
Fig. 4.6.: Predictions obtained from validation simulations for an airfoil with VG. The three
different mesh types are represented. (a) shows predicted cl, while (b) shows predicted
cd, both for α ∈[0, 17]. All meshes produce satisfactory predictions for α < 13, but fail
to predict the performance loss in the stall regime.
(a) Relative error of predicted cl when compared to
experimental cd,exp for an airfoil with VG.
(b) Relative error of predicted cd when compared to
experimental cd,exp for an airfoil with VG.
Fig. 4.7.: Relative error of predictions compared to experimental values for an airfoil with VG. The
relative error ϵ is deﬁned as ϵ = ∆cl/cl,exp, where ∆cl = cl −cl,exp. The three different
mesh types are represented. (a) shows the relative error of predicted cl, while (b) shows
the relative error predicted cd, both for α ∈[0, 15] °.
4.2
Mesh validations
37
==PAGE:46==
(a) The predicted cl(cd) polar for a clean airfoil.
(b) The predicted cl(cd) polar for an airfoil with VG.
Fig. 4.8.: cl as function of cd for the three mesh types. Predictions are calculated for the range α ∈
[0, 17], while experimental data for the clean airfoil is shown for the range α ∈[−15, 16]
and for the airfoil with VG is shown for α ∈[−5, 16].
An alternative visualization of the characteristics is presented in Fig. 4.8, where the cl(cd)
polars are shown for both cases.
The discrepancy between the accuracy in drag and lift is potentially due to the difﬁculty
in predicting the friction drag on an airfoil. Lift is driven by pressure, which tends to
be easier to predict outside of stall, while drag largely consists of friction drag outside
of stall. The accurate prediction of friction drag on a clean airfoil requires an accurate
resolution of the boundary layers, which is not trivial to achieve, and the improvement in
the prediction accuracy going from the clean case to the VG case (as summarized in Table
4.3) is potentially due to a shift in the composition of drag from being primarily frictional
to primarily pressure driven. Using results from mesh C at α = 3.0°, the simulation predicts
42 % of the absolute drag arises from shear in the clear case, while this is reduced to 17 %
in the VG case.
Furthermore, while the stall angle is more accurately predicted in the VG case compared
to the clean case (using mesh C’s predictions, ∆αmax,clean = 2.8° compared to ∆αmax,VG =
1.8°), the increase in stall angle due to the installation of a VG is evidently not predicted, as
the experimental data suggests an increase in stall angle by 2°, going from αmax,clean = 11.2°
to αmax,VG13.2°, while mesh C only predicts an increase of 1°, going from αmax,clean = 14.0°
to αmax,VG15.0°. In other words, it is possible that the stall angle prediction is not improved
in the VG case, but rather that the simulations’ difﬁculty in predicting stall is simply
coincidentally mitigated.
38
Chapter 4
Validation
==PAGE:47==
(a) The predicted cp distribution for a clean airfoil at
α = 3.0°.
(b) The predicted cp distribution for a clean airfoil at
α = 15.0°.
Fig. 4.9.: The predicted cp distributions for the three mesh types, shown together with the XFOIL-
predicted pressure distribution. cp is shown for (a) α = 3.0° and (b) α = 15.0°. Note the
conventional reversed Y-axis.
4.2.3 Pressure distributions
The distribution of the pressure coefﬁcient, cp, is examined for the clean case only, as no
source for validation is readily available for the VG case.
Due to the absence of a pressure distribution for the experimental series, a choice is
made to validate the clean case using a pressure distribution obtained from XFOIL
(Drela2XFOILSystem). XFOIL is a well-known airfoil analysis programme, which sees
some use in the industry (Timmer and Van Rooij, 2003), and is intended as a consistency
check on the CFD-predicted pressure distributions.
The pressure distributions in x, cp(x), with x deﬁned in the chord-aligned coordinate
system, are shown in Fig. 4.9. The CFD and XFOIL results are in signiﬁcant agreement
with each-other at α = 3.0° (Fig. 4.9a), with a minor disagreement at x ∼0.38c, shortly
after the adverse pressure gradient is applied. A more signiﬁcant disagreement is found
at α = 15.0° (Fig. 4.9b), where mesh A and C predict a lower negative pressure than
XFOIL on the suction side, while mesh B agrees with XFOIL up until x ∼0.5c chord.
Characterizing the point of separation by the lack of a pressure gradient (i.e. constant
cp(x)), XFOIL predicts the point of separation at x = 0.65c, while mesh C seemingly predict
separation at x ∼0.8c.
In light of this disagreement, it is worth noting that XFOIL does not necessarily predict stall
exceptionally well. For example, a cursory check ﬁnds that for a clean DU-08-W-210 airfoil,
4.2
Mesh validations
39
==PAGE:48==
XFOIL predicts cl,max = 1.8052 at α = 15.8°, which is a worse prediction than what was
obtained using CFD (the predictions of which is found in Table 4.1). However, it is argued
that the simulations are none the less validated with regards to the pressure distributions,
as they are shown to produce reasonable results.
4.2.4 Summary
A brief summary of the validation efforts is presented to help collect the observations and
thoughts considered most relevant in the subsequent sections.
• The continuity residuals (Fig. 4.1 and Fig. 4.2) were examined for α = 3.0° and
α = 15.0°. It was found that all mesh types showed a convergence of residuals for
α = 3.0° in both cases, but for α = 15.0°, mesh A performs worse in both cases, mesh
B respectively better and slightly worse for the clean case and VG case respectively,
while mesh C shows a decent convergence until ∼2200 iterations, after which it
diverges.
• The wall-y+ (Fig. 4.3) is examined for the VG case for α = 3.0° and α = 15.0°. The
majority of cells are shown to have wall-y+ < 1.0, except in select few areas, such as
the base plate edges, and, exclusively for mesh A, the trailing edge due to the lack of
prism cells.
• cl and cd predictions examined in α ∈[0, 17]° for the clean case (Fig. 4.4) and the
VG case (Fig. 4.6) are largely in agreement with the experimental data, with mesh C
showing the most accurate predictions on average (see Table 4.3). The predictions
on cd tend to be less accurate than cd for all mesh types. Additionally, the sudden
stall at α = 11.2° and α = 13.2° in the two cases respectively is not predicted by any
of the mesh types, with mesh A showing difﬁculties predicting a loss of lift in both
cases, while mesh B and C predict a less sudden stall at a higher α.
• The pressure distributions are presented in Fig. 4.9, compared to the pressure dis-
tribution predicted by XFOIL. This also means that only the clean case is presented,
as XFOIL cannot predict the performance of an airfoil with a VG installed. A sig-
niﬁcant agreement is found at α = 3.0° between all meshes and XFOIL, but slight
disagreement is found on the suction side at α = 15.0°. Mesh A and C predict a
higher pressure on the suction side in the front half of the airfoil compared to mesh
B and XFOIL, and a comparably lower pressure on the back half. The differences are
argued to arise from the difﬁculty in predicting stall.
All in all, mesh C is argued to be the most consistent mesh, and is chosen as the mesh type
for further investigations.
40
Chapter 4
Validation
==PAGE:49==
5
Sensitivity analysis
With mesh type C chosen following the validation, further insight into the sensitivity of the
simulation to ﬂow model and meshing parameters is sought. In particular, the sensitivity
to mesh reﬁnement, size of the ﬂow region, turbulence models, and the similarity principle
are examined in this section.
The sensitivity analysis will only be performed on simulations using the VG case, as it is
assumed that improvements to the methodology gleaned from a sensitivity analysis on
the VG case are sufﬁciently likely to (more or less) also apply to the clean case, as the
inclusion of a vortex generator represents a scenario with a comparatively more complex
ﬂow structures than a plain, clean airfoil.
5.1 Mesh reﬁnement
The sensitivity to mesh reﬁnement is examined for α = [7.0°, 12.0°, 15.0°]. The reﬁnement
is adjusted by implementing a mesh scale, km, which is a constant factor multiplied onto
all mesh size control parameters as outlined in section 3.3, and by adjusting the mesh
Base Size, as all reﬁnement controls are deﬁned relative to the base size. Five series
are examined, formatted as [base size, km]: [1.0c, 1.0], [1.0c, 0.9], [1.0c, 0.8], [1.5c, 0.59],
[1.5c, 0.53]. Here c = 1.0 m is the chord. The predicted aerodynamic characteristics are
summarized in Table 5.1 for the ﬁve series.
α = 7.0°
α = 12.0°
α = 15.0°
BS
km
Ncell
T sim
cl
cd
cl
cd
cl
cd
1.0c
1.00
3 634 741
2.57 h
1.3200
0.0119
1.8100
0.0233
1.9600
0.0373
1.0c
0.90
4 399 831
2.82 h
1.3232
0.0120
1.8042
0.0236
1.9361
0.0383
1.0c
0.80
5 556 598
3.58 h
1.3225
0.0120
N/A
N/A
1.9268
0.0387
1.5c
0.59
4 592 211
2.86 h
1.3209
0.0127
1.8031
0.0245
1.9273
0.0399
1.5c
0.53
5 603 954
3.89 h
1.3199
0.0130
1.7963
0.0252
1.9307
0.0399
Tab. 5.1.: An overview of the sensitivity to the mesh reﬁnements. BS indicates mesh base size,
km is a mesh scale factor, and Ncell indicates the number of cells. T sim indicates the
mean simulation solve-time (in hours) for the three angles of attack in that particular
reﬁnement series.
41
==PAGE:50==
(a) The predicted cl at three different α and varying
mesh reﬁnement.
(b) The predicted cd at three different α and varying
mesh reﬁnement.
Fig. 5.1.: Predicted cl and cd at three different α and varying mesh reﬁnement levels. The red
lines indicated the experimental data interpolated to that exact angle of attack, as noted
in the plots. No appreciable sensitivity to reﬁnement is observed, with no improvement
in the stall prediction. Refer to Table 5.1 for the numbers.
As can be seen in Table 5.1 and Fig. 5.1, there is no appreciable improvement in the
prediction of CL and CD with a reﬁnement of the mesh. An increase in the cell count from
Ncell = 3 634 741 to Ncell = 5 556 598 (an increase of 53 %) only produced a marginal im-
provement at α = 15.0 %, where the predicted CL is reduced from 1.9600 to 1.9268, bring-
ing the maximum lift further in line with the experimental maximum lift of cl,max = 1.9009.
In spite of this slight gain in the predicted cl,max, the reﬁnement shows no improvement
in the prediction of stall, with none of the reﬁned simulations at α = 15.0° being able
to predict the decrease in lift and increase in drag which is associated with drag, and
experimentally observed.
The increase in solve-time associated with the mesh reﬁnement is deemed signiﬁcant
enough (a 53 % increase in cell count yields a 39 % increase in solve-time) that the minor
gains are not worthwhile to pursue, and the mesh as-is is considered sufﬁciently insensitive
to changes in the mesh reﬁnement. As a ﬁnal observation, the series with a Base Size of
1.5c show a slight decrease in accuracy with regards to CD, suggesting that the simulation
is slightly sensitive to mesh reﬁnement in the far-regions.
The insensitivity to mesh reﬁnements indicates that the solution is "saturated", i.e. the
mesh is unable to produce better results with the employed ﬂow- and turbulence models.
However, a change in the mesh (e.g. by modifying the ﬂow region), rather than simply
reﬁning the current mesh, could produce a more accurate solution. This is examined in
the following section.
42
Chapter 5
Sensitivity analysis
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Flow region
In section 3.3.2, it was noted that the ﬂow region is considered small compared to the
typical domain size of 35c × 25c (Meana-Fernández et al., 2019). The ﬂow region in this
thesis is deﬁned as 15c × 10c × Lz, where Lz = 0.0215c, and is restricted to accommodate
for 3D simulations, which incur an increase in cell count if a reduction in the resolution is
unacceptable. Consequently, it is relevant to see to which extent the solutions are sensitive
to the size of the ﬂow region.
To this end, the parameters Lx and Ly are introduced. Lx is deﬁned as the normal distance
from the leading edge to the downstream outlet, and Ly is deﬁned as the normal distance
from the chord-line to either the upper or lower inlet. Additionally, the normal distance
from the upstream inlet to the leading edge is set to 0.5Lx. To sum up, the ﬂow region can
be described as x ∈[−0.5Lx, Lx], y ∈[−Ly, Ly], and z ∈[0, Lz].
The predicted cl and cd are used to evaluate the sensitivity. A range of Lx ∈[10c, 20c] and
Ly ∈[5c, 15c] is examined at α = 7.0° and α = 15.0°, depicted in Fig. 5.2 and Fig. 5.3
respectively. The ﬁgures show the cl and cd values at particular points in [Lx, Ly]-space,
with experimental value also shown to allow easy comparison. For reference, a ﬂow
domain with Lx = 20c and Ly = 15c comes out to a total domain of 30c × 30c × Lz, which
is comparable to the literature standard (Meana-Fernández et al., 2019).
In the aforementioned ﬁgures, a general trend can be observed: Increases in Lx result
in a decrease in drag, while increases in Ly yield a decrease in lift and increase in drag,
regardless if it is an improvement or not. With respect to lift, changes in Lx is observed
to generally move the predicted lift towards the experimental lift. Assuming that cl,max
is predicted to be found at α = 15°, the predicted cl = 1.9060 at Lx = 20c and Ly = 5c
suggests an improvement in the prediction of cl,max, as (the experimental value being
cl,max = 1.9009) the results imply that the extension of Lx from 10c to 20c improves the
relative error from 3.04 % (see Table 4.3) to 0.27 %. It is noted, however, that a limited
range of range of α is examined, and the sensitivity to increases in domain size might be
dependent on α.
In other words, a sensitivity to the size of the ﬂow domain is observed. At α = 7.0°,
increasing Ly from 5c to 15c while keeping Lx = 10c decreases cl by 4.3 % and increases
cd by 79.0 %, while increasing Lx from 10c to 20c while keeping Ly = 5c increases cl
by 0.2 % and decrease cd by 16.0 %. Thus, the simulation is markedly more sensitive to
increasing Ly than Lx - however, the sensitivity to simultaneous increases seem notably
lower than isolated increases in Lx and Ly: Increasing Lx from 10c to 20c and Ly from 5c
to 15c decreases cl by 0.8 % and increases cd by 3.4 %. A similar behaviour is observed for
α = 15.0°.
5.2
Flow region
43
==PAGE:52==
(a) Predicted cl at α = 7.0° for varying ﬂow region
size.
(b) Predicted cd at α = 7.0° for varying ﬂow region
size.
Fig. 5.2.: Predictions of (a) cl and (b) cd at α = 7.0° for varying ﬂow region sizes, all normalized
by the chord c. The ﬂow region is deﬁned in the chord-aligned coordinate system, with
x ∈[−0.5Lx, Lx], y ∈[−Ly, Ly], and z ∈[0, Lz]. The experimental value is shown at the
top for ease of comparison.
(a) Predicted cl at α = 15.0° for varying ﬂow region
size.
(b) Predicted cd at α = 15.0° for varying ﬂow region
size.
Fig. 5.3.: Predictions of (a) cl and (b) cd at α = 15.0° for varying ﬂow region sizes, all normalized
by the chord c. The ﬂow region is deﬁned in the chord-aligned coordinate system, with
X ∈[−0.5Lx, Lx], Y ∈[−Ly, Ly], and Z ∈[0, Lz]. The experimental value is shown at
the top for ease of comparison.
44
Chapter 5
Sensitivity analysis
==PAGE:53==
(a) cl(cd) polars for the smallest and largest ﬂow do-
mains.
(b) Relative difference ϵ between the smallest and
largest ﬂow domains for cl and cd.
Fig. 5.4.: cl(cd) polar and relative error ϵ for the smallest (Lx = 10c, Ly = 5c) and largest
(Lx = 20c, Ly = 15c) ﬂow domains, simulated for α ∈[0, 20]°. ϵ is evaluated as the
difference in predictions between the small and the large domain, and normalized with
respect to the smallest, such that a positive value for ϵ indicates that the small domain
predicts a larger value.
To gain further insight into the ﬂow domain sensitivity, a full range of α ∈[0, 20]° is
simulated for a ﬂow domain of 30c × 30c × Lz, and subsequently compared to the cl(α)
polar obtained with the small ﬂow domain of 15c × 10c × Lz. The cl(cd) polars for the
two domains are shown in Fig. 5.4a, while the relative difference ϵ between the cl(α) and
cd(α) polars for the two domains is shown in Fig. 5.4b. In the examined α range, The
large domain is found to underpredict the lift by 1.2 % and overpredict the drag by 1.4 %
compared to the small domain. When considering the relative error of the small domain, as
shown in Fig. 4.7, the large domain does not improve the prediction, as the small domain
already tends to underpredict and lift and overpredict drag. It does, however, seem to
improve the stall prediction slightly, as it predicts the stalled lift at α = 18°, compared to
the small domain, which predicts it at α = 19°. Although, the angle of attack where cl,max
occurs is unchanged, found at αmax = 15°, thus seeing no improvement in the prediction
of the onset of stall.
The simulation is considered sufﬁciently insensitive to simultaneous increases in the
domain size that the small domain is kept for further computations. However, it is worth
considering that this result does not agree with the literature, which suggests that this
domain would be of insufﬁcient size if it was a 2D simualtion (Sørensen et al., 2016). As
this is a 3D simulation, it is possible that the optimal domain size is different, and warrants
further considerations, which unfortunately is outside the scope of this thesis.
5.2
Flow region
45
==PAGE:54==
5.3 Turbulence and transition models
In the choice of turbulence and transition models, it was reasoned that the k-ω turbulence
model with the γ-Reθ was expected to be the most accurate model, as it allows resolving of
the viscous sub-layer and the prediction of transition from laminar to turbulent boundary
layer. However, the sensitivity of the simulations to the choice of turbulence and transition
models is reckoned to be worth examining none the less. All simulations presented in this
section use the VG case.
A selection of four RANS models will be examined: 1) a Standard Spalart-Allmaras
turbulence model with a Low y+ Wall Treatment, 2) a Standard K-Epsilon Low-Re
model with a Low y+ Wall Treatment, 3) a SST (Menter) K-Omega turbulence model
with a Low y+ Wall Treatment and a Gamma-ReTheta transition model, and ﬁnally 4)
a SST (Menter) K-Omega turbulence model with a Low y+ Wall Treatment without a
transition model. The third model is the model used for all other simulations outside of
this particular sensitivity analysis. Models one through three are simulated for α ∈[0; 20]
in steps of 1°, while model four is simulated for α ∈[0; 15] in steps of 1°. The distinction in
ranges is semi-arbitrary, as it is caused by minor issues with the logistics of simulating on a
remote server.
Table 5.2 presents the main results from the turbulence model sensitivity analysis.
Model
cl,max
ϵCL,max
αmax
∆αmax
|ϵCL|
|ϵCD|
T
Std. Spalart-Allmaras
1.7896
−5.85 %
15.0°
+1.8°
7.1 %
49.8 %
1.54 h
Std. k-ϵ Low-Re
1.8255
−3.97 %
20.0°
+6.8°
8.0 %
71.7 %
2.00 h
SST k-ω γ-Reθ
1.9586
3.04 %
15.0°
+1.8°
1.0 %
7.1 %
2.43 h
SST k-ω
1.8895
−0.60 %
15.0°
+1.8°
4.1 %
23.4 %
1.96 h
Tab. 5.2.: An overview of the aerodynamic characteristics obtained using different turbulence
models. ϵ denotes the relative error, ∆αmax denotes the absolute error of αmax, |ϵ|
denotes the absolute mean relative error, and is computed in the pre-stall regions,
deﬁned as α ∈[0, 13]°. T is the mean solve-time. All simulations use the VG case.
Note that the SST k-ω models use a1 = 0.28, instead of the standard a1 = 0.31 used in
STAR-CCM+.
5.3.1 RANS models
In Fig. 5.5, eight X-normal contour slices of vorticity distributed from the tip of the vortex
generator and 0.25c downstream are presented for the four different RANS models at
α = 5.0°, together with the skin friction coefﬁcient cf shown on the airfoil surface. Using
the distance normal to the airfoil surface at which vorticity ω = 1.0 s−1 as the boundary
layer thickness, it can be seen that the lack of transition modelling forces the entire
46
Chapter 5
Sensitivity analysis
==PAGE:55==
boundary layer to be turbulent, resulting in a thicker boundary layer. The k-ω γ-Reθ model
is shown to transition as the ﬂow passes over the VG, which is reasonable, given that
sudden changes in geometry (e.g. zig-zag tape used in experiments to simulate leading
edge roughness) are known to trigger transition.
Spalart-Allmaras Turbulence Model, alpha = 5 deg.
K-Epsilon Turbulence Model, alpha = 5 deg.
K-Omega Turbulence Model /w Gamma-ReTheta Transition Model, alpha = 5 deg.
K-Omega Turbulence Model, alpha = 5 deg.
Fig. 5.5.: Eight X-normal slices showing vorticity, distributed equidistantly between x = 0.4c to
x = 0.65c for four different RANS models at α = 5.0°. The skin friction coefﬁcient is
shown on the airfoil surface. The vorticity uses logarithmic scaling with base 10. All
models visibly show vortex generation. All except the k-ω γ-Reθ model predict turbulent
boundary layers on the entire airfoil surface due to the lack of transition modelling,
which is visible as thicker boundary layers. The k-ω γ-Reθ model predicts transition as
the ﬂow passes over the VG. The solution is mirrored along the centerline z = 0.
The cl(α) and cd(α) polars obtained using the different RANS turbulence models are
presented in Fig. 5.6 and Fig. 5.7, respectively. The results support previous assumptions.
The k-ω turbulence models perform the best, while the Spalart-Allmaras and k-ϵ models
performing markedly worse. The γ-Reθ transition model seem to improve the lift and
drag prediction, and all the models with no transition modelling underpredict lift and
overpredict drag, an error which is likely exacerbated by the assumption of a turbulent
boundary layer.
5.3
Turbulence and transition models
47
==PAGE:56==
The results also suggest that the point of transition is predicted to be too far downstream
from the leading edge for α < 5°, as the k-ω γ-Reθ model underpredicts the drag in this
region. As a last observation pertaining to the cl(α) and cd(α) polars, none of the turbulent
models seem to improve the prediction of the stall regime, with the k-ω γ-Reθ model still
showing the best performance in this regard as well.
To sum up, the k-ω turbulence model with γ-Reθ transition is the right choice in the predic-
tion of the drag and lift on a DU-08-W-210 airfoil with a VGShip-type vortex generator, but
comes at a minor computational cost (as outlined in Table 5.2), as it takes 23.97 % longer
to converge compared to the k-ω turbulence model without transition. This computational
cost also makes it the most expensive of the examined RANS models, as it takes 57.8 %
longer than the cheapest model, the Spalart-Allmaras. It is reasonable to expect that this
conclusion can be generalized to all airfoils and vortex generators, as it is in-line with what
is found in the examined literature, and what is recommended by STAR-CCM+ - however,
such a strong statement requires a more thorough examination of a wider range of airfoils
and types of vortex generators.
As a last aside, it is worth mentioning that the analysis uses a mesh designed to allow the
boundary sub-layers to be resolved, which is where the k-ω turbulence model is known to
excel. If the computational cost is a signiﬁcant concern and prohibits obtaining wall-y+
values less than 1, other turbulence models will likely emerge as the better choice.
Fig. 5.6.: cl as function of α using different turbulence models. All simulations are run to conver-
gence of cl and cd (3000 iterations). The k-ω γ-Reθ model performs most in-line with
the experimental data, and k-ω without the Reθ transition model performing noticeably
worse. None of the examined models are able to predict the sudden stall. The k-ω γ-Reθ
and Spalart-Allmaras (SA) showing signs of instability for high α.
48
Chapter 5
Sensitivity analysis
==PAGE:57==
Fig. 5.7.: cd as function of α using different turbulence models.
All simulations are run to
convergence of cl and cd (3000 iterations). The k-ω γ-Reθ model performs most in-
line with the experimental data, and k-ω without the Reθ transition model performing
noticeably worse. No models are able to predict the stall, with all models except k-ω
γ-Reθ and Spalart-Allmaras (SA) showing signs of instability for high α.
5.4 Similarity parameters
The simulations made up to this point have been taking advantage of the Reynolds
number being a similarity parameter, allowing easy control of Re by effectively setting
U∞= ρ = c = 1.0 (with their respective units, of course), and then simply setting the
dynamic viscosity to the reciprocal value of the desired Re (see section 3.2).
The reasonable results obtained so far suggest that while it was a ﬁne decision, it is worth
examining further. To that end, the clean case has been simulated for α ∈[0, 15]°, and the
VG case have been simulated for α ∈[0, 20]° using U∞= 78.33 m s−1, ρ = 1.184 15 kg m−3,
µ = 1.855 08 × 10−5 Pa s, and c = 1.0 m, resulting in Re = 5 × 106. Here, ρ and µ have
assumed the default values given in STAR-CCM+. The two variants of Re will be referred
to as the "simpliﬁed" (U∞= 1.0 m s−1) and "realistic" (U∞= 78.33 m s−1) variants.
The cl(α) and cd(α) polars are shown in Fig. 5.8 and Fig. 5.9 for the clean case and VG
case, respectively. There is no signiﬁcant change in the prediction of the clean case between
the variants, but in the VG case, the realistic variant sees a signiﬁcant improvement in the
prediction of stall, as it predicts the steep fall in lift and steep increase in drag shortly after
reaching cl,max. To gain further insight into this improvement, the skin friction coefﬁcient
cf is examined.
5.4
Similarity parameters
49
==PAGE:58==
(a) Predicted cl from simulations on a clean airfoil for
varying α.
(b) Predicted cd from simulations on a clean airfoil
for varying α.
Fig. 5.8.: Predictions obtained from identical Re simulations for a clean airfoil. (a) shows predicted
cl, while (b) shows predicted cd, both for α ∈[0, 15]. Both simulations have density ρ
and dynamic viscosity µ adjusted to ensure Re = 5.0 × 106.
(a) Predicted cl from simulations on an airfoil with
VG for varying α.
(b) Predicted cd from simulations on an airfoil with
VG for varying α.
Fig. 5.9.: Predictions obtained from identical Re simulations for an airfoil with VG. (a) shows
predicted cl, while (b) shows predicted cd, both for α ∈[0, 20]. Both simulations have
density ρ and dynamic viscosity µ adjusted to ensure Re = 5.0 × 106.
50
Chapter 5
Sensitivity analysis
==PAGE:59==
(a) Skin friction coefﬁcient cf(x) along z = 0 for
varying α with U∞= 1.0 m s−1.
(b) Skin friction coefﬁcient cf(x) along z = 0 for
varying α with U∞= 78.33 m s−1.
Fig. 5.10.: Skin friction coefﬁcient cf(x) along the centerline z = 0 obtained from identical Re
simulations on an airfoil with VG. (a) shows cf with U∞= 1.0 m s−1, while (b) shows
cf with U∞= 78.33 m s−1, both for Re = 5.0 × 106. The red circle identiﬁes a dip in
the skin friction, showing that vortices move slightly downstream from the VG before
making contact. The blue circle identiﬁes the points of separation.
The skin friction coefﬁcient cf is a strong indicator of separation, and examining its
distribution in the ﬂow-direction (x) along the center of the airfoil (z = 0) can allow some
insight into the stall behaviour experimentally observed. First, cf is deﬁned as:
cf =
τw
0.5ρU2∞
,
(5.1)
where τw is the wall shear stress, which in Newtonian ﬂuids is given by:
τw = µ
∂u
∂y

y=0
,
(5.2)
using the position vector x = [x, y, z] and the velocity vector u = [u, v, w], and deﬁning y
as the distance normal to the wall (Kundu et al., 2015). As cf ∝τw, it can intuitively be
surmised that points on the airfoil surface where cf = 0 represent points of separation, as
the ﬂuid must be stagnant for no shear to arise.
In Fig. 5.10, cf(x) is shown for both variants at α = [14, 15, 16]°. At chord position
x ∼0.5c, a dip in the skin friction is observed. This is argued to indicate that the vortices
travel slightly downstream from the VG, which stretches from x = 0.4c to x = 0.44c, before
making contact with the airfoil surface. Additionally, it is observed that in the realistic
variant, the point of separation is suddenly moved upstream from x ∼0.8c to x ∼0.4c at
α = 16°, with the VG no longer able to energize the boundary layer. This behaviour is not
observed to the same extent in the simpliﬁed variant, where it is surmised that the point
5.4
Similarity parameters
51
==PAGE:60==
of separation moves further upstream than x ∼0.8c before the sudden jump upstream,
resulting in a "smoother" stall. The mechanism behind this sudden change in the point of
separation is examined in section 6.1.2.
The main results from the cl(α) and cd(α) polars (see Fig. 5.8 and Fig. 5.9) are summarized
in Table 5.3. Combined with the observations made regarding cf, it is apparent that the
realistic variant produces a markedly better stall prediction in the VG case, improving the
error on the prediction of cl,max from 3.04 % to 0.55 %, and the predicted stall angle error
from +1.8° to +0.8°. It does perform slightly worse on average in the clean case compared
to the simpliﬁed variant, but the difference is considered to be too insigniﬁcant. Thus, the
realistic variant will be used going into the next section.
As an aside, both variants exhibit stagnation rather than stall in the clean case. This is
potentially due to the emergence of time-dependent ﬂow structures, which require an
unsteady solver to resolve. The lack of such instability in the VG case is (all other things
being equal) due to the inclusion of a vortex generator in the geometry, which seemingly
makes the ﬂow more steady, and less ﬂuctuating. Implementing an unsteady solver for the
clean case in the stall regime could improve the prediction accuracy.
U∞[m/s]
ρ [kg/m3]
µ [Pa s]
cl,max
ϵCL,max
αmax
∆αmax
|ϵCL|
|ϵCD|
Clean
78.3
1.184
1.9 × 10−5
1.6905
5.84 %
15.0°
+3.8°
7.1 %
12.4 %
1.0
1.000
2.0 × 10−7
1.6970
6.25 %
14.0°
+2.8°
6.3 %
11.7 %
VG
78.3
1.184
1.9 × 10−5
1.9113
0.55 %
14.0°
+0.8°
1.1 %
6.7 %
1.0
1.000
2.0 × 10−7
1.9586
3.04 %
15.0°
+1.8°
1.0 %
7.1 %
Tab. 5.3.: An overview of the aerodynamic characteristics obtained with identical Re, but different
U∞, ρ, and µ. ϵ denotes the relative error, ∆αmax denotes the absolute error of αmax,
|ϵ| denotes the absolute mean relative error, and is computed in the pre-stall regions,
deﬁned as α ∈[0, 11]° and α ∈[0, 13]° for the clean and VG case respectively.
5.5 Summary
As part of the sensitivity analysis, the simulation’s sensitivity to the following is examined:
Mesh reﬁnement (section 5.1), the size of the ﬂow domain (section 5.2), turbulence and
transition models (section 5.3), and changing the ﬂow speed while keeping Re constant
(section 5.4). A brief summary of the ﬁndings is presented here. Unless stated otherwise, all
results were obtained using the VG case. Changes in lift coefﬁcient cl and drag coefﬁcient
cd were used as the primary indicators of sensitivity.
52
Chapter 5
Sensitivity analysis
==PAGE:61==
• A low sensitivity to mesh reﬁnement was observed. A 53 % increase in cell count from
Ncell = 3 634 741 to Ncell = 5 556 598 saw no signiﬁcant change in the predictions of
cl and cd at the examined α = [7.0, 12.0 15.0]°. Furthermore, no improvement in the
prediction of stall was observed. See Table 5.1 for an overview of the results.
• A low sensitivity to simultaneous increases in the XY -ﬂow domain size was observed,
while a signiﬁcant sensitivity was observed when increasing only the X or Y ﬂow
domain (see Fig. 5.2 and Fig. 5.3). The cl(cd) polar was obtained for the largest
examined domain size, 30c × 30c × Lz, in the range α ∈[0, 20]° and compared to the
baseline of 15c × 10c × Lz (see Fig. 5.4b). On average, the large domain was found
to underpredict the lift by 1.2 % and overpredict the drag by 1.4 % compared to the
small domain. A slight improvement in the stall prediction is observed. Sensitivity
to the Z-ﬂow domain size was not examined, and was kept at Lz = 0.0215c for all
simulations.
• In addition to the k-ω turbulence model with γ-Reθ transition modelling, the Spalart-
Allmaras, k-ϵ Low-Re, and k-ω without transition turbulence models were examined.
Table 5.2 summarizes the results. A signiﬁcant sensitivity to the choice of turbulence
model was observed, with the k-ω turbulence model with γ-Reθ yielding the best
results when compared to the experimental data.
• An overall low sensitivity to changes to U∞, ρ, and µ, bounded by Re = 5 × 106,
was observed. The cl(α) and cd(α) polars were obtained using U∞= 78.33 m s−1 for
both the clean and VG cases (see Fig. 5.8 and Fig. 5.9, respectively), and compared
to the results obtained with U∞= 1.0 m s−1. No noteworthy difference is observed
in the clean case, and in the VG case outside the stall regime (α ∈[0, 13]°). However,
a signiﬁcant improvement in the stall prediction is observed for U∞= 78.33 m s−1
in the VG case, as it seems to predict the stall mechanism more accurately (see Fig.
5.10).
From the different examinations, a single change is carried forward: The free-ﬂow speed
is changed from U∞= 1.0 m s−1 to U∞= 78.33 m s−1, with the associated changes
of ρ = 1.0 kg/m3 to ρ = 1.184 kg/m3 and µ = 2.0 × 10−7 Pa s to µ = 1.9 × 10−5 Pa s.
This allows better stall prediction in the VG case when the results are presented in the
subsequent chapter.
5.5
Summary
53
==PAGE:62==
==PAGE:63==
6
Results
In this chapter, the main results pertaining to the predicted impact of installing a VG are
presented and discussed. The results are obtained using the models and methodology
outlined in chapter 3, which have been subsequently validated in chapter 4. The sensitivity
to the level of reﬁnement utilized in the mesh, the choice of ﬂow domain size, the choice
of turbulence model, and the Re-bounded proportionality of the ﬂow parameters U∞, ρ,
and µ, were examined in chapter 5.
The results will be presented in three sections.
The ﬁrst concerns the aerodynamic
enhancements gained by installing the VG by presenting the predicted changes in cl and cd,
as well as how it impacts the pressure coefﬁcient and skin friction coefﬁcient distributions,
cp(x) and cf(x). The second examines the resistance to leading edge roughness gained
by implementing a VG, and the ﬁnal section investigates the optimal span-wise distance
between VGs for maximizing lift and minimizing drag. The results presented are all for
U∞= 78.33 m s−1 and Re = 5.0 × 106, unless stated otherwise.
6.1 Aerodynamic enhancements
6.1.1 Characteristics
To begin, the impact of the VG is examined by investigating any changes in cl and cd.
Preliminary results from previous investigations have already indirectly shown some
beneﬁt, but the interest now lies with quantifying the predicted changes. Thus, the
simulated cl(α) and cd(α) polars are shown in Fig. 6.1 together with the experimental
data for both a clean airfoil and an airfoil with VG. The former has been simulated for
α ∈[0, 15]° in steps of 1°, while the latter has been simulated for α ∈[0, 17]° using the
same α step size.
As noted at multiple occasions in previous sections, the simulations are unable to properly
predict the stall regime, with the clean simulation being unable to predict a drop in lift
within the examined range of α, while it does seem to be able to predict some semblance
of separation-induced drag for α > 12°. The VG simulation shows more promising results,
as - while delayed - it does simulate the drop in lift and drag associated with stall, and
manage to approach the post-stall regime values of cl and cd.
55
==PAGE:64==
Fig. 6.1.: (Left) cl(α) and (right) cd(α) polars from experimental data and simulations. U =
78.33 m s−1 and Re = 5.0 × 106.
At a glance, the aerodynamic impact of the VG on lift is replicated somewhat accurately
by the simulation, while the predicted impact on drag is harder to discern. The onset
of the lift stagnation observed in the clean simulation occurs at α = 12.0°, while cl,max
occurs at αmax = 14.0°. Using these angles of attack as the separation angle, the simulation
predicts an extension of the operational range by 2° - a result which is consistent with the
experimental data, which shows the VG extends the range from α = 11.2° to 13.2°, going
by experimental αmax.
Fig. 6.2.: The cl/cd(α) polars from experimental data and simulations in both a clean case and VG
case. The polar differs noticeably for the experimental data for α > 12° depending on
whether the direction of pitching. U = 78.33 m s−1 and Re = 5.0 × 106.
The cd results suggests a more complex underlying picture, and requires some clariﬁcation.
The experimental set-up uses a turn-table to actively pitch the airfoil to change α, and thus
56
Chapter 6
Results
==PAGE:65==
obtains data which can be used to evaluate the airfoil and VG aerodynamic characteristics
pitching up into stall, and down from stall. The clean airfoil’s aerodynamic characteristics
are invariant with respect to the pitch direction, and the same can (largely) be said for
cl in the VG case. However, cd is observed to be dependant on the pitch direction, as
illustrated by the lift-over-drag ratio cl/cd shown in Fig. 6.2. Intuitively, the VG is shown
to be more effective at delaying stall than recovering from stall. The simulations replicate
the "pitching up" scenario, as it is initialized with a stagnant ﬂow-ﬁeld.
To further elaborate on the aerodynamic impact of the vortex generator, the difference of
cl(α) and cd(α) between the two cases is examined, normalized with respect to the values
for the clean case (cl,clean and cd,clean respectively):
∆cl
cl,clean
= cl,VG −cl,clean
cl,clean
,
∆cd
cd,clean
= cd,VG −cd,clean
cd,clean
.
(6.1)
This normalized difference shows the relative change caused by the VG, and is shown as a
function of α in Fig. 6.3. Both the experimental and simulated changes are shown, and
the experimental data is interpolated to integers of α to facilitate the computation of ∆cl
and ∆cd.
Fig. 6.3.: Normalized difference in (left) cl and (right) cd between the clean airfoil and VG-
equipped airfoil. The predicted lift enhancement is reasonably in-line with the experi-
mental results, while both the drag penalty and drag enhancement is under-predicted in
the pre-stall and stall region, respectively.
It can be seen that the simulation manages to reasonably capture the lift enhancement,
albeit seemingly shifted by 0.8° to the right in the range α ∈[7.0, 15.0]° compared to the
experimental data. In the examined range α ∈[0, 15]°, the experimental data predicts a
mean lift enhancement of 7.6 %, while the simulation predicts a markedly lower 3.6 %.
However, this discrepancy is in large part driven by the lack of stalling in the clean
simulation. For α < 5.0°, the simulation over-predicts the lift enhancement, as it predicts
6.1
Aerodynamic enhancements
57
==PAGE:66==
an enhancement of ∼1 %, while the experimental data reports a mean lift enhancement
of ∼0.1 % in the same range, becoming a lift penalty at 0° and 1° angles of attack.
With respect to the impact on drag, the simulation under-predicts the VG’s drag penalty, and
fails to properly replicate how the drag penalty changes as α increases; the experimental
data shows a steady 2.7 % drag penalty from α = 0° to α = 8°, which for α > 8° starts
to fall as the clean airfoil enters the pre-stall regime, and switches to a signiﬁcant drag
reduction as the clean airfoil enters stall, peaking at a 59.4 % drag reduction at α = 13°.
As the airfoil with VG enters the stall regime, ∆cd(α > 15°) ∼0.0, the VG is submerged in
the separated ﬂow, effectively removing it from any active ﬂow, and effectively reducing
the VG-equipped airfoil to a clean airfoil. This behaviour is, as noted, not observed in
the simulation for the examined range, instead showing a steady decline from a 1.5 %
to a 0.6 % drag penalty as α is increased from 0° to α = 10°, followed by a less deﬁned
switch to drag reduction as the simulated clean airfoil stagnates. The simulation predicts a
peak reduction of 34.5 % at α = 14°, hence underestimating the peak reduction by 42.0 %.
The simulated drag difference seems to approach ∆cd = 0 past the peak reduction, but
the range does extend far enough to verify that is the case. However, considering that
time-dependent ﬂow structures such as vortex shedding can be expected to occur as α
is increased past the stall region, it is likely required that the simulations switch to an
unsteady solver to properly capture such ﬂows.
6.1.2 Pressure and skin friction distributions
The pressure cp and skin friction cf distributions are examined in the X-direction on
the airfoil in a Z-normal plane placed at z = 0.0c, i.e. along the symmetry plane, as it
represents the center-line of the examined span-wise airfoil element of the wing with
inﬁnite span. The plane cuts the VG in half along its only plane of symmetry. cp(x)
and cf(x) will be presented for α = [5.0, 9.0, 12.0, 15.0]° for both a clean airfoil and a
VG-equipped airfoil.
Before presenting the distributions, Fig. 6.4 shows cf on the surface of the airfoil suction
side for α = 5.0° and α = 9.0°, together with the z = 0 center-line, to aid the spacial
understanding of the plotted distributions to follow. cf is shown both on a clean airfoil and
a VG-equipped airfoil. Please note that cf in this particular ﬁgure is incorrectly normalized
by a factor of ∼7 000, and cf = 70.0 should be cf = 0.01.
The simulations shows no signiﬁcant difference from the leading edge to 0.4c chord
position, where the VG is installed. Downstream of 0.4c chord position, the VG’s impact is
noticeable as energy is transported into the boundary layer, represented by an extended
region of high cf, reaching towards the trailing edge. The particular VG examined in this
thesis is also shown to generate a pair of counter-rotating vortices, resulting in a high
58
Chapter 6
Results
==PAGE:67==
momentum region in the immediate wake downstream of the VG, and a low momentum
region at the edges of the wake. As such, the VG is qualitatively similar to two triangular
plate VGs in a counter-rotating set-up (Godard and Stanislas, 2006a).
AOA = 5 deg.
z=0
x=0.4c
Lz
AOA = 9 deg.
Fig. 6.4.: cf shown on the surface of the airfoil suction side at (upper) α = 5.0° and (lower)
α = 9.0° both for a clean airfoil and a VG-equipped airfoil. As one would expect, there
is no remarkable difference between the two cases upstream of the VG at 0.4c chord
position, illustrated in red. The center-line z = 0 is illustrated as a black dashed line,
and the solution reﬂected along the z = 0 symmetry plane. Note that cf is incorrectly
normalized, and cf = 70.0 should be cf = 0.01. This has no qualitative impact.
cp(x) is shown in Fig. 6.5. At ∼0.4c chord position on the suction side, the VG and
base-plate have a visible impact on the pressure, but otherwise the clean airfoil and VG-
equipped airfoil have virtually identical pressure distributions for α = 5.0° and α = 9.0°,
while for α = 12.0° and α = 15.0°, the two diverge. The cl(α) polar (Fig. 6.1) supports
this, as the lift is generated by a pressure difference between the suction and pressure side,
and the clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil starts to signiﬁcantly converge past α = 9.0°
(as shown in Fig. 6.3). At α = 15.0°, a point of separation on the suction side is visible at
∼0.62c chord position, as identiﬁed by the pressure gradient disappearing.
The pressure distribution for the clean airfoil at α = 15.0° is likely not accurate, as it
has already been established that the clean airfoil simulation exhibits some unexpected
behaviour for α > 12.0°. In the mesh validation, it was shown that at α = [16.0°, 17.0°],
the clean simulation begins to predict stall (Fig. 4.4), rather than stagnation, but no
simulations have been performed for α > 17.0° in the clean case to check if the clean
simulation manages to predict the fully stalled characteristics of the airfoil. Considering
the relative success in predicting stall for the VG-equipped airfoil, it is argued that the
methodology likely struggles in predicting more complex ﬂow behaviour such as boundary
layer reattachment. The VG is shown in the experimental data to incur a steep stall, and
the simulation’s success in predicting this might be due to the effective elimination of
time-dependant ﬂow structures arising from mild separation.
6.1
Aerodynamic enhancements
59
==PAGE:68==
Fig. 6.5.: cp(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil
simulations for α = [5.0, 9.0, 12.0, 15.0]°. Barring the obvious pressure difference at
0.4c chord position due to the base plate and VG, cp(x) for the two cases are virtually
identical at α = [5.0, 9.0]°, but start to diverge on the suction side at α = [12.0, 15.0]°.
Note the reversed Y-axis.
cf(x) is shown in Fig. 6.6, with the points of separation and transition indicated by
respectively red and blue circles. The two cases show virtually identical cf(x) distributions
on the pressure side, and on the suction side upstream of the VG at x = 0.4c. Downstream
of the VG, cf is demonstrably higher for the VG-equipped airfoil, as expected. At α = 12.0°,
the clean airfoil has a point of separation on the suction side at x ∼0.75c (identiﬁed by
cf = 0), followed by an instability which potentially is an artifact arising from the steady
solver incapable of properly modelling the boundary layer reattaching. The VG-equipped
airfoil shows no signs of separation at this angle of attack. At α = 15.0°, both cases
exhibit separation. The clean airfoil separates at x ∼0.5c, while the VG-equipped airfoil
delays separation by ∼0.2c, separating instead at x ∼0.7c. Having established that the
VG-equipped airfoil simulation predicts a full stall at α = 16°, it becomes apparent that
60
Chapter 6
Results
==PAGE:69==
the VG experiences a steep stall (when increasing α) because the point of separation for
the clean airfoil moves upstream of the VG, effectively nullifying the VG by submerging
it in a stagnant separation bubble, and discontinuously moving the point of separation
from x ∼0.7c to x < 0.4c. This behaviour was noted in the similarity parameter sensitivity
analysis (section 5.4), but the mechanism is shown here. This similarly explains why the
VG is less effective at stall recovery; pitching down from α = 16.0° immediately after a full
stall results in the point of separation marching (slowly) downstream, rather than jumping
back to x ∼0.7, until enough fast-moving boundary-layer ﬂow passes over the VG for it to
become effective again. The distributions for α ∈[0, 15]° are shown in appendix B.
Fig. 6.6.: cf(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil
simulations for α = [5.0, 9.0, 12.0, 15.0]°. Blue circles indicate points of transition, while
red circles indicate points of separation. The points of transition are identical for both
cases, and the pressure side exhibits virtually identical cf(x) distributions. On the suction
side, the VG-equipped airfoil shows increased cf compared to the clean airfoil. Note that
the Y-axis was limited to a maximum cf = 0.01 for the sake of clarity. A few points near
the leading edge and at the vortex generator extend beyond this limit.
6.1
Aerodynamic enhancements
61
==PAGE:70==
6.1.3 Velocity ﬁelds
The velocity ﬁelds for varying α are examined at varying locations to help build a qualitative
understanding of the results and expanding on the observations made in the previous
section.
First and foremost, streamlines around the VG-equipped airfoil are shown in Fig. 6.7 at
α = 9.0° and α = 16.0° along the velocity ﬁeld in the Z-normal symmetry plane at z = 0.0c.
The two angles of attack are chosen to act as a baseline visualisation of respectively an
attached ﬂow and a separated ﬂow. The expected downwards deﬂection of the streamlines
are observed in the attached ﬂow, while the previously observed severe boundary layer
separation is seen in the separated ﬂow at α = 16.0°. The streamlines deﬂect just upstream
of the vortex generator due to the separation.
VG, AOA = 16 deg.
VG, AOA = 9 deg.
U
U
Fig. 6.7.: Streamlines around the VG-equipped airfoil for α = 9.0° and α = 16.0°, shown together
with the velocity ﬁeld in the symmetry plane at z = 0.0c.
The X-normal velocity ﬁeld, presented in six equidistant slices, in the close vicinity of the
VG α = 15.0° and α = 16.0° is shown in Fig 6.8. The vortex generator design is more
intricate than previously assumed, as it is shown to generate two sets of counter-rotating
vortices; one upper vortex counter-rotating vortex couple, and one lower. Upper and lower
vortices generated on the same side of the VG are also counter-rotating.
The difference between the ﬁelds when increasing from α = 15.0° to α = 16.0° is stark, but
the onset can be observed in the cf ﬁeld on the downstream half of the base-plate, which
62
Chapter 6
Results
==PAGE:71==
is too close to the VG to be energized by the generated vortices. At α = 16.0°, it can be
seen how the VG is made ineffective by being submerged in the separation bubble.
AOA = 15.0 deg.
AOA = 16.0 deg.
Fig. 6.8.: Close-up of the velocity ﬁeld in X-normal slices in the immediate vicinity of the VG at
α = 15.0° and α = 16.0°. cf is shown on the airfoil surface. The scene is mirrored along
the symmetry plane at z = 0.0c.
Finally, the velocity ﬁeld at α = 15° for both a clean and a VG-equipped airfoil is examined
in X-normal slices in the range x = 0.35c to x = 1.0c on the suction side, and presented in
Fig. 6.9. The intent is to expand on what was observed in the VG close-up (Fig. 6.8) by
examining the ﬁeld downstream of x = 0.4c in both cases, and compare the ﬁelds.
As has been remarked multiple times, the point of separation in the clean case is found at
the trailing edge of the VG, and the VG-equipped airfoil is close to moving into a full stall.
The juxtaposition of the two cases also clearly shows the delay in separation introduced by
the VG, and how - as the vortices lose strength - the separation bubble quickly catches up
in size to the clean case, likely due to how localized separation is observed to occur at the
midpoint between two vortex generators (z = Lz), as the vortices transport momentum
towards the center-line (z = 0).
Recirculation is observed in the separation bubble in the clean case, and is responsible for
the non-zero cf past the point of separation (as can be seen in Fig. 6.6). The observed
recirculation and separation suggests a switch to an unsteady solver is prudent when
simulating near-stall and stall regimes for the clean airfoil. The absence of any signiﬁcant
observable recirculation in the VG-equipped airfoil simulation is likely a contributing factor
to the superior accuracy of the VG simulation in comparison to the clean simulation, but
6.1
Aerodynamic enhancements
63
==PAGE:72==
unsteady simulations of both cases in their stall regime is necessary for a more concrete
conclusion on the matter.
VG, AOA = 15 deg.
Clean, AOA = 15 deg.
Fig. 6.9.: The velocity ﬁeld at α = 15° for both a clean and a VG-equipped airfoil in X-normal slices
from x = 0.35c to x = 1.0c on the suction side . The VG is observed to effectively nullify
the ﬁrst ∼0.25c stretch of the separation bubble, but otherwise form a similar separation
bubble as the clean case. It can also be seen that the clean airfoil’s point of separation
occurs near the trailing edge of the VG (at x ∼0.44c), which puts it dangerously close
to moving upstream of the VG.
6.2 Resistance to leading-edge roughness
Experimental results by Timmer and van Rooij show that cl(α) is virtually unchanged by
premature transition when the airfoil is equipped with simple plate VGs, and only the drag
penalty arising from increased wall shear stress is observed (Timmer and Van Rooij, 2003).
To examine this, the results obtained for the k-ω turbulence model without transition
(thus replicating premature transition) are compared to the main results to evaluate the
degree to which the VG resists LER. It is noted that this method, while customary, likely
under-predicts the degree to which LER deteriorates the aerodynamic characteristics (Bak
et al., 2016).
Furthermore, the fully turbulent simulation is run using U∞= 1.0 m s−1, while the
transitioning case is examined using U∞= 78.33 m s−1. Both cases are set-up with the
same Reynolds number, Re = 5.0 × 106, and the simulation is proven insensitive outside of
stall to changes in U∞, ρ, and µ, as long as Re is kept constant (see section 5.4).
64
Chapter 6
Results
==PAGE:73==
Fig. 6.10.: (Left) cl(α) and (right) cl(cd) polars for a fully-turbulent VG-equipped airfoil, simulating
LER, and a transitioning VG-equipped airfoil. The relative difference in cl(α) between
the two is shown in yellow. The turbulent case is examined using U∞= 1.0 m s−1
for α ∈[0, 15]°, while the transitioning case is examined using U∞= 78.33 m s−1 for
α ∈[0, 17]°. For both cases, Re = 5.0 × 106.
Fig. 6.10 shows the cl(α) and cl(cd) polars for the fully-turbulent VG-equipped airfoil and
the transitioning VG-equipped airfoil, together with the relative difference in cl(α) between
the two. A minor difference in cl is observed. For α ∈[0, 14]°, the relative difference ranges
from a 5 % loss in cl to a 1 % loss, with the percentage loss decreasing as α increases, up
until stall occurs, as the turbulent case does not predict stall. This is consistent with what
Timmer and van Rooij reports, and suggests that the ship-shaped VG model retains the
same LER-mitigating property as more simple devices.
The LER still incurs a drag penalty, however, as is observed in the cl(cd) polar. This drag
penalty arises from an increase in friction due to the boundary layer being wholly turbulent,
on both the suction side and the pressure side, and the VG is unable to combat frictional
drag, and is only able to combat pressure drag by delaying separation.
6.3 Optimal span-wise distance between VGs
The span Lz of the ﬂow region is set-up such that it corresponds to exactly the half-way
point between two vortex generators, Lz = 0.5λVG, where λVG is the span-wise distance
between the leading edge tips of two adjacent VGs. Due to the ease of adjusting Lz,
the optimal span-wise distance between VGs is evaluated based on cl, cd, and cl/cd for
λVG ∈[0.030c, 0.068c] and α ∈[4, 16]°. For reference, the experimental data (and all
simulations up to this point) have used Lz = 0.0215c, corresponding to λVG = 0.043c.
6.3
Optimal span-wise distance between VGs
65
==PAGE:74==
Fig. 6.11.: (Left) cl(λVG) and (right) cd(λVG) for varying α are shown, with the base λVG used in
all previous simulations indicated by the red line.
cl(λVG) and cd(λVG) are shown in Fig. 6.11, while cl/cd(λVG) is shown in Fig. 6.12. To
begin, increasing λVG shows a noticeable decrease in lift and increase in drag for α = 11°
and α = 14°. This is reasonable, as for λVG →∞, it is expected that the characteristics of
the VG-equipped airfoil will approach those of a clean airfoil. To put it differently, spreading
out the vortex generators reduces the area of energized boundary layer downstream of the
VGs, thus reducing their effectiveness in delay stall.
Fig. 6.12.: cl/cd(λVG) for varying α is shown, with the base λVG used in all previous simulations
indicated by the red line.
66
Chapter 6
Results
==PAGE:75==
By extension, the characteristics at α = 16° show some erratic ﬂuctuations; however, there
is no decipherable trend in either direction, which would imply that a tighter spacing will
not improve the stall delay. This is to be expected within the established behaviour of the
simulations, as changing the spacing does not allow the VG to energize boundary layers
upstream from itself (see Fig. 6.8).
For α = 14° (and a lesser extent, α = 11°), however, a tighter spacing sees an increase in
lift, and a decrease in drag. This does, however, also incur an increase in drag for low α,
which is hard to spot in the cd(λVG) plot, but is easily noticed in the cl/cd(λVG) plot. By
decreasing λVG from 0.043c to 0.030c, the cl/cd at α = 14° is improved from 40 to 48 (a
20 % increase), enhancing the aerodynamic performance in the near-stall regime. However,
this comes at a heavy cost for lower angles of attack; at α = 4.0°, cl/cd is reduced from
117 to 98 (a 16 % reduction) and at α = 7.0°, cl/cd is reduced from 117 to 102 (a 13 %
reduction), with an expectancy of similar losses in performance for angles in between.
Assuming that LM Wind Power and Power Curve choose a span of 0.043c to examine in
the experiment, the simulation corroborates this as an optimal spacing. A slightly better
spacing is potentially found at λVG = 0.044c, but the difference is sufﬁciently small that
a strong statement on the optimal position would require a demonstrably more accurate
simulation.
6.3
Optimal span-wise distance between VGs
67
==PAGE:76==
==PAGE:77==
7
Conclusion
A CFD approach was prepared to investigate whether a RANS turbulence model is able to
properly predict the impact incurred by the installation of a passive vortex generator on an
airfoil. The examined airfoil was the DU-08-W-210 airfoil, and the vortex generator was a
ship-inspired, so-called "ShipVG".
Models and method
The ﬂow model was set-up with Re = 5 × 106. A steady solver was used, and the ﬂow was
assumed to be incompressible, as the Mach number was found to be M = 0.22 < 0.3. For
turbulence modelling, the k-ω RANS turbulence model was chosen, as it 1) allows the
resolving of the viscous sub-layer, and 2) has access to the γ-Reθ transition model. The
ﬂow was set-up with U∞= 1.0 m s−1, ρ = 1.0 kg m−3, c = 1.0 m, and µ = 2 × 10−7 Pa s,
circumventing the need for normalization of coefﬁcients.
A simple base plate was designed in SOLIDWORKS to allow the mounting of the VG on the
airfoil surface. Two geometry cases were established: A "clean" case, with a clean airfoil,
and a "VG" case, with an airfoil equipped with a base plate and VG at 0.4c chord position.
A ﬂow region of size 15c × 10c × 0.0215c was deﬁned. Standard boundary conditions were
set-up, with an upstream velocity inlet, downstream pressure outlet, and a symmetry plane
placed at z = 0c and z = 0.0215c. Three meshes (A, B, and C) were initially examined,
each employing different control methods.
Validation
A validation was performed on the three meshes to determine the most accurate one.
Experimental data obtained wind tunnel measurement performed by LM Wind Power
and Power Curve were used for validation. The accuracy was primarily based on the
aerodynamic characteristics, cl and cd.
The continuity residuals (Fig. 4.1 and Fig. 4.2) were presented for α = 3.0° and α = 15.0°.
All mesh types showed a convergence of residuals for α = 3.0°, but for α = 15.0°, varying
performances were observed. The wall-y+ (Fig. 4.3) was examined for the VG case for
α = 3.0° and α = 15.0°. The majority of cells were shown to have wall-y+ < 1.0, except in
select few areas, such as the base plate edges.
69
==PAGE:78==
cl and cd predictions examined in α ∈[0, 17]° for the clean case (Fig. 4.4) and the VG
case (Fig. 4.6) are largely in agreement with the experimental data (see Table 4.3). The
predictions on cd tend to be less accurate than cl for all mesh types. The sudden stall
demonstrated in the experimental data at α = 11.2° and α = 13.2° in the two cases
respectively was not predicted by any of the mesh types.
The simulated pressure distributions cp(x) (Fig. 4.9) were compared to cp(x) predicted
by XFOIL. An agreement was found at α = 3.0°, but a slight disagreement was found on
the suction side at α = 15.0°. The differences were argued to arise from the difﬁculty in
predicting stall.
Mesh C was evaluated to be the most accurate mesh, overestimating cl,max by 6.25 % and
3.04 % for the clean case and VG case respectively, and having an absolute mean relative
error in the pre-stall regions of 1.7 % and 1.0 % for cl and 11.7 % and 7.1 % for cd in the
clean case and VG case respectively. Mesh C consists of 2 673 000 cells in the clean case,
and 3 634 000 cells in the VG case.
Sensitivity analysis
A sensitivity analysis was performed with respect to mesh reﬁnement, ﬂow domain size,
turbulence and transition models, and the changing variables in the similarity parameter
Re while keeping Re = 5.0 × 106 constant. Changes in lift coefﬁcient cl and drag coefﬁcient
cd were used as the primary indicators of sensitivity.
• A low sensitivity to mesh reﬁnement was observed. A 53 % increase in cell count from
Ncell = 3 634 741 to Ncell = 5 556 598 saw no signiﬁcant change in the predictions of
cl and cd at the examined α = [7.0, 12.0 15.0]°. See Table 5.1.
• A low sensitivity to simultaneous increases in the XY -ﬂow domain size was observed,
while a signiﬁcant sensitivity was observed when increasing only the X or Y ﬂow
domain (see Fig. 5.2 and Fig. 5.3).
• The k-ω γ-Reθ, Spalart-Allmaras, k-ϵ Low-Re, and k-ω turbulence models were
examined. Table 5.2 summarizes the results. A signiﬁcant sensitivity to the choice of
turbulence model was observed, with the k-ω turbulence model with γ-Reθ being in
best agreement with experimental data.
• An overall low sensitivity to changes to U∞, ρ, and µ, bounded by Re = 5 × 106,
was observed. The cl(α) and cd(α) polars were obtained using U∞= 78.33 m s−1 for
both the clean and VG cases (see Fig. 5.8 and Fig. 5.9, respectively), and compared
to the results obtained with U∞= 1.0 m s−1. A signiﬁcant improvement in the stall
prediction is observed for U∞= 78.33 m s−1 in the VG case.
70
Chapter 7
Conclusion
==PAGE:79==
U∞= 78.33 m s−1 is adopted as the base free-ﬂow speed, accompanied by ρ = 1.0 kg/m3
changing to ρ = 1.184 kg/m3 and µ = 2.0 × 10−7 Pa s to µ = 1.9 × 10−5 Pa s to ensure
Re = 5.0 × 106.
Results
In the main results, the aerodynamic impact of installing a vortex generator were ex-
amined and discussed by looking at the aerodynamic characteristics, cp distributions, cf
distributions, velocity proﬁles, leading edge roughness resistance, and optimal spacing
between VGs.
The simulations were shown to predict a 2° delay in stalling due to the VG, consistent
with the experimental data (Fig. 6.1). The normalized difference in cl(α) and cd(α)
between the clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil was examined and compared to the
experimental data (Fig. 6.3). In the range α ∈[0, 15]°, the experimental data shows a
mean lift enhancement of 7.6 %, while the simulation predicted a markedly lower 3.6 %.
The drag penalty was also found to be under-predicted, as the experimental data showed
a near-constant 2.7 % drag penalty from α = 0° to α = 8°, while the simulation predicted a
drag penalty linearly decreasing from 1.5 % drag penalty to 0.6 % from α = 0° to α = 10°.
Similarly, the simulated peak drag reduction gained by delaying stall is under-estimated
by 42.0 %.
cp and cf were presented for the clean and VG cases for α ∈[5.0, 9.0, 12.0, 15.0]° (see Fig.
6.5 and Fig. 6.6). The former shows agreement between the cases for α = [5.0, 9.0]°, and
minor divergence in the pressure distributions for higher α. The latter identiﬁes points of
transition and separation, visualizing the mechanism behind the steep stall demonstrated
in the VG simulation, and observed in the experimental data for the VG case only, not the
clean case. It is identiﬁed that the VG-equipped airfoil stalls when the clean airfoil’s point
of separation moves upstream from the VG, resulting in the sudden movement of the point
of separation from x ∼0.7c at α = 15.0° to x < 4.0c for α > 16.0°. This stall behaviour
was qualitatively demonstrated by examining velocity ﬁelds at varying locations on the
airfoil (Fig. 6.7, Fig. 6.8, and Fig. 6.9).
The VG-induced resistance to LER is examined. A fully turbulent simulation was compared
with the transition-modelling simulation (Fig. 6.10). The fully turbulent simulation was
run using U∞= 1.0 m s−1, while the transitioning case used U∞= 78.33 m s−1. Both cases
were set-up with the same Reynolds number, Re = 5.0 × 106. The simulations were found
to predict that a fully turbulent boundary layer inﬂicts a 5 % to 1 % loss of cl for α ∈[0, 14]°.
LER is still found to incur a drag penalty. These results are in line with the literature.
Finally, the optimal spacing, λVG = 2Lz, between VGs was examined, with optimal spacing
being based on cl, cd, and cl/cd (Fig. 6.11 and Fig. 6.12). The simulation predicted that
71
==PAGE:80==
λVG = 0.043c or λVG = 0.044c are optimal. Increasing λVG beyond 0.044c saw a decrease
in the ability to delay stall, while decreasing λVG saw a loss in aerodynamic performance
due to drag increase.
Closing remarks
As a way of summarizing the thesis, the stated problem formulation is reconsidered:
Using CFD with a RANS turbulence model, what are the predicted enhance-
ments and penalties incurred by equipping an airfoil with a passive vortex
generator, and how do the predictions compare to experimental data?
While a satisfying answer requires the full body of work preceding this closing remark,
it can in qualitative terms be answered as follows: A steady RANS turbulence model
struggles to properly predict the ﬂow when it is approaching stall, but the results show
some promise in predicting the stall delay and in predicting the optimal span-wise VG
spacing.
However, it is important to remark that the results are limited to a single type of vortex
generator installed on a single type of airfoil. Further work is required before a more
general statement on the accuracy of the employed methodology can be made.
7.1 Future work
Towards the end of a long project, the ﬁnal product risks becoming tainted in the eyes of
the author, as ones expanded knowledge and experience in the subject matter uncovers
many odd choices and unfruitful endeavours. As such, it is always of interest to look
forward towards future work.
To this end, the following points of interest are noted, in no particular order:
• Unsteady solver. While the steady solver has proven to be capable of producing
accurate results (for this particular combination of airfoil and VG) in the pre-stall
region, major issues arose with regards to predicting stall. Thus, an in-depth in-
vestigation of the stall region using an unsteady solver would be of interest. By
extension, it would also be interesting to evaluate the improvements in accuracy that
one can obtain by employing more expensive turbulence models, such as DES and
LES models - and quantify the cost.
• Full wind tunnel simulation. As a wind tunnel is bounded by walls in all directions
(rather than inlets), it can give rise to wall effects which might inﬂuence the boundary
72
Chapter 7
Conclusion
==PAGE:81==
layer ﬂow on the airfoil near the wall. This could possibly lead to an earlier stall
than in an idealized non-wall bounded ﬂow domain. Simulating the full wind tunnel
set-up could be interesting - however, it can likely carry severe computational costs
due to a sizable 3D geometry, with a requirement of wall-y+ < 1.
• Testing the rigidity of the methodology. The employed methodology is able to
reasonably predict parts of the aerodynamic impact of the ship-type VG on a DU-
08-W-210 airfoil. However, it would be interesting to test the methodology using
different combinations of airfoils and VGs to determine how rigid the methodology
is, or rather, how sensitive it is to changes in the geometry.
• Further examining optimal VG parameters.
Only the span-wise spacing was
examined. Given more time, it could be interesting to evaluate if the simulation
is capable of predicting optimal VG parameters with regards to VG height and
chord-wise positioning.
7.1
Future work
73
==PAGE:82==
==PAGE:83==
A
Derivation of the Reynolds-Averaged
incompressible Navier-Stokes
momentum equation
The incompressible Navier-Stokes equation is given by, using index notation:
ρ
∂uj
∂t + ui
∂uj
∂xi

= −∂p
∂xj
+ ρgj + µ∂2uj
∂x2
i
,
(A.1)
where ρ is the density of the ﬂuid, t is time, p is pressure, gi, xi, and ui are the i-th
component of respectively the body force vector g, the position vector x, and the velocity
vector u. Applying the Reynolds composition to the pressure, velocity, and force variables,
one obtains:
p = p + p′,
ui = ui + u′
i,
gi = gi + g′
i,
(A.2)
where the bar denotes mean (or time-averaged), and the prime denotes a ﬂuctuation.
Notably, time-averaging the mean just produces the mean, p = p, while the ﬂuctuations
cancel each-other out over time, which means time-averaging the ﬂuctuations yield zero,
p′ = 0. Inserting Eq. (A.2) into Eq. (A.1), one obtains:
ρ
 ∂(uj + u′
j)
∂t
+ (ui + u′
i)∂(uj + u′
j)
∂xi
!
= −∂(p + p′)
∂xj
+ ρ(gj + g′
j) + µ∂2(uj + u′
j)
∂x2
i
. (A.3)
Time-averaging Eq. (A.3) produces:
ρ
 ∂(uj + u′
j)
∂t
+ (ui + u′
i)
∂(uj + u′
j)
∂xi
!
= −∂(p + p′)
∂xj
+ ρ(gj + g′
j) + µ
∂2(uj + u′
j)
∂x2
i
. (A.4)
Using the properties p = p and p′ = 0, which apply to all decompositions, and using the
superposition principle to split the derivatives, Eq. (A.4) can be simpliﬁed to:
ρ
 
∂uj
∂t + ui
∂uj
∂xi
+ u′
i
∂u′
j
∂xi
!
= −∂p
∂xj
+ ρgj + µ∂2uj
∂x2
i
.
(A.5)
75
==PAGE:84==
The continuity equation informs that both the mean and ﬂuctuating velocity ﬁelds are
divergence free (Kundu et al., 2015). By combining this with the product rule, one can
manipulate Eq. (A.5) to obtain:
ρ
∂uj
∂t + ui
∂uj
∂xi

= −∂p
∂xj
+ ρgj + µ∂2uj
∂x2
i
−ρ
∂u′
ju′
i
∂xi
.
(A.6)
By introducing the mean rate of strain tensor, Sij, given by:
Sij = 1
2
 
∂ui
∂xj
+ ∂uj
∂xi
!
,
(A.7)
it is possible to rewrite Eq. (A.6) to the ﬁnal form of the Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes
incompressible momentum equation:
ρ
∂uj
∂t + ui
∂uj
∂xi

= ρgj + ∂
∂xi
h
−pδij + 2µSij −ρu′
ju′
i
i
,
(A.8)
where the mean strain tensor, τij = −pδij + 2µSij −ρu′
ju′
i, evidently has obtained an extra
term in the form of the Reynolds stress tensor (Crowe et al., 2012),
Rij = u′
iu′
j,
(A.9)
which is the source of the turbulence closure problem.
76
Chapter A
Derivation of the Reynolds-Averaged incompressible Navier-Stokes momentum equation
==PAGE:85==
B
Distributions
All cf(x) and cp(x) distributions along the z = 0 airfoil center-line for simulations at
Re = 5 × 106 are presented here for both a clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil.
B.1 cf(x) distributions
Fig. B.1.: cf(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil
simulations for varying α. Note that the Y-axis was limited to a maximum cf = 0.01
for the sake of clarity. A few points near the leading edge and at the vortex generator
extend beyond this limit.
77
==PAGE:86==
Fig. B.2.: cf(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil
simulations for varying α. Note that the Y-axis was limited to a maximum cf = 0.01
for the sake of clarity. A few points near the leading edge and at the vortex generator
extend beyond this limit.
78
Chapter B
Distributions
==PAGE:87==
Fig. B.3.: cf(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil
simulations for varying α. Note that the Y-axis was limited to a maximum cf = 0.01
for the sake of clarity. A few points near the leading edge and at the vortex generator
extend beyond this limit.
B.1
cf(x) distributions
79
==PAGE:88==
Fig. B.4.: cf(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil
simulations for varying α. Note that the Y-axis was limited to a maximum cf = 0.01
for the sake of clarity. A few points near the leading edge and at the vortex generator
extend beyond this limit.
80
Chapter B
Distributions
==PAGE:89==
B.2 cp(x) distributions
Fig. B.5.: cp(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil
simulations for varying α. Note the reversed Y-axis.
B.2
cp(x) distributions
81
==PAGE:90==
Fig. B.6.: cp(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil
simulations for varying α. Note the reversed Y-axis.
82
Chapter B
Distributions
==PAGE:91==
Fig. B.7.: cp(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil
simulations for varying α. Note the reversed Y-axis.
B.2
cp(x) distributions
83
==PAGE:92==
Fig. B.8.: cp(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped airfoil
simulations for varying α. Note the reversed Y-axis.
84
Chapter B
Distributions
==PAGE:93==
Bibliography
Bak, Christian, Mac Gaunaa, Anders S. Olsen, and Emil K. Kruse (2016). “What is the critical height
of leading edge roughness for aerodynamics?” In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series. Vol. 753.
2 (cit. on pp. 4, 12, 64).
Bensow, R. E., C. Fureby, C. Liefvendahl, and T. Persson (2006). “A Comparative Study of RANS,
DES and LES”. In: 26th ONR Symposium on Naval Hydrodynamics 2.January 2017, pp. 17–22
(cit. on p. 5).
Crowe, Clayton T., John D. Schwarzkopf, Martin Sommerfeld, and Yutaka Tsuji (2012). Multiphase
Flows with Droplets and Particles. Second Edition. CRC Press, pp. 199–202 (cit. on pp. 18, 76).
Global Wind Energy Council (2021). Global Wind Energy Report 2021. Tech. rep. (cit. on p. 1).
Godard, G., J. M. Foucaut, and M. Stanislas (July 2006). “Control of a decelerating boundary layer.
Part 2: Optimization of slotted jets vortex generators”. In: Aerospace Science and Technology 10.5,
pp. 394–400 (cit. on p. 3).
Godard, G. and M. Stanislas (2006a). “Control of a decelerating boundary layer. Part 1: Optimization
of passive vortex generators”. In: Aerospace Science and Technology 10.3, pp. 181–191 (cit. on
pp. 3, 59).
– (Sept. 2006b). “Control of a decelerating boundary layer. Part 3: Optimization of round jets
vortex generators”. In: Aerospace Science and Technology 10.6, pp. 455–464 (cit. on p. 3).
H. D. Taylor (1947). “The Elimination of Diffuser Separation by Vortex Generators”. In: United
Aircraft Corporation Report No. R-4012.June, pp. 13–14 (cit. on p. 2).
Hansen, Martin O. L. (2015). Aerodynamics of Wind Turbines. Third Edition. Routledge (cit. on
pp. 9, 11).
Haunschild, Robin, Lutz Bornmann, and Werner Marx (July 2016). “Climate change research in
view of bibliometrics”. In: PLoS ONE 11.7 (cit. on p. 1).
Im, Hong Sik and Ge Cheng Zha (2014). “Delayed Detached Eddy Simulation of Airfoil Stall Flows
Using High-Order Schemes”. In: Journal of Fluids Engineering, Transactions of the ASME 136.11
(cit. on pp. 2, 6).
Jones, W. P. and B. E. Launder (Feb. 1972). “The prediction of laminarization with a two-equation
model of turbulence”. In: International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 15.2, pp. 301–314
(cit. on p. 19).
Kundu, Pijush K., Ira M. Cohen, and David R. Dowling (2015). Fluid Mechanics. 6th Edition.
Academic Press (cit. on pp. 9, 14, 16, 18, 51, 76).
85
==PAGE:94==
Lin, John C. (1999). “Control of turbulent boundary-layer separation using micro-vortex generators”.
In: 30th Fluid Dynamics Conference. American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Inc, AIAA
(cit. on p. 2).
– (2002). Review of research on low-proﬁle vortex generators to control boundary-layer separation.
Vol. 38. 4-5, pp. 389–420 (cit. on p. 3).
Lin, Mou and Hamid Sarlak (2016). “A comparative study on the ﬂow over an airfoil using
transitional turbulence models”. In: AIP Conference Proceedings 1738 (cit. on p. 2).
Matyushenko, A. A. and A. V. Garbaruk (2016). “Adjustment of the k-ω SST turbulence model
for prediction of airfoil characteristics near stall”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 769.1
(cit. on pp. 5, 20).
Meana-Fernández, Andrés, Jesús Fernández Oro, Katia Argüelles Díaz, and Sandra Velarde-Suárez
(Feb. 2019). “Turbulence-Model Comparison for Aerodynamic-Performance Prediction of a
Typical Vertical-Axis Wind-Turbine Airfoil”. In: Energies 12.3, p. 488 (cit. on pp. 20, 24, 43).
Menter, F. R. (May 1994). “Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering applica-
tions”. In: AIAA Journal 32.8, pp. 1598–1605 (cit. on pp. 5, 20).
Menter, F. R., R. B. Langtry, S. R. Likki, et al. (2006). “A correlation-based transition model using
local variables - Part I: Model formulation”. In: Journal of Turbomachinery 128.3, pp. 413–422
(cit. on p. 20).
Moin, Parviz and Krishnan Mahesh (1998). “Direct numerical simulation: A Tool in Turbulence
Research”. In: Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics 30.April 2016, pp. 539–578 (cit. on p. 16).
Rao, D. M. and T. T. Kariya (1988). “Boundary-Layer submerged vortex generators for separation
Control-An exploratory study”. In: 1st National Fluid Dynamics Conference, 1988. American
Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Inc, AIAA (cit. on p. 2).
Reynolds, Osborne (Dec. 1895). “IV. On the dynamical theory of incompressible viscous ﬂuids and
the determination of the criterion”. In: Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London.
(A.) 186, pp. 123–164 (cit. on p. 18).
Samuel, A. E. and P. N. Joubert (1974). “A boundary layer developing in an increasingly adverse
pressure gradient”. In: Journal of Fluid Mechanics 66.3, pp. 481–505 (cit. on p. 19).
Siemens PLM Software (2020). Simcenter STAR-CCM+ Documentation (cit. on pp. 16, 18, 20, 21).
Sommerfeld, Arnold (1908). “Ein Beitrag zur hydrodynamischen Erkläerung der turbulenten Flüs-
sigkeitsbewegüngen (A Contribution to Hydrodynamic Explanation of Turbulent Fluid Motions)”.
In: International Congress of Mathematicians 3, pp. 116–124 (cit. on p. 11).
Sørensen, Niels N., B. Méndez, A. Muñoz, et al. (Sept. 2016). “CFD code comparison for 2D airfoil
ﬂows”. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 753.8, p. 082019 (cit. on p. 45).
Spalart, P. R. and S. R. Allmaras (1994). “One-equation turbulence model for aerodynamic ﬂows”.
In: Recherche aerospatiale 1, pp. 5–21 (cit. on p. 19).
Suluksna, Keerati, Pramote Dechaumphai, and Ekachai Juntasaro (Feb. 2009). “Correlations for
modeling transitional boundary layers under inﬂuences of freestream turbulence and pressure
gradient”. In: International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 30.1, pp. 66–75 (cit. on p. 21).
Timmer, W. A. and R. P.J.O.M. Van Rooij (2003). “Summary of the Delft University wind turbine
dedicated airfoils”. In: ASME 2003 Wind Energy Symposium, WIND2003, pp. 11–21 (cit. on pp. 4,
22, 39, 64).
86
Bibliography
==PAGE:95==
Wilcox, David C (2008). “Formulation of the k-omega Turbulence Model Revisited”. In: (cit. on
p. 5).
– (May 1988). “Multiscale model for turbulent ﬂows”. In: AIAA Journal 26.11, pp. 1311–1320
(cit. on pp. 5, 19).
Bibliography
87
==PAGE:96==
==PAGE:97==
List of Figures
2.1
An illustration of an airfoil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
An illustration of streamlines bending past an airfoil
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
An illustration of the boundary layer on an airfoil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
An illustration of boundary layer separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1
The geometry of the DU-08-W-210 airfoil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
The geometry of the base plate
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
The geometry of the vortex generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
The chord-aligned and ﬂow-aligned coordinate systems . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
An illustration of mesh A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.6
An illustration of mesh B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.7
An illustration of mesh C . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.8
A representation of the boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.1
Residuals obtained from simulations for a clean airfoil
. . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2
Residuals obtained from simulations for an airfoil with VG . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.3
Wall-y+ values obtained from simulations for an airfoil with VG . . . . . . .
33
4.4
Predictions obtained from validation simulations for a clean airfoil
. . . . .
35
4.5
Relative error of predictions compared to experimental values for a clean airfoil 35
4.6
Predictions obtained from validation simulations for an airfoil with VG . . .
37
4.7
Relative error of predictions compared to experimental values for a clean airfoil 37
4.8
cl as function of cd for the three mesh types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.9
The predicted cp distributions for the three mesh types . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.1
Predicted cl and cd at three different α and varying mesh reﬁnement levels .
42
5.2
Predictions of cl and cd at α = 7.0° for varying ﬂow region sizes . . . . . . .
44
5.3
Predictions of cl and cd at α = 15.0° for varying ﬂow region sizes . . . . . . .
44
5.4
cl(cd) polar and relative error ϵ for the smallest and largest ﬂow domains . .
45
5.5
X-normal slices of vorticity downstream of the VG for four different RANS
models.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.6
cl as function of α using different turbulence models
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.7
cd as function of α using different turbulence models . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.8
Predictions obtained from identical Re simulations for a clean airfoil
. . . .
50
5.9
Predictions obtained from identical Re simulations for an airfoil with VG . .
50
89
==PAGE:98==
5.10
Skin friction coefﬁcient cf(x) along the centerline z = 0 obtained from
identical Re simulations on an airfoil with VG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
6.1
cl(α) and cd(α) polars from experimental data and simulations . . . . . . . .
56
6.2
The cl/cd(α) polars from experimental data and simulations in both a clean
case and VG case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.3
Normalized difference in cl and cd between the clean airfoil and VG-equipped
airfoil
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.4
cf shown on the surface of the airfoil suction side at α = 5.0° and α = 9.0°
both for a clean airfoil and a VG-equipped airfoil
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.5
cp(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped
airfoil simulations for varying α . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
6.6
cf(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped
airfoil simulations for varying α . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.7
Streamlines around the VG-equipped airfoil for α = 9.0° and α = 16.0°
. . .
62
6.8
Close-up of the velocity ﬁeld in X-normal slices in the immediate vicinity of
the VG at α = 15.0° and α = 16.0° . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
6.9
The velocity ﬁeld at α = 15° for both a clean and a VG-equipped airfoil in
X-normal slices from x = 0.35c to x = 1.0c on the suction side . . . . . . . .
64
6.10
cl(α) and cl(cd) polars for a fully-turbulent VG-equipped airfoil and a transi-
tioning VG-equipped airfoil
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
6.11
cl(λVG) and cd(λVG) for varying α . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
6.12
cl/cd(λVG) for varying α
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
B.1
cf(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped
airfoil simulations for varying α. Note that the Y-axis was limited to a maxi-
mum cf = 0.01 for the sake of clarity. A few points near the leading edge and
at the vortex generator extend beyond this limit.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
B.2
cf(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped
airfoil simulations for varying α. Note that the Y-axis was limited to a maxi-
mum cf = 0.01 for the sake of clarity. A few points near the leading edge and
at the vortex generator extend beyond this limit.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
B.4
cf(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped
airfoil simulations for varying α. Note that the Y-axis was limited to a maxi-
mum cf = 0.01 for the sake of clarity. A few points near the leading edge and
at the vortex generator extend beyond this limit.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
B.5
cp(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped
airfoil simulations for varying α. Note the reversed Y-axis.
. . . . . . . . . .
81
B.6
cp(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped
airfoil simulations for varying α. Note the reversed Y-axis.
. . . . . . . . . .
82
B.7
cp(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped
airfoil simulations for varying α. Note the reversed Y-axis.
. . . . . . . . . .
83
90
List of Figures
==PAGE:99==
B.8
cp(x) along the z = 0 airfoil center-line from clean airfoil and VG-equipped
airfoil simulations for varying α. Note the reversed Y-axis.
. . . . . . . . . .
84
List of Figures
91
==PAGE:100==
==PAGE:101==
List of Tables
3.1
An overview of the cell count and computational costs for different mesh types 26
4.1
An overview of the experimental data series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
An overview of the mesh validation simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.3
An overview of the aerodynamic characteristics obtained from the mesh
validations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.1
An overview of the sensitivity to the mesh reﬁnements
. . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
An overview of the aerodynamic characteristics obtained using different
turbulence models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
5.3
An overview of the aerodynamic characteristics obtained with identical Re,
but different U∞, ρ, and µ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
93
==PAGE:102==
