==PAGE:1==
Guarantees of Diﬀerential Privacy
in Overparameterised Models
Eleonora Micozzi
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Deep Learning (DL) has become increasingly popular in recent years.
While DL models can achieve high levels of accuracy, due to their dimension-
ality they also tend to leak information about the data points in their training
dataset.
This leakage is mainly caused by overﬁtting, which is the tendency of Machine
Learning (ML) models to behave diﬀerently on their training set with respect
to their test set. Overﬁtted models are prone to privacy leaks because they do
not generalize well, and they memorize information on their training data.
Diﬀerential Privacy (DP) has been adopted as the de facto standard for pri-
vacy of data in ML. DP is normally applied to ML models through a process
called Diﬀerentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD): it involves
adding noise to the gradient update step, limiting the eﬀect any data sample
has on the model.
Since DP protects data points by limiting their eﬀect on the model, it is also con-
sidered a strong defence against Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs). MIAs
are a type of attack against the privacy of ML models, that aim to infer whether
a data point was part of the training set of a target model. This information is
sensitive, and therefore needs to be protected.
This thesis work explores the relationship between diﬀerential privacy and mem-
bership inference attacks, and the eﬀect overﬁtting has on the privacy leakage.
We test the eﬀectiveness of DP as a defence against MIAs by analyzing and
reproducing 3 state-of-the-art MIAs, and testing them on models trained with
diﬀerent privacy budgets, and without DP.
Our results show that diﬀerential privacy is an eﬀective defence against mem-
bership inference attacks, reducing their eﬀectiveness signiﬁcantly with respect
to non-private models.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at Aalto University under the supervision of profes-
sor N.Asokan (Aalto University)and co-supervision of professor Nicola Dragoni
(DTU), in fulﬁlment of the requirements for acquiring an M.Sc. in Engineering.
The advisor for this thesis is Sebastian Szyller, M.Sc., from Aalto University.
The thesis deals with diﬀerential privacy guarantees in deep learning models,
and their eﬀect on the eﬀectiveness of membership inference attacks.
The thesis consists of 61 pages.
Espoo, July 16, 2021, 2021
Eleonora Micozzi
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my advisor, Sebastian Szyller, for guiding me through this
thesis. He helped me stay on track and provided valuable feedback throughout
the thesis process.
I would also like to thank my supervisors, professor N.Asokan and professor
Nicola Dragoni, for their availability and support throughout this process.
This thesis could not have been possible without the constant encouragement
of my partner, Jack, who helped me stay motivated, pushed me to give my all,
and always believed in me, even when I did not.
A huge thanks also goes to my friend Shreya, who was always there for me, on
the good and the bad days (and nights), and without whom I would have often
been lost.
Ai miei genitori, grazie per avermi sempre supportato, ed aver sempre creduto
in me, senza alcun dubbio. Senza di voi non sarei mai arrivata dove sono ora.
(To my parents, thank you for always supporting me, and always believing in
me, without any doubts. Without you I would have never gotten where I am
today.)
Espoo, July 16, 2021
Eleonora Micozzi
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
v
1
Introduction
3
2
Background
5
2.1
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
. . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Diﬀerential Privacy (DP)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Diﬀerentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD) . .
10
2.4
Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Problem and approach
17
3.1
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Scope and Goals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Methods and implementation
21
4.1
Attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.1
Threshold attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.2
Data Augmentation attack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.3
Shadow models attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.2.2
Model architectures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:10==
viii
CONTENTS
4.2.3
Experimental setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5
Evaluation
33
5.1
Baseline models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
5.2
Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2.1
Threshold attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.2.2
Data augmentation attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.2.3
Shadow models attack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.2.4
Timing considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6
Discussion
43
6.1
Performance of various attacks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.2
Eﬀect of diﬀerent ε values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6.3
Connection to overﬁtting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.4
Complexity-accuracy tradeoﬀ. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.5
Satisfying requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7
Related Work
49
8
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
57
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ML
Machine Learning
DL
Deep Learning
DP
Diﬀerential Privacy
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
MI
Membership Inference
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
BGD
Batch Gradient Descent
NN
Neural Network
MIA
Membership Inference Attack
DP-SGD Diﬀerentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent
SVR
Support Vector Regression
RDP
Rényi-Diﬀerential Privacy
IID
Independent and Identically Distributed
DG
Domain Generalization
OOD
Out-Of-Distribution
MLaaS
Machine Learning (ML)-as-a-Service
AC
Advanced Composition
==PAGE:12==
2
CONTENTS
zCDP
Zero-Concentrated Diﬀerential Privacy (DP)
NC
Näive Composition
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Machine Learning (ML) models have become increasingly popular in recent
years, and are now widely used to analyse a variety of data, such as medical
imaging [1], social media posts [2], and facial images [3].
One branch of ML that has gained particular popularity is deep learning. Deep
learning models, such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), can achieve
very high accuracy. To do so, they need not only to have more parameters, but
also to be trained on an increasing amount of data.
Recent studies [4] have found that, due to the large capacity of these models,
they not only lack explainability, but also encode information on the training
data.
This is problematic since it exposes the models to various attacks, such as model
extraction [5], attribute inference, membership inference [6] and model inver-
sion [7]. These attacks exploit the information leaked by a model to discover
sensitive information about the individuals in the training dataset.
In particular, the goal of a Membership Inference Attack (MIA) is to discover
whether a certain data point was used to train the model, and this constitutes a
privacy violation. For example, in the case of a model used to detect a medical
condition, the training set would be composed of individuals aﬀected by the
condition. Therefore, discovering the membership status of an individual would
allow the attacker to learn that the individual is aﬀected by this condition. This
in turn would reveal very sensitive medical information.
Similarly, model inversion attacks allow an attacker to reconstruct the input of
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
a MLs model, such as faces or records.
Moreover, these privacy risks can lead companies leveraging ML models to vio-
late privacy regulations, incurring extra costs and legal issues.
Given the sensitivity of the applications, it is of paramount importance that
ML models protect the privacy of their datasets; at the same time, the current
trend is to create increasingly deep models, which are more prone to memorise
and leak information.
Therefore, the research community has started to look for ways to protect these
models, making them more secure and private, without decreasing their utility.
Diﬀerential Privacy (DP) [8, 9, 10] has become the standard for privacy guar-
antees in ML models. DP is a probabilistic privacy mechanism that provides
a theoretical privacy guarantee. Originally designed for interactive statistical
queries to a database, it has later been adopted by the ML community with
some modiﬁcations. The main idea behind DP is that for any two adjacent
datasets, which diﬀer by only one data point, the output of the ML model
should be indistinguishable; this provides privacy to the individual members of
the training set.
While much research has been carried out in the ﬁeld of diﬀerentially private
ML, DP still remains a somewhat obscure privacy metric. It is in fact often
diﬃcult to understand what guarantee a certain privacy budget provides for an
average member of the dataset. Moreover, DP is usually applied to ML models
through the addition of noise during training, and this procedure signiﬁcantly
degrades the accuracy of models [11]. As a result, in most real-world applica-
tions, where utility is the main concern, DP is applied with very high privacy
budget, which does not provide any meaningful privacy guarantee.1
In recent years, a lot of defensive [11, 12] and oﬀensive [13, 6, 14, 15] research
has been carried out in the ﬁeld of diﬀerentially private ML.
In this work, we analyse the eﬀectiveness of DP as a defence mechanism against
MIAs.
We observe the eﬀects of DP on various models, trained on diﬀer-
ent datasets. We then attack these models using relevant Membership Infer-
ence (MI) techniques, and analyse the behaviour of the models for varying pri-
vacy budgets. Finally, we carry out a comparison between the various MIA
methodologies, in terms of performance and complexity.
The structure of this thesis is as follows: Chapter 2 presents key background
knowledge and deﬁnitions; Chapter 3 deﬁnes the problem this thesis is address-
ing and the proposed approach, Chapter 4 contains details on the MIAs executed
and implementation details; Chapter 5 contains the results of the experiments,
Chapter 6 presents a discussion on the eﬀectiveness of the attacks and the results
obtained, Chapter 7 discusses relevant related work, and Chapter 8 concludes
the thesis.
1https://www.wired.com/story/apple-differential-privacy-shortcomings/
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Background
This chapter provides necessary background knowledge regarding machine learn-
ing and diﬀerential privacy.
2.1
Machine Learning
Machine Learning (ML) is the term used to describe computer algorithms that
learn patterns from raw data.
The birth of ML dates back to the 1950s, with Alan Turing’s “Imitation Game” [16].
In the same years, Arthur Samuel is credited for coining the term “machine
learning” based oﬀhis game of checkers [17]. One of the ﬁrst widely accepted
deﬁnitions of ML was given by Tom Mitchell in 1997 [18]:
A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect
to some class of tasks T and performance measure P, if its perfor-
mance at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with experience
E.
A ML algorithm can be divided in three parts:
==PAGE:16==
6
Background
1. A decision process based on the algorithm used;
2. An error function used to evaluate the model’s performance;
3. A model optimisation process used to update the model’s parameters
and increase accuracy.
Nowadays, ML algorithms are generally divided in three main categories: super-
vised learning, unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning. For the scope
of this thesis, we are only interested in supervised learning.
Supervised learning algorithms aim to learn a general rule that maps an input
to an output. They are characterised by the use of labelled datasets of the form
Dtrain = {(x, y)}, where x is a feature vector and y is the label associated with
it. The ML model is a function f(x, θ) which takes x as input and outputs
y= f(x, θ).
Supervised learning models can be divided in two categories, based on their
task: classiﬁcation models and regression models. In regression algorithms, the
output y is continuous, and it represents a real value, such as a quantity or
a size. The most common types of regression algorithms are linear regression,
regression trees and Support Vector Regression (SVR).
On the other hand, in classiﬁcation models, the output y is discrete. In this case,
the output is a category or a label. The most common types of classiﬁcation
algorithms are logistic regression and decision trees.
2.1.1
Deep Learning
Deep Learning (DL) is the main method used in artiﬁcial intelligence applica-
tions, and it lies behind many products and services used everyday by millions
of people worldwide.
DL is a subset of ML that uses artiﬁcial neural networks structured in multi-
ple layers. What diﬀerentiates DL from ML is the type of data it consumes.
While ML normally requires structured data, often pre-processed, DL can pro-
cess unstructured data, and automatically extract the most important features,
removing the pre-processing step.
From a mathematical standpoint, a DL algorithm deﬁnes parameterised func-
tions from inputs to outputs as compositions of many layers, such as transforma-
tions and nonlinear functions. It uses a loss function L to represent the penalty
for mismatching the training data. The loss on the parameters of the model θ
is the average of the loss over all the training points [10]:
L(θ) =
1
|D|
X
i
L(θ, xi)
(2.1)
==PAGE:17==
2.2 DP
7
The training process aims to minimise the training loss.
This is normally
achieved through a process called stochastic gradient descent. At each training
step, we consider a batch B of examples and compute
gB = 1
|B|
X
x∈B
∇θL(θ, x)
(2.2)
We then update the parameters θ following the direction −gB in order to reach
a local minimum in the loss function.
2.1.2
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)
Gradient descent is an optimization algorithm used to minimise an objective
function by iteratively moving in the direction of the steepest descent, deﬁned
by the negative of the gradient.
There are various versions of gradient descent, such as Stochastic Gradient De-
scent (SGD) or Batch Gradient Descent (BGD). We are mainly interested in
SGD.
SGD is based oﬀof BGD, but it is called stochastic because it replaces the
actual gradient, calculated on the whole dataset, with an estimate, calculated
on a randomly selected subset of the data.
θj = θj −α(ˆyi −yi)xi
j
(2.3)
This method allows the model to converge faster, especially when dealing with
big datasets, and therefore it is the most popular optimization algorithm used
in deep learning.
2.2
Diﬀerential Privacy (DP)
Diﬀerential Privacy (DP) is a privacy-preserving mechanism presented by Dwork
et al. in 2006 [19]. It aims to protect the privacy of all individuals in the dataset,
and is independent of any knowledge the adversary might have. Due to this,
it is a very promising privacy guarantee, and in the latest years it has been
established as the standard for privacy preserving ML.
Deﬁnition 1 (ε-diﬀerential privacy) For two datasets D and D′ such that
||D −D′||1 ≤1, a randomised algorithm M guarantees ε-diﬀerential privacy for
==PAGE:18==
8
Background
any subset of the output S, if M satisﬁes:
P[M(D) ∈S] ≤eεP[M(D′) ∈S]
(2.4)
DP has several desirable properties:
• Composability. DP can be applied to modular mechanisms. If all com-
ponents of a mechanism are diﬀerentially private, then so is their compo-
sition.
Deﬁnition 2 (Sequential composition) If M1(x) satisﬁes
ε1-diﬀerential privacy, and M2(x) satisﬁes ε2-diﬀerential privacy, then
the mechanism G(x) = (M1(x), M2(x)) satisﬁes (ε1 + ε2)-diﬀerential pri-
vacy.
• Group privacy. DP was theorised for datasets that contain Independent
and Identically Distributed (IID) records. A collection of samples is IID if
all samples are independent of one another, and they are all sampled from
the same probability distribution, that does not exhibit trends. Nonethe-
less, the privacy guarantee provided by DP degrades gracefully even if
there are related inputs in the dataset (hence the IID assumption does
not hold).
• Post-processing. It is impossible to reverse the privacy guarantee of DP
by post-processing the data in some way. Therefore, it is always possible
to perform arbitrary computations on the output of a diﬀerentially private
mechanism, and the privacy guarantee will be untouched.
Deﬁnition 3 (Post-processing) If M(X) satisﬁes ε-diﬀerential privacy,
then for any deterministic or randomized function f, f(M(X)) also sat-
isﬁes ε-diﬀerential privacy.
This property also implies robustness to auxiliary information. In
fact, even if the function f contains auxiliary information about elements
of the dataset, and tries to perform a linking attack, this attack will be
limited by the privacy guarantee ε, no matter the auxiliary information
contained in f.
Nonetheless, deﬁnition 2 is quite strict, and not easily applicable to machine
learning models. For this reason, relaxations have been designed in order to
make it easier to apply DP to ML models. The two most used relaxations are
Rényi-Diﬀerential Privacy (RDP) [20] and (ε, δ)-diﬀerential privacy [21].
In particular, RDP [20] is a relaxation of DP based on the Rényi divergence.
==PAGE:19==
2.2 DP
9
Figure 1: Diﬀerential privacy mechanism.
Deﬁnition 4 ((α, ε)-RDP) For two datasets D and D′ such that ||D−D′|| ≤1,
a randomised algorithm M guarantees ε-Rényi diﬀerential privacy of order α,
or (α, ε)-RDP for short, if it holds that
Dα(M(D)||M(D′)) ≤ε
(2.5)
where
Dα(P||Q) ≜
1
α −1 log Ex∼Q
P(x)
Q(x)
α
(2.6)
is the deﬁnition of Rényi divergence.
Another popular relaxation of DP is (ε, δ)-diﬀerential privacy [21].
Deﬁnition 5 ((ε, δ)-diﬀerential privacy) For two datasets D and D′ such
that ||D −D′|| ≤1, a randomised algorithm M guarantees (ε, δ)-diﬀerential
privacy for any subset of the output S, if M satisﬁes:
P[M(D) ∈S] ≤eεP[M(D′) ∈S] + δ
(2.7)
This relaxation allows for ε-diﬀerential privacy to be broken with probability
δ. δ can be interpreted as the probability of a privacy breach, or of a record
being leaked. This is the version of diﬀerential privacy that is widely applied to
machine learning models.
Theoretically, to provide meaningful privacy guarantees and make the proba-
bility of a privacy breach inﬁnitesimal, δ should be of the order of an inverse
polynomial of |D| (i.e. 1/100|D|). In practice, most academic publications and
applications choose it to be 1/|D| [22].
==PAGE:20==
10
Background
Figure 2: Diﬀerentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD) process.
The parameter ε represents the so called “privacy budget" of the mechanism,
and it controls the privacy level. For ε = 0, the output of the mechanism on the
datasets D and D′ is indistinguishable, meaning that there is complete privacy
for the members of the training dataset. Since privacy is normally obtained by
adding noise to the ML model during the training step, as we will see in more
detail in section 2.3, a value of ε = 0 would lead to a completely useless model
in terms of accuracy.
It is also important to note that privacy degrades exponentially for increasing
values of ε. Therefore, acceptable values of ε should be smaller than 10 . Values
of ε > 10 provide practically no guarantee [19], as the probability of the mecha-
nism behaving diﬀerently on the two datasets becomes exponentially large (for
example, ε = 14 leads to a coeﬃcient of 1 million).
2.3
Diﬀerentially Private Stochastic Gradient De-
scent (DP-SGD)
Abadi et al. [22] presents a method to apply DP to DL models. The authors
add noise during the training of the model, rather than after the training has
ﬁnished; in this way, they are able to control the inﬂuence of the training data
during the process, speciﬁcally during the SGD computation.
Algorithm 1 outlines the main steps of the process and Figure 2 illustrates the
mechanism.
The main steps in this process are:
==PAGE:21==
2.3 DP-SGD
11
Algorithm 1: Diﬀerentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD)
Input: Examples {x1, . . . , xN}, loss function L(θ). Parameters: learning
rate ηt, noise scale σ, group size L, gradient norm bound C
Initialize: θ0 randomly
for t ∈[T] do
take a random sample Lt with sampling probability L/N
Compute gradient
For each i ∈Lt, compute gt(xi) ←−∇θtL(θt, xi)
Clip gradient
¯gt(xi) ←−gt(xi)/ max(1, ||gt(xi)||2
C
)
Add noise
˜gt(xi) ←−1
L(P
i ¯gt(xi) + N(0, σ2C2I))
Descent
θt+1 ←−θt −ηt˜gt
end
Output: θT and compute the overall privacy cost (ϵ, δ) using a privacy
accounting method
• Norm clipping. In order to apply DP in Algorithm 1, the inﬂuence of
each example needs to be bounded. This is done by clipping each gradient
in the l2 norm. The clipping ensures that if ||g||2 ≤C, then g is preserved,
else it is scaled down to be the norm of C.
• Lots. The gradient of L is estimated by computing the gradient of the loss
on a group of samples and taking the average. This group is a lot, diﬀerent
from a computational group, which is instead a batch. Normally, the lot
size is much bigger than the batch size. We assume that each lot is formed
by independently picking each example with probability q = L/|D|. The
training is divided in epochs, where each epoch is the number of batches
required to process |D| examples; in this case, an epoch consists of |D|/L
lots.
• Privacy accounting. The composability property of DP allows to im-
plement an “accountant" method that computes the cost at each access of
the training data, and accumulates the cost as the training progresses.
Abadi et al. [22] add Gaussian noise during the gradient update step.
For
this type of noise, if σ is chosen to be
q
2 log 1.25
δ /ε, then each step is (ε, δ)-
diﬀerentially private with respect to the lot. Since the lot itself is a random
sample from the database, then by the privacy ampliﬁcation property of DP,
each step is (O(qε), qδ)-diﬀerentially private with respect to the full dataset,
==PAGE:22==
12
Background
with ε ≤1.
The tightest bound so far known was given by the strong composition theorem.
The authors invent a new, stronger accounting method, that they call moments
accountant.
Thanks to the moments accountant, the authors prove that algorithm 1 is ac-
tually (O(qε
√
T), δ)-diﬀerentially private, for appropriate settings of C and σ.
With respect to the strong composition theorem, which was the best bound in
literature, the authors’ moments accountant saves a
p
log(1/δ) factor in the ε
part and a Tq factor in the δ part. Since δ should be small and T ≫1/q, the
saving provided by the moments accountant is quite signiﬁcant.
Theorem 1 There exist constants c1 and c2 such that given the sampling prob-
ability q = L/N and the number of steps T, for any ε < c1q2T, Algorithm 1 is
(ε, δ)-diﬀerentially private for any δ > 0 if we choose
σ ≥c2
q
p
T log(1/δ)
ε
If we were using the strong composition theorem, we would need to choose
σ = Ω(q
p
T log(1/δ) log(T/δ)/ε). Therefore, from theorem 1, we save a factor
of
p
log(T/δ). The moments accountant keeps track of a bound on the moments
of the privacy loss random variable.
2.4
Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs)
A MIA is a form of attack against ML models that aims to identify if a certain
data point was part of the model’s training dataset.
Due to the nature of modern ML models, disclosing that a data point belonged
to the training dataset can leak sensitive and conﬁdential information. This is
the case, for example, of models trained to detect medical conditions, such as
cancer.
MIAs normally exploit the abnormal conﬁdence that models have when queried
on their training data. Since the model has already seen, and has been trained
on that example, it will have higher conﬁdence in classifying it with respect to
an example it has never seen before.
A probable cause for this behaviour is overﬁtting. A ML model is said to overﬁt
to its training data when its performance on the training data and test data
diﬀer. This means that the ML model does not generalize well, and its general-
ization error is large.
==PAGE:23==
2.4 MIAs
13
Deﬁnition 6 (Average generalization error [14]) The average generaliza-
tion error of a ML algorithm M on D is deﬁned as
Rgen(M, n, D, l) =
E
D∼Dn
z∼D
[l(MD, z)] −
E
D∼Dn
z∼D
[l(MD, z)]
(2.8)
where l is the loss function, D is the distribution of n data points, and D ∼Dn
is the model’s training dataset, sampled IID from D.
In practice, the model MD overﬁts if its expected loss on samples from the
training set is much lower than its expected loss on samples from the test set.
When a ML algorithm is stable, its generalization error is low and it does not
overﬁt [23].
Given a trained model MD and a data sample x, the adversary uses a classiﬁer
or a decision rule fMD to compute a membership prediction f(x; MD) ∈{0, 1}.
The goal is for the prediction to be 1 if and only if the data point was a member
of the training dataset. The model MD is called target model since it is the
target of the attack.
Yeom et al. [14] formalises the MIA:
Experiment 1 (Membership experiment ExpM(A, M, n, D)) Let A be an
adversary, M be a learning algorithm, n be a positive integer, and D be a distri-
bution over data points (x, y). The membership experiment proceeds as follows:
1. Sample D ∼Dn, and let MD = M(D).
2. Choose b ←−{0, 1} uniformly at random.
3. Draw z ∼D if b = 0, or z ∼D if b = 1.
4. ExpM(A, M, n, D) is 1 if A(z, MD, n, D) = b and 0 otherwise. A must
output either 0 or 1.
There are mainly two types of defences against MIAs:
1. reducing overﬁtting, using regularisation techniques such as weight decay
or early stopping;
2. perturbing a model’s predictions to minimise the success of known mem-
bership attacks.
Each MIA assumes that a certain amount of knowledge is in the attacker’s
possession. This knowledge is related to the target model, and it is divided in
ﬁve diﬀerent categories: task knowledge, training knowledge, model knowledge,
output knowledge, and data knowledge [24].
==PAGE:24==
14
Background
Task knowledge refers to the model’s prediction task. Since task knowl-
edge is necessary for the model to be used, it is always considered to be
known.
Training knowledge is the knowledge of the model’s learning algorithm,
and it reveals how the model was trained. In most settings, this is assumed
to be known by the attacker.
Model knowledge refers to the knowledge of the trained target model.
This can be divided in two subcategories:
– model architecture, the various layers and functions that make up the
model; this is assumed to be known in both white-box and black-box
attacks;
– model parameters, the value of the parameters of the model; this is
assumed to be known in a white-box setting.
Output knowledge corresponds to the knowledge of the model’s output.
It can be:
– full, when the attacker has access to all the prediction scores (logits);
– partial, when the attacker has access to a limited amount of predic-
tion scores;
– label-only, the most conservative setting, in which the attacker only
has access to the predicted label.
Data knowledge refers to the knowledge of the model’s training dataset
D. Most MI attacks assume partial data knowledge, i.e. access to some
samples belonging either to the training data or to the same distribution.
This way, an attacker can obtain samples from the same data distribution
as D and build a disjoint dataset, D′.
Based on which types of knowledge the attacker possesses, MIAs can be divided
in two categories:
Black-box, this threat model assumes task, training and model archi-
tecture knowledge.
The attacker does not have access to the model’s
parameters.
White-box, assumes all the knowledge of a black-box attack, but has
also access to the model’s parameters θ.
In this work, we concentrate on black-box MIAs because they are the most real-
istic; a white-box MIA is in fact quite diﬃcult to realise in practice, as the type
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs)
15
of information it requires is in most cases impossible to gain from a commercial
model.
Notation
Table 1 contains an overview of the notation used in this thesis.
Symbol
Explanation
M
Machine learning model
D
Dataset
S
Subset of outputs
x
Example from a dataset
y
Label associated with x
A
Adversary
L
Loss function
B
Batch
θ
Model’s parameters
ε
Privacy budget
δ
Privacy failure probability
g
Gradient
T
Number of epochs
C
Clipping coeﬃcient
σ
Noise coeﬃcient
N
Gaussian noise
Table 1: Notation used in this thesis.
==PAGE:26==
16
Background
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Problem and approach
3.1
Problem Statement
Various mechanisms have been designed to prevent data leakage and provide
data anonymity and privacy, but the de facto standard for privacy preserving
Machine Learning (ML) is Diﬀerential Privacy (DP).
DP [19] is a statistical privacy guarantee that protects against MIAs.
It was initially designed to secure interactive databases, but has later been ap-
plied to ML with various relaxations; in particular, (ε, δ)-diﬀerential privacy
and Rényi-Diﬀerential Privacy (RDP) [20] are two of the most common relax-
ations applied to deep learning models.
There are various issues concerning the use of DP in ML [25]. First, the privacy
guarantee has been relaxed in order to be make it applicable to ML models
without signiﬁcant utility loss. This relaxation is useful in terms of accuracy,
but it has rendered the privacy guarantee weaker - δ is normally chosen in the
order of 1/|D|, and this means that the ε privacy guarantee holds even if the
complete information of a small number of individuals is leaked [19]. On the
other hand, we still observe a signiﬁcant loss of accuracy in models trained with
sensible values of ε: in [26], the authors observe a 13% accuracy loss for ε = 8
and a 19% accuracy loss for ε = 2, with respect to the same model trained
non-privately.
==PAGE:28==
18
Problem and approach
The second issue is that the privacy guarantee is often obscure and diﬃcult to
interpret, especially with (ε, δ)-DP. It is diﬃcult for users to understand exactly
how much privacy the models are guaranteeing, and how much they are risking
by joining the training set.
Moreover, given the enormous number of parameters used in deep learning mod-
els, it is impossible to understand exactly which parts of the model are leaking
private information, and therefore, it is extremely hard to stop it from happen-
ing.
Lastly, DP is often used in commercial settings as a shield; companies release
models claiming that they are diﬀerentially private, and therefore they are pro-
tecting the privacy of individuals.
In practice, given the high loss of utility
caused by small values of ε, commercial models often use ε values on the order
of magnitude of 10, or even higher.1 These values are extremely high and allow
companies to maintain high accuracy, but they provide practically no guarantee,
therefore exposing users’ data to attacks.
Although in recent years DP has become a central topic in ML research, there is
a necessity for an analysis of the trade-oﬀbetween DP and accuracy of models,
also in relation to various attacks, such as MIAs.
Such an analysis should satisfy certain criteria, namely:
R1 be comprehensive, analysing the most relevant attacks;
R2 reproduce experiments presented in the literature;
R3 provide clear insights by analysing the results in depth.
3.2
Scope and Goals
The main aim of this thesis is to investigate the relationship between DP and
accuracy, and the protection provided against MIAs. For this analysis, we focus
on performance of the MIA, security of users’ data, and complexity.
In particular, we elaborate and answer the following research questions:
Q1 How does the performance of diﬀerent MIAs compare on various datasets?
Q2 How do diﬀerent values of ε inﬂuence the accuracy of MIAs?
Q3 How does overﬁtting inﬂuence the eﬀectiveness of MIAs?
Q4 What is the trade-oﬀbetween the accuracy of MIAs and their complexity?
1https://www.wired.com/story/apple-differential-privacy-shortcomings/
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Approach
19
3.3
Approach
In order to answer the research questions presented in Section 3.2, in this work
we reproduce current state-of-the-art attacks in the ﬁeld of Membership Infer-
ence (MI).
In the original papers, these attacks were evaluated on non-private models, and
DP was proposed as a defence in order to mitigate their eﬀects.
In relevant related work, Jayaraman et al. [27] reproduces two of these attacks,
presented in [6] and [14], and evaluates their eﬀectiveness against models trained
with diﬀerent values of ε, and various diﬀerential privacy variants.
We expand on [27] by testing models trained using (ε, δ)−DP, which was not
considered by Jayaraman et al.
We also reproduce a more recent attack by
Choquette-Choo et al. [15].
Our analysis concentrates on the precision and recall of the attacks, and we test
ε values ranging from 0.5 to 8. Our choice of ε is quite conservative if compared
to e.g. [27], where the authors test ε values up to 103. Nonetheless, it has been
shown that (ε, δ)-DP with values of ε > 10 provide little to no guarantee, which
justiﬁes our choice.
We also carry out a comparison of the attacks in terms of their complexity,
measured in terms of execution time (wall clock time).
These experiments show the relationship between MIAs and DP, and the con-
nection between overﬁtting and attack’s performance.
==PAGE:30==
20
Problem and approach
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 4
Methods and
implementation
4.1
Attacks
In this work, we replicate and analyse three state-of-the-art, black-box Membership
Inference Attacks (MIAs): the threshold attack [14], the data augmentation at-
tack [15] and the shadow models attack [6]. See Table 2 for an overview of the
attacks.
4.1.1
Threshold attack
Yeom et al. [14] presents various types of membership and attribute inference
attacks. In this work, we concentrate on the threshold adversary, as this is
the only attack that can be applied to Neural Networks (NNs).
The threshold adversary is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 7 (Threshold adversary) Suppose f(ϵ|b = 0) and f(ϵ|b = 1),
the conditional probability density functions of the error, are known in advance.
Then, on input z = (x, y), MD, n and D, the threshold adversary A proceeds as
follows:
==PAGE:32==
22
Methods and implementation
Attack
Access to
outputs
Requirements
Privacy Risks in
Machine Learning: Analyzing
the Connection to Overﬁtting [14]
(Threshold attack)
Logits
Knowledge of
target model’s loss L
Label-Only
Membership Inference Attack [15]
(Data augmentation attack)
Label
Possibility of
making multiple queries
to target model
Membership Inference
Attacks Against Machine
Learning Models [6]
(Shadow models attack)
Logits
Computational resources
and data from similar distribution
as target model to train
shadow models
Table 2: Overview of the Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs) presented in this section.
1. Query the model to get MD(x)
2. Let ϵ = y −MD(x)
3. Output arg maxb∈{0,1} f(ϵ|b)
The authors assume that σD and σD, the standard errors of the model on D
and D respectively, are known in advance, and are such that ϵ ∼N(0, σ2
D) when
b = 0 and ϵ ∼N(0, σ2
D) when b = 1.
This adversary is designed for linear and tree-based models.
In order to be
applied to deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), some modiﬁcations
need to be made. In particular, in CNNs, the predictions made by the target
model can be compared against LD, the average training loss of the model. In
this setting, the adversary uses the average training loss as threshold to classify
a data point as member.
Deﬁnition 8 (Threshold adversary on NN) Suppose LD, the average train-
ing loss of the target model MD, is known in advance. Then, on input z = (x, y),
MD, n and D, the threshold adversary A proceeds as follows:
1. Query the model to get MD(x)
2. Output I(L(MD(x), y) ≤LD), where I(·) is the indicator function.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Attacks
23
The authors tested this method on MNIST, CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100; in order
to accelerate the training, they chose a subset of each dataset to train on.
4.1.2
Data Augmentation attack
Choquette-Choo et al. [15] proposes a MIA that makes use only of the predicted
label. Most MIAs rely on the conﬁdence scores [22, 14], since abnormally high
or low conﬁdence scores can leak information on the membership status of the
example.
This attack, instead, makes use only of the label predicted by the target model.
The authors choose this setting as they believe it to be a realistic query inter-
face. Often, a Machine Learning (ML) model is part of a bigger system, and
the user does not have access to the conﬁdence scores but can only observe the
output of the model. Moreover, this makes the attack universal, as it can be
mounted on top of any ML service.
The attack relies on data augmentation to infer membership. The intuition
behind the attack lies in the idea that a ML model will exhibit higher robust-
ness on members of its training dataset, compared to other examples, due to
the fact that non-training points are closer to the decision boundary, and thus,
more susceptible to perturbations [28].
Moreover, models trained with data
augmentations have the capacity to overﬁt to them [29]. It follows that testing
the robustness of a model by evaluating a point and its augmentation can be a
good proxy for Membership Inference (MI).
Nonetheless, even if the model was not trained using data augmentation, the
robustness to perturbations can be a proxy for the model’s conﬁdence, in a label
only setting.
The authors argue that, while in linear models obtaining a data point’s distance
to the decision boundary yields the same information as obtaining conﬁdence
scores, this linear relationship actually persists even in deep, non-linear models;
and this thesis is also supported by the claim that deep NNs can be approxi-
mated by linear functions near the data [30].
The data augmentation attack proceeds as detailed in Deﬁnition 9.
Deﬁnition 9 (Data augmentation attack) Given a target datapoint z =
(x, ytrue) and a target model M:
1. On data from the same distribution as the target model’s training set, train
one shadow model
ˆ
M.
2. Create a dataset Dattack by querying the shadow model
ˆ
M on a set of
data points and their augmentations, and recording ˆz = (ˆx, ˆy), where ˆx =
==PAGE:34==
24
Methods and implementation
[
ˆ
M(xi)] ∀i ∈{0, N} and ˆy is the membership status of data point ˆx0
(original non-augmented data point)
3. Let bi ←I(ytrue = yi) be the indicator function for whether or not the ith
point was misclassiﬁed
4. Train a prediction model f(b0, b1, . . . , bN) →{0, 1} on Dattack to decide
whether ˆx0 should be classiﬁed as a training member or not
5. Consider data separate from the target model’s training set, and create
additional data points {ˆx1, . . . , ˆ
xN} via diﬀerent augmentation strategies.
6. Query target model M to obtain yi = M(ˆxi), ∀i ∈{1, N} and y0 = M(x)
7. Use f(·) to infer membership on the output of the target model for data
point x0
The data augmentations used in the paper are image rotation and transla-
tion. In particular, 2 augmentations are generated by rotating the image by
±r◦, r ∈{1, 15}. Moreover, N = 4d images are generated by translating the
image ±i pixels horizontally, and ±j pixels vertically, with i and j satisfying
|i| + |j| = d, where d is the pixel bound chosen in advance.
The evaluation is done on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and MNIST for vision datasets;
and Adult, Purchase-100, Texas-100, and Locations datasets for tabular data,
with standard CNNs trained for 20-1000 epochs.
The shadow model
ˆ
M is
trained using a non-overlapping subset of the original training set. The mem-
bership predictor f is a NN.
4.1.3
Shadow models attack
Shokri et al. [6] formally introduces the concept of a membership inference at-
tack. This attack exploits the concept of overﬁtting, which causes the model
to behave diﬀerently on training data points with respect to non-training data
points.
The attack assumes black-box access to a target model, and access to the pre-
diction vector of the model. The proposed membership inference attack is based
on a technique called shadow training: it relies on building multiple shadow
models, that mirror the architecture of the target model. These shadow models
are trained on data provided by the attacker, which comes from a similar dis-
tribution as the data used to train the shadow model. Therefore, the attacker
knows whether a certain data-point was a member of their training dataset, and
can train an attack classiﬁer A to maximise membership inference accuracy on
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Attacks
25
these shadow models, given a data point and its prediction vector. Since the
models mirror the target model’s architecture, and they are trained on data that
come from a similar distribution of the target model’s training data, maximising
membership inference on the shadow models allows the attacker to achieve good
inference results on the target model as well.
The authors propose three methods to obtain data that is distributed similarly
to the target model’s training data: model-based synthesis, statistics-based syn-
thesis and noisy real data.
The attack model consists of a collection of models, one for each class of the
target model, as this increases the accuracy of the attack.
The attack is detailed in Deﬁnition 10.
Deﬁnition 10 (Shadow model attack) Let M be a target model, and Dtarget
train
be the dataset on which the target model is trained. The target model receives as
input a datapoint z = (xtarget, ytarget) and produces a prediction vector ctarget,
with elements in [0, 1] that sum up to 1. Then:
1. Train a set of shadow models
ˆ
Mi on datasets Dshadowi
train
from the same
distribution as Dtarget
train .
2. Create dataset Dattack
train by querying the shadow models on each member of
their training dataset Dshadowi
train
, recording (y, ctarget, in) and adding it to
Dattack
train . Then, do the same for each member of the model’s test dataset
Dshadowi
test
, recording (y, ctarget, out) instead.
3. Split Dattack
train into as many partition as the number of classes of the training
model’s dataset, each partition associated with a diﬀerent class label.
4. For each label i, train Ai that, given ctarget, predicts in or out membership
status for x.
5. Use the attack model A = S Ai, ∀i ∈{1, |ctarget|} to predict membership
status for data points predicted by the target model M.
The attack is evaluated on MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, Purchases-100, Lo-
cations, Adult and Texas Hospital datasets.
The target model is obtained using both cloud-based machine learning services
from Google and Amazon, and NNs. The CNNs are trained on subsets of all
the datasets, leaving enough data out to train the shadow models on.
For the CIFAR datasets, the attack model is local, while for the other datasets
the attack is carried out using datasets on cloud platforms, either Google or
Amazon.
For the cloud-based models, the authors do not know the type of
model architecture, nor the hyperparameters used for tuning.
==PAGE:36==
26
Methods and implementation
In the case of a locally trained target model, the shadow models are trained on
the same architecture as the target model, which is assumed to be known by
the attacker. In the case of machine learning as a service, the attacker can use
the same API used to train the target model, to train the shadow models.
4.2
Implementation
In this work, we analyse the performance of the membership inference attacks
detailed in Section 4.1 using models trained with diﬀerent privacy budgets.
4.2.1
Datasets
The models are trained on MNIST [31], FashionMNIST [32] and CIFAR10 [33]
for vision tasks, see Figure 3. For tabular data, we use the Purchase100 dataset [6].
See Figure 3 for an overview of the image datasets.
These datasets were chosen mainly due to their popularity in ML research. Al-
though in the original papers the attacks are tested on a variety of datasets, in
this work we are mainly interested in the performance diﬀerence between models
trained on the same dataset, but with diﬀerent ε values. Therefore, we chose
3 vision datasets, which are our main focus, and 1 tabular dataset, in order to
measure this performance diﬀerence.
All the attacks we evaluate were originally tested on MNIST and CIFAR10,
and two of the attacks were tested on Purchase 100. We add the FashionM-
NIST dataset to our evaluation as it can be a direct replacement of the MNIST
dataset, while providing a slightly harder prediction task.
MNIST
This dataset contains 70,000 28x28 pixels images of handwritten digits, in
greyscale, normalised so that the digit is at the center of the image. The class
label indicates which digit is represented in the image. The dataset is split in
60,000 training samples and 10,000 test samples.1
1http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Implementation
27
(a) MNIST
(b) FashionMNIST
(c) CIFAR10
Figure 3: Examples from image datasets.
FashionMNIST
The dataset is a collection of Zalando’s article images, it contains 60,000 training
samples and 10,000 test samples, for a total of 70,000 images. The images are
28x28 greyscale. The class label indicates the type of article depicted in the
picture.2
CIFAR10
CIFAR10 is a benchmark dataset used to evaluate image recognition algorithms.
It it composed of 32x32 coloured images divided in 10 classes. It contains 60,000
images, split into 50,000 training samples and 10,000 test samples.3
Purchase100
This dataset is based on Kaggle’s "acquire valued shoppers" dataset that con-
tains the shopping history of thousands of customers.4 Each record contains
user’s transactions over a year, and transactions include many attributes. We
use the simpliﬁed Purchase100 dataset crafted by Shokri et al. [6], containing
197,324 records.
Each record consists of 600 binary features.
Each feature
corresponds to an item and indicates if the user has purchased it or not. The
2https://github.com/zalandoresearch/fashion-mnist
3https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/cifar.html
4https://www.kaggle.com/c/acquire-valued-shoppers-challenge/data
==PAGE:38==
28
Methods and implementation
Figure 4: LeNet5 model architecture [31].
records can be clustered in 5 diﬀerent ways, depending on the number of clusters:
{2, 10, 20, 50, 100}. We use 100 classes in our classiﬁcation task.
4.2.2
Model architectures
We use the LeNet5 [31] architecture for MNIST and FashionMNIST, see Fig-
ure 4. This architecture is detailed in Table 3, and it is a CNN with 3 convolu-
tion layers with Tanh activation functions and max pooling, followed by 2 fully
connected layers, the ﬁrst with Tanh activation and the second with softmax
activation function.
Layer
Parameters
Convolution
6 ﬁlters 5x5, stride 1, padding 0
Max-Pooling
2x2, stride 2
Convolution
16 ﬁlters 5x5, stride 1, padding 0
Max-Pooling
2x2, stride 2
Convolution
120 ﬁlters 5x5, stride 1, padding 0
Fully Connected
120 units
Dropout
0.5 probability
Fully Connected
10 units
Table 3: CNN model architecture for MNIST and FashionMNIST.
For CIFAR10, we use the model architecture detailed in Table 4. This architec-
ture was adapted by Tramèr et al. in [12] based on the architecture proposed
in [11] by Papernot et al..
For the Purchase100 model, we use the same model as Shokri et al. [6], a
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Implementation
29
Layer
Parameters
Convolution x2
32 ﬁlters 3x3, stride 1, padding 1
Max-Pooling
2x2, stride 2
Convolution x2
64 ﬁlters 3x3, stride 1, padding 1
Max-Pooling
2x2, stride 2
Convolution x2
128 ﬁlters 3x3, stride 1, padding 1
Max-Pooling
2x2, stride 2
Fully Connected
128 units
Fully Connected
10 units
Table 4: CNN model architecture for CIFAR10.
fully connected neural network with one hidden layer of size 128, with Tanh
activation function.
4.2.3
Experimental setup
We implemented our experiments using the Pytorch 1.8.0 [34] framework.
Experiments are run both on Triton5 , a high performance computing cluster
provided by Aalto University, and on the Puhti supercomputer provided by CSC
– IT Center for Science, Finland6. We used NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs.
Following previous work [12], we use the DP-SGD implementation in opacus.7
Baseline models
For all models, we use the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) optimizer. We
attach opacus’ PrivacyEngine to the optimizer in order to keep track of the
privacy loss at each epoch. We use CrossEntropyLoss as the loss function.
We choose ε values ranging from 0.5 to 8: in particular, we use ε ∈{0.5, 2, 8}
for MNIST, FashionMNIST and Purchase100, while we use ε ∈{2, 4, 8} for
CIFAR10.
The diﬀerent values of ε are achieved by changing the values of σ, the noise
level, and C, the gradient clipping threshold.
For all models, we use δ = 10−5, since the suggested value of δ is
1
|D|, and all
our datasets have size in the order of 105.
5https://scicomp.aalto.fi/triton
6https://research.csc.fi/-/puhti
7https://github.com/pytorch/opacus
==PAGE:40==
30
Methods and implementation
Attack setup
The threshold attack does not require an attack classiﬁer.
For the shadow models attack, we train n = 5 shadow models with the same
architecture as the target model. We then train c = 10 attack models for the
MNIST, FashionMNIST and CIFAR10 datasets, and c = 100 attack models for
the Purchase100 dataset, one for each class of the datasets.
We use BinaryCrossEntropyLoss for the attack model, which is commonly used
for binary classiﬁcation tasks. We choose the Adam optimizer for the attack
model. The model is a Neural Network (NN) with one hidden layer and ReLU
activation functions.
The output of our target models is the prediction vector for each datapoint.
We create an auxiliary dataset containing the prediction vectors as datapoints,
and the membership status as label, 1 for member, and 0 for non-member. We
then train the attack classiﬁers on this auxiliary dataset, dividing it based on
the labels.
For the data augmentation attack, we train 1 shadow model with the same ar-
chitecture as the target model. We create an auxiliary dataset based on the
predictions of the shadow model on the augmented data. We use the function
b(x) ∈{0, 1} to determine whether a datapoint was misclassiﬁed. We then cre-
ate an auxiliary dataset that contains the results of function b for each prediction
in the augmented data samples, and the membership status of the datapoint as
label. We then train the attack model to maximize membership inference based
on the output of the shadow model.
The attack model mimics the one used for the shadow models attack, with one
hidden layer and ReLU activation functions. We also use the BinaryCrossEn-
tropyLoss function as loss function, and the Adam optimizer.
For both the threshold attack and the shadow models attack, we need data that
comes from the same distribution as the training data of the target model. In
order to achieve this, we use the test set of each dataset as a training set for the
shadow models.
The shadow model for the data augmentation attack is trained on the whole
test set, 10.000 samples for MNIST, FashionMNIST and CIFAR10. We then
use 10.000 samples from the training set to test the model, and generate the
augmented predictions for the non-member case.
Therefore, the number of
members vs. non-members the attack model is trained on is the same, 10.000
samples for each category. We also use 20.000 samples to test the attack on the
target model. We use the 10.000 samples from the test set as non-members, and
10.000 samples from the training set as members.
For the shadow models attack, since we are creating n=5 shadow models, we
split the test set into 5, and train each shadow model on a disjoint subset of 2.000
samples from the test set. We then query the shadow models on their training
set, and the training set of a diﬀerent shadow model, in order to generate the
==PAGE:41==
4.2 Implementation
31
member and non-member predictions. This way, we obtain 4.000 samples for
each shadow model, and 20.000 overall to train the attack models.
The attack models are trained each on one class extracted from the 20.000 sam-
ples. For the target model predictions, we use 1000 samples from each class
for both the train and test set, resulting in 2.000 samples per class and 2.0000
samples overall, with which we query the attack model to obtain its precision
and accuracy.
==PAGE:42==
32
Methods and implementation
==PAGE:43==
Chapter 5
Evaluation
This chapter reports the results obtained from the Membership Inference At-
tacks (MIAs) presented in Chapter 4. We report the accuracy results for our
baseline models, and precision and recall values for all the attacks. We also
report the time the attack took to be executed, measured in seconds.
To account for randomness, we repeat our experiments 10 times and report the
average and standard deviation in our graphs; the error bars are present in all
graphs, but since most results are very consistent throughout runs, often the
error bars are not visible from the graph.
5.1
Baseline models
We report the accuracy results obtained with diﬀerent values of ε on the datasets
described in Section 4.2.1 (Figure 5).
For MNIST, FashionMNIST and CIFAR10, we used σ = 2, σ = 4 and σ = 8 to
achieve ε = 8, ε = 2 and ε = 0.5 respectively, with clipping threshold ﬁxed to
C = 4. For CIFAR10, we use σ = 6 and C = 3 for all values of ε.
We also compare the values of the test and train accuracy for the base models
trained without diﬀerential privacy, Table 5.
The diﬀerence between train and test accuracy is a useful metric to understand
==PAGE:44==
34
Evaluation
whether the models are overﬁtting to their training data; since overﬁtting is
considered the main culprit for information leakage in Machine Learning (ML)
models, this metric can be used to understand the behaviour of MIAs on our
baseline models.
Figure 5: Baseline models accuracy for varying values of ε. The graph highlights a high loss
of accuracy for models trained with lower values of ε. The highest utility loss is
registered for the CIFAR10 model, where the accuracy drops 34.25% between the
model trained with ε = 8 and its non-private counterpart.
Test accuracy
Train Accuracy
Diﬀerence
MNIST
98.91
99.39
0.48
FashionMNIST
90.17
92.38
2.21
CIFAR10
88.80
98.60
9.8
Purchase100
83.98
91.63
7.65
Table 5: Diﬀerence in test accuracy and training accuracy for the non-private baseline mod-
els. The diﬀerence shows that the most overﬁtted model is the CIFAR10 model,
followed by the Purchase100.
The most overﬁtted models are the CIFAR10 model and the Purchase100, with
a train-test accuracy diﬀerence of 9.8% and 7.65% respectively. The MNIST and
FashionMNIST models are instead stable, with a diﬀerence of accuracy between
the train and test sets of only 0.48% and 2.21%.
==PAGE:45==
5.2 Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs)
35
5.2
Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs)
We evaluate MIAs based on their precision and recall, in line with previous
work [6, 14].
Precision corresponds to the proportion of samples identiﬁed as members that
are actually members of the training dataset, while recall represents the portion
of actual members that is correctly identiﬁed as member by the attack classiﬁer.
In our case, members are considered positive samples, while non-members are
considered negative samples.
Precision:
TP
TP + FP
(5.1)
Recall:
TP
TP + FN
(5.2)
where TP= True Positives, FP= False Positives and FN = False Negatives. For
the data augmentation attack, the authors [15] use accuracy to evaluate their
work. Therefore, for comparison, for this attack we report also the accuracy
metric.
5.2.1
Threshold attack
We now present the results of precision and recall obtained on the various
datasets for the threshold attack (Figure 6).
We obtain very high recall (> 90%) for all models trained without diﬀerential
privacy. This is in line with the ﬁndings in the original paper [14].
For the models trained with diﬀerential privacy as a defence mechanism, the at-
tack exhibits very low recall. In particular, the recall for FashionMNIST drops
to <20%, even with a high value of ε such as 8. For the MNIST model, the
recall drops to 50% and for the CIFAR10, to 57%, with low values of ε such as
0.5 and 2 respectively.
The Purchase100 model does not seem to beneﬁt from the diﬀerential privacy
defence in terms of recall, which stays above 90% for all values of ε. Also in
terms of precision, it maintains a precision of 50% throughout, which is equal to
random guessing, and does not exhibit particular changes in the precision with
the changing of ε.
The attack on both MNIST and FashionMNIST models does not decrease sig-
niﬁcantly in precision with decreasing values of ε. The diﬀerence between the
non-private baseline and the model trained with ε = 0.5 is in fact 3% and 3.93%
respectively for MNIST and FashionMNIST.
==PAGE:46==
36
Evaluation
(a) Precision
(b) Recall
Figure 6: Precision and recall for the threshold attack. The attack is most successful on
CIFAR10, but the Diﬀerential Privacy (DP) defence is very eﬀective already at
ε = 8. The performance is very low on Purchase100, and on MNIST and Fashion-
MNIST it decreases only slightly when DP is applied. Recall is very high (>90%)
for all non-private models, and decreases signiﬁcantly with DP, with the exception
of the Purchase100 model.
The CIFAR10 model exhibits the biggest beneﬁt from diﬀerential privacy. While
the attack reaches a precision of 90.96% for the non-private baseline, the accu-
racy drops to <75% for all diﬀerentially private models, even with high values
of ε.
Overall, from these ﬁndings we can conclude that DP is an eﬀective defence
against the threshold attack. In fact, while the threshold attack was very eﬀec-
tive on the non-private models, the same models trained with DP were much
==PAGE:47==
5.2 Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs)
37
less aﬀected by the attack. This implies that the diﬀerentially private models
leaked less information on their training dataset with respect to their non-private
counterparts.
5.2.2
Data augmentation attack
We present the results obtained on the various datasets for the data augmenta-
tion attack.
For this attack, the authors [15] report accuracy as an evaluation metric. There-
fore, we report accuracy (Figure 8), for comparison with [15], and precision and
recall (Figure 7), for comparison with the other attacks we carry out.
(a) Precision
(b) Recall
Figure 7: Precision and recall for the data augmentation attack. Precision is higher for the
CIFAR10 attack, but decreases quickly when Diﬀerential Privacy (DP) is applied,
even with high ε.
Recall is highest for the non-private CIFAR1O model, and
remains low (<50%) for all other models.
Since this attack is based on data augmentation techniques such as rotation and
translation, it cannot be applied to the Purchase100 dataset, which consists of
tabular data. Therefore we do not test this attack on the Purchase100 dataset.
For CIFAR10, we observe the highest change between private and non-private
models. In fact, the attack has 89% recall, 74.56% precision and 79.44% overall
accuracy on the non-private baseline. This is consistent with what the authors
report in [15], which is an accuracy of about 75% on CIFAR10. Moreover, we
observe an exponential drop in the recall when using diﬀerential privacy: for
ε = 8, the recall value is just 10.91%. The precision and accuracy also drop
signiﬁcantly, and are close to the random guessing baseline for all the values of
ε.
With regards to the MNIST and FashionMNIST datasets, the attack achieves
==PAGE:48==
38
Evaluation
Figure 8: Accuracy for the data augmentation attack. The attack has low accuracy, near
random guessing, for all models apart from the CIFAR10 non-private model. When
Diﬀerential Privacy (DP) is applied, the accuracy drops to 50% also for the CI-
FAR10 model.
precision and accuracy just above the random guessing baseline. The recall is
very low, 44.95% for the non-private MNIST model and 26.89% for the non-
private FashionMNIST model. On both models, the recall falls under 20% with
ε = 0.5. The accuracy results are consistent with the results presented in [15],
where the authors achieve 53% accuracy on MNIST.
5.2.3
Shadow models attack
For the shadow models attack [6], the authors achieve 78% accuracy on CIFAR10
with a training set of 2500 data points, using a local Neural Network (NN) as the
target model. They also achieve 51.7% precision on MNIST using the Google
model as the target model. We now present the results of our experiments for
this attack (Figure 9).
Our attack achieves very high recall (>95%) on all datasets, for the non-private
baselines. With respect to the precision, we achieve 55% and 52% respectively
for MNIST and FashionMNIST. For CIFAR10, we achieve 76% accuracy, which
is in line with the ﬁndings in [6]. For Purchase100, we achieve 65% accuracy.
The original attack [6] achieves 93.5% accuracy on Purchase100, for the cloud
based target model, while it achieves 80% accuracy on the local NN target
model. We notice a signiﬁcant drop in accuracy between the non-private and
private models. The attack achieves less than 50% accuracy on both MNIST
and FashionMNIST, and 53.7% accuracy on Purchase100, for ε = 0.5. For the
CIFAR10 model, the accuracy drops to 58% with ε = 2.
==PAGE:49==
5.2 Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs)
39
(a) Precision
(b) Recall
Figure 9: Precision and recall for the shadow models attack.
The attack is eﬀective on
CIFAR10 and Purchase100, which are also the most overﬁtted models. On MNIST
and FashionMNIST the attack achieves high recall non-privately, and precision just
above random guessing. All models beneﬁt from the addition of DP in terms of
privacy.
5.2.4
Timing considerations
In this section, we report the timings of the attacks (Table 6). We measured the
timings by running each attack 5 times for each ε value, and then averaging all
the runs. Therefore, each result is the average of 20 runs of the attack on the
same dataset.
The timings are recorded using the process_time() function from the time
module. It records the value of the sum of the system and user CPU time of
==PAGE:50==
40
Evaluation
the current process.1
Threshold
attack
Data
augmentation
attack
Shadow
models
attack
MNIST
7,065 (0,584)
1314,842 (167,769)
468,155(55,510)
FashionMNIST
7,046 (0,385)
1342,348 (168,473)
457,830 (52,482)
CIFAR10
42,749 (1,757)
1542,669 (114,188)
629,743 (39,382)
Purchase100
0,169 (0,005)

315,938 (21,201)
Table 6: Timing results for the three attacks. We report the standard deviation in brackets.
All attacks are dependent on the complexity of the target model. The data aug-
mentation attack takes the longest to run, followed by the shadow models attack
and the threshold attack.
We notice that the execution times are highly dependent on the complexity of
the target model. In fact, for the most complex target model, the CIFAR10
model, the time is consistently higher than for the other models, for all attacks.
The attacks on FashionMNIST and MNIST are very similar in terms of timing,
since the target model has the same architecture. The attack on Purchase100
requires the least time, since the target model is the simplest.
Overall, the threshold attack runs in the least amount of time. This attack is
a metric-based attack, which does not require an attack classiﬁer, but instead
relies on average training loss of the target model. Therefore, our expectations
is that it would run faster than the other more complex attacks; and these
expectations are conﬁrmed by our experimental results.
On the other hand, both the data augmentation attack and the shadow models
attack require an attack classiﬁer and shadow models. In particular, the shadow
models attack requires an arbitrary number of shadow models, which we ﬁx at 5,
and as many attack classiﬁers as the number of classes in the dataset. The data
augmentation attack instead requires only one shadow model, and one attack
classiﬁer.
Therefore, we expect these attacks to run in much longer time than the threshold
attack.
Interestingly, the data augmentation attack in our experiments runs for longer
than the shadow models attack, taking about 3 times more time.
Our intuition is that this happens due to the amount of data that the data
augmentation attack uses. In fact, while for the shadow models attack we only
use the data in the test set of the datasets, which is equal to 10.000 samples for
all datasets, in the data augmentation attack we use the same data, but augment
each sample, creating 12 extra images for each example. Hence ultimately the
1https://docs.python.org/3/library/time.html
==PAGE:51==
5.2 Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs)
41
shadow model in the data augmentation attack is trained on 130.000 images.
On the other hand, while for the shadow models attack we create 5 diﬀerent
shadow models, each of them is trained on a subset of 2.000 samples from the
test set.
Therefore, the time needed to train the 5 shadow models is much
lower. Moreover, the target model in the shadow models attack is queried on
10.000 samples from the training set and 10.000 from the test set. On the other
hand, for the data augmentation attack, we query the target model on 130.000
samples for the test set, and 130.000 samples for the train set (10.000 + 12
augmentations each).
Overall, the results are consistent with our expectations for all attacks, and they
reﬂect the diﬀerent complexity of the attacks, as well as the diﬀerent complexity
of the target models.
==PAGE:52==
42
Evaluation
==PAGE:53==
Chapter 6
Discussion
6.1
Performance of various attacks
The threshold attack does not require any attack classiﬁer, because it is based
on a threshold rule. Nonetheless, it is quite eﬀective on CIFAR10, MNIST and
FashionMNIST.
In particular, while both the shadow models attack and the data augmentation
attack fail to exceed the random guessing baseline, the threshold attack achieves
68.4% and 71.7% accuracy on MNIST and FashionMNIST respectively. The
threshold attack performs very well also on the CIFAR10 model, achieving 90%
accuracy in the non-private setting. On the other hand, the Purchase100 model
does not seem to be vulnerable to this attack.
The data augmentation attack and shadow models attack achieve good recall
and precision on CIFAR10, while they perform only slightly above 50% for
MNIST and FashionMNIST. The lower performance of these attacks on these
datasets can be caused by the lower overﬁtting their target models exhibit. Since
the data augmentation attack tests the robustness of the model, which is strictly
connected to overﬁtting, and the shadow models attack directly exploits the tar-
get model’s overﬁtting, both of these attacks are signiﬁcantly more eﬀective on
overﬁtted models.
In conclusion, to answer research question Q1, we ﬁnd that the threshold attack
is an eﬀective attack, and achieves good performance on non-private models, for
==PAGE:54==
44
Discussion
all models apart from the Purchase100. The shadow models attack and data
augmentation attack perform similarly well on CIFAR10, but fail to achieve
good results on the MNIST and FashionMNIST, given the low overﬁtting of
these models. Finally, the only attack that performs well on the Purchase100
dataset is the shadow models attack.
6.2
Eﬀect of diﬀerent ε values
For our diﬀerentially private target models, we tested values of ε ranging from
0.5 to 8.
Given the addition of noise to the gradient update step, the contribution of
each data point during training should be limited, or anyway masked, so that
the model cannot leak information regarding the training data points.
This is conﬁrmed by our experimental results.
For all attacks, we obtain a signiﬁcant drop in accuracy between the target model
trained in a non-private setting, and the target model trained using diﬀerential
privacy. The only cases in which this does not happen is when the attack is
performing at 50% accuracy already on the non-private baseline, in which case
the diﬀerentially private models perform similarly.
We note how the diﬀerential privacy defence eﬀectiveness is related to utility
loss of the model: when models exhibit a higher utility loss, the MIAs are also
less eﬀective.
The MNIST model exhibits 8% accuracy loss between the model trained with
ε = 2 and the non-private model, and the FashionMNIST model exhibits a 13%
privacy loss. For the shadow models attack, we see that both the MNIST and
FashionMNIST models beneﬁt from the Diﬀerential Privacy (DP) defence, and
the precision and recall of the attack continue to decrease with decreasing values
of ε. This is not the case for the data augmentation attack; since the attack is
not successful on these models, DP has no eﬀect on the accuracy which remains
around the 50% line. For the threshold attack, the DP defence decreases the
precision of the models by about 5% for MNIST and 4% for FashionMNIST,
while the recall drops exponentially with the addition of DP.
At the same time, the CIFAR10 model exhibits a very high loss of utility for
low values of ε, with accuracy at ε = 2 of only 38.02%. Given the results of
our baseline models accuracy, we notice that the highest drop in accuracy is
obtained at ε = 8, where the model loses 34% accuracy with respect to the non-
private baseline. For each of the lower values of ε, the model loses about 8% in
accuracy. Therefore, we expect the biggest diﬀerence in attack performance to
be between the non-private baseline and the model trained without DP. This is
conﬁrmed by our results: for all attacks, we see that the attacks perform well on
==PAGE:55==
6.3 Connection to overﬁtting
45
the non-private baseline, and the precision and recall drop signiﬁcantly for the
model trained with ε = 8. For the other values of ε, the precision and recall drop
further, but we notice how the precision and recall drop less for lower values of
ε when the target model also loses less accuracy.
The Purchase100 model also suﬀers a high loss in accuracy with the addition of
DP, especially for the model trained with ε = 0.5.
For this dataset, the shadow models attack is successful, but when the target
model is trained with DP, the precision and accuracy decrease together with the
values of ε. The threshold attack is not successful on the Purchase100 model,
reaching only 50% accuracy; therefore the DP defence is not needed in this case,
and the precision and recall remain stable throughout the models.
Ultimately, we answer research question Q2: our experimental results show that
DP is an eﬀective defence against MIAs, and we notice that when the target
model’s accuracy decreases as a result of higher DP guarantees, the eﬀectiveness
of MIAs on the model is reduced. Clearly, utility loss is an unwanted side eﬀect
of DP; nonetheless, our experimental results suggest that this utility loss is
directly correlated with the eﬀectiveness of DP as a defence.
Moreover, we
remark that all attacks are aﬀected by the privacy guarantee, and, while the
biggest diﬀerence can be perceived going from a non-private model to a model
trained with ε = 8, lower values of ε still provide better guarantees for all models
and attacks.
Our experiments are limited to values of ε < 10, since theoretically these would
be the only values providing actual privacy to members of the dataset.
An
interesting cue for future work would be to extend these experiments, testing ε
values higher than 8, in order to understand how the privacy guarantee degrades,
and where is the threshold after which the privacy guarantee becomes useless.
6.3
Connection to overﬁtting
We now clarify the relationship between Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs)
eﬀectiveness and overﬁtting.
The most overﬁtted model in our experiments is the CIFAR10 model (see Ta-
ble 5) with a train-test diﬀerence of 9.8%.
At the same time, the CIFAR10 model is also the model on which MIAs achieve
better results in the non-private setting.
In particular, the precision of the
threshold attack on CIFAR10 reaches 90%, while it stays under 72% for all the
other models.
The data augmentation attack performs well on the CIFAR10 model, reaching
recall near 90% and precision just short of 80%.
The shadow models attack is also successful on the CIFAR10 model, with a
precision of 76%, while the precision fails to exceed 55% for both MNIST and
==PAGE:56==
46
Discussion
FashionMNIST, and reaches 65% for Purchase100.
When trained with diﬀerential privacy, the attacks become less eﬀective, with
precision dropping by 20%, 16.5% and 11% already for ε = 8.
Moreover, while the MNIST and FashionMNIST models are stable, with a train-
test diﬀerence in accuracy of only 0.48% and 2.21%, the Purchase100 model also
overﬁts, and its train-test diﬀerence in accuracy reaches 7.65%. For the thresh-
old attack, on these datasets, precision is lower, reaching only 71.7% and 68.4%
on the non-private models of MNIST and FashionMNIST, and failing to exceed
the random-guessing baseline for Purchase100.
The data augmentation attack and the shadow models attack are also less ef-
fective on MNIST and FashionMNIST models, where they only reach accuracy
slightly higher than 50%. Finally, the shadow models attack performs well on
the Purchase100 dataset.
Given the higher overﬁtting presented by the Purchase100 model, it is clear that
it is more overﬁtted with respect to the MNIST and FashionMNIST models;
this explains why the shadow models attack performs well on the Purchase100
dataset.
From these considerations, we answer research question Q3: our results show
that overﬁtting plays a signiﬁcant role in the information leakage of Machine
Learning (ML) models, and consequently in the eﬀectiveness of MIAs; we see a
clear pattern where more overﬁtted models leak more information than models
that are more stable.
6.4
Complexity-accuracy tradeoﬀ
From our analysis of the attacks, it is evident that the threshold attack [14] is
the simplest attack, as it does not involve an attack classiﬁer. It is instead a
metric-based MIA, which classiﬁes points as members or non-members based on
their loss. This attack is therefore quite simple and requires very little resources
and time.
From our results (Table 6), we can see that the timing of this attack is highly
dependent on the type of target model used. In fact, the MNIST and Fashion-
MNIST models, which share the same target model architecture, produce very
similar timings, of about 7s; the attack on the Purchase100 classiﬁer is very
fast, thanks to the very simple structure of the Purchase100 target model, and
takes approximately 0.17s; and the CIFAR10 model is the most complex, taking
approximately 6 times the time as the MNIST and FashionMNIST models, 42s.
As we have already discussed in Section 5.2.2, the data augmentation attack [14],
due to the amount of data it uses, executes in longer time with respect to the
shadow models attack, and both attacks take much longer than the threshold
attack.
==PAGE:57==
6.5 Satisfying requirements
47
Clearly, our results are based on our choices for the attacks; in the shadow mod-
els attack, we decided to use a ﬁxed number of 5 shadow models. In the original
paper [6] the authors try diﬀerent numbers of shadow models, up to 100. This
would increase a lot the running time of the attack, which would then probably
take longer to run than the data augmentation attack. Also, the number of
augmentations impact the timing of the data augmentation attack: we choose
to use 12 augmentations, but using less would make the attack run faster.
Comparing the timing of the attack to their performance, we see that the most
eﬃcient attack is the threshold attack, which achieves good results on 3 out of
4 datasets while running for less than 1 minute in all cases.
The shadow models attack, while taking longer than the threshold attack to
run, achieves good performance in terms of recall on all non-private models,
and high precision on CIFAR10 and Purchase100.
On the other hand, the data augmentation attack takes the longest to run, and
achieves good performance only on the CIFAR10 model.
Given the results we achieved, we can answer research question Q4: from our
experiments, the shadow models attack and threshold attack are more eﬃcient,
providing a good trade-oﬀin terms of attack precision and complexity. The data
augmentation attack is not very eﬀective on the models, and takes the longest
to run.
Overall, the data augmentation attack is attractive because it only
requires the predicted label of the target model, and therefore can be applied
to any machine learning system, also in the case of ML-as-a-Service (MLaaS);
nonetheless, our results show that the attack is quite complex, and not eﬀective
on most datasets. The shadow models attack (if performed with a low number of
shadow models) and threshold attack are less time-consuming, and can achieve
high precision on most models. Therefore they oﬀer a better precision-accuracy
trade-oﬀ.
6.5
Satisfying requirements
In Section 3.1, we introduced 3 requirements this analysis should satisfy.
In this work, we concentrate on three very relevant MIAs. In fact, we anal-
ysed the shadow models attack by Shokri et al. [6] since it is the ﬁrst MIA
ever presented. We then chose the threshold attack by Yeom et al. [14] as it
is a much simpler attack that requires less computational resources, but still
achieves high precision and recall. It is also often used as a baseline to compare
other attacks [15, 35, 36]. Finally, we chose to reproduce the data augmentation
attack since it is one of the only instances (together with the boundary-attack
proposed by Zheng et al. in [37]) of a label-only black box attack. This setting
is very conservative, and therefore it allows us to study the leakage of models
even when the attacker has the minimum amount of information. Hence, we
==PAGE:58==
48
Discussion
satisfy requirement R1.
Within this work, in order to satisfy requirement R2, we reproduced the three
MIAs we analysed, and tested them on various models trained with and without
DP.
In Chapters 5 and 6, we present and analyse our results in detail, drawing clear
conclusions on the eﬀect of DP and overﬁtting on the attacks, and comparing
the attacks’ eﬃcacy with respect to their complexity. Thus, we satisfy require-
ment R3.
==PAGE:59==
Chapter 7
Related Work
Diﬀerentially Private Learning Does Not Bound Member-
ship Inference [13]
Humphries et al. [13] challenge the idea that Diﬀerential Privacy (DP) is always
a successful defence against Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs). In particu-
lar, they hypothesize the idea that resilience against MIAs is actually a property
of the whole dataset, rather than a single sample’s. They claim that when the
data in the training set is not Independent and Identically Distributed (IID),
the privacy guaranteed by DP is actually lower than what the theoretical bound
would predict.
In order to prove this, they craft experiments to evaluate the eﬀects of non-IID
data in practice.
They evaluate membership inference attacks from Shokri et al. [6] and Yeom et
al. [14], and prove that, both on artiﬁcially crafted synthetic datasets and on
real-life datasets, diﬀerential privacy bounds can be broken if the data does not
satisfy the IID assumption.
The authors state that this limitation of DP should always be taken into ac-
count when deploying Machine Learning (ML) models commercially, since the
data they are trained on may not be IID. In this case, the models would oﬀer
much lower guarantees than what their creators expect, therefore putting users’
data at risk.
==PAGE:60==
50
Related Work
Overall, this work challenges the idea that DP is a good defence against Membership
Inference (MI) in general, and stresses that the IID assumption is fundamental
in order for the DP guarantees to hold.
In this thesis, in line with most previous research [6, 14, 15], we carry out an
analysis of MIAs on IID datasets. Therefore, our results are not directly com-
parable to the results obtained by Humphries et al.
Does Learning Stable Features Provide Privacy Beneﬁts for
Machine Learning Models? [38]
This paper concentrates on Domain Generalization (DG) as a defence against
privacy leakage and MIAs.
In particular, the authors investigate the connection between Out-Of-Distribution
(OOD) generalization, learning stable features and privacy attacks.
Stable (or causal) features are those that maintain the same relationship with
the outcome, no matter the data distribution, and they allow a ML model to
perform well even on data that comes from a diﬀerent distribution than the
one it was trained on. This allows a model to perform well on OOD data, thus
having high OOD generalization capabilities.
The authors explore whether these properties are correlated to higher privacy
guarantees, and they ﬁnd that OOD generalization is not a reliable metric to
measure privacy.
On the other hand, learning stable feature can be used as a proxy for privacy
of data: models that rely on learning stable features actually provide better
guarantees. Nonetheless, not all state-of-the-art algorithms are able to capture
these stable features.
This paper highlights the importance of creating better models, that are able
to practically learn stable features, since this allows for models to be private
by design. While privacy mechanisms such as DP rely on adding noise to the
gradients, therefore reducing the utility of the models, models that learn stable
features can provide privacy without any loss of accuracy.
This work does not directly compare with diﬀerentially private models as the
authors’ intention is to create private models only using OOD generalization
and stable features.
Nonetheless, the work is interesting as it opens the possibility of providing pri-
vacy without loss in accuracy, and this is a very compelling motivation for future
work in this area.
==PAGE:61==
51
Evaluating Diﬀerentially Private Machine Learning in Prac-
tice [27]
Since DP has become the standard for privacy in ML, there has been a ten-
dency to use high ε values in order to achieve higher privacy guarantees while
still maintaining the utility of the model.
In order to do this, many relaxations and variations of DP have been designed
that tighten the privacy bound and allow for higher ε values.
This trend does not keep into account the various consequences of these relax-
ations. Moreover, high ε values often used in commercial settings undermine
the privacy guarantee oﬀered by DP, even though there is no real consensus on
a threshold value for ε.
Hence, Jayaraman et al. [27] evaluate DP mechanisms for ML across diﬀer-
ent choices of ε, for both linear regression models and deep learning models.
They cover three variants of DP: Rényi-Diﬀerential Privacy (RDP), DP with
Advanced Composition (AC), and Zero-Concentrated DP (zCDP).
The experiments are evaluated based on both the accuracy loss of the models,
relative to a non-private baseline, and the privacy leakage, namely the attacker’s
advantage as deﬁned by Yeom et al. [14]. The work is evaluated using both the
shadow models attack by Shokri et al. [6] and the threshold attack by Yeom et
al. [14]
The authors ﬁnd that there is a very big gap between the ε-DP upper bound,
and the actual privacy leakage showed by the attacks.
While the privacy loss bounds provided by relaxations of DP improve utility,
they also increase vulnerability to attacks. For all models and attacks, as ex-
pected, as the privacy budget increases both the attacker’s advantage and the
model utility increase.
For small values of ε, the models show a very high loss in utility. As the value of
ε grows, for all relaxations, the experiments show an increased privacy leakage.
In particular, RDP stands out as the relaxation that leaks the most throughout
the various attacks. For example, RDP at ε = 10 achieves, on logistic regression
models, similar utility and privacy as the Näive Composition (NC) at ε = 500.
The work also highlights how, even with the lower guarantee provided by these
relaxations, membership inference attacks available still perform poorly. Nonethe-
less, as technology and research evolves, membership inference attacks may be-
come increasingly successful, and may break the privacy guarantees oﬀered by
DP relaxations.
Overall, [27] ﬁnds that no DP relaxation is able to provide acceptable values of
both model utility and privacy, especially in the case of Neural Networks (NNs).
These experiments use ε values ranging from 0.01 to 1000.
In our work, we evaluate ε ranging from 0.5 to 8.
While Jayaraman et al.
concentrate on evaluating diﬀerent versions of DP on 2 datasets, Purchase100
and CIFAR-100, our work concentrates on a single relaxation of diﬀerential pri-
==PAGE:62==
52
Related Work
vacy, (ε, δ)-diﬀerential privacy. Our analysis compares three diﬀerent attacks,
including the recent label-only attack proposed by Choquette-Choo et al. [15],
mainly based on their performance, and complexity. We evaluate the attacks
on 4 datasets, 3 vision datasets (CIFAR-10, MNIST and FashionMNIST), and
1 tabular dataset (Purchase100).
Our ﬁndings conﬁrm the results presented in [27]. Since we concentrate on low
values of ε, smaller than 10, we ﬁnd, as expected, a high loss of accuracy, cor-
related to a higher degree of privacy oﬀered against all MIAs. For the higher
value of ε = 8, we ﬁnd that, while the accuracy loss decreases with respect to
models trained with lower values of ε, it is still signiﬁcant with respect to the
non-private baseline. This is due to our conservative choice of ε and in line with
the ﬁndings in [27], where the authors record high loss of accuracy (< 20%) for
all values of ε < 102 for both datasets.
Adversary Instantiation: Lower Bounds for Diﬀerentially
Private Machine Learning [39]
This paper suggests that DP is actually a conservative guarantee, and that ad-
versaries may not be able to obtain as much information as suggested by the
theoretical bound.
In particular, the authors concentrate on Diﬀerentially Private Stochastic Gradi-
ent Descent (DP-SGD), which is the most common method to train diﬀerentially
private neural networks.
This work stems from the fact that DP assumes a strong adversary, which might
be unrealizable in practice. Therefore, if the adversary is weaker than assumed
by DP-SGD, the privacy in practical scenarios is greater than theory would sug-
gest.
This means that the high values of ε used by many ML practicioners in commer-
cial models could potentially provide an actual privacy guarantee that is higher
than the theoritical predicted guarantee.
The authors carry out an empirical evaluation, instantiating diﬀerent adver-
saries with increasing capabilities, and testing their MI accuracy.
For their
weaker attack, which only has API access to the model, the authors use the
shadow models attack [6] by Shokri et al.
Nasr et al. prove that, while the DP-SGD bound is tight in the worst case of
an adversary with full capabilities, it may be loose under a realistic setting; for
example, when the adversary only has black-box access to the model.
This also suggests that by including additional assumptions in the DP adversary
threat model, the guarantee could be closer to the average case, and higher than
theory currently predicts, while decreasing the utility loss that comes with the
addition of noise.
Our results in this thesis suggest that DP is a good defence against MI. Our
==PAGE:63==
53
attacks are all black-box attacks. We chose this setting as, in agreement with
Nasr et al., we believe it to be the most realistic, especially with the increasing
popularity of ML-as-a-Service (MLaaS). Our adversaries are therefore theoret-
ically weaker than the adversary proposed by DP, which can instead access the
intermediate parameters of the model during training. Hence, the work in [39]
is relevant for this thesis, as it shows that the privacy guarantees we achieved
in this work may be higher than what is currently predicted by theory.
==PAGE:64==
54
Related Work
==PAGE:65==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
This thesis explores the relationship between Diﬀerential Privacy (DP) and
Membership Inference Attacks (MIAs), and the eﬀect of overﬁtting on the ac-
curacy of the attacks.
In this work, we analyse and reproduce 3 state-of-art MIAs, chosen based on
their relevance in the ﬁeld.
We examine the behaviour of the attacks on models trained with diﬀerent pri-
vacy budgets. We report the results of the attacks on each of the models, and
carry out an in-depth discussion about our results, according to the research
questions presented in Section 3.2.
Our analysis satisﬁes the requirements we put forward in Section 3.1.
Our experiments show that DP is an eﬀective defence against MIA, and that
privacy budgets up to ε = 8 are eﬀective in protecting the training data of target
models. We notice that privacy increases when ε values decrease, but we can
achieve good privacy already with ε = 8.
We also highlight the role of overﬁtting in the success of MIAs: the more over-
ﬁtted a model, the more a MIA will be successful on it.
We compare the models’ accuracy and precision on diﬀerent models, and notice
that even simpler attacks can achieve very good results when the target model
is highly overﬁtted.
We also compare the attacks based on their precision, and complexity.
We conclude that the threshold attack by Yeom et al. and the shadow models
attack by Shokri et al. provide a good precision-complexity trade-oﬀ; on the
==PAGE:66==
56
Conclusion
contrary, the data augmentation attack by Choquette-Choo et al., while being
very attractive thanks to the little amount of information it requires, is very
time-consuming, and provides good results only for the most overﬁtted model.
Ultimately, we note that while DP is an eﬀective defence, MIAs developed thus
far are not optimal, and they fail to achieve high precision even on non-private
models. Therefore, in the future, when more eﬀective MIAs will be developed,
the defence provided by DP might have to be revisited, as it may not be suﬃcient
anymore. Lastly, we present relevant related work in the ﬁeld of diﬀerentially
private machine learning.
Considerations and future work
In this thesis, we carried out an analysis of three MIAs on various models and
using diﬀerent values of DP. While we tried to be as exhaustive as possible, due
to time restrictions some topics remain unexplored, and they provide cues for
future work. In particular, it would be interesting to explore the behaviour of
the MIAs on models trained with higher values of ε, following the work in [27].
Moreover, we could further evaluate the attacks on other datasets. Lastly, repro-
ducing additional MIAs would oﬀer more insights on whether the DP defence is
universally useful, or can be broken with stronger Membership Inferences (MIs)
techniques.
Additionally, taking inspiration from [12], during this thesis work we tried to
develop a Deep Learning (DL) model that would be private by design, investigat-
ing the impact that feature engineering and disentanglement would have on the
models’ privacy. These experiments have not been included in the thesis since
they were inconclusive, but it is a relevant area of future work; creating models
that are inherently private would allow to signiﬁcantly decrease the utility loss
of the models, which is the main issue of private Machine Learning (ML). This
work is currently being further developed in the SSG research group at Aalto
University.1
1https://ssg.aalto.fi
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1] A. S. Lundervold and A. Lundervold, “An overview of deep learning in
medical imaging focusing on MRI,” Zeitschrift für Medizinische Physik,
vol. 29, May 2019.
[2] F. Monti, F. Frasca, D. Eynard, D. Mannion, and M. M. Bronstein,
“Fake News Detection on Social Media using Geometric Deep Learning,”
arXiv:1902.06673 [cs, stat], Feb. 2019. arXiv: 1902.06673.
[3] Y. Sun, D. Liang, X. Wang, and X. Tang, “DeepID3: Face Recognition
with Very Deep Neural Networks,” arXiv:1502.00873 [cs], Feb. 2015. arXiv:
1502.00873.
[4] N. Carlini, C. Liu, Erlingsson, J. Kos, and D. Song, “The Secret Sharer:
Evaluating and Testing Unintended Memorization in Neural Networks,”
28th {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 19), pp. 267–
284, 2019.
[5] F. Tramer, F. Zhang, A. Juels, M. K. Reiter, and T. Ristenpart, “Stealing
Machine Learning Models via Prediction APIs,” 25th {USENIX} Security
Symposium ({USENIX} Security 16), 2016.
[6] R. Shokri, M. Stronati, C. Song, and V. Shmatikov, “Membership Inference
Attacks Against Machine Learning Models,” in 2017 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy (SP), May 2017. ISSN: 2375-1207.
[7] M. Fredrikson, S. Jha, and T. Ristenpart, “Model Inversion Attacks that
Exploit Conﬁdence Information and Basic Countermeasures,” in Proceed-
ings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communi-
cations Security, (Denver Colorado USA), ACM, Oct. 2015.
==PAGE:68==
58
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[8] C. Dwork, F. McSherry, K. Nissim, and A. Smith, “Calibrating Noise to Sen-
sitivity in Private Data Analysis,” in Theory of Cryptography (D. Hutchi-
son, T. Kanade, J. Kittler, J. M. Kleinberg, F. Mattern, J. C. Mitchell,
M. Naor, O. Nierstrasz, C. Pandu Rangan, B. Steﬀen, M. Sudan, D. Ter-
zopoulos, D. Tygar, M. Y. Vardi, G. Weikum, S. Halevi, and T. Rabin,
eds.), vol. 3876, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006. Se-
ries Title: Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
[9] R. Shokri and V. Shmatikov, “Privacy-Preserving Deep Learning,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Com-
munications Security - CCS ’15, (Denver, Colorado, USA), pp. 1310–1321,
ACM Press, 2015.
[10] M. Abadi, A. Chu, I. Goodfellow, H. B. McMahan, I. Mironov, K. Talwar,
and L. Zhang, “Deep Learning with Diﬀerential Privacy,” Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security - CCS’16, pp. 308–318, 2016. arXiv: 1607.00133.
[11] N. Papernot, A. Thakurta, S. Song, S. Chien, and Erlingsson, “Tempered
Sigmoid Activations for Deep Learning with Diﬀerential Privacy,” Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 35, pp. 9312–
9321, May 2021.
Section: AAAI Technical Track on Machine Learning
III.
[12] F.
Tramèr
and
D.
Boneh,
“Diﬀerentially
private
learning
needs
better
features
(or
much
more
data),”
in
9th
international
con-
ference
on
learning
representations,
ICLR
2021,
virtual
event,
austria,
may
3-7,
2021,
OpenReview.net,
2021.
tex.bibsource:
dblp
computer
science
bibliography,
https://dblp.org
tex.biburl:
https://dblp.org/rec/conf/iclr/TramerB21.bib
tex.timestamp:
Wed,
23 Jun 2021 17:36:39 +0200.
[13] T. Humphries, M. Rafuse, L. Tulloch, S. Oya, I. Goldberg, U. Hengartner,
and F. Kerschbaum, “Diﬀerentially Private Learning Does Not Bound Mem-
bership Inference,” arXiv:2010.12112 [cs], Feb. 2021. arXiv: 2010.12112.
[14] S. Yeom, I. Giacomelli, M. Fredrikson, and S. Jha, “Privacy Risk in Machine
Learning: Analyzing the Connection to Overﬁtting,” in 2018 IEEE 31st
Computer Security Foundations Symposium (CSF), pp. 268–282, July 2018.
ISSN: 2374-8303.
[15] C. A. Choquette-Choo, F. Tramer, N. Carlini, and N. Papernot, “Label-
Only Membership Inference Attacks,” in International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, (PLMR), pp. 1964–1974, Jan. 2021. arXiv: 2007.14321.
[16] A. M. Turing, “I.—COMPUTING MACHINERY AND INTELLIGENCE,”
Mind, vol. LIX, pp. 433–460, Oct. 1950.
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
59
[17] A. L. Samuel, “Some Studies in Machine Learning Using the Game of Check-
ers,” IBM Journal of Research and Development, vol. 3, pp. 210–229, July
1959. Conference Name: IBM Journal of Research and Development.
[18] T. M. Mitchell, Machine Learning. McGraw-Hill series in computer science,
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.
[19] C. Dwork and A. Roth, “The Algorithmic Foundations of Diﬀerential Pri-
vacy,” Foundations and Trends® in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 9,
no. 3-4, 2013.
[20] I. Mironov, “Renyi Diﬀerential Privacy,” 2017 IEEE 30th Computer Se-
curity Foundations Symposium (CSF), pp. 263–275, Aug. 2017.
arXiv:
1702.07476.
[21] C. Dwork, K. Kenthapadi, F. McSherry, I. Mironov, and M. Naor, “Our
Data, Ourselves: Privacy Via Distributed Noise Generation,” in Advances
in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2006 (S. Vaudenay, ed.), vol. 4004, pp. 486–
503, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006.
[22] M. Abadi, A. Chu, I. Goodfellow, H. B. McMahan, I. Mironov, K. Talwar,
and L. Zhang, “Deep Learning with Diﬀerential Privacy,” Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, Oct. 2016. arXiv: 1607.00133.
[23] S. Yeom, I. Giacomelli, A. Menaged, M. Fredrikson, and S. Jha, “Overﬁt-
ting, robustness, and malicious algorithms: A study of potential causes of
privacy risk in machine learning,” Journal of Computer Security, vol. 28,
no. 1, pp. 35–70, 2020.
[24] H. Hu, Z. Salcic, G. Dobbie, and X. Zhang, “Membership Inference Attacks
on Machine Learning: A Survey,” arXiv:2103.07853 [cs], Mar. 2021. arXiv:
2103.07853 version: 2.
[25] J. Domingo-Ferrer, D. Sánchez, and A. Blanco-Justicia, “The Limits of
Diﬀerential Privacy (and its Misuse in Data Release and Machine Learn-
ing),” Communications of the ACM, vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 33–35, 2021. arXiv:
2011.02352.
[26] R. Shokri and V. Shmatikov, “Privacy-Preserving Deep Learning,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Com-
munications Security - CCS ’15, (Denver, Colorado, USA), ACM Press,
2015.
[27] B. Jayaraman and D. Evans, “Evaluating Diﬀerentially Private Machine
Learning in Practice,” 28th {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX}
Security 19), pp. 1895–1912, Aug. 2019. arXiv: 1902.08874.
==PAGE:70==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[28] T. Tanay and L. Griﬃn, “A Boundary Tilting Persepective on the Phe-
nomenon of Adversarial Examples,” arXiv:1608.07690 [cs, stat], Aug. 2016.
arXiv: 1608.07690.
[29] C. Zhang, S. Bengio, M. Hardt, B. Recht, and O. Vinyals, “Understanding
deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization,” Communications
of the ACM, vol. 64, pp. 107–115, Mar. 2021.
[30] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “"Why Should I Trust You?": Ex-
plaining the Predictions of Any Classiﬁer,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
ing, (San Francisco California USA), pp. 1135–1144, ACM, Aug. 2016.
[31] Y. Lecun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haﬀner, “Gradient-based learn-
ing applied to document recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 86,
pp. 2278–2324, Nov. 1998. Conference Name: Proceedings of the IEEE.
[32] H.
Xiao,
K.
Rasul,
and
R.
Vollgraf,
“Fashion-MNIST:
a
Novel
Image
Dataset
for
Benchmarking
Machine
Learning
Algorithms,”
arXiv:1708.07747 [cs, stat], Sept. 2017. arXiv: 1708.07747.
[33] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning Multiple Layers of Features from Tiny Images,”
Master’s thesis, University of Toronto, Dept. of Comp. Sci., 2009.
[34] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan,
T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, A. Desmaison, A. Kopf,
E. Yang, Z. DeVito, M. Raison, A. Tejani, S. Chilamkurthy, B. Steiner,
L. Fang, J. Bai, and S. Chintala, “PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-
Performance Deep Learning Library,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024–8035, Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
[35] K. Leino and M. Fredrikson,
“Stolen Memories:
Leveraging Model
Memorization for Calibrated White-Box Membership Inference,”
29th
{USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security 20), June 2020.
arXiv: 1906.11798.
[36] L. Song and P. Mittal, “Systematic Evaluation of Privacy Risks of Ma-
chine Learning Models,” 30th {USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX}
Security 21), p. 18, 2021.
[37] Z. Li and Y. Zhang, “Membership Leakage in Label-Only Exposures,”
arXiv:2007.15528 [cs, stat], Jan. 2021. arXiv: 2007.15528.
[38] D. Mahajan, S. Tople, and A. Sharma, “Does Learning Stable Features
Provide Privacy Beneﬁts for Machine Learning Models?,” in Workshop on
Privacy Preserving Machine Learning (NeurIPS PPML), p. 16, 2020.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
[39] M. Nasr, S. Song, A. Thakurta, N. Papernot, and N. Carlini, “Adversary
Instantiation: Lower Bounds for Diﬀerentially Private Machine Learning,”
arXiv:2101.04535 [cs], Jan. 2021. arXiv: 2101.04535.
