==PAGE:1==
M.Sc.Eng. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
LiRA PMS: A Pavement Management System exploiting on-
line road condition data in an eﬀicient way
LiRA PMS: Et Pavement Management System der effektivt anvender online tilstandsdata for
danske veje
Mike Glisby
Supervised by:
Ekkart Kindler and Shahrzad M. Pour
==PAGE:2==
Preface
This master thesis was written at the department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter Science at the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the require-
ments for acquiring a Master of Science degree in Computer Science and Engineering.
Kongens Lyngby, 16th July 2021
Mike Glisby
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost I would like to thank Ekkart Kindler for supervising this master
thesis and providing great feedback throughout the thesis by the means of reviewing
artefacts and weakly meetings. Secondly, I would like to thank Niels Dujardin and
Shahrzad M. Pour as co-supervisors to the thesis, and settings aside the time to do
weakly meetings for discussions on the topics presented in the report.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Preface
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Research Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Related Work
7
3
Capital-Preserving Maintenance Planning: Concepts and Approaches
9
3.1
Concepts
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Roads, Road Networks and Parcels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1.2
Road Conditions and Condition Indexes . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.1.3
Pavements and Administrative Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.1.4
Repair Work, Follow up Work and Reparation Strategies
. . .
17
3.1.5
Inspections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.1.6
CPM Optimisations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2
Pavement Management Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2.1
Linear Reference Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2.2
Belægningsoptimering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Business Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.1
Capital-Preserving Maintenance Optimisation . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.2
Pavement Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.3
Evaluate and Adapt Maintenance Prioritisation . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3.4
Manage Road Network in IT-System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3.5
Maintain Catalogues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.4
Challenges and Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
A Conceptual Framework: Increasing the Uniformity of Parcels
using Key Performance Indicators
34
4.1
Key Performance Indicators and Their Role In Redefining Parcels . . .
35
4.1.1
What are Key Performance Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1.2
From Measurement Data to Key Performance Indicator . . . .
37
==PAGE:5==
Contents
iv
4.2
A Method for Redefining Parcels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.1
The Uniformity of Parcels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2.2
Identifying the Boundaries of Parcels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.3
Segmentation of a Road Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.3.1
Grouping Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.2.3.2
Segregation Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2.3.3
Aggregation Phase . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.2.3.4
Comparing the Results of a Segmentation . . . . . . .
50
4.3
Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
52
4.3.1
User Stories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3.2
Acceptance Criteria
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.3.3
Non-Functional Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
4.3.4
Potential User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3.4.1
Basic UI Components . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3.4.2
Visualising Parcels on a Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
4.3.4.3
Utilising the Side-View
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
4.3.5
Complete Domain Model of the Information System . . . . . .
61
5
LiRA PMS: A Realisation of the Conceptual Framework
64
5.1
The Architecture of LiRA PMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.1.1
Overview of The Frontend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.1.2
Overview of The Backend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.1.2.1
Road Network Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.1.2.2
WayProvider Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
5.1.2.3
Condition Service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.1.2.4
Optimisation Service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.2
The Interplay Between the Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.3
Problems and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
5.3.1
The Central Road and Path List Service (CVF) . . . . . . . . .
75
5.3.2
An Architectural Mistake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
5.4
Evaluation of The Developed Artefacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.4.1
The Acceptance Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
6
Evaluation
81
6.1
Problem Statement Revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.2
Research Questions Revisited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.2.1
Existing Knowledge
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
6.2.2
Challenges and Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.2.3
Parcels and Their Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.2.4
Improving Upon the Definition of Parcels . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.2.5
Exploiting Parcels in an Information System
. . . . . . . . . .
84
6.3
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.3.1
Performance Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.3.2
Search Metaheuristic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
==PAGE:6==
Contents
v
6.3.3
Remaining User Stories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
7
Conclusion
86
Appendices
87
Appendix A Product Backlog
88
Appendix B Acceptance Criteria
91
Bibliography
93
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In Denmark, The Danish Road Directorate (DRD) are responsible for maintaining
the Danish national roads. These roads are considered as their assets and the primary
goal of The Danish Road Directorate is to maintain these assets so they do not lose
their capital-value.
As a road is being constructed, the money that has gone into constructing the road
is seen as its capital-value. The capital-value of a road will start to decrease as the
road begins to deteriorate due to traﬀic load, environment, climate amongst other
causes. As deterioration progresses, road conditions such as, cracks and pot holes
will begin to accumulate, decreasing the capital-value of the road even more. A road
will typically deteriorate at a slow phase in the beginning but as it ages it will begin
to deteriorate exponentially. This means that if the road is not maintained before it
starts to deteriorate exponentially then it will become significantly more expensive
to repair. By spending more money to repair an individual road, less money will be
available to accommodate other roads that might need maintenance. It is therefore
very important to make good decisions regarding when and where to maintain, oth-
erwise there is a possibility to go over budget or the roads may begin to suffer from
more severe road conditions, which lowers the collective capital-value of the roads
and can result in accidents, bad driving experiences and additional expenses for the
users of the road as their vehicles might be damaged over time.
Capital-preserving maintenance planning is the practice of creating a strategy, outlin-
ing the roads that needs to be maintained, and doing so in the most cost-effective way
to in the best way possible sustain the collective capital value of the roads. In order to
effectively do capital-preserving maintenance planning, two things are needed. The
first being the concept of parcels. A parcel is a part of a road that has similar char-
acteristics such as, pavement structure, surface and road conditions. The second is
to use specialised information systems called Pavement Management Systems. These
systems support its end-users in figuring out when and how a given parcel should be
maintained, to best sustain the collective capital of the parcels that makes up the
roads, given a specific budget.
The effectiveness of a Pavement Management System depends on many criteria but
two are especially important. The first criteria is to have data that accurately reflects
==PAGE:8==
1.1 Problem Description
2
the road conditions of the parcels. Without data it is not possible to know where
maintenance is needed. The second is providing the system with parcels that are
very uniform in regards to the state of their pavement. The reason it is important
is due to parcels being evaluated as a single entity. This means that if the system
suggest that a parcel should undergo maintenance then it is the whole parcel, even if
some of it is in a good state. Therefore having parcels that are uniform in regards to
the state of their pavement, ensures that only parts that needs maintenance actually
gets it. Maintaining roads that does not suffer any or just a small amount of dete-
rioration could negatively impact the capital as money is spend where it is not needed.
Finding ways to accommodate the two criteria can enable Pavement Management
Systems to better provide support, and will enable end-users in sustaining the capital
of their roads more effectively.
1.1
Problem Description
The Danish Road Directorate has established a sequence of processes that defines the
way they do capital-preserving maintenance. It is crucial that these processes are
effective and provide reliable outcomes so The Danish Road Directorate can get the
most out of their budget.
At the time of writing, The Danish Road Directorate starts by gathering data about
the parcels in their road network. They will now select around 25-30% of the road net-
work where it is estimated that a parcel is within five years of a surface replacement.
From here they will manually go and inspect the selected parcels and register any road
conditions found. Furthermore, they will also redefine the parcels accordingly so they
are uniform. The parcels are then processed by the Pavement Management System
that also uses the road conditions registered together with other types of data. The
latter will result in a list or parcels that require maintenance with information about
when, and the type of maintenance needed together with other types of information.
One of the core issues with the way they do capital-preserving maintenance is the
fact that parcels are being defined based on subjective opinions of the technicians
inspecting the parcels. This is an issue since there is a possibility of the technicians
not defining the parcels in the most precise and optimal way so they can take fully
advantage of the parcels uniformity. Though, there are predefined guidelines and
methods that must be applied when inspecting a parcel, there does not exist criteria
that are so clearly defined that every technician will come to the same conclusion.
Therefore, every single technician will have to use their personal opinion when decid-
ing on the geometry of the parcel. This might lead to inconsistencies, since there will
naturally appear differences on some cases. Beside the latter, the estimations used
to select around 25-30% of the road network are based on the pavement type and the
==PAGE:9==
1.1 Problem Description
3
typical deterioration of such type. This means that the estimation is not based on
the actual deterioration which could be worse than what is typically seen with the
type of pavement.
Having these issues does not only negatively impact the effectiveness of the capital-
preserving maintenance processes executed, but it restricts the Danish Road Direc-
torate in doing capital-persevering maintenance in a better way.
Based on the latter a problem statement has been formulated:
PS: The Danish Road Directorate does not reach the full potential of the capital-
preserving maintenance processes they perform to sustain the capital of the
roads in the Danish national road network. This is due to parcels being defined
based on subjective measures, as well as the parcels not being exploited fully
throughout these processes.
From the problem statement, a research question have been formulated, and has fur-
ther been decomposed into a set of manageable research questions.
How can a more dynamic and objective definition of parcels contribute to sustain the
capital of the Danish road network in a better way?
- [RQ1]: What are the existing capital-preserving maintenance processes, and
what concepts, and data exist in relation to those?
- [RQ2]: How can those processes improve, and what would be required?
- [RQ3]: What are the properties e.g., uniformity and size, of a parcel that effects
the outcome of the capital-preserving maintenance processes?
- [RQ4]: What kind of data is relevant in order to improve upon the identified
properties, and how should the data be used to do so?
- [RQ5]: How should a system be realised to support defining parcels in a more
dynamic and objective way, and also assist its end-users in making strategic
decisions when planning maintenance?
The research questions stated will be answered throughout the thesis, where they
will also be revisited in the final evaluation to access the final outcome. RQ1-4 are
answered through technical documentation of existing software systems, literature,
and multiple interviews with the Danish Road Directorate.
RQ5 is answered through a well documented design and is demonstrated through a
proof of concept information system, that allows for visualisation of parcels, automatic
readjusted of parcels based on objective measures, and capabilities for supporting
maintenance planning processes by visualisation.
==PAGE:10==
1.2 Research Methodology
4
In general the contributions of the thesis comes in three parts. The first being analyti-
cal work within the local environment of the Danish Road Directorate, understanding
their capital-preserving maintenance processes and the challenges they are faced with,
together with the opportunities. The second part contributes with an general idea
on how parcels can be defined using objective measures such as, Key Performance
Indicators derived from measurements collected by ARAN vehicles. But also how
these revised parcels can be used to further support The Danish Road Directorate in
some of their decisions. The last part is a software prototype serving as a proof of
concept to the ideas put forward in the second part.
1.2
Research Methodology
In this thesis, the research methodology of Design Science is used [1]. Design Science
aims to solve problems of general interest via the creation of innovative artefacts. A
Design Science project will contribute with new knowledge to an existing knowledge
base, as well as drawing upon existing knowledge to ensure that proposed results are
both well founded and original.
To ensure that the thesis addresses the key aspects of Design Science, the artefact
will be constructed using the three design science cycles, The Relevance Cycle, The
Rigor Cycle and The Design Cycle as depicted in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.1. Design Science cycles [1]
The three cycles are centred around the environment, design science research and the
knowledge base. The environment is where people, organisations and the systems that
are being used by these groups exist. The environment contains the problems and op-
portunities that a design science research project aims to provide solutions for in the
form of answering a research question. The answer to the research question should
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Research Methodology
5
here be based on the construction and evaluation of the developed artefact.
The
knowledge base is where existing knowledge persist, which includes theories, methods
and previous projects within the same area of research.
The Relevance Cycle central element is the desire to improve the environment.
To do so, new artefacts, as well as the processes for building them, will be initi-
ated. Furthermore, requirements and field testing are focal to this cycle. The cycle
investigates people, organizational systems and technical systems while aiming at
identifying problems and creating newfound opportunities, by focusing on the inter-
play of the mentioned categories. In addition, to provide research requirements the
relevance cycle also defines acceptance criteria. When the artefact has been approved
and assumingly meets the accept criteria, field testing within the environment will
be executed, finally leading to an evaluation. The results of the evaluation determine
whether the artefact meets the accepted criteria or if further iterations of the rele-
vance cycle are needed in the design science research project.
The thesis begins in the relevance cycle, by outlining the application context, and
identifying and representing opportunities with problems that exist within the appli-
cation environment in Chapter 3. The chosen problem is then explicated to ensure its
relevance, and requirements are put forward in the form of user stories where each is
associated with a set of acceptance criteria that will be used to evaluate if the intended
software have been successfully implemented. The requirements and acceptance crite-
ria is put forth in Chapter 4. The requirements put forward has been achieved in an
agile manner, through iterations of field testing done by the Danish Road Directorate.
The Rigor Cycle consists of two steps, the first one is grounding, here it is investi-
gated if and how the artefact and the design processes are grounded by the existing
knowledge base. It is further researched which theories (if any) supports the artefact
design and the design process. This is a crucial step in a design science research
project since it ensures that the research will be an innovative scientific contribution,
rather than routine design. The second step of the rigor cycle is the addition to the
knowledge base, the contribution is the research and the final artefact such as the fi-
nal design product and the design processes, or the extensions to the original theories
and methods.
In regards to the thesis, the rigor cycle has provided the research with past knowledge
to ensure its innovation. Related works as described in Chapter 2 has been researched
and referenced, and the application context has been analysed for existing methods
and approaches as presented in Chapter 3 to ensure the artefact does not fall in the
category of routine design.
The Design Cycle is the most central part of a design science project. This cycle
operates within the design science research field, where design artefacts are built, and
processes and evaluation happen until an adequate design has been accomplished.
==PAGE:12==
1.2 Research Methodology
6
This cycle has relative independence during the execution of the research. However,
it is important to note the importance of the two other cycles as they are all in-
terconnected. The requirements for the design cycle stem from the relevance cycle
while the rigor cycle contributes to the design and evaluation theories and methods.
Multiple iterations of the design cycle in design science research are necessary before
contributions are output into the relevance cycle and the rigor cycle.
In relation the thesis, the artefact has been iteratively developed in the Design Cycle
using the outcome from the other two cycles as elaborated on in Chapter 5. Inner
design cycle evaluations of the artefact has been documented and is presented in the
same chapter.
Having gone through the cycles of design science, the thesis will present an overall
evaluation of the project and revisit the problem statement and research question in
Chapter 6
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2
Related Work
Pavement Management Systems are a tool that has been around since 1979. As tech-
nology advances the methods for persisting and monitoring road networks as well as
the models for predicting and aiding its end-users in making more informed decisions
about where maintenance is needed advances too. Pavement Management Systems
are today a tool that has gone from being an individual system adopted by agencies
to become a part of larger Asset Manage Systems such as Deighton1 and Agile As-
sets2. Doing so allows agencies to manage all their assets from a single place, and not
use multiple systems separating different kinds of assets e.g., roads, bridges, people
and more. With the advances within the field of smart devices and IoT3, many agen-
cies research innovative ideas to improve pavement management, such as finding new
ways to gather informative data about the state of their road network. Companies
like, DPTI in Australia, MoID in the UAE and RoadCare in Malaysia is attempting
to use drones for road data collection [2]. Drones can easily manoeuvre around in
most environments, and therefore assist with general data collection and furthermore
with inspections as personal inspections can be expensive. An extensive amount of
research has also been done in the attempt of estimating a road’s state using smart-
phones. RoadSense is a smartphone application that can indicate a roads state using
Machine learning and a smartphone’s accelerometer and gyroscope [3].
The Live Road Assessment project (LiRA) [4], is a collaboration project between The
Technical University of Denmark, The Danish Road Directorate, Green Mobility and
Sweco. It proposes to improve pavement management by producing road condition
data from alternative data streams. Green Mobility is a crowdsourced alternative and
has almost one thousand cars with built-in sensors that can produce data about the
roads on which they drive. The latter will generate a continuous flow of data that
would otherwise only be available annually given traditional methods.
The LiRA
project has produced four theses in total where two of them are relevant to this
thesis. Live Road Assessment based on modern cars: A prototypical geographic infor-
mation system for road maintenance planning [5] produced a map that was able to
visualise road condition data for agencies to get a better overview of surface problems
in their road network. LiRA Map: A Cloud-based Geo-information System for Road
1https://www.deighton.com/
2https://www.agileassets.com/
3Internet Of Things
==PAGE:14==
2 Related Work
8
Maintenance [6] continued on the work of transforming the artefact into a cloud-based
service. The two theses both put forth ideas for improving maintenance planning by
visualisation, additionally they have both been made in collaboration with The Dan-
ish Road Directorate.
Research has also been done on how to define homogeneous sections which will be
referred to as uniform parcels in this thesis. One paper analyses three different ap-
proaches on how to detect breakpoints which is the place where a road should be
divided into two. It analyses the MINSSE (MINimization Sum of Squared Error),
AASHTO Cumulative Difference and the bayesian approach using measures of skid
resistance and the unevenness of a road. Furthermore, it outlines the differences be-
tween the approaches as well as what their strengths and downsides are [7].
In general there has been searched for research papers related to the topic of the thesis,
but no directly related works were found. Therefore, the above-described works have
been chosen and described since they have the most relevance to this report’s research
area. When searching for related works the following terms were searched for:
- Road network segmentation
- Homogeneous road sections
- Increasing the uniformity of parcels
- Uniform road sections
- Optimising parcels in a road network
- Using road condition data to form parcels
- Dividing roads into parcels
- Road sections for maintenance
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 3
Capital-Preserving
Maintenance
Planning: Concepts
and Approaches
Capital-preserving maintenance planning is, as described in the introduction, the
practice of creating a strategy that outlines which parcels, in a given road network
that needs to be repaired to sustain the capital value of the road network, in the best
way possible.
This chapter will present and describe the concepts that are used within the practice.
Secondly, commonly used systems will be introduced, with the aim of providing un-
derstanding of their value and purpose. Core processes within the practice will then
afterwards be outlined and explained thoroughly. Finally, the information that has
been presented will be used to put forth a set of challenges and opportunities that
exist within the practice.
The information that will be presented is mainly gathered through several interviews
with The Danish Road Directorate, and additionally some research papers (as men-
tioned in Chapter 2). To ensure the information put forth is correct and corresponds
to the information obtained during the interviews, the chapter has been read by the
Danish Road Directorate and thus validated through reviews.
3.1
Concepts
All the important concepts will in the following sections be described. The general
structure of the sections is that the concept is explained and then presented in the
==PAGE:16==
3.1 Concepts
10
form of a domain diagram. Some concepts will appear in several domain diagrams
but to note is that their relations might not be included if not necessary.
3.1.1
Roads, Road Networks and Parcels
In the context of capital-preserving maintenance planning, the maintenance that is
planned is associated with repairs that span over several days, such as resurfacing a
long stretch of road, as these types of repairs are typically very expensive and therefore
have a bigger impact on the budget. Planning maintenance requires much information
about the roads as well as the ability to precisely specify where maintenance is needed.
Roads are a concept that is used in everyday life, most people consider it a stretch
of asphalt that allows one to travel between two places in a vehicle. As a general
definition, this is true but a clearer and more precise definition is needed for different
parties to have the same understanding of what a road is, and what its psychical
boundaries are.
Figure 3.1a shows a picture of Frederikssundmotorvejen going in
two directions with ramps that allows one to enter or exit the road, depending on
the direction of the vehicle. Figure 3.1b likewise showcase Frederikssundmotorvejen,
however different parts of the road, is in this picture depicted in various colours.
Blue depicts the main course of the road while the other colours depict secondary
courses, either of the main or the secondary courses themselves.
Based on these
pictures, one might assume that only the blue lines refer to the road, however, all
the parts as well as additional parts not visible in this picture depicts the same road;
Frederikssundmotorvejen.
(a) Frederikssundmotorvejen
(b) Frederikssundmotorvejen outlined
Given the latter, we now understand that a road consists of one or more parts. As
these parts of the road deteriorate with time and maintenance is needed, agencies
can now specify which parts require maintenance and coordinate accordingly with
the contractors. Given parts of the road can vary from a few meters to several kilo-
metres, contractors therefore, require the parts to be of a certain length, since it
would otherwise not be economically beneficial for the contractor to conduct mainte-
nance as moving heavy equipment and pay for workhours are expensive. A typical
requirement is that the part of the road needing maintenance should be at least 300
to 500 meters in length. The requirement of the maximum-length is typically 3-5
==PAGE:17==
3.1 Concepts
11
kilometres. If a part of a road exceeds this limit it will compromise the detail-degree
regarding correctly depicting if a certain part of a road should be maintained.
To overcome the fact that road parts must be of a certain length, the concept of
parcels is introduced. Parcels have many properties behind them which makes them
suited for usage within the context of planning maintenance. Besides the properties
mentioned in the introduction, one essential property is that they enable road parts
to be decomposed into smaller parts, so they will all meet the length requirements.
An example of the latter is depicted in Figure 3.2 where the boundaries of the parcels
are shown with a black line.
Figure 3.2. Frederikssundmotorvejen depicted in parcels
In the process of planning maintenance, a so-called road network is used. A road
network typically refers to a collection of roads, this could for example be all the
roads in Denmark but in regards to maintenance planning, this is however not the
case as it would not be precise enough. Instead, a road network is linked to parcels
and therefore it is a collection of parcels that makes up parts of roads or entire
roads within some geographical boundaries. An example is that The Danish Road
Directorate is responsible for all the national roads in Denmark, meaning that The
Danish Road Directorate has a road network with parcels representing all the Danish
national roads. The rationale for associating parcels to a road network and not the
roads themselves, is that roads can cross the boarders of municipalities, and since the
entire road network of Denmark is owned by different agencies and municipalities it
is not suﬀicient to define a given road as belonging to a road network. This is yet
another property of the parcel, as it enables the Danish Road Directorate to divide
roads into parts that fit a specific need within the practice.
Considering the latter, it is now possible to outline the fundamental domain that other
concepts build upon. Figure 3.3 shows the initial domain as described, showcasing
that a road has a road number and name. The road number is a unique identifier of
a given road, this is needed as roads can have the same name across municipalities.
Parcels have a road part where zero would denote the main course while anything
above is secondary courses. A parcel furthermore has a description of where it begins
==PAGE:18==
3.1 Concepts
12
and where it ends, and is also related to a location describing the mileage from
which the parcel begins and the mileage of where it ends. The location additionally
contains information about which lane the parcel is associated with and is depicted
by a number. The number zero represents all lanes where a parcel can be restricted to
a specific lane starting from the inner lane with number one and then increments by
one as moving to the outer lane. The side of the road is represented as either right or
left from the direction of the mileage. The domain also shows how the road network
is associated with a collection of parcels. The road network also has a name and a
description, this is important for the agencies because it not always makes sense to
consider a whole road network at once. Therefore, they are now able to divide their
road network into smaller networks and do specific procedures as will be elaborated
on in Section 3.3. Here the remaining two attributes of the road network will also be
described.
Figure 3.3. Domain diagram of core concepts
3.1.2
Road Conditions and Condition Indexes
Having established the fundamentals we can now dive into other important concepts
used within capital-preserving maintenance planning. One of the key concepts are
road conditions. Road conditions can takes many shapes and forms but in general
they represent a damage in the pavement.
Figure 3.4 shows three types of road
conditions. The left most picture is a pothole which is typically bowl-shaped and
associated with a diameter and depth. The middle picture shows rutting which is
permanent deformation in the asphalt in form of depression and/or uplift caused by
traﬀic load. The final picture shows raveling which is where the pavement surface is
wearing away causing porous asphalt.
==PAGE:19==
3.1 Concepts
13
(a) Pothole
(b) Rutting
(c) Raveling
Figure 3.4. Pictures of road conditions [8]
Road conditions are important as they are a key factor in determining how good of a
state a parcel is in. The more severe road conditions a parcel has, the less of a good
state the parcel is in.
Figure 3.5 shows the domain diagram of road conditions. Road conditions typically
has a date representing when they have been identified. Road conditions are also as-
sociated with a type, which could be e.g. pothole, rutting or raveling as described in
the latter. Different types of road conditions typically require different kinds of data
associated with them. An example to this could be pothole versus rutting. Pothole is
as mentioned associated with data types such as, diameter and depth, while rutting
is associated with data types such as, the length and average depth of the rutting.
The data types that are used to define the different types of road conditions has a
unit type so one can know if the value represents meters, miles or other types of units.
To know where the road condition is located, the road condition have a location. In the
domain diagram it is depicted that the road conditions is associated with one parcel.
This is typically the case in Pavement Management Systems when road conditions
are registered and linked to the road network. Road conditions can however also be
associated with an inspection which is elaborated on in Section 3.1.5.
==PAGE:20==
3.1 Concepts
14
Figure 3.5. Domain diagram of road conditions
Condition indexes are similar to road conditions as both of them indicates something
about the state of the parcel. Conditions indexes differentiates themselves by not
being interpreted as a type of damage inflicted on the parcel but instead is being seen
as a type of measurement that is used to describe the state of the parcel in certain
ways. An example of a condition index is the International Roughness Index (IRI).
This index has a value describing the deviation of a parcels elevation over a distance.
This means that if the IRI is measured for the whole parcel, and the parcel is very
bumpy then the IRI would indicate that the parcel has a rough and uneven surface.
Condition indexes can be measured as described with IRI, but one can also create
condition indexes by using road conditions or other tools in combination to arrive at
a value which describes a specific state of the road.
Figure 3.6 shows the domain diagram for condition indexes. Condition indexes has
a date at which it is created and a value representing the index itself. As there exist
many types of indexes, and agencies sometimes create their one types based on road
conditions, it is necessary to associate the condition index with a type. In regards to
the previous example, IRI is considered an index type. Every index type has a name
and a description explaining its purpose furthermore it is associated with a unit type.
As it were the case with the road condition, the condition index is likewise linked to
the road network through a parcel and a location.
==PAGE:21==
3.1 Concepts
15
Figure 3.6. Domain diagram of condition indexes
3.1.3
Pavements and Administrative Attributes
When parcels are being constructed, several layers are applied on the ground to ensure
that the parcel is robust and stays in a good state for many years. Figure 3.7 shows
the traditional construction layers. The surface layer as seen in the picture is refereed
to as pavement. This layer ensures that the parcel does not easily wear down, and it
also secures against water infiltration. The second layer is a combination of a base
and binder layer which is refereed to as the bearing layer and consists of one or more
GAB layers. This ensures that the pressure from the vehicles are spread out and
thereby is strong enough to carry the traﬀic. The last two layers is typically not
being accommodated for in the context of capital-preserving maintenance, but their
purpose is to create a stronger parcel that is able to carry more weight and also to
prevent frostbites.
Figure 3.7. Picture of traditional road construction
shows how the concept of pavement plays into the domain. Parcels have one pave-
ment, but the defined pavement can be associated with multiple parcels. A pavement
consists of multiple attributes which are necessary when determining if a specific
pavement should be used to repair a parcel. A pavements’ quantity and price are
==PAGE:22==
3.1 Concepts
16
interdependent so that the price is the price pr quantity. The pavement additionally
has an attribute which refers to the average daily traﬀic accounted for during a year
(ådt). This attribute is both given in a minimum and maximum, where the maximum
is to define how much traﬀic load the pavement can withstand and the minimum is
to define the minimal traﬀic load that a parcel should have for the pavement to be
used. The pavement also has the attribute æ10 which is the equivalent 10 tons axis
and describes how much weight the parcel can withstand in case of the maximum,
and how much weight a parcel should be exposed to before usage. Finally, the pave-
ment is also associated with a lifespan which indicates the time in years before a new
pavement must be applied.
As there exist many types of pavements it is necessary for the pavement to be as-
sociated with a pavement type. The pavement can also have reinforcement which
refereres to the second layer shown in Figure 3.7.
Figure 3.8. Domain diagram of pavement
Besides from parcels having a pavement, road conditions, condition indexes and more,
parcels are also associated with some administrative information.
Administrative
information describes when the parcel was paved, what road class does it belong to,
and its district. Road class referees to if the parcel is highway, local road, and so
fourth. District is a way to divide a road network into areas, so an example to this
could be Northern Zealand.
==PAGE:23==
3.1 Concepts
17
Figure 3.9. Domain diagram of administrative attributes
3.1.4
Repair Work, Follow up Work and Reparation Strategies
Another important concept in the context of capital-preserving maintenance are repa-
rations and reparation strategies. When a parcel has begun to deteriorate or has in
some way been exposed to road conditions it is important to be able to associate a
method for accommodating the road conditions. This is where the concept of a repair
comes into play which is depicted in Figure 3.10. A repair has an attribute called
priority which states whether actions to accommodate the road condition of a specific
severity should take place immediately, the current year or later. A repair is then
associated to repair work which states the specific work and price of the repair. It is
important to note that these concepts are used on a strategical level and not opera-
tional, which means that the concepts do not refer to the actual repairing of the parcel.
To automate the process of identifying the actions that needs to be taken according to
specific road conditions and their severities, one can define a so-called repair strategy
for their road network. A repair strategy has a set of identified repair methods that
accommodate each severity a road condition has. This means that the repair strategy
defines the way that each road condition should be accommodated. As it can be
beneficial to have differed repair strategies depending on the road class, district and
pavement type, a road network is able to have multiple repair strategies associated
with it, where it is stated that given the road class, district and pavement type then
a specific repair strategy should be used.
==PAGE:24==
3.1 Concepts
18
Figure 3.10. Domain diagram of repair strategies
In Figure 3.10 there is also defined the concept follow up work.
Follow up work
referees to work that can be performed after an actual repair has taken place on a
parcel. An example to this could be that a new pavement have been applied so as
follow up work, new road markings needs to be painted on the parcel.
3.1.5
Inspections
Many agencies that are responsible for doing capital-preserving maintenance use so
called inspections to gather road condition data of the parcels in their road network [2].
This is also the case with The Road Directorate, where technicians physically looks
at the road to identify road conditions.
Figure 3.11 shows how the inspections plays into the domain. Inspections are related
to the parcel being inspected. An inspection has an inspector also known as a mea-
surement technician who performed the inspection, a date when it occurred and when
the next inspection should take place. In relation to the concept of inspection are the
concept of a damage, a damage is associated with a road condition and a repair that
themselves are linked as described in Section 3.1.4. The damage also has an extend
describing the quantity of the repair. Having the repair which itself has a price pr
unit, it is now possible to calculate the total cost of repairing the road condition since
it is equal to the extent of the road condition times the price of the repair.
==PAGE:25==
3.1 Concepts
19
Figure 3.11. Domain diagram of inspections
3.1.6
CPM Optimisations
The final concept described is capital-preserving maintenance (CPM) optimisation.
In most Pavement Management Systems, tools that can help identify the parcels in
a given road network that should be maintained exist. These tools uses mechanisms
to try and identify how it in the most cost-effective way should arrange maintenance
for the parcels in a road network. The latter is what is referred to as a CPM optimi-
sation and will be further described in Section 3.3.1. Figure 3.12 shows the domain
in regards to CPM optimisations. In the figure it can be seen that a CPM optimi-
sation has a relation to the road network used. The CPM optimisation also is given
a name and description together with a status describing if the optimisation is done
or ongoing. In order for the mechanisms to properly identify the parcels that should
undergo maintenance, it is necessary to specify a budget year and how many years
that should be accommodated for. Each year is then associated with a budget so the
tool knows how much money it can conduct maintenance for.
When the optimisation has been completed, it will be indicated by its status, and users
are now able to generate different reports based on the outcome of the optimisation.
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Pavement Management Systems
20
Figure 3.12. Domain diagram of CPM Optimisation
3.2
Pavement Management Systems
Pavement Management Systems are designed to support its end-users in making more
consistent, cost-effective and in general better decisions in regards to preserving the
capital-value of the end-users road network. It is important to note that the system
does not make decisions but provide the necessary objective information in order for
managers to do so.
Pavement Management System consist of the following main
components, an inventory, location/asset referencing system, analysis module and a
reporting module. The inventory manages all the data used by the system. This
includes the road network, parcels, road conditions, repair strategies, follow up work
and so forth. The location/asset referencing system is the underlying structure that
allows different types of data such as, road conditions to be mapped accurately to
the asset in the system which in this case is the parcels. The analysis module is the
part of the system that contains different models for e.g. prediction of the state of
the parcel, cost-benefit analysis and in general the tools needed for analysing data
to produce reports that can help decision-makers with management decisions. The
final component is the reporting part of the system, this part provides the tools to
visualise the results of the analysis module in the from of text of with the use of a
geographic information system (GIS).
==PAGE:27==
3.2 Pavement Management Systems
21
3.2.1
Linear Reference Systems
Reference Systems are the backbone of Pavement Management Systems and allows
data to be accurately mapped to each other and easily analysed. One of the most
common reference systems used is the Linear Reference System known as LRS [2].
The LRS defines a way that allows data to be mapped along a linear feature [9]. A
linear feature can be of many types but in common is that it represents a line. When
using LRS with road networks, centerline geometries are used to represent the roads.
A centerline geometry is a line that is placed in the center of the geometry, in this
case roads as depicted in Figure 3.13. The figure consist of two pictures, picture 3.13a
shows the centerlines of roads with no additional courses, where picture 3.13b shows
the centerline of a highway in red and orange. As can be seen from picture 3.13b is
that despite the highway having two main courses a centerline follows the center in
between the two courses.
(a) Centerline geometries of individual roads
(b) Centerline geometry of a highway
Figure 3.13. Centerline geometries taken from http://cvf.vd.dk/cvf/mapui.jsp
Data that should be referenced to a specific place along a centerline can be stored as a
LRS event, which simply means that additional mapping attributes is stored with the
data. In relation to the domain described in Section 3.1 we can create so called LRS
event tabels that shows how datatypes are mapped to the centerlines. Figure 3.14 is
an example of such table but only containing the mapping attributes. In the example
we have three centerlines, orange (road_number: 14, part: 0), green (road_number:
14, part: 1) and blue (road_number: 10, part: 0). A thing to note is that the green
centerline does not start at chainage zero, and this because it is a secondary course to
the orange, the main course, and therefore starts at three. Another thing to note is
that the centerline is defined by road_number and road_part, and chainage describes
the position along the line, but the road_side and road_lane accurately positions the
data along the cross section of the centerline. This can also be seen in the table at
row one and two as these have the same centerline but referees to different sides of
the road.
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Pavement Management Systems
22
Figure 3.14. LRS event table for referencing along centerline
A simple example to reference data could be that an accident happened at road_number:
14, road_part: 1 road_lane: 0, chainage: 4.5 then we would know it would be on
the green centerline in between chainage four and five.
3.2.2
Belægningsoptimering
As The Danish Road Directorate is responsible for maintaining and planning mainte-
nance for around 3800 kilometres of national road in Denmark [10], one of the most
essential tools used by the Danish Road Directorate is the called Vejman. This sys-
tem is designed as a hub that gathers all information and data about the Danish
roads at one place [11]. An integrated part of Vejman is the Pavement Management
System (PMS) Belægningsoptimering. The Danish Road Directorate uses this system
when performing activities related to planning maintenance. The main purpose of the
Belægningsoptimering System is to do capital-preserving maintenance optimisations.
That is, the system is trying to figure out what should be maintained and how, such
that the suggested maintenance in the best possible way accommodates the goal of
sustaining the capital of the road network. It can do so given a road network, budget
and specified years the budget should be used.
Figure 3.15 gives an overview of the Belægningsoptimering System. Software systems
are shown as dashed boxes and labeled Software System, where the internal contain-
ers that the software systems are composed off are light-blue filled boxes labeled
Container. In the figure, several actors are also present and illustrated as dark-blue
persons labeled Person. The actors shown are not all explicitly defined in the system
but are implicitly present within the bounded context of maintenance and mainte-
nance planning. To be noted is that the figure only shows a subset of the containers
present within Vejman. This is due to Vejman being used as a data container, where
basic data about the roads in a specified road network can be retrieved and used
within the Belægningsoptimering System.
==PAGE:29==
3.2 Pavement Management Systems
23
Figure 3.15. Overview of the Belægningsoptimering System
The Belægningsoptimering System is a two-part system consisting of a local desktop
application that runs on a windows machine, and a web-application that you can
access through a URL. The desktop application contains the functionality to create
road networks, define parcels, view detailed information of parcels such as, pavement,
damages and their suggested reparations, measurement data, specified follow-up work
and more. The local application also allows a measurement technician which purpose
is to inspect parcels and register any damages found, to register damages directly into
the system during an inspection without an internet connection. The web-application
has the functionality to initiate optimizations and allows its users to view generated
reports as a result of the optimizations done. The web-application also enables its
users to configure and maintain catalogs which serve to improve the quality and per-
sonalize the optimizations that are to be performed.
The synchronisation server which is also a part of the Belægningsoptimering System
functions as a gateway to the database within the system boundaries and the external
database of Vejman. Besides providing both applications with data, the synchronisa-
tion server also ensures that the data used by both the applications are up to date
and not outdated. As an example, if new damages have been registered locally on the
desktop application, once the desktop application connects to the internet, it is then
possible to synchronize the desktop application making the newly registered damages
available for the web-application.
==PAGE:30==
3.3 Business Processes
24
3.3
Business Processes
From the interviews with The Danish Road Directorate three essential processes have
been identified in regards to planning maintenance. These processes are, Collect Road
Condition Data, Do Visual Pavement Inspection and Plan Maintenance. Figure 3.16
is a process landscape where the three processes are defined as core processes, as they
are the most essential for accommodating the goal of The Danish Road Directorate.
Besides the core processes, it also shows support processes which enables the execu-
tion of the core processes, and management processes that provide direction and rules
for core and support processes.
Figure 3.16. Process Landscape of the identified processes
Each core process in the landscape is composed of one or more sequential processes,
that in themselves can be further decomposed in to individual activities. The sequen-
tial processes from the process landscape defines a general chain of value as seen in
Figure 3.17.
Figure 3.17. Sequential processes in a value chain
On a yearly basis, The Danish Road Directorate sets out to plan which parcels in
the Danish road network that should be maintained. The first step towards reaching
the point of having a list of pavement jobs ready for tender, is collecting road con-
dition data. Road condition data is collected with so called ARAN1 vehicles. Once
1to be written
==PAGE:31==
3.3 Business Processes
25
data has been collected, an evaluation process begins where around 25-30% of the
road network is selected for visual pavement inspection [10]. The initial phase of
the selection is where parcels that are within five years of a surface replacement is
selected. Secondly, the selected parcels gets a new estimation of when they require
a surface replacement that is based upon the gathered road condition data but also
previous collected data and observations made during pavement inspections. During
a pavement inspection a measurement technician will register any damages found
into the Belægningsoptimerings System, where a damage will be associated to the
parcel being inspected. After inspections have been carried out, a capital-preserving
maintenance optimisation is initiated by a technical specialist. The specialist will
access the Belægningsoptimerings System through the web-application where they
are able to select the road network for optimisation. The system will then generate a
report containing a prioritised list of parcels that should be maintained. The gener-
ated report will then go through an evaluation process where different departments in
the company gives their input on what they think would be a suﬀicient maintenance
strategy to carry out. When the plan is finalised it will then be put out for tender,
giving the winning contractor the responsibility to carry out the actual maintenance.
The coming sections will present a detailed description of the most essential processes
identified, starting with the core processes, followed by a short description of some of
the support processes. The management processes are typically very generic which is
also the case in this analysis and will therefore not be discussed further.
3.3.1
Capital-Preserving Maintenance Optimisation
From the process landscape seen in Figure 3.16 it can be concluded that the sequential
process Perform Capital-Preserving Maintenance Optimisation is the most essential
when it comes to planning maintenance. The reason is that this process lays the
foundation of the strategic maintenance plan by generating a report consisting of a
prioritised list of parcels that should be maintained in order to in the best way pos-
sible sustain the capital in the road network. The processes that are located before
said process in the value chain serve as input, while the processes located afterwards
are post processing steps that serve to finalise and realise the generated strategic
maintenance plan.
Figure 3.18 is a BPMN diagram of the process with its individual activities. In general
the process takes as argument a road network, budget, budget-year and the number
of years the system should make a plan for. The system will then iterate over all of
the parcels in the network and retrieve the most effective maintenance with lowest
cost for each parcel. The maintenance chosen also comes with a year that it should
be realised. The year that the system suggest is very important as the deterioration
of the parcel may increase exponentially if maintenance is postponed, consequently,
resulting in a more expensive repair. The results of the optimisation is stored in
==PAGE:32==
3.3 Business Processes
26
the database located within the Belægningsoptimerings System and can be extracted
based on the data that is needed in the form of reports.
In Figure 3.18 it can be seen that the process is initiated when it receives a request
from the Danish Road Directorate.
This request contains the information as de-
scribed above. With the road network chosen, the system fetches all of the parcels
in said network from the Belægningsoptimerings System database. For each parcel
it will perform the Perform Optimisation sub-process which is presented within the
first group frame. This sub-process starts executing four different processes in paral-
lel. One of these, is that the system will generate a damage overview. The damage
overview is contained within its own sub-process and essentially retrieves all damages
it can find on the parcel from both Vejman and within its own system boundaries.
The system searches internally for damages registered during pavement inspections
and it search externally for damages registered during the collection of road condition
data. Following the damage overview is a determination of repair method for each
damage associated to the parcel. This happens within the sub-process called Deter-
mine Repair Strategy and is presented in the bottom group frame. Here the system
will search the Reparation Strategy Catalogue for the damage, and will then be able
to associate a repair method to said damage. Having determined the repair strategy
for each damage, the system now needs four types of information to calculate the
total repair costs. The information needed are, Follow-up Work Costs, Reparation
Costs and Future Reparation Costs. Follow-up Work Costs and Reparation Costs are
retrieved from the Repair and Follow-up Work Catalogue where a repair method is
associated with a cost and can also be associated with some follow-up work that has
a price. The Future Reparation Costs can only be calculated once the VRL has been
retrieved from the external Vejman database. The VRL is the estimated remaining
time in years before a parcel has to be completely reconstructed and a surface layer
replacement will not be suﬀicient enough to repair the parcel. When the VRL has
been retrieved it is then possible to estimate the Future Reparation Costs based on
the damages and the VRL.
The second sub-process that is being executed in parallel is the Determine Structural
VRL & Reinforcement Needs. Structural VRL is an estimation for how long the par-
cel will be able to sustain the needed baring capacity to carry the measured traﬀic
load. In order to do so, the system will retrieve information about the surface thick-
ness and e-modules from the external database Vejman. The measured traﬀic load is
retrieved from Mastra, where the system will sent a request containing information
about the parcel and then receive information regarding traﬀic load on said parcel.
Having gathered all of the parameters, the system will now be able to give an esti-
mation about the structural VRL. Given the structural VRL, it is now possible for
the system to determine the type of surface layer to be used if a surface replacement
would be beneficial. The Pavement Catalogue contains different surface types and
information about their baring capacity and price. The system uses The Pavement
Catalogue both when determining the appropriate surface type but also to calculate
==PAGE:33==
3.3 Business Processes
27
the cost of applying a new surface layer to the parcel. Knowing the VRL the system
also calculates the estimated additional cost of a new surface layer. This value repre-
sents a cost of having a parcel that has surpassed its VRL, due to the fact it is more
expensive to repair as the degradation of the parcel has surpassed what is estimated
to be the optimal time to change the wearing course.
An essential part of the optimisation is knowing how effective the chosen maintenance
solution will be. The effect is based on the capital gained subtracted with the user
cost. User cost is the estimated additional costs that comes as a consequence of driv-
ing on a damaged road. The system then strives to achieve a solution that provides
an increase in capital with low user costs, thus achieving a positive effect. In order
to get the effect, the capital value of the current surface layer, and the bearing layer
has to be calculated together with the user costs. The capital value of the bearing
layer is based on the Structural VRL, while The capital value of the surface layer is
based on the VRL and the age of the surface layer. Finally the user cost is based on
the IRI (International roughness index) which is retrieved from Vejman.
Having gathered all the information as described in the latter, it is now possible for
the system to perform a cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA), where the cost and effect
of multiple maintenance solutions for a parcel is evaluated. As a result of the analysis,
the system will choose the maintenance solution that is estimated to have the best
effect based on its cost.
The results of the optimisation performed on all of the parcels are then persisted
within the Belægningsoptimerings System. Having persisted the results, the system
will wait for the user to select the type of report they would like to generate, which
it will make available for the user to see.
The Belægningsoptimerings System is
able to generate many types of reports, but the most common report is the Parcels
with pavement suggestions pr.year. This report generates a list of parcels that were
suggested to undergo a surface replacement.
The surface replacements will span
across the number of years the optimisation was based upon.
==PAGE:34==
3.3 Business Processes
28
Figure 3.18. BPMN diagram of the Capital-preserving Maintenance Optimization process
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Business Processes
29
3.3.2
Pavement Inspection
In order for the Belægningsoptimerings System to achieve meaningful results from
an optimisation, it is essential that the road condition data the system has about
the parcels reflects the actual state at the time of optimisation. The main goal of
a pavement inspection is to identify all damages related to the inspected parcel and
register them into the system so that they can be included in the optimisation. The
actor who performs the inspection is a measurement technician.
A measurement technician will be assigned a road network and is then responsible for
performing inspections of the parcels in that network. The program the technician
uses to register the damages identified is the Belægningsoptimerings System. The
technician will search for the parcel he is going to inspect and then start a new visual
inspection in the program. To be noted is that when a new inspection is started the
previous inspection details from the latest inspection will be deleted. When the tech-
nician starts the inspection, he must enter his credentials, date and when the next
inspection should be performed. Having created the inspection, it is now possible to
register damages which is then associated to the parcel. In the process of registering
a damage, the technician will have to specify the location of the damage and its type.
During the inspection, the measurement technician will also have all of the parcels
data available. This information includes general data such as, surface type, traﬀic
load and bearing capacity, but it also includes information that has been collected by
ARAN vehicles such as, IRI and mean ruth depth.
If a measurement technician evaluates that a parcel varies to much in its overall state,
they have the opportunity to segregate the parcel. The technician can also aggregate
two or more parcels together if it is his evaluation that they are in similar state.
3.3.3
Evaluate and Adapt Maintenance Prioritisation
The Evaluate and adapt maintenance prioritisation process is initiated after the opti-
misation has been performed and a report that serves as a maintenance strategy has
been generated. The strategy will be evaluated and adapted by multiple departments
before being in its final state and ready for tender. Meetings will be held with the
daily operations department where possible additions to strategy will be discussed.
The strategic plan will then be discussed with the construction department that will
make sure that maintenance will not be done on parcels that are to be reconstructed
soon. From there, further discussions with the traﬀic department and also the traf-
fic noise and safety department will take place to make sure that the plan does not
violate any regulations.
==PAGE:36==
3.4 Challenges and Opportunities
30
3.3.4
Manage Road Network in IT-System
Before an optimisation process is initiated, it is essential that the road network chosen
for optimisation goes through a validation process. This is to ensure that parcels are
not overlapping or that some parcels that make up the road network are missing. If
the road network does not satisfies the conditions it will not be possible to start the
optimisation.
The process begins by selecting the road network within the Belægningsoptimerings
System.
The system will then send a request to Vejman with the road network
to be validated.
If any of the above mentioned conditions is violated it will be
presented for the user performing the validation. If parcels are missing in the road
network, the response will include a list of all the parcels that are missing. As most
optimisations are performed using established road networks from previous years, it
is an opportunity to identify newly constructed roads that have not been registered in
the road network. If it is the case that parcels are missing or parcels are overlapping,
it is up to the person performing the validation to manually register and correct the
mistakes within the Belægningsoptimerings System.
3.3.5
Maintain Catalogues
Within the Belægningsoptimerings System there are three main catalogues Reparation
Strategy Catalogue, Pavement Catalogue and Repair and Follow-up Work Catalogue
as described in the previous sections. These catalogues are an essential part of the op-
timisation process as they contain valuable data that dictate the chosen maintenance
solution for a given parcel. These catalogues are updated manually from Belægning-
soptimerings System whenever changes or additional data to the catalogues becomes
available to the Danish Road Directorate.
3.4
Challenges and Opportunities
The Danish Road Directorate is faced with the general challenge of having to sustain
the capital in the road network. This is the main objective that they strive to achieve
and it is composed of several sub-challenges that are more comprehensible and gives
rise to opportunities.
One of the sub-challenges that has an impact on the objective is being able to collect
data such that the data stored within Vejman reflects the actual condition of the
parcels when needed. This could increase the effectiveness of identifying and select-
ing critical parcels that should undergo a visual inspection, but also when performing
a capital-preserving maintenance optimisation.
Currently, some parcels may have
deteriorated more then others or sudden road conditions may have appeared in be-
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Challenges and Opportunities
31
tween the collection of data and the optimisation. The deterioration could have an
impact on the results of the optimisation as some parcels should be prioritised before
others to avoid a more expensive repair and therefore have a negative impact on the
capital. Given that ARAN vehicles are expensive to operate, and produces measure-
ments that are only usable if collected in daylight and dry conditions, increasing the
frequency of collecting data will not be a feasible way to accommodate the challenge.
Even if it were possible, the time it would take from having collected the data to
a given percentage of the road network being inspected would still remain, unless
the optimisations being performed were based solely on measurement data. Since
the Danish Road Directorate are responsible for around 3800 kilometres of road, it
also not feasible to increase the amount of inspections before an optimisation as this
would require a lot of resources.
The latter gives rise to opportunities such as, LiRA and other crowed-sourced alterna-
tives as they can help improve the quality of data by collecting data more frequently.
This is with the exception that useful data can be extracted and transformed into
some kinds of condition indexes, which can give an indication about the individual
state of the parcels in the road network. If it is possible to gather road condition
data using crowed-sourced alternatives, then this would increase the effectiveness of
identifying parcels for visual inspections. Another challenge occur when wanting to
use the data for a capital-preserving maintenance optimisation. The reason being is
that the optimisation is primarily based around data coming from visual inspections,
so in order to benefit from the road condition data, correlations between the two types
of data should be made so that they can accommodate each other in reaching a more
accurate estimation of the state of a parcel. This is a challenge that the Danish Road
Directorate is currently faced with as it can be hard to find concrete correlations
between the measurements coming from ARAN vehicles and the inspections being
performed. Finding the interplay between the measurement data and the inspection
data would accommodate The Danish Road Directorate in reaching their goal as a
combination of the two would provide a more accurate picture of the parcels state.
Finding the interplay would also lead the way of using crowed-sourced alternatives
for optimisation, as there would be a clear understanding of how such data should be
used in practice.
Increasing the frequency of gathering data would not only improve the effectiveness
of the optimisation and the parcel identification and selection, but it can also help
identify sudden road conditions, and may even be able to predict when a given road
condition would occur. Gathering data in different seasons could also give rise to
interesting findings, as one might be able to detect the impact of cold temperatures
that in some cases will speed up the deterioration process.
Measurement data and the data coming from inspections differentiates, but both pro-
vide value in estimating the state of a parcel. Finding a way to do optimisations solely
based on measurements would lower the resources and expenses related to doing in-
==PAGE:38==
3.4 Challenges and Opportunities
32
spections, and further anatomise the value chain mentioned in Section 3.3. This is
an opportunity that is not within the scope of the thesis, but if results of high qual-
ity could be produced based on measurements solely, it would provide great value
towards the goal of The Danish Road Directorate.
Another challenge is evolved around defining parcels based on objective measures
such that they are more consistently defined with high uniformity in regards to their
state. The latter can enable The Danish Road Directorate to save money in certain
situations as also described in the introduction to the thesis. From the processes
described in Section 3.3 it could be seen that none of these took into account that
parcels within the system might be composed of pavement in both good and bad
states. The processes used the damages registered at inspections, so in the case of
where a measurement technician does not make the right decisions to ensure a parcels
uniformity during the inspection, said parcel will at that point negatively impact the
goal of The Danish Road Directorate. Therefore there is an opportunity to improve
the activity of defining parcels so it is not in the hands of measurement technicians
but instead is done automatically with the use of objective measures. This problem
also highlights that the uniformity of a parcels state has the biggest impact on the
outcome of capital-preserving maintenance processes since the processes does not take
into account the uniformity and therefore having more uniform parcels would protect
the system against allowing non-uniform parcels to be processed.
In regards to parcels, one of the downsides with the current system is that when a
new inspection or follow-up work is registered into the system then all of the data
previously registered is lost. This is also the case if a parcel is redefined. The informa-
tion being lost, are valuable information that can be used in the process of identifying
critical parcels that should undergo an inspection, but also later in the evaluation and
adaption process, to get a better understanding of the parcels that have been chosen
for maintenance. The challenge of loosing data, like the others also have a negative
impact on sustaining the capital of the road network, and being able to have parcels
which data does not despairs would be an opportunity to further accommodate the
goal of The Danish Road Directorate.
The thesis will from now on be scoped around the challenge of defining parcels based
on objective measures. Even though the other challenges and opportunities would
also bring a lot of value to the goal of The Danish Road Directorate, this challenge
was chosen due the complexity of the other challenges and the limited time of the
thesis. The thesis will be using measurement data coming from ARAN vehicles as
its objective measure. The reason data from ARAN is chosen is due to the fact that
a comprehensive dataset could be used and condition indexes can be obtained from
the road conditions in the data. Understanding the interplay between measurement
data and the damages gathered from inspections would also bring value, but is out
of scope of this project.
Instead it will focus on how measurement data can be
used in a way such that parcels can automatically be readjusted. Besides the latter,
==PAGE:39==
3.4 Challenges and Opportunities
33
the thesis will also dive into how such functionality should be incorporated into an
information system and what features are needed in order to fully exploit parcels to
further support the capital-preserving maintenance processes. The system proposed
should be flexible in the way it handles incoming measurement data so it in the future
is able to adopt data from other sources such as LiRA.
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 4
A Conceptual
Framework: Increasing
the Uniformity of
Parcels using Key
Performance
Indicators
This Chapter is a conceptual analysis on how to define parcels more objectively, and
how parcels can be used in an information system to support agencies in taking better
decisions when determining parcels that require maintenance.
To fully understand what the difference between the way parcels might be defined
now and what is desired, a simplified example is given in Figure 4.1. Two pictures
are shown of the same road in Copenhagen. The black lines represent where a parcel
starts/ends while the coloured lines is a representation of state of the parcel. Red
indicates it is in a bad state, orange indicates the parcel is on the way to become
in a bad state and finally the green which indicates the parcel is in good state. If
maintenance were suggested on the parcel in 4.1a then the parts in that are in a good
state would also undergo maintenance. However in 4.1b we see the parcel has been
divided into two so that the uniformity of the parcels have increased. Maintenance
would therefore only be suggested on the left-most parcel, which means that money
is saved as maintenance is not being performed where it is not needed.
==PAGE:41==
4.1 Key Performance Indicators and Their Role In Redefining Parcels
35
(a) The picture illustrates a parcel that is not very
uniform
(b) The picture illustrates two parcels with in-
creased uniformity
Figure 4.1. Comparison between current state and the desired state
The example makes a clear statement on why it is important to properly define parcels
and why measures needs to be taken to go from 4.1a to 4.1b. The actions that were
taken in order to go from one parcel to two is refereed to as a segregation. In some
cases there might be the need to combine two parcels given that they are in similar
states. In such cases the combining of the parcel is refereed to as an aggregation.
The example given in the latter might make segregating/aggregating a road network
seem simple but it comes with lots of questions that have to be answered in order
to work in practice. The coming sections will cover the concept of Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs) and how these can be used to redefine the parcels in a road network.
Before describing a method to do the actual segregating/aggregating of parcels, it is
necessary to look into what uniformity means and how that relates to improving
parcels so they become more suitable for maintenance.
4.1
Key Performance Indicators and Their Role In
Redefining Parcels
This section will introduce the concept of Key Performance Indicators and how they
play an important role in redefining parcels. Besides the latter, this section will also
cover how KPIs can be derived from the measurement data produced by ARAN9000
vehicles.
4.1.1
What are Key Performance Indicators
Key Performance Indicators are important indicators that can reflect progression to-
wards a desired state. KPIs ensures that an organisation has focus on what their goal
is and how they are doing as of now compared to that goal. A KPI will therefore help
==PAGE:42==
4.1 Key Performance Indicators and Their Role In Redefining Parcels
36
decision making and direct attention to what matters most [12].
In relation to pavement management, KPIs are becoming more popular as they can
reflect many properties of a road network in a simple way and also because pavement
management is becoming more performance-based. Figure 4.2 is an example of how
KPIs can be used to give a simple overview of different properties in a road network.
The example comes from The Danish Road Directorate, and it shows KPIs on different
levels of aggregation.
At the bottom it shows single indicators, which are values
that have been measured and where the mean has been calculated for respectably
motorways and other roads. These values are normalised to be in between 0 and 100
together with a qualitative assessment for simplicity that allows non-technical users
to quickly understand if the indicators show something positive or negative. On the
middle level it shows combined indicators that are based on the combination of the
single indicators. The single indicators are combined based on a percentage, such
as the safety indicator that is a combination of 10% Evenness, 30% Rutting, 30%
Texture and 30% Road markings. On the highest level there is a global indicator
which gives a very quick and easily understandable overview of the road network.
This indicator is itself based upon a percentage of the combined indicators.
Figure 4.2. Summery of the road conditions at the Danish state roads [13]
KPIs can be used on different levels as seen in the figure but also in different circum-
stances. This thesis proposes to use a KPI that can reflect the state of a parcel and
use that to form parcels more objectively. A KPI reflecting the state of a parcel is
referred to as a Pavement Condition Index. As KPIs follows the same definition as
condition indexes, KPIs is from now on considered a type of condition index.
==PAGE:43==
4.1 Key Performance Indicators and Their Role In Redefining Parcels
37
4.1.2
From Measurement Data to Key Performance Indicator
The Measurement data used in the thesis comes from ARAN9000 vehicles. Figure
4.3 is an example that has been recorded on a highway in Denmark called Moterring
3. The data is displayed in a JSON-format and it contains a wide range of entries
most of them being road conditions.
Figure 4.3. Measurement data from Motorring 3, Denmark
Measurement data from ARAN9000 vehicles are collected in one meter intervals,
which is indicated by the distance between BeginChainage and EndChainage. Chainage
is the same value that is used to describe the location of parcels, road conditions and
condition indexes as mentioned in Section 3.2.1.
The goal is to define a Pavement Condition Index (PCI), that can accurately reflect
a parcels state. Defining a PCI is currently being a popular research field as it can
provide great value to the practice. An article called Current international practices
on pavement condition assessment aimed to find a so called best practice for defining
a PCI [14]. The article looked at six different countries and analysed their way of
defining such an indicator. The results from the analysis concluded that the coun-
tries were in general considering the same road conditions and condition indexes for
calculating the PCI, despite each country doing it in their own way. Some of the
reasons the PCI differentiates, is because of experiences, resource availability and
the knowledge of local road conditions that comes as a consequence of environmental
differences.
In Denmark, the Danish Road Directorate is also experimenting with defining a PCI,
and it is this formula that is going to be used throughout the thesis.
To note is
that the ARAN9000 data available did not include the needed rutting and evenness
condition indexes, so the results of the thesis is based upon the damage index seen
in equation 4.1 which accounts for the road conditions present in the pavement.
==PAGE:44==
4.1 Key Performance Indicators and Their Role In Redefining Parcels
38
DamageIndex(DI) = (AlligCracksSmall ∗3 + AlligCracksMed ∗4 + AlligCracksLarge ∗5)0.3+
(CracksLongitudinalSmall2 + CracksLongitudinalMed3 + CracksLongitudinalLarge4+
CracksLongitudinalSealed2 + CracksT ransverseSmall3 + CracksT ransverseMed4+
CracksT ransverseLarge5 + CracksT ransverseSealed2)0.1+
(P otholeAreaAffectedLow ∗5 + P otholeAreaAffectedMed ∗7+
P otholeAreaAffectedHigh ∗10 + P otholeAreaAffectedDelam ∗5)0.1
(4.1)
P CI = (DamageIndex + (
(RuttingDepthL + RuttingDepthR)
2
)0.5)) ∗(
(IRI −L + IRI −R)
2
)0.2
(4.2)
The Damage Index (DI) seen in equation 4.1 is as mentioned composed of the at-
tributes available in the measurement data. It uses cracks, alligator cracks and pot-
hole road conditions. As can be seen from the equation, the more severe the road
condition the higher the multiplier it has, e.g. AlligCracksSmall has lower multiplier
then AlligCracksLarge. It can also be seen that alligator cracks are the type of road
condition that is weighed the most out of the three road condition types since it has
the highest exponent. To assess the outcome of a calculated damage index, Table 4.1
is presented. The table is known as an assessment table and has three columns, road
class, range and qualitative assessment. The rows describes in what range a DI has
to be for a given assessment based on the road class.
Road Class
Range
Qualitative Assessment
Municipality
0 - 1.5
Good
1.5 - 3
Medium
3 +
Bad
Highway
0 - 1
Good
1 - 3
Medium
3 +
Bad
Table 4.1. Damage Index - Assessment table
The PCI is seen in equation 4.2 and uses the damage index calculated but also takes
into the account the evenness and rutting of the pavement. Table 4.2 shows how the
calculated PCI is assessed.
==PAGE:45==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
39
Road Class
Range
Qualitative Assessment
Municipality
0 - 4
Good
4 - 8
Medium
8 +
Bad
Highway
0 - 3
Good
3 - 6
Medium
6 +
Bad
Table 4.2. PCI - Assessment table
The Damage Index and the PCI uses three qualitative labels, Good, Medium and Bad.
To put these words into the context of capital-preserving maintenance planning, Good
is associated with a pavement that is estimated to last for more than ten years before it
has to be resurfaced. Medium reefers to a pavement that has between five to ten years
left, while Bad is less then five years, and is therefore the main target for maintenance.
An important takeaway when trying to define a PCI is that the equation typically
differentiates depending on the country and its environment as also concluded by
the article Current international practices on pavement condition assessment. This
means that when developing an information system it is important to allow its users to
define how condition indexes should be calculated to not only accommodate the local
practice of capital-preserving maintenance planning by having predefined equations
in the system for doing it their way.
4.2
A Method for Redefining Parcels
This section will propose an idea for how one can take the parcels in a road network
and redefine them so that they become more suitable for maintenance using the PCI
presented in the previous section. Initially, a discussion about what uniformity is and
how it can be quantified will be presented. Secondly a set of parameters that defines
the boundaries of a parcel will be elaborated on before presenting the method on how
to perform a segmentation of a road network.
4.2.1
The Uniformity of Parcels
The uniformity of a parcel is as mentioned a measure of how uniform the parcel is
with respect to the state of its pavement over its entire length. Over a parcels length
several road conditions and condition indexes can have been measured and identified
which could be depicted as seen in Figure 4.4 where condition indexes are red and
road conditions are blue. It can be noticed that some parts of the parcel are blank,
==PAGE:46==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
40
which indicates that the identified condition indexes are insignificant and in relation
to road conditions is that the stretch of pavement does not have any.
If we were to use the PCI equation on the parts that have conditions related to
them, then this would result in a set of calculated PCIs. These PCIs could then be
mapped to the assessment table which would result in the PCIs being distributed
into the three categories (Good, Medium and Bad). Converting the number of PCIs
into percentages could as an example result in a parcel having a state distribution of
60% - Good, 20% - Medium and 20% - Bad.
Figure 4.4. Conditions along a parcel
One problem with the latter is that the calculation only took into account the parts
of the parcel with road conditions and condition indexes. This will portray a wrong
picture of the uniformity of the parcel since it might be in a very good state with only
a couple of conditions. The PCI should therefore be calculated on the entire parcel.
Doing so will more accurately portray the actual state distribution of the parcel, but
not fully. This is because of the fact that currently there is no estimation of how
long the parts are that a PCI has been calculated for. This means that a parcel
could potentially have a starting part of 100 meters that has no conditions, and have
two 20 meter parts in respectively Medium and Bad state. The Good state clearly
makes up most of the parcel and therefore should be valued more than the other
parts, but since only three PCIs is calculated and distributed then this would result
in the following percentages 33.33% - Good, 33.33% - Medium and 33.33% - Bad. It
is therefore important to identify the length of the parts being used. By doing so, it
is possible to conclude that a certain amount of meters is in a specific state and how
much it is compared to the entire length of the parcel.
Another thing that can produce misleading results is the mapping of the PCIs into
the different assessment categories. As the PCI is a calculation that is based upon
different types of data, calculating the PCI of a given part can become troublesome.
The reason why is because different types of data stretches over different lengths. An
example to this can be seen in Figure 4.5.
==PAGE:47==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
41
Figure 4.5. Conditions along a parcel
The figure shows different types of road conditions and conditions indexes that have
been identified on a parcel. As can be seen is that the different conditions can cross
each other and have different starting and ending locations. If the PCI is calculated
within the dashed lines, it would be necessary to combine the same type of conditions
so that there is no multiple of the same condition type. In regards to the example
this would be to take the mean of the two potholes identified and use that in the
calculation.
Combining conditions in such a way might be a problem since their
severity can level each other out resulting in a value that does not represent their
actual severity. Calculating a PCI based on misleading values could result in a PCI
being categorised as Medium despite its actual state is Bad. An example of the latter
can be seen in Figure 4.6. Table 1 is the case where the potholes are combined to form
a single value resulting in a PCI of 4.87. Table 2 shows where the PCI is calculated
on smaller parts so no combination is needed resulting in PCIs of 3.25 and 6.5. The
final distributions can be seen in the state distribution table showcasing that table 1
has a higher percentage of the Medium state than table 2. This indicates that table 1
did not recognise that one of the potholes was very severe due to it being levelled out
by the other pothole not being equally severe. The latter indicates that the larger
the area the PCI is calculated on, the more uncertain the results are since there is a
higher chance that there is a need for combining conditions.
==PAGE:48==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
42
Figure 4.6. Impact of combining conditions
To accommodate the issue of combining conditions, it is important to introduce the
concept of granularity. Granularity in this context means that you specify at which
lengths the calculations should be based upon. By doing so you can have high gran-
ularity which means that the calculation is based on small lengths resulting is a high
degree of detail. While low granularity means doing calculation on larger lengths
resulting in a low degree of detail. This concept can be introduced in different ways
as one can choose to only use the specified granularity on parts that have conditions,
or one can choose to divide the parcels into lengths of the specified granularity and
calculate the PCI of each of the individual parts. In this thesis the former option is
chosen due to it being a simple way, without having to measure lengths and cross
sections of conditions to know whether or not you should use the granularity. Calcu-
lating the PCI at the granularity specified and distributing these into the categories
of the assessment table, it is now possible to accurately conclude how much a parcel
is in the respective Good, Medium and Bad state.
One thing that should be taken into consideration when determining the distribution
of a parcels state is the assessment table of the PCI. The table is responsible for
correctly distributing the PCIs calculated, and provides a clear line in where a state
goes from Good to Medium and Medium to Bad. One could define more entries than
what is presented in this thesis to quantify a parcels state, but the point here is
that uniformity is not necessarily correlated to how equal a set of values are. One
could essentially have a ten values of 2.9 and ten values of 3.1, and according to the
assessment table for a highway in Figure 4.2 the distribution of the parcel would be
represented as 50%/50% despite the values being so similar across the parcel. The
reason clear lines are defined and used to describe the uniformity of a parcel is because
of its practicality. At some point a decision has to be made whether a given parcel
should be preferred over another i.e it has a worse state. Drawing the line is not a
==PAGE:49==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
43
question of if it should be done but rather when it should be done. Given the example
before with ten values of 2.9 and ten values of 3.1, if this parcel was considered to
have equal states then its assessment would be described as in between Good and Bad.
If any range of values as long as they are close should have their own assessment it
would ruin the practicality of the assessment table and also go against what is defined
as a Key Performance Indicator. This is because it will become very hard to interpret
the meaning of any range and also associate actions that has to be taken for each of
these.
4.2.2
Identifying the Boundaries of Parcels
With a better understanding of uniformity, we will now dive into the properties that
describes the boundaries of parcels.
Looking at the domain specified in Chapter 3 it was mentioned that a parcel have
a specific pavement type. The pavement of a parcel plays an important role as dif-
ferent pavements may have different maintenance requirements so having a parcel
with different pavements does not really makes sense from a maintenance point of
view and therefore it is important that a parcel is only associated with one pavement
type. Another parameter is the Road Class. This parameter is important because
even if the same type of pavement is used, different road classes could indicate that
the pavement is thicker or the addition of a reinforcement layer. The differences in
the structural composition of a pavement can also result in different maintenance re-
quirements and a parcel should therefore not be associated with more then one road
class.
Parcels also have some restrictions in regards to their location which has to be accom-
modated for. Every time there is a change in the road number, road part, road side
and road lane, there have to be a new parcel. This idea is based on the linear reference
system, so agencies using a different reference system might have other requirements
for when parcels should begin and end. Defining parcels based on a reference system
makes it more manageable for agencies to plan where maintenance should happen. If
connecting parcels should undergo maintenance together, these can be put in a list
instead of having unnecessary complex systems for handling parcels that crosses the
borders defined by the reference system.
Another parameter is the length of a parcel. As described when discussing the con-
cepts, maintenance is typically preferred on parts that are more the 300 meters and
no longer then 5 kilometres. This is of course very depended on the agencies, contrac-
tors and the methods used in a given country, so being able to regulate this would
be a necessity in an information system.
==PAGE:50==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
44
4.2.3
Segmentation of a Road Network
In the following a way for performing a segmentation of a road network will be pre-
sented. The aim of the segmentation is to redefine the parcels in a road network so
they are more suitable for maintenance, in other words, the aim is to find a solution
that is better then the current. Finding the optimal solution for how parcels should
be defined is the goal, though finding an optimal solution is nearly impossible as the
search space is huge and the best solution depends on the agency and their way of
working. From the field of optimisation, search metaheuristics are used and are very
beneficial when searching for a good solution. This is mainly because they are build
so that you search and explore multiple solutions to an optimisation problem, and
doing so in a relative short amount of time. Simulated Annealing is an example to
a search metaheuristic that is widely understood and have been around for a long
time. Simulated Annealing uses a randomisation approach for finding solutions, and
doing so allows one to explore many and different solutions and not get stuck in a
local maxima. Simulated Annealing uses previous found solutions to find new ones
which also include solutions that are rated to be worse then the current. This is one
property it has so a local maxima can be avoided and further search for a global
maxima can continue.
The proposed method for segmentation of a road network is not going to be using a
search metaheuristic such as Simulated Annealing but it will use some of the concepts
and ideas for how to approach an optimisation problem. The proposed method can
be seen as an initial solution to a search metaheuristic as the Simulated Annealing.
The solution that the method aims find is one that is better than current, and one
that will be a good starting point for further optimisation.
The segmentation method is done in three phases, the grouping phase, the segregation
phase and the aggregation phase. The phases will be elaborated on individually in
the following and having arrived at a solution, a way of evaluating the outcome of
the solution will be presented.
4.2.3.1
Grouping Phase
In the grouping phase, a division for each differentiating road_number, road_part,
road_side and lane will be made.
Every parcel in the road network will now be
distributed into these divisions.
Since the parcels in each division might not be
connected from start to end due to some parcels not being owned by the same agency
or simple that the agency do not want the parcel included, it is necessary to further
create groups within each division as illustrated in Figure 4.7. These groups contains
parcels that are connected from start to end. The constructed groups in the road
network are those that are to be redefined individually.
==PAGE:51==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
45
Figure 4.7. Result of grouping phase
The following summarises the grouping phase in a sequence of steps:
1. Group the parcel in the road network according to the same, road_number,
road_part, road_side and lane.
2. Further group the parcels in the individual groups such that connecting parcels
are in the same groups.
4.2.3.2
Segregation Phase
The following steps that are going to presented is done from the perspective of an
individual group, which means that every group in the road network goes through
the same process. The first step is to calculate the PCIs based on the granularity
specified. In the following steps a granularity of 1 will be used which is equivalent to
one meter. The results of having calculated a the PCI of each meter of the whole group
is illustrated in left-most picture in Figure 4.8. The picture shows a x,y-coordinate
where on the x-axis is equal to the length of the group in meters while the y-axis is
the PCI. On the graph the assessments associated with the PCI are shown so that
it is possible to see which are in respectively Good, Medium and Bad. The right-
most picture illustrates the latter by having highlighted the Good parts in green, the
Medium in orange and the Bad in red.
==PAGE:52==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
46
Figure 4.8. Segregation Step 1
Knowing the state distribution of the group, a segmentation phase will be initiated.
This phase will segregate the group according to where there is a higher frequency
of the PCIs in the respective states and will begin in the Bad state. This is because
finding where there is a higher frequency of Bad states and grouping these is more
important for agencies than finding where there is a higher frequency of Good states.
It is important due to the fact the parts in Bad are those that pose a danger both in
regards to not being maintained in time and therefore being more costly, but also to
those who drives on the road, increasing the possibility of accidents and user costs. In
general this means that finding where there is a higher frequency of Bad states could
indicate that maintenance should happen. The left-most picture in Figure 4.9 shows
how it is possible to identify the frequency. A distance is measured between the parts
that have been identified in the Bad state. If the distance is below a certain number,
it will result in these parts being grouped into a parcel as illustrated in the right-
most picture. The threshold for the distance was set to 20, meaning that the first two
instances of Bad states were aggregated and the same with the Bad states at the end.
If the two aggregated states becomes longer than the maximum length specified then
the aggregation will not happen and the process will continue. Specifying the distance
that should go into finding the frequency is necessary as it may depend on the road
class. An example to this is highway versus local roads. Highways can have longer
breaks in between their conditions compared to local roads meaning that it would be
necessary to increase the distance to find a high frequency of Bad states that would
indicate maintenance is needed. Defining a variable also allows for experimentation
and enables agencies to try and do multiple optimisations until they reach something
they are satisfied with. It also allows for search metaheuristics to explore different
solutions increasing the change of reaching a global maxima.
Figure 4.9. Step2
When the Bad states have been processed, it will now continue with the Medium
==PAGE:53==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
47
states. This is an iterative process so if the PCI has more assessments associated
with it, the process would simply go through each of them starting from the worst
state and moving to the best.
As can be seen in the left-most picture in Figure 4.10 there are no Medium states that
have a direct distance to each other. This is also illustrated with the arrows as the
two Medium states cannot each other without crossing the parcel created in the first
iteration. This means that all of the Medium states will simply become their own
parcel as indicated by the right-most picture. Since the next iteration is the final one,
there is no reason to check the distance as the last parts becomes their own parcels.
Figure 4.10. Step3
When all of the different assessments for the PCI have been processed, a number
of parcels have been defined in different lengths as illustrated in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11. Result of segregation
The following summarises the segregation phase for an individual group in a sequence
of steps:
1. Calculate the PCIs based on the granularity specified over the entire length of
the group.
2. Distribute the calculated PCIs into the assessments associated with the PCI.
3. For every assessment starting with the one representing the worst state do the
following:
a) Take the first unprocessed calculated PCI and measure the distance to the
next. If the distance is shorter than the specified threshold, then aggregate
the entire part between the two PCIs and repeat step a. If their combined
length is longer than the specified maximum or the distance calculated is
==PAGE:54==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
48
to long then mark the PCI as processed and repeat step a. If the PCI
is the last in the assessment then mark the PCI as processed and begin
processing the next assessment group.
4. The result of step 3 is collection of individual and aggregated PCIs in each
assessment group. The individual PCIs represents parcels with a length of the
specified granularity. The aggregated PCIs represents parcels with a length of
the distance between the first and the last PCI in the aggregation.
4.2.3.3
Aggregation Phase
The final phase before having redefined the parcels is the aggregation phase. Since
there is no guarantee that the segmentation will result in parcels that are within the
requested length, it is here necessary to aggregate parcels. The aggregation also helps
combining parcels that have similar states improving upon the uniformity since the
distance might have been to short to identify similar occurring states. Figure 4.12
shows the parcels combined to form the initial group, where the parcels are identified
by the dashed lines. The aggregation will start with the segment that has the highest
frequency in the worst state i.e Bad. The reason for this is again because of the
fact that this parcel pose the biggest danger to an agency. From the figure it can
be seen that the parcels with the worst parts have their distribution labelled where
the percentages indicate how much a parcel contains Good, Medium and Bad states.
The parcel labelled one has the highest frequency of the worst states followed by the
parcel labelled two and then the parcel labelled three. Given that two parcels have
the same percentage then the order is decided based on the percentage of the second
worst state i.e Medium.
Figure 4.12. Aggregation step 1
When the parcel with the highest frequency of the worst state is found, the parcel will
now check its neighbour parcels to see if their distribution has the highest percentage
in either the same state or the state below as illustrated in Figure 4.13. Given the
neighbour with the highest percentage, the two parcels will be aggregated if their
combined length does not become larger than the maximum specified. If the other
neighbour parcel also had the highest percentage in either the same state or the state
below, then this parcel will also be combined unless it violates the maximum length
requirements. Given there is a parcel like the red between 50 and 60 meters that
==PAGE:55==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
49
has no neighbours with the highest percentage in either the same state or the state
below, then this parcel will be aggregated with the neighbour that will give the biggest
increase in the Bad state. This is often the smallest parcel since it will then have a
bigger impact.
Figure 4.13. Aggregation step 2
Having gone through the steps of aggregating the parcels with the highest frequency
in the Bad state, the same process begin for the other assessments i.e. Medium and
Good. When all the assessments have been processed, if there should be parcels that
are too short, then this will initiate a new round of aggregation going from Bad to
Good as before, but only on the parcels that does not fulfil the length requirements.
Figure 4.14 is an example of this. The highlighted area is too short to be a parcel
and therefore it applies the concept of looking for the neighbour that the highest
percentage in either the same state or the state below. Since none of its neighbours
satisfies this, the parcel will be aggregated with the neighbour that gives the biggest
increase to the Bad distribution. If the parcel that were too short stemmed from the
Medium then it would be combined with the neighbour that gives the biggest increase
to the Medium distribution.
Figure 4.14. Aggregation step 3
The following summarises the aggregation phase for an individual group in a sequence
of steps:
1. For every assessment group do the following:
a) Calculate for every parcel its state distribution.
b) Arrange the parcel starting with the one that has the highest percentage
of the worst assessment.
c) For every parcel in the assessment group starting from the beginning do
the following:
i. Calculate the state distribution of the parcels neighbours.
==PAGE:56==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
50
ii. If the neighbours has their highest percentage in a worse, the same or
better assessment as is being evaluated then both neighbours will be
aggregated with the parcel starting with the neighbour that has the
highest percentage in the worst of the three assessments. If none of the
neighbours has their highest percentage in neither three assessments,
then aggregate the parcel with the neighbour that gives the biggest
increase to the assessment being evaluated. If the parcel violates the
maximum length then stop aggregating and move to the next parcel
in the list as described in step c. If the parcel is the last then move on
to the next assessment group.
2. If the the parcels does not satisfy the length requirements go to step 1.
4.2.3.4
Comparing the Results of a Segmentation
When a road network have been segmented an important step is to evaluate if the
solution of the segmentation is better than the original solution. This concept is also
a key part in search metaheuristic like Simulated Annealing where there is a cost
function. This function determines how a solution is evaluated and rated compared
to other solutions found, i.e it clearly defines the properties that makes a solution
good. In the following, a method for evaluating the solution of the segmentation will
be presented.
The properties that agencies want out a segmentation is to identify where there is
a high occurrence of pavement that is in worst state, so actions can be taken to ac-
commodate this part before being more costly or resulting in a higher probability of
accidents and user costs. Agencies also wants these parts to be grouped together so
that money can be saved by not maintaining parts that does not require maintenance.
Using the uniformity of parcels does not satisfy the properties agencies want of a
solution. If parcels are defined based on what yields the highest uniformity then one
could aggregate short parcels in bad state to long parcels of good state and therefore
the short parcels in bad state would have less of an impact on the uniformity of the
aggregated parcels. Doing so would go against what is desired since the bad parcel
would no longer be noticeable as wanted. An example to this can be seen in Figure
4.15, where Good parts are depicted in green, Medium parts in orange and Bad parts
in red. The parcels are divided by the dashed line, and in the example an outcome of
aggregating two parcels can be seen. The aggregation could be necessary if a parcel
did not satisfy til minimal lengths requirements. If the parcel with worst state were
aggregated with the longest parcel in the good state then this would result in the Bad
part not so noticeable as seen by its low percentage of Bad. Aggregating the parcel in
the worst state with the smallest parcel in the Good state, would make the bad parts
much more noticeable as indicated with the higher Bad percentage and therefore be
the better result.
==PAGE:57==
4.2 A Method for Redefining Parcels
51
Figure 4.15. Results of combining parcels
Despite having combined Good and Bad parts, money was still saved as maintenance
would not have been done on a larger piece of pavement in a good state. The latter
highlights the need for rewarding aggregations that yields to a higher percentage of
parts in the Bad state, as this is also the state that has the highest economic impact.
If a parcel is mostly comprised of parts in the Good state, does not mean the parcel is
not defined in a good way, but if the parcel also have a low percentage of parts being
in a Bad state then this would indicate that there might be a better way to form the
parcel so that the Bad part can become a part of a parcel with a higher percentage
of the Bad state.
Evaluating how well-defined a parcel is based on the Bad parts it is associated with
is hard to indicate with a single value. This is because the amount of parts that
are in the Bad state and where they are located differentiates throughout the road
network. The Bad parts could be close to each other meaning that a parcel with a
high frequency of Bad parts could be formed, but the Bad parts could also be far
apart, meaning that no parcel with a high frequency could be defined. Therefore it
does not mean they one is formed better than the other, but due to the location of the
conditions it was simply possible to define a parcel that resulted in a higher percentage
of the Bad state. Instead of evaluating a single parcel and give it a value to determine
how well-defined it is, it is instead possible to compare two groups of defined parcels
that covers the same stretch of road to see which one is actually defined in the better
way. Given the example before in Figure 4.15, there are three ways the three parcels
can be aggregated to form two parcels or a single one covering the whole stretch of
road. Since aggregating the short parcel in Good state with the parcel in Bad state
resulted in a higher percentage of Bad then it is possible to conclude that this is the
better option. This idea can be translated into the equation as seen below.
Rating =
∑n
i=1
xi
yi ∗100
n
(4.3)
==PAGE:58==
4.3 Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
52
The equation uses the variables n, x and y and is calculated on the set of parcels in a
solution that have more than zero length of Bad parts. The variable n is equal to the
number of parcels in the set. x equals the length of a parcels Bad state. y equals the
total length of the parcel. In general the equation calculates the average distribution
of the Bad state amongst the parcels in the solution. The higher the result is the
more isolated are the parts in the Bad state. Figure 4.16 and Figure 4.17 illustrates
a two different solutions to the same stretch of road where 4.16 is labelled solution1
and 4.17 is labelled solution2. Solution1 should be the chosen solution as the Bad
parts are more isolated compared to solution2.
Figure 4.16. Solution 1
Calculating the rating for solution1 results in the following:
Solution1_Rating =
( 44
50 ∗100) + ( 19
19 ∗100) + ( 39
39 ∗100)
3
= 96
(4.4)
Figure 4.17. Solution 2
Calculating the rating for solution2 can be seen here:
Solution2_Rating =
( 44
50 ∗100) + ( 6
20 ∗100) + ( 13
13 ∗100) + 39
39 ∗100)
4
= 79.5
(4.5)
As can be seen from the results, solution1 had the highest rating which means that
the solution was better compared to solution2.
4.3
Requirement Specification: An Information System
Exploiting Parcels
In the conceptual analysis we proposed a method for defining parcels based on ob-
jective measures. In the coming sections are requirements for an information system
==PAGE:59==
4.3 Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
53
utilising the proposed method, together with features that can support agencies in
taking more informed maintenance planning decisions put forward. After having de-
fined the requirements, a proposal for a user interface will be presented. In the end, a
domain model containing all the concepts that are needed to realise the requirements
shown, where new concepts that have yet to be described will be elaborated on.
4.3.1
User Stories
User Stories are in the project used to ensure that the information system have
features that satisfies the needs of the end-user. A user story is a few short sentences
that explains a software feature informally from the perspective of the end-user to
ensure it brings them value [15]. The user stories in the project have been defined
in collaboration with The Danish Road Directorate and will be presented using the
structure:
• ”As a (persona), i want to (perform some action), so that i (can achieve some
result/goal).”
The user stories are prioritised using the MoSCoW (Must have, Should have, Could
have, Won’t have) method. User stories categorised in the Must Have group, are
critical for the success of the artefact and are considered as the Minimum Viable
Product (MVP). User stories categorised as Should Have, are also essential but not
necessary for the success of the artefact even though they would greatly improve the
user experience and the usability of the system. Could Have, are desirable and if
implemented they would improve the end-user satisfaction. Finally the Won’t Have,
which are the user stories that are the least critical and necessary for the end-user to
achieve their desired goal when using the system.
The user stories shown are those that have been implemented and makes up the arte-
fact described in Chapter 5. User stories have in the project been managed using
concepts from the agile framework Scrum. One of the concepts are sprints, where a
sprint is short period of time where user stories are being implemented. In the project
a sprint period of two weeks have been used, allowing for enough functionality to be
developed so that feedback could be given and taken into account when planning for
the next sprint. Sprint planning is another concept that have been used throughout
the project. Before starting a new sprint, a meeting with The Danish Road Direc-
torate has taken place where the user stories in the backlog have been discussed and
an appropriate amount of work have been assigned to the coming sprint.
Despite there being many user stories that would be very beneficial for agencies do-
ing capital-preserving maintenance planning, only the most important user stories
that have also been implemented will be presented while the others can be found in
a backlog in Appendix A. The user stories are presented with a Story ID indicat-
ing its ranking in the backlog. With the user stories, Story Points are also given.
==PAGE:60==
4.3 Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
54
Story points, is an overall estimate of the effort required to fully implement a user
story, where effort is understood as the complexity of the user story together with the
amount of work that it is associated with. When using story points it is not so much
the actual story points that are important but rather how they are used in relation
to each other. This means that if a user story is assigned 2 story points and another
is assigned 4 then the user story with 4 story points should require twice the effort of
the first user story. In this project are 1 story point estimated to around one work day.
The description of the user story is the final field and results in the following notation:
Story ID: X
Story Points: X
Description: X
Must have
Story ID: 1
Story Points: 10
Description: As a user, I want to be able to import a road network, so it is stored
in the system and I can easily access it without having to re-import the road
network when I need it.
Story ID: 2
Story Points: 3
Description: As a user, I want to be able to get one of my road networks presented
on a 2D Map, so that I can get an overview of the parcels in the road network
and see how they are psychically located.
Story ID: 3
Story Points: 1
Description: As a user, I want to be able to view basic information about a parcel
on the map, i.e its location and administrative data, so that I can quickly look
up basic information about the parcels in the road network.
Story ID: 4
Story Points: 3
Description: As a user, I want to be able to apply an interval based colour-schema
to my road network that can highlight parcels using basic information and a
standardised set of colours, so that I can accurately identify parcels in the road
network.
Story ID: 5
Story Points: 1
==PAGE:61==
4.3 Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
55
Description: As a user, I want to be able to apply a gradient colour-schema to my
road network that can highlight parcels using basic information and a standard-
ised set of colours, so that I can quickly compare and identify parcels in the
road network.
Story ID: 6
Story Points: 5
Description: As a user, I want to be able to define index types, and specify how
they should be calculated and assessed using other index and road condition
types, so that I can experiment and define different ways to reflect the state of
my road network.
Story ID: 7
Story Points: 2
Description: As a user, I want to be able to use the colour-schemes to highlight
parcels based on index types using a standardised set of colours, so that I can
get an overview of how my road network is affected by the chosen index type.
Story ID: 8
Story Points: 10
Description: As a user, I want to be able to have the parcels in my road network
be optimised, so that the pavement in the worst state gets encapsulated, and I
can more easily identify where maintenance is needed the most.
Story ID: 9
Story Points: 2
Description: As a user, I want to be able to get an overview of the parcel optimi-
sations that have been performed on my road network, including information
describing the effectiveness of the optimisation, so that I can get an overview
of performed optimisations and see what parameters and adjustments has led
to the best outcome.
Story ID: 10
Story Points: 1
Description: As a user, I want to be able to have the redefined parcels from an
optimisation shown on the map, so that I can get an overview of how the
redefined parcels are located and defined.
Having defined the user stories, we will now go over some of the acceptance criteria
related to these.
==PAGE:62==
4.3 Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
56
4.3.2
Acceptance Criteria
Acceptance criteria are important when it comes to being able to validate that a
user story have been successfully developed and provides the functionality that was
intended. While user stories describes what the intended functionality is, acceptance
criteria aims to explain the conditions that has to be satisfied for the user story to be
accepted by the end-user [16]. Acceptance criteria can be written in different formats,
but the one used in the project is the scenario-oriented. It ensures that a user story
satisfies its purpose by validating it against scenarios. Scenarios are written in the
format:
• Given (some precondition)
• When (one or multiple actions are performed)
• Then (a specific result is expected)
The Given keyword is used to describe preconditions to a scenario. An example could
be that before you can logout of a system you would have had to be logged in, where
being logged in is seen as the precondition. The When keyword is used to describe
one or more actions being performed by the user e.g the user logs out of the system.
The Then keyword describes the expected result of the action being performed. In
relation to the example of logging out. The expected result could be that the user is
logged out and is forwarded to the login page. If there are more preconditions that
should be stated or any of the other keywords, it can be done with the And keyword
e.g Given the user have an account And the user is logged in.
In the following an example of the acceptance criteria for first and second user story
will be presented. The rest of the acceptance criteria can be found in Appendix B.
Story ID: 1
Scenario: Import road network
1. Given the user is on the page where a road network can be imported.
2. And the user have an excel-sheet with rows formatted (number, part, side,
lane, from and to).
3. When the user enters the name and description of the road network.
4. And the user selects the excel-sheet containing the parcels.
5. And the user choose to import the road network.
6. Then the system have imported the road network.
==PAGE:63==
4.3 Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
57
Story ID: 2
Scenario: Visualise road network
1. Given that there exist a road network in the system.
2. And the user have navigated to the list of imported road networks.
3. When the user selects a road network.
4. Then the road network is visualised on the map.
With the acceptance criteria defined both in the latter and in Appendix B we have now
covered the functional requirements of an information system exploiting parcels. In
the coming section, a description of the non-functional requirements will be presented.
4.3.3
Non-Functional Requirements
This section will cover a set of non-functional requirements for the information system
that have been established together with the project leaders. The requirements are
the following:
• Open Source
It is a requirement that the developed artefact is open source and therefore does
not use any technologies or tools that does not fall in this category. Based on the
requirement the artefact will be using OpenStreetMap1 (OSM) as its underlying
system for map referencing as will be elaborated on the Section 4.3.5.
• Cloud Based
The artefact should be developed as a web application that is accessible through
the most common browsers such as, Google, Microsoft Edge and Firefox.
• Extendable
The artefact should be designed in a way that makes it easy to extend with
additional features. This means that internal components should be developed
with re-usability in mind.
These requirements together with the functional requirements forms the core purpose
of the information system, and it is upon these the system will be build. The system
will be a web application that uses OpenStreetMap as its underlying system for map
referencing. The system will have functionality for optimising the parcels in a road
network and contain features that can assist capital-preserving maintenance processes
by visualisation. A potential user interface for the information system will now be
presented in the coming section.
1https://www.openstreetmap.org/
==PAGE:64==
4.3 Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
58
4.3.4
Potential User Interface
This section will describe how a potential user interface (UI) for an information system
exploiting parcel could look like. The section will begin by covering the basic UI
components that makes up the web application. Afterwards a few examples will be
presented that shows how the basic components can be used to realise the user stories
described.
4.3.4.1
Basic UI Components
The components that are going to be presented will be described and referenced using
a red circle with a number so specific components can be referenced directly. The
basic UI components can be seen in Figure 4.18. The figure shows an example web
page that has a toolbar at the top, a side-view to the left and a map in the middle
of the page. The toolbar as indicated with the number one, is the central navigation
point of the application as the navigation buttons (number two) is located in the
toolbar and allows for users to open different side-views (number four). The toolbar
is also responsible for letting the user know the name of the road network that is
opened and being used by the user. The main component of the application is the
map (number three). The map is where the parcels are going to be visualised and
will be responsible for showing most of the information that will help users in taking
more informed decisions when planning maintenance. Finally there is the side-view
(number four), which is responsible for containing different features. The side-view
is in the figure shown as opened but if none of the buttons in the toolbar have been
pushed then it will be closed so the map is shown and covers the entire page except
the toolbar. In the figure it can be seen that the map is gray-scaled. This is due
to geometries and information being displayed on the map becoming more visible,
enhancing the user experience.
==PAGE:65==
4.3 Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
59
Figure 4.18. Basic UI components
The layout of the web application is centred around a single page, where features are
accessible either through the map component or the buttons in the toolbar that opens
the side-view. The reason behind gathering the functionality on a single page, is to
make it easy to access the tools offered by the application. Since the functionally of
the application is primarily related to manipulating the parcels on the map i.e their
colour or geometry, it is therefore expected by users that these features are close to
the map component.
4.3.4.2
Visualising Parcels on a Map
Parcels are the core of the application, and therefore needs to be visualised in a good
way. Figure 4.19 shows how parcels can be visualised on the map component. On the
figure it can be seen that parcels are coloured in blue. Blue was chosen because it is a
colour that is typically not associated with indicating a state such a red and green for
respectively something in a bad or good state, Blue is in that sense a neutral colour
that is hard to misinterpret, and is therefore a good candidate for initially visualising
the parcels in a road network.
==PAGE:66==
4.3 Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
60
Figure 4.19. Parcels visualised a map
Since parcels are often connected to each other it can be troublesome to see where
they start and end since there is no space in between. To accommodate this problem
a parcel could be highlighted when you hover over it. Additionally when clicking on a
parcel it could stay highlighted so that the user is able to navigate around and still be
able to see the boundaries of the parcel. Figure 4.19 also illustrates how information
about a parcel can be displayed when it is clicked (number one). Having information
directly displayed on the map makes it quick for users to get a brief overview of the
information related to parcel.
4.3.4.3
Utilising the Side-View
The side-view is an important component as it allows users to access more complex
features that cannot be directly used from the map. An example of its usage can be
seen in Figure 4.20 that shows how it is possible for a user to create an index type
that could be used when optimising parcels or in collaboration with a colour-schema
to highlight parcels based on the index. The features name is shown at the top of the
side-view so users can easily understand its purpose. In the example multiple text
fields are used to specify information about the index type which is needed for it to
be created. The formula is one of these and is a text field that allows the user to
specify how the index type should be calculated. Given that a user want to see the
available functions that can be used in the formula, the user is able to open a popup
window (number three) that shows the different functions and conditions that can be
==PAGE:67==
4.3 Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
61
used. Finally there is also the possibility to specify assessments for the index type,
so that its values can be easily understood when used with the parcels in the road
network.
Figure 4.20. Creating an index type
4.3.5
Complete Domain Model of the Information System
From the specified requirements it is possible to layout the entire domain model of the
information system. Figure 4.21 shows the domain model where several concepts have
been reused from the analysis in Chapter 3. The new concepts that are introduced
is based on the requirements and the concepts that have been identified throughout
this chapter. An Index Type is now associated with an Assessment Table being one
of the most important concepts as it is used to give meaning to the values of the
condition indexes of said Index Type. Since different road classes may be evaluated
differently it is necessary for an Index Type to be able to have multiple assessment
tables. The Assessment Table can have multiple Assessments that each specifies a
range that the index should be within and a name to identify its meaning. An Assess-
ment is also associated with a colour that can be used to visually identify its meaning.
The Index Type can also have a Formula that describes the way the index should be
calculated. An example of its use was given when presenting a possible user interface
==PAGE:68==
4.3 Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
62
for defining new index types.
Another concept is that of an Optimisation and relates to redefining the parcels in
a road network. An Optimisation have a Specification that contains the parameters
that the optimisation can be regulated upon. The Optimisation also have a Status
that reflects how far it has come in the optimisation, so that users are able to follow
the progression. Finally the optimisation also have an OptimisationResult, specifying
the difference between the newly defined parcels and the ones used in the optimisation.
The average_length_diff relates to the difference in the average length of a parcel,
and the rating_diff relates to the evaluation method specified in Section 4.2.3, and if
the value is positive for optimisation then this would indicate that the parcels have
been defined in a way that better encapsulates the bad parts of the road network.
Figure 4.21. Application Domain
The last change/addition is that of the OSM domain. Using a crowds-sourced and
open source database for geographical data was one of the non-functional require-
ments of the project. OSM is built from different types of data but the ones being
used in the project are Nodes and Ways. A Way represent a polyline and is defined by
a sequence of nodes where a Node can be seen as a coordinate specified by a longitude
and a latitude. Ways are what makes up the roads in OSM which can also be seen
==PAGE:69==
4.3 Requirement Specification: An Information System Exploiting Parcels
63
on the map present on their oﬀicial website2. To note is that a Way is not what
is defined as a road in the project nor is it a parcel. A Way is geographical data
structure that by itself or in sequence with other ways can geographically represent a
parcel. As can be seen in the domain model is that there is a WayNodeRelation that
connects ways and nodes. The reason this data type is used is to identify the order
in which the nodes are located with respect to the way. This is important as nodes
can be part of multiple ways, so it is not possible for an individual Node to know its
own position in a Way.
The WayCoverage is the entity that links other entities that needs a map reference
to the underlying OSM structure. The WayCoverage is specified by the attributes
From, To and Way. This means that a WayCoverage tells how much an entity covers
a specific Way. If e.g a parcel stretches over multiple ways then the parcel would be
associated with multiple waycoverages with each of these telling how much the parcel
is covering the Way by the attributes From and To.
With the requirements specified and the final domain presented, a realisation of the
information system will in the coming chapter be covered.
2https://www.openstreetmap.org/#map=16/55.9129/12.4544
==PAGE:70==
CHAPTER 5
LiRA PMS: A Realisation
of the Conceptual
Framework
This chapter will cover how the requirements specified in Chapter 4 have been realised.
The result of the realisation is an information system refereed to as LiRA PMS, that
serves as a prototype for how an information system could be developed to support
the conceptual framework together with visualisation features that can assist agencies
in taking more informed maintenance planning decisions.
Initially, an overview of the architecture will be elaborated on, which will then be
followed by an evaluation of the developed artefacts.
5.1
The Architecture of LiRA PMS
The final architecture of LiRA PMS can be seen in Figure 5.1. The architecture have
evolved throughout the project as user stories have been developed resulting in the
addition of new functionality to existing components, or the creation of a new compo-
nent to handle the functionality. From the figure it can be seen that the application is
comprised of two main components, the Frontend and the Backend where the backend
of the application is comprised of microservices. Microservices have been chosen as
they can provide low coupling and high cohesion to the application, as well as main-
tainability and scalability. Each of the microservices presented, with the exception of
the WayProvider, is based on a business concept and contains its own database with
the models related to that area of the business.
The frontend of the application communicates with the backend microservices through
their individual REST APIs in order to serve the needs of the user.
Having the
microservies being directly accessed by the Frontend is also known as the client-to-
microservice communication architecture [17]. This type of microservice architecture
==PAGE:71==
5.1 The Architecture of LiRA PMS
65
can create highly coupled applications and course slow response times as the fron-
tend might have to make multiple requests to different microservices in order to get
what it needs. What is typically the preferred option is to have one or multiple API
gateways that functions as the point of entry to the Backend services. One of the
benefits of the API gateway is that it would allow a single client request to call multi-
ple microservies whose responses would be aggregated to a single client response and
thereby reduce the number of requests the client would have to make. The reason
that direct communication to the microservices are chosen for the application is due
to it being relative small at its current state, and given the additional work it would
require to setup the API gateway without bringing much value to the project is why
this was the chosen solution.
Besides client-to-microservice communication it can be seen in the figure that the
microservies also communicates with each other. This communication also happens
over the REST APIs, which means that each microservice that relies on the function-
ality of another microservice would have to know about said service which can cause
high coupling as the application grows in size. To accommodate this problem actions
could be taken to move towards asynchronous communication which can be achieved
with RabbitMQ1 message queues, if further development of the application were to
take place.
In the following are the Frontend and the Backend components discussed together
with the external services they are communicating with.
Figure 5.1. Component diagram of the final architecture
1https://www.rabbitmq.com/
==PAGE:72==
5.1 The Architecture of LiRA PMS
66
5.1.1
Overview of The Frontend
The frontend component seen in Figure 5.1 are the part of the application that the
user interacts with. The most important part of the Frontend is the map. The map
is responsible for visualising the parcels in a road network as required by the user
story 2. As also mentioned in the non-functional requirements is that the application
should be open-source which led to the use of OSM. This is reflected by having the
map component connected with OSM through its provided interface. In order for
the map to display parcels in a road network, a road network has to be imported as
required by user story 1. To do so a RoadNetwork service has been introduced in the
Frontend that handles the communication with the backend service responsible for
taking requests related to road networks. To reduce the amount of functionality in
the map component a RoadNetworkPanel have been introduced where users are able
to see their road networks and also import new ones. To import a road network, the
RoadNetworkPanel uses the RoadNetwork service to send a request to the backend
with the required details. Having a road network in the Backend it is now possible
for the map component to use the RoadNetwork service to get a road network and
visualise its parcels.
In order for users to be able to apply color-schemas as described in user story 3 and 4,
a FilterPanel is used. The FilterPanel is comprised of two sub components that are
not being visualised on the diagram. These components are Interval-Color-Schema
and Gradient-Color-Schema for respectively user story 3 and 4. These components
contains the UI elements that enables the user to provide the necessary information
in order for the Color service to successfully apply the color-schemas.
Another requirement is that of being able to create index types. A user can do so
through the ConditionIndexPanel, which uses a Condition service to send a request
to the Backend responsible for handling conditions.
The final components in the Frontend are those related to performing optimisations
of the parcels in a road network. In the Frontend there is a OptimisationPanel that
allows users to specify the parameters needed for an optimisation as described in user
story 6. The OptimisationPanel will then use the Optimisation service to send a
request to the Backend that will process the request. The OptimisationPanel is also
used to get an overview of the optimisations performed as required by user story 7.
The map component does also require the interface of the Optimisation service as it
uses it to show the results of an optimisation on the map as needed by user story 8.
5.1.2
Overview of The Backend
The Backend of the application is responsible for storing and processing data as
requested by the users of the application. The Backend consists of four microservices,
==PAGE:73==
5.1 The Architecture of LiRA PMS
67
that in the following will be described and presented with their internal components.
5.1.2.1
Road Network Service
The RoadNetworkService is a microservice that is responsible for handling all requests
related to road networks in the application. It allows the users to import road net-
works and retrieve these as needed. From the requirements it is stated that the road
networks being imported into the system should be provided in the form of an excel-
sheet. This excel-sheet should contain basic information about the parcels in the
road network so that geographical data for said parcel can be retrieved and used to
visualise the parcels.
In order for the RoadNetworkService to transform the information in the excel-sheet
to geographical data, three external services were needed. The first service is The
Central Road and Path List Service2 (CVF). This is a nationwide reference system
that is commonly used by all road authorities in Denmark, where information about
roads and paths can be retrieved. The RoadNetworkService communicates with this
service for each parcel listed in the excel-sheet, and thereby gets geographical data for
the centerlines of the parcels. Centerlines is as described in Section 3.2.1 a result of
the underlying linear reference system that are being used by The Danish Road Direc-
torate. As the purpose of getting the geographical data is to visualise the parcels, the
centerlines have to be projected to the actual roads. This is the purpose of the last
two external services, a MapMatchingService3 and a service to retrieve OSM nodes
and ways called Overpass. The MapMatchingService is used to project the centerline
onto the actual road while the Overpass service is used to get the map references of
the road that the centerline is projected to.
As additional internal microservices are going to use the MapMatchingService and
the Overpass service, an internal processing service have been introduced into the
architecture. This is the WayProvider service, which only purpose is to take a set of
coordinates and transform these into WayCoverage entities which is the link to the un-
derlying OSM structure of nodes and ways as mentioned in Section 4.3.5. Having this
functionality to be its own service, reduces the amount of duplicate code and makes
it more maintainable. Using the WayProvider is also illustrated in Figure 5.1 where
it can be seen that the RoadNetworkService requires the interface of the WayProvider.
Figure 5.2 shows the internal components of the RoadNetworkService. As the service
receives a request which could be to import a new road network, or retrieve an
already imported road network, the request goes into the controller. Given that the
request is not a query the controller will forward the request to the handler which
will orchestrate the use of internal service components to handle the request. An
2http://cvf.vd.dk/cvf/
3http://project-osrm.org/docs/v5.5.1/api/#general-options
==PAGE:74==
5.1 The Architecture of LiRA PMS
68
example could be when there is a request to import a road network. The request
will be forwarded to the handler which will ask the ExcelParser to process the data
from the excel-sheet into parcels. When the handler gets back the parcels they do
not have any map reference so the handler will then ask the CVF service to get the
centerlines of the parcels. When it has gotten the centerlines it can now ask the
WayProvider to get the map references for the parcels, and finally the handler can
use the RoadNetworkRepository to insert the road network with the parcels into the
database of the RoadNetworkService.
Figure 5.2. Roadnetwork service component
5.1.2.2
WayProvider Service
The WayProvider service does not directly stem from a user story but is a product
of having to access the same external services for the same purpose but from differ-
ent microservices. The purpose of the WayProvider is as mentioned to transform
coordinates into WayCoverages which is associated to the underlying OSM structure.
Figure 5.3 shows the internal components of the WayProvider. The service also has a
controller to receive incoming requests and a handler that will coordinate the actions
needed to successfully handle the request. Since the WayProvider does not have its
own database, it is very small with only a few classes.
==PAGE:75==
5.1 The Architecture of LiRA PMS
69
Figure 5.3. WayProvider service component
5.1.2.3
Condition Service
The ConditionService is a microservice responsible for handling road conditions and
condition indexes. The service allows users to create new index types as was shown
when disusing a potential user interface for the system in Figure 4.20, which is to
accommodate user story 7. The service also allows users to retrieve calculated condi-
tion indexes based on the formula specified in the index type, so that users can try
and reflect the state of their road network in different ways by simply updating the
formula of the index type or by creating a new one.
From the initial component diagram it can be seen that the ConditionService is con-
nected to LiRA and have a direct connection to the database. This is because LiRA
is being used to get the ARAN9000 vehicle measurements that are being used as
test data in the thesis for the optimisation. In the future, this connection could be
expanded to retrieve road conditions produced by LiRA which could then be used for
visualisation purposes or the optimisations if a user wanted to. The measurements
that the ConditionService gets from LiRA are being processed into road conditions
which can then be used to calculate a specified index type, but in order to do so, the
processed measurements have to be mapped to the underlying OSM structure which
is why the ConditionService also uses the WayProvider service.
==PAGE:76==
5.1 The Architecture of LiRA PMS
70
Figure 5.4 shows the internal components of the ConditionService. As can be seen
in the figure is that the service is responsible for everything related to conditions.
The reason behind gathering these concepts into a single microservice is due to them
being so closely related and highly dependent on each other. The microservice is
structured like the other services with controllers, handlers, repositories and then
internal services that handles logic that does not fit into domain objects themselves.
Figure 5.4. Condition service component
5.1.2.4
Optimisation Service
The final service is the OptimisationService. This service is responsible for performing
the optimisations of the parcels in a road network, and is thereby a consequence of
user story 8. In order for the service to do so, it uses the ConditionService to get the
condition indexes that is being used when evaluating the state of the pavement and
for knowing how the parcels should be redefined. The internal components of the Op-
timisationService can be seen in Figure 5.5. It can be seen that handler is associated
with a GroupingService, SegregationService, AggregationService and a ParcelTrans-
formationService. These are services that corresponds to the different phases in the
method for redefining parcels as elaborated on in Chapter 4. Besides the latter, the
OptimisationService also have its own database, which can be accessed through the
OptimisationRepository.
==PAGE:77==
5.2 The Interplay Between the Services
71
Figure 5.5. Optimisation service component
The coming section are going to elaborate further on how the components commu-
nicate with each other in order to satisfy the desired functionality specified in the
requirements.
5.2
The Interplay Between the Services
This section is going to present how the components interact with each other in order
to complete the scenarios presented as the acceptance criteria for the user stories.
The sections is not going to cover all of the scenarios but only the most important
two, the Import road network and Perform Optimisation, as these also interacts with
most of the components in the application. To note is that the sequences are taken
from the perspective of a successful scenario and does not include any error handling
Figure 5.6 shows the sequence diagram of theImport road network scenario.
The
scenario starts by the user navigating to the side-view where the user is able to import
a road network. The user then fill in the details needed to create a road network which
is name and description. Having filled in the information needed, the user then selects
the excel-sheet containing the parcels of the road network and then chooses to import
the road network. The Frontend component handles all the interaction with the user,
and forwards the request to import the road network to the RoadNetworkService.
When the RoadNetworkService gets the request, it will take out the file and parse
it using the ExcelParser which were seen as one of the internal components of the
RoadNetworkService in Figure 5.2. The ExcelParser will transform each row of the
excel-sheet into parcels without a map reference. The next step is to take each parcel
and retrieve its centerline using the external CVF service. The centerline that is being
==PAGE:78==
5.2 The Interplay Between the Services
72
returned is in the form of a GeoJSON that contains the individual coordinates of the
centerline. When the centerlines have been retrieved for all of the parcels, a request
to transform these into WayCoverages will take place. The RoadNetworkService will
combine all of the coordinates from the centerlines into a two-dimensional list of
coordinates and send a request to the WayProvider to find the WayCoverages. When
the WayProvider receives the request, it will then take each list of coordinates from
the request and process separately.
For each of the lists of coordinates a request
to the MapMatchingService will be made. The MapMatchingService will return a
list of map-matched coordinates and a list of nodes that stretches over the map-
matched coordinates. Since the WayCoverage entity are associated with Ways, the
WayProvider combines all of the nodes and sends a request to the OverpassService
for all the ways that is associated with any of the nodes. Knowing the map-matched
coordinates, the nodes and the ways, it is now possible to figure out how much in
meters the map-matched coordinates stretches over one or multiple ways. Since this
is now possible, the WayProvider is able to create the WayCoverages for each of the
map-matched coordinates and return back a two-dimensional list of WayCoverages
that the RoadNetworkService can match with the parcels and thereby create a new
road network based on the initial request from the user and the processed parcels
which is then persisted in the database of the RoadNetworkService.
==PAGE:79==
5.2 The Interplay Between the Services
73
Figure 5.6. Sequence diagram of importing a road network
The reason behind letting the WayProvider process all of the coordinates of the parcels
in one request is so that the number of requests that have to be made to external
services is reduced at it can result in slow response times. This is especially the case
with the Overpass service as users of the service is given a cooldown to give other
users a chance to pose a request [18].
The second scenario that will now be presented is the Perform Optimisation. Figure
5.7 shows the sequence diagram of how the components interacts in order to have the
parcels in a road network be optimised. Initially, a user navigates to the side-view
where it is possible to start a new optimisation. The user will then fill out the required
details about the optimisation, these details include, Name, Description, and a Spec-
ification comprised of Granularity, MinLength, MaxLength, Distance and finally an
IndexType. With the details being filled out, and given the user have opened a road
network, the user is now able to start the optimisation. The Frontend will include in
==PAGE:80==
5.2 The Interplay Between the Services
74
the request the RoadNetworkId and the Parcels that are to be optimised. The Fron-
tend will then forward the request to the OptimisationService which will create a new
optimisation and mark its status as In Progress. The service will afterwards store the
optimisation, so users are able to see that it is processing as it might take some time
for the optimisation to finish depending on the size of the road network, Granular-
ity and recursive functions in the formula of the index type. With the optimisation
stored, the OptimisationService will now start a new task that runs in its own thread
allowing the OptimisationService to respond to the user that the optimisations was
successfully started.
The OptimisationService will now being to optimise the parcels in the road network
according to the method described in Chapter 4, beginning with the Grouping Phase
followed by the Segregation Phase and finally the Aggregation Phase.
When the
parcels have been divided into groups according to their location and then further
divided into subgroups that are based on connecting parcels, the OptimisationService
will now process the subgroups of connecting parcels individually. The Optimisation-
Service will begin by sending a request to the ConditionService to have the condition
index calculated for the specified indextype. The will contain all the WayCoverages
that the subgroup is comprised off, together with the IndexType and the Granularity
that the calculations should be based upon. The Condition Service will then take
the request and use the formula specified for the indextype to calculate the condition
indexes over the wayCoverages with the individual condition indexes being the size
of the specified granularity. As the OptimisationService receives the response, it will
begin to segregate the subgroup by calling the SegregationService as was one of the
internal components of the OptimisationService. The result of the segregation will
then be used to aggregate the segments which is performed by the internal Aggrega-
tionService. Finally having found a solution for new parcel definitions, the internal
ParcelTransformationService will be used to redefine the parcels. The last step is
that the results of the optimisation is updated for the optimisation and the user will
now be able to see this in their list of optimisations.
==PAGE:81==
5.3 Problems and Limitations
75
Figure 5.7. Sequence diagram of performing an optimisation
5.3
Problems and Limitations
This section is going to cover some of the problems with the current implementation
of LiRA PMS, and also limitations found during the development of the application.
5.3.1
The Central Road and Path List Service (CVF)
The CVF is as mentioned a nationwide reference system that is commonly used by
all road authorities in Denmark. The system is a key link as it provides the geograph-
ical data in the form of centerlines that is being map-matched and referenced to the
==PAGE:82==
5.3 Problems and Limitations
76
underlying OSM structure.
It was documented in Section ?? that there sometimes might be gabs in between two
parcels after having imported a road network into the application. As the gab in
between two parcels is misleading to the users of the application, further actions were
taken to see if the problem stemmed from the processing of the centerlines retrieved
from the public CVF endpoint4 available, or if the problem stemmed from the data
that came from CVF. After further investigation it was found that the CVF service
sometimes does not provide the same data points when referencing the same mileages.
An example of this can be seen if data is queried for respectively;
Road number: 14
Road Part: 1
Mileage From: 360820
Mileage To: 370088
Road number: 14
Road Part: 0
Mileage From: 370088
Mileage To: 400994
When looking at the mileages between the two parcels, it can be noted that one
should be connected to the other through 370088. When the centerline is queried it
was found that the data gotten did not lineup with each other so that the two parcels
are connected through a single data point, but instead were one of them offset by a
couple of meters resulting in the misalignment.
Having communicated this to the Danish Road Directorate which are behind the CVF
services, it was confirmed that there can be problems such as the described, and this
is something that is being looked at.
5.3.2
An Architectural Mistake
The final implementation of LiRA: PMS suffers from a mistake that has caused the
application to not work as intended. This is not something that have been the case
during the entire thesis, but has come as a consequence of refactoring near the end of
the thesis for trying to achieve more generic and reusable software components. The
problem is that the final implementation of LiRA: PMS does not take into account
that Ways being retrieved from OpenStreetMap through Overpass cannot be assumed
to go in the same direction. This means that when WayCoverages are to be sorted
according to which comes first when e.g a parcel or road condition are to be used in
the different components, then it is no longer possible as the sorting is now based
4https://search.vd.dk/search/sysline
==PAGE:83==
5.4 Evaluation of The Developed Artefacts
77
on false assumptions. The initial architecture did not suffer from this problem as it
ensured that WayCoverages were assigned a sequence number that would indicate its
position along the entity it was associated to. The effects of the mistake has caused
the application to not have all of its features as described in the requirements section,
which has also effected the field tests, as only the features that were introduced before
the refactoring works as expected.
In order to solve this problem it would be necessary to reintroduce the sequence num-
ber into the concept of WayCoverages, but as a lot of functionality is built around the
WayCoverages this would require a bigger refactoring corresponding to a couple of
days but unfortunately due to the late introduction of the problem, the time wasn’t
there to solve it.
In the following the developed artefacts will be evaluated by an end-user from The
Danish Road Directorate. This evaluation covers both LiRA: PMS and the proposed
method for redefining parcels in a road network.
5.4
Evaluation of The Developed Artefacts
This section will cover the evaluation of LiRA: PMS and the proposed method for
redefining the parcels in a road network. Firstly, I will go through the evaluation,
covering the field-testing that has been conducted on LIRA: PMS. Afterwards, the pro-
posed method will be evaluated, the evaluation will be based upon showcased results
produced from the OptimisationService which used measurements from Motorring 3,
furthermore, additional example-scenarios that have been constructed for the purpose
of further testing the method. The reason for the evaluation of the proposed method
not being conducted by LiRA: PMS is due to the problem mentioned in Section 5.3.2.
The field tests have been carried out by making LiRA: PMS available on a public
website where the Danish Road Directorate has been able to test out the features
in the application. This has allowed the Danish Road Directorate to evaluate how
well the developed features satisfy their needs of such an application as well as the
requirements that have been specified. The features that have been made available for
field testing are user-story 1-5. The other user stories from 6-8 have been presented
and explicated but have not been in the hands of the Danish Road Directorate.
I will now go through the implemented user stories chronologically from 1 to 8. When
the end-user, was asked about their thoughts on the importation of a road network
as well as their opinion on the implemented feature, they claimed that they think
it lives up to what is needed since it allows them to quickly import a new road net-
work pulled out of their own system in the form of an excel-sheet. Regarding the
feature’s usability, they commented that it was easy to use and easy to figure out
==PAGE:84==
5.4 Evaluation of The Developed Artefacts
78
quickly without any issues. In regards to opening a road network and visualising its’
parcel’s, there was one comment regarding that they imagined it would be nice to
have a search mechanism, that could allow one to search for a road network as it
would ease the experience of finding a road network when a series of networks have
been imported into the system.
When it comes to visualising the parcels on the map, the end-user stated that it ful-
filled their requirements as it initially provides a clear overview of the road network
without showing the borders of the parcels. However, if they need to see the borders
of the parcels it worked well to simply drag the cursor over the parcel, or just clicking
on the parcel to get it highlighted. The only comment here was that it might be nice
to be able to toggle on a button that will showcase all the borders of the parcels in the
road network so that you would not have to select or highlight them. The end-user
was asked about the ability to view basic information about the parcel when it is
being clicked, the response was that it worked well, but it would be nice if you were
able to drag away the box that displaces the information. Additionally, the end-user
wanted to be able to toggle or select which type of information that will be displayed.
Regarding the colour-schemes, the end-user thought that it was nice to have both the
gradient and interval-based schemas as it allowed them to use the gradient when they
quickly wanted to compare a given parameter of the parcels across the road network
and use the interval-based when more clearly defined borders should be highlighted
of the parcels in the road network. A comment on the usability was that it would be
nice with a standardised schema defined for each parameter that can be used so that
they would not have to provide the settings each time they want to use the features.
Additionally, they thought that it would also be nice to be able to see the colour
scheme that has been applied on the road network. So that when you manoeuvred
the map, you would know what the colours mean, without having to go into the
colour scheme that you applied.
In regard to defining a new index type and defining how the index type should be
calculated, it was stated that it is a really practical feature to have; it brings great
value and allows them to truly experiment with ways that one can represent the state
of a road network. The only comment was that it would be nice to be able to specify
the assessments in another place than where you create the index type, as it would
allow them to just focus one thing at a time.
The end-user was presented with how the optimisations of the road network would be
accessed and how they would be able to create new optimisations. They responded
that it was manageable to figure out due to the user interface resembling how you
see the list of road networks and how you create a new road network. Additionally,
they commented that it would be nice to have separate views for the different states
that an optimisation is in, so not all optimisation is gathered in a single list. No
feature has been implemented to make it possible to visualise the difference between
==PAGE:85==
5.4 Evaluation of The Developed Artefacts
79
the optimised road network and the original road network. Therefore, the end-user
was presented with the idea that you would have a split-screen; one with the original
and one with the optimised parcels, so one could in that way navigate around on each
road network and see the differences. The end-user thought that this was a good idea,
but it would have to be tested in order to validate that it is a good way of showing
the differences.
When it comes to the developed method of redefining the parcels in a road network,
the end-user was presented with a set of results of optimisations that have been ex-
ecuted. The end-user was then asked how the results compared to how the parcels
given the road condition available would have been defined. The end-user said that
if the parcels were only defined based on the conditions, then the results that were
produced by the optimisations would live up to what would be expected.
There
were instances where the end-user commented that it would be nice if a system were
able to give a notification or an indication, where you have individual small pieces of
pavement that is in a severe state so that they could be recommended for repair-work.
After having presented the end-user with a set of scenarios from optimisations per-
formed, the method for redefining the parcels where then explicated to the end-user,
and the end-user were asked what their thoughts on the method are. The end-user
here stated that it does seem like the criteria for what is good parcel definition is
defined in a good way, given that the parcels are only defined based on the condition
and not an economical aspect. Additionally, the end-user stated that to truly know
whether or not the developed method for redefining the parcels, works well in practice
it would have to be tested on a whole road network, and not only example scenarios,
though one of them were based on actual road condition data.
When the end-user was asked if they could see this system being used in practice
and as a part of the capital-preserving maintenance planning processes, the end-user
answered that it would definitely be useful. However, it would be nice to have a
more finished product with additional features that could help to identify the correla-
tions between road conditions and condition indexes, and if the system in some way
could account for some of the economic decisions that have to be made when defining
parcels.
The key takeaway from the evaluation of both LiRA: PMS and the developed method
for redefining parcels is that it looks promising and seems useful, though additional
testing on a more comprehensive dataset would be required to fully conclude whether
or not the proposed method for redefining parcels truly lives up to the criteria for it
to be used in practice.
==PAGE:86==
5.4 Evaluation of The Developed Artefacts
80
5.4.1
The Acceptance Criteria
The acceptance criteria that were written for some of the user stories presented in the
thesis, have been tested manually which is not ideal. It would have been a good idea
to have them being tested through software written tests, as it is also a big part of
working agile. Some tests have been written to test out specific features, but nothing
to an extend such that it can be qualified as validation for an acceptance criteria.
From the evaluation presented and the feedback gotten from the end-user, it is was
found that user story 1-5 were considered implemented correctly with functionality
satisfying the needs of the end-user, while user story 5-10 cannot be fully considered
implemented correctly as the mistake mentioned were introduced before the software
were evaluated.
==PAGE:87==
CHAPTER 6
Evaluation
In this section, the problem statement and the research questions will be revisited, as
the final evaluation before rounding the thesis with a conclusion. Firstly, the problem
statement will be revisited to give a brief explanation of how the problem statement
is explicated to ensure its relevance.
6.1
Problem Statement Revisited
The Danish Road Directorate does not reach the full potential of the capital-preserving
maintenance processes they perform to sustain the capital of the roads in the Danish
national road network. This is due to parcels being defined based on subjective mea-
sures, as well as the parcels not being exploited fully throughout these processes.
The problem statement of the thesis states that there exist multiple processes that are
being executed when measure are taken to sustain the capital of a road network. These
processes have been identified through interviews with The Danish Road Directorate
and put forward in Chapter 3. One of the identified processes also highlights the
fact that parcels are being based on subjective measures since it is a measurement
technicians job to ensure that parcels are defined in the best way. The Challenges
and Opportunities section found in Chapter 3 explicates the problem with parcels
being defined based on subjective measures, and highlight the opportunity of using
objective measures to define parcels.
6.2
Research Questions Revisited
In this section are the research questions presented in Chapter 1 revisited. The section
will outline a brief answer to each research question and redirect to the relevant
chapters that goes into depth answering the questions.
6.2.1
Existing Knowledge
What are the existing capital-preserving maintenance processes, and what concepts,
and data exist in relation to those?
==PAGE:88==
6.2 Research Questions Revisited
82
Commonly used concepts within the practice of capital-preserving maintenance plan-
ning have been identified and described in Chapter 3. For each concept described, a
domain model identifying a concepts properties, relations and how it plays into the
overall domain of the practice have been explicated. The most important concept is
that of parcels. Parcels are partitions of a road network, that have been defined on
similar characteristics such as, a pavements structural composition and the state of
the pavement. Parcels are used to improve the capital-preserving maintenance pro-
cesses by encapsulating where maintenance is needed, which is beneficial to agencies
as they are able to evaluate those partitions and create a strategic plan for when and
how they should be maintained.
To create the strategic plan, agencies have a sequence of capital-preserving mainte-
nance processes that have also been identified in Chapter 3. These processes combined
forms a value chain that outlines the steps needed to end up with an effective plan
for when and how maintenance should be carried out. The steps can be summarised
as, collection of road condition data, identifying parcels in a bad state, do visual
inspections of the identified parcels, perform a cost-effectiveness analysis, review the
suggested maintenance informed by the analysis and finally sent out public tenders.
One of the most important steps is the cost-effectiveness analysis. This process ar-
ranges the parcels that have been identified, so that the they are maintained in an
order that results in sustaining the capital value of the road network in the most
cost-effective way.
The research question has led to a thorough analysis of the concepts and approaches
used within the practice of capital-preserving maintenance planning. It has provided
the project with the general knowledge needed to identify the problem statement, and
the knowledge for how the problem statement could be accommodated.
6.2.2
Challenges and Opportunities
How can those processes improve, and what would be required?
From researching the concepts and the capital-preserving maintenance processes, sev-
eral challenges and opportunities were identified and explicated in Chapter 3 Section
3.4. One of the findings were that there was an opportunity to use objective measures
to define parcels so that the parcels encapsulates where the pavement is in a bad state
more effectively as the parcels would be based on actual road condition data and not
a subjective opinion. Doing so was an opportunity to save money by not maintaining
pavements that does not need to be maintained which will enable agencies to use the
money on other pavements and thereby sustain the capital of the road network more
eﬀiciently. This was also the opportunity that this project set out to accommodate,
==PAGE:89==
6.2 Research Questions Revisited
83
by proposing a method for defining parcels using road condition data.
The research question has led to a general understanding that there is a future in
using road condition data from different sources as it can provide a clearer picture of
state of a road network which will benefit all of the processes identified.
6.2.3
Parcels and Their Properties
What are the properties e.g., uniformity and size, of a parcel that effects the outcome
of the capital-preserving maintenance processes?
Parcels and the way they are used within each capital-preserving maintenance process
is elaborated on throughout Chapter 3 while a more in depth analysis of the properties
of parcels have been presented in Chapter 4. In general are the processes affected by
how well the parcels in the road network have been defined. Having parcels with a
high uniformity of what is estimated to be a bad state and parcels with no occurrences
of the bad state is the ideal definition of the parcels in a road network. Given that a
high uniformity can be achieved with having many short parcels it is also important
to take into consideration the their lengths.
6.2.4
Improving Upon the Definition of Parcels
What kind of data is relevant in order to improve upon the identified properties, and
how should the data be used to do so?
From the previous research question it was identified that the most important prop-
erty of parcels is their uniformity in relation to the state of the pavement. In order to
improve upon this property, data that can accurately reflect the state of the parcels in
a road network is needed. The conceptual analysis in Chapter 4 elaborates on how it
is possible to use road condition data to give an indication about the state of a parcel,
and it proposes a method for how that state could be used to defined the parcels in a
road network. To define parcels in a road network using the state reflected from the
road condition data, the analysis aimed to answer the following two questions;
1. How is it possible to quantify if one definition of parcels is better then another?
2. How is it possible to define parcels so that the parcels in a road network is
improved upon according to the quantification method in (1)?.
From the analysis it was found that a feasible way to determine if one definition of
parcels is better then another was to identify the percentage of the bad state of a
parcel and then calculate the average based on the parcels that have bad states. This
method tells if the pavement in a bad state have been encapsulated in a better way
==PAGE:90==
6.2 Research Questions Revisited
84
such that the parcels have a higher uniformity in relation to the bad state.
With a method for evaluating if one definition of parcels is better then another a
sequence of steps for defining the parcels were proposed. This method focuses on the
pavement in the bad state as these are the parts that can have a bigger impact the on
capital of the road network, as these parts can quickly become in a worse state and
thereby being more expensive to repair. To know if the method produced results that
matches the expectations of how agencies would have defined the parcels, the method
was evaluated by the Danish Road Directorate. The evaluation was done based on
results from the method using actual road condition data recorded on the highways
in Denmark. From the results that were being evaluated it was said that the method
seemed to meet the expectations given the parcels are only being based on the state
of the pavement. Though it could not be said if the method would provide the results
needed when being used on a complete road network.
6.2.5
Exploiting Parcels in an Information System
How should a system be realised to support defining parcels in a more dynamic and
objective way, and also assist its end-users in making strategic decisions when plan-
ning maintenance?
The research question has been accommodated by identifying the requirements of an
information system that can be used in practice to assist agencies in defining parcels
and also in taking more informed decisions when planning maintenance by the means
of visualisation. The requirements of such system is specified in Chapter 4 Section 4.3,
where the architecture and its evaluation is specified in Chapter 5. The information
system developed also known as LiRA: PMS, contains the most essential features that
are needed to define parcels and also visualise the parcels in a road network. These
features were evaluated through field testing by The Danish Road Directorate where
the system was made available on a website such that it could be easily accessed. The
outcome of testing the system was that the idea behind the system and its features
are good and it could be a useful tool when planning maintenance. Given the current
state of the system, further development would be required for it to be used as it
currently suffers from the problem described in Section 5.3.2. Secondly, there would
also be the need to do additional testing on a larger network as mentioned previously
as the proposed method for defiling parcels might produce some unexpected results in
certain situations. Despite the latter, the system does allow for experimentation and
defining parcels automatically using objective measures in the form of road condition
data. It also allows agencies to specify their own way of calculating the state of a
parcel which is very beneficial as pointed out by The Danish Road Directorate.
==PAGE:91==
6.3 Future Work
85
6.3
Future Work
During the thesis potential improvements to the developed artefacts have been dis-
covered, but due to limited time of the project and its scope, further actions have not
been taken to accommodate these findings. The following sections will elaborate on
possible future work and improvements.
6.3.1
Performance Improvements
Given that LiRA: PMS currently uses three external services in order to visualise
parcels, it would greatly improve the performance if some of these service where
being setup locally. For instance it is possible to setup a local instance of the map
matching service, which have also been done in the LiRA Project. This service was
not used in the project as it seemed to reference nodes that were no longer up to date
with the nodes and ways that were retrieved from OSM.
6.3.2
Search Metaheuristic
As described in Chapter 4 the proposed method for defining parcels is rather simple
and requires that manual actions are taken in order to explore different solutions.
Introducing search metaheuristics could greatly improve upon the results of the opti-
misation as it would allow for further exploration of the available search space to find
a solution that comes closer to a global maxima. Additionally, the method for defin-
ing the parcels does not give any penalty for crossing the length boundaries that have
been set by the user. Being able to negatively impact the rating of such a solution
would be valuable as it would allow to more easily recognise better solutions.
6.3.3
Remaining User Stories
The user stories that have been implemented in LiRA: PMS currently only covers the
most essential features that are needed for it to be considered a MVP. The remaining
user stories that are presented in the backlog, accounts for some of the comments
that were made during the evaluation of the developed artefacts. Having these im-
plemented would greatly improve the user experience and make the application more
suitable for being used in practice.
==PAGE:92==
CHAPTER 7
Conclusion
The goal of the project was to propose a way to define parcels more objectively with
the use of road condition data, and develop a system that incorporates this function-
ality, while at the same time provides visualisation features for agencies to take more
informed decisions when planning maintenance. The project initially set out with a
thorough analysis of the practice, outlining the capital-preserving maintenance plan-
ning concepts and approaches used at the time of writing. From the analysis a set of
challenges and opportunities there exist within the practice was identified where also
the problem statement were explicated.
The knowledge gotten from the analysis led to the proposed method for defining
parcels using road condition data, which meets the criteria and expectations of The
Danish Road Directorate based on the tests that were performed. With a method
for defining parcels, an information system was developed that allows users to auto-
matically redefine the parcels in a road network using road condition data. Users are
able to specify the way that the road condition data should be used to calculate a
condition index, that is used to redefine the parcels. The developed system also have
visualisations features for visualising different parameters of parcels and their state.
To allow the system to be tested by end-users a deployment pipeline was setup so new
features could quickly be evaluated and the feedback gotten could be used to further
improve the features.
This project presents the foundation for a way that parcels can be automatically rede-
fined and further accommodate agencies to take more informed maintenance planning
decisions. The project also provides a way to work with road condition data in gen-
eral and not be restricted to a specific type which will allow the system to work with
road condition data not only from ARAN9000 vehicles but also crowed-scoured al-
ternatives as in the LiRA project. Besides the latter the project also provides future
projects with an in-depth analysis of the best practices of capital-preserving mainte-
nance planning together with the challenges and opportunities that is currently being
faced.
==PAGE:93==
Appendices
==PAGE:94==
APPENDIX A
Product Backlog
The backlog continues from the Must have features as presented in Chapter 4.
Should have
Story ID: 11
Story Points: 3
Description: As a user, i want to be able to quickly get an overview of the state
distribution of my road network based on the PCI, so i know how much my road
network is in the different assessment categories which provides clear picture of
the state of the road network.
Story ID: 12
Story Points: 2
Description: As a user, i want to be able to view aggregated values for the condition
indexes related to a parcel as part of its basic information, so that i can easily
get an idea of how the conditions related to the parcel correlates.
Story ID: 13
Story Points: 4
Description: As a user, i want to be able to manually segregate and aggregate
parcels in a road network, so that the parcels can be fine tuned, and defined
using measures not taking into account by the parcel optimisation.
Story ID: 14
Story Points: 2
Description: As a user, i want to be able to extract my road network to an excel-
sheet so that it can be used by other systems and sent to different departments
for review.
Story ID: 15
Story Points: 1
Description: As a user, i want to be able to filter my road networks so that i can
quickly find the road network that i am using.
==PAGE:95==
Appendix A Product Backlog
89
Could have
Story ID: 16
Story Points: 2
Description: As a user, i want to be able to view the number of each type of road
conditions associated to a parcel as part of its basic information, so that i can
quickly estimate if a parcel should be further investigated for maintenance.
Story ID: 17
Story Points: 2
Description: As a user, i want to be able to quickly find specific parcels in road
network by location attributes, in order to quickly navigate to a specific parcel.
Story ID: 18
Story Points: 2
Description: As a user, i want to be able to easily see the colour-schema that have
been applied to my road network, so i know what the colours means.
Story ID: 19
Story Points: 5
Description: As a user, i want to be able to overlay my road network with an
optimisation performed so that i can visually see the differences in the definitions
of the parcels.
Won’t have
Story ID: 20
Story Points: 2
Description: As a user, i want to be able to choose the information that is displayed
when selecting a parcel on the map, so that i can quickly identify the parameters
that are important for me.
Story ID: 21
Story Points: 4
Description: As a user, i want to be able to create a new road network from an
optimisation performed on my initial road network, so that i can still have the
old road network but also work with the new one.
Story ID: 22
Story Points: 5
==PAGE:96==
Appendix A Product Backlog
90
Description: As a user, i want to be able, when choosing a parcel on the map, to
see a graph showing the road conditions and conditions indexes over the course
of the parcel, so that i can see the individual conditions and their correlations
with each other.
==PAGE:97==
APPENDIX B
Acceptance Criteria
Story ID: 3
Scenario: Apply interval-based color-schema
1. Given that there exist a road network in the system.
2. And the road network is being visualised on the map.
3. And the user is on the page where a interval-based color-schema can be
applied.
4. When the user selects the parameter that the color-schema should be based on.
5. And the user enters the intervals.
6. And the user selects the colors of the intervals.
7. And the user choose to apply the color-schema.
8. Then the road network is coloured according to the color-schema.
Story ID: 6
Scenario: Create index type
1. Given the user is on the page where a index type can be created.
2. When the user enters the name, description and formula.
3. And the user fills out assessments.
4. And the user choose to create the index type.
5. Then the index type have been created.
Story ID: 8
Scenario: Perform optimisation of the parcels in a road network
==PAGE:98==
Appendix B Acceptance Criteria
92
1. Given that there exist a road network in the system.
2. And the road network is being visualised on the map.
3. And the user is on the page where an optimisation can be started.
4. When the user enters the name and description of the optimisation.
5. And the user enters the granularity, minimum and maximum length of the
parcels.
6. And the user enters the distance in between the states, the optimisation
should account for.
7. And the user selects the index type.
8. And the user starts the optimisation.
9. Then the optimisation have been started.
10. And the results of the optimisation is stored in the system when finished.
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
[1]
H. Alan, Design Research in information Systems. Springer, 2010.
[2]
H. Rade, Innovative Approaches to Asset Management. The World Road Asso-
ciation, 2019.
[3]
A. Allouch, “RoadSense: Smartphone Application to Estimate Road Conditions
Using Accelerometer and Gyroscope,” IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, 2017.
[4]
LiRA Project. http://lira-project.dk/. Accessed: 2021-02-05.
[5]
M. Berthold, “Live Road Assessment based on modern cars: A prototypical geo-
graphic information system for road maintenance planning,” Technical University
of Denmark, 2020.
[6]
J. D. Bendsen, “LiRA Map: A Cloud-based Geo-information System for Road
Maintenance,” Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[7]
S. Cafiso, “Definition of Homogenous Sections in Road Pavement Measurements,”
SIIV - 5th International Congress - Sustainability of Road Infrastructures, 2012.
[8]
J. S. Miller, “Distress Identification Manual for the Long-Term Pavement Perfor-
mance Program (Fifth Revised Edition),” Oﬀice of Infrastructure Research and
Development, 2014.
[9]
F. H. Administration, ARNOLD Reference Manual. All public roads geospatial
represenation study, 2014.
[10] The Danish Road Directorate. https://www.vejdirektoratet.dk/sektion/om-os1.
Accessed: 2021-02-05.
[11] Vejman. http://www.vejman.dk/DA/om/Sider/Default.aspx.
Accessed: 2021-
02-05.
[12] https://kpi.org/KPI-Basics. Accessed: 2021-06-15.
[13] The
Danish
Road
Directorate.
http://www.erpug.org/media/files/
forelasningar_2019/8-KeyPerfomanceIndicatorsforPavementCondition.
pdf. Accessed: 2021-06-10.
==PAGE:100==
Bibliography
94
[14] M. Crispino, World Conference on Pavement and Asset Management.
CRC
Press/Balema, 2017.
[15] Max,Rehkopf.
https://www.atlassian.com/agile/project-management/user-
stories. Accessed: 2021-03-15.
[16] https://www.altexsoft.com/blog/business/acceptance-criteria-purposes-formats-
and-best-practices/. Accessed: 2021-03-20.
[17] Nish,Anil. https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/architecture/microservices/architect-
microservice-container-applications/direct-client-to-microservice-
communication-versus-the-api-gateway-pattern. Accessed: 2021-04-10.
[18] https://dev.overpass-api.de/overpass-doc/en/preface/commons.html. Accessed:
2021-05-18.
