==PAGE:1==
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
Master’s Thesis
Ashkan Tarlani ­ S190322
DTU Architectural Engineering
Department of Civil Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
Master’s Thesis
Ashkan Tarlani ­ S190322
August, 2021
By
Ashkan Tarlani
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil Engineering, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This 32.5 ECTS thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Design and
Processes, Department of Civil Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, in
partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science (MSc) in Architectural Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statics and structural
engineering in general.
Ashkan Tarlani ­ s190322
Signature
Date
ii
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The following master’s thesis, Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings, investigates and
elaborates the influence of stability on high­rise buildings, depending on their geometrical
shape and structural system, when applying different calculation methods. These meth­
ods consist of analytical and numerical calculation methods, where the latter is performed
by utilising the finite element software Robot Structural Analysis 2022 by Autodesk. Es­
sentially, calculation methods are compared to each other, and their corresponding devi­
ation is elaborated. In addition, calculations are conducted on the basis of three different
case studies developed, containing different structural systems, identical modulus of elas­
ticity and concrete volume for better frame of reference. Case study 1 consists of a core
system, case study 2 consist of a shear wall system, and case study 3 consist of a rigid
frame system. Simplified 30­storey models are establish, consisting of rectangular plan
configurations, 30 meters x 20 meters, and storey heights of 3 meters.
Analysis results of critical buckling loads and maximum horizontal deflections are deter­
mined in the light of the case studies. Subjecting horizontal loads equivalent to 1 kN
m2
across the buildings, deflections are determined as 17 mm for the core system, 158 mm
for the shear wall system, and 82 mm for the rigid frame system. Stability analyses, con­
sidering buckling of the buildings under their own weight, show a critical buckling load of
12852 MN for the core system, 1149 MN for the shear wall system, and 1317 MN for the
rigid frame system. Conclusively, the core system performs best in the horizontal deflec­
tion analyses and buckling analyses, followed by the rigid frame system, and lastly by the
shear wall system.
Furthermore, similar investigations are performed on 60­storey building models with plan
configurations and member dimensions similar to the 30­storey buildings. The purpose is
to elaborate whether the high­rise buildings perform proportionally to their building height,
or if increased building heights result in another case study, with a different structural sys­
tem, being the most suitable system. Horizontal deflection results show 281 mm for the
core building, 2458 mm for the shear wall building, and 458 mm for the rigid frame build­
ing. Additionally, critical buckling loads are determined as 3295 MN for the core building,
293 MN for the shear wall building, and 1145 MN for the rigid frame building. Essentially,
the core system remains the most favorable structural system as a 60­storey building,
followed by the rigid frame system, and lastly the shear wall system. The reason for the
great performance of the core system is among others, due to its great bending stiffness,
and the ability to consider the plan configuration of the core as a beam cross section.
The advantage is especially evident, when comparing to results of the shear wall system.
Lastly, given the stiffness contribution of the rigid frame system is mainly governed by
shear stiffness, its overall stiffness cannot be compared to the significant stiffness of the
core system.
Finally, when comparing results obtained by analytical calculations with FE­results, ac­
ceptable deviations are generally attained. Deviations are mainly in the range of 1%­10
%. However, considering the rigid frame system, while the horizontal deflection deviation
is in the range of 0­1%, the deviation of critical load calculations are in the range of 32%­
46%. The significant deviations are assumed to be due to wrongful disregard of stiffness
contributions in the analytical calculations, or due to FE­modelling errors.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Egil Borchersen, External Associate Professor, Supervisor
Technical University of Denmark
Philip Skov Halding, Assistant Professor, Supervisor
Technical University of Denmark
iv
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Aim
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.4
Method and Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.5
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.6
Disposition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
High­Rise Buildings
3
2.1
Evolution of High­Rise Buildings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Reinforced Concrete Buildings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Loads . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Structural Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Plan Configurations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
2.6
Challenges with Tall Buildings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3
Finite Element Method
23
3.1
Theory of Finite Element Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Capabilities of Finite Element Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3
Reality vs. Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4
Calculation Method
29
4.1
Analytical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Numerical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
5
Case Studies
59
5.1
Assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.2
Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.3
Load Distribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5.4
Preliminary Evaluations of FE­Model’s Validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6
Results
65
6.1
Case Study 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.2
Case Study 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
6.3
Case Study 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
7
Analysis
77
7.1
Comparison of Analytical Analysis Vs. Numerical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . 77
7.2
Theoretical Relation of Case Study Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
7.3
Performance Evaluation of Structural Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
8
Conclusion
87
9
Further Studies
89
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
v
==PAGE:8==
Bibliography
91
A Case Study 1 ­ Core Buildings
94
A.1 Horizontal Deflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
A.2 Critical Load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
B Case Study 2 ­ Shear Wall Buildings
100
B.1 Horizontal Deflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
B.2 Critical Load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
C Case Study 3 ­ Rigid Frame Buildings
106
C.1 Horizontal Deflection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
C.2 Critical Load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
D Drawings
119
D.1 Plan Configurations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
vi
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Concurrently with cities around the world face rising urbanization, taller and taller build­
ings are constructed. These new demands evolve new challenges, which pushes the
boundaries of structural engineering to the limits of its knowledge. To accommodate this
tendency, the structural aspect of tall buildings has never been more relevant, knowing the
importance of stability rises rapidly, when increasing the height of a structure. Accordingly,
motivation for a master’s theses about the topic of structural stability of high­rise buildings
arose.
1.2
Aim
Defining stability as a structure’s ability to withstand loads, without undergoing a sudden
change in configuration, the aim of this master’s thesis is to examine and investigate the
influence of stability on high­rise buildings, depending on their geometrical shape and
structural system, when applying different calculation methods.
1.3
Objectives
Objectives consist of analysing calculation methods used, when conducting assessments
and calculations of high­rise buildings, particularly horizontal deflections and critical buck­
ling loads. Based on case studies of high­rise buildings, analytical calculations consisting
of different structural systems, will essentially be compared to numerical calculations, per­
formed on finite element models to appraise possible variations.
In addition, the impact to a structure’s stability, when extra floors are added, will be inves­
tigated. On the basis of this, the most favorable static system, depending on the number
of floors, will be clarified.
1.4
Method and Theory
A comprehensive research on the topic of high­rise concrete structures has been made,
reviewing subjects as the evolution of high­rise buildings, structural systems and plan
configurations, challenges with tall buildings, and finite element modelling. On the basis
of preliminary research, case studies of high­rise structures with varying geometries will
be designed. Initially, hand calculations of horizontal deflections, and critical­buckling
loads will be conducted, which will be compared to finite element calculations made in
the software program Robot Structural Analysis 2022. Furthermore in this context, an
elaboration of the basic theory of the finite element method will be performed, along with
the theory of linear elasticity, which will be the governing theory used in the following
thesis.
1.5
Limitations
A full­scale structural design of a high­rise building contains numerous subjects for inves­
tigation and verification, and addressing all of these subjects will be beyond the scope of
this master’s thesis. Therefore, no structural elements will be designed, and the influence
of structural dynamics will not be investigated. Furthermore, the effects of shrinkage,
creep and temperature will not be considered.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
1
==PAGE:10==
1.6
Disposition
1 Introduction
Provides motivation and objectives of writing a thesis regarding structural stability of
high­rise buildings, what the aim is, and with what methods and theories the thesis
will be devised
2 High­Rise Buildings
Gives an insight to the evolution of high­rise buildings, and introduces preliminary
design considerations, including acting loads, structural systems and challenges
concerning high­rise buildings
3 Finite Element Method
Elaborates the basic theory of the Finite Element Method
4 Calculation Methods
Introduces analytical design approaches, as well as considerations about numerical
analysis by the use of FEM
5 Case Studies
Describes case studies and models used for analyses, as well as descriptions of
associated assumptions
6 Results
Presents results acquired by analytical and numerical calculations from case studies
7 Analysis
Includes analyses of calculated results, by considering deviations of the two cal­
culation methods, as well as verifying results against standard limitations. Finally,
reflections upon the most ideal static system depending on the geometrical shape
of the models are performed
8 Conclusion
Summarises the essential aspects drawn from the analyses, and concludes the aim
of the thesis
9 Further Studies
Proposes further relevant studies around the topic of structural stability of high­rise
buildings
2
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:11==
2
High­Rise Buildings
2.1
Evolution of High­Rise Buildings
In 1885 the Home Insurance Building located in Chicago was completed. With a height of
42 meters, it is considered the first high­rise building built. Following the construction of
the 381 meters tall Empire State Building completed in 1931, the 442 meters Willis Tower
completed in 1974, and the 828 meters Burj Khalifa in 2009, this process of high­rise
construction is evolving at an even faster speed today.
Figure 2.1: Evolution of High­Rise Buildings, 1885­2009.
However, not only the height of high­rise buildings have changed, but so have the building
materials and governing loads over the years. With technological progression leading
to stronger and lighter building materials, combined with taller and slender geometries,
today the critical loads are governed by lateral loads from wind and earthquakes. On
the contrary, in the beginning of the development of high­rise buildings, designs were
governed by vertical loads caused by the structure’s own weight.
In modern times expressions of high­rise buildings from the 1970s and 1980s have changed
from being a symbol of corporate wealth to rather being an expression of civil or national
pride. Their purpose is to illustrate a certain status of a city or country in the world, which
is seen in countries in Asia and in the Middle East with ultra tall high­rise structures (S.
Taranath, 2017). In the past, boundaries to ideas from developers and architects were
governed by engineering knowledge. On the contrary, today computer software have
changed the limits of creating exciting shapes and forms that would have been impossi­
ble to build before. As a combination of better understanding within structural complexity,
and the implementation of computer software within design processes, the boundaries of
structural engineering have been rapidly reduced, and are more governed by economy,
rather than knowledge within the field. A great example of this is the 1 km tall Jeddah
Tower, which is on hold due to economical and labor issues.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2
Reinforced Concrete Buildings
2.2.1
Properties
Compression strength is the main property of interest, when using concrete for structures.
Normal concrete strength vary from 15 ­ 50 MPa, and is determined depending on usage,
environmental class and lifespan. For structures with extensive forces, high strength con­
crete with strength from 55 ­ 90 MPa, or even higher, may be used in exceptional cases.
However, it should be noted the higher the compression strength of concrete, the more
brittle is the material. The general relation between the compression strength of a con­
crete cylinder subjected to uniaxial compression, and the associated strain is illustrated
on Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Stress­Strain Curve for Concrete in Uniaxial Compression.
Source: Betonkonstruktioner efter DS/EN 1992­1­1
Generally, concrete structures subjected to compression are pushed by forces, which may
lead to crushing of the material. This typically happens to short structural members, or
at surfaces of beams and columns. Failures are often shown as local splitting or cracks.
In opposite, when tall and slender concrete members are subjected to compression, they
may fail suddenly due to buckling or bending. This type of sudden failure, given concrete
is a brittle material, is to be avoided in structural design (S. Taranath, 2010). Compared
to its compression strength, concrete has a very low tensile strength. With only 5­10%
strength of its compression strength, combined with the sudden collapse following fail­
ures of pure concrete members subjected to tension, the tensile strength is not reliable,
and is often neglected in designs (Nielsen & Hoang, 2011). To accommodate poor tensile
properties, longitudinal reinforcement is applied in concrete members to obtain tensile
forces. By doing so, sudden failure mechanisms are avoided, and the strength of the
reinforced concrete member is significantly increased. Additionally, reinforcement allow
longer spans and smaller cross­sections. Also, stirrups are added to avoid shear cracks,
as they obtain shear forces that are transferred across these cracks and may cause shear
failures.
By adding reinforcement to concrete members, their ductility is significantly increased, and
the danger of sudden failures due to the brittle concrete is greatly reduced. Furthermore,
ductility also enables resistance in the inelastic domain of response for the reinforced con­
crete members, which is vital for structures subjected to dynamic loading, e.g. wind load
or seismic loads from earthquakes. This characteristic of sustaining a major proportion of
the strength, when subjected to dynamic motions, is the single most important ability for
4
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:13==
high­rise structures in seismic zones, and structures subjected to heavy wind motions (S.
Taranath, 2010).
2.2.2
In­situ vs. Precast
A various of advantages exist by using in­situ concrete over precast and opposite. The
following subsection presents a number of advantages of the two types of concrete pro­
ductions.
A great advantage of in­situ concrete is its continuity and allowance of better detailing,
whereas precast concrete possess a large number of structural joints, resulting in poor
detailing, poor continuity, as well as poor ductility compared to in­situ concrete. Particu­
larly in high­rise structures, these are properties of interest, as mentioned in the previous
subsection 2.2.1 Properties. Furthermore, precast concrete requires heavy machinery
and cranes on site, which often is a limitation, particularly in high­rise construction, as
lifting and installation of elements in heights are difficult. Though, in­situ concrete does
not necessarily require cranes, and can be cast easily in any altitudes.
However, given precast concrete is manufactured in a factory, without the influence of
weather conditions, the casting and curing conditions allow greater quality in terms of
durability and reliability. Additionally, exact measurements can be conducted throughout
the process. Precast concrete also requires less number of labor, as in­situ concrete re­
quires labor for pouring, mixing and shuttering all on site. This essentially increase costs,
whereas all of these processes are maximised in factories, by the use of machinery and
tools. Precast concrete also requires less time for on site construction, as elements are
delivered ready for use, without the necessity of waiting for it to gain strength. In addition,
as elements can be directly lifted and installed at delivery, result to greatly decreased
construction time. Lastly, given factories use standard forms for precast concrete manu­
facturing, elements can easily be mass­produced. In large scale construction, as high­rise
structures with a significant number of similar types of elements, this is typically a very
economical advantage.
2.3
Loads
Depending on country and geographical location, where a building is to be constructed,
associated standards of design loads are valid for use. These include universal loads,
such as dead load and live load. Additionally, natural loads such as wind load, soil load,
and seismic load are to be considered in structural designs. Additional natural loads are
to be considered in specific regions and environments. For instance, these may be loads
from snow, rain, ice, water etc. Lastly, accidental loads from fire, explosions, vehicle
impact etc. may be considered in designs.
In the following chapter, typical loads for acting loads in structures located in Denmark are
described.
2.3.1
Dead Load
Dead loads are defined as vertical loads caused by the structure’s own weight, including
all building components. Dead load can divided into two subcategories: 1) Permanent
dead load, and 2) Variable dead load. Permanent dead load is caused by the weight of
load bearing structural members in the building, whereas variable dead loads cover loads
from non­load bearing components, cladding, insulation, flooring etc.
At initial stages of a building’s structural design, dead loads have to be estimated as
accurately as possible. Although it may be difficult to predict accurate values of the dead
load, before the structure is completed, experience from previous designs, weight tables
or available data, may be usable to make qualified estimates. Tables from DS/ EN 1991­
1­1 Actions on Structures may be convenient for use.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
5
==PAGE:14==
2.3.2
Live Load
Live load is classified as a variable load, which is determined depending on occupancy.
Values of live load are based on peoples’ presence, furniture and movable objects, ve­
hicles and anticipation of rare events, e.g. concentrations of people or objects during
moving, reorganisation or redecoration.
Live loads are specified as uniformly distributed loads, line loads, concentrated loads, or
a combination of these. Furthermore, when determining live loads, floor and roof areas
should be categorised in accordance to their use, e.g. residential, office, shopping etc.
Live loads may be determined in accordance to DS/ EN 1991­1­1 Actions on Structures.
2.3.3
Snow Load
Snow load is to be considered on roofs and other areas that may gather snow, e.g. bal­
conies, elevated courtyards etc. Snow load is determined based on geographic location,
characteristic value of the snow load in a given region, roof slope, exposure of the build­
ing, and thermal properties of the building surface. On the basis of these parameters, a
flat load for design is calculated.
However, it should be mentioned that roof failure usually occurs due to localised wind
drifting of snow, rather than as a result of a uniform load. Therefore, if possible, snow
should be led away to avoid accumulation of snow to prevent drifting snow failures.
2.3.4
Wind Loads
Unless any large openings on the building, forces due to wind load act on the exterior
surface. These forces are determined on the basis of height, wind velocity, air density,
and local ground surface roughness. Wind loads act inward as pressure on the windward
side of the building, and as suction on most other sides of the building, including leeward
sides and the roof, see Figure 2.3.
Figure 2.3: Wind Pressure Distribution.
Source: Reinforced Concrete Design of Tall Buildings
6
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:15==
As a result of air turbulence around leeward corners and edges, vortices, which are high­
velocity air currents, may be developed. These vortices generate circular updrafts and
suction streams on the building. To accommodate this, the building is designed to resist
the sum of horizontal forces and uplift forces, and the individual sections to resist inward
and outward pressure concentrations. To allow a continuous load path, these sections
must be strongly connected to supporting structural members (S. Taranath, 2010).
The terms along­wind motion and across­wind motion are used to define the direction of
the wind load acting on the building surface. Along­wind motion is used, when the building
sways at the time when the direction of the wind is parallel to the building. Additionally,
across­wind motion is used, when the building sways at the time, when the direction of the
wind load is perpendicular to the surface of the building. The phenomenon is illustrated
on Figure 2.4. Wind induced building motion can be divided into in three groups. 1)
Along­wind motion, 2) Across­wind motion, 3) Torsional motion.
Figure 2.4: Tall Building Motions.
Source: Reinforced Concrete Design of Tall Buildings
The latter of the three groups of motion occurs, when the building is asymmetrical, the
structural system is asymmetrical or if the building is loaded asymmetrically.
The resultant of the wind load is located at the geometrical center of the building surface,
when acting perpendicularly to the surface, whereas the reaction of the load is located at
the stiffness center of the building, also known as the shear center. When these two lo­
cations do not have identical coordinates, the resulting eccentricity will induce a torsional
moment about the vertical axis.
Ordinarily, across­wind motion and torsional moments are most critical in high­rise build­
ings, than along­wind motion. However, due to the complexity of determining building
responses, when affected by across­wind motion and torsional moment, most building
codes only suggests procedures for determining along­wind loads (H. Günel & E. Ilgin,
2014). Consequently, for high­rise buildings it is recommended to analyse the building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
7
==PAGE:16==
response due to along­wind motion, across­wind motion and torsional motion by dynamic
calculation methods or wind­tunnel tests. This is due to the fact that for tall and slender
structures, the static calculation of wind loads is insufficient, causing the necessity of con­
sidering the wind as a dynamic load. Further description of dynamic loading is given in
subsection 2.6.1 Structural Dynamics.
Furthermore, as modern high­rise buildings are built taller than elderly tall structures, with
lightweight curtain walls, dry partitions and high­strength materials, they are more ex­
posed to wind­motion problems. Elderly structures have the weight advantage of heavy
masonry walls, stone facades and massive structural members, which made the vertical
load much more critical than wind loads. This often made engineers neglect the influence
of wind loads. However, in modern days it can be stated that a combination of technologi­
cal progression, within structural innovation and lightweight construction, has reduced the
stiffness, mass, and damping properties of modern structures. As a result of the increase
in the height to weight ratio, the influence of horizontal loads, including wind loads, are
therefore of significant importance today (S. Taranath, 2010).
2.3.5
Seismic Loads
Earthquakes are natural catastrophic events, which mostly occur at the boundaries of
tectonic plates. When movements in these regions occur, waves are generated at the
surface of the earth, resulting in large and destructive seismic loads. As these seismic
loads act on the mass of a structure, this procedure develops horizontal accelerations,
essentially generating seismic loads, that causes the building foundation to vibrate back
and forth in almost a horizontal plan.
The procedure for structural design against seismic loads varies depending on country to
country. In most European countries, including Denmark, the seismic design load is 1,5%
of the summarised vertical dead­ and live load acting on each floor. This load is applied
horizontally on the respective floor, according to DS/EN 1991­1­1 Actions on Structures.
Other standards, e.g. US standards, the procedure is similar, however the forces applied
to the floors are not only determined based on the mass of each floor, but also the height
of the mass above ground (S. Taranath, 2010). In multi­storey buildings, this means
that horizontal forces are applied to each floor line, and each being greater than the floor
below. An illustration is given on Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: Seismic Load Distribution and Sway.
Source: Tall Building Design
Buildings designed to resist seismic actions must have well designed joints and detail
members, to ensure their ability to sustain large horizontal deformations, without losing
its vertical load carrying capacity.
8
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:17==
2.4
Structural Systems
As previously stated, the influence of horizontal loads on structures have become of signif­
icant importance in recent times, where three to four decades ago, the structural system
in high­rise buildings would consist of either one or two systems. These were typically
buildings consisting of either shear wall systems or rigid frame systems. And given the
rapid formation of taller and slender buildings, the structural system of a building has to
restrain its lateral integrity in a greater extent than before. A notable person within the in­
novation of structural systems was the engineer Fazlur Khan (S. Taranath, 2017). Among
systems that Khan innovated was the bundled tube system, that is the structural system
used for Burj Khalifa.
Figure 2.6 illustrates a general estimate on today’s more commonly used structural sys­
tems, and their associate connection to number of floors (S. Taranath, 2010). The sys­
tems are ideal for reinforced concrete buildings, though, some systems are also frequently
used for steel structures and composite systems.
Figure 2.6: Structural System Categories.
Source: Reinforced Concrete Design of Tall Buildings
In the following sections a various of structural systems and combinations will be pre­
sented. However, numerous of more systems and combinations exist that will not be
reviewed. These may include outrigger belt systems, flat slab systems, braced systems,
as illustrated on Figure 2.7.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
9
==PAGE:18==
(a) Flat Slab and Columns
(b) Exterior Diagonal Bracing
(c) Outrigger Belt System
Figure 2.7: Examples of Different Structural Systems
Source: Reinforced Concrete Design of Tall Buildings
2.4.1
Rigid Frame Systems
Rigid frame systems are used for both steel­ and reinforced concrete structures, and
are characterized by flexure of beams and columns, and rigid joints. Structures often
consist of parallel or orthogonally placed columns and girders with moment rigid joints.
The simplicity and convenience of its rectangular form is often one of the great advantages
of the system. Eliminating the necessity of structural walls, enables freedom internally
for the layout of the plan configuration. Rigid frame systems are suited for buildings up
10
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:19==
to 25 storeys, when provided closely spaced columns and deep girders at the building
periphery (S. Taranath, 2010). Structures exceeding 25 storeys do often have difficulties
with lateral inter­storey drift resistance, known as the displacement with respect to the
other storeys. When exceeding 25 storeys, the drift resistance will often become costly
to control. However, is the rigid frame system combined with shear walls, the resulting
stiffness of the building will be greatly increased, allowing the number of storeys to exceed
more than 50 storeys.
There are two causes of lateral drift in rigid frame buildings. The first is bending, consisting
of global bending of the whole structure, also known as cantilever bending, and local
bending, consisting of bending of the local columns, with the beams purely acting as
connecting members with pinned supports. Bending deformation makes up approximately
20% of the total lateral drift. The second cause is deformations due to bending of the
beams and columns, called shear deformations, which consist of approximately 80% of
the total lateral drift. Approximately 65% of the shear deformations are due to bending of
the beams, and 15% due to bending of the columns (H. Günel & E. Ilgin, 2014). Figure
2.8 illustrates deformations due to shear, global bending and local bending, respectively.
Figure 2.8: Characteristic Sub­Deformations and Actual Deformation.
Source: Structural Analysis of Multi­Storey Buildings
When considering structural members, the horizontal stiffness of the system is mainly
governed by bending resistance of the columns, girders, their rigid connections and the
axial rigidity of the columns. The total horizontal shear on each story of a rigid frame is
mainly resisted by shear in the columns of that storey, and to a smaller degree also by
the beams of that storey. As a result of horizontal shear, the columns are bend in double
curvature between two nodal points, with points of contraflexure at approximately mid­
span height, see Figure 2.8. The girders are likewise bend in double curvature, as the
moments applied to connection details from the columns above and below a given storey,
are resisted by the attached girders.
In global bending, the structure as a whole unit is deforming, and bending of the unit
occurs by axial deformation, lengthening and shortening, of the full height columns. Local
bending is associated with the full height bending of the individual columns of the frame.
Here, the girders only function as connected members with pinned joints between the
columns. Finally, the corresponding stiffnesses are shear stiffness, global stiffness and
local stiffness.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
11
==PAGE:20==
2.4.2
Shear Wall Systems
Shear wall systems are used for reinforced concrete buildings up to 35 storeys (H. Günel
& E. Ilgin, 2014). They can be considered as vertical rigidly fixed cantilevers, and resist
horizontal and vertical loads without the necessity of columns. With lateral inter­storey
drift between adjacent floors being larger at the top floors, than at the lower floors, height
limitations are governed by difficulties controlling lateral displacements at the top floors of
the building.
Figure 2.9: Shear Wall Systems.
Source: Tall Buildings: Structural Systems and Aerodynamic Form
To increase stiffness, and essentially horizontal resistance, coupled shear walls provide
stiffness that far exceeds the summation of the individual wall stiffnesses. This is valid,
given the interconnecting slabs or beams restrain the cantilever bending of individual
walls, by making the system work as a composite unit, rather than individual units (H.
Günel & E. Ilgin, 2014).
Given shear walls obtain loads in their plan, walls in two orthogonal directions are nec­
essary to resist horizontal loads from two directions. In addition, particularly for individual
shear walls and coupled shear walls, the location of walls are of great importance to re­
strain influence by torsion. Further description of plan configurations are made in section
2.5 Plan Configuration.
12
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.10: Coupled Shear Walls.
Source: Reinforced Concrete Design of Tall Buildings
2.4.3
Core Systems
Core systems are well­suited for reinforced concrete structures. The system consists of
shear walls placed around building services, such as elevators and stair cores, and are
resisting vertical and horizontal loads as a spatial system, capable of obtaining horizontal
loads from both directions.
Figure 2.11: Core System.
Source: Tall Buildings: Structural Systems and Aerodynamic Form
A great advantage of the core system is its ability to provide great horizontal and torsional
stiffness to a building. Being a hollow, three dimensional system, the building is capable
of resisting bending moments and shear forces from two directions. This is possible,
given the system simply consist of connected shear walls, making up a three dimensional
system being the core system. Additionally, a core is capable of providing considerable
torsional resistance itself, which often constitute a significant part of the overall torsional
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
13
==PAGE:22==
resistance of the building (Zalka, 2020). The shape of a core is often governed by stair­
and elevator requirements, and is typically a single rectangular core, but can vary to up to
multiple cores, which essentially only increases the stiffness of the system. Additionally,
the torsional stiffness can be strengthened even further, by adding beams and slabs above
the open part of the core.
Furthermore, slabs in core system buildings are cantilevered and supported by the core
shear walls independently, or may additionally be supported by discontinuous perimeter
columns, see Figure 2.12.
(a) Cantilever Slabs
(b) Strengthened Cantilever Slabs
Figure 2.12: Core Systems with Different Slab Supports.
Source: Tall Buildings: Structural Systems and Aerodynamic Form
The bending rigidity of the core is limited due to the flexural depth. Thus, the core system
provides sufficient stiffness to resist lateral loads simply and economically for high­rise
structures up to 20 storeys (H. Günel & E. Ilgin, 2014).
For structures located in areas with great horizontal loads, e.g seismic zones, and or
taller than 20 storeys, mega core systems are suitable. These systems are similar to core
systems, but are made with much thicker core shear walls, which provide resistance for
high­rise structures with more than 40 storeys. An example of a mega core system is the
54 storey 190 meters tall Turning Torso located in Malmö, illustrated on Figure 2.13.
14
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.13: Turning Torso, Malmö.
Source: Tall Buildings: Structural Systems and Aerodynamic Form
2.4.4
Tube Systems
The tube system is evolved from the rigid frame system, and is defined by structures
with closely spaced columns along the perimeter, 4­6 meters, that are connected by deep
girders, 1­1.5 meters. The closely spaced columns essentially make up a hollow, three di­
mensional rigid frame. A building consisting of a tube system can be considered a hollow
cantilever beam from the ground, where the building exterior exhibits a tubular behavior
against horizontal loads.
Limitations of the tube system are governed by horizontal drift, due to axial displacement
of columns, and web drift as a result of shear and bending deformations in girders and
columns. The primary disadvantage of the system is its great tendency to suffer from
shear lag (S. Taranath, 2010). When subjected to horizontal loads, columns on the oppo­
site side of the neutral axis of the building are in tension and compression. As a result of
shear lag, the stress distribution in the columns will be uneven. Dimensions and spacing
of columns, along with the flexual stiffness of girders, influence the significance of shear
lag. The phenomenon occurs, since framed tube systems cannot fully behave as tubu­
lar cantilever systems, due to lack of sufficient flexibility of the girders, which will slightly
deform due to bending, when transferring shear forces to columns. Therefore, in reality,
the behavior of a tube system is a combination of the behavior of a vertical cantilever and
a frame. Consequently, due to limited flexural stiffness of the girders, they will deform
due to bending, resulting in axial stresses in the corner perimeter columns being greater,
than the inner perimeter columns. Finally, axial compression and tension stresses in the
perimeter columns, due to horizontal loads, cannot be linear. Simplified, it can be de­
fined as a phenomenon introduced due to discontinuity in a stress field, as a result of
connections. This phenomenon is illustrated on Figure 2.14 and 2.15.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.14: Distribution of Stresses due to Shear Lag in a Tube System.
Source: Tall Buildings: Structural Systems and Aerodynamic Form
Closely spaced columns in the perimeter, 1.5­4.5 meters, and utilising deeper girders min­
imise the phenomenon of shear lag. Additional solutions that provide increased structural
integrity is attained by adding shear walls to the core, making a tube­in­tube system, or
combining more than one tube, bundled tubes, as presented in the subsection below.
Tube systems are very efficient for buildings taller than 40 storeys to about 70 storeys (S.
Taranath, 2010).
16
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.15: Shear Lag in a Framed Tube.
Source: Reinforced Concrete Design of Tall Buildings
2.4.5
Bundled Tube Systems
A final example of a structural system is the bundled tube system, which is a combination
of several tubes acting together as one unit system. The main achievement is decreased
shear lag effects, and is obtained by distributing horizontal forces to the interconnected in­
dividual tubes. The frames in the horizontal load direction will carry shear forces, whereas
the perpendicular flange frames will carry the majority of the overturning moment forces.
Consequently, stresses in the columns are more evenly distributed, essentially increasing
their contribution to the lateral stiffness.
Furthermore, the interconnection of the individual tubes enables the architectural pos­
sibility of having various heights for the single tubes. This is due to the fact that the
slenderness and flexural stiffness of the structure is controlled by having great building
cross section dimensions at the base (S. Taranath, 2010). This allows the possibility of
reducing the cross sectional dimensions throughout the height of the structure, which has
been taken advantage of in the designs of Burj Khalifa and Willis Tower, see Figure 2.16.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
17
==PAGE:26==
(a) Burj Khalifa, Dubai
(b) Burj Khalifa, Cross Section
(c) Willis Tower, Chicago
(d) Willis Tower, Cross Section
Figure 2.16: Examples of Buildings with Bundled Tube Systems.
Sources: Reinforced Concrete Design of Tall Buildings and Tall Buildings: Structural Sys­
tems and Aerodynamic Form
18
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:27==
2.5
Plan Configurations
In preliminary design processes, the importance of considerations regarding plan con­
figurations is significant. Optimal configurations ensure buildings’ performances against
vertical loads and lateral loads, caused by seismic loads and wind loads.
Among the desired characteristics of an optimal configuration is having a continuous load
path. This allows a uniform loading, and prevents stress concentrations in single struc­
tural members. Additionally, a symmetrical plan eliminates eccentricities, and essentially
the possibility of developing torsional moments. If the building contains shear walls, the
most ideal torsional resistance is also achieved by locating as many along the periphery
of the building. To further minimize stress concentrations, it is desirable to have equal
floor heights, and having identical vertical resistance of structural members. These char­
acteristics will equalize wall or column stiffness and strengths, and thereby prevent stress
concentrations. Avoiding openings in floor diaphragms will additionally minimize discon­
tinuity of horizontal forces to the receiving lateral structural system.
Lastly, if the building contains load bearing walls, locate as much gravity load to the foun­
dations via these walls. This will reduce uplift forces in the foundations, while also lowering
the demand for flexural reinforcement in those walls.
2.6
Challenges with Tall Buildings
2.6.1
Structural Dynamics
Loads that rapidly or suddenly change in value are considered dynamic loads. These may
be vertical or horizontal loads. Example of vertical dynamic loads could be loading from
pedestrians on bridges, or sport spectators jumping on tribunes at stadiums. In terms of
horizontal loads, it is often the effects of wind or earthquake loads that are considered. In
the following, the influence of horizontal dynamic loading will be described.
The effects of dynamic loading depend on how fast the load varies. In high­rise structures,
the oscillations may not be great enough to observe or sense. However, given all structural
members can never be totally rigid, all structures sway due to horizontal loads. The time
it takes a structure to complete a full oscillation is called its period. The significance of
the gust depends on the period of the building, as well as the time it takes for the gust
to reach its maximum value and decrease again. A load is considered dynamic if the
gust reaches its maximum value and vanishes in a time shorter than the period of the
building. In opposite, the load is static, if the gust reaches its maximum value and vanishes
in a time larger than the period of the building. Generally, it can be said that a force
the building can slowly obtain is static, whereas the load is dynamic if it is unexpected.
Among the most dangerous phenomenons a structure, especially a high­rise structure,
may be subjected to is resonance (S. Taranath, 2010). This phenomenon occurs when a
structure is rhythmically imposed to a load that has the same period as the structure. The
force is here said to be in resonance with the structure. Resonance forces do not develop
significant effects immediately, but developed steadily with time, they can be catastrophic
and result in collapse of the structure due to severe oscillations. A measure to restrain
resonance in structures is to install shock mounts to absorb resonant frequencies, and
thereby dissipate the absorbed energy.
Even though horizontal loads such as wind load and seismic load are time varying loads
that differ in value as a function of time, and thereby considered dynamic loads, they
are often not treated likewise. They are replaced by an equivalent load representing the
maximum value of the loads, and applied to the structure as a static load (S. Taranath,
2017). This is particularly the case for low­rise stiff buildings. However, for tall and slender
structures with a low stiffness, resonant frequencies become low, and the influence of
dynamic loading is often of great importance, which has to be analysed.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
19
==PAGE:28==
2.6.2
Progressive Collapse
Explosive loading incidents happen and must be addressed. Besides the consequential
immediate and localised damages following these incidents, the possibility of progressive
collapse must be considered. Progressive collapse occurs in structures when the loading
pattern or boundary conditions in structural members change, and the consequential in­
crease in loading exceed their bearing capacity resulting in failure. The residual structure
will seek to redistribute the load applied by alternative paths. As a result, the bearing
capacity of other structural member may fail, causing to further load distribution.
This process will proceed until the structure find equilibrium, either by finding stable alter­
native load paths or by reduction in loading as a result of the failures of other members.
It is estimated that at least 15%­ 20% of the total number of building failures are due to
progressive collapse (Krauthammer, 2008). Thus, progressive collapse is a design con­
sideration that must be performed, particularly in high­rise buildings. Especially in modern
building designs, where technology has enabled the possibility of building lighter and more
optimised structural systems, with considerably reduced over­design characteristics as in
structures in the past (Krauthammer, 2008).
Essentially, progressive collapse is a failure sequence that relates local damage to large
scale collapse in structures. This occurs as a result of loss in load bearing capacity of one
or several structural members in the building’s structural system. Following redistribution
of forces, structural members will attain different loads, and if any of the loads exceed the
bearing capacity of the structural members, it will cause another local failure. If the num­
ber of failed structural members is too significant, the structure will experience excessive
partial or total damage. An example of a progressive collapse incident is the Ronan Point
apartment building in 1968, when a gas explosion on the 18th storey resulted in extensive
damage to the entire corner of the 22­storey building.
Figure 2.17: Damage at Ronan Point Apartment Building, London, 1968.
Source: Modern Protective Structures
20
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:29==
The gas explosion that occurred in the Ronan Point apartment building is categorised
among accidental loads or abnormal loads. Among other things, these loads are often
caused by gas explosions, vehicle collisions, but also bombs from possible terror attacks.
The possibility of an event of abnormal loading in a building is increased with the building
size. Particularly, high­rise buildings tend to be at higher risk for gas explosions or bomb
explosions. Studies have shown, that hazards due to gas explosions exceed hazards due
to vehicle collisions in buildings taller than five storeys (Krauthammer, 2008).
Several considerations may be performed to mitigate the risk of progressive collapse. In
terms of materials, certain types are more prone to progressive collapse, due to poor
ductility properties or weak connection details. In­situ concrete contains better detailing
properties, and is generally said to provide better performance against progressive col­
lapse than prefabricated concrete. In addition, a various of different approaches exist
to increase robustness of a structure. Typically few recur, including implementation of
continuous reinforcement. The purpose is to form a building that is tied together mechan­
ically to enhance continuity, ductility and allowing the possibility of redistribution of forces
in case of member failure. These ties are placed horizontally as well as vertically in the
building, and is shown as an example on Figure 2.18 in accordance to standards of the
US Department of Defense (Krauthammer, 2008).
Figure 2.18: Tie Forces According to DoF, 2005.
Source: Modern Protective Structures
Among other approaches are designing structural members statically indeterminate as of­
ten as possible, enabling alternative load patterns to redistribute forces, in case of change
in boundary conditions or loading. Additionally, key elements located in high­risk regions
may be provided with sufficient strength to resist abnormal loads, in order for the structure
to develop alternative load paths. Finally, approaches such as change in the direction of
span floor slabs, short spans of members, ductile detailing, and walls rather than columns,
are among possibilities to ensure redundancy and thereby also robustness.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
21
==PAGE:30==
2.6.3
Evacuation
With an increasing number of tall buildings around the world follows a major concern
for building owners and occupants; evacuation. Providing safety and sufficient evacua­
tion time during an emergency is accompanied with much greater difficulties in high­rise
buildings for occupants. Heat, toxic smoke and gasses can spread rapidly from the com­
partment of fire origin to different locations of a building. Consequently, the time provided
for occupants to get to safety is of most importance. Whether it being safety in the form
of a refuge area inside the building, or an open space outside. The aim is to ensure that
the available evacuation time exceeds the required evacuation time for occupants to get
to safety. The available evacuation time is defined as the time duration from fire igni­
tion to the arrival of the critical smoke conditions in the evacuation routes that prevent
evacuation. In addition, the required evacuation time is defined as the time duration from
fire ignition to the time required for all occupants being evacuated. This condition can be
satisfied by the use of various fire protection measurements, including automatic smoke
alarms, live voice communication as well as occupants evacuation training and planning
(Yung, 2008).
However, these fire protection measurements cannot stand alone. As an example, Fig­
ure 2.19 illustrates the reliability of fire alarms based on experience in the United States.
With a variation of reliability as low as 58%, multiple measurements must be present,
particularly in high­rise buildings, to ensure great safety (Yung, 2008).
Figure 2.19: Reliability of Fire Alarms in the United States based on Experience.
Source: Principles of Fire Risk Assessment in Buildings
Particularly in high­rise buildings, regular evacuation planning and training are important.
Controlled selective evacuation of certain storeys is desirable, rather than uncontrolled to­
tal evacuation of the building, as these scenarios generate congestion in the stairs, which
essentially slows down the evacuation. However, among the most efficient methods of
evacuation in high­rise buildings at specific locations, particularly for disabled occupants,
is the usage of refuge areas and safe elevators. Refuge areas are areas designed and
perceived to be safe from smoke and fire spread. Occupants can seek temporally safety
until safe to leave, or arrival of rescue. Areas often considered as refuge areas are those
that are part of the elevator lobby or part of the landing in the stairwell.
Safe elevators are special elevators designed to be safe against fire, smoke and water,
and are equipped with fail­safe power. They are operated manually by firefighters, so
they can control where they should stop, and who can get in. However, refuge areas and
safe elevators are not very common, despite their great increase in safety, since they are
very expensive solutions.
22
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:31==
3
Finite Element Method
In modern time many structural designs are performed by computer programs. These pro­
grams have efficiently allowed possibilities of creating structures with complex geometries
and designs in a much greater time. These programs utilise the Finite Element Method
(FEM) to make finite element analysis (FEA) of structural members, e.g. investigating
stresses, strains, vibrations etc.
The purpose of the following chapter is to briefly introduce basic principles of the Finite
Element Method, and to outline capabilities of programs using FEM in structural designs.
The description of the FEA process, along with analysis considerations are presented
later in chapter 4.2 Numerical Design.
3.1
Theory of Finite Element Method
The finite element method is a numerical method applied to solve field problems, e.g.
stress analysis, heat transfer, magnetic fields etc. This is conducted by determining spa­
tial distribution of one or multiple dependent variables, being distribution of displacements
and stresses in a slab, or the distribution of temperatures in an engine an so on. Essen­
tially, field problems are approximated by connecting simple interpolation functions, each
defined over regions called finite elements. These numbers of finite elements, often be­
ing triangular or rectangular shaped, together represent the field problem being analysed.
The finite element model summarises the behavior of the individual elements to establish
a consolidated behavior.
3.1.1
FEM Terminology
The principles of FEM can be described by considering a solid in either one, two or three
dimensions subjected to displacements or stress. During modelling, the solid is subdi­
vided into a gathering of small parts defined as elements ­ finite elements, as described
earlier. The term finite describes the limited number of degree of freedom, used to model
the behaviour of each element. A degree of freedom (DOF) represents the number of
directions a node can move or rotate. Nodes are defined as the interconnected joints,
where elements are connected to one another, while also being the location loads are
applied and boundary conditions are imposed. The complete set of elements is known
as a mesh. The finer a mesh, the more accurate representation of the structure. These
outlined principles essentially constitute the primary fundamental aspect of understanding
analyses based on FEM, known as discretisation. Namely, the process of representing a
component as a complete set of finite elements.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 3.1: Basic FEA Terminology.
Program: Robot Structural Analysis 2022
Another important principle is the assumption that the field variable, e.g. stresses or
strains, acts over each element in a predefined manner. Examples of variable assump­
tions may be a constant, linear, or quadratic distribution.
3.1.2
Basic Principles of FEA
To review the basic principles of finite element analysis, consider a one dimensional solid
as a 2 node bar element illustrated on Figure 3.2 with element length L, elastic modulus
E, cross­section area A and applied forces F1 and F2. Axial displacements at nodes are
defined u1 and u2, and internal axial stresses σ.
Figure 3.2: 2 Node Bar element.
Source: Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis
Derived by Hooke’s Law, axial stresses are related to the elastic modulus E and the axial
strain ϵ = (u2 −u1)/L.
σ = Eϵ
(3.1)
On the basis of this, the following expressions can be derived:
AE
L (u1 −u2) = F1
AE
L (u2 −u1) = F2
or
[
k
−k
−k
k
] { u1
u2
}
=
{ F1
F2
}
where k = AE
L
(3.2)
24
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:33==
Abbreviating equation 3.2 the following is obtained:
[k]{u} = {F}
(3.3)
Where [k] is the element stiffness matrix. It gives the relation between node forces and
displacements. Essentially, the stiffness matrix derives how a load on one node affects
that node, and every other node in the structure. Equation 3.3 is called the structure
stiffness equation. Note k = AE
L can be regarded as k, the stiffness of a linear spring,
since a bar and a spring have the same behavior when subjected to axial load.
Considering an element consisting of two uniform elastic bar elements attached, as shown
on Figure 3.3, the structure stiffness equation is as following:


k1
−k1
0
−k1
k1 + k2
−k2
0
−k2
k2





u1
u2
u3


=



F1
F2
F3



or
[K]{D} = {R}
(3.4)
[K] is called the structure stiffness matrix or the global stiffness matrix, {D} is the as­
semblage nodal displacement vector, and {R} is the assemblage nodal load vector. The
process of building a matrix from constituent element matrices, [k], {u}, and {f} is called
assembly.
Figure 3.3: 2 Node Bar element.
Source: Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis
A method to determine [K] is to think of the bar element on Figure 3.3 as two separate
elements provided with the numbers 1 and 2 for element 1, and 2 and 3 for element 2.
Separately, their respective stiffness matrices can be written as follows:
Column headings u1, u2 and u3 indicate degrees of freedom activated to generate matrix
columns. Considering element 1, the zeros in the rows indicate, that since element 1 is
not connected to node 3, displacement of any node cannot cause element 1 to produce
a force at node 3. In addition, the column of zeros indicate that displacement u3 does not
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
25
==PAGE:34==
strain element 1, so element 1 applies no force to any node. Finally, by summing the two
matrices results in [K] from Equation 3.4.
Equations 3.3 and 3.4 can be used to determine nodal displacements or reaction vectors
{R}. As an example, assume the solid on Figure 3.3 is a two element beam with one pinned
support and two roller supports. We assume no vertical loads. By expanding Equation
3.4, the following is obtained:



F1
F2
F3


= [K] ·



u1
u2
u3


=



R1
R2
R3


+



Q1
Q2
Q3



(3.5)
Here, {R} represent the reaction vectors and {Q} the external load vectors acting at each
support. Based on support conditions, the number of unknowns, either nodal displace­
ments or reactions, are reduced and the remaining can be solved by equilibrium. This is
considered the basics of the finite element calculations.
The fundamental calculation process of the FEM is near equivalent for two and three di­
mensional solids. Determining reactions or displacements are similar to Equation 3.5, but
with an increase in the number of degrees of freedom at each node. While one dimen­
sional elements have 1 DOF, two dimensional elements have 3 DOF at each node. This
results the global stiffness matrices to be extended. An example of a stiffness matrix in a
two dimensional beam element, with two nodes, is illustrated below:
[k] =


AE
L
0
0
−AE
L
0
0
0
12El
L3
6EI
L2
0
−12El
L3
6EI
L2
0
6El
L2
4EI
L
0
−6El
L2
2EI
L
−AE
L
0
0
AE
L
0
0
0
−12EI
L3
−6EI
L2
0
12EI
L3
−6EI
L2
0
6EI
L2
2EI
L
0
−6EI
L2
4EI
L


(3.6)
As it can be derived from Equation 3.6, the number of calculations are increased greatly.
In addition, for three dimensional beam elements, one node posses six degrees of free­
dom, resulting in 12 by 12 stiffness matrices for a one element beam with two nodes. It
goes without saying, that going from one or two dimension elements to three dimensional
elements increase the amount of calculations even more greatly, due to the increase in
DOF at each node. Essentially, the reason for not always choosing three dimensional
models is cost. By going from two dimensions to three, the demands on the analyst’s
time and computer resources are likely to increase by a factor 10 or more. Therefore, if
the conceptual one or two dimensional model represents the physical model to an ade­
quate extend, three dimensional models are to be omitted.
Finally, additional finite element calculations remain, e.g. for arbitrary orientation of bar
and beam elements, and three dimensional elements, which will not be described further,
as they go beyond the scope of basic FE­calculations. For further studies see (D. Cook
et al., 2001).
26
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Capabilities of Finite Element Method
Finite element software offer many analysis areas, including linear thermal, linear dynamic
and often the most important for structural engineers: linear static analysis. To a limited
degree non­linear static analysis is also applied. However, these areas of analysis are
not necessarily only used independently, but may be coupled. As an example, results
of a thermal analysis may be transferred to a stress analysis. This may be relevant in
cases where structural members are subjected to heat and consequently want to expand.
Due to physical restraints, expansions may not be possible, resulting in thermally induced
stresses within the member. It is advisable to acquire knowledge of these capabilities, so
the designer is aware of the required form of analysis. As an example, if working with
structural members subjected to large deformations, the theory of linear­elasticity may
not be suitable, and a non­linear analysis may be necessary.
Some problems the FEM can handle are problems possessing areas of the following
characteristics:
• Mathematical problems described by the equations of calculus, e.g.
differential
equations, integrals
• Boundary value problems, also known as equilibrium problems
• The domain of problem may be in any geometrical shape, and in any dimensions
• Varying physical properties in the system, e.g. stiffness, density, conductivity
• External influences as loads may be in any physically meaningful way, e.g. forces,
temperatures etc.
• Problems may be linear or to a lesser degree non­linear
The possible amount of results acquired from FEM problems in each analysis area are
great. Among the important ones as a result of a stress analysis are: deflections, support
reactions, stress components, strains, buckling loads and mode shapes.
3.3
Reality vs. Model
It should be noted that finite element models are approximate solutions of reality. Though,
this accounts for all engineering models, numerical as analytical models. Their accuracy
and validity are dependent on multiple parameters; first, the designer’s understanding of
the behaviour of the system being modelled. Secondly, confidence with the assumptions
and limitations that make the ground basis of the system being modelled. Examples of
relevant assumption considerations are given below:
• Are the loads worst­case scenarios or expected scenarios? Is the load static or
dynamic? Applicable for uplift or pressure?
• What are the boundary conditions? How is the component supported?
• What are the relevant material properties? How do utilised materials behave, when
subjected to loading? Linearly or non­linearly?
Given the fact that the finite element method is mainly related to the theory of linear elas­
ticity, modelling in some software introduces some aspects of insufficiency that needs
to be considered, including the aspect of long term effects. Considering long term ef­
fects, creep and shrinkage are obvious to mention, when using concrete for high­rise
structures, as these effects cannot be directly described linearly, when performing FE­
modelling. Shrinkage is a time dependent decrease of concrete. Four parameters are
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
27
==PAGE:36==
of great influence concerning shrinkage of concrete; the concrete mixture, member size,
time and the surroundings humidity. Shrinkage is increased by an increase in the water­
cement ratio, and is decreased by an increase in relative humidity. No general theory of
shrinkage determination exist, thus, empirical approached are used, resulting in a variety
of results (Chr. Jensen, 2012). Creep is defined as the increase in strain over time under a
constant stress. Similarly to shrinkage, creep is increased by an increasing water­cement
ratio, and is decreased by an increase in relative humidity.
Essentially, when performing FE­modelling of structures, particularly high­rise structures,
long term effects must be considered, as these aspects introduce deformations that may
develop large eccentricities, e.g. possibly resulting in second­order effects in columns.
28
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:37==
4
Calculation Method
4.1
Analytical Analysis
4.1.1
Description of Method
The following chapter introduces analytical calculations of deflection of high­rise build­
ings under horizontal load, stability analysis, global structural analysis and horizontal load
distribution. Its purpose is to present simple preliminary analytical calculations to estab­
lish the main structural dimensions, which later can be compared and followed by more
detailed software analyses. These calculations are part of the two levels of analysis nor­
mally carried out: 1) assuring individual members’ structural integrity, and 2) assuring the
building as a whole contains adequate stiffness, and that the structural system fulfils its
purpose of providing sufficient stability to the building. This section provides approaches
to carry out part two of the two analyses.
The calculation methods applied are based on assumptions presented below:
• At least four storey structures with identical storey heights
• Regular structures, meaning their characteristics do not vary throughout the height
• Sway structures with build­in lower end at ground level and free upper end
• Floor slabs contain great in­plane stiffness and small out­of­plane stiffness
• Deformations are small, and behavior of materials are linear elastic
• Secondorder effects are negligible
4.1.2
Deflection of Buildings under Horizontal Load
In analytical calculations, the equivalent column approach, also know as the continuum
method, is often used, when analysing structural systems (Zalka, 2020). The method is
based on an equivalent medium that replaces the whole building, where the discrete load
and stiffnesses of the building are modelled by continuous load and stiffness, see Figure
4.1. The method and formulas presented in the following subsection are all given by the
literature devised by the engineer Karoly Zalka (Zalka, 2020).
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 4.1: Model for Multi­Bay Sway Frame.
Source: Structural Analysis of Multi­Storey Buildings
Considering a multi­bay and multi storey frame as in Figure 4.1, the contributions to the
shear stiffness are associated with the beams and columns, and are determined by the
following, respectively:
Kb =
n−1
∑
j=1
12EbIb,j
ljh
Kc =
n
∑
j=1
12EcIc,j
h2
(4.1)
where
Eb is the modulus of elasticity of the beams of the frame
Ib,j is the moment of inertia of the jth beam of the ith frame
lj is the jth bay of the ith frame
h is the storey height
n is the number of columns in the ith frame
Ec is the modulus of elasticity of the columns of the frame
Ic,j is the moment of inertia of the jth column of the ith frame
By the use of the two components of the shear stiffness in Formula 4.1, the complete
shear stiffness of the ith frame is obtained by the Föppl Papkovich theorem rewritten as
below.
K = Kb
Kc
Kb + Kc
(4.2)
The local bending stiffness (EIcr) of a frame is associated with the full bending height of
the individual columns, and the complete stiffness is determined by the sum of moment
of inertia of the columns as shown below.
30
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:39==
Il = r
n
∑
j=1
Ic,j
(4.3)
where r is the reduction factor determined by
r =
Kc
Kb + Kc
(4.4)
Often times columns of a frame have identical cross sections, and in these cases the
moment of inertia of the columns is simply multiplied by n and r.
The global bending stiffness (EIg), is associated with the full height bending resistance
of the frame, when the columns act as longitudinal members in bending. It is determined
by the following:
Ig =
n
∑
j=1
Ac,jt2
j
(4.5)
where Ac,j is the cross section area of the building jth column and tj is the distance of the
jth column from the centroid of the cross sections.
However, it should be noted that according to the author, Ig represents an approximation,
which generates an unconservative estimate in the region of 0­3% for four­bay buildings
and up to 6% for ten­bay buildings (Zalka, 2020).
The total bending stiffness of the ith bracing unit can now be determined by summing the
local and global second moment of area.
If = I + Ig
(4.6)
Bearing in mind that the deflection of the ith frame is identical to the deflection of the whole
building, the maximum top deflection of a frame building is accordinly determined by
ymax = yi,max = qiwH4
8EIf,i
+ qiwH2
2Kis2
i
−qiwEIi
K2
i s3
i
(1 + κiHsinh(κiH)
cosh(κiH)
−1
)
(4.7)
where si and κi are the following parameters
si = 1 + Il,i
Ig
κi =
√
Kisi
EIl,i
(4.8)
In Equation 4.7, qi is the apportioner of the external load, that essentially is a distribution
factor for the external load, which is dependent of overall horizontal stiffness of the ith
bracing unit, Si
qi =
Si
∑f+m
i=1 Si
Si =
1
yi,max
(4.9)
If the structural system consist of shear walls, the following formula is applicable to deter­
mine the maximum horizontal deflection.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
31
==PAGE:40==
ymax = yi,max = qiwH4
8EI
(4.10)
In buildings with both shear walls and frame units, the result of the final deflection of the
whole building is the same, for whichever bracing unit is chosen as the ith bracing unit.
Often a shear walls is chosen as the ith bracing unit, given the simplicity of Formula 4.10
compared to Formula 4.7.
However, for calculating the load share qi, it is required to determine the maximum de­
flection yi,max of every bracing unit in the bracing system, when calculating the overall
horizontal stiffness Si, see Formula 4.9. To accommodate this, an arbitrary apportioner,
e.g. qi = 1, is be used in calculations, given the intensity of the load drops out of the for­
mulas. Essentially, by determining the maximum top deflection of each bracing unit with
qi = 1, the resulting value is used for the determination of the overall horizontal stiffness,
Si. Finally, the load share qi for the whole bracing system is determined by the ratio on
an arbitrary unit’s horizontal stiffness, and the summarised overall horizontal stiffness of
all units. Thereby, the attained load share is used to determine the maximum horizontal
deflection of the whole building, ymax.
The weakness of this procedure is the process of separating the two systems, frames and
shear walls. By doing so, the direct interaction between frames and shear walls is ignored.
However, the method is considered acceptable for most practical cases, according to
accuracy analysis performed by the author (Zalka, 2020). A further developed method is
described in the literature taking into account the direct interaction between frames and
shear walls.
A commonly used limitation standard for the maximum horizontal deflection for buildings,
including the one used among ASCE standards, is given below, with H being the full
height of the building (Zalka, 2020).
dmax ≤dASCE = H
500
(4.11)
32
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:41==
Example 4.1 ­ Maximum Horizontal Deflection of a 30 Storey Shear Wall Building
The following section presents an example of determining the maximum horizontal de­
flection of a 30 storey building, consisting of shear walls as its structural system. Thus
Formula 4.10 is utilised. The storey height is h = 3m, resulting in a full building height
of H = 90m. The thickness of all shear walls is t = 0.7m, and the modulus of elasticity
is E = 25 · 106 kN
m2 . The building is subjected to a uniformly distributed horizontal load
w∗= 1 kN
m2 both along and across the building plan, thus the horizontal load across the
building is wy = w ∗L = 30 kN
m and wx = w ∗B = 20 kN
m along the building.
Moment of inertia of walls in orthogonal directions.
Ix = 1
120.7m · (6.5m)3 = 16.0197m4
ΣIx = 4 · 16.0197m4 = 64.0791m4
Iy = 1
120.7m · (6.0m)3 = 12.60m4
ΣIx = 4 · 12.60m4 = 50.40m4
Table 4.1: Geometrical Parameters of Shear Walls
Geometrical Parameters
Walls in Y­Direction
Walls in X­Direction
Length [m]
6.5
6.0
Thickness [m]
0.7
0.7
Moment of Inertia, Ix [m4]
64.07
Moment of Inertia, Iy [m4]
50.40
Figure 4.2: Plan View of 30 Storey Shear Wall Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
33
==PAGE:42==
Given the structural system only consists of shear walls, the lateral stiffness is only de­
pendant on the stiffness of the shear walls. Thus, the apportioner of the external load is
equal to one, qi = 1.
The maximum horizontal deflection across the building can thereby be determined using
Formula 4.10.
ymax,y = qiwyH4
8EIx
=
1 · 30kN
m (90m)4
8 · 25 · 106 kN
m2 64.07m4 = 0.153m
Similarly, the maximum horizontal deflection along the building can be determined.
ymax,x = qiwxH4
8EIy
=
1 · 20 kN
m (90m)4
8 · 25 · 106 kN
m2 50.40m4 = 0.130m
By the use of the limitation formula given in Formula 4.11, the maximum allowable deflec­
tion in accordance to the ASCE is controlled.
dASCE = H
500 = 90m
500 = 0.18m
{ymax,y = 0.153m
ymax,x = 0.130m
}
≤dASCE = 0.180m
The horizontal deflection in both axis directions of the building does not exceed the allow­
able limitation.
34
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:43==
Example 4.2 ­ Maximum Horizontal Deflection of a 30 Storey Frame Building
The following section presents an example of determining the maximum horizontal de­
flection of a 30 storey building, consisting of a rigid frame system. Thus Formula 4.7 is
utilised. The storey height is h = 3m, resulting in a full building height of H = 90m.
The modulus of elasticity is E = 25 · 106 kN
m2 . Furthermore, given the plan configuration
is symmetrical, only half of the system is considered. Additionally, since the building is
subjected to a uniformly distributed horizontal load w∗= 1 kN
m2 both along and across the
building plan, thus the horizontal load across the building is wy = w ∗L/2 = 15kN
m and
wx = w ∗B/ = 7.5kN
m along the building. Lastly, as the columns are placed orthogonally,
only the horizontal deflection across the building is investigated, as this is assumed to be
the most critical case.
Table 4.2: Cross­Sectional Dimensions
Column Geometries
Beam Geometries
Height [m]
1.4
0.6
Width [m]
0.8
0.6
Figure 4.3: Plan View of 30 Storey Frame Building
As each frame contains 3 columns, the summarised moment of inertia of the columns for
each frame is determined below.
Ic = 1
120.8m · (1.4m)3 = 0.1829m4
ΣIc = 3 · 0.182m4 = 0.5488m4
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
35
==PAGE:44==
Similarly, the summarised moment of inertia of the beams for each frame, containing 2
beams, is determined below.
Ib = 1
120.6m · (0.6m)3 = 0.0108m4
ΣIb = 2 · 0.010m4 = 0.0216m4
Length of the jth frame is determined below.
lj = 1
220m −1
21.4m = 9.3m
Finally, the global moment of inertia of the columns is determined below.
Ig = 1.4m · 0.8m · (9.3m)2 + 1.4m · 0.8m · (9.3m)2 = 193.73m4
Summarised values of the geometrical parameters of columns and beams are shown on
the table below.
Table 4.3: Geometrical Parameters of Half the Building
F5
F7
F9
Moment of Inertia of Columns, Ic
[m4]
0.5488
0.5488
0.5488
Moment of Inertia of Beams, Ib
[m4]
0.0216
0.0216
0.0216
Length of jth bay of ith frame, lj
[m]
9.3
9.3
9.3
Global Moment of Inertia of Columns, Ig
[m4]
193.73
193.73
193.73
Initially, the basic characteristics of each frame is determined, after which the maximum
horizontal deflection of the building can be determined by the use of Formula 4.7.
Frame F5
First, the part of the shear stiffness that is associated with the beams of the frame Kb,1,
and the part of the shear stiffness associated with the columns Kc,1, are determined using
Formula 4.1.
Kb,1 = 12EbIb,j
ljh
= 12 · 25 · 106kN/m2 · 0.0216m4
9, 3m · 3m
= 232.25MN
Kc,1 = 12EcIc,j
h2
= 12 · 25 · 106kN/m2 · 0.5488m4
(3m)2
= 18293.33MN
Next, the reduction factor r, for the total shear stiffness is determined by Formula 4.4.
r =
Kc,1
Kb,1 + Kc,1
=
18293.33MN
232.25MN + 18293.33MN = 0.987
36
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:45==
Using Formula 4.2, the shear stiffness of the frame is determined.
K1 = Kb,1
Kc,1
Kb,1 + Kc,1
= 232.25MN
18293.33MN
232.25MN + 18293.33MN = 229.34MN
By the use of the local bending stiffness Il determined by Formula 4.3, and the global
bending stiffness Ig given in the Table 4.3, the total moment of inertia of the bending
stiffness If can be determined.
Il,1 = r
n
∑
j=1
Ic = 0.987 · 0.5488m4 = 0.5419m4
If,1 = Il,1 + Ig = 0.5419m4 + 193.73m4 = 194.27m4
The parameters s, κ and κH is determined using Formulas 4.8.
s1 = 1 + Il,1
Ig
= 1 + 0.5419m4
193.73m4 = 1.002
κ1 =
√
K1s1
EIl,1
=
√
229.34MN · 1.002
25 · 106 kN
m2 · 0.5419m4 = 0.130 1
m
κ1H = 0.130 · 90m = 11.72
Lastly, the maximum top deflection of the frame can now be determined using Formula
4.7.
y1,max = q1wH4
8EIf,1
+ q1wH2
2K1s2
1
−q1wEIl,1
K2
1s3
1
(1 + κ1Hsinh(κ1H)
cosh(κ1H)
−1
)
=
1 · 15 kN
m (90m)4
8 · 25 · 106 kN
m2 194.27m4 +
1 · 15kN
m (90m)2
2 · 229.34MN(1.002)2
−1 · 15 kN
m 25 · 106 kN
m2 0.5419m4
(229.34MN)2 · (1.002)3
(1 + 11.72sinh(11.72)
cosh(11.72)
−1
)
= 0.247m
Lastly, the overall stiffness of bracing unit F5 can be determined, using Formula 4.9.
s1 =
1
y1,max
=
1
0.247m = 4.038 1
m
The same approach is used to determine the maximum top deflection of the frames F7
and F9, y2,max and y3,max, respectively, as well as the overall stiffness of the individual
bracing units, s2 and s3. Given the plan configuration is symmetrical, the values of all
frames’ maximum top deflection and overall stiffness are identical, y1,max = y2,max =
y3,max = 0.247m and s1 = s2 = s3 = 4.038.
Choosing the bracing unit F9 for the calculation of the maximum top deflection, the overall
maximum horizontal deflection of the building can be determined.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
37
==PAGE:46==
q3 =
s3
s1 + s2 + s3
=
4.038
4.038 + 4.038 + 4.038 = 0.33
ymax =
0.33 · 15 kN
m (90m)4
8 · 25 · 106 kN
m2 194.27m4 +
0.33 · 15kN
m (90m)2
2 · 229.34MN(1.002)2
−0.33 · 15 kN
m 25 · 106 kN
m2 0.5419m4
(229.34MN)2 · (1.002)3
(1 + 11.72sinh(11.72)
cosh(11.72)
−1
)
= 0.082m
By the use of the limitation formula given in Formula 4.11, the maximum allowable deflec­
tion in accordance to the ASCE is controlled.
dASCE = H
500 = 90m
500 = 0.18m
ymax = 0.082m ≤dASCE = 0.180m
The horizontal deflection does not exceed the allowable limitation.
38
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:47==
4.1.3
Stability Analysis
The following subsection outlines a simple analytical method to determine the critical load
of buildings braced by either, or a combination of, a structural system of frames, shear
walls, coupled shear walls and cores. The assumptions presented in subsection 4.1.1
Description of Method are still applicable, with the addition that the load of the building is
uniformly distributed over the floors.
The method and formulas presented in the subsection are all given by the literature de­
vised by the engineer Karoly Zalka (Zalka, 2020). The procedure of the method to deter­
mine the global critical load is divided into three steps. First, the basic stiffness charac­
teristics will be established for the analysis. To enable the establishment of an equivalent
column by the summation of the relevant stiffnesses, the effective shear stiffness will be
introduced. Similarly to subsection 4.1.2 Deflection of Buildings under Horizontal Load.
Second, solutions for sway buckling based on the equivalent column will be presented.
Third, the coupling of the basic modes, e.g. sway modes and pure torsional modes, will be
taking into account. However, given torsional effects lay beyond the scope of relevance
for the later case studies, this step will be omitted.
Consider a structural system consisting of i = 1...f frames and coupled shear walls, and
k = 1...m shear walls and cores. The stiffness of the structural system can be charac­
terised by the shear stiffness of the frames and coupled shear walls, the global bending
stiffness of the frames and coupled shear walls, and the individual bending stiffness of the
shear walls, cores and column/ wall sections. Essentially, these stiffness characteristics
are combined into bending stiffness EI and shear stiffness Ke, which together replace
the stiffness with an equivalent cantilever beam with EI and Ke, as illustrated on Figure
4.4.
Figure 4.4: Equivalent Model for Lateral Stability Analysis.
Source: Structural Analysis of Multi­Storey Buildings
The forces acting on the equivalent column Fi are concentrated loads determined as the
product of the vertical floor loads and the surface area of each level. To make the loads
on the equivalent column continuous, they are distributed over the height, resulting the
load q.
q = Fi
h = QA
h
(4.12)
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
39
==PAGE:48==
However, the approximation of converting the concentrated loads into a uniformly dis­
tributed load is unconservative, given the centroid of the column consequently will be
moved downwards. To accommodate for this, a load distribution factor rs will be intro­
duced later in the following subsection.
The modification of the concentrated loads into a distributed load is illustrated on Figure
4.5.
Figure 4.5: Load on Equivalent Column.
Source: Structural Analysis of Multi­Storey Buildings
As mentioned, the initial step is to determine the characteristic stiffness of the equivalent
column. Consider a building with a structural system consisting of frames, shear walls
and cores. The shear stiffness of the building originates from the structural system, and
can be subdivided into two parts; the global stiffness and the local stiffness.
The global stiffness of the ith frame corresponds to the global, full height, shear resistance
of the frame, which is associated with the beams of the frame, which are assumed to be
continuously distributed over the the height of the frame. Essentially, resulting in a full
height shear deformation as illustrated on Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.6: Global, Local, and Actual Shear Deformation.
Source: Structural Analysis of Multi­Storey Buildings
However, given the fact that the beams are not distributed continuously over the height
of the building, but only contribute to the shear resistance at floor levels, it is the respon­
sibility of the storey height columns to resist sway locally between two floor levels, as it
appears from Figure 4.6. The local shear stiffness is associated with the storey height
shear resistance of the building. Consequently, the part of the shear stiffness that is as­
sociated with the beams of the frame, and the shear stiffness associated with the columns
40
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:49==
of the frame, can be expressed by the following, respectively.
Kb,i =
n−1
∑
j=1
12EbIb,j
ljh
Kc,i =
n
∑
j=1
π2EcIc,j
h2
(4.13)
where
Eb is the modulus of elasticity of the beams of the frame
Ib,j is the moment of inertia of the jth beam of the ith frame
lj is the jth bay of the ith frame
h is the storey height
n is the number of columns in the ith frame
Ec is the modulus of elasticity of the columns of the frame
Ic,j is the moment of inertia of the jth column of the ith frame
Given the fact that the local part of the shear stiffness is associated with the storey height
buckling, enables the formula to be applied for frames with non­uniform storey heights
and frames on pinned supports. It is noteworthy to mention the very similarities of For­
mulas (4.1) and Formulas (4.13), both describing the shear stiffnessess associated with
the beams and columns of a frame. However, while the formulas determining the shear
stiffness associated with the beams are identical, when wanting to determine either the
maximum horizontal deflection or critical load of a rigid frame system, it is not the case
with the formulas determining the shear stiffness associated with the columns. It can
quickly be noticed, that the formula for determining the shear stiffness associated with
the columns, when determining the critical load of a building with a rigid frame system, is
similar to the Critical Euler Load formula.
Accordingly, the complete shear stiffness of a multi bay frame structure is determined
similarly to Formula 4.2 and repeatedly shown below.
Ki = Kb,i
Kc,i
Kb,i + Kc,i
Consequently, the complete shear stiffness of f bracing frames is:
K =
f
∑
i=1
Ki
(4.14)
The global bending resistance is ensured by the global moment of inertia of the sum of
columns, similarly to Formula 4.5.
Ig,i =
n
∑
j=1
Ac,jt2
j
Where Ac is the cross section area of the jth column, and tj the distance of the jth column
from the centroid of the cross sections. Finally, the global critical bending resistance of
the ith frame is determined by the following:
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
41
==PAGE:50==
Ng,i = 7.837rsEcIg,i
H2
(4.15)
where
rs is the load distribution factor
Ec is the modulus of elasticity of the columns
Ig,i is the global moment of inertia of the ith frame
H is the height of the frame
The load reduction factor rs in Formula 4.15 compensates for the approximation following
the modification of the loads, when the uniformly distributed load of the equivalent column
was developed, see Figure 4.5. This factor is necessary, given the formula is derived
based on a cantilever beam subjected to a uniformly distributed axial load. However, in
a multi­storey building, the vertical load is not uniformly distributed over the height, but
consist of floor loads at each storey.
The value of the reduction factor is determined as a function of the number of floors n in
the building.
rs =
n
(n + 1.588)
(4.16)
There is an interaction between shear mode and the global bending mode during buckling.
This interaction is detrimental, given the resulting critical load is smaller than either the
critical shear load or the global critical bending load. The phenomenon can be taking
into account by interpreting the role of global bending as an eroding effect that leads to
a reduced shear shear stiffness. By doing so, the shear stiffness in Equation 4.2 can be
modified and reduced, resulting to a reduced shear stiffness defined as the effective shear
stiffness of the ith frame.
Ke,i = Ki
Ng,i
Ki + Ng,i
(4.17)
The effective shear stiffness, or critical shear load, of the equivalent column and thereby
the whole system is
Ke =
f
∑
i=1
Ke,i =
f
∑
i=1
Kisi
(4.18)
The effectiveness factor for the whole system s is determined based on the effective shear
stiffness Ke and the complete shear stiffness of the f bracing frames
s = Ke
K
(4.19)
Essentially, Equation 4.18 represents the critical buckling load of a whole building, if con­
sisting of a rigid frame system only. Although, whether the structural system consists of
frame columns, shear walls, coupled shear walls, cores or a combination of these, they
all possess bending stiffness. However, the bending stiffness contributed by the columns
42
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:51==
and beams in a rigid frame system is so modest, it is often neglectable. However, all
these vertical structural members practically work in unity with the floor slab and frame
beams to sustain lateral resistance, and their individual local bending contribution to the
total bending stiffness of the building is determined as given below.
EI = EcIc + EwIw = Ec
f
∑
i=1
Ic,iri + Ew
m
∑
k=1
Iw,k
(4.20)
where
Ew is the modulus of elasticity of the shear walls/ cores
Iw,k is the moment of inertia of the kth shear wall/ core
ri is the combination factor
The combination factor ri in Equation 4.20 is to adjust the bending stiffness of the columns
of the frames. Theoretical and numerical investigations have concluded the necessity of
a factor to prevent over­representation of the moment of inertia of the columns in the
equivalent column, where they are also represented in the shear stiffness (Zalka, 2020).
To summarise, the equivalent column of the bracing system, illustrated on Figure 4.5 has
been established, along with the equivalent shear stiffness Ke, bending stiffness EI, and
the uniformly distributed vertical load q. The local critical bending load of the system Nl
consisting of frames and shear walls/ cores can now be determined as below.
Nl = Nf + Nw =
f
∑
i=1
Nf,iri +
m
∑
k=1
Nw,k
= 7.837rs
H2
(
Ec
f
∑
i=1
Ic,iri + Ew
m
∑
k=1
Iw,k
)
= 7.837rsEI
H2
(4.21)
where
Nf is the critical load of the full height columns of the frames
Nw is the critical load of the shear walls
Knowing the local critical bending load Nl and the shear critical load Ke, an approximation
of the overall critical load Ncr of the building can be determined by the following formula.
Ncr = Nl + Ke
(4.22)
Formula 4.22 on the right­hand side contains the contribution of the local critical bending
load and the shear critical load. However, the interaction between local bending and shear
modes are not taken into account. For doing so, a differential equation for the problem
has to be established and solved. Skipping the processes of setting up the differential
equation and going straight to the practical solution, the following formula is applied in
practice for the determination of the sway critical load.
Ncr = Nl + Ke + (α −β −1)sNl
(4.23)
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
43
==PAGE:52==
Finally, Formula 4.23 presents the expression of the critical load of a whole building con­
sisting of frames and shear walls. The first two terms in the right­hand side stand for the
local critical bending load and the critical shear load of the structural system, while the
third term represents the effect of the iteration between bending and shear deformations
determined by α, β, and the effectiveness factor s, determined by Equation 4.19, for the
whole building. Given the fact that (α −β)≥1 stands, the interaction term essentially in­
creases the critical load of the system.
The parameters β and α are determined by the following formulas.
β = Ke
Nl
α = Ncr
Nl
(4.24)
Additionally, values of critical load parameter α are shown on Table 4.4 as a function of
part critical load ratio β, which may be used to determine the sway critical load Ncr.
Table 4.4: Critical Load Parameter α as a Function of Part Critical Load Ratio β
β
α
β
α
β
α
β
α
0.0000
1.0000
0.06
1.1782
4
9.1001
200
246.3
0.0005
1.0015
0.07
1.2075
5
10.697
300
359.5
0.001
1.0030
0.08
1.2367
6
12.241
400
471.3
0.002
1.0060
0.09
1.2659
7
13.749
500
582.1
0.003
1.0090
0.10
1.2949
8
15.227
600
686.5
0.004
1.0120
0.20
1.5798
9
16.682
700
798.0
0.005
1.0150
0.30
1.8556
10
18.118
800
904.5
0.006
1.0180
0.40
2.1226
20
31.820
1000
1115
0.007
1.0210
0.50
2.3817
30
44.862
2000
2199
0.008
1.0240
0.60
2.6333
40
57.545
5000
5361
0.009
1.0270
0.70
2.8780
50
69.991
10000
10567
0.010
1.0300
0.80
3.1163
60
82.265
50000
51016
0.020
1.0598
0.90
3.2488
70
94.405
100000
102579
0.030
1.0896
1.00
3.5758
80
106.44
1000000
1011864
0.040
1.1192
2.00
5.6244
90
118.38
2000000
2018802
0.050
1.487
3.00
7.4266
100
130.25
>2000000
β
Does the structural system consist of shear walls only, the local critical bending load Nl
in Formula 4.21 only contains contribution from the critical load of the shear walls Nw,
meaning Nf = 0. Thereby, formula 4.23 is simplified to the following:
Ncr = qH = Nl = Nw = 7.837rsEwIw
H2
(4.25)
Formula 4.25 is also applicable for cores. Additionally, as previously mentioned, does the
structural system consist of frames only, Formula 4.18 is applicable for the determination
of the critical load of the building.
44
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:53==
Example 4.3 ­ Stability Analysis of a 30 Storey Core Building
The following section presents an example of determining the critical buckling load of a
30 storey, 30 meters x 20 meters building, buckling under its own weight. The structural
system consists of a core, thus Nf in Equation 4.21 is set to zero, whereby Equation 4.25
is utilised. The storey height is h = 3m, resulting in a full building height of H = 90m.
The thickness of all shear walls in the core is t = 0.7m. The modulus of elasticity is
Ew = 25 · 106 kN
m2 .
Only moment of inertia about the weak axis is determined, as it is assumed buckling will
happen along this axis.
Ix = 1
1216m · (10m)3 −1
12(16m −2 · 0.7) · (10m −2 · 0.7)3 = 559.46m4
Table 4.5: Core Dimensions
Geometrical Parameters
Width [m]
16.0
Depth [m]
10.0
Thickness [m]
0.7
Moment of Inertia [m4]
559.46
Figure 4.7: Plan View of 30 Storey Core Building
Given the structural system consists of a core, Formula 4.25 must me applied. Given all
parameters are material­ and geometrical parameters, except the load reduction factor
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
45
==PAGE:54==
rs, the critical load can easily be determined as shown below.
The reduction factor rs is determined by on Equation 4.16, which is based on the number
of stories n = 30:
rs =
n
(n + 1.588) =
30
(30 + 1.588) = 0.949
Finally, the critical load resulting to buckling across the building is determined:
Ncr,y = 7.837rsEwIx
H2
= 7.837 · 0.949 · 25 · 106kN/m2 · 559.46m4
(90m)2
= 12852.18MN
46
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:55==
Example 4.4 ­ Stability Analysis of a 30 Storey Frame Building
The following section presents an example of determining the critical buckling load of a
30 storey, 30 meters x 20 meters building, buckling under its own weight. The structural
system consist of a rigid frame system, thus Nl in Formula 4.23 is set to zero, whereby
Formula 4.18 is utilised. The storey height is h = 3m, thus the full height of the building
is H = 90m. The modulus of elasticity is Ec = 25 · 106 kN
m2 . The geometrical parameters
of the columns and beams are shown in the table below. Given the plan configuration is
symmetrical, only half of the system is considered.
Table 4.6: Cross­Sectional Dimensions
Column Geometries
Beam Geometries
Height [m]
1.4
0.6
Width [m]
0.8
0.6
Geometrical parameters shown in the table below, are determined similarly to the previous
example of a rigid frame building, Example 4.2.
Table 4.7: Geometrical Parameters of Half the Building
F5
F7
F9
Moment of Inertia of Columns, Ic
[m4]
0.5488
0.5488
0.5488
Moment of Inertia of Beams, Ib
[m4]
0.0216
0.0216
0.0216
Length of jth bay of ith frame, lj
[m]
9.3
9.3
9.3
Global Moment of Inertia of Columns, Ig
[m4]
193.73
193.73
193.73
Initially, the basic characteristics of each frame is determined, after which the critical load
of the building can be determined by the use of Formula 4.18.
Frame F5
First, the part of the shear stiffness associated with the beams of the frame Kb,1, and
the part of the shear stiffness associated with the columns Kc,1, are determined using
Formula 4.13.
Kb,1 = 12EbIb,j
ljh
= 12 · 25 · 106kN/m2 · 0.0216m4
9, 3m · 3m
= 232.25MN
Kc,1 = π2EcIc,j
h2
= π2 · 25 · 106kN/m2 · 0.5488m4
(3m)2
= 45136.99MN
Next, the load distribution factor is determined using Formula 4.16.
rs =
n
(n + 1.588) =
30
(30 + 1.588) = 0.949
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
47
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.8: Plan View of 30 Storey Frame Building
Using Formula 4.15, the global critical bending load is determined.
Ng,1 = 7.837rsEcIg,1
H2
= 7.837 · 25 · 106kN/m2 · 193.73m4
(90m)2
= 4450.59MN
The shear stiffness of the frame is determined by Formula 4.2.
K1 = Kb,1
Kc,1
Kb,1 + Kc,1
= 232.25MN
45136.99MN
232.25MN + 45136.99MN = 231.06MN
The effective shear stiffness is determined by Formula 4.17.
Ke,1 = K1
Ng,1
K1 + Ng,1
= 231.06MN
4450.59MN
231.06MN + 4450.59MN = 219.66MN
The same approach is used to determine the effective shear stiffness of the frames F7 and
F9, Ke,2 and Ke,3 respectively. Given the plan configuration is symmetrical, the values of
all the frames’ effective shear stiffnesses are identical, Ke,1 = Ke,2 = Ke,3 = 219.66MN.
Finally, the effective shear stiffness of the whole building can be determined by Formula
4.18.
Ke = 2
f
∑
i=1
Ke,i = 2Ke,1 + 2Ke,2 + 2Ke,3 = 1317.98MN
48
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:57==
The formula is multiplied by a factor 2, since only half of the system was considered due
to symmetry. Additionally, given the building consist of a rigid frame system, consisting
of columns and beams only, the critical buckling load of the building is identical to the
effective shear stiffness of the whole building. Formula 4.23 gives:
Ncr = Nl + 2Ke + (α −β −1)sNl = 0 + 1317.98MN + 0 = 1317.98MN
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
49
==PAGE:58==
4.1.4
Global Structural Analysis
The following subsection presents a method to assess the overall performance of the
structural system of a high­rise building.
Depending on the coordinate direction, the global critical load ratio may be defined by the
following:
λ = Ncr
N
(4.26)
where
Ncr is the global critical load for buildings subjected to uniformly distributed floor
load
N is the total vertical load of the high­rise building
The total vertical load N may be determined as
N = LBQn
(4.27)
where
L, B are the plan length and breadth, respectively, of the building
Q is the uniformly distributed load floor load kN
m2
n is the umber of storeys
Formula 4.26, defining the global critical load λ, is often a ratio applied to consider the
stability of a structure, and to assess whether a second­order analysis is necessary. A
condition typically used in practice is:
λ ≥10
(4.28)
If the condition is satisfied, the structural system is adequate, and the vertical structural
elements can be considered as braced by the structural system. Neglecting the second­
order effects due to sway or torsion may result in an error up to 10% (Zalka, 2020). How­
ever, if the condition is not satisfied, but the condition λ > 1 is valid, the stability of the
building may be acceptable, but a second­order analysis is necessary. Though, a com­
mon rule among structural engineering communities is that the lowest acceptable value
of the critical load ratio is 4 (Zalka, 2020).
Furthermore, the value of the global critical load ratio may also be applied as an assess­
ment tool to signify the buckling resistance of the high­rise building. The greater the global
critical load ratio, the greater buckling resistance does the structural system possess.
50
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:59==
4.1.5
Horizontal Load Distribution
The following subsection introduces methods for distributing horizontal forces to structural
systems. The Rigid Floor Method will be applied to distribute forces to shear walls, while
beam theory will be utilised to determine the distribution of forces in a core system.
Shear Wall System
The Rigid Floor Method is frequently used to establish a distribution of horizontal forces in
orthogonal directions of a floor plane, with the structural system consisting of shear walls
(Jensen, 2010). The method is valid on the basis of the following assumptions:
• Floor plate is infinitely rigid
• Walls are elastic and fixed in the foundation
• Columns do not participate in resisting horizontal load
• For simplicity, walls have their main coordinate axes parallel to the same overall
coordinate system
The relative stiffness of the individual walls are determined based on the moment of inertia
of the ith wall Ii, and the reference moment of inertia Io.
αxi = Iyi
Io
αyi = Ixi
Io
(4.29)
The relative stiffness is often determined by a pure estimate, provided that the estimate
reflects the magnitude of the stiffness of each wall. The essential aspect is to achieve a
distribution of reactions, which is in equilibrium with the external loads.
Utilising the local coordinate of the ith wall, the total relative stiffness in the two axis di­
rections are determined by the following:
αx =
i=n
∑
i=1
αxi
αy =
i=n
∑
i=1
αyi
(4.30)
To eliminate the possibility of the floor plate to rotate, the shear center of the plate has
to be determined. The shear center is defined as the point, in which the resultant of the
external load in both axis directions have to pass, in order for the floor plate not to rotate.
The shear center coordinates are determined by the formulas below, and an illustration is
given on Figure 4.9.
xF =
∑i=n
i=1 xiαyi
αy
yF =
∑i=n
i=1 yiαxi
αx
(4.31)
where
xi and yi are wall coordinates in the plan
αi is the relative stiffness of the ith wall
αx and αx are the total relative stiffness in the two axis directions
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.9: Example of Shear Center and Wall Coordinates in Both Axis Directions.
Source: Betonelementbyggeriers Statik
The relative torsional stiffness of the whole wall system is determined by the following:
Iz =
i=n
∑
i=1
[
αxi (yi −yF )2 + αyi (xi −xF )2]
(4.32)
The external moment, also known as the torsional moment, acting on the floor plate, is
for an arbitrary horizontal load resultant W determined by the following:
Mw = W · z
(4.33)
where
W is the reaction force of a wall parallel to the x­axis or y­axis
z is the vertical resultant’s lever arm about the shear center
Figure 4.10: Horizontal Load Resultant.
Source: Betonelementbyggeriers Statik
In structures with symmetrical plan configuration, Mw is zero, as the horizontal load will
automatically act in the shear center, eliminating possible lever arms, z, generating a
torsional moment.
52
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:61==
Finally, the reactions obtained by the ith wall in both axis directions parallel to the external
load, can now be determined:
Rxi = αxi
[Wx
αx
−(yi −yF ) · MW
Iz
]
Ryi = αyi
[Wy
αy
+ (xi −xF ) · MW
Iz
]
(4.34)
Core System
Elementary linear elastic beam theory may be applied for determining section forces in
core systems, as they may be considered thin­walled columns. By doing so, the assump­
tions which beam theory calculations are based on, must also be valid. These are based
on the following conditions:
• Geometrical conditions, i.e. plane sections remain plane
• Physical conditions, i.e. relation between stress and strain
• Static conditions, i.e. equilibrium between stresses in the beam and i.e. forces
affecting the beam
As mentioned in subsection 2.11 Core Systems, a core system is a three dimensional
system, which essentially allows the system to be considered as a large cantilever beam.
This enables the possibility of utilising the Euler­Bernoulli Beam Theory, when distributing
horizontal load to the system. By utilising beam theory, stresses acting in walls can be
determined, in order to check whether the concrete is of sufficient strength to obtain the
acting stresses generated by the horizontal load.
Presented in subsection 3.1.2 Basic Principles of FEA and shown by Formula 3.1, the
relation between strain and stress is given by Hooke’s Law. For uncracked concrete
sections, the stiffness contribution from the reinforcement is often neglected (Chr. Jensen,
2012). Accordingly, the stresses in an uncracked concrete section subjected to bending
and normal force is given by Navier’s Formula:
σc = N
A ± M
I y
(4.35)
where
N is the normal force
A is the cross­section area
M is the bending moment
I is the moment of inertia
y is the distance to the stress from the neutral axis
By the use of Navier’s Formula, bending­ and normal stresses in walls, acting as flanges
and webs, are transformed into reaction forces by multiplying the stresses with wall lengths
and thicknesses.
Similarly, while using theory of linear elasticity, the shear stresses can be determined by
Grashof’s Formula given below:
τ = V S
IT
(4.36)
where
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
53
==PAGE:62==
V is the shear force
S is the static moment
I is the moment of inertia
t is the thickness of the wall
By the use of Grashof’s Formula, shear stresses in the walls are transformed into reaction
forces by multiplying the stresses with the wall lengths and thicknesses.
4.2
Numerical Analysis
The following section presents necessary analysis considerations prior, during and af­
ter finite element analysis. Furthermore, the section outlines the process of structural
analysis with finite element analysis, and lastly gives a short presentation of the software
program Robot Structural Analysis.
4.2.1
Description of Method
As previously stated, FEA is an effective tool in modern engineering to evaluate designs,
and for making comparisons between various alternatives. However, FEA should never
stand alone in a design situation, and the engineer must always conduct a thorough un­
derstanding of the engineering and physical principles involved.
”It is possible to use FEA programs while having little knowledge of the analysis method or
the problem to which is applied, inviting consequences that may range from embarrassing
to disastrous ­ Robert D. Cook
The following presents some of these necessary consideration essentials:
• Understand the mechanisms of the materials being modelled
• Be aware of possible failure mechanisms of the structural members
• Be aware of the environmental impact on the structures being modelled
• Be aware of boundary conditions, loads and material behaviors
• Assume results from the FEA are incorrect before being verified
It is important to remember that FEM develops an approximate simulation to the mathe­
matical model. To clarify, a mathematical model is an idealization of the physical structure,
where geometries, material properties, loads and boundary conditions are simplified. Ex­
amples may include materials regarded as homogeneous, isotropic, and linear elastic,
which is not the case in reality. Loads concentrated over a small area may be regarded
as a point load, which is not physically possible either. Lastly, a support may be regarded
as fixed, although no supports are totally rigid in reality. A mathematical model is discre­
tised by dividing the model into a mesh of finite elements. An example of a mathematical
model, based on a tapered support post that is discretised, is illustrated on Figure 4.11
54
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.11: Steps in Modeling and FE Analysis of a Tapered Support Post.
Source: Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis
4.2.2
Process of Structural Analysis with FEM
The process of finite element modelling contains six steps, which need to be covered.
These steps cover the processes of establishing the problem classification, the actual
modelling, and the revision of attained results. The steps are presented below, and are
described in further detail over the following subsection.
1. Problem Classification
2. Mathematical Model
3. Preliminary Analysis
4. Finite Element Analysis
5. Results Check
6. Revision
1. Problem classification
Initially, the important physical phenomena involved in the problem should be classified.
Examples of questions may be as: is the load static or dynamic, does the problem involve
non­linearity, causing the necessity of iterative solutions, what accuracy is required, and
what results are desired in the analysis? These classifications narrow and specify the
problem needed to be analysed.
2. Mathematical Model
Before initiating FE discretisation and a numerical solution, a mathematical model must
be developed. This step comprises the decision of what features are important for the
analysis to reduce unnecessary detail, while also including what theory describes the
behavior most accurately. Examples of necessary considerations, when developing the
mathematical model may be similar to the ones previously mentioned in subsection 4.2.1
Description of Method.
Furthermore, since FE solutions are approximate and only pertain to the mathematical
mode, FEA is steps from reality. Modelling decisions are influenced by what information
is desired, what accuracy is required and the model’s capabilities and limitations. Also,
initial modeling decisions may be provisional, causing the necessity of refinements in
geometry, applicable theory etc.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
55
==PAGE:64==
3. Preliminary Analysis
As previously stated, FEA should never stand alone in a design situation. Consequently,
at least one analytical calculation must be conducted. This process may result to a better
mathematical model, but most importantly it allows the possibility to check results from the
FEA. Ideally, preliminary analysis must be conducted prior to the FEA to reduce a natural
tendency to find answers that support FEA results rather that the opposite.
4. Finite Element Analysis
Typical steps involved by using FEA software are preprocessing, numerical analysis and
postprocessing.
Preprocessing is the step in which input data is stated, e.g. geometry, boundary con­
ditions, loads, and material properties. Based on input data, the software automatically
prepares the FE mesh. However, the software must be given directions to the desired
density of the mesh.
Numerical analysis is the step in which the software develops matrices that describe the
behavior of each element, and combines these into a large matrix equation that essen­
tially represents the entire finite element structure. To determine values of field quantities
at nodes, the matrix equation is then solved. If non­linearity or dynamic loading is present,
additional calculations are performed.
Postprocessing is the last step, in which the determined FEA solution and quantities are
displayed. These may be stresses on various planes, deformed shapes etc.
5. Results Check
Results are analysed for potential errors. These errors may be due to misrepresented
boundary conditions, resulting in deformations in unexpected locations, unexpected sec­
tion forces in given structural members etc. If none obvious errors are detected, and
results are satisfactory, FEA results are compared to solutions from the preliminary anal­
ysis.
6. Revision
Rarely the first FEA is satisfactory. Therefore, potential errors detected must be corrected.
Errors may be due to misunderstanding of the physical structure, misunderstanding of the
FE model developed, or a combination of both. Consequently, the mathematical model
and, or the FE model must be revised. Figure 4.12 outlines the steps involved in a typical
finite element analysis.
56
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.12: Outlined Process of Finite Element Analysis.
Source: Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis
4.2.3
Robot Structural Analysis
A widely used commercial software program for finite element analysis in structural de­
signs is the program named Robot Structural Analysis developed by Autodesk. Among
other things, the software determines loads and stresses, and verifies code standards,
based on arbitrary structural systems and materials, with various strengths and quali­
ties. The software analyses bar elements, beams, columns, slabs, as well as frames and
three dimensional models, allowing the possibility of thorough assessments of interac­
tions among structural members, and essentially assessments of the whole building.
Case studies that are later introduced, will in this thesis be modelled and numerically
analysed using Robot Structural Analysis 2022.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
57
==PAGE:66==
58
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:67==
5
Case Studies
Multiple case studies will be developed based on high­rise structures with different struc­
tural systems; a core system, a shear wall system, and a rigid frame system. The high­rise
buildings will consist of 30 storeys, and possess a storey height of 3 meters, resulting in
full building heights of 90 meters. Investigations of maximum horizontal deflections and
critical buckling loads will be performed, analysed and compared to each other. Thus,
the high­rise building with the structural system that shows the best results, based on the
investigations performed, will be clarified. Subsequently, the number of storeys for all the
case studies will be increased from 30 storeys to 60 storeys, resulting in a full building
height of 180 meters. Similar investigations will be performed to elaborate, whether the
high­rise buildings will perform proportionally with their building height, or whether the in­
creased building height will result in another case study, with a different structural system,
being most suitable.
These case studies will be performed in the form of simplified analytical calculations in
Microsoft Excel, and numerical investigations performed with the software program Robot
Structural Analysis 2022, RSA. In order to minimise possible calculation errors, e.g. due
to unit errors, few analytical calculations will be performed in MathCad Prime to verify Mi­
crosoft Excel results. Additionally, simplified FE­models will be developed to strengthen
the validity of later developed FE case study models. Illustrations of the 30­storey case
study models are shown below.
Figure 5.1:
Case Study 1 ­ Core
System
Figure 5.2:
Case Study 2 ­ Shear
Wall System
Figure 5.3:
Case Study 3 ­ Rigid
Frame System
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
59
==PAGE:68==
5.1
Assumptions
Prior to establishing and analysing the case studies presented, a number of assumptions
must be formulated to ensure the integrity of the calculation methods. These assumptions
are similar to the assumptions presented in Subsection 4.1.1 Description of Method under
Analytical Approach.
• Case studies are regular, meaning their characteristics do not vary throughout the
height
• Case studies are sway structures with build­in lower end at ground level and free
upper end
• Floor slabs contain great in­plane stiffness and small out­of­plane stiffness
• Deformations are small, and the behavior of materials are linear elastic
• Second­order effects are negligible
5.2
Geometry
All case studies are designed with rectangular plan configurations, 30 meters x 20 me­
ters. The core system consist of a centered core, and a symmetrical plan configuration.
The shear wall system consists of shear walls in two orthogonal directions, symmetrically
placed, and located mostly in the building periphery to minimize the influence of torsion.
The rigid frame system contains columns and beams orthogonally placed in both direc­
tions, also with a symmetrical plan configuration.
For simplicity, all case studies contain the same member dimensions in all storeys through­
out the building height. Furthermore, for better frame of reference, the core buildings and
shear wall buildings contain identical wall thicknesses. The rigid frame buildings contains
identically dimensioned columns, and identically dimensioned beams on each storey. Ad­
ditionally, for better frame of reference, the same amount of concrete volume is used in
all case studies.
Figure 5.4:
Case Study 1 ­ Core Sys­
tem
Figure 5.5:
Case Study 2 ­ Shear Wall
System
Figure 5.6:
Case Study 3 ­ Rigid
Frame System
5.3
Load Distribution
The three different case studies devised, each possess their own structural system, which
essentially distributes lateral and vertical forces to the foundation. Case study 1) possess
an internal core, which accounts for its lateral and vertical load bearing system. Case
study 2) possess shear walls, which also account for its lateral and vertical load bearing
system. Lastly, case study 3) possess rigid frames, made of orthogonally placed beams
and columns, which account for its lateral and vertical load bearing system.
60
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:69==
5.4
Preliminary Evaluations of FE­Model’s Validity
Following later sections, results from analytical calculations will be compared to numerical
results attained by Robot Structural Analysis 2022. In order to verify FE­results of com­
prehensive high­rise FE­models, simplified FE­models will be analysed and compared to
analytical results. The purpose of this is to establish the confidence of structural agree­
ment with analytical calculations, and later confidence to the results and integrity of the
final FE­models representing the high­rise structures.
Example ­ Load Distribution of 1­storey Shear Wall Building
The following example determines horizontal and vertical section forces in a symmetrical
10 meters x 10 meters shear wall building, when applied a point load of 100kN horizon­
tally and 100kN vertically. The modulus of elasticity is Ec = 25 · 106 kN
m2 . Geometrical
parameters of the shear walls are shown in the table below.
Table 5.1: Geometrical Parameters of Core Shear Walls
Dimensions of Core Shear Walls
Length [m]
4.0
Height [m]
3.0
Thickness [m]
0.22
According to section 4.1.5 Horizontal Load Distribution concerning shear wall systems, the
Rigid Floor Method is applicable. The method neglects shear walls located perpendicular
to the external load, while only shear walls parallel to the external load obtains forces.
Consequently, Formula 4.34 is applicable. However, as the building is symmetrical, and
only contains 2 shear walls parallel to the external load, the load is evenly distributed to
each wall, without the necessity of applying Formula 4.34.
Ry.1 = Ry.2 = 1
2100kN = 50kN
Ry.2 = Ry.4 = 0
Rz.1 = Rz.2 = Rz.3 = Rz.4 = 1
4100kN = 25kN
Using Robot Structural Analysis (RSA), the vertical­ and horizontal load distribution is
determined as illustrated on Figure 5.7.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
61
==PAGE:70==
(a) Vertical Load Distribution
(b) Horizontal Load Distribution
Figure 5.7: Load Distribution of Shear Wall System
Analysing Figure 5.7, it is seen that mainly shear walls parallel to the external load obtain
forces, in agreement with the Rigid Floor Method. The forward wall and leeward wall both
obtain forces, as RSA distributes forces based on stiffnessess of members. However,
their individual stiffness is minor, thus their contribution is neglectable, when comparing
to the stiffness of the shear walls parallel to the external load. Conclusively, FE­results
are in agreement with analytical results.
Example ­ Horizontal Deflection and Critical Load of a Column
The following example determines maximum horizontal deflection, and critical load of a
6 meters fixed­free column. The cross­section is 200 mm x 200 mm, and the column is
subjected to a uniformly distributed horizontal load 5kN
m and a vertical point load of 50kN.
The modulus of elasticity is Ec = 25 · 106 kN
m2 .
Table 5.2: Geometrical Parameters of Column
Geometrical Parameters of Column
Length, L [m]
6
Buckling Length, Ls [m]
12
Moment of Inertia, I [m4]
0.00133
Initially, the critical load of the column will be determined utilising the critical Euler Formula.
Pcr = π2EI
L2s
= π2 · 25 · 106 kN
m2 · 0.00133m4
(12m)2
= 228.46kN
Finally, the horizontal deflection is determined.
u = 1
8
ql4
EI = 1
8
5kN
m (6m)4
25 · 106 kN
m2 · 0.00133m4 = 243mm
Figure 5.8 illustrates the horizontal deflection of the column using RSA.
62
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:71==
Figure 5.8: Deformation of Column
Furthermore, the critical load is calculated as 230.18 kN using RSA. The values attained
by the two calculation methods are presented in the table below.
Table 5.3: Calculation Results and Deviations
Results of Calculation Methods
Critical Load, PCr
[kN]
Horizontal Deflection, u
[mm]
Analytical Calculation
228.46
243.0
Numerical Calculation
230.18
243.0
Deviation
1 %
0
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
63
==PAGE:72==
64
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:73==
6
Results
As mentioned in Chapter 5, the same amount of concrete volume is used in all case stud­
ies for better frame of reference. Furthermore, as all structural members are homoge­
neous, a modulus of elasticity of E = 25·106 kN
m2 is applied. Additionally, buckling analysis
is performed based on the self­weight of the buildings only, as the analytical method is
only valid for buckling of buildings under their own weight. During numerical analyses,
an element size of 0.5 meters is used in meshing. Finally, in order to apply a horizontal
distributed surface load of 1kN
m2 on FE­models, point loads and uniformly distributed loads
are applied on structural members, equivalent to the 1kN
m2 surface load.
6.1
Case Study 1
(a) FE­model of 30­Storey Model
(b) FE­Model of 60­Storey Model
Figure 6.1: FE­models of Core System Buildings
6.1.1
Analytical Analysis
To determine the maximum horizontal deformation and the critical load of case study 1,
by an analytical analysis, the same approach is applied as in Example 4.1 and Example
4.3, by using Formula 4.10 and Formula 4.25. For calculations, see Appendix A.1 and
Appendix A.2.
The following table presents the maximum horizontal deformation of case study 1, per­
formed by analytical calculations, for both the 30­storey building and 60­storey building.
In addition, the difference in factor of the two buildings is given.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
65
==PAGE:74==
Table 6.1: Deformation Across the Building of Core Models
Horizontal Deformation of Analytical Models
30­Storey Model
60­Storey Model
Difference in Factor
17 mm
281 mm
16.5
The critical load leading to buckling across and along the building of Case Study 1, per­
formed by analytical calculations, is presented below. Additionally, the difference in factor
is given.
Table 6.2: Critical Loads of Core Models
Critical Loads of Case Study 1
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
Difference in Factor
Critical Load,
Buckling Across Building
12852 [MN]
3295 [MN]
3.90
Critical Load,
Buckling Along Building
27175 [MN]
6969 [MN]
3.89
Studying Table 6.2 it is seen that the analytically calculated critical load of the buildings
of case study 1 are 12852 MN and 3295 MN for the 30­storey building and 60­storey
building, respectively.
6.1.2
Numerical Analysis
Horizontal point loads, corresponding to 1kN
m2 , are applied on every floor level. The loads
are determined based on the tributary area of each floor, resulting in loads of 90 kN.
F = 1kN
m2 · 3m · 30m = 90kN
(a) Displacement of 30­Storey Model
(b) Displacement of 60­Storey Model
Figure 6.2: Displacement of Core Models
66
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:75==
The maximum horizontal deformation of case study 1, determined by Robot Structural
Analysis (RSA), for both the 30­storey building and 60­storey building is presented on the
table below.
Table 6.3: Deformation of Core Models
Horizontal Deformation of FE­Models
30­Storey Model
60­Storey Model
Difference in Factor
16 mm
234 mm
14.6
RSA calculates critical buckling load factors (BLF), corresponding to the established mode
shapes. Multiplying the lowest critical buckling load factor with the acting load on a mem­
ber or structure, formulates the critical load. Essentially, by multiplying the lowest critical
buckling load factor with the sum of reaction forces at the supports, determines the critical
load of the building.
Table 6.4: Critical Loads of Core Models
Critical Parameters of FE­Models
30 Storey Model
60 Store Model
Difference in Factor
Reactions
177.49 [MN]
354.99 [MN]
2.00
BLF, Buckling Across Building
8.084 ·101
1.085 ·101
Critical Load
14348 [MN]
3851 [MN]
3.72
BLF, Buckling Along Building
1.555 ·102
2.100 ·101
Critical Load
27599 [MN]
7454 [MN]
3.70
Studying Table 6.4 it is seen that the numerically calculated critical loads of the buildings
of case study 1 are 14348 MN and 3851 MN for the 30­storey building and 60­storey
building, respectively.
The associated mode shapes for the critical buckling load factors are illustrated on Figure
6.3.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
67
==PAGE:76==
(a) Mode Shape 1 ­ 30­Storey Model
(b) Mode Shape 1 ­ 60­Storey Model
(c) Mode Shape 2 ­ 30­Storey Model
(d) Mode Shape 2 ­ 60­Storey Model
Figure 6.3: Mode Shapes of Core Buildings
.
68
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:77==
6.2
Case Study 2
(a) FE­model of 30­Storey Model
(b) FE­Model of 60­Storey Model
Figure 6.4: FE­models of Shear Wall System Buildings
6.2.1
Analytical Analysis
Similarly to case study 1, the determination of maximum horizontal deformation and crit­
ical load of case study 2, is performed by using Formula 4.10 and Formula 4.25. Thus,
the same approach is applied as in Example 4.1 and Example 4.3. For calculations, see
Appendix B.1 and Appendix B.2.
The following table presents the maximum horizontal deformation of case study 2, per­
formed by analytical calculations, for both the 30­storey building and 60­storey building.
In addition, the difference in factor of the two buildings is given.
Table 6.5: Deformation Across Shear Wall Models
Horizontal Deformation of Analytical Models
30­Storey Model
60­Storey Model
Difference in Factor
153 mm
2457 mm
16.0
The critical load leading to buckling across and along the building of Case Study 2, per­
formed by analytical calculations, is presented below. Additionally, the difference in factor
is given.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
69
==PAGE:78==
Table 6.6: Critical Loads of Shear Wall Models
Critical Loads of Case Study 2
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
Difference in Factor
Critical Load,
Buckling Across Building
1472 [MN]
377 [MN]
3.9
Critical Load,
Buckling Along Building
1157 [MN]
296 [MN]
3.9
Studying Table 6.6, it is seen that the analytically calculated critical load of the buildings of
case study 2 are 1157 MN and 296 MN for the 30­storey building and 60­storey building,
respectively.
6.2.2
Numerical Analysis
Horizontal loads, corresponding to 1kN
m2 , are applied and evenly distributed to each shear
wall parallel to the external load, at each floor level. Given the plan configuration consists
of 4 symmetrically positioned, equivalent shear walls in each axis direction, the following
distribution is determined.
F = 1kN
m2 · 3m · 1
4 = 22.5kN
(a) Displacement of 30­Storey Model
(b) Displacement of 60­Storey Model
Figure 6.5: Displacement of Shear Wall Models
The maximum horizontal deformation of case study 2, determined by RSA, for both the
30­storey building and 60­storey building is presented on the table below.
Table 6.7: Deformation of Shear Wall Models
Horizontal Deformation of FE­Models
30­Storey Model
60­Storey Model
Difference in Factor
158 mm
2458 mm
15.55
70
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:79==
Similarly to Case Study 1, RSA calculates critical buckling load factors (BLF), correspond­
ing to the established mode shapes. Multiplying the lowest critical buckling load factor with
the sum of reaction forces at the supports, determines the critical load of the building.
Table 6.8: Critical Loads of Shear Wall Models
Critical Parameters of FE­Models
30 Storey Model
60 Store Model
Difference in Factor
Reactions
174.40 [MN]
348.81 [MN]
2.00
BLF, Buckling Across Building
8.146 ·100
8.750 ·10−1
Critical Load
1420 [MN]
305 [MN]
4.65
BLF, Buckling Along Building
6.592 ·100
8.414 ·10−1
Critical Load
1149 [MN]
293 [MN]
3.92
Studying Table 6.8 it is seen that the numerically calculated critical load of the buildings of
case study 2 are 1149 MN and 293 MN for the 30­storey building and 60­storey building,
respectively.
The associated mode shapes for the critical buckling load factors are illustrated on Figure
6.6.
(a) Mode Shape 1 of 30­Storey Model
(b) Mode Shape 1 of 60­Storey Model
(c) Mode Shape 2 of 30­Storey Model
(d) Mode Shape 2 of 60­Storey Model
Figure 6.6: Mode Shapes of Shear Wall Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
71
==PAGE:80==
6.3
Case Study 3
(a) FE­model of 30­Storey Model
(b) FE­Model of 60­Storey Model
Figure 6.7: FE­models of Rigid Frame System Buildings
6.3.1
Analytical Analysis
To determine the maximum horizontal deformation and the critical load of case study 3, by
an analytical analysis, the same approach is applied as in Example 4.2 and Example 4.4,
by using Formula 4.7 and Formula 4.23. For calculations, see Appendix C and Appendix
C.2.
The following table presents the maximum horizontal deformation of case study 3, per­
formed by analytical calculations, for both the 30­storey building and 60­storey building.
In addition, the difference in factor of the two buildings is given.
Table 6.9: Deformation Across Rigid Frame Models
Horizontal Deformation of Analytical Models
30­Storey Model
60­Storey Model
Difference in Factor
82 mm
457 mm
5.5
The critical load leading to buckling across and along the building of Case Study 3, per­
formed by analytical calculations, is presented below. Additionally, the difference in factor
is given.
72
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:81==
Table 6.10: Critical Loads of Rigid Frame Models
Critical Loads of Case Study 3
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
Difference in Factor
Critical Load,
Buckling Across Building
1317 [MN]
1145 [MN]
1.15
Critical Load,
Buckling Along Building
1743 [MN]
1601 [MN]
1.08
Studying Table 6.10, it is seen that the analytically calculated critical load of the buildings of
case study 3 are 1317 MN and 1145 MN for the 30­storey building and 60­storey building,
respectively.
6.3.2
Numerical Analysis
The load distribution, corresponding to 1kN
m2 , is applied by uniformly distributed loads on
the exterior facade columns. The loads are determined based on the tributary area of
each column, i.e. the column distances of 5.84 meters and column with of 0.8 meters,
resulting in loads of 5.84kN
m throughout the building height, though 3.32kN
m on the corner
columns.
F = 1kN
m2 · 5.84m = 5.84kN
m
F = 1kN
m2 · (5.84m
2
+ 0.8m
2
) = 3.32kN
m
(a) Displacement of 30­Storey Model
(b) Displacement of 60­Storey Model
Figure 6.8: Displacements of Rigid Frame Models
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
73
==PAGE:82==
The maximum horizontal deformation of case study 3, determined by RSA, for both the
30­storey building and 60­storey building is presented on the table below.
Table 6.11: Deformation of Rigid Frame System Models
Horizontal Deformation of FE­Models
30­Storey Model
60­Storey Model
Difference in Factor
82 mm
458 mm
5.58
The following buckling analysis values presented on the table below, are determined
based on the models of case study 3.
Table 6.12: Critical Loads of Rigid Frame Models
Critical Parameters of FE­Models
30 Storey Model
60 Store Model
Difference in Factor
Reactions
185.21 [MN]
370.42 [MN]
2.00
BLF, Buckling Across Building
1.145 ·101
4.504 ·100
Critical Load
2120 [MN]
1668 [MN]
1.27
BLF, Buckling Along Building
1.734 ·101
7.613 ·100
Critical Load
3211 [MN]
2820 [MN]
1.13
Studying Table 6.12 it is seen that the numerically calculated critical load of the buildings of
case study 3 are 2120 MN and 1668 MN for the 30­storey building and 60­storey building,
respectively.
The associated mode shapes for the critical buckling load factors are illustrated on Figure
6.9.
74
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:83==
(a) Mode Shape 1 of 30­Storey Model
(b) Mode Shape 1 of 60­Storey Model
(c) Mode Shape 2 of 30­Storey Model
(d) Mode Shape 2 of 60­Storey Model
Figure 6.9: Mode Shapes of Rigid Frame Buildings
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
75
==PAGE:84==
76
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:85==
7
Analysis
7.1
Comparison of Analytical Analysis Vs. Numerical
Analysis
The purpose of the following section is to clarify deviations of the calculation methods, by
comparing the analytical and numerical results. In addition, results will be evaluated and
held up against standard limitations to check, whether limitations are fulfilled.
7.1.1
Case Study 1 ­ Core System
As mentioned in section 4.2 Numerical Analysis, simplified analytical models are nec­
essary, in order to assess results obtained, when applying finite element software. To
establish a frame of reference, results of the two calculation methods, concerning case
study 1, are compared, and their corresponding deviation are given on the table below.
Table 7.1: Deviation of Analysis Results ­ Case Study 1
Deviation of Analysis Results ­ Core System
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
Horizontal Deformation
6 %
17 %
Critical Load ­ Buckling Across
11 %
15 %
Critical Load ­ Buckling Along
2 %
7 %
Studying Table 7.1, it is seen that the relation between the analytical and numerical calcu­
lations is more precise for the 30­storey building, than for the 60­storey building. Consid­
ering analytical and numerical result tables of subsection 6.1 Case Study 1, the difference
in factors are all above 2.0, when comparing results of horizontal deflection and critical
loads for the two building heights. This indicates that the behavior and stability is dispro­
portional, when doubling the height of the buildings. In addition, the factors are greatest
when comparing analytical calculations of the 30­storey building to the analytical calcula­
tion of the 60­storey building. This may indicate, that the analytical method becomes less
applicable, as the height of the analysing building increases. More specifically, the load
reduction factor rs, see Formula 4.16, which compensates for the approximation following
the modification of the loads, and depends on the number of floors, may be less accurate.
Table 7.2 shows analysis results of case study 1, for both the analytical and the numerical
analysis.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
77
==PAGE:86==
Table 7.2: Analysis Results of Case Study 1
Analysis of Case Study 1 ­ Core System
Analytical Calculations
Numerical Calculations
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
Horizontal Deformation,
[mm]
17
281
16
234
Critical Load ­ Buckling Across,
[MN]
12852
3295
14348
3851
Critical Load ­ Buckling Along,
[MN]
27175
6969
27599
7454
To assess whether determined results are satisfactory according to standard limitations,
formulas from section 4.1.2 and section 4.1.4 will be applied.
To evaluate whether limitations of maximum horizontal deflection is fulfilled, Formula 4.11
is utilised.
dmax ≤H
500
Given the results of the maximum deflection by the analytical calculation are greatest, cf.
Table 7.2, these will be utilised for the limitation check.
17mm ≤90m
500 = 180mm
281mm ≤180m
500
= 360mm
Limitation standards are fulfilled, and the utilization degree of the 30­storey building and
60­storey building is 9 % and 78 %, respectively.
To consider the stability of the buildings of case study 1, and to assess whether a second­
order analysis is necessary, Formula 4.28, depending on the global critical load ratio λ, is
utilised.
λ ≥10
The self­weight of the building is given by Table 6.4, defined as the sum of reactions
of the considered building, which is G = 177.49MN and G = 354.99MN for the 30­
storey building and 60­storey building, respectively. Assuming the buildings are used for
residential purposes only, the live load would consist of 1.5kN
m2 , and the associated design
load factor being γ = 1.5, cf. DS/ EN 1991­1­1 Actions on Structures. An estimation of
the total vertical loads of the buildings would be as shown below.
N = LBQγn + G
N = 30m · 20m · 1.5kN
m2 · 1.5 · 30 + 177.49MN = 217.99MN
N = 30m · 20m · 1.5kN
m2 · 1.5 · 60 + 354.99MN = 435.99MN
Given results of the critical load by the analytical calculations are the lowest, cf. Table 7.2,
these will be utilised for the limitation check. In addition, as buckling across the building
is the most critical scenario, this case will be investigated.
78
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:87==
λ = Ncr
N
λ = 12852MN
217.99MN = 58.95
λ = 3295MN
435.99MN = 7.55
Given the limitation of λ ≥10 stands for the 30­storey building, its stability is adequate
against buckling under its own weight, and the vertical structural members are considered
braced by the structural system. Consequently, a second­order analysis is not necessary,
cf. (Zalka, 2020). Though, for the 60­storey building, a second­order analysis is neces­
sary, as the critical load ratio is below 10.
However, given the above global critical load ratio λ is determined based on buckling of
the buildings under their own weight, the contribution of the horizontal wind load are not
included, which is on the unsafe side. The actual critical load of the buildings are in fact
lower. Furthermore, given Robot Structural Analysis determines critical loads on the basis
of Euler­buckling theory, only considering vertical loads, a second­order analysis is nec­
essary for an accurate stability assessment. The load combination will consist of dead
load, based on self­weight, and horizontal wind load. By performing a second­order anal­
ysis, the actual critical load of the buildings are clarified. Lastly, as it has been shown that
there is sufficient agreement with the analytical and numerical calculations, the validity
of the FE­models have been verified. Therefore, the numerical analysis can stand alone
without the necessity of also performing an equivalent analytical calculation. Results of
the analyses are given in the table below.
Table 7.3: Second­order Buckling Analysis Results
Critical Buckling Loads ­ Case Study 1
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
Reactions
212.99 [MN]
­
BLF, Buckling Across
6.736 ·101
­
Critical Load, Buckling Across
11956 [MN]
­
When performing a second­order analysis of the 60­storey building, RSA gives a warning,
claiming no convergence of nonlinear problem. According to Autodesk Support, the cause
of the warning may among other things be due to the following:
• Imprecisely defined model.
• Model behavior when a small increase of load causes significant change in the de­
formation shape, which makes obtaining converged solution difficult.
• Excessive load causing lost of stability either for single element of a model or a
structure as a whole.
Relating to the mentioned possible causes, they are all likely to be the cause of lacking
convergence. Particularly, as no structural members are designed. Consequently, this
means the structural stability of the 60­storey building is insufficient. Therefore, only the
30­storey building will be investigated further.
N = 30m · 20m · 1.5kN
m2 · 1.5 · 30 + 212.99MN = 253.49MN
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
79
==PAGE:88==
λ = 11956MN
253.49MN = 47.16
Given the limitation of λ ≥10 stands following the second­order analysis, the building’s
stability is adequate, and the vertical structural members are considered braced by the
structural system.
7.1.2
Case Study 2 ­ Shear Wall System
Likewise case study 1, in order to establish better frame of reference, results of the ana­
lytical and numerical analysis are compared, and their corresponding deviation are given
on the table below.
Table 7.4: Deviation of Analysis Results ­ Case Study 2
Deviation of Analysis Results ­ Shear Wall System
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
Horizontal Deformation
4 %
1 %
Critical Load ­ Buckling Across
4 %
20 %
Critical Load ­ Buckling Along
1 %
2 %
Studying Table 7.4, most deviation results attained by horizontal deflection and buckling
analyses of both calculations methods are acceptable. Though, the deviation of the critical
load across the 60­storey building is substantial.
Table 7.5 shows analysis results of case study 2, for both the analytical and numerical
analysis.
Table 7.5: Analysis Results of Case Study 2
Analysis of Case Study 2 ­ Shear Wall System
Analytical Calculations
Numerical Calculations
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
Horizontal Deformation,
[mm]
153
2457
158
2458
Critical Load ­ Buckling Across,
[MN]
1472
377
1420
305
Critical Load ­ Buckling Along,
[MN]
1157
296
1149
293
Similar to case study 1, formulas from section 4.1.2 and section 4.1.4 will be applied
to evaluate, whether limitations of maximum horizontal deflection and global stability is
fulfilled.
Given results of maximum horizontal deflection by the numerical calculation are greatest,
cf. Table 7.5, these will be utilised for the limitation check of horizontal deflection.
158mm ≤90m
500 = 180mm
2458mm ≥180m
500
= 360mm
Limitation standards are only fulfilled for the 30­storey building, as the horizontal deflection
for the 60­storey building exceeds the limitation. The utilization degree of the two buildings
is 87% and 682%, respectively.
Likewise case study 1, the stability analysis will be performed first without a second­order
80
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:89==
analysis, only considering self­weight, and later with a second­order analysis, considering
self­weight and wind load. Determining the self­weight reactions of the 30­storey and 60­
storey building, G = 174.40MN and G = 348.81MN, respectively, shown on Table 6.8,
the limitation check is conducted similarly to the approach in case study 1.
N = 30m · 20m · 1.5kN
m2 · 1.5 · 30 + 174.40MN = 214.90MN
N = 30m · 20m · 1.5kN
m2 · 1.5 · 60 + 348.81MN = 429.81MN
Given results of the critical load by numerical calculations are lowest, cf. Table 7.5, these
will be utilised for the limitation check. In addition, as buckling along the building is the
most critical scenario, this case will be investigated.
λ = Ncr
N
λ = 1149MN
214.90MN = 5.34
λ =
293MN
429.81MN = 0.68
Neither of the values above fulfill the limitation λ ≥10. As the limitation of λ ≥1 stands for
the 30­storey building, the structural system may be sufficient after performing a second­
order analysis. However, concerning the 60­storey building, as λ ≤1, the building is
unstable, and the structural system must be strengthened.
Following a second­order analysis of the 30­storey building, the warning of no conver­
gence of nonlinear problem appears, meaning the structural stability of the 30­storey
building is also insufficient.
7.1.3
Case Study 3 ­ Rigid Frame System
As for the other case studies, results of analytical and numerical analyses are compared,
and their corresponding deviations are given on the table below.
Table 7.6: Deviation of Analysis Results ­ Case Study 3
Deviation of Analysis Results ­ Rigid Frame System
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
Horizontal Deformation
0
1 %
Critical Load ­ Buckling Across
38 %
32 %
Critical Load ­ Buckling Along
46 %
44 %
Studying Table 7.6, it is seen that the relation between analytical and numerical calcula­
tions is deviating greatly, when considering the critical buckling loads. This may be due
to the fact that the analytical method only considers shear stiffness associated with the
columns and beams of the frames, and neglects their bending stiffnesses. On the con­
trary, RSA includes all types of stiffnesses of the finite elements in the models. While the
models are of large sizes, bending stiffnesses of members may summarised have a large
stiffness contribution to the overall stability of the buildings, for which reason deviations
may be introduced. Furthermore, among the assumptions presented in section 5.1 As­
sumptions under Case Studies, one is that deformations are small, and the behaviour of
materials are linear elastic. This counts for both the analytical and numerical calculations.
Given the large sizes of the case studies, resulting in great forces and loads, deviations of
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
81
==PAGE:90==
critical load calculations may be due to the fact that deformations are simply too large for
either the analytical method, the numerical method or both methods. Finally, calculation
errors or FE­modelling errors are also possible causes of deviation.
Table 7.7 shows analysis results of case study 3, for both the analytical and numerical
analysis.
Table 7.7: Analysis Results of Case Study 3
Analysis of Case Study 3 ­ Rigid Frame System
Analytical Calculations
Numerical Calculations
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
30 Storeys
60 Storeys
Horizontal Deformation,
[mm]
82
457
82
458
Critical Load ­ Buckling Across,
[MN]
1317
1145
2120
1668
Critical Load ­ Buckling Along,
[MN]
1743
1601
3211
2820
The maximum horizontal deflection of the 30­storey building is 82 mm determined by both
calculation methods, cf. Table 7.7, thus this will be utilised for the limitation check of the
horizontal deflection. In addition, the deflection of 458 mm is utilised for the 60­storey
building.
82mm ≤90m
500 = 180mm
458mm ≥180m
500
= 360mm
Limitation standards are only fulfilled for the 30­storey building. The utilization degree of
the 30­storey building and 60­storey building is 45 % and 127 %, respectively. To reduce
the deflection and strengthen the structural system, the shear stiffness of columns and
beams must be increased, either by increasing cross­sectional dimensions or increasing
material class properties.
Likewise other case studies, a stability analysis will be performed, only considering self­
weight of the buildings, followed by a second­order analysis, while considering self­weight
and horizontal wind load. Determining the self­weight reactions of the 30­storey and 60­
storey building, G = 175.20MN and G = 370.42MN, respectively, shown on Table 6.12,
the limitation check is conducted similarly to the approach in the two other case studies.
N = 30m · 20m · 1.5kN
m2 · 30 + 175.20MN = 215.70MN
N = 30m · 20m · 1.5kN
m2 · 60 + 370.42MN = 451.42MN
Given results of the critical load by analytical calculations are lowest, cf. Table 7.7, these
will be utilised for the limitation check. In addition, as buckling across the building is the
most critical scenario, this case will be investigated.
λ = Ncr
N
λ = 1317MN
215.70MN = 6.10
λ = 1145MN
451.42MN = 2.53
82
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:91==
Given neither of the two buildings of case study 3 fulfill the limitation of λ ≥10, only λ ≥1,
a second­order analysis is necessary, in order to verify their stability. However, due to
their low global critical load ratio, and their large horizontal deflections, when subjected
to wind load, a second­order analysis will not be performed, as it is assumed that the
structural system will most likely be insufficient and must be strengthened in order for the
buildings to be stable.
7.2
Theoretical Relation of Case Study Results
7.2.1
Case Study 1 ­ Core System
Studying deflection shapes of the core buildings, when subjected to horizontal load, as
shown on Figure 6.2, it is seen that horizontal displacement at the top floors are of signif­
icant magnitude. In addition, by knowing that for tall buildings consisting of shear walls,
the contribution of bending displacements are much greater than shear displacements,
the shape of the deformation shown on Figure 6.2 is greatly as expected, and illustrative
for bending deformations on similar buildings (Chr. Jensen & Hansen, 2005).
7.2.2
Case Study 2 ­ Shear Wall System
Deflection shapes of the shear wall buildings, subjected to horizontal load, shown on
Figure 6.5, are very similar to the deflection shapes of the core buildings. This is due to
the fact, that the structural system of both buildings consist of shear walls, and therefore
deform likewise.
7.2.3
Case Study 3 ­ Rigid Frame System
Contrary to the core buildings and shear wall buildings, the deflection shapes of the rigid
frame buildings are mainly influenced by shear deformations, as shown on Figure 6.8.
This is in agreement with the description given in subsection 2.4.1 Rigid Frame Systems,
where it was stated that approximately 80% of the deformations are due to shear de­
formation, bending of beams and columns, and 20 % are due to bending deformations,
cantilever bending of building. Thereby, the deformation shapes are likewise greatly as
expected and illustrative for shear deformations on similar buildings.
7.3
Performance Evaluation of Structural Systems
7.3.1
Horizontal Deflection
Evaluating the horizontal deflection of the 3 case studies, one structural system stands
out significantly; the core system. With a horizontal deflection of about 17 mm for the
30­storey building, it is significantly lower than the deflections of the shear wall building
and rigid frame building, being 158 mm and 82 mm, respectively. The deflection of the
core system is 10 % of the deflection of the shear wall system, and 20% of the rigid frame
system.
The major reasoning for the great performance of the core system is its great stiffness
properties, due to its moment of inertia. This is particularly evident, as the calculation
method for determining horizontal deflections and critical loads for core and shear wall
buildings are identical. The only difference in the analytical calculations of the two case
studies, is the moment of inertia utilised, which possess a significant role.
Studying the 60­storey building case studies, similar discoveries are detected; the core
system is the best performing structural system. Deflections are 281 mm, 2458 mm and
458 mm, for the core building, shear wall building, and rigid frame building, respectively,
meaning the deflection of the core system is 11% of the shear wall system, and 61%
of the rigid frame system. Thus, it is elaborated that the performance of the high­rise
buildings is approximately proportional to their building height, when comparing to each
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
83
==PAGE:92==
other. The core building is continuously the best performing system, followed by the rigid
frame system, and lastly by the shear wall system.
7.3.2
Stability
Studying stability of the case studies, the core system is likewise the best performing
structural system. The 30­storey core building was the only building maintaining stability,
following a second­order analysis. Comparing lowest critical buckling loads of the 30­
storey buildings, based on bucking under their own weight, the critical load of the core
building is 12852 MN, 1317 for the rigid frame system and 1149 MN for the shear wall
system. Thus, the critical load of the rigid frame building and shear wall building is 10%
and 8% of the core building, respectively. For the 60­storey buildings, the critical load of
the core building is 3295 MN, 1145 MN for the rigid frame building and 293 MN for the
shear wall building. Thus, 34% and 8 %, of the core building, respectively.
7.3.3
Recapitulation of Evaluation
Summarising the evaluation of the case studies’ performances, case study 1 with the core
system is the overall best performing system. It is the system with the least horizontal de­
flection, and highest values of critical buckling ratios. Next, case study 3 with the rigid
frame system performs the best, where only horizontal deflection limitations of the 30­
storey building is fulfilled. Due to its low values of critical buckling ratios, determined by
buckling under their own weight, both rigid frame buildings are assumed to be unstable
following a second­order analysis, where horizontal wind load is included. Lastly, case
study 2 with the shear wall system performs the worst. Limitations of horizontal deflection
of the 30­storey building is fulfilled, though not for the 60­storey building. Additionally, as
determined critical buckling ratios, based on buckling under their own weight, are lower
than the values determined for the rigid frame system, both shear wall buildings are like­
wise assessed to be unstable. The 60­storey shear wall building is also the only building
of all case study buildings that is unstable, alone due to buckling under its own weight.
The reason for the great performance of the core building is most likely due to its large
geometrical stiffness. As the moment of inertia of the core building can be determined
by considering the plan configuration as one beam, the moment of inertia considering the
shear walls of case study 2 must be determined individually and summarised. In addition,
the stiffness of the rigid frame building is mainly governed by the shear stiffness of the
columns and beams, and only to a less degree by their bending stiffness. Performances
of case studies are illustrated graphically on Figure 7.1.
(a) Performances of 30­storey Buildings
(b) Performances of 60­storey Buildings
Figure 7.1: Horizontal Deflection and Critical Load of Case Studies
84
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:93==
Studying Figure 7.1a, it is seen that while horizontal deflection resistances of all three case
studies vary from each other, the critical buckling loads of case study 2 and case study 3
are approximately in the same bottom region. On the contrary, case study 1 is alone in the
upper region with the best performance. Furthermore, as the ranking of building systems
remain unchanged for the 60­storey buildings, when compared to the 30­storey buildings,
it is noteworthy to address the large change in critical load resistances of case study 2
and case study 3. While the critical load strength of the two case studies were almost
the same for the 30­storey buildings, it is visually illustrated that case study 3 performs
considerably better than case study 2 as a 60­storey building.
As a final evaluation, the case studies are compared to Figure 2.6 from section 2.4 Struc­
tural Systems, to review their performances held up against the literature. Figure 2.6 is
repeatedly shown below.
Figure 7.2: Structural System Categories.
Source: Reinforced Concrete Design of Tall Buildings
Bearing in mind only multiple structural analyses are performed, excluding dynamic anal­
ysis, and design of structural members, the performance of the individual case studies
very well reflect the performances of structural systems shown on Figure 7.2. According
to the figure, core systems and rigid frame systems are indeed applicable for 30­storey
buildings, while shear wall systems are applicable for buildings up to about 15 storeys.
Though, analysis of critical buckling loads of case study 3, consisting of rigid frame build­
ings, showed both buildings were unstable following a second­order analysis. However,
horizontal limitation standards were met for the 30­storey building. Thus, if performing
designs of structural members, the critical buckling load may become sufficient in order
for the building to become stable, and thereby be in correlation to Figure 7.2.
The reason to why case study 2, consisting of shear walls, still fulfilled deflection limitations
as a 30­storey building, may be due to the great stiffness of the shear walls applied in the
case study. Particularly for a 30 storey building. In practice, utilising another structural
system may be more economical. Finally, the correlation between the best performing
structural systems in the analyses reflect Figure 7.2, with the core system being the best,
the rigid frame as number two, and lastly the shear wall system as number three.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
85
==PAGE:94==
86
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:95==
8
Conclusion
The aim of the following master’s thesis was to investigate the influence of stability of
high­rise buildings, depending on their geometrical shape, when applying analytical and
numerical calculation methods. Based on an excessive theoretical research about the
topic, followed by analyses of three case studies with different structural systems, analyt­
ical and numerical calculations of horizontal deflections and critical buckling loads have
been performed. Consequently, the most favorable structural system, depending on num­
ber of storeys, is possible to be clarified.
Assessing deviations of the calculation methods applied for analyses, it can be stated that
results from both methods are consistent with each other. Particularly, when considering
horizontal deflection calculations of the three case studies, deviations of the 30­storey
and 60­storey buildings are in the range of 6%­17%, 1%­4%, and 0­1%, respectively.
Analysing deviation results of critical buckling loads of case study 1 and case study 2,
deviations vary to a slightly larger degree, ranging from 2%­20%, respectively. However,
deviation results of case study 3 vary to an extend, where its results are questionable.
Ranging from 32%­46%, deviations are most likely due to wrongful disregard of stiffnesses
in analytical calculations or due to FE­modelling errors.
Generally, the applicability of the analytical calculation methods, considering critical buck­
ling loads, become more debatable, as deviations increase similarly, when the number
of storeys increase. However, the applicability of the analytical methods, considering
horizontal deflection determination, stands as deviations remain satisfactory and approx­
imately unchanged, in spite of increasing number of floors.
Following the analyses of the buildings’ horizontal deflections, when subjected to a load
corresponding to 1kN
m2 , their individual performance varied. While all 30­storey case stud­
ies fulfilled the limitation standard of maximum 180 mm horizontal deflection, only the
core building managed to comply with the limitation of 360 mm as a 60­storey building.
The horizontal deflection of the 30­storey buildings were determined as 17 mm for the
core building, 158 mm for the shear wall building, and 82 mm for the rigid frame building.
Considering the 60­storey buildings, horizontal deflections were determined as 281 mm
for the core building, 2458 mm for the shear wall building and 458 mm for the rigid frame
building. Thereby, the core building performed best in terms of withstanding horizontal
deflection, followed by the rigid frame building, and lastly the shear wall building.
Similar to the deflection analyses, the core system performed best in the stability analyses.
Critical loads of the 30­storey buildings, buckling under their own weight, were determined
as 12852 MN for the core building, 1149 MN for the shear wall building and 1317 MN for
the rigid frame building. Their associated global critical load ratio were determined as
λ = 58.93, λ = 5.34, and λ = 6.10, respectively. However, following a second­order anal­
ysis, with a load combination consisting of self­weight and horizontal wind load, only the
core building showed sufficient stability with a ratio of λ = 47.16 ≥10. The structural sys­
tems of the shear wall building and rigid frame building must be strengthened in order to
become stable. Likewise, the critical load of the 60­storey buildings, buckling under their
own weight, were determined as 3295 MN for the core building, 293 MN for the shear wall
building, and 1145 MN for the rigid frame building. Their associated global critical load
ratio were determined as λ = 7.55, λ = 0.68, and λ = 2.53. However, following a second­
order analysis, combining self­weight and horizontal wind load, neither of the buildings’
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
87
==PAGE:96==
structural systems were adequate, and therefore must be strengthened in order for the
buildings to become stable.
Overall, it can be stated that the core building is the best performing system of the three
case studies. Relating to possible explanations of the performance order, the case stud­
ies’ individual geometrical stiffness are a significant factor of importance. While the core
of case study 1 can be assessed as a hollow beam, its corresponding moment of inertia
becomes remarkably larger than the moment of inertia of case study 2. This is due to the
fact that the moment of inertia of the shear walls must be summarised individually. Addi­
tionally, while the stiffness of the rigid frame building is mainly governed by shear stiffness
contributions of the columns and beams, and to a less degree by bending stiffness con­
tributions, the overall stiffness of the core building can be stated as much greater than
the two other case studies. For which probability the performance of the core building is
greater than the two other structural systems.
Continuous research about the topic of high­rise buildings, including structural stability, is
of great importance. Particularly, as boundaries are constantly pushed, seen in the light
of buildings getting taller and taller. Consequently, knowledge of properties of different
structural systems, their behavior and suitability, depending on geometrical shape, is sub­
stantially important. Therefore, the following thesis has now given insight to the subject,
for which strengthens engineering knowledge in favour for both academic and practice
purposes. In addition, given commercial analysis software have become part of general
engineering practice in the industry, comparisons of analytical results and numerically cal­
culated FE­results have been performed. This has established theoretical understanding
of stability of high­rise buildings. Thus, as a partly new and practical analysis tool has
entered the industry, we must not abandon fundamental theoretical understandings of
engineering. Because without it, scepticism of FE­results will have a weak foundation,
and we are more likely to accept results, which can lead to fatal consequences. We must
value opportunities introduced by FEM­software, and use it as a great resource, rather
than as a substitute.
88
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:97==
9
Further Studies
Numerous further studies would be relevant to investigate, on top of analyses already per­
formed. The most intuitive analysis would be the influence of structural dynamics on the
high­rise building case studies. As only a static horizontal wind load has been subjected
to the buildings, the influence of a dynamic wind load is necessary, in order to analyse vi­
bration comfort limitations, dynamically induced deflections, possibility of resonance etc.
Subsequently, possible damping provisions must be proposed. Furthermore, other than
developing additional case studies of different structural systems to investigate, combina­
tions of structural systems would also be of interest. As was stated in Chapter 7 Analysis,
stiffnesses of buildings with cores are mainly governed by bending stiffness contributions,
whereas stiffnesses of buildings with rigid frame systems are mainly governed by shear
stiffness. As an example, investigations of case studies with combinations of the two stiff­
nesses would be relevant, e.g. a core­frame building.
Other than analysing structures on a global scale, local investigations of structural mem­
bers would also be relevant to cover next. Besides local stability at each storey level,
general design of reinforced concrete members to withstand compression and tension
fores, as well as bending moments, would be necessary to perform. Finally, as the topic
of sustainability and green material use become increasingly important internationally, it
would be evident to perform a study of high­rise buildings consisting of timber as load
bearing elements. Particularly, as the use of timber in tall buildings are currently only in
the initial stages.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
89
==PAGE:98==
90
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:99==
Bibliography
S. Taranath, B. (2017). Tall Building Design (1.Edition). CRC Press.
S. Taranath, B. (2010). Reinforced Concrete Design of Tall Buildings (1. Edition). CRC
Press.
Nielsen, M. P., & Hoang, L. C. (2011). Limit Analysis and Concrete Plasticity (3.Edition).
CRC Press.
H. Günel, M., & E. Ilgin, H. (2014). Tall Buildings: Structural Systems and Aerodynamic
Form (1. Edition). Routledge.
Zalka, K. (2020). Structural Analysis of Multi­Storey Buildings (2.Edition). CRC Press.
Krauthammer, T. (2008). Modern Protective Structures (1.Edition). CRC Press.
Yung, D. (2008). Principles of Fire Risk Assessment in Buildings (1.Edition). Wiley.
D. Cook, R., S. Malkus, D., E. Plsesha, M., & J. Witt, R. (2001). Concepts and Applications
of Finite Element Analysis (1.Edition). John Wiley & Sons.
Chr. Jensen, B. (2012). Betonkonstruktioner efter DS/EN 1992­1­1 (2.Edition). Nyt Teknisk
Forlag.
Jensen, J. F. (2010). Betonelementbyggeriers Statik (1.Edition). Polyteknisk Forlag.
Chr. Jensen, B., & Hansen, S. O. (2005). Bygningsberegninger efter DS 409 og DS 410
(1.Edition). Nyt Teknisk Forlag.
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
91
==PAGE:100==
92
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:101==
Appendices ­ Table of Contents
A Case Study 1 ­ Core Buildings
A.1 Horizontal Deflection
A.2 Critical Load
B Case Study 2 ­ Shear Wall Buildings
B.1 Horizontal Deflection
B.2 Critical Load
C Case Study 3 ­ Rigid Frame Buildings
C.1 Horizontal Deflection
C.2 Critical Load
D Drawings
D.1 Plan Configurations
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
93
==PAGE:102==
A
Case Study 1 ­ Core Buildings
A.1
Horizontal Deflection
Figure A.1: Deflection Across 30­Storey Building
Figure A.2: Deflection Across 60­Storey Building
94
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:103==
Figure A.3: Deflection Along 30­Storey Building
Figure A.4: Deflection Along 60­Storey Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
95
==PAGE:104==
Figure A.5: FE­model ­ Deflection Across 30­Storey Building
Figure A.6: FE­model ­ Deflection Across 60­Storey Building
96
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:105==
Figure A.7: MathCad Check ­ Horizontal Deflection of 30­storey Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
97
==PAGE:106==
A.2
Critical Load
Figure A.8: Critical Load Along and Across 30­Storey and 60­Storey Buildings
(a) Critical Load Values ­ 30 Storey Building
(b) Critical Load Values ­ 60 Storey Building
Figure A.9: FE­Calculated Critical Load Values
98
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:107==
Figure A.10: MathCad Check ­ Critical Load of 30­storey Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
99
==PAGE:108==
B
Case Study 2 ­ Shear Wall Buildings
B.1
Horizontal Deflection
Figure B.1: Deflection Across 30­Storey Building
Figure B.2: Deflection Across 60­Storey Building
100
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:109==
Figure B.3: Deflection Along 30­Storey Building
Figure B.4: Deflection Along 60­Storey Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
101
==PAGE:110==
Figure B.5: FE­model ­ Deflection Across 30­Storey Building
Figure B.6: FE­model ­ Deflection Across 60­Storey Building
102
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:111==
Figure B.7: MathCad Check ­ Horizontal Deflection of 30­storey Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
103
==PAGE:112==
B.2
Critical Load
Figure B.8: Critical Load Along and Across 30­Storey and 60­Storey Buildings
(a) Critical Load Values ­ 30 Storey Building
(b) Critical Load Values ­ 60 Storey Building
Figure B.9: FE­Calculated Critical Load Values
104
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:113==
Figure B.10: MathCad Check ­ Critical Load of 30­storey Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
105
==PAGE:114==
C
Case Study 3 ­ Rigid Frame Buildings
C.1
Horizontal Deflection
Figure C.1: Deflection Across 30­Storey Building
Figure C.2: Deflection Across 30­Storey Building
106
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:115==
Figure C.3: Deflection Across 30­Storey Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
107
==PAGE:116==
Figure C.4: Deflection Across 60­Storey Building
Figure C.5: Deflection Across 60­Storey Building
108
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:117==
Figure C.6: Deflection Across 60­Storey Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
109
==PAGE:118==
Figure C.7: Deflection Along 30­Storey Building
Figure C.8: Deflection Along 30­Storey Building
110
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:119==
Figure C.9: Deflection Along 30­Storey Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
111
==PAGE:120==
Figure C.10: Deflection Along 60­Storey Building
Figure C.11: Deflection Along 60­Storey Building
112
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:121==
Figure C.12: Deflection Along 60­Storey Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
113
==PAGE:122==
Figure C.13: FE­model ­ Deflection Across 30­Storey Building
Figure C.14: FE­model ­ Deflection Across 60­Storey Building
114
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:123==
C.2
Critical Load
Figure C.15: Critical Load Across 30­Storey Building
Figure C.16: Critical Load Across 30­Storey Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
115
==PAGE:124==
Figure C.17: Critical Load Across 60­Storey Building
Figure C.18: Critical Load Across 60­Storey Building
Figure C.19: Critical Load Along 30­Storey Building
116
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:125==
Figure C.20: Critical Load Along 30­Storey Building
Figure C.21: Critical Load Along 60­Storey Building
Figure C.22: Critical Load Along 60­Storey Building
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
117
==PAGE:126==
(a) Critical Load Values ­ 30 Storey Building
(b) Critical Load Values ­ 60 Storey Building
Figure C.23: FE­Calculated Critical Load Values
118
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:127==
D
Drawings
D.1
Plan Configurations
Figure D.1: Case Study 1 with Horizontal Load
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
119
==PAGE:128==
Figure D.2: Case Study 2 with Horizontal Load
Figure D.3: Case Study 3 with Horizontal Load
120
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
==PAGE:129==
Structural Stability of High­Rise Buildings
121
==PAGE:130==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
