==PAGE:1==
Time Series predictions
in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
***
Master’s thesis report
Student:
Pierre Ouchene (s192610), DTU Master student
Supervisors:
Anders Stockmarr, DTU Associate professor
Ren´e Bødker, UCPH Senior researcher
9th July 2021
==PAGE:2==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Acknowledgements
I would like to warmly and sincerely thank the supervisors of this project, Anders Stockmarr,
DTU Associate professor, and Ren´e Bødker, UCPH Senior researcher. Both of them have
provided critical information and thinking throughout the project. Their complementary ex-
pertise helped a lot in all aspects of this work. Their investment and interest in the project
surpassed my expectations and have much to do with reaching solutions for both inital ob-
jectives.
It has been a pleasure working with them on this project.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
1
==PAGE:3==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Abstract
The range and speed of mosquito-borne disease transmission such as West Nile virus and
malaria are predicted to increase as sudden precipitation events become more frequent and
temperatures globally warm. Mosquitoes species originating from warmer climates can be
observed more and more frequently now in northern Europe, and with them come the risk of
spreading infectious diseases. In that context, the Danish Surveillance Program for Mosquito-
borne spread of Disease aims to survey the number of mosquitoes on the danish territory and
publish estimations on www.myggetal.dk, backed by sometimes incomplete or unexploited
data collected during the past 10 years in various locations across Denmark. In an eﬀort
to improve the quality of available data for the program and explore new ways to extract
additional information on mosquito population dynamics from these data, this work focuses on
estimating local mosquito density when no data are available, and estimate a daily mortality
rate for mosquitoes of the Coquillettidia genus based on the provided surveillance data. In
this report are presented the methods employed to reconstruct missing data and to estimate a
daily decay rate for Coquillettidia mosquitoes depending on local weather conditions. These
estimation methods are based on assumptions challenged and discussed in this report, and are
able to provide estimations of missing data, daily decay rate and indicators on the performance
and reliability of these estimations.
2
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:4==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Contents
1
Introduction
5
1.1
Project description and motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.2
Scope and goal of the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Report summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Related studies survey
8
2.1
On mosquito population evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
On estimating mosquito survival rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Mathematical background
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Data presentation
10
3.1
Trap system, locations and frequency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Mosquito genus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4
Missing data reconstruction
13
4.1
Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.1
ARIMA processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.1.2
Reconstruction algorithm, multi-pass ARIMA ﬁt . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.2
Daily data in Greve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2.1
Pre-processing of the data, missing days and multiple days collection .
16
4.2.2
Results analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Handling weekly data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.1
Pre-processing of the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.3.2
Weekly missing data estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.3.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.4
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4.1
Model order estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4.2
Eﬀects of zero-inﬂated distributions on ARIMA ﬁtting . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4.3
Model consistency over years, locations and genus . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4.4
Including weather data as an external regressor . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Daily survival rate estimation
25
5.1
Modelisation of available data and mosquito population evolution
. . . . . . .
25
5.1.1
Reformulation of the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.2
Analytical model for mosquito population evolution: the case of Coquil-
lettidia
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.1.3
Coupled processes for mosquito population estimation . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Daily decay rate estimation method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.1
Unobserved process reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.2
Parameters estimation algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.2.3
Model variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3.1
The case of year 2014, B = 0.25 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.3.2
Summarized result analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
Master’s thesis (s192610)
3
==PAGE:5==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
5.3.3
Estimated longevity of active mosquitoes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.4
Discussion and model expansion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4.1
Introducing out of season values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4.2
Controlling parameter A . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.4.3
Including an MA(1) term in the observed process . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4.4
Reﬁning the link between mosquito activity and temperature . . . . . .
41
5.4.5
Multiple generations of mosquitoes in a single season . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Conclusion
42
Bibliography
43
4
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:6==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
1
Introduction
1.1
Project description and motivation
Denmark surveys the number of mosquitoes every week at ﬁve diﬀerent stations, due to the
risk of outbreaks of infectious diseases like the West Nile virus. For practical reasons, most
mosquito traps are only operable three days a week (from Thursday to Sunday) on ﬁve ﬁxed
stations. A geometric average of the ﬁve traps is calculated for diﬀerent groups of mosquitoes
and published every week on www.myggetal.dk.
There is a series of problems with these average ﬁgures:
• 1) First of all, each group of mosquitoes has its own population dynamics throughout
the season.
The populations do not increase or decrease linearly, and therefore the
application of linear interpolation is not advisable for the days where the traps are not
operable.
• 2) Secondly, the weather (in particular the wind speed) decides how eﬀective the traps
are, i.e. the proportion of mosquitoes they catch is a function of the weather. The traps
catch mosquitoes with a luring and suction method that is less eﬀective when the wind
blows, thus the traps catch a relatively smaller fraction of the population at increased
wind speeds.
• 3) Thirdly, many of the traps break down frequently, causing missing data. Since there
is a diﬀerence in whether a malfunctioning trap is expected to catch many mosquitoes
or few, this introduces a bias in a prediction of the number of mosquitoes.
The initial purpose of the project is to improve the prediction of the daily number of mosqui-
toes in Denmark, the so-called ‘mosquito number’ (available at www.myggetal.dk), such that
the following issues are taken robustly into account:
• 1) that populations increase and decrease over the season, depending on meteorological
phenomenon and the species;
• 2) that the weather and in particular the wind speed aﬀect catch eﬃciency on catching
days;
• 3) that most of the traps do not operate every day in a week and break down at random
on random days.
If densities can be predicted for every day in the mosquito season, it opens the possibility to
calculate how long the diﬀerent mosquito species tend to survive in Denmark, and what is
their infection potential. It is assumed that mosquitoes have a given probability of survival
over the next 24 hours which is independent of their age. This implies that mosquitoes in
a cohort will die oﬀexponentially, such that in reality only a small part of the population
will be ‘older’ mosquitoes. Because the virus has to develop within the mosquito before it
becomes infectious, only older mosquitoes represent a risk of infection. Therefore, it has great
value to estimate the daily abundance of older mosquitoes in order to be able to estimate the
overall infection potential in an epidemiological model.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
5
==PAGE:7==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
1.2
Scope and goal of the project
The main objective of the project is to develop a model that can ‘ﬁll in the gaps’ in the
surveillance data. An intelligent method to interpolate data for the days mosquitoes are not
collected and the days the traps break down should be developed, possibly accounting for
meteorological phenomenon. From the estimated mosquito population and their evolution,
it should be possible to estimate mosquito survival in the wild, an important parameter for
modelling vector borne disease transmission. This should ultimately lead to estimate the
probability that a vector will live long enough to become infectious. To sum up the tasks to
undertake in the project:
• 1) Based on Danish surveillance data for the last 10 years, a mathematical/statist-
ical model should be developed, such that the model is able to predict the number of
mosquitoes on missing catch days and may adjust the observed mosquito densities for
variations in weather.
• 2) From estimated daily densities of mosquitoes, the daily survival rates should be
estimated, and utilized to estimate how many mosquitoes live long enough to potentially
be able to spread diseases like West Nile virus and Malaria in Denmark.
1.3
Report summary
After presenting a few similar study projects focusing on mosquito seasonality description
and survival rate estimation, the format of the provided surveillance data is described.
Afterwards, two methods for missing data reconstruction are presented and applied to estim-
ate respectively daily and weekly missing data. The design of the missing data reconstruction
algorithm and the assumptions it is based on are all detailed in this report. A summary of
the results analysis is provided, and all produced results are provided in Appendix 1: Daily
missing value reconstruction (Greve) and Appendix 2: Weekly missing value es-
timation.
Finally, the second objective of estimating a daily survival rate for the mosquitoes is tackled.
The focus is put on mosquitoes from the Coquillettidia genus, assumed to only birth from a
single generation per year (Becker et al. (2010), p.309). A method to estimate a daily motality
rate for the Coquillettidia genus is presented and implemented, based on the reconstruction of
the population size from daily capture data. This process estimates various parameters of the
mosquito population evolution, among which ﬁgures the daily mortality rate. The best estim-
ations obtained for Coquillettidia daily motality rate per year are presented, and all produced
results are provided in Appendix 3: Decay rate estimation (from Greve’s daily data).
The assumptions made and possible extensions of the estmation designed are all discussed
throughout the report, in an eﬀort to make this work reproducible and more importantly
improveable.
6
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:8==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Important remark: the appendix containing all produced results consists of more than 250
report sheets each containing several graphs. It has been chosen to provide both this report
and the appendix as separate and merged ﬁles. It is advised to have the appendix opened at
the same time as the report and go through the results as the report invites the reader to.
The structure of the appendix should become clear as the reading of the report progresses
and the result sheets are presented. The appendix also serves as the output of this project,
containing all estimated missing data and daily decay rates for the Coquillettidia genus.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
7
==PAGE:9==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2
Related studies survey
The work presented in this report is in line with mosquito population study and control, and
should be considered as part of a broader project of evaluation and forecast of the threat
mosquitoes represent as a vector of certain types of diseases.
2.1
On mosquito population evolution
Mosquitoes go through four stages in their lifetime: egg, larvae, pupae and the adult stage
(Ewing et al. (2019), page 6). Modelling the dynamics and seasonality of these stages have
been made easier by the use of large scale statistical analysis, but remain limited by the
quality and quantity of data available.
Ewing et al. (2019) present an interesting research on the dynamics of all stages backed by fre-
quent and precise seasonal abundance data for the species Culex pipiens, the common house
mosquito. By confronting the collected data to mathematical models linking the diﬀerent
stages, a strong impact of temperature on larvae mortality has been highlighted, indirectly
linking temperature and the seasonality of adult mosquitoes and explaining partly how incon-
sistent the timespan of adult mosquito season can be observed to be, although the research
experiment had only been led over a single year.
Studying further the link between mosquito population dynamics and temperature, the sci-
entiﬁc article by Ewing et al. (2016) focuses exclusively on the eﬀect of temperature on the
seasonal mosquitoe population dynamics. The focus is put on ’Culex pipiens’ again, and the
relation between its seasonal abundance and temperature. It is also explained that many
temperate mosquito are able to overwinter. In addition to the fact that egg rafts can be laid
multiple times a year, this means that the dynamics of adult mosquito population can include
multiple generations like it had been observed in the work of Ewing et al. (2019) (page 9,
ﬁgure 3).
Both studies show diﬀerent aspects of mosquito population seasonality study and the eﬀects
of diﬀerent external parameters such as temperature and rainfall, but both studies mention
the importance of challenging already established models with recent and frequent data in
an eﬀort to better predict vector-borne disease outbreaks. Due to the nature of the data
available for the work carried out and presented in this report, its low frequency and limited
scale, most of the methods of confrontation between empirical and analytical data described in
the previously mentionned studies cannot be directly applied, but elements of interpretation
and the use of weather data as explanatory variable for mosquito seasonality are explored
and applied in this project.
8
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:10==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.2
On estimating mosquito survival rate
As described in 1.2, one of the objectives of this work is to estimate a daily decay rate (or daily
mortality rate) in the wild for the available genus of mosquitoes in the provided data: Aedes,
Anopheles, Coquillettidia, Culex and Culiseta. Daily mortality rate as a single parameter of
mosquito population can be used to estimate the longevity of mosquitoes, possibly depending
on the temperature. Estimations of their longevity along with the knowledge of incubation
time of certain diseases are extremely helpful information to establish and reinforce when
studying and monitoring mosquito-borne spread of disease.
An article from Matthews et al. (2020) presents methods employed to estimate survival rates
of Anopheles mosquitoes, able to transmit the malaria parasite. Generally, few reviews of
mosquito mortality rate are available, as experiments for that matter require the mosquitoes
to live in natural conditions, meaning laboratory experiments are of limited interest to estim-
ate this particular population parameter. Diﬀerent methods of estimation are presented and
analyzed by Matthews et al. (2020), and mostly revolve around three indicators: the rate of
disappearance of a marked sample, inferences from the infectiousness of the mosquitoes or
the age or stage structure of samples.
Unfortunately, none of these indicators are available in the provided surveillance data for
this project, thus making these methods not reproducible. All the challenge of this project
comes from the nature of the data: raw capture data with possibly uneven frequency, only
capturing adult mosquitoes with no control data on other stages of their life, and no additional
information on the caught mosquitoes besides their genus. The presented research papers all
contain useful indications and information for our work of estimating mosquito density and
mortality rate, but new methods to obtain these estimations from the available data have to
be established.
2.3
Mathematical background
Most of the mathematical tools, models and processes used to solve the initial problem of
estimating missing density data and mosquito mortality rate are introduced and presented
throughout the report. It should be noted however that most of the mathematical background
necessary to understand and reproduce this work can be found in the book Time Series
Analysis, Madsen (2007), used as a reference work for this study.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
9
==PAGE:11==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3
Data presentation
Blood-feeding insect traps have been set up in various sites in Denmark, and have been col-
lecting data since 2011. This is part of a surveillance program for mosquito-borne spread of
disease, and its main purpose is to monitor the evolution of mosquito population from diﬀer-
ent genus, with a particular emphasis on genus and species able to transmit certain diseases
(Malaria, West Nile virus...) that could become more common in northern Europe in the
following years.
The available data comes in the form of a yearly table (Excel spreadsheet) set up by manu-
ally emptying traps, identifying the mosquitoes caught and reporting the date and place of
collection. The data is then harmonized between the diﬀerent sites by computing a geometric
average, and used to produce the graphs shown on the website www.myggetal.dk.
3.1
Trap system, locations and frequency
Traps designed to capture and kill blood-feeding insect have been placed in various places
across Denmark, with the most consistent placements being in the communes of ˚Arslev, Greve,
Malling, Rebild and Sorø. They mostly operate by attracting and capturing mosquitoes in a
net, simulating the presence of a mammal with CO2, octenol and heat emissions. All these
elements are naturally produced by mammals in the form of body heat, sweat and exhaled
air. Additional information on the eﬃciency of octenol-CO2 traps are studied and presented
by Roiz et al. (2011).
The trap with the highest harvest frequency is found in Greve, and is shown in ﬁgure 1.
Figure 1: ’Mosquito magnet’ trap used for blood-feeding insect collection in Greve.
10
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:12==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Let us now introduce the way data is collected and stored by desribing the way mosquito
traps are operated:
• The trap (empty) is switched on on a certain day denoted Trap start date.
• After some time (usually 1 to 3 days), the trap is shut down and the caught mosquitoes
collected. That day is denoted Trap end date.
• The genus and species of collected mosquitoes are identiﬁed, and their number saved in
a data entry along with Trap start date, Trap end date and the location.
• After some time (possibly immediatly, up to a few weeks) the trap is switched on again
and the process executed again.
Following this process between (generally) June and September, yearly data sheets are set up.
The data can be quite inconsistent as the number of collecting days (informally Trap end date−
Trap start date) and the time between successive data entries can vary between locations and
years. The site in Greve is to diﬀerentiate from all others, as the collection frequency is way
higher.
3.2
Dataset
All data come in the form of a yearly excel table, in which each entry (line) corresponds to a
single harvest and sorting of caught mosquitoes in a single trap. Consistently available data
parameters (column names) are the following:
• Site: location of the trap, among the communes of ˚Arslev, Greve, Malling, Rebild and
Sorø. Data for 2011 and 2012 are only available at Greve, while data at all site are
available between 2013 and 2020.
• Trap start date ∶day the trap has been set on and starts catching mosquitoes.
• Trap end date ∶day the trap stops catching mosquitoes, the caught mosquitoes are
harvested and counted.
• Days: Number of days the trap has been operating, mainly used to check consistency
between Trap start date and Trap end date.
• Aedes: number of caught mosquitoes identiﬁed as members of the Aedes genus.
• Anopheles: number of caught mosquitoes identiﬁed as members of the Anopheles genus.
• Coquillettidia: number of caught mosquitoes identiﬁed as members of the Coquillettidia
genus.
• Culex: number of caught mosquitoes identiﬁed as members of the Culex genus.
• Culiseta: number of caught mosquitoes identiﬁed as members of the Culiseta genus.
• ...: additionnal unexploited parameters giving the number of caught mosquitoes per
species for each genus.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
11
==PAGE:13==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.3
Mosquito genus
Every time a trap is emptied and data is reported, the mosquitoes are identiﬁed and classiﬁed
into genus and species. The genus reported include:
• Aedes: now found in most regions of the planet, some species of this genus transmit
serious diseases including dengue fever, yellow fever, the Zika virus and chikungunya.
• Anopheles: some species are able to live in colder latitudes, and the genus is infamous
for its role as a malaria parasite vector.
• Coquillettidia: possible vector of disease, biting both birds and mammals. Has been
observed to only have one generation per year under the right weather conditions (Becker
et al. (2010), p.309).
• Culex: fairly common mosquito genus, possible vector of West Nile virus and avian
malaria.
• Culiseta.
The classiﬁcation into species give very sparse data and is of limited interest for this speciﬁc
work, therefore not accounted for.
12
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:14==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
4
Missing data reconstruction
The objective of the ﬁrst part of the project consists in developping a statistical model
able to predict the number of mosquitoes on missing catch days for the last 10
years and which may adjust the observed mosquito densities for variations in
weather.
The data are considered year by year, genus by genus and site by site, meaning that a given
year, genus and site yields one single time series with missing data to reconstruct using this
same set of data.
4.1
Method
The method employed for estimating missing data consists in establishing a ﬁrst model that
aims to describe elements of the structure observed in the available data, use the available
data to ﬁt the model and its parameters, forecast values for missing days, and ﬁnally analyze
the performance of the model. When describing the process of ﬁtting the model, it will come
up as necessary to reiterate the ﬁtting using the newly forecast data to achieve consistency
over the whole set of available data.
A few interesting points should be immediatly highlighted in the available data:
• traps operate for at most a few months per year;
• for all sites except Greve, most weeks have only one harvest, thus a single entry summing
the amount of mosquitoes caught over 3 days;
• data show some form of trend starting and ending close to zero whith potentially mul-
tiple rising and decreasing seasonal trends depending on the number of mosquito gen-
erations each genus is able to produce in a year.
For these reasons,non-stationary models are considered at ﬁrst. A class of non-stationnary
models that allow for quick testing, forecating and model analysis due to the wide array
of libraries and built-in tools in most porgramming languages are the ARIMA processes
presented below.
4.1.1
ARIMA processes
For a more in-depth and formal description of ARIMA processes, the reader can refer to
Madsen (2007) which was used as a reference work for this project.
A process (yt) is called an integrated autoregressive moving average, or in short an ARIMA(p,
d, q) process, if it can be written in the form
φ(B)∇dyt = θ(B)ϵt
(1)
where (ϵt) is a white noise (i.e. a sequence of mutually uncorrelated identically distributed
zero mean random variables), φ(z−1) is a polynomial of order p, B is the backward shift
Master’s thesis (s192610)
13
==PAGE:15==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
operator BkPt = Pt−k and θ(z−1) is a polynomial of order q, both polynomials φ and θ having
all roots inside the unit circle.
The general purpose of using an ARIMA model to describe a process is to diﬀerentiate said
process to achieve stationnarity (or at least assume it), and then describe the diﬀerentiated
process with an ARMA process. An ARMA(p,q) process (zt) can be described by:
zt + φ1zt−1 + ... + φpzt−p = ϵt + θ1ϵt−1 + ... + θqϵt−q
(2)
where ϵt is white noise.
4.1.2
Reconstruction algorithm, multi-pass ARIMA ﬁt
The algorithm set up to estimate missing values is designed to operate in two distinct steps: a
ﬁrst pass over the data to estimate missing data while ﬁtting an initial model simultaneously,
and all subsequent passes where data estimation and model ﬁtting are separated and done
successively until stability is reached. Let the current date be a day in the mosquito season,
meaning that capture data are available up until now but more mosquitoes may be caught
the following days. The objective here is to estimate the missing values in all previous days
of the current season using all data available up until now.
Important remark: the algorithm detailed below can only be applied when daily values are
available, in this case only in Greve, for reasons detailed in 4.3. This mainly comes from the
data given as a sum of catches for multiple days in all sites except Greve that do not allow to
diﬀerentiate daily. An adaptation of the algorithm for other sites and weekly data is detailed
in 4.3.
Here is a description of the reconstruction algorithm for daily data:
• 1) First pass: using data ranging from the start of this mosquito season (the ﬁrst day
the trap at the considered location caught a mosquito of the considered genus this year),
consider the ﬁrst day data is missing.
Using values up to this day, ﬁt an ARIMA model and apply a 1-step predition to es-
timate the missing value.
Consider the next untreated missing value, ﬁt an ARIMA model using the days up to
said missing value including the past estimated missing values, and estimate the next
missing value by a 1-step prediction of the ARIMA model.
Proceed until all missing values have been estimated.
• 2) Second an further passes: Fit an ARIMA model on all available days including
the estimated values from the previous pass, and keep its parameters constant for the
entirety of this pass.
Estimate again the ﬁrst missing value using the ﬁxed ARIMA model and previous val-
ues, without ﬁtting the model again.
Proceed until all missing values have a new estimation.
14
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:16==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Keep iterating (ﬁtting a new model using estimated data, obtain new estimates using
this model, etc...) until stability or convergence is attained.
• 3) Stopping criterion: several stopping criteria have been studied, including the
squared distance between the model’s parameter vectors, or the sum of squared residuals
from the ARIMA process. In the end the model’s ’Akaike’s Information Criteria (AIC)’
(introduced below) has been chosen as a convergence indicator, stopping when relative
improvements (i.e. decrease) between successive AICs are inferior to a given tolerance
(ex: a less than 0.1% decrease).
Most of the time two behaviours have been observed: either the model converges and
eventually the estimated values do not change in further passes, or the model seems to
diverge by alternating between two models (i.e. convergence is observed separately for
even and odds passes) in which case the lowest AIC model is selected.
The previously introduced Akaike’s Information Criteria (AIC) is deﬁned by
AIC = −2log(max. likelihood) + 2ni
(3)
where ni is the number of estimated model parameters, and is explicitly described for ARMA
processes in Madsen (2007). The value of the log likelihood of the data is the logarithm of
the probability of the observed data coming from the estimated model. The method used
to estimate this log-likelihood can vary from a library to another, and as a reference the
programming language R has been used throughout this project.
From a set including missing data, the algorithm above should be able to estimate the missing
data using a rather simple structure of ARIMA process. There a numerous advantages to
using an ARIMA process, including:
• 1) ﬁtting the model and forecasting data can be done using available libraries in most
programming languages;
• 2) indicators are available to analyze the performance of the model in the form of the
model’s residuals behaviour (distribution, variance, autocorrelation);
• 3) the whole procedure can be executed even before the end of the mosquito season, every
day of additionnal data having an inﬂuence on the estimation of past missing values
from the same season. This is especially desirable as the data are used as a surveillance
indicator of mosquito activity and are updated weekly on the website www.myggetal.dk.
First, the missing data estimation procedure will be applied to every year and genus available
at Greve, only site where daily data are available. Adapting the algorithm to handle weekly
entries still requires some more data pre-processing.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
15
==PAGE:17==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
4.2
Daily data in Greve
4.2.1
Pre-processing of the data, missing days and multiple days collection
Data collected form the trap located in Greve usually have a daily frequency. Occasionnally,
harvesting only happens after 2 or 3 days, requiring cleaning and pre-processing data before
applying the daily version of the missing data estimation algorithm described in 4.1.2.
Data pre-processing for Greve:
• If Trap end date is not the immediate day after Trap start date, distribute evenly all
caught mosquitoes over the cathing days.
• If an entry has been incorrectly ﬁlled in, for instance if the number of catching days
does not match the diﬀerence between Trap start date and Trap end date, the location
has been omitted or the trap has been declared as malfunctionning, then the entry is
considered missing and will later be estimated by the missing data estimation procedure.
Evenly distributing mosquitoes over multiple days will often result in a non whole number of
caught mosquitoes associated to a given day which is not problem as it is already the case
on speciﬁc days. For example after sorting mosquitoes into genus, if they are too numerous
only a portion of the mosquitoes is actually accounted for, multiplied by a factor depending
on the weight or visual size of the sample.
Finally, it has been observed that the data distribution is heavily zero-inﬂated, and some years
present great variations in scale during a single season. To account for that, two measures
have been taken:
• 1) Data has been truncated to include only a given number of days with no mosquitoes
caught before the ﬁrst day and after the last day any mosquito was caught at all. This
eﬀectively consists in setting a beginning and ending to the mosquito activity season.
The amount of days prior to and following mosquito activity season to include vary
between 0 and 3 days, eﬀectively depending on if it breaks the algorithm or not.
• 2) The data has been log transformed (and this cannot be emphasized enough!),
meaning that if we denote mt the number of mosquitoes of a given genus caught by the
trap in Greve on day t after eventually distributing the catches over multiple days, the
series reconstructed by the multi-pass ARIMA algorithm is yt = log(1 + mt).
These pre-processing steps applied to the collection data in Greve for a speciﬁc genus on a
speciﬁc year yields a series of log transformed catching data (yt)t with possibly missing values
(either from the trap not operating, or the data being incorrectly ﬁlled-in) ready to be passed
through the multi-pass ARIMA reconstruction algorithm.
16
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:18==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
4.2.2
Results analysis
Model order selection: the method to select a global model order is detailed further
in 4.4.1.
It has been selected to use an ARIMA(2,1,1) process to modelize the daily log
transformed catching data (yt)t:
zt = yt −yt−1
(4)
zt = φ1zt−1 + φ2zt−2 + et + θ1et−1
(5)
(6)
The daily missing data estimation algorithm has been applied to all available data in Greve
between years 2011 and 2020. All results are available in Appendix 1: Daily missing
value reconstruction (Greve) in the form of summary sheets such as the one available in
ﬁgure 2. Diﬀerent types of results have been obtained:
• 1) Increasing AIC (ex: 2011, Greve, Aedes): despite reaching a minimum value for the
model’s AIC at some point, the model keeps evolving as the estimated values change,
changing the newly ﬁtted model and thus the values ﬁtted during the following iterations
until stability is achieved.
• 2) Decreasing AIC (ex: 2011, Greve, Anopheles): some results from this category
might end up in the previous category if more passes are executed The algorithm stops
at this pointpossibly because of the tolerance value for successive AICs improvement
(stopping criterion).
• 3) 2-passes execution (ex: 2012, Greve, Culex): 2 is the minimum number of passes
required for the algorithm to execute, and usually happens when either few or no data
are missing, or when no mosquitoes were caught for most of the season.
Residual analysis:
for each combination of year and genus, ﬁgures presented in Ap-
pendix 1: Daily missing value reconstruction (Greve) include the error (or residuals)
of the ARIMA model used for reconstruction along with their autocorrelation and partial-
autocorrelation. These last two quantities are used to verify if the error can be considered a
white noise. If the value of the ACF and PACF remain inside the conﬁdence bands (around
zero), this indicates that the order of the ARIMA model might be adequate. If signiﬁcant
values of autocorrelation and partial-autocorrelation are observed at a given lag, this means
that there is some form of correlation between the errors that should be taken into account
and potentially eliminated by increasing the order of the ARIMA model. A high value of
autocorrelation at a given lag means that the series exchanges power/information with itself
delayed by said lag (interpretation derived from the formula for autocorreltion, see Madsen
(2007)). For almost all of the results obtained, the residuals’s autocorrelation stays inside
the conﬁdence band, meaning little to no structure can be observed in the part of the series
yt not explained by the ARIMA process. The few times larger values of autocorrelation are
observed at certain lags (ex: 2011, Culex or 2018, Aedes) are not signiﬁcant enough to justify
increasing the order of the ARIMA(2,1,1) model employed.
All these observations seem to conﬁrm that using an ARIMA(2,1,1) model to explain part of
the data structure is absolutely possible, and the values estimated using the algorithm set up
in 4.1.2 ﬁt in nicely within the identiﬁed ARIMA structure.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
17
==PAGE:19==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 2: Example of daily missing data estimation (red). Site: Greve. Year: 2011. Genus:
Coquillettidia
18
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:20==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
4.3
Handling weekly data
After estimating missing data coming from the site in Greve, it is now time to tackle all other
locations. However as explained in 3.2 data for all other site are available at a much lower
frequency. The consequences on the estimation of missing data using a similar procedure as
precedently are detailed further.
4.3.1
Pre-processing of the data
Data collected form the traps located at all sites except Greve usually have a weekly harvest
frequency and a catching duration of three days, requiring cleaning and pre-processing the
data before applying an adapted version of the missing data estimation algorithm described
in 4.1.2.
Weekly data pre-processing:
• The weeks in a season are considered one by one, a week starting and ending on Monday
12am. All mosquitoes caught during a week are added up per genus, divided by the
number of days the trap has been running during the week and then multiplied by 7 to
get a weekly average of mosquitoes caught.
• If an entry has been incorrectly ﬁlled in, for instance is the number of catching days
does not match the diﬀerence between Trap start date and Trap end date, the location
has been omitted or the trap has been declared as malfunctionning, then the entry is
considered missing for the week and will later be estimated by the missing data estim-
ation procedure.
This pre-processing of the data yields weekly values by forming weekly averages of mosquitoes
caught from the days a trap has been catching mosquitoes during said week. Missing values
will only appear if an entry has been ﬁlled in incorrectly, of is a trap has not run for an
entire week ranging fron Monday to Sunday. This means that data for days a trap has not
been running in a week where it ran at least one day are not estimated. This change is neces-
sary to apply a similar estimation procedure to the one described in 4.1.2 and adapted in 4.3.2.
Finally, it has been observed that the data distribution is still heavily zero-inﬂated, and some
years present great variations in scale between weeks during a single season. To account for
that, two measures have been taken:
• 1) Data has been truncated to include only a given number of weeks with no mosquitoes
caught before the ﬁrst week and after the last week any mosquito was caught at all. This
eﬀectively consists in setting a beginning and ending to the mosquito activity season.
The amount of week prior to and following mosquito activity season to include vary
between 0 and 3 week, eﬀectively depending on if it breaks the algorithm or not.
• 2) The data has been log transformed (and this cannot be emphasized enough!),
meaning that if we denote mt the average number of mosquitoes of a given genus caught
by a trap during a week t, the series reconstructed by the multi-pass ARIMA algorithm
is yt = log(1 + mt).
Master’s thesis (s192610)
19
==PAGE:21==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
These pre-processing steps applied to the collection data for a speciﬁc genus on a speciﬁc year
yields out a series of weekly log transformed catching data (yt)t with possibly missing values
(either from the trap not operating for an entire week, or the data being incorrectly ﬁlled-in)
ready to be passed through and adapted version of the multi-pass ARIMA reconstruction
algorithm established previously.
4.3.2
Weekly missing data estimation
The algorithm set up to estimate weekly missing values is designed to operate similarly to
the daily algorithm (4.1.2) in two distinct steps: a ﬁrst pass over the data to estimate values
for missing weeks and ﬁt an initial model simultaneously, and then all subsequent passes
where data estimation and model ﬁtting are separated and done successively until stability
is reached. Let the current time t be a week in the mosquito season, meaning that capture
data are available up until now but more mosquitoes may be caught the following weeks. The
objective here is to estimate the missing values for previous weeks of the current season using
all data available up until now.
Important remark: the algorithm detailed below operates on weekly data, meaning that
each value represents a weekly average of mosquitoes caught. The algorithm described in
4.1.2 breaks when applied to daily data other than from Greve. To describe the problem
brieﬂy, most weeks of data in all sites except Greve consist of a period of 3 consecutive days
of catching with a single harvest after these 3 days, eﬀectivelly yielding a single entry per
week. If the data are pre-processed to distribute the mosquitoes evenly over these 3 days,
each week would consists of the 3 same values followed by missing data. If one denotes such
series xt then the diﬀerentiated series xt −xt−1 is always either 0 or a missing value, and
an ARIMA(p,d,q) ﬁt on the daily series xt will have its autoregressive AR(p) and moving
average MA(q) coeﬃcients equal to zero when using the same range or order than for the
Greve data. The only way to estimate anything else than a piecewise constant output for
daily data would be to increase greatly the order of the ARIMA process, giving up on any
consistency between the estimates for Greve’s data and all other data. For these reasons, it
has been chosen to process weekly data.
Here is a description of the reconstruction algorithm for weekly data:
• 1) First pass: using weekly pre-processed data ranging from the start of this mosquito
season (Monday of the ﬁrst week the trap at the considered location caught a mosquito
of the considered genus this year), consider the ﬁrst week an entry is missing.
Using values up to this week, ﬁt an ARIMA model and apply a 1-step predition to
estimate the missing value.
Consider the next untreated missing value, ﬁt an ARIMA model using the days up to
said missing value including the past estimated missing values, and estimate the next
missing value by a 1-step prediction of the newly ﬁtted ARIMA model.
Proceed until all missing values have been estimated.
• 2) Second an further passes: Fit an ARIMA model on all available weeks of the
season including the estimated values from the previous pass, and keep the model’s
parameters constant for all the next pass.
20
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:22==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Estimate again the ﬁrst missing value using the ﬁxed ARIMA model and previous val-
ues, without ﬁtting the model again.
Proceed until all missing values have a new estimation.
Keep iterating (ﬁtting a new model using estimated data, obtain new estimates using
this model, etc...) until stability or convergence is attained.
• 3) Stopping criterion: several stopping criteria have been studied, including the
squared distance between the model’s parameter vectors, or the sum of squared residuals
from the ARIMA process. In the end the model’s ’Akaike’s Information Criteria (AIC)’
(introduced in 4.1.2) has been chosen as a convergence indicator, stopping when relative
improvements between successive AICs are inferior to a given tolerance (ex: a .1%
improvement).
Most of the time two behaviours have been observed: either the model converges and
eventually the estimated values do not change in further passes, or the model seems to
diverge by alternating between two models (i.e. convergence is observed separately for
even and odds passes) in which case the lowest AIC model should be selected.
From a set including missing data, the algorithm above should be able to estimate the missing
data using a rather simple structure of ARIMA process. This time the procedure is applied
to every year and genus available at all sites except Greve, operating on weekly data.
4.3.3
Results
All otbained results are available in Appendix 2: Weekly missing value estimation at
sites ˚Arslev, Malling, Rebild and Sorø for years 2013 to 2020. First of all, notice that some
results are missing. Due to the low number of weeks sometimes available by season, and the
still relatively high number of mosquito-less harvests, ﬁtting an ARIMA(2,1,1) model is not
always feasible.
All missing data reconstruction and ARIMA model ﬁtting come with representations of the
model’s residuals which are of great interest to justiﬁy modelling weekly catching data
by and ARIMA(2,1,1) model. In particular, the autocorrelation function ACF and partial-
autocorrelation function PACF (see Madsen (2007) for deﬁnition and use of these functions)
systematically stay within the conﬁdence bands, thus not rejecting the hypothesis that the
error of the ARIMA model consists of a white noise.
The same behaviours for the algorithm as the ones described in 4.2.2 can be observed: In-
creasing AIC (ex: 2017, Sorø, Aedes), Decreasing AIC (ex: 2017, Malling, Anopheles)
and 2-passes execution (ex: 2018, Sorø, Coquillettidia). Generally it can be observed that:
• on years with no missing data (ex:
2016, Malling, Coquillettidia), ﬁtting an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) process on the data series does not lead to any inconsistencies or disquali-
fying obervations;
• on years with missing data (ex:
2016, Sorø, Aedes, ﬁgure 3), the multi-pass AR-
IMA(2,1,1) weekly estimation algorithm yields estimates for missing data that ﬁts within
the identiﬁed ARIMA(2,1,1) structure in the available data.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
21
==PAGE:23==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
All in all, the adapation of the multi-pass ARIMA reconstruction algorithm to weekly data
yields satisfactory results for missing data estimation without raising any critical inconsist-
encies.
Figure 3: Example of weekly missing data estimation (red). Site: Sorø. Year: 2016. Genus:
Aedes
22
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:24==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
4.4
Discussion
In this section are provided discussions on the method employed to set up missing data
estimation models, on considered expansions, improvements and additionnal possible features.
4.4.1
Model order estimation
Both introduced algorithms (daily and weekly reconstruction) make use of an ARIMA(2,1,1)
model for data modelling and estimation.
The order of the model for daily data has been established by successively increasing the
order of the model and analyzing the error’s autocorrelation and partial-autocorrelation. If
any signiﬁcant values for these functions can be consistently observed at a speciﬁc lag, this
highlights some form of structure in the model’s error. Raising the model’s order can possibly
remove that structure.
When only using an ARIMA(1,1,1) process, the error’s ACF and PACF regularly reached out
of the conﬁdence bands for the white noise hypothesis. Increasing the order to ARIMA(1,1,2)
corrected a good portion of the compromising values, and switching to ARIMA(2,1,1) re-
moved almost all autocorrelation in the model’s error as can be observed in the results in
Appendix 1: Daily missing value reconstruction (Greve).
The order for weekly data has been set similar to the daily ARIMA process, but due to the
low amount of data available per year the order cannot be increased too much further due
to risks of overﬁtting. It might be possible to lower the model’s order, but the wide selection
of combinations for year, site and genus makes consistency harder to achieve. The AR and
MA coeﬃcients’s signiﬁcance has also been studied in the form of the variance of their
estimators: as each of the ARIMA(2,1,1) coeﬃcients has been observed to be signiﬁcant in
at least one application, it has been chosen to not lower the model’s order. As no outliers
have been observed in the error’s autocorrelation, increasing the model’s order is not justiﬁed.
4.4.2
Eﬀects of zero-inﬂated distributions on ARIMA ﬁtting
When detailing daily data pre-processing (4.2.1), it has been mentionned that mutliple-days
harvests have been distributed evenly, meaning that the same amount of caught mosquitoes
has been declared for these days, eﬀectively setting the diﬀerence of successive values at zero.
This was the very reason that the daily algorithm could not be applied to weekly harvests.
It also means that the overrepresentation of piecewise constant portions in daily data along
with the few range of values taken by the weekly data series skews the ARIMA ﬁtting towards
small coeﬃcients, close to zero. The consequences of this are:
• a reduced part of the variations in the data is actually explained by the ARIMA process,
highlighted by the shape of the model’s error being close to the shape of the original
signal;
• the model’s coeﬃcient’s signiﬁcance analysis using their estimator’s variance not being
consistently reliable due to the speciﬁc nature of the data.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
23
==PAGE:25==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
4.4.3
Model consistency over years, locations and genus
When discussing model order estimation in 4.4.1, a point to be consistent across locations,
years and genus has been made. It had been considered at some point to build an ’average
model’ for each genus, either across sites, years or both to hopefully observe some consist-
ency, the objective being to have the coeﬃcients of the ARIMA models used for missing data
estimation depend solely on the mosquito genus.
However no consistency other than the model’s order has been observed when ﬁtting ARIMA
models on the available data. This can be explained by the mosquitoes population evolution
and activity level being dependent on the weather, the weather itself being inconsistent across
years and locations.
4.4.4
Including weather data as an external regressor
It has been mentionned in the inital objective of the project that the model ’may adjust the
observed mosquito densities for variations in weather’. This has been taken into account in
the second part of the project by linking temperature and mosquito activity levels. It also
has been experimented to include weather conditions as external regressors on the weekly
missing data estimation to try to explain the diﬀerences between locations and years while
ﬁnally producing a consistent model for each genus. The considered weather conditions are:
• Wind speed and direction: wind speed, changes in wind directions and turbulences
all have an impact on mosquitoes activity and trap eﬃciency, meaning that a trap
might catch less mosquitoes because it is windy, and not because there are less active
mosquitoes alive in the region;
• Temperature: temperature has an inﬂuence on the cycle of life of mosquitoes (number
of generations), their survival rate at diﬀerent stages, their activity and infectiousness;
• Precipitations: rainfall can impact mosquito activity, but most importantly the avail-
ability of potential breeding habitat.
• Solar radiation: linked to cloud coverage and brightness, this has been considered
to deﬁne the time window for mosquito activity each day. This information can be
used to select only part of the weather data relevant to what one seeks to modelize, for
example: are wind, rainfall and temperature as signiﬁcant during the time of day when
mosquitoes are usually inactive?
Unfortunately this did not give the hoped results, as weelky data are not frequent enough to
use many external regressors without stepping into overﬁtting. Because it is essential to have
data across diﬀerent locations and years to verify what part of the variations the weather can
explain, more frequent data should be gathered across sites and time and a reduction of the
ARIMA model’s order considered before including weather data as external regressors.
24
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:26==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
5
Daily survival rate estimation
The second part of this master’s thesis project focuses on objective n°2 described in 1.2: from
estimated daily densities of mosquitoes, the daily survival rates should be estimated, and
utilized to estimate how many mosquitoes live long enough to potentially be able to spread
diseases like West Nile virus and Malaria in Denmark.
The estimation of a ’daily decay rate’ (i.e.: the probability that a given mosquito does not
live another day) proved to be a challenging modelling exercise, as the data available does
not come with speciﬁc experiments or classiﬁcation of the caught mosquitoes that would have
allowed to apply the decay rate estimation methods described in Matthews et al. (2020). In-
stead, from simple models of the evolution of mosquito population through their season and
the inﬂuence of temperature on their biting frequency, results close to decay rates that can
be found in the litterature have been obtained and can be further improved by following a
similar method while introducing additionnal explaining data.
It should also be noted that even if the objective of the two parts of the project are diﬀerent,
they use the same two underlying sets of data: the mosquito surveillance data (location, date
and number of mosquitoes caught) and the weather data. Furthermore the reconstructed and
completed data obtained as a result from the work carried out in the ﬁrst half of the project
is used for decay rate estimation. If one read through the explanations and motivations that
led to the construction of the previous models used for missing data estimation, the assump-
tions and hypothesis formulated to modelize the evolution of mosquito population through
the season and the variations in their activity will seem familiar.
5.1
Modelisation of available data and mosquito population evolution
5.1.1
Reformulation of the problem
As a way to introduce the thought process employed to desgin a solution to the problem
in the form of an algorithm that produces an estimation of the daily mortality rate, let us
reformulate the problem as follows:
• Assuming that each day a mosquito living in the wild has a ﬁxed probability to die
independently from his age, meaning that each day a ﬁxed percentage of the mosquito
population alive the day before has passed away, estimate a daily decay rate using
the collection data of the traps presented in 3. Data presentation.
There are two distinct features of interest that require hypothesis to be made to modelize
them:
• Firstly, the number of mosquitoes caught on a given day at a certain site does not only
depend on the mosquito population alive at that place and time. Due to the way the
traps operate, the number of mosquitoes caught reﬂects the activity of the mosquitoes,
which in turn depends greatly on the weather conditions.
• Secondly, the modelling of mosquito population evolution over an entire season is in
itself a signiﬁcantly challenging task, considered out of the scope of this project. The
Master’s thesis (s192610)
25
==PAGE:27==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
chosen focus on time series reconstruction and parametrization along with the lack of
background on living population modelling, the time constraint of the project and the
lack of direct observations of the mosquito population led to setting up and using a
simpliﬁed parametric model to represent the mosquito population dynamics.
To sum up, the ﬁrst process of interest for which observations are available (refered to as the
observed process) is the number of active mosquitoes caught by the traps each day, which
depends on the overall population size, the trap eﬃciency and the mosquito activity, itself
depending on the weather conditions. The second process of interest for which no observtions
are available (refered to as the unobserved process) is the number of living mosquitoes
’in the vicinity of a given trap’, i.e. the cohort of mosquitoes that can potentially be caught
were they to be actively seeking to bite.
To give a hint on the way the algorithm will operate and justify introducing a model for the
evolution of a single-generation mosquito population, the objective will be to reconstruct the
unobserved process (in which the decay rate appears as a parameter) from the observations
of the observed process. Therefore these two processes have to be established and linked.
5.1.2
Analytical model for mosquito population evolution: the case of Coquil-
lettidia
As explained in the reformulation of the problem, a simple model for the evolution of the
mosquito population through a season should be established. It has been chosen to focus on
the Coquillettidia genus as they have been observed to retain a univoltine lifecycle (one single
generation per year, Becker et al. (2010) p.309) under certain weather conditions, mostly in
not too high temperatures. From the caught mosquito data in Denmark used for this pro-
ject, it has been observed that Coquillettidia eﬀectively seems to have one generation per year.
Let us present the assumptions made on the evolution of their population and derive an
analytical expression and a daily process description:
• Mosquitoes from the Coquillettidia genus only give birth to a single generation of mos-
quitoes.
• Due to the proximity of mosquitoes in a cohort, it is assumed that as the weather and
overall living conditions have been the same then the parameters of the population
model remain homogenous within a cohort of mosquitoes.
• Each day a ﬁxed percentage of the mosquito population alive the day before dies.
• The day a given egg from the cohort hatches, the day a given larvae becomes a mosquito
and the day a given mosquito becomes old enough to be active and bite all follow a
normal distribution with the same ﬁxed mean and deviation for a given cohort, and
the duration of the diﬀerent stages of life are considered ﬁxed. This last assumption
can be simpliﬁed into the following: the number of mosquitoes entering the category of
’actively biting mosquitoes’ follows a normal distribution.
The last assumption might be the furthest away from reality, as a lot of these parameter
will depend greatly on the tempereture. However this assumption mainly serves as a way
26
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:28==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
to describe the inﬂux of new mosquitos that become part of the ’active population’ which is
ultimately the unobserved process this work tries to modelize and reconstruct.
Following these assumptions, and denoting x(t) the number of active mosquitoes in a cohort
at a given time/day t, then the following diﬀerential model is established:
dx
dt (t) = Au(t) −ηx(t)
(7)
where:
• x(t) is the number of active mosquitoes,
• A > 0 is a scaling constant,
• u(t) is the ’daily innovation’, i.e. the daily inﬂux of mosquitoes that become part of
the active population able to bite and transmit diseases,
• η > 0 the ’decay rate’ of the population.
Transforming this equation into a discrete process yields the ﬁrst version of the description
of the unobserved process x:
xt = (1 −η)xt−1 + Aut + e1,t
(8)
where (e1,t) are hopefully observed to be independent identically distributed white noise.
It has been chosen to represent u as a normal curve with parametric mean µ and stand-
ard deviation σ: u(t) = fµ,σ2(t) where f is the density of the normal distribution fµ,σ2(t) =
1
√
2πσ2 e−
1
2σ2 (t−µ)2. This assumption can be easily changed, for example to assume a constant
and uniform number of new mosquitoes each day for a given period of time, or include an
initial burst of new mosquitoes that rapidly disappears. These models for the innovation
process u could be established from surveillance data of the egg, larvae and pupae stages of
the mosquito life cycle, and example for the species Culex pipiens have been studied in both
studies Ewing et al. (2016) and Ewing et al. (2019).
Let us continue further with the study of an analytical expression for x(t) as it will be used
to estimate the parameters that allow for a reconstruction as close to the anaytical solution
possible. Looking for a solution in the form
x(t) = h(t)e−ηt,
it comes from equation 7
dx
dt (t) = h′(t)e−ηt −ηx(t)
indicating that
Master’s thesis (s192610)
27
==PAGE:29==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
h′(t) = Afµ,σ2(t)eηt.
Integrating, it is found that:
h(t) = c0 + A∫
t
0 fµ,σ2(t)eηtdu
= c0 + A
1
√
2πσ2 ∫
t
0 exp( −
1
2σ2 (u2 −2uµ + µ2) + ηu)du
= c0 + A
1
√
2πσ2 ∫
t
0 exp( −
1
2σ2 (u2 −2u(µ + σ2η) + µ2))du
= c0 + A
1
√
2πσ2 exp(σ2η(2µ + σ2η))∫
t
0 exp( −
1
2σ2 (u −(µ + σ2η))2)du
= c0 + A
1
√
2πσ2 exp(σ2η(2µ + σ2η))Φµ+σ2η,σ2(t)
where Φµ+σ2η,σ2(t) is the distribution function for the normal distribution with mean µ + σ2η
and variance σ2. Introducing the constant
c2 = A
1
√
2πσ2 exp(σ2η(2µ + σ2η))
an analytic expression for the active population of the considered mosquito cohort denoted
xA from now on is obtained:
xA(t) = (c0 + c2Φµ+σ2η,σ2(t))e−ηt.
(9)
As a reference is presented in ﬁgure 4 an example of the analytical solution xA(t). This
analytical expression will be used to estimate the parameters of the two-process model by
solving the following problem: assuming that the unobserved active mosquito population
x(t) can be described by the previously presented model including a Gaussian distribution of
daily newly active mosquitoes and a constant decay rate, what parameters of the model give
a reconstruction of the unobserved signal as close as possible to the analytical expression?
28
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:30==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 4: Analytical solution xA(t) for = 1.103,µ = 10,σ = 2 and η = 5%.
5.1.3
Coupled processes for mosquito population estimation
The ﬁnal step in setting up the model revolves around describing the available data by a
process involving the mosquito population of which the parameters should be estimated. To
do so, the observed process yt = log(1+Caught mosquitoest) is introduced, and the following
assumptions are made:
• yt represents the logarithm of 1 + Mosquitoes caught on day t where t = 0 is the ﬁrst
day the traps operate in a given year in Greve;
• yt depends on xt, the size of the active mosquitoes cohort in a vicinity of the trap, in a
way that scales with the population size by a factor B representing the eﬃciency of the
trap independently from the weather conditions;
• the dependency of yt on yt−1 is introduced in the form of an AR(1) term to account for
continuity in the overall conditions around the trap, especially the weather conditions
not speciﬁcally accounted for in the model;
• yt depends on the temperature over the present and past days, in a way that reﬂects
the change in mosquito activity and biting frequency with the temperature. This phe-
nomenon explored and described by Shapiro et al. (2017) should be accounted for, as for
example higher temperatures in certain range can result in a higher mosquito activity
and biting frequency and thus a higher number of mosquitoes caught while the number
of active mosquitoes in the cohort stays the same.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
29
==PAGE:31==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Establishing these assumptions, the objective is to account for various parameters that inﬂu-
ence the number of caught mosquitoes in order to reconstruct the number of active mosquitoes
xt. The following processes are ﬁnally introduced:
xt = (1 −η)xt−1 + Au(t,µ,σ2) + e1,t
(10)
yt = log(B(1 + xt)) + Cyt−1 + f(Ts≤t) + e2,t
(11)
where as a reminder:
• x(t) is the size of the cohort of mosquitoes from which mosquitoes are caught,
• yt represents log(1+ Number of mosquitoes caught),
• f a deterministic function to determine and improve on by looking at the relation
between the temperature and the residuals of the models,
• η,µ and σ are parameters of the evolution of the cohort size.
5.2
Daily decay rate estimation method
5.2.1
Unobserved process reconstruction
The modelisation work carried out to estimate a daily decay rate derives from intuition and
observed phenomenons, but remains heavy in assumptions due to the limited and sparse
nature of the data. These are necessary as the ﬁnal objective is to estimate a parameter from
a process for which no observations are available, and the link between the observed and unob-
served processes is not explicitely known and must be established from the assumptions made.
The processes decribed in equation 11 allow for a reconstruction of xt from yt which will
ultimately result in an estimation of the daily decay rate η for the Coquilletidia for mutliple
years. The reconstruction of xt uses the conditionnal expectation, a useful statistical tool
on which the reader can ﬁnd a formal deﬁnition in the context of time series analysis in Mad-
sen (2007).
From equation 11 can be derived that:
log(B(1 + xt)) = yt −Cyt−1 −f(Ts≤t) −e2,t
B(1 + xt) = exp(yt −Cyt−1 −f(Ts≤t) −e2,t)
xt = 1
B (exp(yt −Cyt−1 −f(Ts≤t) −e2,t)) −1
The reconstruction process is achieved by using the following estimator:
E[xt∣ys≤t,Ts≤t] = E[ 1
B (exp(yt −Cyt−1 −f(Ts≤t) −e2,t)) −1∣ys≤t,Ts≤t]
= 1
B (exp(yt −Cyt−1 −f(Ts≤t))E[exp(−e2,t)∣ys≤t,Ts≤t]) −1
= 1
B (exp(yt −Cyt−1 −f(Ts≤t))) −1
30
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:32==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
if it can be assumed that the residuals e2,t have an expected value of 0 which has been veriﬁed
empirically during the model check phase.
The reconstruction of the process xt will be denoted ˆxt or from now on:
ˆxt = 1
B (exp(yt −Cyt−1 −f(Ts≤t))) −1
(12)
Finally, it has been established a way to reconstruct the active mosquito population xt from a
log transformation of the mosquitoes caught yt and (possibly) the temperature over the past
days Ts≤t if the function f eﬀectively depends on the temperature. However this reconstruction
depends on a set of parameters, and for given parameters the reconstruction can be more or
less ’close’ (here in the sens of a sum of squared errors - SSE) to the expected analytical
expression 9 established in 5.1.2.
5.2.2
Parameters estimation algorithm
Let us now describe the algorithm that from the initial data of the Coquillettidia genus in
Greve for a given year yields an estimation of a daily decay rate. As a reminder the site Greve
was chosen as it is the only location for which daily data is available, and the Coquillettidia
genus was chosen as it can be expected to observe a single generation of mosquitoes per sea-
son, assumption used in the modelisation of the cohort population (unobserved process) and
that seems to be conﬁrmed by the available data.
Including the set of parameters P = {A,B,C,η,µ,σ,f1,...,fm} where {f1,...,fm} are para-
meters for the function f, one can study the sum of squared errors SSEr/a between the
reconstruction of the unobserved process ˆxt and the analytical expression of the mosquito
population evolution xA(t):
SSEr/a = SSEr/a(A,B,C,η,µ,σ,f1,...,fm)
(13)
=
N
∑
t=1
(ˆxt −xA(t))2
(14)
All parameters from the set P take possible values in an interval for which the borders are to
establish either from the previous hypothesis (σ > 0,η ≥0), from the choice of the function f
or other considerations. There is a lot of uncertainty on acceptable boundaries, and depend-
ing on both the results obtained for the reconstruction ˆxt and the estimation of the residuals
e1,t and e2,t, the boundaries are adjusted.
Important remark: the parameter B will not be part of the parameter optimization pro-
cess, in the sense that it will be ﬁxed in advance. B serves as a scaling factor between the
unobserved and the observed process, and represents an indicator of the proportion of mos-
quitoes caught by the trap. From now on, let us denote P ′ = P/{B} the set of parameters to
optimize with respect to B.
Once the boundaries are set, the intervals of each parameter are discretised on a number of
values depending on the time available for the optimization and precision desired, the error
Master’s thesis (s192610)
31
==PAGE:33==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
SSEr/a is minimized such that the reconstruction of ˆxt is as close as possible to its analytical
expression xA(t), and another optimization is made in the same way in a neighbourhood of
the previously found solution until the relative improvement of SSEr/a after each iteration is
below a given threshold.
Below is presented a more formal description of the algorithm:
Algorithm 5.1 Parameter optimisation for cohort size reconstruction
1: Fix the value of the scaling parameter B
2: Deﬁne upper and lower bounds for all parameters in P ′
3: Discretize the parameter intervals into the parameter space P ′
d,1
4: it ←1
5: while (it = 1) or ((it ≤maxIteration) and (improvement ≥tolerance)) do
6: For each parameter combination in P ′
d,it, compute SSEit
r/a
7: SSEit
r/a ←minP ′
d,it(SSEr/a)
8: Deﬁne new upper and lower bounds in a neighbourhood of the found minimum
9: Discretize the newly formed intervals into the new parameter space P ′
d,it+1
10: improvement ←
∥SSEit
r/a−SSEit−1
r/a ∥
SSEit−1
r/a
11: it ←it + 1
12: end while
13:
For a given value of the scaling factor B and function f, initial lower and upper bounds for the
parameters in P ′, number of discrete values to consider per interval, tolerance on successive
improvements and maximal number of iterations, this algorithm provides a set of parameters
P ′ that minimizes the sum of squared errors between the reconstruction of the unobserved
process ˆxt and its analytical expression xA(t). Among the parameters in P ′ can be the daily
decay rate η.
5.2.3
Model variants
Five model variants are introduced in this section and have been studied during the project.
These variants are characterized by diﬀerent functions f that modelize the inﬂuence of tem-
perature on the observed process yt.
Before introducing the diﬀerent functions, let us introduce the series T75,t of the daily 75th
percentile of temperature.
This speciﬁc series is considered to quantify an answer to the
question ’how hot was the day?’, the mosquito’s level of activity as well as the timespan of
their activity depending on the temperature.
These data were obtained from the Danish
Meteorological Institute website from year 2011 to 2020, at a station located in Køge (Den-
mark), the closest station to Greve available among the weather data. Let us also denote S
the mosquito season, i.e: the time interval between the ﬁrst and last day of the year where
the trap eﬀectively caught mosquitoes. Then using these quantities, the following models are
introduced:
32
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:34==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
• Model A: f(t) = 0, no inﬂuence of temperature;
• Model B: f(t,T75,s∈S,D) = D(1
7 ∑6
k=0 T75,t−k −
1
#S ∑t∈S T75,t)
• Model C: f(t,T75,s∈S,D,E) = D(1
7 ∑6
k=0 T75,t−k −
1
#S ∑t∈S T75,t) + E(1
7 ∑6
k=0 T75,t−k −
1
#S ∑t∈S T75,t)
2
• Model D: f(t,T75,s∈S,F,G) = F(1
7 ∑6
k=0 T75,t−k −
1
#S ∑t∈S T75,t) + G(1
7 ∑6
k=0 T 2
75,t−k −
1
#S ∑t∈S T 2
75,t)
• Model E: f(t,T75,s∈S,H) = H(1
7 ∑6
k=0 log(T75,t−k) −
1
#S ∑t∈S log(T75,t))
Here we can see that the function f sometimes depends on future temperatures which might
cause problem if one wants to estimate the parameters as the season progresses, or for caus-
ality purposes. This could be changed to either use the temperatures available up to the
current date, or the expected temperatures regarding the previous years. However in the
overall procedure for decay rate estimation, it is assumed that the mosquito season focused
on is over so that the beginning and end dates are known. As opposed to the signal recon-
struction problem tackled in the ﬁrst part of the project where estimating missing data as the
season goes is useful, the use of ’future’ values for the temperature should not be regarded as
a major ﬂaw in the decay rate estimation method.
The motivation for setting up these diﬀerent models is to provide an answer to the problem:
’is there an inﬂuence in the activity of the mosquitoes and thus in the number of caught
mosquitoes that would be due to the temperature independently from the cohort size? If so,
can that eﬀect be accounted for before estimating the cohort size from the number of caught
mosquitoes?’.
The diﬀerent models A to E introduce diﬀerent new parameters (D,...,H) and dependencies
on the temperaturs of diﬀerent nature: linear, polynomial, logarithmic and deviation sensit-
ivity. The use of the parameter D twice in both models B and C comes from the fact that
the latter is an extension of the former. The solution provided by the diﬀerent models will
be studied comparatively, following the logic of starting with model A and trying to explain
the part in the errors linked/correlated to the temperature of the past week by exploring the
use of various temperature dependant regressors in the observed process yt.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
33
==PAGE:35==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
5.3
Results
After much trial and error, boundaries that yields interesting sets of parameters have been
established. These boundaries have been tuned to avoid undesirable eﬀects such as the optim-
ization over-emphasizing negative values in the regressors (i.e. f(t)) so that the reconstruction
ˆxt stays close to zero, thus diminishing the scale of the error. Instead, the objective is to only
remove the correlation observed between the regressors and the error in the more simple
model A. The solution employed to ensure this way of processing the weather data is to use
the results of the parameter optimization in the case of model A as a starting point for the
optimization in the other models, allowing the optimization algorithm to increase or decrease
the values of the previously found parameters by a certain percentage. For the purpose of
presenting an set of reproducable results in this report, the authorized variation from model
A has been set to 70%, allowing improvements while directing the algorithm into keeping the
same scale for the previously found parameters.
The results will be presented in detail for a selection of years and values of the scaling factor B.
The inﬂuence of the scaling factor B and the consistency between the years will be presented
in the report, while a complete collection of results and graphs for all years and various values
of B are provided as an appendix in Appendix 3: Decay rate estimation (from Greve’s
daily data).
5.3.1
The case of year 2014, B = 0.25
Let us explore in detail the estimation provided for year 2014 using the scaling factor B = 0.25.
The results of the parameter estimation algorithm described in 5.2.2 are presented in ﬁgures
5 to 7.
(a) Daily decay rate estimation
for year 2014, B = 0.25.
(b) log(1 + CapturedMosquitoes) (year: 2014; site: Greve; genus:
Coquillettidia).
Figure 5: Parameter estimation results for B = 0.25 and observations of the (yt) process for
year 2014.
34
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:36==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Important remark: the AIC shown in ﬁgure 5(a) is obtained for the observed process (yt)t,
by using as parameters the outcome of the optimisation on SSEr/a, and eventually a function
of temperature depending on the model (A,...,E).
First thing to notice is that the diﬀerent models do estimate a daily decay rate in the same
range, bewteen 2.9% and 3.4%. However when looking at data from the same year with
diﬀerent values of the scaling factor B or even other years in appendix Appendix 3: Decay
rate estimation (from Greve’s daily data) one can see that the decay rate estimate does
vary a lot. Possible explanations for these variations are discussed in part 5.4.
Secondly, let us focus on the diﬀerent model’s AIC. In this particular example model D
performs the best when it comes to the AIC, meaning that introducing the temperature and
its squared value (both centered around zero) as additionnal explanation variables (see 5.2.3)
provided additionnal information on the possible correlation between the errors/residuals of
the observed process yt and the temperature. However, once again, this result varies from
year to year as can be seen in the global results in appendix Appendix 3: Decay rate
estimation (from Greve’s daily data): model D is not consistently the one presenting
the lowest AIC.
Finally, lets us talk about model checks. The way the parameter estimation algorithm pro-
ceeds seeks to minimize the distance SSEr/a between the reconstruction of the process ˆxt and
its analytical expression xA(t) under the assumption that a daily decay rate exists. Once
the parameter optimization is over, it is of great interest to check the performance of the
observed process model. The AIC presented systematically in the SUMMARY graphs is
one indicator, but for the purpose of this example let us look at the observed model error e2,t
(refer to 11 where the processes are described). These errors along with their partial auto-
correlation (Madsen (2007), APPENDIX B) are presented in ﬁgure 7. It can be noticed
signiﬁcant autocorrelations at lags 1 to 3. This observation holds for other years and values of
scaling factor B, meaning that the observed process could potentially be improved by adding
an MA(1) term (i.e. yt = ... + θe2,t−1). This point is discussed in 5.4.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
35
==PAGE:37==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 6: Parameter estimation and unobserved process reconstruction (year: 2014; site:
Greve; genus: Coquillettidia; B = 0.25).
36
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:38==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 7: Observed process yt error analysis (year: 2014; site: Greve; genus: Coquillettidia;
B = 0.25).
Master’s thesis (s192610)
37
==PAGE:39==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
5.3.2
Summarized result analysis
All produced results, AICs of ﬁtted models and estimated decay rates are available in Ap-
pendix 3: Decay rate estimation (from Greve’s daily data) for years 2011 to 2020,
with the exception of 2012 due to missing temperature data, and 2018 for a still unknown
reason. This might come from the actual parameter optimization algorithm which was writ-
ten from sratch in a way that allowed for quickly adapting the lower and upper bounds of the
parmeter research at the cost of robustness.
Diﬀerent values for the scaling factor B have been employed, and it can clearly be seen in
the results that lower values of B lead generally to lower decay rate estimations. This can be
sign of the two modelled processes not scaling properly with respect to each other, calling for
modelling improvements.
For all available years, data for the Coquillettidia genus in Greve have been passed through
the parameter estimation algorithm for the 5 models A to E, each applied with nine diﬀerent
values for B ∶1, 0.5, 0.25 ,0.1, 0.05, 0.025, 0.01, 0.005 and 0.0025. For each year, table
1 reports the combination of model and scaling factor B yielding the lowest (i.e. best) AIC
and the corresponding daily decay rate estimation.
Year
B
Model
AIC
Decay rate
2011
1
A
155.17
3.39%
2013
0.025
E
52.53
2.1%
2014
0.25
D
52.06
3.37%
2015
0.25
A
-9.97
2.67%
2016
.005
C
93.96
0.57%
2017
0.25
A
59.20
2.67%
2019
0.25
C
1.93
1.11%
2020
0.5
E
62.8
0.72%
Table 1: Decay rate estimation synthesis, best estimation per year according to the AIC
For a given year and value of B, the results presented in Appendix 3: Decay rate estim-
ation (from Greve’s daily data) show consistency in the decay rate estimations across
all ﬁve models. The values extracted from the best estimations (table 1) for daily mortality
rates of active mosquitoes are slightly lower than the reference value of 5% classically used
when few data is available, and gravitate in the low range of mortality rates found for the
genus Anopheles in Matthews et al. (2020) (5% to 34% depending on the estimation method).
All in all this daily mortality rate estimation method is able to yield results from wild mosqui-
toes capture data, with few external additional information and based on simple modelling of
the evolution of mosquito population throughout the season. Even if the obtained estimates
seem to gravitate towards the low end of the expected rates, the modularity of the method
regarding the modelling of both the unobserved process xt and observed process yt, and the
innovation function u(t) provide means of improving the method. For example, it might be
38
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:40==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
worth selecting new forms for the functions f and u introduced in model 11 by using actual
data sets used in mortality rate estimation experiments.
5.3.3
Estimated longevity of active mosquitoes
From all the estimations of daily survival rate accessible in Appendix 3: Decay rate es-
timation (from Greve’s daily data) and analyzed in 5.3.2, an estimation of the longevity
of the mosquitoes after they become actively searching for a blood meal (i.e. can potentially
infect new people) can be given. The yearly estimated daily decay rate were used to plot
the graphs in ﬁgures 8 and 9. These graphs represent the estimated longevity of a cohort of
Coquillettidia mosquitoes from the estimated daily decay rates in the form of a remaining
percentage of the original cohort through time.
The incubation time of certain diseases and the usual frequency with which mosquitoes feed
both depend on temperature but can be and have been studied in a controlled environment
such as a laboratory, which is not the case for mosquito daily survival rate in the wild.
Having estimations for all these parameters allows to compute estimations for the number
of infections per cohort and per season. Learning more about cohort sizes or the general
mosquito population dynamics by controlling and studying their breeding environment is
also an essential step in estimating and preventing the spread of mosquito-borne diseases.
Figure 8: Estimated cohort size survival, years 2011 to 2015.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
39
==PAGE:41==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 9: Estimated cohort size survival, years 2016 to 2020.
5.4
Discussion and model expansion
5.4.1
Introducing out of season values
Let us focus on the graphical solution representation provided in Appendix 3: Decay rate
estimation (from Greve’s daily data), or at ﬁgure 6 for example. The parameter optim-
isation aims at reducing SSEr/a, the sum of squared diﬀerences between the nalaytical (red)
and reconstructed (black) mosquito population shown in the graphs. Introducing sequences
of zeros to simulate not catching mosquitoes outside of the mosquito season and looking at
changes in the cohort size reconstruction can be a way to verify for the inﬂuence of intercept
values in the models that artiﬁcially shift values up or down.
5.4.2
Controlling parameter A
It can be seen from the summary and graphs of results in Appendix 3:
Decay rate
estimation (from Greve’s daily data) that the estimated decay rates seem to depend on
the value of scaling factor B. The process xt is proportionnal to the value of parameter
A, and changes scale when B changes. Here, parameter A is optimized ’naively’ without
considering this link with the scaling factor B, and might rely on changing the values of µ
and σ to keep up with the scale of ˆxt and reduce the value of SSEr/a (distance between the
40
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:42==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
red and black line). There is hope that describing and accounting for this link between A and
B eliminates the variation in mortality rate estimation regarding to B.
5.4.3
Including an MA(1) term in the observed process
Observations on all model’s residuals (A,...,E) post-optimization led to observing great values
of autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation at lags 1 to 3, possibly indicating that the
model of the observed process yt could use a MA(1) term.
5.4.4
Reﬁning the link between mosquito activity and temperature
The link between mosquito activity and temperature is described by the function f in equation
11. This term has been introduced with the aim of explaining increases in mosquito activity
and thus the number of caught mosquitoes due to weather conditions indepedently from
variations in the actual number of mosquitoes alive at a given time.
Relations between
mosquito biting frequency and temperature can be determined by experiments in a controlled
environment (think laboratory), and the result of these studies could be considered to form
new candidates for function f.
5.4.5
Multiple generations of mosquitoes in a single season
Finally, the entirety of the work presented for estimating a daily mortality rate focused on the
Coquillettidia genus, with the assumption of the genus only having one generation per year.
This assumption led to the modelling of the innovation function ut used for this application,
and a way of expanding this work to multi-generation genus could be to introduce additionnal
generations g1,....,gp where the income of new mosquitoes are normally distributed centered
around diﬀerent days (µ1,...,µn) with either the same or diﬀerent variances (σ1,....,σp) surely
depending on the weather conditions. The only thing to do really is to provide a new de-
scription of the process xt, and an analytical expression for xA(t) before applying the same
procedure.
Master’s thesis (s192610)
41
==PAGE:43==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
6
Conclusion
Motivated by the increased threat of mosquito-borne disease transmission expected in northen
Europe in the following years, this work focused on exploiting data gathered for the Danish
Surveillance Program for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease.
A ﬁrst task of missing data estimation and reconstruction has been undertaken, while studying
the use of ARIMA processes in modelling mosquito capture data. A method able to estim-
ate both daily and weekly missing values has been designed, presented and applied across 5
locations and 10 years worth of surveillance data.
The later half of the project focuses on estimating daily mortality rate in mosquitoes from the
Coquillettidia genus, based on the same surveillance data and local temeprature. A paramet-
ric description of the mosquito population dynamics has been set up and applied to available
data to estiamte said mortality rate. The obtained results gravitate a bit lower than what
can be found in the litterature but remain in the same order of magnitude, and the interest
of the presented method resides in the few data needed to produce a result.
Many elements of discussion were given on the limits and possible improvements of the meth-
ods studied throughout this work, in directions as diverse as multi-generation moquito pop-
ulation dynamics or the impact of weather conditions on mosquitoes’s feeding behaviour.
42
Master’s thesis (s192610)
==PAGE:44==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Bibliography
Becker, N., Petric, D., Zgomba, M., Boase, C., Madon, M., Dahl, C. and Kaiser, A.: 2010,
Mosquitoes and Their Control, Springer.
Ewing, D. A., Purse, B. V., Cobbold, C. A., Sch¨afer, S. M. and White, S. M.: 2019, Uncovering
mechanisms behind mosquito seasonality by integrating mathematical models and daily
empirical population data: Culex pipiens in the uk., BioMed Central .
Ewing, D., Cobbold, C., Purse, B., Nunn, M. and White, S.: 2016, Modelling the eﬀect of
temperature on the seasonal population dynamics of temperate mosquitoes., Journal of
Theoretical Biology .
Madsen, H.: 2007, Time Series Analysis, CHAPMAN HALL/CRC.
Matthews, J., Bethel, A. and Osei, G.: 2020, An overview of malarial anopheles mosquito
survival estimates in relation to methodology., BioMed Central .
Roiz, D., Roussel, M., Mu˜noz, J., Ruiz, S., Soriguer, R. and Figuerola, J.: 2011, Eﬃcacy of
mosquito traps for collecting potential west nile mosquito vectors in a natural mediterranean
wetland., The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene .
Shapiro, L. L. M., Whitehead, S. A. and Thomas, M. B.: 2017, Quantifying the eﬀects of
temperature on mosquito and parasite traits that determine the transmission potential of
human malaria., PLoS Biology .
Master’s thesis (s192610)
43
==PAGE:45==
Time Series predictions
in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
***
Master thesis report
Appendix : Numerical results
Student:
Pierre Ouchene (s192610), DTU Master student
Supervisors:
Anders Stockmarr, DTU Associate professor
Ren´e Bødker, UCPH Senior researcher
9th July 2021
==PAGE:46==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Contents
1
Appendix 1: Daily missing value reconstruction (Greve)
3
1.1
Greve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.1
2011, Greve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.1.2
2012, Greve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.1.3
2013, Greve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.1.4
2014, Greve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
1.1.5
2015, Greve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
1.1.6
2016, Greve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
1.1.7
2017, Greve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
1.1.8
2018, Greve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
1.1.9
2019, Greve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
1.1.10 2020, Greve . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
2
Appendix 2: Weekly missing value estimation
53
2.1
˚Arslev
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
2.1.1
2013, ˚Arslev
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
2.1.2
2014, ˚Arslev
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
2.1.3
2015, ˚Arslev
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
2.1.4
2016, ˚Arslev
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
2.1.5
2017, ˚Arslev
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
2.1.6
2018, ˚Arslev
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
2.1.7
2019, ˚Arslev
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
2.1.8
2020, ˚Arslev
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
2.2
Malling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
2.2.1
2013, Malling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
2.2.2
2014, Malling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
2.2.3
2015, Malling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
2.2.4
2016, Malling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
2.2.5
2017, Malling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
2.2.6
2018, Malling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
118
2.2.7
2019, Malling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
2.2.8
2020, Malling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
128
2.3
Rebild . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
2.3.1
2013, Rebild . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
2.3.2
2014, Rebild . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
138
2.3.3
2015, Rebild . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143
2.3.4
2016, Rebild . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
148
2.3.5
2017, Rebild . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
153
2.3.6
2018, Rebild . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
158
2.3.7
2019, Rebild . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
163
2.3.8
2020, Rebild . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
168
2.4
Sorø . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
173
2.4.1
2013, Sorø
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
173
2.4.2
2014, Sorø
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
178
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
1
==PAGE:47==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.4.3
2015, Sorø
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
183
2.4.4
2016, Sorø
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
188
2.4.5
2017, Sorø
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
193
2.4.6
2018, Sorø
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
198
2.4.7
2019, Sorø
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
203
2.4.8
2020, Sorø
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
208
3
Appendix 3: Decay rate estimation (from Greve’s daily data)
213
3.1
Summarized results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
213
3.1.1
2011, Greve (summary) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
213
3.1.2
2012, Greve (summary) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
214
3.1.3
2013, Greve (summary) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
215
3.1.4
2014, Greve (summary) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
216
3.1.5
2015, Greve (summary) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
218
3.1.6
2016, Greve (summary) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
219
3.1.7
2017, Greve (summary) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
221
3.1.8
2018, Greve (summary) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
222
3.1.9
2019, Greve (summary) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
223
3.1.10 2020, Greve (summary) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
224
3.2
Cohort size reconstruction (Greve) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
226
3.2.1
2011, Greve (graphical representation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
226
3.2.2
2012, Greve (graphical representation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
235
3.2.3
2013, Greve (graphical representation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
236
3.2.4
2014, Greve (graphical representation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
245
3.2.5
2015, Greve (graphical representation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
254
3.2.6
2016, Greve (graphical representation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
263
3.2.7
2017, Greve (graphical representation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
272
3.2.8
2018, Greve (graphical representation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
281
3.2.9
2019, Greve (graphical representation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
290
3.2.10 2020, Greve (graphical representation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
299
2
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:48==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
1
Appendix 1: Daily missing value reconstruction (Greve)
1.1
Greve
1.1.1
2011, Greve
Figure 1: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2011. Site: Greve. Year:
2011. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
3
==PAGE:49==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 2: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2011. Site: Greve. Year:
2011. Genus: Anopheles
4
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:50==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 3: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2011. Site: Greve. Year:
2011. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
5
==PAGE:51==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 4: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2011. Site: Greve. Year:
2011. Genus: Culex
6
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:52==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 5: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2011. Site: Greve. Year:
2011. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
7
==PAGE:53==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
1.1.2
2012, Greve
Figure 6: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2012. Site: Greve. Year:
2012. Genus: Aedes
8
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:54==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 7: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2012. Site: Greve. Year:
2012. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
9
==PAGE:55==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 8: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2012. Site: Greve. Year:
2012. Genus: Coquillettidia
10
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:56==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 9: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2012. Site: Greve. Year:
2012. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
11
==PAGE:57==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 10: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2012. Site: Greve.
Year: 2012. Genus: Culiseta
12
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:58==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
1.1.3
2013, Greve
Figure 11: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Greve.
Year: 2013. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
13
==PAGE:59==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 12: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Greve.
Year: 2013. Genus: Anopheles
14
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:60==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 13: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Greve.
Year: 2013. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
15
==PAGE:61==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 14: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Greve.
Year: 2013. Genus: Culex
16
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:62==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 15: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Greve.
Year: 2013. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
17
==PAGE:63==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
1.1.4
2014, Greve
Figure 16: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Greve.
Year: 2014. Genus: Aedes
18
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:64==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 17: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Greve.
Year: 2014. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
19
==PAGE:65==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 18: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Greve.
Year: 2014. Genus: Coquillettidia
20
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:66==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 19: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Greve.
Year: 2014. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
21
==PAGE:67==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 20: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Greve.
Year: 2014. Genus: Culiseta
22
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:68==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
1.1.5
2015, Greve
Figure 21: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Greve.
Year: 2015. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
23
==PAGE:69==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 22: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Greve.
Year: 2015. Genus: Anopheles
24
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:70==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 23: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Greve.
Year: 2015. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
25
==PAGE:71==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 24: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Greve.
Year: 2015. Genus: Culex
26
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:72==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 25: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Greve.
Year: 2015. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
27
==PAGE:73==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
1.1.6
2016, Greve
Figure 26: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Greve.
Year: 2016. Genus: Aedes
28
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:74==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 27: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Greve.
Year: 2016. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
29
==PAGE:75==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 28: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Greve.
Year: 2016. Genus: Coquillettidia
30
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:76==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 29: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Greve.
Year: 2016. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
31
==PAGE:77==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 30: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Greve.
Year: 2016. Genus: Culiseta
32
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:78==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
1.1.7
2017, Greve
Figure 31: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Greve.
Year: 2017. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
33
==PAGE:79==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 32: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Greve.
Year: 2017. Genus: Anopheles
34
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:80==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 33: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Greve.
Year: 2017. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
35
==PAGE:81==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 34: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Greve.
Year: 2017. Genus: Culex
36
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:82==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 35: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Greve.
Year: 2017. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
37
==PAGE:83==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
1.1.8
2018, Greve
Figure 36: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Greve.
Year: 2018. Genus: Aedes
38
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:84==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 37: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Greve.
Year: 2018. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
39
==PAGE:85==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 38: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Greve.
Year: 2018. Genus: Coquillettidia
40
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:86==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 39: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Greve.
Year: 2018. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
41
==PAGE:87==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 40: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Greve.
Year: 2018. Genus: Culiseta
42
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:88==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
1.1.9
2019, Greve
Figure 41: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: Greve.
Year: 2019. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
43
==PAGE:89==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 42: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: Greve.
Year: 2019. Genus: Anopheles
44
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:90==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 43: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: Greve.
Year: 2019. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
45
==PAGE:91==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 44: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: Greve.
Year: 2019. Genus: Culex
46
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:92==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 45: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: Greve.
Year: 2019. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
47
==PAGE:93==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
1.1.10
2020, Greve
Figure 46: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Greve.
Year: 2020. Genus: Aedes
48
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:94==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 47: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Greve.
Year: 2020. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
49
==PAGE:95==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 48: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Greve.
Year: 2020. Genus: Coquillettidia
50
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:96==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 49: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Greve.
Year: 2020. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
51
==PAGE:97==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 50: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Greve.
Year: 2020. Genus: Culiseta
52
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:98==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2
Appendix 2: Weekly missing value estimation
2.1
˚
Arslev
2.1.1
2013, ˚
Arslev
Figure 51: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2013. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
53
==PAGE:99==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 52: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2013. Genus: Anopheles
54
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:100==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 53: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2013. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
55
==PAGE:101==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 54: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2013. Genus: Culex
56
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:102==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 55: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2013. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
57
==PAGE:103==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.1.2
2014, ˚
Arslev
Figure 56: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2014. Genus: Aedes
58
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:104==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 57: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2014. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
59
==PAGE:105==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 58: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2014. Genus: Coquillettidia
60
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:106==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 59: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2014. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
61
==PAGE:107==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 60: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2014. Genus: Culiseta
62
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:108==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.1.3
2015, ˚
Arslev
Figure 61: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2015. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
63
==PAGE:109==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 62: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2015. Genus: Anopheles
64
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:110==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 63: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2015. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
65
==PAGE:111==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 64: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2015. Genus: Culex
66
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:112==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 65: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2015. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
67
==PAGE:113==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.1.4
2016, ˚
Arslev
Figure 66: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2016. Genus: Aedes
68
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:114==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 67: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2016. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
69
==PAGE:115==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 68: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2016. Genus: Coquillettidia
70
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:116==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 69: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2016. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
71
==PAGE:117==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 70: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2016. Genus: Culiseta
72
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:118==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.1.5
2017, ˚
Arslev
Figure 71: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2017. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
73
==PAGE:119==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 72: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2017. Genus: Anopheles
74
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:120==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 73: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2017. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
75
==PAGE:121==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 74: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2017. Genus: Culex
76
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:122==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2017, Culiseta: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
77
==PAGE:123==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.1.6
2018, ˚
Arslev
Figure 75: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2018. Genus: Aedes
78
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:124==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 76: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2018. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
79
==PAGE:125==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 77: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2018. Genus: Coquillettidia
80
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:126==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2018, Culex: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
81
==PAGE:127==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 78: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2018. Genus: Culiseta
82
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:128==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.1.7
2019, ˚
Arslev
Figure 79: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2019. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
83
==PAGE:129==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 80: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2019. Genus: Anopheles
84
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:130==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 81: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2019. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
85
==PAGE:131==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 82: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2019. Genus: Culex
86
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:132==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 83: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2019. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
87
==PAGE:133==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.1.8
2020, ˚
Arslev
Figure 84: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2020. Genus: Aedes
88
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:134==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 85: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2020. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
89
==PAGE:135==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 86: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2020. Genus: Coquillettidia
90
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:136==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 87: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: ˚Arslev.
Year: 2020. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
91
==PAGE:137==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2020, Culiseta: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
92
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:138==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.2
Malling
2.2.1
2013, Malling
Figure 88: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Malling.
Year: 2013. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
93
==PAGE:139==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 89: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Malling.
Year: 2013. Genus: Anopheles
94
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:140==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 90: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Malling.
Year: 2013. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
95
==PAGE:141==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 91: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Malling.
Year: 2013. Genus: Culex
96
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:142==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 92: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Malling.
Year: 2013. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
97
==PAGE:143==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.2.2
2014, Malling
Figure 93: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Malling.
Year: 2014. Genus: Aedes
98
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:144==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 94: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Malling.
Year: 2014. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
99
==PAGE:145==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 95: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Malling.
Year: 2014. Genus: Coquillettidia
100
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:146==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 96: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Malling.
Year: 2014. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
101
==PAGE:147==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 97: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Malling.
Year: 2014. Genus: Culiseta
102
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:148==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.2.3
2015, Malling
Figure 98: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Malling.
Year: 2015. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
103
==PAGE:149==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 99: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Malling.
Year: 2015. Genus: Anopheles
104
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:150==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 100: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Malling.
Year: 2015. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
105
==PAGE:151==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 101: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Malling.
Year: 2015. Genus: Culex
106
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:152==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 102: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Malling.
Year: 2015. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
107
==PAGE:153==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.2.4
2016, Malling
Figure 103: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Malling.
Year: 2016. Genus: Aedes
108
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:154==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 104: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Malling.
Year: 2016. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
109
==PAGE:155==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 105: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Malling.
Year: 2016. Genus: Coquillettidia
110
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:156==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 106: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Malling.
Year: 2016. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
111
==PAGE:157==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 107: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Malling.
Year: 2016. Genus: Culiseta
112
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:158==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.2.5
2017, Malling
Figure 108: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Malling.
Year: 2017. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
113
==PAGE:159==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 109: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Malling.
Year: 2017. Genus: Anopheles
114
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:160==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 110: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Malling.
Year: 2017. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
115
==PAGE:161==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 111: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Malling.
Year: 2017. Genus: Culex
116
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:162==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 112: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Malling.
Year: 2017. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
117
==PAGE:163==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.2.6
2018, Malling
Figure 113: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Malling.
Year: 2018. Genus: Aedes
118
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:164==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 114: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Malling.
Year: 2018. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
119
==PAGE:165==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2018, Coquillettidia: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
120
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:166==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2018, Culex: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
121
==PAGE:167==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 115: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Malling.
Year: 2018. Genus: Culiseta
122
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:168==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.2.7
2019, Malling
Figure 116: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: Malling.
Year: 2019. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
123
==PAGE:169==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2019, Anopheles: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
124
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:170==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 117: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: Malling.
Year: 2019. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
125
==PAGE:171==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 118: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: Malling.
Year: 2019. Genus: Culex
126
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:172==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2019, Culiseta: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
127
==PAGE:173==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.2.8
2020, Malling
2020, Aedes: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
128
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:174==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 119: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Malling.
Year: 2020. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
129
==PAGE:175==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 120: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Malling.
Year: 2020. Genus: Coquillettidia
130
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:176==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 121: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Malling.
Year: 2020. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
131
==PAGE:177==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2020, Culiseta: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
132
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:178==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.3
Rebild
2.3.1
2013, Rebild
Figure 122: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2013. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
133
==PAGE:179==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2013, Anopheles: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
134
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:180==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 123: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2013. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
135
==PAGE:181==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 124: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2013. Genus: Culex
136
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:182==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 125: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2013. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
137
==PAGE:183==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.3.2
2014, Rebild
Figure 126: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2014. Genus: Aedes
138
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:184==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 127: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2014. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
139
==PAGE:185==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 128: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2014. Genus: Coquillettidia
140
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:186==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 129: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2014. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
141
==PAGE:187==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 130: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2014. Genus: Culiseta
142
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:188==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.3.3
2015, Rebild
Figure 131: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2015. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
143
==PAGE:189==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 132: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2015. Genus: Anopheles
144
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:190==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 133: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2015. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
145
==PAGE:191==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 134: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2015. Genus: Culex
146
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:192==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 135: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2015. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
147
==PAGE:193==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.3.4
2016, Rebild
Figure 136: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2016. Genus: Aedes
148
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:194==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 137: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2016. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
149
==PAGE:195==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 138: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2016. Genus: Coquillettidia
150
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:196==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 139: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2016. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
151
==PAGE:197==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 140: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2016. Genus: Culiseta
152
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:198==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.3.5
2017, Rebild
Figure 141: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2017. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
153
==PAGE:199==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2017, Anopheles: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
154
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:200==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 142: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2017. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
155
==PAGE:201==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 143: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2017. Genus: Culex
156
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:202==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 144: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2017. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
157
==PAGE:203==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.3.6
2018, Rebild
Figure 145: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2018. Genus: Aedes
158
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:204==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 146: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2018. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
159
==PAGE:205==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 147: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2018. Genus: Coquillettidia
160
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:206==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 148: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2018. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
161
==PAGE:207==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 149: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2018. Genus: Culiseta
162
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:208==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.3.7
2019, Rebild
Figure 150: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2019. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
163
==PAGE:209==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 151: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2019. Genus: Anopheles
164
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:210==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2019, Coquillettidia: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
165
==PAGE:211==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 152: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2019. Genus: Culex
166
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:212==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 153: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2019. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2019. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
167
==PAGE:213==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.3.8
2020, Rebild
2020, Aedes: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly show
no caught mosquitoes.
168
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:214==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 154: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2020. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
169
==PAGE:215==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 155: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2020. Genus: Coquillettidia
170
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:216==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 156: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2020. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
171
==PAGE:217==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 157: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Rebild.
Year: 2020. Genus: Culiseta
172
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:218==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.4
Sorø
2.4.1
2013, Sorø
Figure 158: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Sorø. Year:
2013. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
173
==PAGE:219==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 159: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Sorø. Year:
2013. Genus: Anopheles
174
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:220==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 160: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Sorø. Year:
2013. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
175
==PAGE:221==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 161: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Sorø. Year:
2013. Genus: Culex
176
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:222==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 162: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2013. Site: Sorø. Year:
2013. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
177
==PAGE:223==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.4.2
2014, Sorø
2014, Aedes: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
178
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:224==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 163: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Sorø. Year:
2014. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
179
==PAGE:225==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 164: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2014. Site: Sorø. Year:
2014. Genus: Coquillettidia
180
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:226==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2014, Culex: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
181
==PAGE:227==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2014, Culiseta: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
182
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:228==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.4.3
2015, Sorø
Figure 165: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Sorø. Year:
2015. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
183
==PAGE:229==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 166: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Sorø. Year:
2015. Genus: Anopheles
184
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:230==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 167: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Sorø. Year:
2015. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
185
==PAGE:231==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 168: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Sorø. Year:
2015. Genus: Culex
186
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:232==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 169: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2015. Site: Sorø. Year:
2015. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
187
==PAGE:233==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.4.4
2016, Sorø
Figure 170: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Sorø. Year:
2016. Genus: Aedes
188
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:234==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 171: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Sorø. Year:
2016. Genus: Anopheles
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
189
==PAGE:235==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 172: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Sorø. Year:
2016. Genus: Coquillettidia
190
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:236==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 173: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Sorø. Year:
2016. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
191
==PAGE:237==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 174: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2016. Site: Sorø. Year:
2016. Genus: Culiseta
192
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:238==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.4.5
2017, Sorø
Figure 175: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Sorø. Year:
2017. Genus: Aedes
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
193
==PAGE:239==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 176: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Sorø. Year:
2017. Genus: Anopheles
194
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:240==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 177: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Sorø. Year:
2017. Genus: Coquillettidia
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
195
==PAGE:241==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 178: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Sorø. Year:
2017. Genus: Culex
196
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:242==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 179: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2017. Site: Sorø. Year:
2017. Genus: Culiseta
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
197
==PAGE:243==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.4.6
2018, Sorø
Figure 180: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Sorø. Year:
2018. Genus: Aedes
198
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:244==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2018, Anopheles: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
199
==PAGE:245==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 181: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Sorø. Year:
2018. Genus: Coquillettidia
200
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:246==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 182: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2018. Site: Sorø. Year:
2018. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
201
==PAGE:247==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2018, Culiseta: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
202
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:248==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.4.7
2019, Sorø
2019, Aedes: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
203
==PAGE:249==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2019, Anopheles: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
204
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:250==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2019, Coquillettidia: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
205
==PAGE:251==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2019, Culex: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
206
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:252==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2019, Culiseta: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
207
==PAGE:253==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2.4.8
2020, Sorø
2020, Aedes: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
208
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:254==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2020, Anopheles: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
209
==PAGE:255==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 183: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Sorø. Year:
2020. Genus: Coquillettidia
210
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:256==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 184: Capture data available and missing data estimation (red), 2020. Site: Sorø. Year:
2020. Genus: Culex
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
211
==PAGE:257==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
2020, Culiseta: NO RESULT AVAILABLE
The most probable reason being that not enough capture data was available to ﬁt an AR-
IMA(2,1,1) model. Either not enough data was gathered, or the data gathered mainly shows
no caught mosquitoes.
212
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:258==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3
Appendix 3: Decay rate estimation (from Greve’s daily data)
3.1
Summarized results
3.1.1
2011, Greve (summary)
Figure 185: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2011 (1/3.)
Figure 186: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2011 (2/3).
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
213
==PAGE:259==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 187: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2011 (3/3).
3.1.2
2012, Greve (summary)
NO RESULTS AVAILABLE: missing temperature data did not allow to compute decay
rates for year 2012.
214
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:260==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.1.3
2013, Greve (summary)
Figure 188: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2013 (1/3.)
Figure 189: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2013 (2/3).
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
215
==PAGE:261==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 190: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2013 (3/3).
3.1.4
2014, Greve (summary)
Figure 191: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2014 (1/3.)
216
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:262==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 192: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2014 (2/3).
Figure 193: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2014 (3/3).
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
217
==PAGE:263==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.1.5
2015, Greve (summary)
Figure 194: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2015 (1/3.)
Figure 195: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2015 (2/3).
218
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:264==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 196: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2015 (3/3).
3.1.6
2016, Greve (summary)
Figure 197: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2016 (1/3.)
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
219
==PAGE:265==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 198: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2016 (2/3).
Figure 199: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2016 (3/3).
220
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:266==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.1.7
2017, Greve (summary)
Figure 200: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2017 (1/3.)
Figure 201: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2017 (2/3).
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
221
==PAGE:267==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 202: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2017 (3/3).
3.1.8
2018, Greve (summary)
NO RESULTS AVAILABALE: for a still unknown reason the models’s AIC computation
does not succeeds and the algorithm breaks, despite 2018 Greve’s data not seemingly being
diﬀerent or particular compared to other years.
222
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:268==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.1.9
2019, Greve (summary)
Figure 203: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2019 (1/3.)
Figure 204: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2019 (2/3).
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
223
==PAGE:269==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 205: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2019 (3/3).
3.1.10
2020, Greve (summary)
Figure 206: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2020 (1/3.)
224
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:270==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 207: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2020 (2/3).
Figure 208: Daily decay rate estimation for year 2020 (3/3).
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
225
==PAGE:271==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.2
Cohort size reconstruction (Greve)
3.2.1
2011, Greve (graphical representation)
Figure 209: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2011. B = 1.
226
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:272==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 210: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2011. B = 0.5.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
227
==PAGE:273==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 211: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2011. B = 0.25.
228
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:274==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 212: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2011. B = 0.1.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
229
==PAGE:275==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 213: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2011. B = 0.05.
230
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:276==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 214: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2011. B = 0.025.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
231
==PAGE:277==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 215: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2011. B = 0.01.
232
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:278==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 216: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2011. B = 0.005.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
233
==PAGE:279==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 217: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2011. B = 0.0025.
234
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:280==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.2.2
2012, Greve (graphical representation)
NO RESULTS AVAILABLE: missing temperature data did not allow to compute decay
rates for year 2012.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
235
==PAGE:281==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.2.3
2013, Greve (graphical representation)
Figure 218: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2013. B = 1.
236
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:282==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 219: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2013. B = 0.5.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
237
==PAGE:283==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 220: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2013. B = 0.25.
238
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:284==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 221: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2013. B = 0.1.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
239
==PAGE:285==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 222: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2013. B = 0.05.
240
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:286==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 223: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2013. B = 0.025.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
241
==PAGE:287==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 224: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2013. B = 0.01.
242
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:288==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 225: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2013. B = 0.005.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
243
==PAGE:289==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 226: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2013. B = 0.0025.
244
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:290==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.2.4
2014, Greve (graphical representation)
Figure 227: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2014. B = 1.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
245
==PAGE:291==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 228: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2014. B = 0.5.
246
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:292==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 229: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2014. B = 0.25.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
247
==PAGE:293==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 230: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2014. B = 0.1.
248
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:294==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 231: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2014. B = 0.05.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
249
==PAGE:295==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 232: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2014. B = 0.025.
250
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:296==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 233: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2014. B = 0.01.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
251
==PAGE:297==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 234: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2014. B = 0.005.
252
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:298==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 235: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2014. B = 0.0025.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
253
==PAGE:299==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.2.5
2015, Greve (graphical representation)
Figure 236: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2015. B = 1.
254
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:300==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 237: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2015. B = 0.5.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
255
==PAGE:301==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 238: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2015. B = 0.25.
256
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:302==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 239: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2015. B = 0.1.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
257
==PAGE:303==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 240: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2015. B = 0.05.
258
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:304==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 241: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2015. B = 0.025.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
259
==PAGE:305==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 242: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2015. B = 0.01.
260
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:306==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 243: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2015. B = 0.005.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
261
==PAGE:307==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 244: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2015. B = 0.0025.
262
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:308==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.2.6
2016, Greve (graphical representation)
Figure 245: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2016. B = 1.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
263
==PAGE:309==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 246: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2016. B = 0.5.
264
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:310==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 247: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2016. B = 0.25.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
265
==PAGE:311==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 248: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2016. B = 0.1.
266
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:312==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 249: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2016. B = 0.05.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
267
==PAGE:313==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 250: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2016. B = 0.025.
268
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:314==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 251: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2016. B = 0.01.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
269
==PAGE:315==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 252: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2016. B = 0.005.
270
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:316==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 253: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2016. B = 0.0025.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
271
==PAGE:317==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.2.7
2017, Greve (graphical representation)
Figure 254: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2017. B = 1.
272
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:318==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 255: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2017. B = 0.5.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
273
==PAGE:319==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 256: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2017. B = 0.25.
274
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:320==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 257: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2017. B = 0.1.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
275
==PAGE:321==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 258: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2017. B = 0.05.
276
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:322==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 259: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2017. B = 0.025.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
277
==PAGE:323==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 260: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2017. B = 0.01.
278
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:324==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 261: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2017. B = 0.005.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
279
==PAGE:325==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 262: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2017. B = 0.0025.
280
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:326==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.2.8
2018, Greve (graphical representation)
Figures/Part2/2018/2018g1.png
Figure 263: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2018. B = 1.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
281
==PAGE:327==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figures/Part2/2018/2018g05.png
Figure 264: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2018. B = 0.5.
282
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:328==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figures/Part2/2018/2018g025.png
Figure 265: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2018. B = 0.25.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
283
==PAGE:329==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figures/Part2/2018/2018g01.png
Figure 266: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2018. B = 0.1.
284
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:330==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figures/Part2/2018/2018g005.png
Figure 267: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2018. B = 0.05.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
285
==PAGE:331==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figures/Part2/2018/2018g0025.png
Figure 268: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2018. B = 0.025.
286
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:332==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figures/Part2/2018/2018g001.png
Figure 269: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2018. B = 0.01.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
287
==PAGE:333==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figures/Part2/2018/2018g0005.png
Figure 270: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2018. B = 0.005.
288
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:334==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figures/Part2/2018/2018g00025.png
Figure 271: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2018. B = 0.0025.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
289
==PAGE:335==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.2.9
2019, Greve (graphical representation)
Figure 272: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2019. B = 1.
290
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:336==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 273: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2019. B = 0.5.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
291
==PAGE:337==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 274: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2019. B = 0.25.
292
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:338==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 275: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2019. B = 0.1.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
293
==PAGE:339==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 276: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2019. B = 0.05.
294
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:340==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 277: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2019. B = 0.025.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
295
==PAGE:341==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 278: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2019. B = 0.01.
296
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:342==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 279: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2019. B = 0.005.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
297
==PAGE:343==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 280: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2019. B = 0.0025.
298
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:344==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
3.2.10
2020, Greve (graphical representation)
Figure 281: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2020. B = 1.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
299
==PAGE:345==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 282: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2020. B = 0.5.
300
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:346==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 283: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2020. B = 0.25.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
301
==PAGE:347==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 284: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2020. B = 0.1.
302
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:348==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 285: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2020. B = 0.05.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
303
==PAGE:349==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 286: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2020. B = 0.025.
304
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:350==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 287: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2020. B = 0.01.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
305
==PAGE:351==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 288: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2020. B = 0.005.
306
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
==PAGE:352==
Time Series predictions in the Danish Surveillance Program
for Mosquito-borne spread of Disease
Figure 289: Cohort size (unobserved process) reconstruction and decay rate estimation. Site:
Greve. Year: 2020. B = 0.0025.
Master’s thesis Appendix (s192610)
307
