==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Biochemical characterisation of terpene synthases
from liverworts in P. patens 21
Characterizing enhanced terpene
synthesis in Physcomitrella patens by
modiﬁcation of microbial terpene
synthesis-like genes from liverwort
Author:
Mikkel Schardelmann, s163731, DTU Msc Student
Supervisors:
Henrik Toft Simonsen, DTU Bioengineering
Spring 2021
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This project attempts to determine the function of various microbe terpene synthase-like
genes native to Nardia scalaris and Lopcholea bidentata by integrating them into locus 108 of
Physcomitrella patens through in vivo assembly and homologous recombination. The function
is determined by GC-MS analysis of hexane:ethyl acetate extractions, GC-MS analysis of solid
phase head-space microextractions and a qualitative evaluation based on smell. While multiple
potential mutants were created none had their integrated DNA fully veriﬁed, but experiments
indicates that the integration was a success. The function of microbe terpene synthase-like
genes were not determined as contamination and faulty equipment negatively impacted various
experiment causing uncertainties leading to the option of multiple conclusions. The GC-MS
data from the hexane:ethyl acetate displayed no indication of any heterolog terpenoids being
present in the mutants. The GC-MS data from the solid phase head-space microextraction dis-
played possibilities of the presence of monoterpenoids and sesquiterpenoids. The monoterpenoid
p-cymene were even identiﬁed however with much uncertainty. The qualitative evaluation was
not performed for all mutants but a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in smell was observed by the ones per-
formed upon. The various experiments used to characterize the function of the microbe terpene
synthase-like genes were contradicting each other, therefore reperforming certain experiments
are required to remove uncertainties to draw an accurate conclusion.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Physcomitrella patens as a cell factory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2.1
Chemical proﬁle of P. patens, N. scalaris and L. bidentata
. . . . . . . .
4
1.2.2
P. patens as a target for genetic engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Terpenoids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Microbial terpene synthase-like genes (MTPSL) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Background for the Genetic Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.6
Background for use of Chemical Extraction techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.6.1
Background for Hexane/ethyl acetate extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.6.2
Background for Head-space solid phase microextraction . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Materials and Methods
11
2.1
BCD media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Propagation and cultivation of P. patens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.1
Blending of P. patens before propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.2
Propagation of P. patens on solid media
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.3
Propagation of P. patens in liquid media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Fragments from the Genetic design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.1
Fragment 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.2
Fragment 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3.3
Fragment 3
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.4
Fragment 4
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.4
Polymerase Chain Reactions (PCR) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Puriﬁcation of PCR products
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
pRH004 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.7
Cultivation of bacteria from glycerol stock and extraction of plasmids pRH004 .
17
2.8
Transformation of DNA fragments into P. patens
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.9
Extraction of gDNA from P. patens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.10 Hexane:ethyl acetate extraction of P. patens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.11 Head-space Solid Phase microextraction analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.12 Qualitative evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Results
21
3.1
Results of project predecessors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Preparations for transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Transformation events
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.4
Growth of mutants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5
Genotyping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6
Hexane:Ethyl Acetate extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.7
Head-Space Solid Phase microextraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.8
Qualitative evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4
Discussion
34
2
==PAGE:4==
5
Conclusion
36
6
Acknowledgements
36
7
Supplementary material
42
3
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
1.1
Purpose
The entire purpose of this master thesis project is to genetically engineer the moss Physcomitrella
patens to express microbial terpene synthase-like (MTPSL) genes from liverworts Nardia scalaris
and Lophocolea bidentata to enable better characterization of these MTPSL genes. P. patens,
N. scalaris and L. bidentata are taxonomically related as clades under the classiﬁcation em-
bryophytes [1][2][3]. The moss’s close relation to the liverworts, the proven potential of P.
patens as a cell factory and the chemical proﬁle of P. patens makes it an ideal host to express
the MTPSL genes from the liverworts. Being able to express these MTPSL genes in a het-
orolog organism will hopefully give insight in the various characteristics and functionalities of
the proteins and conﬁrm and support the in silico work of other similar studies.
1.2
Physcomitrella patens as a cell factory
The use of Physcomitrella patens as a green cell factory has been developed over the last three
decades where it has gone from odd forest plant to superb green cell factory which has proven
resourceful in basic biology, biotechnology and synthetic biology. Mosses in general while sim-
ple in structure has evolved to achieve a high degree of chemical complexity both in regards
of generally distributed metabolites and more specialized metabolites. Mosses have also been
able to adapt to the environment of northern Europe, surviving long winters and thriving in
the summer by developing a high growth rate which also resulted in a high and energy-eﬃcient
yield. From a genetic engineering aspect the simple structure of mosses makes it more tangible
modifying the DNA because unlike seed plants which dominant phase is sporophytic P. patens
dominant phase is gametophytic. As a result during the dominent part of P. patens lifecycle
the cells are haploid. Haploid cells allows for easier modiﬁcation of DNA since there is only one
of each chromosome. P. patens generally only enter diploid state during the winter and as such
this state is triggered by low temperature and short-day conditions. The artiﬁcial environment
created in a laboratory can therefore easy eliminate the possibility of P. patens entering the
sporophytic lifecycle and it’s cells from becoming diploid. In a laboratory setting it is easily
possible to reach P. patens preferred conditions of temperature and light but also conditions
such as supplements and surroundings can be easily regulated. This allows P. patens to grow
in various systems such as solid agar media in petri dishes, Erlenmeyer ﬂasks, photobioreactors
and 500 liter wave reactors. [4][5].
1.2.1
Chemical proﬁle of P. patens, N. scalaris and L. bidentata
Terpenoids are a big part of the chemical proﬁle of P. patens as a lot are produced as pre-
cursors for a variety of biosyntheses and some have their own function. What is remarkable
about the chemical proﬁle of P. patens is that there is only a single terpene synthase that
produces diterpenoids and no synthases that produces either monoterpenoids or sesquiter-
penoids. As a result there is no volatile compounds except those produced by this terpene
synthase. The diterpene synthase in P. patens is known as copalyl pyrophosphate/kaurene
synthase (CPS/KS) which is a bi-functional diterpene synthase that produces ent-kaur-16-ene
4
==PAGE:6==
and ent-16-α-hydroxy-kaurene from geranylgeranyl diphosphate. One function of CPS/KS is
to convert geranaylgeranyl diphosphate into ent-copalyl diphosphate which then can be con-
verted into either ent-kaur-16-ene and ent-16-α-hydroxy-kaurene. About 20% of the ent-copalyl
diphosphate is converted into ent-kaur-16-ene by and CPS/KS and the other 80% are converted
into ent-16-α-hydroxy-kaurene. The terpenoid ent-kaur-15-ene can also be observed however it
is not a product of CPS/KS. The mostly like reason for appearance of ent-kaur-15-ene in P.
patens is the breakdown of ent-16-α-hydroxy-kaurene. When comparing to other plants, hav-
ing only three terpenoids produced across three diﬀerent terpenoid biosyntheses are extremely
rare. This is very unique and allows for many opportunities when realising that most volatile
compounds produced by plants are small terpenoids. As a result P. patens chemical proﬁle also
makes it an ideal green cell factory for small terpenoid production since the background noise
from the terpenoids produced by the host itself is minimized.
As P. patens, N. scalaris has a large amount of terpenoids which makes up the majority of the
secondary metabolites. While not being studied as much a P. patens a variety of diterpenoids
has been identiﬁed from N. scalaris [6]. These terpenoids seems to originate from ent-kaurene
and branch into kauranoids and diterpene melonates. As of yet no papers have been pub-
lished describing the production of either monoterpenoids or sesquiterpenoids in N. scalaris. L.
bidentata also produces a large amount of terpenoids as secondary metabolites. Amoung the
smaller terpenoids L. bidentata has been found to produce sesquiterpenoids such as valencene,
β-selinene, α-cuparenone, diplophyllolide and epoxy-trinoreudesmane [7][8][9].
1.2.2
P. patens as a target for genetic engineering
There are already several reasons why P. patens is a suitable green cell factory, and already back
around 1991 did researchers ﬁnd another reason for P. patens to be regarded as a resourceful
and opportunistic green cell factory. Researchers were able to establish antibiotic-resistance
in P. patens by PEG-mediated uptake of plasmids with resistance genes. This led to further
research of P. patens and soon precise gene targeting were achieved via homologous recombi-
nation. Turns out that P. patens has an outstanding high ability of performing homologous
recombination, and together with the haploid nature of the moss it makes it a great chassis
for gene targeting. Homologous recombination is one of two options of double stranded break
repair in most organisms, the other being non-homologous end joining. In short, homologous
recombination works by recognizing double stranded breaks of DNA fragments and comparing
the DNA sequence of the fragment to the DNA sequences of the chromosome. If large parts
of a DNA fragment’s sequence matches a sequence in the chromosome the cell will insert the
fragment into the chromosome where the sequence matches. For homologous recombination
to happen the identical sequence in a fragment and the chromosome has to share at least 500
basepairs. Researchers were able to utilize homologous recombination to both create knock-out
of speciﬁc genes and integration of desired genes, by making DNA fragments which has identical
sequences to a site in the chromosome in both ends. In recent years it has been proved that P.
patens can succesfully assemble multiple fragments in vivo and integrate a large fragment with
the size up to 9.2 kilobases into it’s genom [10]. This makes creating the sequence that has to
be integrated into the chromosome much easier since smaller fragments that together makes
the entire sequence can be assembled in a P. patens cell (Figure 1). The only requirement is
that the fragments share a small homologous sequence. The size of the homologous sequence
5
==PAGE:7==
can be anywhere between 12 - 100 basepair. It has been proven that a longer identical sequence
doesn’t result in a higher eﬃcacy of in vivo assembly, the largest eﬃcacy was achieved at 20
homologous basepairs. As such utilizing P. patens own mechanisms for DNA repair allows for
easy genetic modiﬁcation.
Figure 1: Illustrates an example of how an in vivo assembly of multiple fragments and homolo-
gous recombination works in P. patens. (1): Fragment 1, illustrated in black, has an identical
seqeunce to part of the P. patens chromosome. Fragment 2 has an optional coding sequence
(green) and in the ends it has a sequence identical to the ends of the two adjacent fragments
(yellow). Fragment 3 is an optional coding sequence (blue). Fragment 4 has an optional cod-
ing sequence (red) and in the ends it has a sequence identical to the ends of the two adjacent
fragments (yellow). Fragment 5, ilustrated in black, has an identical seqeunce to part of the
P. patens chromosome. (2): All the fragments have been assembled and integrated into the
chromosome of P. patens
6
==PAGE:8==
1.3
Terpenoids
As brieﬂy mentioned, P. patens has an extensive chemical complexity of both general metabo-
lites and specialized metabolites. A large part of the specialized metabolites are terpenoids,
which in plants functions as hormones, photosynthetic pigments, electron carriers, mediators
of polysaccharide assembly, structural components of membranes, attraction of pollinators and
seed dispersers, competetive phytoxins, antibiotics and herbivore repellent such as toxins. Fur-
thermore humans have found important applications of terpenoids for biopharmaceuticals, ﬂa-
voring, fragrances, adhesives, agriculture and cosmetic products.
The ﬁrst principle for deﬁning terpenoid structures were already formulated in 1914 by noble
prize recipient Otto Wallach, who theorized that terpenoids were constructed by repetetive
joining of isoprene, this principal became known as the "isoprene rule". The principal was
reﬁned by Leopold Ruzicka in 1953, to the terpenoid structure being able to ignore the pre-
cise character of the biological precursors and assumes that they are "isoprenoid" in structure.
Meaning that the chemical structure of a terpenoid can be constructed from isoprene, however
the various isoprenes might have undergone electrophillic elongations, cyclizations, and rear-
rangements. The reﬁned principal became known as "biogenetic isoprene rule" [11].
Figure 2: The ﬁgure illustrates various simple terpenoids with diﬀerent size and how many
isoprenes each terpenoid is assembled of. NOTE: This is not the biosynthesis of terpenoids.
Through the biogenetic isoprene rule it can be deduced that terpenoids will contain a number
of carbons in the backbone from the 5th table. The largest group of terpenoids have been ob-
served with a backbone of C40, which are the tetraterpenoids known as carotenoids. Besides the
7
==PAGE:9==
tetraterpenoids there are hemiterpenoids (C5), monoterpenoids (C10), sesquiterpenoids (C15),
diterpenoids (C20), sesterterpenoids (C25), triterpenoids (C30) and sesquaterpenoids (C35) (Fig-
ure 2) [12]. The smaller terpenoids such as mono-, sesqui- and diterpenoids are known for their
more volatile natrue, whereas the larger terpenoids are known to be more complex and more
scarce as the backbone gets larger [13].
1.4
Microbial terpene synthase-like genes (MTPSL)
Microbial terpene synthase-like (MTPSL) genes are found in lower plants such as bryophytes,
and almost completely absent in higher plants, they are known for their inﬂuence on produc-
tion of the smaller terpenoids such as mono-, sesqui- and diterpenoids and they get their name
from their evolutionary similarity to microbial terpene synthases. The similarities are mainly
structural, there is however also some genetic similarities. Traditional plant terpene synthases
can be composed of a combination of diﬀerent structural domains.
One has the α-domain
and β-domain (αβ-type) and the other has the α-domain, β-domain and γ-domain (αβγ-type).
The structural domains α-domain and β-domain carries a conserved aspartate rich motif which
plays a major role in the reaction mechanism of plant terpene synthases together with the
substrate binding motif NSD/DTE. The aspartate rich motif sequence in the α-domain is con-
served in the C-terminal end and terpene synthases that carries this motif’s funtion is called
class I terpene synthases. For class I terpene synthases the aspartate rich motif sequence is
DDxxD which function employs ionization-induced carbocation formation. Ionization-induced
carbocation formation utilizes a magnesium cluster which binds the diphosphate of the sub-
strate and allows for ionizing the allylic diphosphate ester bond resulting in detachment of
the disphosphate group from the rest of the molecule. The motif sequence in the β-domain is
DxDD and terpene synthases which carries this function is called class II terpene synthases.
Class II terpene synthases reaction mechanism is protonation-induced carbocation formation.
Protonation-induced carbocation formation is involved in protonating an isoprenoid dobbelt
bond between carbon atoms resulting in cyclization of the carbon backbone. Plant terpene
synthases of the αβ-type only carries the class I function, whereas plant terpene synthases of
αβγ-type can carry either the class I function, the class II function or be bifunctional and carry
both class functions [14]. The single native P. patens terpene synthase CPS/KS is one of these
bifunctional terpene synthases. The two previously mentioned reaction that is catalysed by
CPS/KS can also be placed in the two classes. The ﬁrst reaction is a class II reaction that
causes cyclization in the geranylgeranyl backbone and the second reaction is a class I reaction
which removes the diphosphate group from the molecule. Besides the structural classiﬁcation
plant terpene synthases can also be classiﬁed by conserved intron-exon patterns in the genetic
sequence. In plant terpene synthases there are 3 classes of intron-exon patterns, the ﬁrst class
is 12-14 introns, the second class is nine introns and the third class is six introns [15].
Where plant terpene synthases structures are consisting of multiple domains seen both in the
αβ-type and the αβγ-type, MTPSL genes structures diﬀerentiates itself by only consisting of an
α-domain (Figure 3). Terpene synthases from bacteria have three classiﬁcations the ﬁrst is the
βγ-type, the second is the only α-type and the third is the tandem αα-type. Terpene synthases
from fungi have three types as well one αβγ-type, one only α-type and one type where the
α-domain fuses with the isoprenyl diphosphate synthase. By comparison of protein structures
of MTPSL genes to terpene synthases from plants, bacteria and fungi it is clear that there is
8
==PAGE:10==
a much closer resemblance between MTPSL genes and terpene synthases from bacteria or fungi.
Figure 3: A display of the diﬀerent structures that terpene synthases from diﬀerent organisms
and MTPSLs can have.
Just like plant terpene synthases, MTPSL genes from plants can be devided into classes. For
MTPLS genes there are four classes which are called group I-IV where group I and group II
are more similar to the terpene synthase from bacteria and group III and group IV are more
similar to terpene synthase from fungi. MTPSL genes have the same two important motifs for
the reaction mechanism as plant terpene synthases. NSD/DTE is mostly conserved between
the MTPSL genes and terpene synthases but the aspartate rich motif is not. The aspartate
rich motif is largely what divides MTPSL genes into the four major groups, all dependent on
what order the asparic acids appear in the motif. The motif of group I is DDxxD, the motif
of group II is DDxxxD, the motif of group III is DDxxx and the motif of group IV is DDxxD
[16]. The sequence of the aspartate rich motif of MTPSL genes are also were they diﬀerentiate
themselves from bacteria and fungi as bacteria and fungi in general have the same sequence
9
==PAGE:11==
of the aspartate rich motif as plants [17]. Though the sequence of the aspartate rich motif of
MTPSL genes have evolved a bit comparing the aspartate rich motif to the aspartate rich mo-
tif of plant terpene synthases suggests that they most likely belong as a class II terpene synthase.
To further improve the point that MTPSL genes doesn’t originate from plants the genetic
classiﬁcations can be used. Looking at the intron-exon pattern it can be seen that MTPSL
genes doesn’t ﬁt into any of the classes for plant terpene synthases as they in general doesn’t
have introns. The liverwort Marchantia polymorpha was found to have a few MTPSL genes
with 4 introns which still wouldn’t ﬁt the classiﬁcation with the fewest introns of plant terpene
synthases. So from a genetic aspect MTPSL genes seems to take more after the prokaryotes
which doesnt use introns at all [18].
In an article from 2016, Qidong Jia [16] did a phylogenetic analysis of 712 MTPSL genes from
plants transcriptomes together with 48 known MTPSL genes from Selaginella moellendorﬃi
and selected terpene synthase genes from bacteria and fungi. They were able to put the various
MTPSL genes into the four major groups and identify the the presence of diﬀerent groups in
diﬀerent bryophytes. Jia found that 86% of liverwort MTPSL genes was group I and 34% of
the moss MTPSL genes were group I. In group II 66% of the moss MTPSL genes were found,
together with 50% of the hornworts genes. Group III had a small amount of hornworts and
liverworts. Group IV consists mainly of monilophytes and lycophytes and no bryophyte genes
were found in group IV. Since the MTPSL genes of interest are from liverworts there is a large
chance that they will be in group I. Group I uses the exact same aspartate motif as class I
terpene synthases which causes the molecular separation of diphosphate from the rest of the
molecule.
1.5
Background for the Genetic Design
The genetic design created for this project follows the concept of in vivo assembly and homol-
ogous recombination combined with an antibiotic resistance for selection. The genetic design
created was made of four diﬀerent fragments which primers added overhangs to adjacent frag-
ments. During the in vivo assembly smaller fragments were ligated together ﬁrst, which results
in the four fragments creating one large fragment 5 that through homologous recombination
would be integrated into the chromosome of P. patens in locus 108. The important sequences
of the diﬀerent fragments can be seen in table 1.
1.6
Background for use of Chemical Extraction techniques
To characterize the MTPSL genes of interest determining what metabolite partake in their
reaction is vital.
From what is known about MTPSL genes, they will most likely enable
production of either mono-, sesqui- or diterpenoids.
Therefore two methods that allow for
chemical identiﬁcation of the assumed products will be utilized.
1.6.1
Background for Hexane/ethyl acetate extraction
This extraction technique works great for extraction of simple non-volitile terpenoids without
any decorations (modiﬁcation that are not cyclizations). The targeted terpenoids of this ex-
10
==PAGE:12==
Sequence
Size (bp)
Brief description of purpose
Origin of sequence
Locus 108 -5’ homologous region
1220
Enables homologous recombination in locus 108 of P. patens
Physcomitrella patens
CaMV poly(A) signal
177
Terminates transcription with a poly adenylation
of transcription started by the CaMV 35S promoter
Cauliﬂower musaic virus
Neomycin/Kanamycin resistance
795
Coding sequence for proteins involved in resistance
towards neomycin and kanamycin
Gram negative bacteria
CaMV 35S promoter
345
Promotes transcription
Cailoﬂower musaic virus
I2:48
357
Promotes transcription
Zea mays
MTPSL
Varies
Coding sequence of any of the 8 given MTPSL genes
Nardia scalaris or Lophocolea bidentata
OCS terminator
708
Terminates transcription
Boechera divaricarpa
Locus 108 -3’ homologous region
1352
Enables homologous recombination in locus 108 of P. patens
Physcomitrella patens
Table 1: Table of the various sequences that was part of the fragment that was transformed
into Physcomitrella patens, the sequences size, a brief description of the purpose the sequence
serve and from what organism the sequence originates from.
traction would usually be the terpenoids that are too big or has a too high polarity to be
volatile. These terpenoids are most likely the terpenoids with a backbone that is larger than
C15. So the point of this extraction would be to detect if any of the MTPSL genes of interest
carries diterpene synthase characteristics [19]. However in the case of this project the extrac-
tion is performed searching for mono- and sesquiterpenoids as they are the assumed product of
MTPSL proteins.
1.6.2
Background for Head-space solid phase microextraction
This method of analysing analytes were already proved useful back in 1994 where it was also
used for liquid solution. The idea is having a matrix at the bottom of the ﬂask and then using
an extraction ﬁber to siphoning the analytes to an seperation matrix. Using this setup insures
the optimal devision of analytes from P. patens as only very few native compounds are volatile.
Growing the moss on solid BCD media instead of liquid BCD media allows for higher analyte
concentration in the head-space. If the moss were grown in liquid BCD media it would be more
diﬃcult for the analytes to escape to the head-space. So by utilizing solid BCD media the best
concentration of analytes is achieved [20].
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
BCD media
All the media that the moss P. patens were grown on during all of the experiments were
some variant of BCD media. The BCD media was made with MQ-water, solution B, solution
C, solution D, trace elements solution and iron-sulfate heptahydrate(FeSO4·7H2O). Solution
B contained 0.1M magnesium-sulfate heptahydrate(MgSO4·7H2O) and the working concentra-
tion of solution B in the BCD had to be 1mM. Solution C contained 0.18M of potassium
phosphate(KH2PO4) with a 6.5 pH adjusted by 4M potassiumhydroxid(KOH) and the working
concentration of solution C in the BCD media had to be 1.8mM. Solution D contained 1M of
11
==PAGE:13==
potassiumnitrate(KNO3) and the working concentration of solution D in the BCD media had
to be 10mM. The trace elements solution contained boric acid(H3BO3), manganese chloride
tetrahydrate(MnCl2·4H2O), aluminium potassium sulfate dodecahydrate(AlK(SO4)2·12H2O),
cobalt chloride hexahydrate(CoCl2·H2O), copper sulfate pentahydrate(CuSO4·5H2O), zink sul-
fate heptahydrate(ZnSO4·H2O), potassium bromide(KBr), potassium iodide (KI), Lithium chlo-
ride(LiCl) and tin chloride dihydrate(SnCl2·H2O), working concentration and stock concentra-
tion can be seen in Table 2. 1L BCD media was made by adding around 900mL MQ-water
in a 1L bottle. Then adding 10mL of stock solution B, stock solution C and stock solution
D. In addition 1mL of trace elements solution and iron-sulfate heptahydrate. Then agar could
be added if needed, to reach 1% (w/v) which for 1L BCD was 10g bacto agar. The volume
was then adjusted to 1L with MQ-water. Then the bottle was autoclaved, if agar was added
it was kept at 60◦C to make sure the media doesn’t solidify in the bottle. Before use calcium
chloride(CaCl2) was added to reach a working concentration of 1mM and in some cases ammo-
nium tartrate((NH4)2C4H4O6) was added to reach a working concentration of 5mM, and then
the BCD media was ready for use.
Chemical
Molarmass (g/mol)
Stock concentration (M)
Working concentration (mM)
MgSO4·7H2O (Solution B)
247.47
0.1
1
KH2PO4 (Solution C)
136.09
0.18
1.8
KNO3 (Solution D)
101.1
1
10
H3BO3
61.83
0.0099
0.0099
MnCl2·4H2O
197.91
0.002
0.002
CoCl2·H2O
237.93
0.0002
0.0002
AlK(SO4)2·12H2O
474.39
0.0002
0.0002
CuSO4·5H2O
249.69
0.0002
0.0002
ZnSO4·H2O
287.56
0.0002
0.0002
KBr
119.0
0.0002
0.0002
KI
166.0
0.0002
0.0002
LiCl
42.39
0.0007
0.0007
SnCl2·H2O
225.65
0.0001
0.0001
FeSO4·7H2O
278.01
0.045
0.045
Table 2: The molar mass, stock solution concentration and working concentration of all the
diﬀerent chemical compounds that were going into BCD media.
2.2
Propagation and cultivation of P. patens
The moss P .patens was cultivated and propagated either in liquid BCD media or on solid BCD
media. If P. patens was grown on solid media it was either grown in petri dishes or in GC
vials. If P. patens was grown in liquid media it was grown in either 250mL erlenmeyer ﬂasks,
12
==PAGE:14==
in 1L ﬂasks as part of a reactor setup or in tissue culture ﬂasks. In most instances the moss
was treated by blending before it was propagated.
2.2.1
Blending of P. patens before propagation
When blending the moss an autoclaved forcept was ﬁrst further sterilized by lowering the end
into ethanol and then heating the same end over a lit bunsen burner. If the moss was kept in
liquid media it was caught in a sieve with pores no larger than 100µm and then added to a
50mL falcon tube containing 10mL BCD media. If the moss was kept on solid media it was
just gathered and added to the falcon tube with 10mL BCD media. An autoclaved blender tip
was then added to the blender and the moss in the falcon tubes were then blended for 30s to
1min. Afterwards the moss was caught in a sieve again and it was ready to be propagated.
2.2.2
Propagation of P. patens on solid media
When propagating on BCD media in petri dishes, autoclaved dishes were prepared by added
40mL of BCD media to each dish and letting it cool down to solidify. Then autoclaved cello-
phane was added and smoothed out on the surface of the solid BCD media. The blended moss
caught in the sieve was then added to the plate. The petri dish was then sealed using oxygen
tape, and transferred to a growth chamber with a temperature of 25◦C and an intense light
sources.
When propagating P. patens in GC vials, membranes, lits and GC vials themselves were ﬁrst
autoclaved. Then BCD media with 1% agar was added to ﬁll half of the GC vial and cooled till
media solidiﬁes. When propagating in a GC vial the moss was not treated beforehand. Using
a inoculation loop a single moss lump was transferred to the solid media in the GC vial. The
GC vial was then sealed using the membrane and lit and transferred to a growth chamber till
use for GC-MS analysis.
2.2.3
Propagation of P. patens in liquid media
When propagating moss in an 250mL erlenmeyers ﬂask 220mL of BCD media was added to
the ﬂask. Using a forcept the moss from the sieve was then trasferred to the ﬂask. The ﬂask
was then transferred to a growth chamber where it was placed on a shaker. When propagating
in tissue culture ﬂasks 20mL of BCD was added to the ﬂask. The moss was then added to
the ﬂask and it was transferred to a growth chamber where it was left on a shaker. When
propagating in 1L bottles and cultivating through a simple reactor setup a single bottle of 1L
autoclaved MQ-water and 1L autoclaved BCD for each potential mutant was prepared. In
the laminar ﬂow bench, the moss was added from the sieve to the bottles and the lids was
changed so tubing could be applied. The tubes inside the bottles had to reach to the bottom
whilst not touching the glass leaving space for air to escape. Using autoclaved plastic 3-way
connectors and autoclaved tubes the setup seen on ﬁgure 4 was achieved. Then metal clamps
were added on the air inlet of each bottle which was then closed oﬀcompletely. The setup was
then transferred to the growth chamber where it was connected to the inlet of air. The metal
clamp on the ﬁrst bottle was then opened a bit and the airﬂow was turned on. When there
13
==PAGE:15==
was continous air bubbles forming in the ﬁrst bottle the clamp on the next bottle was then
opened a bit. This was done again for the next bottle and so on till all bottles had continous
air bubbles forming and the reactor setup was complete.
Figure 4: A display of the reactor setup for quick growth of moss. The air comes in through
a valve, goes through a ﬁlter to the clean water and then through a ﬁlter again. It was then
redirected through the 3-ways connectors to reach the bottle with moss. Small metal clamps
adjust the air pressure which was presented by the small square-like ﬁgures.
2.3
Fragments from the Genetic design
2.3.1
Fragment 1
Fragment 1 consisted of the sequences coding for the Locus 108-5’ homologous region, CaMV
poly(A) signal, Neomycin/Kanamycin resistance gene and the CaMV 35S promoter. In total the
fragment length was 2688 base pairs. The 108-5’ sequence was there as part of the homologous
recombination integration into locus 108. The CaMV poly(A) signal, Neomycin/Kanamycin
resistance gene and CaMV 35S promoter together makes the selection operon, granting the
ability to resist the negative eﬀects of both the antibiotics Neomycin and Kanamycin.
2.3.2
Fragment 2
The second fragment consisted of the I2:48 promoter sequence from Zea mays. This promoter
would promote the transcription of the desired MTPSL genes once the in vivo assembly and
integration through homologous recombination was achieved. Furthermore when this fragment
was ampliﬁed by PCR an overhang was added to the fragment in the 5’-end. The overhang
was added during PCR by using a forward primer which had an additional 21 basepairs in
the 5’-end. The additional 21 basepairs was identical to the last 21 basepairs in the 3’-end of
14
==PAGE:16==
Figure 5: A graphic display of what the assembled fragment would look like with annotations
highlighted by colored arrows and the four diﬀerent fragments highlighted beneath the annotation.
In this graphic display LbMTPSL 1 was used as an example of a MTPSL gene. Black arrow:
Locus 108 homologous regions, red arrow: Cauliﬂower musaic virus polyA signal, light green
arrow: neomycin and kanamycin resistance gene, green: promoter sequence (either Cauliﬂower
musaic virus 35S promoter or the Zea mays I2:48 promoter), blue: MTPSL gene (here shown
by LbMTPSL 1), yellow: OCS terminator
fragment 1. This fragment’s total length was therefore be 378 basepairs.
2.3.3
Fragment 3
The third fragment consisted of one of the MTPSL genes. For this fragment overhangs were
added in both the 5’- and 3’-end during PCR. Due to the diﬀerence of sequences between the
MTPSL genes the length of the primers were not constant. The diﬀerence in length of primers
were created as an attempt to achieve similar Tm-values for the forward and reverse primer.
The forward primer had an overhang added in the 5’-end that was identical to the 3’-end of
fragment 2. The reverse primer had an overhang added in the 5’-end that was identical to the
complementary basepairs in the 5’-end of fragment 4.
2.3.4
Fragment 4
The last fragment consisted of the OCS terminator from Boechera divaricarpa and the ho-
mologous sequence of the locus 108 3’-end from P. patens.
The OCS terminator serves to
terminate transcription of the MTPSL gene. The homologous sequence of the locus 108 3’-end
serves to integrate the ﬁnal fragment into the chromosome of P. patens during the homologous
recombination. The size of fragment 4 was 2060 basepairs in total.
2.4
Polymerase Chain Reactions (PCR)
The necessary DNA required for transformation of P. patens was aquired by performing PCRs.
During this project, only PCRs were performed to amplify fragment 1 and fragment 4. The
recipe mixture was tested by a project predecessor, so no gel was ran after the reaction. The
15
==PAGE:17==
mixture was 36µL of MQ-water, 10µL of CXL buﬀer, 2µL of dNTPs, 0.5µL of forward primer,
0.5µL of reverse primer, 0.5µL of template (pRH004) and 0.5µL of X7-polymerase. The MQ-
water was added ﬁrst, then everything else and lastly the X7-polymerase. This recipe mixture
could be upscaled by making it in a falcon tube and then dividing 50µL to the PCR-tubes.
The upscalings that was performed was x256 and x520.
The PCR vials were then added
to the PCR machine and the following program was used, initial denaturation for 1 minutes
at 98◦C, 35 cycles of denaturation for 15 seconds, annealing for 15 seconds at primer speciﬁc
temperature (lowest primer Tm + 3◦C) and elongation for 30 seconds at 72◦C (end cycles), then
ﬁnal elongation for 5 minutes at 72◦C and afterwards storage at 4◦C indeﬁnently (Appendix
1).
2.5
Puriﬁcation of PCR products
For purifying of DNA in PCR products the Macherey-Nagel NucleoSpin Gel and PCR Clean-
up midi kit was used. First 1.6mL of PCR product was mixed with 2.4mL of NT1 buﬀer in a
15mL falcon tube. The mixture was then added to a collection column and centrifuged for 1
minute at 3000xg, the ﬂowthrough was then added to the column again and it was centrifuged
again under the same conditions. The ﬂowthrough was then discarded and the membrane was
washed with 4mL of NT3 buﬀer and centrifuged for 1 minute at 3000xg. Afterwards 2mL of
NT3 buﬀer was added to the column and it was centrifuged again at 3000xg for 1 minute. The
ﬂowthrough was discarded and the column was dried by centrifuging for 10 minutes at 3000xg
and it was then put in the heating cabinet (70◦C) for 5 minutes to further evaporate any left-
over ethanol. The column was then placed in a new 15mL falcon tube and 200µL of elution
buﬀer was added and it was incubated in the heating cabinet for 5 minutes. After incubation
it was centrifuged for 3000xg for 2 minutes. This process was repeated with 200µL of elution
buﬀer. The elution was then the puriﬁed PCR products which could be concentrated by evapo-
rating water in a heating block at 50◦C. The concentration could be determined by a nanodrop.
When puriﬁcation of PCR products had to be done in small quantities the Cytiva illustra
GFX PCR DNA, Gel band puriﬁcation mini kit was used. The puriﬁcation was performed by
transferring 100µL of PCR product to a 1.5mL eppendorf tube. Then 500µL of capture buﬀer
from the kit was added to the same tube. The contents of the tube was mixed by vortex and
transferred to the bottom again by centrifuging. The contents were then transferred to a GFX
microspin column which was placed in a collection tube. The sample was then centrifuged
through the column at 13200xg for 1 minute. The ﬂow-through was added to the column again
to ensure that the maximum amount of DNA was captured in the column mesh. The column
was centrifuged again at same conditions. The ﬂow-through was then discarded and the column
was washed by adding 500µL of wash buﬀer to the column. The column was centrifuged at
13200xg for 30 seconds and ﬂow-through was discarded. The wash was performed twice to get
the best purity. Then the column was dried by spining for 2 minutes and afterwards added
to a clean 1.5mL tube. Then 50µL of elution buﬀer was added directly to the column mesh
and incubated at room temperature for 1 miunute before centrifuging at 13200xg for 1 minute.
The column was then discarded and the puriﬁed PCR product was in the tube. The sample
of puriﬁed product could be concentrated by evaporating water and concentrations could be
measured on a nanodrop.
16
==PAGE:18==
In cases of multiple bands on gels, DNA puriﬁcation was performed using the Zymoclean Gel
DNA recovery kit. The PCR products was stained with a x6 loading buﬀer and loaded in a
single well in a gel. After the gel had ran it was transferred to a UV light table and the correct
band was exercised using a razor. Gel pieces of around 40mg was added to 1.5mL tubes. The
exact weight was measured and for each mg of gel 3µL of ADB was added to the tube. The
tube was then incubated at 55◦C till the gel was dissolved. The solution was then transferred
to a zymo-spin column which was placed in a collection tube. The column was centrifuged at
13200xg for 1 minute. The ﬂow-through was transferred to the column and centrifuged again
under the same conditions. The ﬂow-through was then discarded. Then 200µL of wash buﬀer
was added to the column and it was centrifuged for 1 minute at 13200xg. The ﬂow-through was
discarded and another 200µL of wash buﬀer was added and centrifuged. After discarding the
ﬂow-through the mesh of the column was dried by centrifuging for 2 minutes at 13200xg. The
column was transferred to a clean 1.5mL tube. Then 15µL of elution buﬀer was added directly
to the column mesh and incubated for 1 minute. When the minute was over the column was
centrifuged at 13200xg for 1 minute and afterwards discarded. The puriﬁed PCR product was
left in the tube and could be concentrated by evaporating water. The concentration could be
measured on a nanodrop.
Sending puriﬁed PCR product for sequencing was done by adding 5µL of puriﬁed product and
5µL of one of the primers in a 1.5mL eppendorf tube. This was done for both the forward and
the reverse primer. The tubes were labelled with the packaging stickers and sent to Macrogen
Europe’s facility for sequencing.
2.6
pRH004
The plasmid pRH004 contained both the homologous locus 108 ends, a kanamycin selection
operon, the OCS terminator and a ZmUbi promoter (Not utilized for this project). These se-
quences has been aligned so the OCS terminator is adjacent to the 108 3’-end and the kanamycin
selection operon is adjacent to the 108 5’-end. The total size of the plasmid was 9496 basepairs.
2.7
Cultivation of bacteria from glycerol stock and extraction of plas-
mids pRH004
In a LAF-bench, there was added 10mL of LB media to a 50mL falcon tube. Then there was
added kanamycin to reach a concentration of 50µm/mL. Then the frozen glycerol stock of E.
coli containing pRH004 was lightly touched with a pippete tip and the tip was then placed
in the falcon tube.
The tube was incubated overnight at 37◦C with shaking, after around
16 hours the culture was ready for plasmid extraction. The extraction was performed using
a zymo research Zyppy Plasmid miniprep kit, where 600µL of the bacteria was added to a
1.5mL eppendorf tube. Then 100µL of lysis buﬀer was added and the contents were mixed by
inverting the tube slowly 5-6 times. The tube was left for incubation at room temperature for 2
minutes. When 2 minutes had passed neutralization buﬀer was added and the tube was again
gently mixed by inverting 5-6 times. The tube was then centrifuged for 4 minutes at 11000xg.
Afterwards the supernatant was collected in a collection column that was placed in a clean
1.5mL eppendorf tube. This tube and column was then centrifuged for 15 seconds at 11000xg.
17
==PAGE:19==
Figure 6: An annotated image of pRH004. The image contains homologous sequence with locus
108 -5’ and -3’ ends (Grey), two resistance genes for kanamycin (Yellow), three promoters
(green), three terminators (red) and one origen of replication (black). Not all terminators and
promoters are annotated
The ﬂowthrough was then discarded and 200µL of endo-wash buﬀer was added to the column
and it was centrifuged again at 11000xg for 30 seconds. The ﬂowthrough was discarded and
400µL of wash buﬀer was added to the column and it was centrifuged again at 11000xg for 1
minute. The column was then transferred to a clean 1.5mL eppendorf tube and 30µL of elutino
buﬀer was added and left 1 minutes before centrifuging again at 11000xg for 30 seconds. The
column was then discarded and the plasmid concentration could be found using a nanodrop
machine.
2.8
Transformation of DNA fragments into P. patens
The recipes for required solutions and calculations can be seen in Appendix 2 and 3. To start oﬀ
the transformation moss that had grown on ammonium tartrate for about 5 days was collected
in a sieve. The moss was then washed with 50mL of MQ-water 4-5 times to remove any leftover
BCD that might inhibit the Driselase. The Driselase was then prepared by adding 20mL of
8.5% D-mannitol to a 50mL falcon tube and adding 200mg of Driselase powder. The powder
was then dissolved by mixing and the tube was centrifuged at 5000xg for 10 minutes. The
supernatant was collected and syringe ﬁltered into a clean 50mL falcon tube. The washed moss
was then added to the falcon tube, it was covered with aluminium foil and put on a small
shaker for at least 1 hour. After the 1 hour the mixture was checked under the microscope
18
==PAGE:20==
every 15 minutes for amount of free ﬂoating protoplast and when the amount was large enough
the protocol procedure could proceed. After this point on the work was performed on fragile
protoplast so all the work was done with slow movements and wide pipette tip openings in an
attempt to preserve as many protoplast as possible till the end. The protoplast was recovered
from the Driselase mixture by ﬁltering through a sieve with a pore opening of 40µm which
would catch any protonemal tissue. The ﬁltered protoplast was then divided into four 10mL
round bottomed glass vials. The glass vials was then centrifuged at 200xg for 5 minutes with
acceleration at 2 and deceleration at 4. The supernatant was removed carefully by pipetting
the top of the liquid and leaving some liquid left at the bottom to be sure not to disturb the
pellet since it was not sturdy. The pellet was resuspended in 1mL of protoplast wash (PW)
solution by gently inverting the vial slowly. The protoplast solutions was collected in one vial
by pouring gently and PW solution was added to reach a volume of 10mL. The vial was then
centrifuged at 200xg for 5 minutes with acceleration 2 and deceleration 4 and the supernatant
was removed from the surface of the liquid. The pellet was resuspended in 5mL PW solution
(1mL was added at a time) by gently inverting and shaking by hand. The protoplast density
was then estimated using a hemocytometer where both grid areas were counted and the average
was used as the estimate protoplasts. The protoplast suspension was then centrifuged for 5 min
at 200xg with acceleration 2 and deceleration 4. The supernatant was removed from the liquid
surface and the pellet was resuspended in MMM solution to reach a concentration of 1.6 · 106
protoplast/mL. The DNA was then added to a 50mL falcon tube and it was centrifuged for 2
minutes at 5000xg. When protoplast suspension, PEG-MCT and DNA was added together the
procedure becomes time dependent till it was stabilized in PW solution. 300µL of PEG-MCT
and 300µL of protoplast suspension was added to the DNA tube and it was mixed gently.
The tube was then incubated at 45◦C (preferably in a water bath) for 5 minutes, followed by
incubation at room temperature for 5 minutes. Afterwards PW solution was added in 1 minute
intervals, the ﬁrst ﬁve intervals 300µL of PW solution was added and the last ﬁve intervals
1mL of PW solution was added. The tube was then centrifuged at 200xg for 5 minutes with
acceleration 2 and deceleration 4. The supernatant was removed from the surface of the liquid
and the pellet was resuspended in 500mL of PW solution. 2.5mL of PRMT was then added to
the tube (cooled down a bit before use) and 1mL of the protoplast mixture was then added to 3
diﬀerent PRMB plates with cellophane. The plates were sealed, wrapped in aluminium foil and
placed in the growth chamber overnight. The next day the aluminium foil was removed and the
incubation was continoued for 5 days. When 5 days had passed the moss was transferred by
cellophane to BCD plates with kanamycin and grown for another month in the growth chamber.
When the month had passed any positive transformation would have grown bushy structures.
2.9
Extraction of gDNA from P. patens
The genomic DNA (gDNA) extraction was performed using the Qiagen QIAamp fast DNA
tissue kit. Before following the kit protocol the moss that the extraction was performed on,
was collected in a ﬁlter, dried using tissues and grinded to a ﬁne powder using a mortar, a pestle
and liquid nitrogen. 25mg of the ﬁne powder was added to the provided tissue disruption tubes.
Then the supplied chemicals and proteins were added to the disruption tube, 200µL of AVE,
40µL VXL, 1µL of Dx reagent, 20µL of Proteinase K and 4µL of RNase A. The contents of
the disruption tube was then homogenized by vortexing at full speed for 5 minutes followed
by incubation in a thermomixer at 1000rpm and 56◦C for 10 minutes. If the contents had not
19
==PAGE:21==
reached homogeneity further incubation was performed. Then 265µL of MVL buﬀer was added
and mixed with a pipette. The contents of the disruption tube was then added to column
from the kit which was placed in a collection tube. The column was centrifuged for 1 min
at max speed. The ﬂow-through was transferred to the column again and centrifuged for 1
minute again. The column was then added to a new collection tube and the old was discarded.
Then 500µL of AW1 buﬀer was added to the column and it was centrifuged at max speed for
1 minute. The ﬂow-through was discarded and 500µL of AW2 buﬀer was added to the column
and it was centrifuged at max speed for 1 minute. The ﬂow-through was discarded and the
column was given a dry-spin for 2 minutes at max speed. The column was added to a clean
1.5mL eppendorf tube and 50µL of ATE buﬀer was directly added to the column mesh. The
column was incubated at room temperature for 1 minute and was then centrifuged for 1 minute
at max speed. The column was then discarded and the contents in the 1.5mL eppendorf tube
was the gDNA. The concentration of gDNA was measured using a nanodrop.
2.10
Hexane:ethyl acetate extraction of P. patens
The Hexane:ethyl acetate extraction was performed by ﬁrst collecting the moss for extraction
in a ﬁlter, drying it with tissues and grinding it to a ﬁne powder using a mortar, a pestle and
liquid nitrogen. The grinded moss was then added to a 10mL glass vial and weighted. Then
5mL of hexane:ethyl acetate with a volume ratio of 1:2 was added to the glass vial and it was
vortexed to mix the moss and the hexane:ethyl acetate. The contents was then exposed to
ultrasound for 20 minutes, followed by centrifuging for 10 minutes at 3000g. The organic phase
(the supernatant) was transferred to a clean glass vial. The solution was then evaporated using
nitrogen gas till there was only around 300µL of solution left in the glass vial. 80µL of the
solvent was then transferred to a HPLC vial which was closed with the appropriate cap and
stored till GC-MS analysis was ran at -20◦. The GC-MS had a cutoﬀat 4.0 minutes and the
mass range was 50 - 700 m/z. The temperatures for the GC-MS was ﬁrst 60◦C for 1 minute
and it would then rise to 300◦C.
2.11
Head-space Solid Phase microextraction analysis
The head-space solid phase microextraction analysis was performed on the moss that was
incubated in GC vials for at least 1 month. This analysis used the gray SPME ﬁber assembly
50/30µm DVB/Carboxen/PDMS StableFlex. Before the analysis started the ﬁbers were cleaned
by adding them to the cleaning station on the GC-MS machine which was set to 300◦C for 30
minutes. The clean ﬁbers were then used to absorb any volatile compounds in the GC vial by
using the needle to enter the vial through the membrane and extending the ﬁber to right above
the moss culture in the vial. The GC vial with the ﬁber in was then incubated for 1-2 hours
at room temperature. The ﬁber was then redrawn into the needle which was transferred to the
GC inlet port set to 270◦C on the running GC-MS machine. The ﬁber was extended inside the
inject port for 1 minute before it was redrawn into the needle and it was placed in the cleaning
station for 30 minutes. The retention time for one sample was 17 minutes and the mass range
was 50 - 700 m/z.
20
==PAGE:22==
2.12
Qualitative evaluation
A qualitative evaluation of the mutants and the P. patens wildtype were performed.
This
evaluation was based on the sense of smell. The mosses were incubated on BCD plates for
about 2 weeks before they were opened in the LAF bench. The plates were opened mostly from
one side where a nose was placed. As the plates were opened the nose would inhale deeply and
the plates were closed again before exhaling. The smell of the mosses would then be described.
3
Results
3.1
Results of project predecessors
This project had had two sets of predecessors, one being Benjamin Svejdal Bejder and Satish
Kumar Kodiripaka and two being Anna Lyhne Skøttrup. The MTPSL genes of interest in this
project was decided by the project’s predecessors Benjamin Bejder [21] and Satish Kodiripaka
[22]. Bejder determined the MTPSL genes of interest originating from Nardia scalaris and
Kodiripaka determined the MTPSL genes of interest originating from Lophocolea bidentata.
Bejder and Kodiripaka determined genes of interest by doing a Translated BLAST search in
the N. scalaris and L. bidentata transcriptomes comparing their genetic data to the amino acid
sequence from a list of already identiﬁed MTPSL protein of other bryophytes. Bejder desig-
nated four diﬀerent MTPSL sequences from N. scalaris NsMTPSL 1-4. Kodiripaka designated
four diﬀerent MTPSL sequences from L. bidentata LbMTPSL 1, 3, 4 and 5. From Bejder’s
in silico research while not being able to conclude anything found reason to believe that all
NsMTPSL genes were part of the isoprenoid synthase domain superfamily. Bejder also found
that NsMTPSL 1 and 2 contained the Terpene synthase metal-binding domain which was re-
lated to monoterpenoid-, sesquiterpenoid- and diterpenoid synthases [23]. Bejder found that
NsMTPSL 4 belonged to the protein family Trichodiene synthases, which were known for the
cyclation of farnesyl diphosphate into sesquiterpenoids [24]. All of Bejder’s ﬁndings indicates
that the sequences isolated from N. scalaris were MTPSL genes with a terpenoid synthase
function. From Kodiripaka’s in silico research even though nothing could be conclude evidence
leading to believing that the four LbMTPSL genes identiﬁed shared functionality with known
MTPSL genes. Kodiripaka found that LbMTPSL 1 and 4 shared functional similarities to
Epi-isozizaene synthases which was a sesquiterpenoid synthase. He also found that LbMTPSL
3 and 5 could shared functionality with Selinadiene synthase, which also was a sesquiterpenoid
synthase. All of Kodiripaka’s ﬁndings indicates that the sequences isolated from L. bidentata
were MTPSL genes with a terpenoid synthase function. Together Bejder and Kodiripaka’s in
silico ﬁndings imply the various MTPSL genes of interest in this project mainly share simi-
larities with sesquiterpenoid synthases, but also smaller similarities with monoterpenoid- and
diterpenoid synthases (Figure 3). Skøttrup’s work were mainly conducted in the lab in the
form of PCRs, optimizing every PCR for ampliﬁcation of fragments required for transforma-
tion. Skøttrup managed to create PCR recipes and programs which resulted in clean gel bands
of every PCR product. Through a large PCR production Skøttrup created a large amount of
PCR product which got puriﬁed.
21
==PAGE:23==
MTPSL gene
Coding sequence size (bp)
Size with overhangs (bp)
Assumed function
Origin of sequence
NsMTPSL 1
1200
1257
Isoprenoid synthase domain superfamily, had metal binding domain.
Nardia Scalaris
NsMTPSL 2
1152
1204
Isoprenoid synthase domain superfamily, had metal binding domain.
Nardia Scalaris
NsMTPSL 3
1602
1650
Isoprenoid synthase domain superfamily.
Nardia Scalaris
NsMTPSL 4
1050
1098
Isoprenoid synthase domain superfamily, Trichodiene synthase.
Nardia Scalaris
LbMTPSL 1
1128
1173
Epi-isozizaene synthase.
Lophocolea bidentata
LbMTPSL 3
1287
1333
Selinadiene synthase.
Lophocolea bidentata
LbMTPSL 4
1155
1201
Epi-isozizaene synthase.
Lophocolea bidentata
LbMTPSL 5
1164
1209
Selinadiene synthase
Lophocolea bidentata
Table 3: Table displaying the size of the coding sequence, assumed functions based on Bejder
and Kodiripaka’s ﬁndings and the origin of the sequence of the 8 diﬀerent MTPSL genes that
were worked with in this project.
3.2
Preparations for transformation
Preperations for the transformation events were immediately prepared after the project was
overtaken. Unfortunately, the moss culture was not ready for transformation due to contam-
ination. Another culture was acquired but this culture had little biomass and had not been
growing on ammonium tartrate so transformation was postponed a week. Meanwhile prepa-
ration of the DNA fragments received from Skøttrup was performed. The PCR products had
already been puriﬁed however they had not been concentrated yet. Along with concentrating
the DNA by evaporating water, calculations for required DNA for transformation was made.
When all the fragments were concentrated to a volume around 100µL the calculations were
performed and while transformation was possible with the acquired DNA it became apparent
that more DNA of fragment 108-5’ and 108-3’ was required for more transformation events
to be possible (Table 10). These two fragments were signiﬁcantly larger than other fragments
included in a transformation which leads to a larger required amount for a 1:1 reaction between
fragments. This can be seen by comparing volume requirements of the various fragments in
table 10. Not only the fact that 108-5’ and 108-3’ were larger fragments displays why more
was needed but also the fact that these two fragments were part of every single transformation
that was performed. At the same time it was desired to use a higher amount of substance to
hopefully improve success rate of transformations. The limiting ceiling for amount of DNA
was the concentration, due to the DNA crystallizing when concentration becomes too high. In
the 600µL that the DNA will eventually be added to it will start to crystallize if 50000ng was
added. For the ﬁrst transformation event the average mass of DNA in each transformation was
around 12500ng and therefore nowhere near the limiting ceiling. Because the current amount of
DNA was nowhere near the limit it was desired to raise the amount to 4.5pmol. Using 4.5pmol
would raise the chance of success for a transformation and at the same time not require an
unrealistic amount of DNA.
On the basis of needing more fragment 108-5’ and 108-3’ PCRs were ran on a large scale. The
template used was pRH004 which was cultivated from bacteria and the forward and reverse
primer for fragment 108-5’ was Fragment 1 Forwards primer and Fragment 1 Reverse primer
and the forward and reverse primer for fragment 108-3’ was Fragment 4 Forward primer and
Fragment 4 Reverse primer (Appendix 1). First 256 PCRs for each of the two fragments was
performed. Even though the results were good they were nowhere near enough. For fragment
22
==PAGE:24==
Fragment
Size (kbp)
Concentration (ng/µL)
Amount of substance (pmol)
Mass (ng)
Volume (µL)
LbMTPSL 1
1.173
377.8
3.0
2322.54
6.15
LbMTPSL 3
1.133
295.1
3.0
2243.34
7.6
LbMTPSL 4
1.201
357.7
3.0
2377.98
6.74
LbMTPSL 5
1.209
481.0
3.0
2393.82
4.98
NsMTPSL 1
1.257
645.6
3.0
2488.86
3.86
NsMTPSL 2
1.204
774.7
3.0
2383.92
3.08
NsMTPSL 3
1.650
397.6
3.0
3267.0
8.22
NsMTPSL 4
1.098
766.1
3.0
2174.04
2.84
I2:48
3.78
411.0
3.0
748.44
1.82
108-5’
2.688
365.8
3.0
5322.24
14.55
108-3’
2.093
452.2
3.0
4144.14
9.16
Table 4: The DNA calculations for the ﬁrst transformation event.
108-5’ the concentration reached was 501.6ng/µL and for fragment 108-3’ the concentration
reached was 690.6ng/µL. These concentrations would allow for more DNA used in a transfor-
mation event if it was not for the fact that only 50µL was left. Therefore another 256 PCRs were
ran for each of the two fragments. After concentrating these and mixing with the preexisting
fragments a concentration of 865.7ng/µL was reached for fragment 108-5’ and 1032.4ng/µL was
reached for 108-3’. Using these concentrations a second transformation was performed where
the amount of DNA was raised to 4.75 (Appendix 3). After the second transformation event
even more of fragment 108-5’ and 108-3’ was require to do anymore transformation events.
Another 520 PCRs were run for both fragments and after combining them with the preexisting
fragment samples a concentration of 1136.3ng/µL for 108-5’ and 615.4ng/µl was reached. These
concentrations and the volume left allowed for an additional two transformation events.
3.3
Transformation events
In total there were performed 4 diﬀerent transformation events. In the ﬁrst transformation event
all 8 diﬀerent mutants were attempted to be created. When counting on the hemocytometer the
amount of protoplast in the grid was found to be around 14, which resulted in a required volume
of MMM solution of 0.44mL. Doing all 8 diﬀerent transformation required that there was at
least 2.4mL of MMM solution mixed with protoplast available therefore this transformation was
done with a lowered concentration of protoplast than desired. The protoplast concentration
for this transformation event ended up being 2.92 · 105 which was around a ﬁfth of the desired
protoplast concentration. When ﬁnishing the ﬁrst transformation event there were no green
spots to be seen in the PRMT, but after 1 months on selection plates there were small green
spots on the plates however none of them had developed gametophore structures. As a result
the ﬁrst transformation event was considered a failure and the plates were discarded. While it
was not entirely known what caused the low amount of protoplast it was assumed that it was
mainly careless handling of protoplast suspensions that cause too much disruption and broke the
protoplasts. Besides more careful handling of protoplasts, another attempt at securing larger
amounts of protoplasts was further incubation with Driselase and washing the moss with MQ-
water to remove any leftover BCD media on the moss. With the new knowledge the second
transformation event was attempted. This time a much higher concentration of protoplasts
were reached. Counting all the protoplasts on the hemocytometer was not really possible so
a rough estimate was found by counting protoplast in the 5 diagonal boxes and upscaling for
23
==PAGE:25==
the whole grid. The estimate number of protoplasts were 230 which was much higher than the
ﬁrst transformation. The required amount of MMM solution to reach the desired protoplast
concentration was 7.12mL which easily allowed for all diﬀerent transformations to be done.
Unfortunately the amount of fragment 108-5’ available only allowed for 6 transformations.
Therefore transformations were not performed for NsMTPSL 3 and NsMTPSL 4 during this
event.
After the transformation event small green spots could be seen in the PRMT and
after growing for 1 months on selection plates most plates had some gametophore structures
growing. Multiple and large structures were observed on the LbMTPSL 3, LbMTPSL 4 and
NsMTPSL 1 plates and the small single structures were observed on LbMTPSL 5 and NsMTPSL
2 plates. These were replated and LbMTPSL 3, LbMTPSL 4 and NsMTPSL 1 which had
large structures were also added to tissue culture ﬂasks.
Having a success rate of ﬁve out
of six this transformation was regarded a success. For the third transformation event all 8
diﬀerent transformations were performed. The protoplasts counted on the hemocytometer was
120, this leads to a required amount of MMM solution to be 3.75mL which was enough to
do all 8 transformations. When the transformation was over little green spots could be seen
in the PRMT. After 1 week on selection plates large fungal cultures were growing on all the
plates.
Due to the severe contamination the plates were discarded and the transformation
considered a failure. When looking through the diﬀerent chemicals used for transformation it
was found that the 0.2M MES pH 5.8 had a large cloud of contamination inside. The MES
was therefore discarded and a new was made before the next transformation event. The fourth
and last transformation event was performed in cooperation with a PhD student and only
transformations of LbMTPSL 1, LbMTPSL 5, NsMTPSL 2, NsMTPSL 3 and NsMTPSL 4
were performed. The PhD student conducted the transformation until the point of combining
protoplasts and DNA. When counting on a hemocytometer 50 protoplasts were counted and as a
result 1.4mL of MMM solution were suppose to be added to the protoplast suspension. However
11 transformations were to be performed which requires to suspend the protoplasts in a volume
of 3.3mL MMM solution. Therefore the desired concentration of protoplast was not reached
for this transformation either. Using 3.3mL of MMM solution meant that the concentration of
protoplasts reached was 6.8 · 105, which was around 42% of the desired concentration. After
completing the transformation event no green spots could be seen in the PRMT, but after 1
months there were plenty of green spots on the selection plates and even a single gametophore
structure were growing from the NsMTPSL 2 transformation. The gametophore structure was
replated and stored in the growth chamber.
3.4
Growth of mutants
The plates from the second transformation event was misplaced and discarded by mistake.
The potential mutants NsMTPSL 2 and LbMTPSL 5 were therefore lost. The mutants left
was therefore only those in tissue culture ﬂasks where there were three LbMTPSL 3 mutants
(designated LbMTPSL 3,1-3,3), two LbMTPSL 4 mutants (designated LbMTPSL 4,1-4,2) and
one NsMTPSL 1 mutant. These mutants that were growing in tissue culture ﬂasks were growing
very slowly. After one month of growth they were large enough to be blended without the risk
of losing more biomass than would be gained. After blending they were placed into 20mL
tissue culture ﬂasks for continuous growth. While growing a small amount of biomass was
transferred from tissue culture ﬂasks to GC vials for later use in the head-space solid phase
microextraction. After further two weeks of slow growth in tissue culture ﬂasks it was decided
24
==PAGE:26==
Figure 7: A display of the fully assembled fragment inserted into the genome of P. patens here
shown with LbMTPSL 1 and annotations and the 7 smaller parts that the genotyping primers
were amplifying.
to transfer the mutants to a bioreactor setup to speed up the growth process. After growing
for two weeks in a bioreactor setup every single moss culture had grown to a large sphere.
These were collected, blended and added to a bioreactor setup again. After another two weeks
of growth the mutants were collected and small amounts of biomass were replated on BCD
plates that was stored in the growth chamber and the majority of biomass were used for gDNA
extraction and hexane:ethyl acetate extraction. Due to lack of time the NsMTPSL 2 mutant
created during the fourth transformation event was never grown on anything else than BCD
plates after the successful selection.
3.5
Genotyping
The genotyping was performed by sequencing the fully assembled fragment that was inserted
into the P. patens mutants, however the entire ﬁnal fragment was too long to sequence all
together. Therefore the fully assembled fragment was divided into smaller parts that would
be ampliﬁed and sequenced individually. The primer design for the genotyping followed two
directives while trying to keep similar Tm-values for matching primers.
The ﬁrst directive
was that the size of DNA ampliﬁed by the primers were not allowed to exceed 1500 basepairs.
The second directive was that the DNA ampliﬁed by the primers would have to overlap by
at least 100 basepairs. Following these two directives the primers were created (Appendix 1).
The primers amplify 7 diﬀerent sequences (8 for NsMTPSL 3 because of the large size) that
were labelled P1-P7 (Figure 7). P1 had a size around 1500 basepairs, P2 had the size of 1298
basepairs, P3 had the size of around 820 basepairs depending on the MTPSL gene, P4 had the
size 1298 basepairs, P5 had the size of around 1000 basepairs depending on the MTPSL gene,
P6 had the size 974 basepairs and P7 had the size of around 800 basepairs. Doing a blastn of
the created primers comparing them to the genome of P. patens revealed that some had some
non-speciﬁc binding sites of up to 18 basepairs. This could potentially create undesired PCR
products however since the primers were around 25 basepairs in total optimization of annealing
temperature should be able to remove any non-speciﬁc primer binding.
When the gDNA extraction was completed the success was tested by running a gel loaded with
5mL of gDNA and doing a PCR similar to amplifying 108-5’ and 108-3’ fragments for P4. As
can be seen on ﬁgure 8 by the bands in the top of the gel there was plenty of gDNA extracted
25
==PAGE:27==
from the potential mutants and from Appendix 4 ﬁgure ?? that PCR were possible because
of the band showing from LbMTPSL 3,1. The ﬁrst PCRs for genotyping were with a similar
PCR recipe to ampliﬁcation of 108-5’ and 108-3’ and PCRs were run for each of the seven geno-
typing fragments. As can be seen in Appendix 4 some of these were successful mainly for the
three diﬀerent LbMTPSL 3 mutants while the LbMTPSL 4,1, LbMTPSL 4,2 and NsMTPSL 1
showed only faint bands if any. The fact that there was band of correct size however faint they
were point towards the integration through homologous recombination being successful. The
faint bands were most likely due to unspeciﬁc annealing temperature and could be corrected
for thereby optimizating the PCR. Due to the lack of time PCR optimizations were limited.
Only the touchdown PCR [25] were attempted for the P7 LbMTPSL 3,1. This would hopefully
remove any non-speciﬁc bindings and increase the yield. As can be seen on ﬁgure 9 the touch-
down PCR worked as intended. Due to the lack of time only three genotyping fragments became
targeted for sequencing. These fragments were P4 LbMTPSL 3,3, P7 LbMTPSL 3,1 and P7
LbMTPSL 3,2. They were chosen because little to no optimization was needed to yield enough
desired PCR product for sequencing. Six PCRs of each were made where the P7 genotyping
fragments were made with the touchdown method. The P4 fragment had non-speciﬁc primer
bindings which resulted in undesired bands on the gel. Therefore the PCR puriﬁcation was done
through gel DNA recovery by only cutting the desired band. The touchdown PCR allowed for
direct puriﬁcation of the PCR product. After concentrating the puriﬁed PCR product the
concentrations were 43.7ng/µL for the P4 LbMTPSL 3,3, 67.1ng/µL for the P7 LbMTPSL 3,2
and 46.3ng/µL for the P7 LbMTPSL 3,1. These puriﬁed products were then sent for sequencing.
Figure 8: A gel ran with gDNA from the diﬀerent potential mutants. From left to right, well 1
was gDNA from LbMTPSL 3,1, well 2 was gDNA from LbMTPSL 3,2, well 3 was gDNA from
LbMTPSL 3,3, well 4 was the 1kb ladder, well 5 was gDNA from LbMTPSL 4,1, well 6 was
gDNA from LbMTPSL 4,2 and well 7 was gDNA from NsMTPSL 1.
26
==PAGE:28==
Figure 9: A gel ran with PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,1 using the touchdown method. From
left to right, well 1 was a 1kb ladder and well 2 was PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,1.
The results of the sequencing were in form of chromatograms displaying the concentration
of nucleotides over time (Appendix 5).
These chromatograms were used to ﬁnd the most
likely sequence of the DNA fragments and determine liability of the found sequence.
The
chromatogram for the sequenced P4 LbMTPSL 3,3 with forward primer were very contaminated
(Appendix 5 ﬁgure 21). The peaks on the chromatogram could have a high concentration but
it was almost never a single nucleotide found at any given time. This displays the impurity
of the DNA sent for sequencing and the suggested sequence was therefore not credible. This
doesn’t suggest that the P4 fragment from LbMTPSL 3,3 was incorrect but rather that a
diﬀerent puriﬁcation had to be done. The impurities in the sample most likely originates from
non-speciﬁc bands and degradation of DNA. The non-speciﬁc bands should have been avoided
by cutting the desired band from the gel, however this was not a guarantee. Optimization
of the PCR to remove any non-speciﬁc binding of primers was therefore to be preferred. By
optimization of PCR and performing a diﬀerent puriﬁcation method would allow for skipping
the heating step that was part of the gel puriﬁcation which likely cause DNA degradation that
also causes impurities. The chromatogram for the sequenced P4 LbMTPSL 3,3 with reverse
primer was the same case as the P4 LbMTPSL 3,3 with forward primer. The chromatogram
did not have the same level of contamination but it was still nowhere near credible enough to
rely on. Because of the contamination of the puriﬁed P4 fragment from LbMTPSL 3,3 the
sequenced data was inconclusive and no further analysis was done. The chromatogram for the
sequenced P7 LbMTPSL 3,1 with forward primer was very pure. There was no point where
27
==PAGE:29==
multiple nucleotides appeared in the chromatogram and the nucleotide concentration was close
to constant. The same applies for the chromatogram for P7 LbMTPSL 3,1 sequenced with
the reverse primer. The chromatogram for P7 LbMTPSL 3,2 sequenced with forward primer
had a few impurities especially towards the beginning. The chromatogram for P7 LbMTPSL
3,2 with reverse primer also had a lot of impurities. The impurities from the P7 LbMTPSL
3,2 most likely originates from non-speciﬁc primer binding during the PCR which implicates
that the touchdown PCR was not properly optimized for this reaction. To further analyse
the sequenced fragments a comparison against the desired sequence was performed for the
sequenced P7 fragments as was allowed by the purity. For the P7 LbMTPSL 3,1 the sequenced
data ﬁt at the expected spot for the P7 fragment and only a single conﬂict was found between
the compared sequences (Figure 10, A). The conﬂict was found in the beginning of the forward
sequenced data where an adenine nucleotide was measured that should have appeared as a
thymine (Figure 10, B). The conﬂict was patched by the reversed sequenced data which found
a thymine at the speciﬁc spot. The conﬂict most likely occured due to a misreading which was
common for the ﬁrst 20 basepairs when sequencing. With only a single occurrence of conﬂicts
which was patched by the complementary sequencing it was assumed that the P7 LbMTPSL
3,1 sequence was correct. Since the P7 fragment overlaps with the P. patens genome at locus
108 it was assumed that the homologous recombination succesfully integrated the DNA into the
desired site. A successful integration would then point towards the option of the LbMTPSL 3,1
moss producing a terpenoid through the LbMTPSL 3 gene. This could however not be known for
certain before all the genotyping fragments had been veriﬁed and an RNA extraction performed
to prove expression. For the P7 LbMTPSL 3,2 the sequenced data ﬁt at the expected spot for
the P7 fragment and 11 conﬂicts were found (Figure 11, A). The ﬁrst two conﬂicts (Figure 11,
D) were an adenine and guanine which by the forward sequencing was found as a thymine and
adenine respectively. These conﬂicts were patched by the reverse sequenced data which looking
at the trace data seems more reliable. The same was the case for the third conﬂict where
the forward sequenced data reads a cytosine instead of a guanine. The fourth conﬂict was a
guanine that the forward sequenced data reads as a thymine. The ﬁfth conﬂict was a guanine
the forward sequenced data reads as a adenine. The sixth and seventh conﬂict was a adenine
and guanine that had been recognized as a guanine and cytosine respectively by the forward
sequenced data (Figure 11, D). The eighth conﬂict was a thymine that the forward sequenced
data read as a cytosine. The ninth conﬂict was a guanine that the forwards sequenced data
read as a cytosine. The tenth conﬂict was the forward sequenced data registered a cytosine
when neither the desired fragment or the reverse sequenced data had any nucleotide (Figure 11,
C). The elevnth conﬂict was a guanine that the forward sequenced data read as an adenine. All
of the conﬂicts were caused by the forward sequenced data which suggest that this sample had
somehow been contaminated and was therefore unreliable. If only the reverse sequenced data
was taken into consideration then the comparison suggest that the homologous recombination
successfully integrated the DNA into the desired site. This lead towards a terpenoid being
produced by the LbMTPSL 3,2 mutant, however more nucleotide experiments like genotyping
and RNA extraction would help to further prove this point.
3.6
Hexane:Ethyl Acetate extraction
For the hexane:ethyl acetate extraction there were made 10 HPLC vials for analysis. For the
mutant cultures that managed to grow a lot during the reactor setup two HPLC vials were
28
==PAGE:30==
Figure 10: A display of the comparison between the LbMTPSL 3 construct and the P7 for-
ward(1F5FZAA113) and reverse(1F5FZAA114) sequenced data. A: An overview of the com-
parison that displays where the comparison was made and where the conﬂict was placed. B: A
zoom in on the nucleotide sequence at the site of the conﬂict.
made, one with 100mg of biomass and one with 50mg of biomass. These were the mutants
LbMTPSL 3,1, LbMTPSL 3,2, LbMTPSL 4,1 and NsMTPSL 1. For the other mutants that
managed to get smaller amounts of biomass only one HPLC vial was made with 50mg. These
samples in HPLC vials was then tested by GC-MS analysis (not all chromatograms shown).
Whether or not the extraction for GC-MS were performed correctly was determined by the
detection of native compounds from P. patens such as Phytol, Kaur-15-ene, Kaur-16-ene and
Kauran-16-ol. The kaurenes were soluble in the solvents and had been shown to make up a large
amount of P. patens biomass [26] which therefore makes it ideal as a control for whether the
experiment was carried out correctly or not. Phytol is one of the most abundant photosynthetic
pigments in plants [27] which therefore also could indicate the detection of metabolites from
P. patens. Searching through the results from the GC-MS showed that four of the samples
had these metabolites. The samples where no detection of these metabolites occurred were
regarded as failures and no further analysis were performed. The samples were the metabolites
were found was the LbMTPSL 3,1 50mg sample, LbMTPSL 3,2 50mg sample, LbMTPLS 4,2
50mg sample and NsMTPSL 1 100mg sample.
The total ion chromatogram (TIC) for the
various samples would look very similar and share a lot of detected metabolites which was to
be expected when the solvents were the same and the organisme extracted from only had one
protein that diﬀers from each other. The chromatograms would have a lot of peaks towards the
beginning (4.0 - 7.0 minutes) and the end (17.5 - 25.0 min). The majority of the peaks towards
the begging were identiﬁed as solvents and the majority of the peaks towards the end were
29
==PAGE:31==
Figure 11: A display of the comparison between the LbMTPSL 3 construct and the P7 for-
ward(1F5FZAA115) and reverse(1F5FZAA116) sequenced data. A: An overview of the com-
parison that displays where the comparison was made and where the conﬂicts were placed. B:
A zoom in on the nucleotide sequence at a site of conﬂicts. C: A zoom in on the nucleotide
sequence at a site of conﬂict. D: A zoom in on the nucleotide sequence at a site of conﬂicts.
identiﬁed as metabolites from the mutants (Figure 12). For the LbMTPSL 4,2 50 mg sample
the kaur-16-ene was detected at 19.88 minutes, the phytol was detected at 20.27 minutes and
the kauran-16-ol was detected at 21.65 minutes. For the NsMTPSL 1 100mg sample the kaur-
15-ene was found at 19.42 minutes, the kaur-16-ene was found at 19.88 minutes, the phytol was
found at 20.29 minutes and the kauran-16-ol was found at 21.66 minutes. For the LbMTPSL 3,1
50mg sample the kaur-15-ene was detected at 16.91 minutes, the kaur-16-ene was detected at
17.3 minutes and the kauran-16-ol was detected at 18.79 minutes. For the LbMTPSL 3,2 50mg
sample the kaur-16-ene was detected at 19.87 minutes, the phytol was detected at 20.27 minutes
and the kauran-16-ol was detected at 21.65 minutes. These expected metabolites appeared at
a similar retention time which further indicates the success of metabolite extraction from these
samples. The TICs were then compared to the blank samples. Four blanks samples were tested
during the GC-MS experiment.
Before any samples were processed a methanol blank and
hexane blank was injected into the GC-MS. After all the samples were processed an additional
30
==PAGE:32==
two hexane blanks were injected. The methanol blank only had one major peak which was
expected. The ﬁrst hexane blank had no major peaks and towards the end the baseline started
rising. The second hexane blank had one major peak and a few small peaks. The third hexane
blank had multiple large peaks which was placed seemingly at random.
All three hexane
blanks showing diﬀerent results may indicate error in the hexane sample or with the machine
either in the column or the needle. The TICs were compared to the second hexane blanks
since they mostly resembled what was expected. Even after not considering peaks from the
blank there were still a signiﬁcant amount of large peaks left, so to further analyse the data a
mass range speciﬁc for monoterpenoids and sesquiterpenoids were created. The mass range for
monoterpenoids were 136 m/z and 154 m/z. The 136 m/z were for monoterpenoids (C10H16)
without any alterations and the 154 m/z were for hydrated monoterpenoids (C10H17OH). The
mass range for sesquiterpenoids were 204 m/z, 220 m/z and 222 m/z. The 204 m/z mass
range were for sesquiterpenoids without any alterations (C15H24), the 220 m/z mass range were
for sesquiterpenoids with an ether (C15H24O) and the 222 m/z mass range were for hydrated
sesquiterpenoids((C15H25OH)). Analysing every major peak in all the samples revealed that not
a single peak in the mass ranges displayed a desired mass spectrum. The desired mass spectrum
would have been a high relative percentage for the mass speciﬁed by the mass range, the only
larger masses detected should be isotopic structures or ion peaks and the only lower masses
detected should be dismantled structures of desired compound. Most mass spectra for the mass
ranges appeared because an isotopic structure would have the speciﬁc mass. In a few cases a
mass spectrum similar to the desired mass spectrum was found however in all these cases a
mass at least double the size was also detected. The TIC count for the compounds that had
the similar mass spectra displayed little to no counts. Small counts and a detected mass double
the size of the desired mass were indications that this peak was not the desired compound.
Throughout the TIC, mass ranges and mass spectra not a single desired compound was found,
therefore an evaluation of the GC-MS analysis was performed. An evaluation of the GC-MS
analysis concluded that there might have been errors with the machine causing contaminations
leading to reduced metabolites detected from mutants. The evaluation was based oﬀdetection
of compounds which should not have been present in the samples. As an example some TMS
derivatives were identiﬁed. TMS derivatization of compounds makes them more volatile and
allows GC-MS analysis of compounds with a high boiling points. Since the GC-MS analysis
was searching for mono- and sesquiterpenoids no TMS derivatization was perform and no
TMS derivatives should appear during the analysis. The presence of compounds such as TMS
derivatives point towards contamination of the samples. So even though the analysis points
towards the absence of mono- and sesquiterpenoids the potential mutants were not regarded as
failures based oﬀthis analysis as contamination seemingly were aﬀecting the results.
3.7
Head-Space Solid Phase microextraction
The results of the head-space solid phase microextraction was a GC-MS TIC chromatogram
which displayed amount of detected compounds appearing at speciﬁc retention times. The
mutants growing in GC-vials were used for this analysis, unfortunately due to mislabeling the
diﬀerent mutants were not speciﬁed beyond LbMTPSL 3, LbMTPSL 4 and NsMTPSL 1 so any
further speciﬁcation used was not comparable to other experiments. For the GC-MS analysis
four blanks were performed. Three of these blanks were with a ﬁber and one was without
adding anything to the inject port at all. The TIC for the blank with no ﬁber were completely
31
==PAGE:33==
Figure 12: The chromatogram depicts the measured data from the GC-MS analysis of NsMTPSL
1 100mg sample. Amount of substrate was measured and displayed by the y-axis and the time
of measurement displayed by the x-axis.
empty as no compounds were detected at all. The blanks with ﬁbers however had multiple
large peaks which was mainly were identiﬁed as various plastic compounds.
Five diﬀerent
LbMTPSL 3 samples were injected into the GC-MS these samples were designated LbMTPSL
3.1 - LbMTPSL 3.5. Two LbMTPSL 4 samples were injected into the GC-MS these samples
were designated LbMTPSL 4.1 and LbMTPSL 4.2. Two NsMTPSL 1 samples were injected
into the GC-MS these samples were designated NsMTPSL 1.1 and NsMTPSL 1.2. The head-
space solid phase microextraction should not result in any P. patens metabolites besides the
kaur-15-ene and kaur-16-ene as these were partly volatile. A library search of the various com-
pounds that appeared in the TIC revealed that from the LbMTPSL 3.1 sample a lot of plastic
compounds were identiﬁed, a lot of TMS derivatives were also identiﬁed and the kaurenes were
not identiﬁed. From the LbMTPSL 3.2 sample a lot of plastic compounds were identiﬁed and
the kaur-15-ene were also identiﬁed. From the LbMTPSL 3.3 sample a lot of plastic compounds
were identiﬁed and the kaur-15-ene were also identiﬁed. From the LbMTPSL 3.4 sample a lot of
plastic compounds were identiﬁed, the kaur-16-ene was identiﬁed and a monoterpenoid known
as p-cymene was identiﬁed. From the LbMTPSL 3.5 sample a lot of plastic compounds were
identiﬁed, some TMS derivatives were identiﬁed and both the kaur-15-ene and kaur-16-ene were
identiﬁed. From the LbMTPSL 4.1 sample a lot of plastic compounds were identiﬁed, some
TMS derivatives were identiﬁed and the p-cymene was identiﬁed. From the LbMTPSL 4.2 sam-
ple a lot of plastic compounds were identiﬁed, some TMS derivatives were identiﬁed and both
the kaur-15-ene and kaur-16-ene were identiﬁed. From the NsMTPSL 1.1 sample a lot of plastic
compounds were identiﬁed and some TMS derivatives were identiﬁed. From the NsMTPSL 1.2
sample a lot of plastic compounds were identiﬁed, some TMS derivatives were identiﬁed, both
kaur-15ene and kaur-16-ene were identiﬁed and the monoterpenoid p-cymene was identiﬁed.
The presence of plastic compounds and TMS derivatives clearly points towards contamination.
Since the plastic compounds appeared in the blank sample the contamination was assume to
come from the ﬁber themselves. The ﬁber cleaning of 30 minutes was therefore assumed to
not be suﬃcient. Due to insuﬃcient cleaning the contaminations were therefore assumed to
originate from previously ﬁber samples or storage of the ﬁbers. The storage of ﬁbers were in a
cardboard box surrounded by styrofoam which could be a possible explanation for the plastic
compounds appearing on the TIC. The contaminations of the ﬁbers would likely reduce the
32
==PAGE:34==
appearance of any mono- or sesquiterpenoids on the TIC and detection therefore becomes much
more diﬃcult. As for the monoterpenoid p-cymene which was detected in multiple samples the
presence of this compound in the actual samples was very unlikely. p-cymene was detected in
very low counts in the LbMTPSL 3.4, LbMTPSL 4.1 and NsMTPSL 1.2 sample which implies
that all three diﬀerent MTPSL genes would express this monoterpenoid. If this was the case
then all the other samples should have a production of p-cymene as well (assuming a successful
transformation). A combination of these reasons make it highly unlikely (not impossible) that
p-cymene was actually present in these samples and it was therefore considered to be contam-
ination.
Isolating the mass ranges for mono- and sesquiterpenoid revealed peaks with the desired mass
spectrum (appendix 6). From the LbMTPSL 3.1 sample a mass spectrum was found in the
mass range of 204 m/z which closely resembles that of a unmodiﬁed sesquiterpenoid. From
the LbMTPSL 3.2 sample no resembling mass spectra was identiﬁed. From the LbMTPSL
3.3 sample a mass spectrum in the mass range of 204 m/z was found resembling a unmodi-
ﬁed sesquiterpenoid, however a large peak beyond the mass of 204 was detected. From the
LbMTPSL 3.4 sample a mass spectrum in the mass range of 136 m/z resembling an unmodiﬁed
monoterpenoid was identiﬁed. From the LbMTPSL 3.5 a mass spectrum in the mass range
of 136 m/z resembling a unmodiﬁed monoterpenoid was identiﬁed. From the LbMTPSL 4.1
sample a mass spectrum in the mass range of 204 resembling a unmodiﬁed sesquiterpenoids
was identiﬁed. From the LbMTPSL 4.2 sample a mass spectrum in the mass range of 136 m/z
resembling a unmodiﬁed monoterpenoid was identiﬁed. From the NsMTPSL 1.1 sample a mass
spectrum in the mass range of 204 m/z resembling a unmodiﬁed sesquiterpenoids was identiﬁed.
From the NsMTPSL 1.2 sample a mass spectrum in the mass range of 204 m/z resembling a
unmodiﬁed sesquiterpenoid was identiﬁed. Further analysis of the mass range spectra revealed
that every sample had both the 136 m/z resembling monoterpenoid and the 204 m/z resembling
sesquiterpenoid and it was found at the same retention time for every sample. while this would
support the idea of all mutants producing p-cymene, it was still considered highly unlikely. In
addition since there was found both a potential mono- and sesquiterpenoid in each sample, the
idea of p-cymene production becomes even more unlikely. The cause of these mass spectra was
therefore considered to be contamination. In most cases the mass spectra were contaminated
by both compounds with larger and smaller masses and attempting to predict what compound
caused the mass spectra becomes near impossible. A mass range chromatogram was not created
for monoterpenoids undergoing aromatisation such as p-cymene as they were not expected to
appear.
The results of the head-space solid phase microextraction could be interpreted in three ways.
One, every mutant produces p-cymene and due to contamination the production level appears
too low for proper detection. Two, there were no monoterpenoids or sesquiterpenoids produced
by any mutant as the mass range chromatograms indicated nothing of interest that was unique
to a mutant. Three, the entire experiment was invalid due to contamination which both prevents
mono- or sesquiterpenoids from binding to the ﬁber and reduce potential appearance on the
TIC. To decide which conclusion of the results were correct another head-space solid phase
microextraction would have to be performed without contamination.
Hopefully raising the
cleaning step of the ﬁber to 24 hours instead would lead to a non-contaminated analysis.
33
==PAGE:35==
3.8
Qualitative evaluation
Unfortunately, ﬁve of the plates that was prepared for the qualitative evaluation had been con-
taminated. Therefore the only mosses that the qualitative evaluation was performed upon was
the wildtype, LbMTPSL 3,1 and LbMTPSL 4,2. The fragrance of the wildtype was described
as fresh. The fragrance of the LbMTPSL 3,1 mutant was described as mild and sweet much
resembling that of sugar. The fragrance of LbMTPSL 3,1 lingered in the air a couple of seconds
after closing the petri dish. The fragrance of the LbMTPSL 4,2 was described as mild and the
fragrance immediately disappeared after closing the petri-dish. Comparing the fragrances of
the mutants to the wildtype there were large diﬀerences. The qualitative evaluation therefore
suggested that the mutants produce a volatile compound not native to the wildtype. The eval-
uation also suggested that the volatile compound produced by the two diﬀerent mutants were
not the same.
4
Discussion
The expected results of the transformation events were to verify the integration of MTPSL
genes into the genom of P. patens and detecting the presence of a mono- or sesquiterpenoid.
Because the MTPSL genes of interest originated from L. bidentata and N. scalaris the protein
produced were expected to carry the terpene synthase class I function. Due to this nature of
the MTPSL proteins it was expected to detect simple mono- or sesquiterpenoids which had
barely been modiﬁed from geranyl diphosphate or farnesyl disphosphate besides the removal of
the diphosphate group. Unfortunately due to complications of various experiments the results
was never compared to the expected outcome. The results of the genotyping while incom-
plete indicated that the mutants LbMTPSL 3,1, LbMTPSL 3,2, LbMTPSL 3,3, LbMTPSL
4,1, LbMTPSL 4,2 and NsMTPSL 1 had successfully integrated the four fragments into lo-
cus 108. PCRs were needed further optimized to complete this experiment as PCR products
from LbMTPSL 3,1, LbMTPSL 3,2 and LbMTPSL 3,3 often showed non-speciﬁc binding of
primers and PCR products from LbMTPSL 4,1, LbMTPSL 4,2 and NsMTPSL 1 barely showed
any gel-bands at all. The samples sent for sequencing further supported the claim of success-
ful integration of DNA fragments into locus 108, disregarding the contaminated sample. The
sequenced sample for fragment P7 LbMTPSL 3,1 had high purity and only a single conﬂict
was detected which was patched by the complementary sequence. The sequenced sample for
fragment P7 LbMTPSL 3,2 had lower purity and had 11 conﬂict which fortunately were all
patched by the complimentary sequence. The sequenced data displayed that fragment 4 seemed
to be intact after the integration which created an expectation of the other fragments to be
intact as well since they were treated similar. There were however no way of knowing without
sequencing the rest of the genotyping fragments. Even if the indicated results of the genotyping
was true the MTPSL protein might not be expressed. To analyse if the MTPSL protein was
being expressed a RNA extraction could be performed. The extracted RNA could then be
converted into cDNA using a reverse transcriptase and PCRs for the presence of MTPSL genes
would determine expression. In case that there was no expression of the MTPSL genes and the
complete genotyping experiment showed no errors, it would be assumed that the MTPSL genes
were not compatible with the host P. patens. This would be highly unexpected as the sequence
originates from another bryophyte. The MTPSL sequence being not compatible would however
support the results of the hexane:ethyl acetate extraction which indicated that no mono- or
34
==PAGE:36==
sesquiterpenoid was produced by the mutants. These results were however not entirely reliable
as contamination seemingly plagued the samples and the blanks measured by the GC-MS in
form of baseline irregularities and TMS derivatives. The suggested approach would therefore
be to redo the experiment with measures to avoid contamination. The same approach would
be suggested for the head-space solid phase microextraction. For the head-space solid phase
microextraction hopefully further ﬁber cleaning would remove the cause of contamination. Due
to the contamination the results could be interpreted in multiple ways. One interpretation was
that all mutants produced p-cymene. Another was that there were no mono- or sesquiterpenoids
produced by the mutants. A third was to deem the experiment invalid as contamination made
analysis impossible. The qualitative evaluation indicated that the LbMTPSL 3,1 mutant and
the LbMTPSL 4,1 mutant did express volatile compounds non-native to the wildtype and that
the volatile compounds from the mutants diﬀer from each other. As the qualitative evaluation
is based on smell and the ability to describe smells, it might not be the most accurate form
of analysis. However due to the ability of P. patens to excrete volatile compounds [28] this
analysis should not be disregarded. The results of this project seemed to have some uncertainty
and to be contradicting, therefore the best course of action to investigate the production of a
mono- or sesquiterpenoid by the mutants would be to complete the experiments that were not
ﬁnished and redo the experiments with low credibility.
If a further investigation of the terpenoids produced by the MTPSL genes proves that there is a
yield it opens up a variety of possible options for production smaller terpenoids. The structural
composition of MTPSL proteins presents an ideal opportunity to express these in microbes.
This would allow for a better yield of the produced terpenoids which opens commercial oppor-
tunities. If the terpenoids become more accessible it would also make them more widespread
and their potential could be utilized better. As an example the monoterpenoid p-cymene which
might be the product of the mutants has shown two major pharmacuetical eﬀects, one as an an-
tioxidant and two anti-inﬂammatory eﬀects. In 2013 an article by Talita Mendes de Oliveira [29]
claimed that p-cymene may have strong eﬀects as an antioxidant. Through in vivo experiments
on rat brains Oliveira managed to prove the claim. Adding a dose of p-cymene to the rat brain
would in 24 hours result in signiﬁcant lower concentration of nitrate and thiobarbituric acid
reactive substances and increased activity of superoxide dismutase and catalase. Nitrate and
thiobarbituric acid reactive substances are commonly known for generating ﬁbrosis as a result
of the oxidative imbalance they cause [30][31]. This occurs especially in diseased individuals
and is known as oxidative stress. Superoxide dismutase is known for decreasing the oxidative
stress by catalyzing the dismutations of superoxide anion free radical into molecular oxygen and
hydrogen peroxide [32]. Catalase is known for decreasing oxidative stress by dismantling hydro-
gen peroxide into water and oxygen [33]. From the results Oliveira postulates that p-cymene
activates the superoxide dismutase and catalase which leads to lower concentration of nitrate
and thiobarbituric acid reactive substances decreasing the oxidative stress. In 2012 Leonardo
R. Bonjardim [34] claimed that p-cymene had anti-inﬂammatory eﬀects. Through formalin-
induced pain test and leukocyte migration induced by carrageenan test of mice Bonjardim
proved his claim. Pretreating the mice with p-cymene showed a signiﬁcant behavioral change
during the formalin-induced pain test. Pretreating with p-cymene would cause mice to lick
their pain induced paw less frequent than when pretreating with acetylsalicyclic acid (reference
drug). Pretreating mice with p-cymene also proved to decrease the leukocyte concentration
of mice injected with carrageenan into their peritoneal cavity. From the results Bonjardim
postulates that p-cymene has eﬀects on the central nervous system and also possibly eﬀects on
35
==PAGE:37==
the autonomous nervous system which causes anti-inﬂammatory eﬀects. These discovery may
lead to the use of p-cymene as a supplement in treatment of diseases that cause oxidative stress
and inﬂamation such as diabetes mellitus, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, vitiligo,
and acatalasemia which then leads to a higher demand of p-cymene. This was just examples
of a single monoterpenoid’s potential in pharmacueticals. p-cymene could also have potentials
in cosmetics and agriculture which only enlarges the demand. Because of the potentially large
demand of terpenoids expressing terpenoids in faster growing organisms would be ideal. As
mentioned, the simple structure of MTPSL genes should allow them to be produced in bacteria.
Therefore the production of MTPSL could be transﬀered to E. coli. Since it has long been a
priority to investigate the functions and applications of terpenoids an E. coli which produces
geranyl diphosphate has already been created [35]. Utilizing a faster growing organism would
have higher yields and have a better chance to meet the potential demand of small terpenoids
which P. patens most likely would not. Because of the vast potential of terpenoids and the ﬂex-
ability of MTPSL proteins it is important to further investigate the characteristics, functions
and potentials of MTPSL proteins.
5
Conclusion
The possible creation of multiple MTPSL mutant in P. patens through in vivo assembly and
homologous recombination could not be determined as the results of the various experiments
are contradicting each other. The genotyping point towards a successful transformation for all
the mutants as PCR products display correctly sized gel bands for at least one PCR. However
no optimization was performed for the PCRs and gel bands were therefore not found for all the
genotyping fragments. The genotyping fragments which was sequenced gave positive results.
These results support the claim of correct integration of DNA fragments. The results gathered
from the genotyping experiment all implies the success of the transformation, but since the
experiment was not fully completed no ﬁnal conclusion can be drawn from the genotyping
experiment. The hexane:ethyl acetate extraction results pointed towards the absence of any
mono- or sesquiterpenoids as the total ion chromatograms did not provide any expected mass
spectra. However the total ion chromatograms did display contamination and irregularities
which query the credibility of the experiment. The head-space solid phase microextraction
results proposed diﬀerent conclusion due to low credibility on the account of contaminated
ﬁbers. One conclusion which could be drawn was that all mutants produce p-cymene. Another
was that no mutants produce any additional terpenoids.
A third conclusion was that the
experiment was invalid due to the contamination of the ﬁbers and no conclusion could therefore
be drawn. The qualitative evaluation of the mosses indicated that the mutants produce volatile
compounds not native to the wildtype and that these compounds diﬀer from each mutant.
With results contradicting each other some experiments would have to be performed again if
an accurate conclusion has to be drawn from this project.
6
Acknowledgements
All materials and supplies were provided by DTU bioengineering. Personally, I would like to
thank Dr. Ritutaj Batth for supervision during labarotory experiments. I would like to thank
36
==PAGE:38==
Dr. Henrik Toft Simonsen for project guidance and allowing me to experience this project.
I would also like to thank everyone working in Lab 112 during the project for help, advise
and having a good time. Lastly, I would like to thank my girldfriend, family and friends for
supporting me during the intensive periods of this project.
37
==PAGE:39==
References
[1] “Taxonomy browser (Lophocolea bidentata).” [Online]. Available:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi
[2] “Taxonomy browser (Physcomitrium patens).” [Online]. Available:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi
[3] “Taxonomy browser (Nardia scalaris).” [Online]. Available:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
Taxonomy/Browser/wwwtax.cgi
[4] R. Reski,
H. Bae,
and H. T. Simonsen,
“Physcomitrella patens,
a versatile synthetic
biology chassis,” Plant Cell Reports, vol. 37, no. 10, pp. 1409–1417, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00299-018-2293-6
[5] H. T. Simonsen, D. P. Drew, and C. Lunde, “Perspectives on using Physcomitrella patens as an al-
ternative production platform for thapsigargin and other terpenoid drug candidates,” Perspectives
in Medicinal Chemistry, vol. 2009, no. 3, pp. 1–6, 2009.
[6] U. Langenbahn, G. Burkhardt, and H. Becker˜, “DITERPENE MALONATES AND OTHER
TERPENES FROM NARDZA SUCCULENTA AND N. SCALARZS*Jf,” Phytochemistry, vol. 33,
no. 5, p. 1173, 1993.
[7] “Volatile
constituents
in
mosses
(Musci)
-
ScienceDirect.”
[Online].
Available:
https:
//www-sciencedirect-com.proxy.ﬁndit.dtu.dk/science/article/pii/S0031942201000693
[8] T. Components, “3 Chemical Diversity of Bryophytes,” vol. 95, pp. 21–24, 2013.
[9] A. Ludwiczuk and Y. Asakawa, “Chemotaxonomic value of essential oil components in liverwort
species. A review,” Flavour and Fragrance Journal, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 189–196, 5 2015. [Online].
Available:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ﬀj.3236https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1002/ﬀj.3236https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ﬀj.3236
[10] B. C. King, K. Vavitsas, N. K. B. K. Ikram, J. Schrøder, L. B. Scharﬀ, B. Hamberger, P. E.
Jensen, and H. T. Simonsen, “In vivo assembly of DNA-fragments in the moss, Physcomitrella
patens,” Scientiﬁc Reports, vol. 6, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep25030
[11] D. J. McGarvey and R. Croteau, “Terpenoid metabolism,” Plant Cell, vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 1015–1026,
1995.
[12] K. Yazaki, G. I. Arimura, and T. Ohnishi, “’Hidden’ terpenoids in plants: Their biosynthesis,
localization and ecological roles,” Plant and Cell Physiology, vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 1615–1621, 2017.
38
==PAGE:40==
[13] P. M. Pour, S. Behzad, S. Asgari, H. P. Khankandi, and M. H. Farzaei, “Sesterterpenoids,” in
Recent Advances in Natural Products Analysis.
Elsevier, 1 2020, pp. 347–391.
[14] M. Köksal, Y. Jin, R. M. Coates, R. Croteau, and D. W. Christianson, “Taxadiene synthase
structure and evolution of modular architecture in terpene biosynthesis,” Nature, vol. 469, no.
7328, pp. 116–122, 2011.
[15] Q. Jia, T. G. Köllner, J. Gershenzon, and F. Chen, “MTPSLs:
New Terpene Synthases in
Nonseed Plants,” Trends in Plant Science, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 121–128, 2018. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2017.09.014
[16] Q. Jia, G. Li, T. G. Köllner, J. Fu, X. Chen, W. Xiong, B. J. Crandall-Stotler, J. L. Bowman,
D. J. Weston, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. Xie, F. W. Li, C. J. Rothfels, A. Larsson, S. W.
Graham, D. W. Stevenson, G. K. S. Wong, J. Gershenzon, and F. Chen, “Microbial-type
terpene synthase genes occur widely in nonseed land plants, but not in seed plants,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 113, no. 43, pp.
12 328–12 333, 10 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.pnas.org/content/113/43/12328https:
//www.pnas.org/content/113/43/12328.abstract
[17] Y. Yamada, T. Kuzuyama, M. Komatsu, K. Shin-ya, S. Omura, D. E. Cane, and H. Ikeda,
“Terpene synthases are widely distributed in bacteria,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 112, no. 3, pp. 857–862, 2015.
[18] G. Lamolle and H. Musto, “Why Prokaryotes Genomes Lack Genes with Introns Processed by
Spliceosomes?”
Journal of Molecular Evolution, vol. 86, no. 9, pp. 611–612, 2018. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00239-018-9874-4
[19] Z. Jiang, C. Kempinski, and J. Chappell, “Extraction and Analysis of Terpenes/Terpenoids,”
Current Protocols in Plant Biology,
vol.
1,
no.
2,
pp.
345–358,
3
2016.
[Online].
Available:
/pmc/articles/PMC5113832//pmc/articles/PMC5113832/?report=abstracthttps:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5113832/
[20] J. Czerwiński, “Head-space solid phase microextraction for the GC-MS analysis of terpenoids in
herb based formulations,” Fresenius’ Journal of Analytical Chemistry, vol. 356, no. 1, pp. 80–83,
1996.
[21] B. s. Bejder, “Characterisation of microbial terpene synthases from bryophytes Author : Benjamin
Svejdal Bejder,” no. June, 2020.
[22] S. K. Kodiripaka, “Forside Expression of presumptive Microbial terpene synthase like genes (
MTPSLs ) from Lophocolea bidentata ( liverwort ) in moss Physcomitrella patens Supervisors,”
2020.
39
==PAGE:41==
[23] “Terpene synthase, metal-binding domain (IPR005630) - interpro entry - InterPro.” [Online].
Available: http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/entry/InterPro/IPR005630/
[24] M. J. Rynkiewicz, D. E. Cane, and D. W. Christianson, “Structure of trichodiene synthase from
Fusarium sporotrichioides provides mechanistic inferences on the terpene cyclization cascade,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 98, no. 24,
pp. 13 543–13 548, 11 2001. [Online]. Available: www.rcsb.org
[25] D. J. Korbie and J. S. Mattick, “Touchdown PCR for increased speciﬁcity and sensitivity in
PCR ampliﬁcation,” Nature Protocols 2008 3:9, vol. 3, no. 9, pp. 1452–1456, 8 2008. [Online].
Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/nprot.2008.133
[26] K. Von Schwartzenberg, W. Schultze, and H. Kassner, “The moss Physcomitrella patens releases
a tetracyclic diterpene,” Plant Cell Reports, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 780–786, 2004.
[27] P.
Gutbrod,
W.
Yang,
G.
V.
Grujicic,
H.
Peisker,
K.
Gutbrod,
L.
F.
Du,
and
P.
Dörmann,
“Phytol
derived
from
chlorophyll
hydrolysis
in
plants
is
me-
tabolized
via
phytenal,”
Journal of Biological Chemistry,
vol.
296,
1
2021.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.jbc.org/article/S0021925821003082/fulltexthttp://www.jbc.org/article/
S0021925821003082/abstracthttps://www.jbc.org/article/S0021-9258(21)00308-2/abstract
[28] X.
Zhan,
Y.-H.
Zhang,
D.-F.
Chen,
and
H.
T.
Simonsen,
“Metabolic
engineer-
ing
of
the
moss
Physcomitrella
patens
to
produce
the
sesquiterpenoids
patchoulol
and
α/β-santalene,”
Frontiers in Plant Science,
vol.
5,
no.
NOV,
11
2014.
[Online].
Available:
/pmc/articles/PMC4235272//pmc/articles/PMC4235272/?report=abstracthttps:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4235272/
[29] T. M. d. Oliveira, R. B. F. d. Carvalho, I. H. F. d. Costa, G. A. L. d. Oliveira, A. A. d.
Souza, S. G. d. Lima, and R. M. d. Freitas, “Evaluation of p-cymene, a natural antioxidant,”
https://doi.org/10.3109/13880209.2014.923003, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 423–428, 3 2015. [Online].
Available: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.3109/13880209.2014.923003
[30] E. Y, K. EB, O. B, G. R, and E. Y, “Evaluation of nitrite/nitrate levels in relation
to
oxidative
stress
parameters
in
liver
cirrhosis,”
Clinics and research in hepatology and
gastroenterology,
vol.
35,
no.
4,
pp.
303–308,
4
2011.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21316327/
[31] “Thiobarbituric
Acid
Reactive
Substance
-
an
overview
|
ScienceDirect
Top-
ics.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/medicine-and-dentistry/
thiobarbituric-acid-reactive-substance
40
==PAGE:42==
[32] H. Younus, “Therapeutic potentials of superoxide dismutase,” International Journal of Health Sci-
ences, vol. 12, no. 3, p. 88, 2018. [Online]. Available: /pmc/articles/PMC5969776//pmc/articles/
PMC5969776/?report=abstracthttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5969776/
[33] A. Nandi, L. J. Yan, C. K. Jana, and N. Das, “Role of Catalase in Oxidative Stress- And Age-
Associated Degenerative Diseases,” Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity, vol. 2019, 2019.
[34] B. LR, C. ES, G. AG, S. MF, O. MG, S. MR, A. AA, A. AR, C. SC, S. MR, and Q.-J.
LJ, “Evaluation of the anti-inﬂammatory and antinociceptive properties of p-cymene in mice,”
Zeitschrift fur Naturforschung. C, Journal of biosciences, vol. 67, no. 1-2, pp. 15–21, 2012.
[Online]. Available: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22486037/
[35] R. KK, Y. Y, M. VJ, N. J, B. J, and K. JD, “Mono and diterpene production in Escherichia
coli,” Biotechnology and bioengineering, vol. 87, no. 2, pp. 200–212, 7 2004. [Online]. Available:
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15236249/
41
==PAGE:43==
7
Supplementary material
Appendix 1 - Primer list
Primer name
Sequence (DNA)
Size (bp)
Tm-value
Ampliﬁcation for Transformation
Fragment 1 Forward primer
CCACATCCTTCTCCGGCTTC
20bp
Fragment 1 Reverse primer
TGAGACTTTTCAACAAAGGGTAATT
25bp
Fragment 2 Forward primer + overhang
ACCCTTTGTTGAAAAGTCTCATGTGCTCGGACCTGTAGATGCTAG
45bp
Fragment 2 Reverse primer
GGTTCTATCTCCTTCGGATCCTCGAGCGT
29bp
Fragment 4 Forward primer
CTGCTTTAATGAGATATGCGAGACG
25bp
Fragment 4 Reverse primer
ACGAAGGCCGTTCTTCCCTG
20bp
Fragment 3 LbMTPSL 1
Forward primer + Overhang
GGATCCGAAGGAGATAGAACCATGGAGGTGCCAGAAACGAAGGAG
45bp
Fragment 3 LbMTPSL 1
Reverse primer + Overhang
GTCTCGCATATCTCATTAAAGCAGCTAGGTGAAACGTTTGCTTGT
45bp
Fragment 3 LbMTPSL 3
Forward primer + Overhang
GGATCCGAAGGAGATAGAACCATGGTACGTGATATGAATTCCGCT
45bp
Fragment 3 LbMTPSL 3
Reverse primer + Overhang
CGTCTCGCATATCTCATTAAAGCAGTTAACCGAAAAGGCCTGAAA
45bp
Fragment 3 LbMTPSL 4
Forward primer + Overhang
GGATCCGAAGGAGATAGAACCATGGGAGCGTTAGAAGGTGATGAG
45bp
Fragment 3 LbMTPSL 4
Reverse primer + Overhang
CGTCTCGCATATCTCATTAAAGCAGCTAGTCGAACCGTTTGTTTG
45bp
Table 5: Primer list for ampliﬁcation for transformation primers.
42
==PAGE:44==
Primer name
Sequence (DNA)
Size (bp)
Tm-value
Ampliﬁcation for Transformation
Fragment 3 LbMTPSL 5
Reverse primer + Overhang
CGTCTCGCATATCTCATTAAAGCAGCTACAAATAGCGCACAGATTT
46bp
Fragment 3 NsMTPSL 1
Forward primer + Overhang
GCTCGAGGATCCGAAGGAGATAGAACCATGGCACTGGTGGAACTTCC
47bp
Fragment 3 NsMTPSL 1
Reverse primer + Overhang
ATAGGCGTCTCGCATATCTCATTAAAGCAGTCACTTATAACGAGAACATG
50bp
Fragment 3 NsMTPSL 2
Forward primer + Overhang
CGAGGATCCGAAGGAGATAGAACCATGCCTCCGGCGGAGGGTCT
44bp
Fragment 3 NsMTPSL 2
Reverse primer + Overhang
AGGCGTCTCGCATATCTCATTAAAGCAGTCAGTACTGACATGTCTTGA
48bp
Fragment 3 NsMTPSL 3
Forward primer + Overhang
CGAGGATCCGAAGGAGATAGAACCATGGCTTCTTCTCCTGCCAC
44bp
Fragment 3 NsMTPSL 1
Reverse primer + Overhang
GTCTCGCATATCTCATTAAAGCAGTCACGAAAGGAGGACTGCTG
44bp
Fragment 3 NsMTPSL 4
Forward primer + Overhang
CGAGGATCCGAAGGAGATAGAACCATGGCTCCTCCTCAATCTGA
44bp
Fragment 3 NsMTPSL 4
Reverse primer + Overhang
GTCTCGCATATCTCATTAAAGCAGTCACCATGAGAATTCGCCTT
44bp
Table 6: Primer list for ampliﬁcation for transformation primers.
43
==PAGE:45==
Genotyping primers
Sequence (DNA)
Size (bp)
Tm-value
P1_Forward_primer
CCAATCCGACCTCAAACAGAGC
22bp
P1_Reverse_primer
CCCGATAAGGGAAATTAGGG
20bp
P2_Forward_primer
GCTGAAGATTCTCTTTGATC
20bp
P2_Reverse_primer
CGTCTTCAAAGCAAGTGGAT
20bp
P3_Forward_Primer
TGCGTGCAATCCATCTTGTT
20bp
P3_Reverse_primer_Lb1
GGCACCTTGTAGGATTGTAC
20bp
P3_Reverse_primer_Lb3
GGAAATTCTGGGAACTGAGC
20bp
P3_Reverse_primer_Lb4
TGTTTCTCTTCCTTGGTGAG
20bp
P3_Reverse_primer_Lb5
CTTAACAAACTCGTTGTCGG
20bp
P3_Reverse_primer_Ns1
CTTGTGGATTCTTCCGTATG
20bp
P3_Reverse_primer_Ns2
GGTATCCCTTGTACCAGACT
20bp
P3_Reverse_primer_Ns3
GAGTGCGTAGCTCAAATCTA
20bp
P3_Reverse_primer_Ns4
TTCTGCATCCTGCTGGCCAA
20bp
P4_Forward_primer
CATCCTTCTAGTAGCAAGGC
20bp
P4_Reverse_primer
ATATCATGCGATCATAGGCG
20bp
Table 7: Primer list for genotyping.
44
==PAGE:46==
Genotyping primers
Sequence (DNA)
Size (bp)
Tm-value
P4.5_Forward_primer_Ns3
AAATCGTCAGAGTTCCGTCT
20bp
P4.5_Reverse_primer_Ns3
AGAATATCATTGCCGGCCTC
20bp
P5_Forward_primer_Lb1
GGTCCTCGAGATGATTTATA
20bp
P5_Forward_primer_Lb3
ATTTTACTGTCGTGAGTAAT
20bp
P5_Forward_primer_Lb4
TGGACCTGGAGAAGATTACA
20bp
P5_Forward_primer_Lb5
AAAGGAATTGGAATCGATTA
20bp
P5_Forward_primer_Ns1
GATCTCGAGAAAGCCTTTGT
20bp
P5_Forward_primer_Ns2
AAGATGCTTTACGATAGGAT
20bp
P5_Forward_primer_Ns3
AACATCCTGGTGATTGCTT
19bp
P5_Forward_primer_Ns4
CTCTCTGGAGTGGAAGAAAA
20bp
P5_Reverse_primer
GGGATTCAAAGCTCAAATAA
20bp
P6_Forward_primer
CCGAGAATTATGCAGCATTT
20bp
P6_Reverse_primer
CACTACTGCAAGATTGCAAC
20bp
P7_Forward_primer
GCATTGATCGTGTTGAACAT
20bp
P7_Reverse_primer
TGCTGCATTATGGATGGAAG
20bp
Table 8: Primer list for genotyping.
45
==PAGE:47==
Appendix 2 - Transformation details
8.5% D-mannitol
The 8.5% D-mannitol is prepared in advance.
• Prepare 500mL of 8.5% D-mannitol by adding 400mL of MQ-water, then add 42.5g of D-
mannitol.
• After dissolving add MQ-water to reach a volume of 500mL and autoclave it.
1M CaCl2
The 1M CaCl2 is prepared in advance.
• Prepare 500mL of 1M CaCl2 by adding 300mL of MQ-water, then add 73.5g of 1M CaCl2·H2O.
• After dissolving add MQ-water to reach a volume of 500mL and ﬁlter sterilize before use.
0.2M MES pH 5.8
The 0.2M MES pH 5.8 is prepared in advance.
• Prepare 100mL of 0.2M 2-(N-morpholino) ethylanesulfonic acid (MES) by adding 40mL of MQ-
water, then add 3.9g of MES hydrate.
• After dissolving use 2M KOH to bring pH to 5.8.
• Once pH is stable add MQ-water to reach a volume of 100mL.
Protoplast wash solution (PW)
The PW solution is prepared in advance.
• Prepare 100mL of PW solution by adding 97mL of MQ-water, then add 2mL of 0.2M MES pH
5.8 and 1mL of CaCl2.
• Filter sterilize before use.
0.4M Tris-Cl pH 8.0
The 0.4M Tris-Cl pH 8.0 is prepared in advance.
• Prepare 100mL of 0.4M Tris-Cl pH 8.0 by adding 70mL of MQ-water, then add 4.84g of Tris
base.
• After dissolving adjust pH with 2M HCl to 8.0 and add MQ-water to reach a volume of 100mL.
46
==PAGE:48==
PEG-MCT
The PEG-MCT is prepared fresh preferably while waiting for Driselase to digest the protonemal tissue.
• Prepare 5mL of PEG-MCT by adding 5mL of 8.5% D-mannitol, then add 118mg of Ca(NO3)2·H2O
and 125µL of 0.4M Tris-Cl pH 8.0.
• After dissolving add 2g of polyethylene glycol (PEG) and mix.
• Keep the solution on a small shaker for at least 2 hours. If it recrystallizes heat can be added
to dissolves crystals.
• Filter sterilize before use.
1M MgCl2
The 1M MgCl2 is prepared in advance.
• Prepare 100mL of 1M MgCl2 by adding 80mL of MQ-water, then add 9.52g of 1M MgCl2·6H2O.
• After dissolving add MQ-water to reach a volume of 100mL and autoclave it.
MMM solution
The MMM solution is prepared fresh preferably while waiting for Driselase to digest the protonemal
tissue.
• Prepare 10mL of MMM solution by adding 10mL of 8.5% D-mannitol, then add 150µL of 1M
MgCl2 and 100µL of 0.2M MES.
• Filter sterilize before use.
PRMB
The PRMB plates is prepared in advance.
• The PRMB media is made using BCD media with 6% (w/v) D-mannitol and 1% (w/v) agar.
• Autoclave it.
• When sightly cooled use 1M CaCl2 to reach a working concentration of 10mM CaCl2.
• Use petri dishes to make plates and cover them in cellophane.
• Store at 4◦C before use.
47
==PAGE:49==
PRMT
The PRMT plates is prepared in advance.
• The PRMT media is made using BCD media with 8% (w/v) D-mannitol and 0.4% (w/v) agar.
• Autoclave it.
• When sightly cooled use 1M CaCl2 to reach a working concentration of 10mM CaCl2.
• Use petri dishes to make plates and cover them in cellophane.
• Store at 4◦C before use.
Calculation of MMM solution
The following is how to calculate the volume of MMM solution that has to be added to the protoplast
suspension to achieve a concentration of 1.6 · 106.
Estimated number of protoplast in solution:
protoplast on grid · 104 · volume in vial = Estimated number of protoplast
Volume of MMM solution required (found in mL).
Estimated number of protoplast
1.6·106
= Required volume of MMM solution
Calculation of necessary DNA material
This is presented by making a table of the necessary information about the DNA. The ﬁrst column is
deciding what fragments information is designated for that row. The second column is the size of the
fragment in kilebasepairs. The third row is the concentration available of the fragment in ng/µL. The
fourth row is the amount of pmol that would like to be used of each fragment, which in most cases
has to be 1:1. The ﬁfth row is the weight of that fragment there will be needed a total of this since
DNA starts to crystallize around 50000ng of DNA in this volume. The sixth row is the volume of the
fragment which is added to the falcon tube during the transformation.
48
==PAGE:50==
Fragment
Size (kbp)
Concentration (ng/µL)
pmol
ng
volume (µL)
660·Size·pmol
ng
Concentration
Example 1
2.4
1000
5
7920
7.92
Example 2
1.5
940
5
4950
4.95
Total
12870
12.87
Table 9: Calculations for DNA
49
==PAGE:51==
Appendix 3
Fragment
Size (kbp)
Concentration (ng/µL)
Amount of substance (pmol)
Mass (ng)
Volume (µL)
LbMTPSL 1
1.173
377.8
3.0
2322.54
6.15
LbMTPSL 3
1.133
295.1
3.0
2243.34
7.6
LbMTPSL 4
1.201
357.7
3.0
2377.98
6.74
LbMTPSL 5
1.209
481.0
3.0
2393.82
4.98
NsMTPSL 1
1.257
645.6
3.0
2488.86
3.86
NsMTPSL 2
1.204
774.7
3.0
2383.92
3.08
NsMTPSL 3
1.650
397.6
3.0
3267.0
8.22
NsMTPSL 4
1.098
766.1
3.0
2174.04
2.84
I2:48
3.78
411.0
3.0
748.44
1.82
108-5’
2.688
365.8
3.0
5322.24
14.55
108-3’
2.093
452.2
3.0
4144.14
9.16
Table 10: The DNA calculations for the ﬁrst transformation event.
Fragment
Size (kbp)
Concentration (ng/µL)
Amount of substance (pmol)
Mass (ng)
Volume (µL)
LbMTPSL 1
1.173
377.8
4.75
3677.36
9.7
LbMTPSL 3
1.133
295.1
4.75
3551.96
12.04
LbMTPSL 4
1.201
357.7
4.75
3765.14
10.68
LbMTPSL 5
1.209
481.0
4.75
3790.22
9.88
NsMTPSL 1
1.257
645.6
4.75
3940.70
6.10
NsMTPSL 2
1.204
774.7
4.75
3774.54
4.87
NsMTPSL 3
1.650
397.6
4.75
5172.75
13.01
NsMTPSL 4
1.098
766.1
4.75
3442.23
4.50
I2:48
3.78
411.0
4.75
1185.03
2.88
108-5’
2.688
865.7
4.75
8426.88
9.73
108-3’
2.093
1032.4
4.75
6561.55
6.35
Table 11: The DNA calculations for the second transformation event.
Fragment
Size (kbp)
Concentration (ng/µL)
Amount of substance (pmol)
Mass (ng)
Volume (µL)
LbMTPSL 1
1.173
377.8
4.75
3677.36
9.7
LbMTPSL 3
1.133
295.1
4.75
3551.96
12.04
LbMTPSL 4
1.201
357.7
4.75
3765.14
10.68
LbMTPSL 5
1.209
481.0
4.75
3790.22
9.88
NsMTPSL 1
1.257
645.6
4.75
3940.70
6.10
NsMTPSL 2
1.204
774.7
4.75
3774.54
4.87
NsMTPSL 3
1.650
397.6
4.75
5172.75
13.01
NsMTPSL 4
1.098
766.1
4.75
3442.23
4.50
I2:48
3.78
411.0
4.75
1185.03
2.88
108-5’
2.688
1136.3
4.75
8426.88
7.41
108-3’
2.093
615.4
4.75
6561.55
10.66
Table 12: The DNA calculations for the third and fourth transformation event.
50
==PAGE:52==
Appendix 4
Figure 13: A gel ran with P4 PCR products from the diﬀerent potential mutants. From left
to right, well 1 is a 1kb ladder, well 2 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,1, well 3 is PCR
product from LbMTPSL 3,2, well 4 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,3, well 5 is PCR product
from LbMTPSL 4,1, well 6 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 4,2, well 7 is PCR product from
NsMTPSL 1 and well 8 is a 1kb ladder.
51
==PAGE:53==
Figure 14: A gel ran with P1 PCR products from the diﬀerent potential mutants. From left to
right, well 1 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,1, well 2 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,2,
well 3 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,3, well 4 is a 1kb ladder, well 5 is PCR product from
LbMTPSL 4,1, well 6 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 4,2 and well 7 is PCR product from
NsMTPSL 1.
52
==PAGE:54==
Figure 15: A gel ran with P2 PCR products from the diﬀerent potential mutants. From left to
right, well 1 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,1, well 2 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,2,
well 3 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,3, well 4 is a 1kb ladder, well 5 is PCR product from
LbMTPSL 4,1, well 6 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 4,2 and well 7 is PCR product from
NsMTPSL 1.
53
==PAGE:55==
Figure 16: A gel ran with P3 PCR products from the diﬀerent potential mutants. From left to
right, well 1 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,1, well 2 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,2,
well 3 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,3, well 4 is a 1kb ladder, well 5 is PCR product from
LbMTPSL 4,1, well 6 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 4,2 and well 7 is PCR product from
NsMTPSL 1.
54
==PAGE:56==
Figure 17: A gel ran with P4 PCR products from the diﬀerent potential mutants. From left to
right, well 1 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,1, well 2 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,2,
well 3 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,3, well 4 is a 1kb ladder, well 5 is PCR product from
LbMTPSL 4,1, well 6 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 4,2 and well 7 is PCR product from
NsMTPSL 1.
55
==PAGE:57==
Figure 18: A gel ran with P5 PCR products from the diﬀerent potential mutants. From left to
right, well 1 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,1, well 2 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,2,
well 3 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,3, well 4 is a 1kb ladder, well 5 is PCR product from
LbMTPSL 4,1, well 6 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 4,2 and well 7 is PCR product from
NsMTPSL 1.
56
==PAGE:58==
Figure 19: A gel ran with P6 PCR products from the diﬀerent potential mutants. From left to
right, well 1 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,1, well 2 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,2,
well 3 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,3, well 4 is a 1kb ladder, well 5 is PCR product from
LbMTPSL 4,1, well 6 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 4,2 and well 7 is PCR product from
NsMTPSL 1.
57
==PAGE:59==
Figure 20: A gel ran with P7 PCR products from the diﬀerent potential mutants. From left to
right, well 1 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,1, well 2 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,2,
well 3 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 3,3, well 4 is a 1kb ladder, well 5 is PCR product from
LbMTPSL 4,1, well 6 is PCR product from LbMTPSL 4,2 and well 7 is PCR product from
NsMTPSL 1.
58
==PAGE:60==
Appendix 5
Figure 21: Chromotogram displaying the concentrations found for the diﬀerent DNA nucleotides
when sequecing the P4 LbMTSPL 3,3 with the forward primer.
59
==PAGE:61==
Figure 22: Chromotogram displaying the concentrations found for the diﬀerent DNA nucleotides
when sequecing the P4 LbMTSPL 3,3 with the reverse primer.
60
==PAGE:62==
Figure 23: Chromotogram displaying the concentrations found for the diﬀerent DNA nucleotides
when sequecing the P7 LbMTSPL 3,1 with the forward primer.
61
==PAGE:63==
Figure 24: Chromotogram displaying the concentrations found for the diﬀerent DNA nucleotides
when sequecing the P7 LbMTSPL 3,1 with the reverse primer.
62
==PAGE:64==
Figure 25: Chromotogram displaying the concentrations found for the diﬀerent DNA nucleotides
when sequecing the P7 LbMTSPL 3,2 with the forward primer.
63
==PAGE:65==
Figure 26: Chromotogram displaying the concentrations found for the diﬀerent DNA nucleotides
when sequecing the P7 LbMTSPL 3,2 with the reverse primer.
64
==PAGE:66==
Appendix 6
Figure 27: Mass spectrum isolated from a peak from mass range 204 m/z which resembles a
desired mass spectrum for a sesquiterpenoid. The sample was LbMTPSL 3.1.
65
==PAGE:67==
Figure 28: Mass spectrum isolated from a peak from mass range 204 m/z which resembles a
desired mass spectrum for a sesquiterpenoid. The sample was LbMTPSL 3.3
66
==PAGE:68==
Figure 29: Mass spectrum isolated from a peak from mass range 136 m/z which resembles a
desired mass spectrum for a monoterpenoid. The sample was LbMTPSL 3.4.
67
==PAGE:69==
Figure 30: Mass spectrum isolated from a peak from mass range 136 m/z which resembles a
desired mass spectrum for a monoterpenoid.The sample was LbMTPSL 3.5.
68
==PAGE:70==
Figure 31: Mass spectrum isolated from a peak from mass range 204 m/z which resembles a
desired mass spectrum for a sesquiterpenoid. The sample was LbMTPSL 4.1.
69
==PAGE:71==
Figure 32: Mass spectrum isolated from a peak from mass range 136 m/z which resembles a
desired mass spectrum for a sesquiterpenoid. The sample was LbMTPSL 4.2.
70
==PAGE:72==
Figure 33: Mass spectrum isolated from a peak from mass range 204 m/z which resembles a
desired mass spectrum for a sesquiterpenoid. The sample was NsMTPSL 1.1.
71
==PAGE:73==
Figure 34: Mass spectrum isolated from a peak from mass range 204 m/z which resembles a
desired mass spectrum for a sesquiterpenoid. The sample was NsMTPSL 1.2.
72
