==PAGE:1==
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
Lilian Mehl
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
Report written by:
Lilian Mehl
(s192584)
Advisors:
Wail Mustafa, Postdoctoral Researcher in image analysis at DTU
Anders Bjorholm Dahl, Professor MSO, Head of DTU compute section
Shachar Mirkin, Head of the laboratory section of the company Digimind
Education:
Master’s thesis
Period:
18 February­18 July 2021
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements
for graduation in the above education at the Technical University
of Denmark.
Copyright:
©Lilian Mehl, 2021
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Sci­
ence, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Recent breakthroughs in object detection have widened the fields of application in many
various areas. Thus, some company marketing services are interested in evaluating the
visibility of their products on social media images. To answer this problem, this thesis
focuses on the development of a new logo detection algorithm. It will propose an method
based on the one­stage one­shot object detection algorithm which allows us an efficient
and rapid detection.The thesis will also deal with model verification and experiments for
a direct application in production.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Throughout my master thesis, I was assisted by several of my colleagues whom I would
like to thank. My supervisor at the Digimind company, Shachar Mirkin has guided me a
lot through all the steps of this thesis. My colleague Bokai Yu took the time to answer my
questions. I would like to thank them both for their great availability and I would like to give
them credits for their work on the deployment and the experiments. Finally, I would like
to give thanks to my DTU supervisors Wail Mustafa and Anders Bjorholm Dahl, for their
valuable advise and all my DTU teachers who supported me during my years of master
at DTU.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Requirement analysis
3
2.1
Metrics for object detection evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Current logo detection method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
The state of the art
11
3.1
Object and logo detection based on machine learning methods . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Feature extraction with deep learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Object and logo detection based on deep learning methods . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4
One­shot object detection model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4
One­shot one­stage model for logo detection
26
4.1
OS2D model presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2
Training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.4
Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.5
Application on logo dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5
Improvements of the One­shot one­stage model for logo detection
40
5.1
Analysis of OS2D for logo detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.2
Fast feature extractor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.3
Label Feature map optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.4
Scale optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.5
Methods to calculate the thresholds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.6
Logo image selection protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
6
Evaluation of the logo detection algorithm
51
6.1
Model validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2
Model testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6.4
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
6.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
7
Conclusion
64
Bibliography
65
A Cross­validation results
68
A.1 ResNet18 backbone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
iv
==PAGE:6==
A.2 ResNet34 backbone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
B Examples of logo detection
70
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The objective of this thesis is to choose and implement an adapted model to detect logos
in natural scene images.The idea of this project came from the need to analyze images
from social networks, such a method will be used by companies willing to assess the
reach of their advertising campaigns on social media. The company Digimind in Greno­
ble, France, develops social media listening softwares to better understand the customers
and the market trends. A logo detection service provides a new tool to analyse and refine
an advertising strategy.
Digimind has developed three years ago a module allowing to locate some logos. The
technology is based on optical character recognition (OCR), it has several limitations
which we will enumerate in the next chapters. The main one is that only logos with texts
can be detected. This thesis proposes a new method responding to the need of general­
ized logo detection and taking into account the constraints of a concrete use. The model
is based on the OS2D model [1] object detection model developed in 2020 . Their algo­
rithm tackles the issue of one­shot object detection, which consists in detecting objects
defined by a single demonstration. This master’s thesis proposes several modifications:
• the use of a faster feature extractor architecture
• optimised resizing factors allowing fast multi­scaling detection
• methods tuning a threshold parameter for each logo
The changes aim to both improve time performance and evaluation metrics of the original
OS2D model on logo detection. This thesis uses the QMUL­OpenLogo benchmark [2]
containing logos in natural scene images, we have adapted it for one­shot learning prob­
lem. The suggested improvements are tuned and tested on the modified logo dataset,
and our final model is compared with the existing solution.
1.1
Objectives
The main objectives are the following:
• Identify the technical scientific issues of logo detection
• Evaluate the current OCR­based solution
• Carry out a bibliographical study on current solutions to this problem
• Suggest a model adapted to the problem and the constraints
• Implement the model, deploy to production
• Test, evaluate the project and have a critical point of view about the limits of the
project
• Communicate the results of the research and the thesis to the company and the
university
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
1
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Thesis outline
Chapter 2, will discuss the current model and the requirements. Then, a state­of­the­art
on logo and object detection will be presented in Chapter 3. Chapter 4 will describe the
chosen OS2D model for logo detection. Then Chapter 5 will present the adaptation of
OS2D model. Finally, Chapter 6 will show the results and the evaluation.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Requirement analysis
This chapter analyses the current logo detection service developed by the company.
Based on the existing solution, the requirements are set and establish a framework for this
thesis. First, the different metrics used are described, it will allow us better understand
and quantify the needs.
2.1
Metrics for object detection evaluation
In our case, the logo detection is represented as the performance of a binary classification
test, answering the question is the query logo in the image. Statistical measures exist to
evaluate the performance, they will be used to compare models.
2.1.1
Accuracy
Accuracy is defined as the percentage of correct predictions for the test data. It is calcu­
lated by dividing the number of correct predictions by the number of predictions.
2.1.2
Confusion matrix
The confusion matrix is a good way to visualize the performance of an algorithm and
allows more detailed analysis than accuracy. It contains the numbers of:
• true positive (TP)
• true negative (TN)
• false positive (FP)
• false negative (FN)
2.1.3
Precision
Precision measures the fraction of positive predictions which are correctly identified.
precision =
TP
TP + FP
2.1.4
Recall
Recall (sensitivity) gives the fraction of positive prediction among the true predictions. It
measures how good the model find all the positives.
recall =
TP
TP + FN
2.1.5
Fβ­score
Fβ­score is a test accuracy, it is calculated from recall and precision. Fβ, that uses a
positive factor β, so that recall is considered β times as important as precision.
fβ = (1 + β2)
precision.Recall
(β2.precision) + recall
F1 score is the harmonic mean of the precision and recall.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
3
==PAGE:10==
2.1.6
Intersection over union (IoU)
Intersection over union IoU is used for object detection problems, it measures how much
predicted boundary overlaps with the ground truth (the real object boundary).
IoU = area_of_overlap
area_of_union
2.1.7
Mean average precision (mAp)
In binary classification, the recall and precision change with the predicted confidence level.
The precision­recall curve (P­R curve) describes the evolution of precision with recall.
Figure 2.1: Example of Precision­recall curve
The definition for the Average Precision (AP) [3] corresponds to the area under the precision­
recall curve (AUC). Average precision is a way to compare classification model perfor­
mance. The mean average precision (mAP) is the AP averaged over all categories. There
is often no difference between AP and mAP.
There exists different ways to calulate this metrics and the area under the curve. The
following models will often use COCO mAP. COCO mAP is the average over multiple IoUs
parameters (the minimum IoU to consider a positive match), defining multiple predicted
confidence level.
2.1.8
Time performance metrics
Latency is the time taken to process detection on one image. The unit is second.
Frame per second (FPS) is the frequency at which consecutive images called frames
appear on a display.
Total FLOPs is the total number of of floating point calculations for an algorithm.
2.2
Context
The project is intended to be used in the ”Digimind Social” software of Digimind. This
software aims to analyze trends in social media. It collects publications in various so­
cial networks such as Facebook, Twitter or Instagram. Publications are then filtered and
selected if they could interest the customer.
Publication containing images are crucial and provide additional data. Custumers are
interested in knowing the context in which their products and logos are found. A first filter
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
4
==PAGE:11==
is applied to publications with images, an evaluation showed that 18 % of the selected
images actually contain the logo in the image. The logo detection service allows to refine
filters and improves the data quality. Finally, analysis algorithms analyze product visibility
and market trends.
Digimind has developed three years ago a module allowing to locate text­based logos.
The technology is based on OCR, the following section details this first solution.
2.3
Current logo detection method
2.3.1
The OCR model
The current approach consists of two components: a text­detector and a text recognition
module.
EAST text detector
The EAST text detector [4] detects text in natural scene images. It is a deep learning
model designed in 2017. The model has to two stages:
• A fully convolutional Network takes as input the image and produced text locations
on the image. The text locations are repesented as bounding boxes which are rect­
angles or quadrangles that surrounds the text. The bounding can have various sizes
and rotations. An example of predicted bounding box is illustrated in the figure.
• The non­maximum­suppresion algorithm (NMS) filters results to remove supper­
posed and not relevant bounding boxes.
Figure 2.2: Example of detected text bounding boxes [4]
The revue [4] tested the algorithm on the ICDAR 2015 dataset, which contains images
with annoted text regions. They assert a good accuracy and efficiency. The proposed
model achieves an F­score of 0.7820 at 13.2fps at 720p resolution on GPU (NVIDIA Titan
X graphic card).
ASTER text recogniton
Once region texts are generated, the algorithm removes the boxes whose shape doesn’t
correspond to logos according to some criterias.
It enables us to get rid of the boxes containing a set of sentences within a text screenshot.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
5
==PAGE:12==
At this step, the algorithm computed the potential regions of text of logos but, it now needs
to turns writing into machine­encoded text. The ASTER method is used [Req_ASTER].The
text recognizer ASTER is also a two­stages model as shown in the Figure 2.3: it contains
a rectification network and a recognition network as illustrated in the figure.
Figure 2.3: ASTER architecture overview [Req_ASTER]
The rectification network uses the thin­Plate Spline method (TPS) performing non­rigid
deformation to transform an input image into a new one. The text in natural scene images
is very often distorted by perspective, angles... TPS can rectify a variety of distortions and
rectify the text image.
Once the text image is corrected, the recognition network turns them into machine­encoded
texts. It is a sequence­to­sequence model which predicts the character sequences from
text images.
Rule creation and detection
The logo detection service has to test if the detected words correspond to words from the
logo. The user intending to add a new text­based logo has to create a rule that matches
the words recognized on the logo. The rule is represented as a boolean function and
allows simple operators ”OR, AND, NOT”. In the following example (Figure 2.4), the user
will enter the boolean function ”Planet AND ball AND stadium”. The logo is considered
being detected if these words are successfully recognized by the OCR model.
Figure 2.4: Example of logo
The boolean function can also include words which exclude the logo detection. In fact,
the words on the logo might not be specific to the brand the user wants to detect. In the
Figure 5.11, the word Gulf has other meanings. The boolean rule for gulf is ”gulf and not
(Persian or oil or energy)”. The detected words should contain the word ”gulf” but not the
words ”Persian” or ”energy”.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
6
==PAGE:13==
(a) Gulf logo
(b) Example of an input image with the
word Gulf
Figure 2.5: Example of the rule ”gulf and not (persian or oil or energy)”
The words are compared to the detected words using python library weighted­levenshtein
0.2.1 [5]. Weighted­levenshtein is based on the Levenshtein distance, which measures
the difference between two string sequences: [6]. Levenshtein distance is definined re­
cursively:
lev(a, b) =















|a|
if |b| = 0
|b|
if |a| = 0
lev(tail(a), tail(b))
if |a| = b[0]
1 + min



lev(tail(a), b)
lev(a, tail(b))
lev(tail(a), tail(b))
otherwise
The tail of a string x is the string x which we remove the first character. It will count the
number of replacements, deletions and insertions, it corresponds to the minimum num­
ber of single­character required to change one word into the other. Weighted­levenshtein
ponderates the costs between characters. Substituting ‘0’ for ‘O’ will cost less than sub­
stituting ‘X’ for ‘O’. A threshold on the measure determines if the two words match. For
example, if the algorithm detects the word ”Stadiu” for the logo of the figure, it will be as­
sociated to the word ”Stadium”. The use of weighted­levenshtein allows the detection of
natural scene logo, the logo can be partially hidden, or a letter can be illegible.
Summary
The algorithm works fine with a lot of text­based logos. In the Figure 2.6, the logo detection
service tries to detect the logo of the british airways company. It detects the words ”Britih”
and ”Airways” on the plane. The words match the rule ”British AND Airways” and the logo
is correctly detected on the plane. This example is challenging because the logo is small.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
7
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.6: Example of detection
2.3.2
Limitations
The OCR detection algorithm has some limits, Digimind expects to improve the logo de­
tection method. This chapter analyzes the limits of the OCR service.
Range of detected logos
. One major drawback of this method is that only logos composed of texts can be detected.
Likewise, texts which don’t have a standard typeface can not be detected as a word box.
The algorithm will not classify them as words and logos.
Figure 2.7: Cases of logo detections
The range of logos concerned by this limitation has been studied on logos from the dataset
LLD­logo_files [7]. The logos in this dataset were extracted by parsing the web pages to
look for the favicon tags. The dataset contains 122 920 logos from twitters. Favicon
declarations allow to display logos as described on [8]. To assess the preformance of the
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
8
==PAGE:15==
OCR approach, we selected randomly 500 logos from this dataset, ran the OCR detection
algorithm and retrived the detected words. Logos are classified in three categories:
• logos with no texts
• logos with texts but with undetectable typeface (detected words don’t correspond to
the texts)
• logos with texts and detectable typeface (detected words correspond to the texts)
We don’t take into account words needed to be excluded in the boolean function, the rule
corresponds to words in the logo.
Logo
Detectable logo
Logo with
undetectable typeface
Logo with no writings
Number of logos
330
145
25
Percentage
66%
29%
5%
Figure 2.8: Range of logo detected with OCR service
It is important to notice this study concentrates on images of logos instead of images
in the wild. In natural images, the number of detected logos will decrease due to light
variations, rotations, transformations, scaling etc.. The purpose of this analysis is to give
an approximate distribution of the above three categories of logos.
It highlights an upper bound of the model, this limitation is inherent to the model based on
logo writings. A technique based on OCR is limited for logo detection : A third of logos
can’t be detected. This thesis thus explores other technologies to improve the range of
detected logos and the recall.
Add a new logo
The process of adding a new logo detection takes time. The user has to determine the rule
for the logo. This rule, represented as a boolean function might be complex to elaborate
because it might need to exclude some word in case of ambiguity. Then the rule is tested
for multiple rounds to ensure the detection service can detect the logos. No training is
needed but the process is restrictive. The ability to add a new logo detection is a key­
point.
Time performance
The service deployed in production only uses CPU to detect logos in images, Digimind
only has an access to a GPU processor in the development phase. The processing of
the EAST and OCR algorithms requires a substantial amount of calculation, and causes
a high execution time. The latency has been calculated on the 500 images of the dataset
previously described, on a device with 6 Intel Core i7­10750HOn.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
9
==PAGE:16==
The mean latency is 6.08 s, attesting to low time performance on CPU. The standard
deviation is 2.19s. Some images contain a lot of text and highly delay the detection (over
10s). This low time performance is a significant limitation for the development of the
service.
2.4
Requirements
In this context, it is important to analyze key­points and requirements for the success of
the project.
The range of detected logos has to be wide. The current OCR­based solution can only
detect logos with texts. This limitation explains the need of Digimind for changing their
solution.
We don’t want too many missclassified retrieved image logos. The precision is important
and should be above 0.8 on a challenging test dataset of natural scene. The recall affects
less the quality of the retrieved data for Digimind. With the huge amount of images in social
medias, a recall above 0.5 is sufficient to perform a analysis on the retrieved dataset.
The model has to be flexible. We want to be able to add the ability to detect a new logo.
New user can be often interested in detecting their logos, the process of adding a logo
has to be fast and should not require too much time. The goal is to automate this process;
a potential training phase should be short.
Time performance is a crucial point. The use of the logo detection service in production
has to be fast because of the huge amount of analyzed images. The company doesn’t
have GPU in production. The logo detection will be performed on CPU. It is an huge
limitation, the model needs to be optimized for a low inference time on CPU. However,
Digimind has GPU server for the development phase, the training will be done on GPU.
The inference time on CPU should be below the current OCR­based latency, the maximum
is fixed to 5 seconds for this thesis.
The research of a suitable dataset for training the chosen models is a key­point. Digimind
has small image datasets which probably won’t be sufficient. Using data augmentation
could be a solution to explore to adress the lack of data.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
10
==PAGE:17==
3
The state of the art
Now that the objectives of the thesis are fixed, the next step is to build a state­of­the­art
of the logo detection in literature which will constitute a basis for answering the problem.
Logo detection is a object detection problem, the following state of the art present jointly
objection detection researches and applications on logos. It begins by laying out the
theoretical foundations of traditional methods and looks at some recent advances in deep
learning.
3.1
Object and logo detection based on machine learning
methods
The first models relied on geometric object features. Affine invariant model based ob­
ject recognition method [9] represents the objects by interest points, line segments, curve
segments and comparison with a reference object. It assumes affine approximation to the
perspective viewing transformation and can only analyse simple object in the foreground.
Color and intensity­based [10] methods then replaced the previous techniques with meth­
ods comparing color histograms. The breakthroughs in object recognition have been
applied to the problem of logo recognition. The model developed in [11] uses chromatic
Gaussian histograms, the visual appearance of each logo is generated from a small num­
ber of sample images using histograms of scale­normalised chromatic Gaussian. Iden­
tification techniques based on multi­dimensional histograms are used to detect logos in
the input image.
Figure 3.1: Example of logo detection using chromatic gaussian histogram [11]
These color and intensity based techniques suffer from a low accuracy, and have been
mostly restricted to the regions which share the same color as that of logo.
More recent works in object detection represent an image as a set of features and use
a visual bag of words approach [12]. In this method, features consist of keypoints and
descriptors. Keypoints are spatial locations in an image that define what is interesting or
stand out in the image. Whatever how the image changes (rotation, projection, shrink­
age...), keypoints remain the same in the modified image when comparing with the orig­
inal image. Descriptors describe the keypoints. These methods treat an image as bag
of visual words, which is a vector of occurrence counts of a vocabulary of local image
features. One of the most famous feature descriptors is Scale­invariant feature transform
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
11
==PAGE:18==
(SIFT) [13] which describes local patches in a 128 dimensional vector. The method to de­
termine SIFT descriptors starts by detecting points of interest. These keypoints are then
taken as minima of the difference of gaussians. Here is an example of SIFT key points
on an image.
(a) Original image
(b) Image Key­points
Figure 3.2: SIFT Key­points [13]
After a selection, orientation assignment is performed to ensure key­points invariance by
rotation. Keypoint descriptor are then computed by the SIFT method as a 128 dimensional
vector.
Several methods use descriptors for logo detection. The publication [14] computes SIFT
keypoints of logos and images and compare the SIFT descriptors and compare the homo­
grapy matching method. The revue [15] performs shape context descriptor on the image,
interest points are based on logo edges (Figure 3.3).
Figure 3.3: Example of shape descriptors [15]
A compact representation of logo is computed. The input image representation is com­
pared with K­nearest neighbors search to localize and classify the logo.
A lot of improvements have been made in logo and object detection using machine learn­
ing. Difficulties arise, however, when they attempt to recognize the logos in real­world im­
ages. The variations (size, orientation, color, illumination) highly affect the performance of
the methods. This lack of robustness is the main weakness of these traditional methods
to localize logos in natural images.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
12
==PAGE:19==
3.2
Feature extraction with deep learning
More recently, big improvements in deep learning techniques have been achieved in ob­
ject detection. These deep learning models usually utilize a feature extraction neural
networks to encode the input into a certain feature representation. The feature extract­
ing network is also called backbone in computer vision. This section explains what is
feature extraction and details the CNN feature extraction method. Other efficient feature
extractors will be explained because time performance plays a critical role as well.
3.2.1
Convolutional neural network image features
Feature is an essential notion in image analysis, as it is an information describing the
properties of a region. It may be specific structures in the image such as points, edges or
objects .
The way to extract these features will be key­point in this master’s thesis. In 2012, fea­
tures built with convolutional neural networks (CNN) have revolutionized feature extraction
thanks to the progress of deep learning [16].
CNNs [17] are versions of multilayer perceptrons network. Usual perceptrons are usually
full connected. Each neuron is connected to all the neurons of the previous layer. For
image analysis, it leads to an high computation time and a risk of overfitting. CNNs use
an unique simpler filter with shared weights after each layer. It decreases complexity,
using smaller and simpler patterns. Common CNNs are built with a succession of the
following layers:
• Convolutional layer. It takes a tensor as input and apply a convolutional filter.
• Activation layer. The activation layer applies an activation function to the output of
the convolutional layer. It is often the rectifier function f(x) = max(0, x) This sparse
activation reduces the risk of vanishing gradient problems. A convolutional layer
within a CNN usually has the attributes: width and height of the filter, the number of
input channels and output channels, padding, stride, and dilation
• Pooling layer. Pooling layer combines the outputs of group of neurons into a single
neuron. It reduces the dimensions of data and reduces the risk overfitting. The
usual pooling layer is the max pooling layer which uses the maximum value of each
local cluster of neurons. The resulting layer is called the activation layer or feature
map
• The networks often end with a fully convolutional layer for classification tasks and a
softmax function.
Here is an example of CNN architecture :
Figure 3.4: Example of CNN architecture [18]
Apply filters or feature detectors to the input image to generate the feature maps
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
13
==PAGE:20==
CNN feature maps after each step characterize the properties of the image at different
scales. It is often difficult to interpret their roles (Figure 3.5).
Figure 3.5: Examples of feature maps [19]
3.2.2
Fast feature extraction
A simple convolutional neural network is often not the best optimisation to extract fea­
tures. This section presents backbone architectures susceptible to tackle the issue of the
efficiency of the model.
ResNet
Deeper neural networks are difficult to train. Accuracy saturates with more layers. The
Resnet architecture was developed in 2015 in [20] , it presents a residual learning to
ease the training of deep neural networks. The model also proves to be efficient in time,
ResNet won the 1st place in COCO 2015 competition in ImageNet Detection, ImageNet
localization, Coco detection and Coco segmentation.
The major improvement is the introduction of skip connections. Here is an scheme of a
residual block in the Resnet. Skip connection or identity shortcut connection skip one or
more layer, as shown in the following figure :
Figure 3.6: Residual block [21]
The identity shortcuts (x) can be directly used when the input and output are of the same
dimensions to compute the output y.
y = F(x, W) + x
A projection is used to match the dimension if x y and y are different dimensions. These
skip connections alleviate the issue of vanishing gradients allows adding multiple layers.
Intuitively, if we consider the optimal solution is the identity function y = x, it is easier to
optimize weight W so that F(x) = 0 and fit the identity mapping than to learn the identity
mapping by a stack of CNN layers. The model F(x) is called residual function.
Residual networks align residual blocks as shown in the following figure:
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
14
==PAGE:21==
Figure 3.7: Resnet50 [21]
It ends with a fully connected layer and a softmax function which outputs the class proba­
bilities for classification problems. There exists different sizes of ResNet models: ResNet18,
Resnet34, ResNet50,ResNet101 etc.. The number corresponds to the number of layers.
FLOPs metric increases with the number of layers and residual blocks. It affects the ex­
ecution times, but deeper models has better performance [22]. There exists variant of
Resnet Models.
Mobilenet
Mobilenet backbone are specialy designed for mobile and embedded vision applications.
MobileNet model [23] is based on depthwise separable convolutions.
Usual convolution layers both filter and combine inputs into output in one step. Depth­
wise separable convolution splits standard convolution into two layers, a separate layer
for filtering and a separate layer for combining as show in figure. It factorizes a stan­
dard convolution into a depthwise convolution and a 1×1 convolution called a pointwise
convolution (Figures 3.09 and 3.10).
Figure 3.8: Depthwise separable convolution [23]
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3.9: MobileNet V1 model [23]
This factorisation drastically decreases the number of parameters and the latency. The
second version [24] uses inverted residual blocks to reduce the parameter numbers.
Inverted residual blocks are based on residual block explained in the previous section
adapted to the depthwise separable convolution method.
3.2.3
Backbone comparison
There exists dozen of backbone architectures with key strengths and weak points. In
this thesis, the choices of tested backbones relies on the revue [22], which compares 40
deep neural network architectures performing feature extraction on an image classification
task. Models are collected from the PyTorch framework [pytorchpackage] or trained with
another framework and converted in PyTorch. Accuracy rate, model complexity, memory
usage, computational complexity, and inference time of each model are computed on the
embedded system is NVIDIA Jetson TX1 board. Jetson TX1 board uses GPU but its
low computing power allows a comparison with our problem, we will expect to minimize
operations (FLOPs) to reduce inference time. Metrics are calculated on inference on the
image classification task ImageNet­1k challenge [25]. The evaluated dataset contains
RGB images of size 224×224×3. Time inference on the Jetson TX1 board are presented
in the following table.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
16
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.10: : Inference time per image for Jetson TX1 [22]
Here is the table of the best models (according top­1 accuracy) satisfying inference speed
(≥15FPS, ≥30FPS, ≥60FPS) constraints on the Jetson TX1. The prediction using the
models outputs the predicted probability for each the classes. Top­1 score checks if the
top class (the one having the highest probability) is the same as the target label.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.11: Top 5 models (sorted in decreasing Top­1 accuracy) satisfying memory con­
sumption ≤1.4GB [22]
These tables highlight the Mobile­Nets (v1 and v2) are particularly efficient for fast classifi­
cation task (>30 frame per second). ResNet18 also presents good performance. ResNet50
gives the best top­1 accuracy (<15 fps) but is slower than the MobileNets and ResNet18.
The choice of backbone will be discussed in the next chapters.
3.3
Object and logo detection based on deep learning
methods
This section presents some popular object detection methods using deep learning and its
adaptations in logo detection.
3.3.1
R­CNN models
The R­CNN family consists of a set of end­to­end object detection models based on neural
networks. They take an input image and produce a set of bounding boxes as output,
where each bounding box contains an object and also the category of the object. This
sub­section presents a review of R­CNN family and its application on the problem of logo
detection.
R­CNN
The original R­CNN [26] [27] was developed by Ross Girshick and al. in 2015. It uses
CNN feature extractor and produces a set of bounding boxes as output. The Figure 3.12
is a scheme of the architecture.
Figure 3.12: R­CNN Architecture [19]
R­CNN first extracts around 2000 region proposals. Regions are selected with the selec­
tive search for object recognition which performs a hierarchical grouping strategy based
on shapes and colors. R­CNN then uses a CNN to extract features for each proposal,
and classifies each region using class­specific linear SVMs. The performance exceeds
all the performance of traditional models. The mAp is 53.7 on the PASCAL VOC dataset
[28]. The dataset build in 2010 provides natural images and annotations for object class
recognition. The main inconvenience is that this method is relatively slow and requires a
lot of computation and a lot of training data.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
18
==PAGE:25==
Fast R­CNN
Fast RCNN is an improvement to the R­CNN algorithm [29] developed in 2015 by Ross
Girshick.
Figure 3.13: Fast R­CNN Architecture [29]
The method doesn’t feed region proposals to the CNN, the all input image is given to the
CNN to generate a convolutional feature map. The region of proposals are identified from
the image feature map and converted to fixed shape by using a region of interest (RoI)
pooling layer. A softmax layer is then used to predict the classes of the proposed regions
and the offset values for the bounding box. The performance are improved to 0.70 mAP
on the PASCAL VOC object detection dataset of 2007.
Faster R­CNN
R­CNN an Fast R­CNN use selective search to find out the region proposals. This process
is slow and affects the time performance. Faster RCNN [30] is an new improvement to
the Fast R­CNN algorithm developed in 2017 by Shaoqing Ren et al. In this network,
Faster­RCNN learns the region proposals by itself and doesn’t use selective search.
Figure 3.14: Faster R­CNN Architecture [30]
The input image is given to a CNN to compute the image features. A new separate net­
work called region proposal network proposes region of interest. The network generates
candidate boxes which might have our objects to detect. The method is based on anchors
and utilizes a sliding window. Every point seen by the sliding window in the feature map
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
19
==PAGE:26==
is called an anchor point. Anchor boxes are generated for every anchor point. 9 anchors
with different sizes are proposed at each position.
Figure 3.15: Anchor boxes generation [27]
These anchors, corresponding to green boxes in the figure 3.16, don’t match with potential
objects for now. The algorithm needs to determine if the box contains an object by giving
a score to the box and to adapt the anchor offsets to the potential object. Each anchor
offset is represented by the center, the width and the height of the box. These two tasks
are achieved by a regression network constituted by two convolution layers on the feature
map.
The network training uses the ground truth (annotated bounding boxes of the objects)
to learn offsets and scores determination. The method uses IoU to compare the ground
truth and the generated boxes. The coordinate difference is computed as objectives to
be learned by the regressor with a smooth L1 loss.
Then the offsets transform the anchor boxes to propose candidate boxes (Region of in­
terest). The RoIs correspond to the red boxes.
Figure 3.16: Example of anchor boxes[27]
The region proposals are then matched and reshaped with the feature map using a RoI
pooling layer. Then, the proposed regions are classified and the offset values for the
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
20
==PAGE:27==
bounding boxes are predicted. The performance are improved with 0.78 mAP on the
PASCAL VOC object detection dataset of 2007 [28].
[31] applied directly faster RCNN to detect car manufacturer with brand logos. The model
has been trained on 1000 images from the different brand logos that they labeled by hand.
Accuracy results are encouraging but the test dataset of only 5 brand logos is too restricted
to draw a clear conclusion. Faster R­CNN is also much faster than its predecessors.
3.3.2
YOLO
The model family called You only look once (YOLO) [32], are specialy designed for real­
time object detection. This time performance objective makes the YOLO models intersting
for the fast logo detection project. Here is a short description of the first YOLO model.
In Yolo, a single convolutional network predicts the bounding boxes and the class prob­
abilities for these boxes. The input image is split in a grid, each case is a bouning box
and the class probabilities for these boxes. . The network outputs a class probability and
offset values for each bounding box. A threshold is used to select object in the image.
Figure 3.17: Yolo V1 model [32]
The model is built in one­stage: region detection and class probabilities are calculated in
the same time. This one­stage model saves a lot of time in detection. A disadvantage is
that the model has spatial constraints, it struggles with small objects detection. New YOLO
versions improves the process. YOLOv2 [33] defined anchor priors by k­means clustering
from the training data. This helps in reducing optimizing difficulties in localization and
reduce spatial constraints. YOLO v3 [34] predicts ten times the number of boxes predicted
by YOLO v2. For three different scales, the model generates three anchor boxes at each
anchor point. The object confidence and class predictions in YOLO v3 are predicted
through logistic regression. The model is a bit slower than YOLO v2 but is able to predict
smaller boxes. [35] implements a variant of YOLO v3, Logo­YOLO, specialized in logo
detection. The algorithm uses a K­means clustering methods to select the best anchor
box sizes, and use a new loss functions. The focal loss is used to tackle the issue of
postive/negative imbalance and the CIoU loss [SOTA_Ciou] The revue also presents the
LogoDet­3K dataset, a large logo detection dataset with full annotation, which has 3,000
logo categories, about 200,000 manually annotated logo objects.
3.3.3
Summary
These models are very promising for the logo detection. However a problem arises as part
of the project of this thesis. The detection of a specific logo relies on the model training on
the images of this logo. The user has a restricted access to images with the new logo he
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
21
==PAGE:28==
expects to detect. The user can collect few images on the web in the logo in the wild, but
he can’t collect enough images for a new training. A second issue is that model retraining
takes time and verification, the process of adding a new logo should be quick and simple.
3.4
One­shot object detection model
The solution explores in this thesis is one­shot learning. Traditional object detection algo­
rithms require training on a very large dataset to localize and categorize objects. On the
contrary, one­shot learning model needs only a few training samples to learn information
about object categories. In other words, with only few examples of the object, one­shot
object detector is able to detect this object in the wild. The solution answers the issue of
adding a new logo detection: no need to collect images and no need to retrain the model
from scratch.
In this section, some one­shot object detection models are detailed.
A deep One­Shot Network for query­based Logo Retrieval
The first one­shot learning model is presented in [36]. A query logo is given to the model,
the model searches for this logo within a target image and predicts the location of the
logo. The following figure shows the example of the adidas logo
Figure 3.18: Example of detection [36]
The method used is based on a binary segmentation mask. Here is the architecture of
the model:
Figure 3.19: Illustration of Query­based logo detection model [36]
The model consists of a conditional branch and a segmentation branch. The conditional
branch gives a latent representation also called feature map of the query logo through a
convolutional network. The segmentation branch is designed with the encoder­decoder
architecture of the U­net model. The encoder applies five down samplings to a bottleneck
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
22
==PAGE:29==
to give a latent image representation. The decoder combines the feature and spatial
information through a sequence of up­convolutions and concatenations features from the
corresponding layers of the encoder.
The query logo feature maps and the encoder outputs are matched using simple concate­
nation operation followed by a 1 × 1 convolution layer. This aggregation is performed at
each layer of the encoder, it corresponds to a matching at different scales. This archi­
tecture allows multi­scale detection. The output is a predicted mask as seen in the figure
3.18, The final binary segmentation mask is obtained by using a threshold of 0.5 on the
predicted mask.
The model is trained on the flickrlogo32 dataset [37]. It contains 8240 annotated images
of 32 logo classes, 20 logos are used for training, 12 for testing. The mAP of 66.8 is not
so good with the one­shot settings (unseen classes detection). The analysis of prediction
highlights the model has difficulties to detect rotated logos, this is a strong limitation.
One­Shot Object Detection with Co­Attention and Co­Excitation (CoAE)
The One­Shot Object Detection with Co­Attention and Co­Excitation model (CoAE) [38]
adresses the issue of one­shot detection two­stage detector based on Faster R­CNN.
CoAE takes as inputs the query image with the object we want to detect and the target
image. The architecture is presented in the following figure:
Figure 3.20: The overall architecture of the CoAE model [38]
First, a siamese Resnet50 network computes the feature maps of the two images.
A siamese network [39] contains two identical subnetworks. In the CoAE model, these
two networks are two ResNet50 feature extractors sharing the same parameters and the
same weights. The interest is that the computed features for the two images are compa­
rable. Siamese network are usualy used to find similarities between the two inputs. The
output of the siamese network is two comparable feature maps ϕ(I), ϕ(p). The model
then computes the extended feature maps F(I), and F(p). F(I) comprises not only image
features from the target image but also the weighted (attended) features between I and
the query patch p (co­attention). The authors also develop the squeeze­and­co­excitation
(SCE) technique which aims to simultaneously emphasize the feature playing crucial roles
in evaluating similarity measures [38]. Then, a non local region proposal network (RPN)
generates object proposals in the target image.
The idea of co­attention and co­excitation is that the RPN based on the extended features
would also learn to explore more information from the query image. The generated region
proposals are not generalised object proposals but are more focused on the regions of
both the target’s and query’s interest.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
23
==PAGE:30==
The following figure 3.21 gives an example, the used RPN corresponds to the image on
the bottom, the usual RPN corresponds to the image in the middle.
Figure 3.21: Proposals are attracted on the correct targets [38]
Non­local RPN will tend to generate proposals focused on the bike thanks to co­attention
effect. A R­CNN outputs the bounding boxes.
The model is trained and tested on the train PASCAL Voc dataset [28]. The CoAE model
mAP on 68.2 mAP with the one­shot setting ( unseen classes). CoAE model is rotation
invariant and more robust than the query based Logo retrieval model. Time performance
is not studied in the revue.
One­shot one­stage model (OS2D
The OS2D model presented in [1] has been developed in 2020 by a collaboration be­
tween researchers from the National Research University Higher School of Economics in
Moscow, the IT Yandex and mirum.io companies.
OS2D is an one­stage system that performs jointly localization and recognition, allowing
end­to­end training. It is constituted by two ResNet50 networks in a siamese way, which
will extract feature maps of the input and logo image. Then an alignment network will
match the logo on the image (the technique details will be explained in the next chapter).
An innovative point of the one­shot detection model is detection and recognition are per­
formed jointly in a one­stage way. Two­stage model detection like faster­RCNN consists
of two steps: the region proposal network (RPN) which generates bounding boxes and the
detection network which classifies the bounding box. One­stage models like the OS2D
architecture or YOLO use only RPN­like networks. One­stage model doesn’t compute
the detections of general objects. This specificity implies faster detection, and a better
generalisation to unseen classes, this is a very promising answer to the constraints of our
problem. A bad point of the one­stage system is accuracy metrics are often a bit lower.
The matching of the logo on the natural scene image is based on the alignment network
[40, 41]. This network computes correspondences based on local image features aligning
the objects of the same category.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
24
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.22: Example of feature matching [41]
The alignment network covers affine transformations (translation, shearing, rotation, rescal­
ing), which is an advantage compared to the query­based logo retrieval network.
The revue presents the model trained and tested on the retail products Grozi­3.2k dataset
[42]. Here is an example of retail detection:
Figure 3.23: Retail product detection example [1]
The OS2D achieves a performance of 71.8 mAP on the test set, with unseen classes.
The revue [1] uses several baselines including the CoAE model (57.2 mAP) and con­
cludes OS2D outperforms the current one­shot detection models. Time performance is
not studied in the revue.
The choice of the one­shot model
The one­shot learning allows the detection of new objects, without retraining. We have
presented three one­shot models. The query based Logo retrieval seems to give the poor­
est results. The mAP is the lowest, and rotated objects are difficulty detected. The OS2D
and the CoAE are both promising, but the comparison realised in [1] tends to conclude
that OS2D outperforms CoAE. Another strength of OS2D is the one­stage architecture,
this could accelerate the inference.
3.5
Summary
The study of literature allowed to better understand the available tools for object detec­
tions. It also gave us promising models for answering our requirements. The one­shot
learning models allow the detection of new objects without retraining and address the lack
of data on the new objects. This thesis focuses on the OS2D solution, the model will be
trained and tested on a logo dataset, and modified according to our needs.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
25
==PAGE:32==
4
One­shot one­stage model for logo
detection
The state­of­the­art provides an overview of techniques for logo detection. Based on this
work, we have decided in this thesis to apply the OS2D model [1] to our logo detection
problem. This chapter details the key components of OS2D, and the application to logo
detection.
4.1
OS2D model presentation
4.1.1
List of variables
Symbol
Description
A
input image
C
class image
{f}
feature map
h
image height
w
image width
d
feature map depth
p
resized logo feature map height
q
resized logo feature map width
T
TransformNet
c
4D correlation tensor
˜c
3D correlation tensor
{pk,l}
parameters of a transformation at (k,l) location
K
number of degrees of freedom of the transformation
H
function representing the regression CNN
g
tensor of the applications of transformations to the grid sample
s
recognition score
4.1.2
OS2D architecture
This section describes the OS2D model. The model takes as input logo or class images,
and input images. It predicts bounding boxes which are rectangles surrounding the pre­
dicted classes on the input images. The following model explication will consider the case
of the detection of only one logo in only one input image, but the model could be general­
ized using logo image batches and input image batches. The main idea behind OS2D is
to use correlation of feature maps between logo and input or target image, and apply an
alignment network [40, 41] on top of it.
The OS2D model consists of four steps (Figure 4.1):
1. compute feature maps for both input and class images using a backbone network
2. calculate the correlation between the two feature maps
3. aligned spatially the features using the TransformNet network
4. compute the localization bounding boxes and recognition scores
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
26
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.1: OS2D model [1]
The bounding box outputs are tensors, each bounding box contains the coordinates of the
rectangle surrounding the predicted class on the input image represented with rectangle
coordinates (xmin, xmax, ymin, ymax). Each bounding box also contains recognition score
which evaluates the probability that the class (logo) is present in this bounding box. The
next points detail the four the steps of the model.
4.1.3
Feature extraction
OS2D takes as input an RGB image A and a RGB class image C (image of the logo).
The feature extractor calculates the two feature maps in a siamese way. The logo feature
map (f.m.) writes {fC
pq} ∈RhC×wC×d, p ∈J0, hCK, l ∈J0, wCK, and the input image f.m.
{fA
kl}, ∈RhA×wA×d, p ∈J0, hCK, l ∈J0, wCK, where h, w and d is height, width and depth of
the feature map, respectively. d is fixed to 1000. w and h depend linearly on the sizes of
the images.
[1] uses Resnet50 or Resnet101 as backbone architecture. As explained in the chapter of
the state of the art, the ResNet architecture is a very good feature extractor because it is
efficient and allows to stack multiple convolutional layers while continuing to learn deeper
features. The last average pooling layer and the fully connected layer enable to output
the class probabilities. The model only expects to use the feature map, so the average
pooling layer and the fully connected layer are removed form the ResNet.
One of the input of the TransformNet T [40, 41] requires to be of fixed size hT × wT with
hT = 16, and wT = 16. It is recommended to resize the logo map so that the output of the
feature extractor matchs the dimension. It corresponds to a logo resized to 240 × 240 × 3,
and a logo feature map {fT
pq} ∈RhT ×wT ×d. These dimensions won’t change in this thesis.
The resizing is performed with the differentiable linear resampling detailed in [43].
4.1.4
Feature matching
Feature map correlation
Once feature maps are calculated, the model will make the logo feature map and the im­
age feature map match to detect the logo. OS2D exploits the alignment method described
by Rocco et al. [40] . It first computes the 4D correlation tensor between {fT
pq} and {fA
kl}.
c[k, l, p, q] = < fA
kl, fT
pq >
||fA
kl||2||fTpq||2
c ∈RhA×wA×hT ×wT
The correlation tensor c is then reshaped in a 3D tensor ˜c ∈RhA×wA×(hT .wT ) to apply
TransformNet.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
27
==PAGE:34==
TransformNet
Given the correlation tensor, the next step consists of estimating the parameters {pk,l},
k ∈J0, hAK, l ∈J0, wAK, of the geometric transformation {Tpk,l} warping the input image
map to the logo feature map for each localization of the input image feature map (k, l).
The model starts by computing the inverse transformation, the geometric transformations
{Tpk,l} warping the input image feature map to the logo feature map as described in [40,
41] for each localisation in the input image f.m.
Tpk,l : R2 −→: R2
Tpk,l : (uA, vA) = Tpk,l(uT , vT )
(uA, vA) are the coordinates in the input image f.m.
(uT , vT ) are the coordinates in the logo f.m.
The transformations {Tpk,l} are chosen to be affine because affine transformation covers
several transformations (translation, shearing, rotation, rescaling) with a restricted param­
eter number. Each affine transformation has 6 parameters.
These parameters are calculated by a geometric transformation regression CNN called
transformNet. The regression CNN consists of two blocks of convolutional layers (Figure
4.2), followed by the batch normalization and the ReLU, ends with a final fully connected
layer.
The idea is that correlation values of the correlation tensor is seen as matching scores
between a location of the input image f.m. and the logo image f.m. in the alignment net­
work. The convolutional layers keep the matches if they are coherent with other matches
in their neighborhood, so the aligned feature map keeps consistency [40].
Figure 4.2: Regression CNN architecture [40]
The function H represents the regression CNN:
H : ˜c ∈RhA×wA×(hT .wT ) −→RK
where K is the number of degrees of freedom of the transformation. K=6 for the affine
transformation.
We write p = P(˜c) the estimated parameters for all the transformations
The output of the regression CNN network is a tensor N’ of size hA × wA × K with K = 6
warping input image f.m. to logo image f.m.. We would like to do the opposite: warping
the logo image f.m. to the input image f.m. w.r.t. input image f.m. coordinates. Both can
not be simply inverted, the inversion is performed by a batch inversion of 3×3 matrices [1].
It gives a tensor N of size hA × wA × P with K = 6.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
28
==PAGE:35==
At each location (k, l) of the input image feature map, the tensor contains K transformation
parameters. The corresponding function Gkl transforms the logo f.m. to the input image
f.m. w.r.t. the coordinates (k,l) of the input image feature map.
Then a grid sampler is created of the size of the logo f.m. hT ×wT . All the Gkl transforma­
tions are applied to the points of the grid sampler. The outputs are stacked in one tensor
g ∈RhA×wA×hT ×wT ×2. The coordinates (g[k, l, p, q, 0], g[k, l, p, q, 1]) represent the output
of the transformation Gkl applied to the coordinates (p,q) of the class f.m. w.r.t. the input
feature map. In other words, the tensor g stores all the alignment transformations of the
image logo f.m. to the input image f.m. at each location of the input image f.m..
The method doesn’t use dummy anchor boxes as the fast­RCNN, it is based on feature
alignments on the grid sampler points at each (k,l) localizations. These points are called
anchor localizations, they are hA ×wA anchor localizations, which correspond to the hA ×
wA alignment transformations.
4.1.5
Score and location extraction
Now that the model has the potential class alignments on the input image, it needs to score
each transformation and determine if the alignments really correspond to a detection of
the class image. The scores will stored in a tensor s ∈RhA×wA×1. The idea is to resample
the correlation tensor c w.r.t. the transformation grid g.
˜s[k, l, p, q] = c[g[k, l, p, q, 0], g[k, l, p, q, 1]]
˜s ∈RhA×wA×hT ×wT
The sampling is computed by differentiable sampling described in [43]. The scores s are
finally obtained by average pooling on ˜s w.r.t to the 3rd and 4th dimensions related to
the class feature map coordinates. The result is a tensor s ∈RhA×wA×1 For a locations
(k, l) , a high average correlation s[k, l] of the input image feature corresponds to a high
score,i.e. a high probability to have the class at this location.
At a localization of the input feature map k,l, the localization of the corresponding detection
is detected by placing a bounding box around the transformation of the class coordinates
w.r.t. to the input image feature map coordinates. This is equivalent to take the maximum
and the minimum of grid tensor g w.r.t. the 3rd and 4th dimensions.
(xmink,l, ymink,l) = (p, q) so that g(k, l, p, q) = min(p∗,q∗)(g(k, l, p∗, q∗))
(xmaxk,l, ymaxk,l) = (p, q) so that g(k, l, p, q) = max(p∗,q∗)(g(k, l, p∗, q∗))
The outputs are hA × wA bounding box coordinates with the corresponding scores (one
box per anchor location). The threshold 0.5 is applied to the scores, selecting the positive
boxes.
4.1.6
Image pyramid representation
Very small objects and very big objects have very different sizes from the usual boxes, so
the regression CNN will have difficulties to align the feature maps. A solution is to process
multi­scale detection by using the image pyramid technique [44], allowing the detection of
images of different sizes. The image is submitted to repeated bilinear interpolation. Each
step creates a resized version of the image, it is equivalent to changing the resolution
of the image. The object size varies at each step with a number of anchor localizations,
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
29
==PAGE:36==
allowing multi­scale detection. A larger resizing densifies anchor localizations and allows
the detection of smaller objects. [1] suggests the scale [ 0.5 0.625 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6].
Figure 4.3: Image pyramid representtaion with the resizing factors 0.5 0.625 0.8 1 1.2 1.4
1.6
Image pyramid representation is not performed for training, only one scale is used for
training. Images are represented with the pyramid technique for the inference. During
the inference loop, the resized version of the image can’t be processed in the same input
image batch because of the different sizes, inference is processed separately. The model
computes the bounding boxes at each scale and then resizes and regroups the bounding
boxes at the original image scale.
This multi­scale detection will allow better precision and recall, but it will affect the time
performance. Different resizing factors will be tested in our experiments.
4.2
Training
4.2.1
Training batches
Training batches are composed by nbinput input images and nbclass class images. Class
images are collected from the input images annotations, nbneg class negative class are also
added. The number of images in batches is important for training, [1] uses 4 input images
and 15 classes with the negative classes. These low number of images by batches is
restricted by memory problem.
4.2.2
Target assignment
The localization anchors correspond to the position of in the input image f.m.. Each an­
chor corresponds a bounding box and a score for the logo detection. The objective func­
tion has to compare these predictions to the true annotated bounding boxes. For this
reason, the target assignment step assigns classification target (positive or negative) to
anchors from the annotations. The classification target will be compared with the score.
The second target is the localisation target, it corresponds to the target coordinates of the
bounding boxes. The localisation target is first determined for each anchor. If an anno­
tated bounding box and and a anchor box have a IoU over 0.5, the annotated bounding
box coordinates will be assigned as the localisation anchor target for the anchor. The
classification target is determined after the output localization is computed. An anchor
with boxes having an IoU over 0.8 is assigned positive and 0.4 for negative assignment.
This technique is called target remapping [1].
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
30
==PAGE:37==
4.2.3
Objective function
The training objective function is composed of a recognition loss and a localisation loss.
The recognition loss for one anchor is computed by the hinge­embedding loss with mar­
gins, implemented by the python library [45]. The score s is chosen as the similarity
measure scoring the alignment of the logo f.m. to the input image f.m.. for one anchor
localisation. s should be high for positive anchor localisation and low for negative anchor
localisation. Considering an anchor with the recognition score s, the hinge­embedding
loss for recognition writes:
lpos
rec(s) = max(mpos−s, 0),
lneg
rec (s) = max(s −mneg, 0),
• s ∈[−1, 1](high for positives and low for negative)
• mpos and mneg are the positive and negative margins,
It uses the marigins of [1] for training. mpos = 0.6 mneg = 0.5. If the bounding box cor­
responds to a positive (IoU > 0.5 with a bounding box annotated), lpos
rec(s) is computed. If
s > mpos then lpos
rec(s) = 0. If s < mpos, then lpos
rec(s) > 0, the prediction fails to get the
target, the loss increases. The model will be optimized so that the positive scores cor­
responding to good alignments converge to the positive margin and the negative scores
corresponding to bad alignments converge to the negative margin.The hinge­embedding
loss is very good for binary classification tasks because it forces a margin between posi­
tives and negatives.
The localization loss is computed only for the positive targets. It takes as input the pre­
dicted bounding box X and the target bounding box Y encoded with their four (xmin, xmax,
ymin, ymax) coordinates. Smooth L1 loss for localization writes:
lloc(X, Y ) =
4
∑
c=1
{ 1
2(Xc −Yc)2, if |Xc −Yc| < 1
|Xc −Yc| −1
2, otherwise
c runs through the (xmin, xmax, ymin, ymax) coordinates. Smooth L1­loss can be seen as a
mix between the L1­loss and the L2­loss. It combines the advantages of both losses. For
large values, gradients are steady and the magnitude of the gradient can be controlled.
As a consequence of this, Smooth L1­loss is more robust to outliers than L2. For small
values, smooth L1­loss has less oscillations than L1. The fact that the loss is smooth
leads to more stability.
The smooth L1­loss largely proved its efficiency in the anchor­based Faster­RCNN [30]
and the Fast­RCNN [29] in the problem of bounding box localization. Other loss functions
like IoU loss could also be promising loss functions for the model, the choice of the local­
ization loss is not discussed in this thesis. The localisation loss Lloc is calculated as the
average of localisation losses of all positive anchor positions i:
Lloc(X, Y ) =
1
npos
∑
i:ti=1
lloc(Xi, Yi)
{ti, Yi} are extracted from the annotation as described before. i ti = 1 designates all
positive anchor positions. {si, Xi} are network outputs.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
31
==PAGE:38==
The recognition loss over the anchors is computed by the ranked list loss (RLL) [46]:
LRLL
rec
=
∑
i:ti=1
lpos
rec(si)
˜npos
+
∑
i:ti=0
wneg
i
lneg
rec (si)
with,
wneg
i
∝exp(Tlrec(si, 0))[lneg
rec (si) > 0]
• ˜npos is the number of positive such that lpos
rec(si) > 0.
• ∝means proportional
• the constant T controls how peaky the weights are. The choice of T is the same as
[1]
• ∑
i:ti=0 wneg
i
= 1
In the case where there is several images and logos in the batches, the weights wi
neg are
normalized d in such a way that they sum to 1 over all the negatives for each image­logo
pair. The weights optimize the importance of the negative anchor examples. Negatives
are better exploited. RLL is more detailed in [46].
The main loss combines the localisation loss and the recognition loss:
Loss = LRLL
rec
+ wloc × Lloc
weightloc controls the balance between the both losses, it is fixed to 0.2 in [1].
4.2.4
Pre­trained model
The OS2D contains two networks with trainable parameters, the ResNet and the trans­
formNet. They are initialised from the pre­trained nets as advised in [1]. Transfer learning
from similar problems will save training time and improve the efficiency as well as the
accuracy.
ResNet initialisation
The Pytorch library [47] proposes implementation of pre­trained ResNets. The ResNets
are trained on the classification problem proposed by the ImageNet dataset [25]. In [48],
it appears that the ResNets trained on the image retrieval problem presented by Filip
Radenovic [48] obtain better results for our model. Thus, the weigths of ResNets will be
used.
TransformNet initialisation
The layers of TransformNet are initialized with the network weights presented in [41]. This
initialisation appears to be compatible with the OS2D architecture and the ResNet50 and
the ResNet101 feature extractiors [1].
4.3
Data
4.3.1
QMUL­OpenLogo benchmark
The QMUL­OpenLogo benchmark [2] was built by aggregating and refining 7 existing
datasets, it was built in 2018 by researchers from the Queen Mary University of London.
It contains 27,083 images from 352 logo classes. Images contain logos in natural scene.
For each image, a list of logo locations are encoded in a xml file in the form of bounding
boxes. All the annotations have been defined manually by framing the logos.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
32
==PAGE:39==
(a) QMUL­openlogo logo example
(b) QMUL­openlogo image example
Figure 4.4: QMUL­openlogo [2]
It was built by aggregating and refining 7 existing datasets. Here is a description of the
QMUL­OpenLogo dataset.
Dataset
Logos
Images
min­max (mean)
Instances / Class
min­max (mean)
Scale (%)
FlickrLogos­27
27
810
35­213 (80.52)
0.0160­100.0 (19.56)
FlickrLogos­32
32
2,240
73­204 (106.38)
0.0200­99.09 (9,16)
Logo32plus
32
7,830
132­576(338.06)
0.0190­100.0 (4.51)
BelgaLogos
37
1,321
18­204 (40.63)
0.0180­99.67 (7.69) (4.51)
WebLogo­2M
194
4,318
1­1080 (23.49)
0.0007­95.91 (1.80) (4.51)
Logo­In­The­Wild
1196
9,393
1­1080 (23.49)
0.0007­95.91 (1.80)
SportsLogo
20
1,978
108­292 (152.25)
0.0100­99.41 (9.89)
QMUL­OpenLogo
352
1,978
10­1,902 (88.25)
0.0014­100.0 (6.09)
Table 4.1: Statistics of logo detection datasets used for constructing the QMUL­OpenLogo
benchmark. Scale is the ratio of the logo instance area to the whole image area
This dataset was chosen for different reasons.
In the paper [1], the dataset used contains a large number of classes, it helps with logo
generalization. The FlickrLogos dataset doesn’t contain enough different classes for our
case. The QMUL­OpenLogo benchmark has three characteristics:
• a large number a highly imbalanced logo frequency distribution
• significant logo scale variation
• rich scene context
These factors are essential for creating a benchmark entailing the true performance test
of logo detection algorithms in real­world large scale deployments.
4.3.2
Negative images from Flickrlogo47 dataset
The logo dataset Flickrlogo47 [37] contains photos showing brand logos. Flickrlogo47
also contains a category called ”no logo” with 4000 negatives images. These images
which don’t contain any logo will be useful for evaluating and testing the model.
4.3.3
QMUL­OpenLogo dataset organisation
The disavantage of the QMUL­OpenLogo dataset for our problem is that there is no ref­
erence image for the logo. It is not adapted to one shot learning, the dataset is only
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
33
==PAGE:40==
composed of the natural scene images with annotations. This is also the case for the
other logo datasets. The first idea to address the lack of image logo references is to crop
an image such that the logo mekes the entire image as shown in figure 4.5. The image is
then removed from the dataset.
Figure 4.5: Logo reference with cropping
This technique is automated for all logos. The issue is that logos are extracted from
image in natural scene, the logo can be deformed (Figure 4.5) or partially hidden. In
consequence, all the training and the evaluation can be biased by the low quality logo
reference. Instead, we extracted all the logo references directly from the internet. Here
is an example for Medibank logo.
Figure 4.6: Logo medibank
4.3.4
Data split
The QMUL­OpenLogo dataset is randomly split into three parts. Each part contains ex­
clusively their own logo classes. The independence of the splits is necessary to not bias
the validation and test results.
Training data
The training data is used to build the OS2D model and learn the weights of the neural
network. It will be used multiple times for the different models decribed in the next section.
It contains 312 classes of logo and 19587 images. This training part is large, the variety
of classes highly improves the generalizability of the model.
Validation data
The validation set is exploited for model selection and parameter tuning. The tunned
parameters will be described in the next sections. Different combinations of parameters
are tested for relevant metrics on the validation data. The best combination of parameters
is selected. The validation set contains 20 logos of 20 images, i.e. 400 images. 1600
negative images from the flickrlogo47 dataset [37] are also added, 80 per logos. The ratio
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
34
==PAGE:41==
of one positive image to four negative images reflects the distribution of positive images
among the retrieved images in social medias (18%).
Testing data
The best model with parameters chosen in the validation phase is evaluated on the test
set. Validation and testing have to be independent, parameter tuning and model selection
don’t look the testing data to prevent overfitting and a biased evaluation. The test set also
contains 20 logos of 20 images and 1600 negative images from the flickrlogo47 dataset
[37], 80 per logos.
Both testing is split again. 10 images per logos and 40 negative images will dedicated to
threshold tuning. 10 images per logos and 40 negative images will dedicated to evaluation
metrics.
4.3.5
Data augmentation
Data augmentation increases the amount of seen data during the training phase. The
model performs a version of the random crop and scale data augmentation. The images
contained in the training batch are cropped with a random scale and a random location.
Other data augmentation techniques failed in [1]. This random crop and scale data aug­
mentation helps reduce overfitting and detect objects of different sizes.
4.4
Implementation
The code of the OS2D model is based on the implementation available on github [49].
4.4.1
Programming tools
The implementation is coded in Python 3.8. Python is the most used programming lan­
guage in AI thanks to its flexibility, its great readability, and the huge number of available
libraries.
The project exploits the Pytorch machine learning framework(version 1.4). Pytorch is
a free and open­source software and provides high level tools for deep learning. This
framework is also very interesting for deploying to production because there exists serv­
ing PyTorch models like Torchserve [50] that ease the deployment. The Torchvision
(version 0.5) provides the ResNet models.
The project has been developed with the integrated development environment (IDE) Py­
charm, designed particularly for the Python language. It provides code analysis, a debug­
ger, an integrated unit tester.
Git manages the different versions of the code.
4.4.2
Code refactoring
Data preparation
The code provided by [49] deals with the Grozi­3.2K dataset. First step was to readapt the
code to the QMUL­OpenLogo dataset. Grozi­3.2K annotations are stored in a CSV file,
the code is now adapted to the QMUL­OpenLogo and the xml annotation files . Bounding
boxes are also normalized with respect to the image dimensions.
Inference process
There is no inference process performing image pyramid representation in the code [49].
I implemented the inference loop to match the data organisation. In a separate github
branch, the code has been cleaned to only keep the code related to inference. Training
and evaluation codes are removed to keep a version which will be deployed in production.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
35
==PAGE:42==
The inference process now includes the image pyramid representation, which performs
box and image resizing with bilinear interpolation, and final bounding boxes grouping.
Image vizualisation
An independant code for image vizualization based on the code [49] is implemented, it
will help to analyze the results for the users. Image vizualisation is managed with the PIL
image library, and includes the predicted bounding boxes on the images.
Model deployment
The OS2D model and new designed models have been deployed to production [51]. A
rest API for model inference has been implemented, we use flask and we deloyed via
kubernetes. Flask is a web application framework. Kubernetes [52] is an open­source
container­orchestration system for automating computer application deployment. The re­
sults of deployment to production is not detailed in this thesis.
4.4.3
Devices
Training and tests on GPU are performed on Nvidia RTX 2080 Ti with 11GB memory.
Tests on CPU are performed on 6 CPU cores Intel i7_10750H.
4.5
Application on logo dataset
4.5.1
Training
The training parameters are the same as [1]. , The optimizer is the stochastic gradient
descent (SGD) optimizer with the learning rate η of 10−4, the weight decay of 10−4 and
the momentum α of 0.9. The momentum tends to keep optimizing in the same direction,
preventing oscillations.
The following equation describes the nth update of the parameter w.
∆wn+1 = η∇wL(W, X, y) + α∆wn
wn+1 = wn −∆wn+1
∇wL(W, X, y) is the gradient if the loss function for the input X and the annotation y. The
model is trained on 150 000 batch iterations, the learning rate decreases by a factor of 10
after 100k. It allows to further refine the network parameters
The model is trained with input image batch of sizes 4, logo batch of size 15 like in [1]. The
logo batch includes the logo which are present in the input images, the rest of logos are
negative logos. The training lasts 26 hours. The following figure shows the loss evolution
on the test during the training of the OS2Dmodel with the ResNet50 backbone.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
36
==PAGE:43==
Figure 4.7: Loss during the training of the OS2D model
In the first iterations, the main loss is high, the predicted bounding boxes don’t match with
the annotations. The loss stagnates after 120k iterations but it doesn’t increase, there is
no overfitting on the train data. This is probably due to data augmentation.
4.5.2
Analysis
Analysis
The model with the ResNet50 backbone is tested on the test set of 20 classes on 10
positive images. 800 negatives images are added to the dataset, it corresponds to 40
negative images for each logo. The image are resized
√
(h × w) = 1480, this value is
chosen so that no factor resizing allow detection of objects in the QMULOpenLogo mean
scale.
Parameters are the same as those in [1]. Image pyramid technique is used with scales
[0.5, 0.625, 0.8, 1, 1.2, 1.4, 1.6]. The threshold score for a positive prediction is 0.5.
For each label or logo, performance is calculated on the 10 positive images and for 40
negative images. Metrics are then average on the 20 test labels.
Model evaluation
The results are presented in the following table:
Backbone
Scale
Precision
Recall
f0.5score
Resnet50
[0.5, 0.625, 0.8,
1, 1.2 , 1.4, 1.6]
0.813
0,615
0,728
More detailed results will be presented in the section 6.3.4. The precision of 0.813 is
correct but it point could be improved. The recall of 0.6 is not great but it is satisfying for
our problem. We have to keep in mind that the dataset is challenging. Some logos in the
image are very hard to see even with human eyes. Next chapter will suggest techniques
to improve the detection.
Here is an example of detection:
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.8: Example of detection
The Digiming logo bounding box has a threshold above 0.5 and is considered as positive.
Time performance
Time performance is a key point in this thesis. The following table gives latency for infer­
ence on CPU and GPU.
Device
average latency (s)
Standard deviation (s)
CPU
35.22
2.27
GPU
1.09
0.10
The inference takes 35.22 seconds on average on CPU. This inference time is too long
and doesn’t respect the requirements. On the contrary, the latency on GPU is more ac­
ceptable, but it is considered that GPU is not available for inference. This thesis will
propose techniques to address this low time performance. The first step is to analyse the
causes of the latency.
The following pies (Figure 4.9) highlight the time taken by the different tasks of the model
for the detection of one logo at scale 1.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
38
==PAGE:45==
(a) Inference time distribution on CPU
(b) Inference time distribution on GPU
Figure 4.9: Inference time distribution
It clearly appears that the feature extraction on the input images is the main cause of the
low time performance on CPU, it represents 84.8% of the inference time. The difference
between logo image feature extraction and input image feature extraction is explained by
the difference of the image sizes: the logo image is resized to 240 × 240, while the input
image is resized so that
√
h × w = 1480. A larger size implies a quadratic increase in the
input values, and a quadratic increase in ResNet operation numbers.
The following figure 4.10 represents latency for different input image scales, it also high­
lights the quadratic increasing time costs of feature extraction with input image resizing.
Figure 4.10: Inference time for different scale
We deduce from these observations that the image pyramid technique significantly affects
the time performance. The choice of scales is crucial to control time performance.
4.6
Summary
The OS2D is an interesting model, the one­shot learning technique allows simplified new
logo detection. The evaluation of the model on the test set gives satisfying results, but
time performance is too poor. The next chapter will propose solutions to improve inference
time while keeping good evaluation metrics.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
39
==PAGE:46==
5
Improvements of the One­shot
one­stage model for logo detection
The analysis of the OS2D model on CPU has highlighted very low time performance
and performance metrics which could be improved. This chapter proposes solutions to
improve the model and describes the implementations.
5.1
Analysis of OS2D for logo detection
5.2
Fast feature extractor
The main reason for high inference time is the feature extraction of images. The idea
developed in this section is to change the feature extraction network to a more efficient
one. Logos are often less detailed than objects which could be detected by the model.
Retail products objects often contain more details than logos and seem more difficult to
detect and classify. Intuitively, a shadow feature maps coming from a smaller backbone
could also detect logos. In other words, performing the feature map extraction on a smaller
network could not affect the performance too much.
Anton Osokin, one of the author of the revue [1] was consulted on this subject, they
agreeded on this intuition. Changing the backbone is definitively a good way to tackle
inference time. But they also warned that features extracted from other backbones could
be incompatible with the rest of the model and the TransformNet. The only way to verify
is to test.
5.2.1
ResNet18 and ResNet34
[1] exploits ResNet50 and ResNet101 as feature extractors. Using simpler version of
the same architecture would probably have more chances to be compatible with the rest
of the OS2D model than other backbone architectures. ResNet18 and ResNet34 have
less layers and floating points operations, the table comparison provided by [22] evokes
ResNet18 as a very good option as backbone for fast detection problem. These simpler
backbones are good candidates.
If all the ResNets are based on skip connection, the architecture is slighty different be­
tween Resnet18 and ResNet34 and other ResNets with more layers.
ResNet50 and
resnet101 use bottleneck residual block. It consists in three convolutional layers 1×1,
3×3, 1×1 layers stacked one over the other. The 1×1 convolution layers deals with di­
mensions reducing. The 3×3 layer is used as a bottleneck. These bottleneck residual
blocks reduce computation time for ResNet with large number of layers. ResNet18 and
ResNet34 utilize classic residual blocks composed by two 3×3 convolutional layers. The
skip connection jumps over two layers instead of three.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
40
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.1: Residual block (left) Bottleneck residual block (right)
Here is a table listing the ResNet architectures.
Figure 5.2: ResNet architectures [47]
ResNet18 has significatively less total FLOPs than ResNet34 and ResNet50. ResNet34
and ResNet compute comparable total FLOPs (3.6 billion FLOPs and 3.8 billion FLOPs)
but [22] note that ResNet34 is more efficient (39.88 ms for an inference) than ResNet50
(53.09 ms). Both ResNet18 and ResNet34 could decrease inference time and represent
valid candidates.
5.2.2
Implementation
ResNet18 and ResNet34 code come from the Pytorch implementation [47]. The average
pooling layer and the fully connected layers are removed to obtain the feature maps. The
backbones are joined to the OS2D model in the Siamese way, the logo feature map and
the input image map are extracted with the same backbone, using unique weights.
Pre­trained model
Resnet50 and ResNet101 are initialized with weights from models trained on the image
retrieval problem presented by Filip Radenovic [39]. However, ResNet18 and ResNet34
were not tested on this problem. Instead, weights are initialized from the models pro­
posed by the Pytorch library [37]. The ResNets are trained on the classification problem
proposed by the ImageNet dataset [38]. Similarly to the last chapter, the layers of Trans­
formNet are initialized with the network weights presented in [40].
Training
The recognition loss function and the L1 Smooth loss function described in the last chapter
are reused; the size of positive input image batch is 6, the size of logo batch is 15. The
logo batch includes the logos which are present in the input images. Batch size is limited
by the available memory on GPU.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
41
==PAGE:48==
The following figure shows the loss evolution on the test during the training of the model
with the ResNet18 backbone.
Figure 5.3: Losses during the training of the model with ResNet18
In the first iterations, the main loss is high, the predicted bounding boxes don’t match
with the annotations. The loss decreases and then stagnates after 135k iterations but it
doesn’t increase.
We attempted to connect the MobileNetv1 backbone architecture to the OS2D without
success. Maybe MobileNet architecture is not compatible with the rest of the model. An
in­depth study of MobileNet architecture to adapt the model and a complete retraining of
the TransforNet could fix the issue. In this thesis, we decided to focus on the ResNet
architecture.
5.3
Label Feature map optimisation
Store the label feature map
The model computes input image feature map and and logo feature map at each infer­
ence. Some logos often are tested multiple times, the clients of the Digimind company
have only two or three different logos which they test on thousands of images on social
medias. The OS2D model recomputes repeatedly the logo feature maps. The figure 4.9
shows that logo feature extraction represents 4.8% and 0.3s of time latency of the in­
ference at the scale 1, but an optimisation is relevant for our case. We implemented a
functionality storing the logo feature map tensor the first time the logo is seen. The tensor
is saved thanks to the ”save” Pytorch function and loaded with ”load” function. A csv file
lists the logos already seen .
This optimisation avoids useless calculation, saves 0.2 seconds on inference and doesn’t
affect the prediction quality. The improvement is retained for the rest of this thesis.
5.4
Scale optimisation
Multi­scaling detection is allowed by the pyramid image representation of images. But the
last chapter highlights that the images resized to larger sizes significantly slow down the
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
42
==PAGE:49==
inference. Using the scales proposed in [1] on CPU is not compatible with the require­
ments. Removing scales or decreasing the resizing factors are a solution to cut down
inference time. On the other hand, the resized images to larger sizes allows detection
of small object in the images. Decreasing the resizing factors will decrease the model
performance. A balance between time performance and the accuracy metrics has to be
found. This balance has to be determined with respect to the requirements described in
the chapter two. The next chapter will use K­fold cross validation on the validation set to
optimize the scaling parameter.
The initial scales are [0.5, 0.625, 0.8 , 1 , 1.2 , 1.4 , 1.6]. The scale 1.6 affects too much
inference time and will be ignored, while the small scale 0.5 doesn’t affect too much the
time and will be conserved. The K­fold cross validation will also evaluate scales with wider
gaps to decrease the number of resized images. The following scales will be tested:
• [0.4, 0.7, 1, 1.4]
• [0.5, 0.9, 1.3]
• [0.4, 1]
5.5
Methods to calculate the thresholds
5.5.1
The need for different thresholds
The role of the threshold on bounding box scores is to determine whether the bounding
box will be considered positive or negative. If one bounding box has a score above the
threshold, the image will be considered positive. A key­point is to find the best thresh­
old which will make the fewest classification mistakes. A good threshold segregates the
negative bounding box score and the positive bounding box scores. Ideally, the threshold
should be fixed above the maximum of negative scores, to consider them as negative,
and below the minimum of the positive scores. An issue is that the range of negative and
positive scores can overlap.
The analysis of the scores given by the OS2D model with ResNet50 highlights an interest­
ing trend concerning label scores (figure 5.4). The average positive and negative scores
are computed for six logos, for 10 positive images and 40 negative images per logo. Pos­
itive and negative predicted bounding boxes are assigned according to the IoU metric. If
a predicted bounding box and an annotation bounding box in the same image has a IoU
over 0.5, the bounding box is assigned positive.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure 5.4: Average positive and negative scores for 6 labels
As expected, the average negative scores are under the positive scores. The figure also
shows the average positive and negative scores are different for each logo. A fixed thresh­
old for all logo will have difficulties to divide the negative score of the logo ”blackmores”
and the positive scores of the ”medibank” logo. In the section, this thesis suggests meth­
ods to custom thresholds to each logo and improve the performance. Customization of
the thresholds will be done when adding a new logo detection, the logo threshold will not
be recomputed during the inference.
5.5.2
Few image annotations
We would like to estimate a good threshold for each logo, which separates positive and
negative scores at best. For that, some information about negative scores and positive
scores for each logo is required. The negative scores can be obtained by performing the
logo detection on the negative images. The output bounding box scores correspond to
the negative scores. The highest negative bounding box score for each image is stored
in a list. The figure 5.5 displays the five highest predicted negative scores, the retained
negative score is 0.4924. The model outputs dozens of negative bounding boxes per
images. We only keep the highest one because a threshold correctly categorizing the
highest negative threshold will also correctly categorize the other negative scores.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
44
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.5: Example of negative score retrieval
The positive scores are more problematic because there are no positive input images for
this logos available at this step. The future users of the detection service employed in
Digimind have been consulted on the issue, the solution which came out is some positive
images can be utilized when the possibility of a new logo detection is added.
The user extracts 10 tuning positive images and the reference from the web, annotates the
positive bounding boxes and transmits the data to the algorithm performing the threshold
calculation. An interface was implemented during this thesis. The user has to upload the
images and annotate the bounding boxes for logos on the images.
Once the data has been transmitted, the positive scores need to be retrieved from the
images. OS2D detection is executed on the above 10 images, and outputs predicted
bounding boxes and scores. IoU metric between the annotated bounding boxes and the
predicted bounding boxes is performed, an IoU above 0.4 considers that the predicted
bounding boxes is a positive, the corresponding score is added to the positive score list.
Tests on the positive images has determined the IoU threshold of 0.4. The figure 5.6
shows an example. The yellow boxes are the predicted boxes, the green box is annotated
by the user for the ”bionade” logo.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure 5.6: Example of positive scores retrieval
IoU between the predicted box with the score 0.5037 and the annotated box is 0.489.
Therefore the score 0.5037 is added to the positive list.
We now have a set of positive scores and a set of highest negative scores for the new
logo. The threshold is determined based on these scores.
5.5.3
The different threshold calculation methods
Several methods to calculate the threshold from scores are suggested. The goal is to
separate the two sets at best.
Fixed threshold
Our baseline is the approach used in [1], the threshold is fixed to 0.5 for all logos. The
baseline will allow to measure the effects of custom threshold methods.
Mean based threshold
This simple approach consists of computing the mean of positive scores, and the mean of
the highest negative scores. The threshold will be the average of both values. The mean
of positive is supposed to be higher than the mean of negative scores., if it not the case,
the threshold is fixed to 0.5.
Max_Min threshold
A perfect threshold should above the maximum of negative scores and below the minimum
of positive scores. The maximum negative score and the minimum positive score are
retrieved, the Max_min threshold is the maximum of the two values. This choice limits the
number of false positives and favours the precision over the recall.
Fβ­score threshold
Fβ­score is a test accuracy calculated from recall and precision. Fβ­score is calculated
so that recall is considered β times as important as precision. The requirements inform
that precision is more important than recall. F.5­score is an adapted accuracy metric,
precision is considered two times as important as recall. The idea of the method is to
tune the threshold to optimize the F.5­score. The threshold that maximizes the F.5­score
is calculated using the fmin function of the scipy python library [53]. The fmin perfoms
the simplex algorithm to find the minimum of function. The computed value is retained
as logo threshold. The F1­score threshold method and the F0.25­score threshold are also
computed.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
46
==PAGE:53==
PDF_DIFF threshold
PDF_DIFF method is inspired from the gaussian naive bayes classifier classifying the
scores between the class N (negative) and the class P (positive). It is assumed that the
highest negative scores and the positive scores both follow a normal distribution (Gaus­
sian) and the number of positives and the number of highest negatives are supposed
identical. Priors πN and πP are fixed to 0.5. First, standard deviations σN, σP , and the
means µN ∈[0, 1], µP ∈[0, 1] are computed for the highest negative and positive scores.
The probability density functions are written as follows:
P(s|C = N) = N(s|µN, σ2
N) =
1
√
2πσ2
N
e
−(s−µN )2
2σ2
N
P(s|C = P) = N(s|µP σ2
P ) =
1
√
2πσ2
P
e
−(s−µP )2
2σ2
P
The score classifier using maximum a posteriori (MAP) writes:
Classifier(s) = argmaxC∈{P,N}πCP(s|C = c)
= argmaxC∈{P,N}P(s|C = c)
=
{ N if P(s|N) −P(s|P) ≥0
P if P(s|N) −P(s|P) < 0
Let’s diff(s) = P(s|N) −P(s|P).
We want to determine a unique value classifying
highest negative and positive scores.
In the very high majority of cases, µN < µP ,
P(µN|N) ≥P((µN|P) and P(µP |N) ≤P((µP |P). Highest negative scores are supposed
to be below the positive scores, these hypothesis are very probable. If these hypothesis
are not respected, the score sampling is of too low quality or poorly realised, the threshold
is fixed to 0.5.
Figure 5.7: Scheme of highest negative and positive distribution for the Cdf_diff method
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
47
==PAGE:54==
Assuming the hypothesis, in the interval [µN, µP ], P(s|N) decreases and P(s|P) increases
so diff(s) decreases. Moreover diff(µN) ≥0 and diff(µP ) ≤0. As a consequence,
there is an unique score t so that diff(t) = 0, this value will be our threshold separating
negative and positive values. The interval [0, µN] regroups the high majority of all the
negative scores, a potential score annulling diff in this interval is not to considered. A
value s < µN is considered negative. The density functions are computed using the
norm function of the scipy library [54] , the zero of the function is determined with the
optimize.brentq function [55]. It uses the classic Brent method to find a zero of the function
on a sign changing interval.
5.5.4
Few­shot learning
Methods calculating thresholds need positive and negative images for inference, the
model is not one­shot learning but few­shots learning. In the context of Digimind, an­
notating few images when adding a new logo doesn’t require too much time, the absence
of retraining and the implemented interface make the process very simple.
5.6
Logo image selection protocol
Some empirical tests showed the choice of the logo image is crucial, it can facilitate the
detection and improve the performance of the detection. A protocol has been written for
the logo selection. This section explains some key­points to improve the selection.
5.6.1
Choosing the logo
Sometimes there are different versions of the same logo. To support them all, the user
has to separately add all of them on the logo detection interface.
Figure 5.8: Example of adidas logos
In some cases, a part of a logo represents multiple versions. The registered logo image
should focus on this part.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
48
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.9: Example of nike logo
5.6.2
Focus on the logo
We notice that the logo image should be cropped as close as possible to the logo.
Figure 5.10: Example of incorrect logo image
Figure 5.11: Example of correct cropped logo
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
49
==PAGE:56==
The examples show that the recognition score is higher for the cropped logo image (0.6503
instead of 0.598). Indeed, the part of the logo image different from the logo is compared
anyway with the background in the input image. The cropping improves the quality of the
detection. The logo images added to the QMULopenlogo dataset are cropped following
this rule.
5.7
Summary
The suggested modifications aim to improve time performance and accuracy metrics. The
impacts of these changes are described in the following chapter.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
50
==PAGE:57==
6
Evaluation of the logo detection
algorithm
This thesis suggested improvements to cut down latency and increase the metric de­
tection. The next step is to test these improvements and design the best model and
parameters. This model is then evaluated on the independent test set and compared to
the current OCR­based detection. Results and the limitations are finally described and
analysed.
6.1
Model validation
The validation step or development phase evaluates the different models and parameters
to choose the best combinations, according to the criterias described in the requirements.
6.1.1
Validation dataset
The validation set extracted from the QMUL­OpenLogo dataset completed with logo ref­
erence images is composed of 20 logos, 20 positive images per logo and 80 negative
images per logo. All the images are resized to the (1480 × 1480) dimensions.The pos­
itive images contain various object scales in natural scene, some images can be very
challenging.
6.1.2
Performance Metrics
Different combinations of model parameters are tested on validation set, the choice of the
best parameter combination relies on evaluation metrics described in this section.
Evaluation metrics
The validation will compute precision, recall, F1­score, F0.5­score and F0.25­score met­
rics, these metrics are described in the first chapter. In the requirements, we explained
that precision is more important than recall in our case. Fβ is computed so that recall is
considered β times as important as precision, the fβ −scores can reflect the precision
importance. In our case, the f0.5­score means that precision is considered two times as
important as recall. This metric will be used to choose the best model on the validation
phase.
Time Performance Metrics
Time performance will be estimated by computing the average latency of the inferences
on the validation dataset. It will be calculated on the CPU of the computer. As described
in the chapter 2, the final model should be faster than the OCR­based algorithm. Models
with inference time over five seconds won’t be selected.
6.1.3
Model hyperparameters
The model hyperparameters tested are:
• The backbone architecture
• The image pyramid factors
• The threshold method
The following values are evaluated:
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
51
==PAGE:58==
Hyperparameter
Testedvalues
backbone
ResNet18
ResNet34
[0.4,1]
Scales
[0.5,0.9,1.3]
[0.4,0.7,1,1.4]
Fixed
Mean­based
Min­max
Threshold method
PDF­diff
F1score
F0.5score
F0.25score
In total, 2 × 3 × 7 = 42 hyperparameter combinations are tested.
6.1.4
Cross validation
The parameter selection and tuning is based on a variant of K­fold Cross validation. The
issue with our validation dataset is we can not tune the threshold method hyperparameters
on one logo and test the found threshold on another logo. The cross validation has to be
performed for each logo. The threshold method tunes a threshold for the logo based on
10 positive images for this logo, and tests it on negative images and on positive images
for this logo. The issue is only 20 positive images are available for each logo. Instead
of performing the usual K­fold cross validation, a variant adapted to the structure of our
validation set is performed for each hyperparameter combination:
• For each logo:
– For k in [0, K = 5]
1. Shuffle the 20 positive images, and the 80 negative images
2. Select 10 positive images, and the 40 negative images
3. Tune the threshold on these images
4. Compute inference for the remaining 10 positive images, and 40 negative
images
5. Compute the evaluation metrics from the outputs with the calculated thresh­
old
– Average the metrics on all the folds
• Average the metrics on all the logos
The main difference is the tests can be computed on the same images for different folds
for one image. This is compensated by the image shuffling which helps increase variability
and gives a more accurate estimate of model prediction performance than a simple test on
all the validation dataset. The hyperparameter combination with the best average metrics
on all the logos is selected.
6.2
Model testing
Once the model and its hyperparameters are selected, an evaluation on the independent
test set provides an unbiased estimation of the model performance. The OCR­based
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
52
==PAGE:59==
model and the original OS2D with ResNet50 are also tested on the same test set and
compared with our best model. Like the validation set, the test set extracted from the
QMUL­OpenLogo with reference logos is composed of 20 logos with 20 positive images
and 80 negative images per logo. Of which 10 positive images and 40 negative images
are dedicated to threshold tuning for each logo.
The following lines present the protocol evaluating a model on the test set:
• For each logo:
1. If a threshold method is used:
– Select the last 10 positive images, and the last 40 negative images
– Tune the threshold on these images
2. Compute inference for the first 10 positive images, and the first 40 negative
images
3. Compute the evaluation metrics from the outputs
• Average the metrics on all the logos
The model performance corresponds to the metrics averaged on all the logos.
6.3
Results
6.3.1
Cross­validation
Here is an extract of the cross­validation results with the most promising hyperparameter
combinations. The complete cross validation results are presented in the appendix A.
ResNet18
Parameters
Metrics
Scales
Threshold
Precision
Recall
F1score
F0.5score
F0.25score
Latency(s)
FIXED
0,665
0,715
0,645
0,65
0,534
[0.5,0.9,1.3]
MIN_MAX
0,846
0,625
0,71
0,766
0,829
4,02
PDF_DIF
0,767
0,665
0,697
0,732
0,742
FB0.5
0,82
0,645
0,69
0,749
0,755
FIXED
0,688
0,670
0,639
0,660
0,575
[0.4,0.7,1,1.4]
MAX_MIN
0,848
0,625
0,71
0,768
0,838
5.32
PDF_DIF
0,798
0,7
0,715
0,75
0,735
FB0.5
0,859
0,625
0,703
0,779
0,812
Table 6.1: Extract of the cross­validation results for the model with ResNet18 backbone
ResNet34
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
53
==PAGE:60==
Parameters
Metrics
Scales
Threshold
Precision
Recall
F1score
F0.5score
F0.25score
Latency(s)
FIXED
0,555
0,675
0,561
0,546
0,455
[0.4,1]
MAX_MIN
0,840
0,525
0,621
0,717
0,836
2.34
PDF_DIF
0,696
0,580
0,600
0,645
0,572
FB0.5
0,793
0,520
0,576
0,665
0,648
FIXED
0,469
0,780
0,537
0,487
0,369
[0.5,0.9,1.3]
MIN_MAX
0,855
0,630
0,706
0,779
0,861
5,77
PDF_DIF
0,768
0,660
0,682
0,724
0,679
FB0.5
0,809
0,610
0,656
0,725
0,684
Table 6.2: Extract of the cross­validation results for model with the ResNet34 backbone
The model with the following parameters (colored in blue in the table 6.1) gives the best results
according to our requirements.
Hyperparameter
Tested values
backbone
ResNet18
Scales
[0.5,0.9,1.3]
Threshold method
Min­max
Indeed, its latency is under 5 seconds and this hyperparameter combination corresponds to the
best F0.5­score. The model using these parameters is selected for testing.
6.3.2
Evaluation of our model
Evaluation metrics
The following table shows the evaluation of the chosen model on the test set. Metrics are pre­
sented for each logo of test set. The last line ”Macro” displays the average metrics which corre­
sponds to the model performance.
Parameters
Metrics
Logo
Threshold
Precision
Recall
F0.5
maxxis
0.5174
0.4
0.2
0.333
rolex
0.5068
0.4
0.2
0.333
colgate
0.5161
0.9
0.9
0.900
pepsi
0.5069
0.875
0.7
0.833
nivea
0.4852
1.0
0.4
0.769
prada
0.5034
1.0
0.5
0.833
bmw
0.4985
1.0
0.6
0.882
amazon
0.4945
0.9
0.9
0.900
l’oréal
0.4932
1.0
0.6
0.882
lego
0.4948
1.0
0.5
0.833
nescafe
0.5011
0.777
0.7
0.760
puma
0.5262
0.75
0.6
0.714
pampers
0.4951
1.0
0.8
0.952
subway
0.5277
1.0
0.8
0.952
mastercard
0.4869
0.8
0.8
0.800
heraldsun
0.5018
1.0
0.9
0.978
bionade
0.4990
0.909
1.0
0.925
McDonalds
0.5092
1.0
0.5
0.833
rittesport
0.4617
0.818
0.9
0.833
redbull
0.504
0.875
0.7
0.833
Macro
0.870
0.660
0.804
Table 6.3: Test results for the our model
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
54
==PAGE:61==
Time performance
Time performance on the test images is computed on CPU, the figure 6.1 highlights the
variation of inference time.
Device
Average
latency (s)
Standard
deviation (s))
CPU
4.196
0.113
GPU
0.32
0.05
Table 6.4: Time performance of our model
Figure 6.1: Latency distribution of the designed model on CPU
6.3.3
OCR­based model evaluation
The following table shows the evaluation of the current OCR­based solution on the test
set. ”N/A” values mean ”Not Applicable”, it corresponds to the case where the model didn’t
predict any positive values for the logo. Precision and F0.5score can not be calculated.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
55
==PAGE:62==
Evaluation metrics
Parameters
Metrics
Logo
Precision
Recall
F0.5score
maxxis
1,000
0,400
0,769
rolex
1,000
0,400
0,769
colgate
1,000
0,800
0,952
pepsi
1,000
0,000
0,000
nivea
1,000
1,000
1,000
prada
1,000
0,600
0,882
bmw
N/A
0,000
N/A
amazon
1,000
0,700
0,921
l’oréal
1,000
0,800
0,952
lego
N/A
0,000
N/A
nescafe
1,000
0,700
0,921
puma
1,000
0,100
0,357
pampers
1,000
0,400
0,769
subway
1,000
0,300
0,682
mastercard
1,000
0,600
0,882
heraldsun
1,000
1,000
1,000
bionade
N/A
0,000
N/A
McDonalds
N/A
0,000
N/A
rittesport
1,000
1,000
1,000
redbull
0,000
0,000
0,000
Macro
1
0,440
0,797
Table 6.5: Test results for the OCR­based model
Time performance
Device
Average latency (s)
Standard deviation (s)
CPU
6.088
2.192
Table 6.6: OCR­based time performance
Figure 6.2: Time performance of the OCR logo detection on CPU
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
56
==PAGE:63==
6.3.4
OS2D model evaluation
The following table shows the evaluation of the original OS2D model on the testset.
Evaluation metrics
Parameters
Metrics
Logo
Threshold
Precision
Recall
F0.5
maxxis
0,500
1,000
0,200
0,556
rolex
0,500
0,333
0,100
0,227
colgate
0,500
0,900
0,900
0,900
pepsi
0,500
0,286
0,800
0,328
nivea
0,500
0,714
0,500
0,658
prada
0,500
0,800
0,400
0,667
bmw
0,500
1,000
0,500
0,833
amazon
0,500
1,000
0,600
0,882
l’oréal
0,500
1,000
0,700
0,921
lego
0,500
1,000
0,600
0,882
nescafe
0,500
1,000
0,700
0,921
puma
0,500
0,346
0,900
0,395
pampers
0,500
1,000
1,000
1,000
subway
0,500
1,000
0,500
0,833
mastercard
0,500
1,000
0,900
0,978
heraldsun
0,500
0,889
0,800
0,870
bionade
0,500
1,000
0,400
0,769
McDonalds
0.5092
1.0
0.5
0.833
rittesport
0,500
1,000
0,700
0,921
redbull
0,500
0,667
0,600
0,652
Macro
0.500
0,813
0,615
0,728
Table 6.7: Test results for the original OS2D model
Time performance
Device
Average latency (s)
Standard deviation (s)
CPU
35.22
2.27
GPU
1.09
0.10
Table 6.8: OS2D model time performance
Figure 6.3: Latency distribution of the original OS2D on CPU
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
57
==PAGE:64==
6.3.5
Model comparison
Model
Precision
Recall
F0.5score
Latency
Our model
0.870
0.660
0.804
4.196
OCR­based model
1
0.440
0.797
6.088
OS2D model
0.813
0.615
0.2
35.220
Table 6.9: Model comparison
6.4
Discussion
6.4.1
Cross­validation
The tables 6.1 ,6.3 and the appendix B show model hyperpararameter combination tests,
the best combination is determined according to the described latency and f0.5score cri­
terias. The best combination hyperparameter is:
Hyperparameter
Tested values
backbone
ResNet18
Scales
[0.5,0.9,1.3]
Threshold method
Min­max
This section goes further in the analysis by focusing on each of these parameters
Method threshold
First, the cross validation tables (6.1, 6.2) highlight that the fixed threshold gives less
good results compared to all the custom threshold methods. If the recall seems slightly
better for the fixed method, the precision and the F0.5score are not satisfying. The custom
threshold methods are an improvement from this point of view.
In most of cases, the Min_Max threshold method gives the best metrics and the best
F0.5score (Table A.1 ,A.2). Min_Max reaches the best precisions, while keeping a cor­
rect recall. This result is surprising. Indeed, the F0.5 method selects the thresholds that
maximizes the F0.5score on the tuning images, we could expect it gives the best F0.5score
on the test images, this is only the case for one combination test. An hypothesis ex­
plaining this low performance is that only ten positive images allow to calculate the F0.5
tuned threshold for each logo. F0.5score is based on a statistical approach, the number
of tuning images is too low, the F0.5 tuned threshold is not precise enough. Likewise, the
PDF_DIFF gives poor results. This might be explained by the low number of positive and
the questionable hypothesis considering that positive and negative scores follow a normal
law.
Backbone comparison
ResNet34 has more layers and parameters than ResNet18, the features extracted should
be more detailed and relevant and the metrics should be improved. The cross­validation
tables (Tables A.1 ,A.2) shows that, for the same scales and threshold method, ResNet18
loses very little in performance compared to ResNet34, while being much more time­
performant. This observations agree with the conclusion of [22], which considers ResNet18
as the second best feature extractor for fast detection (>30 fps) (Figure A.2, Appendix A).
Scale comparison
The first scale [0.4,1] provides good precisions (0.805 for Resnet18 and Min_Max ) but
small recalls (Tables A.1 ,A.2). This observation makes sense, the scale [0.4,1] doesn’t
cover all the range of object sizes, and a substantial number of objects won’t be detected.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
58
==PAGE:65==
The bigger scale [0.4, 0.7, 1, 1.4] allows a more complete detection with correct recalls,
but the latency cost is significant on CPU (Table 6.1). (5.32 s for ResNet18 and 7,48
for ResNet34). The scale [0.5, 0.9,1.3] is a good compromise between performance and
latency.
6.4.2
Model comparison
Test results allow to compare our model to the baseline models and evaluate the effect of
our changes.
Comparison to the original OS2D model
Our model is eight times more efficient than the OS2D model on CPU (Table 6.9). The
re­scaling and the ResNet18 significantly reduced inference time. Moreover, our model
increased both precision and recall metrics. This is due to the custom threshold method.
Indeed, the model with the same parameters as our model but with a fixed threshold (as
the original OS2D model) has poor precision and recall (Table 6.1) compared to the origi­
nal model. Min_Max threshold method improves evaluation metrics, the disadvantage is
that 10 images need to be annotated to tune the logo threshold. The model is not entirely
one­shot like the original OS2D.
Comparison to the OCR­based model
Our model shows slightly better f0.5score than the OCR­based model (Table 6.9). How­
ever, the precision of the OCR model is perfect, 1. Indeed, the OCR model didn’t detect
false positive on the test because false positives are very rare, it would mean that the
model detects the text of a logo written in an image on the outside of the logo. Instead, the
recall is low (0.440). The table 6.5 highlights that some logos are not detected at all. This
is the case for Redbull logo where the typeface is not readable for the model. Likewise,
the recall for puma is very low because most of positive images don’t contain the word
”puma” but only the sign of puma. These undetectable logos are the main inconvenient
of the OCR based model, our model addresses the issue. There is no undetectable logos
on the test set (Table 6.3), but the performances of our model on logos with detectable
text are lower.
Our model is more efficient (Table 6.9) by 2.1s. Moreover, the figure 6.2 shows that some
OCR detections can last more than 10s, this happens when a high number of texts are
detected on the image. Our model doesn’t present the variability, the inference time stan­
dard deviation is 0.113s (Table 6.4) which is a good point for the deployment in production.
To sum up, our model gives both better time performance and evaluation metrics than the
other two models. The developed improvements have a positive impact as part of our
needs.
6.4.3
Analysis of logo detection examples
A discussion around examples of logo detection helps identify the key strengths and the
weaknesses of the designed model. The evaluation presented in the table 6.3 highlights
different performance between logos. For example, the ”amazon” and ”bionade” logo
detection achieve very good performance metrics. The following table illustrates the case
of the ”amazon” logo detection.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
59
==PAGE:66==
Logo
Positive images
Threshold:
Best score =0.5331
Best score =0.7133
0.494
True positive
True positive
Negative images
Threshold:
Best score =0.4447
Best score =0.4837
0.494
True negative
True negative
Table 6.10: Examples of correct amazon logo detections
A detection of the amazon logo on the left is performed on the four input images on the
right. The five predicted bounding boxes with the higher scores are plotted. The two
positive images are detected positive, meaning the amazon logo is correctly detected in
the images. If we look closely the amazon logo in the images, we notice that there is no
yellow arrow on the first input image and the amazon logo is grey and sheared on the
second image. Minor logo modifications like a change of colors are usual when the logos
are displayed. However, the ”amazon” logos are detected as positive despite these mod­
ifications. This is a strength of our model: it’s robust to minor modifications.
The negative images are correctly identified as negative. The predicted bounding box
scores are lower than the threshold. The images contain black and orange colors like the
amazon logo, but it doesn’t impact the detection as expected.
The following table presents detections on more challenging input images.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
60
==PAGE:67==
Logo
Positive images
Threshold:
Best score =0.5565
Best score =0.569
0.4987
true positive
true positive
Positive image
Negative image
Threshold=
Best score = 0.4674
Best score =0.5075
0.5068
False negative
False positive
Table 6.11: Examples of challenging logo detections
The first positive image doesn’t contain the Digimind logo on a product, the logo is a 3D
object with shadows, a different logo color and a different background color. The logo
is correctly detected with a score of 0.6268. This observation also emphasizes the very
satisfying application to detection of logos in the wild, the model adapts to natural modifi­
cations.
The second positive image displays Digimind logos on buildings. The logos in the fore­
ground are correctly retrieved, so the image is correctly considered as positive. However,
the very small Digimind logo on the top left corner is not detected. The image is cropped
so we can see the small logo on the image. The cause of this misdetection is that the
logo is too small for our scaling parameters [0.5, 0.9, 1.3]. The 1.6 scale from the original
OS2D could have detected it. Here is a limit of our model: in return for improving the time
performance, the model fails to detect the extremely small logos.
The detection of the ”rolex” logo on the image of a watch gives an example of a false
negative. The rolex logo on the watch is shiny, pink, partially covered by the needle. It is
far different from the reference logo to be detected, the image is wrongly considered as
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
61
==PAGE:68==
negative.
The last image gives an example of false positive. The M of the ”marlboro” logo shape
may look like the ”rolex” logo with the same colors, its bounding box score 0.5075 is just
slightly higher the threshold so the image is incorrectly categorized as positive.
These examples highlight three sources of mistakes:
• Too many modifications
• Very small sizes
• Shapes similar to the logos
Appendix B presents other examples of detections.
6.4.4
Areas for improvement
This thesis gives a satisfying answer to the logo detection problem. However, other av­
enues for improvement could be explored.
Model evaluation
The test and validation dataset used in this thesis answers the need of the company. The
positive image ratio of 1/4 reflects the distribution of positives in the images retrieved by
Digimind. The chosen model depends on the dataset distribution.
A more generalized approach would allow the model to be extrapolated to other cases.
For example, analysing the model ROC­curve and mAP would provide more robust points
of view to compare and evaluate models, regardless of the positive/negative ratio.
Precision and recall are calculated based on the images and not on the bounding boxes.
If a bounding box score is detected positive but the coordinates don’t surround the logo
on the positive image, the image will still be considered as positive. This choice is justified
because it reflects the company requirements, Digimind only needs to retrieve the positive
images and not the logo localisation. Other metrics like IoU could take into account the
good detection of bounding box locations.
Other improvements of the OS2D model
We notice the importance of the feature extractors in time performance and evaluation
metrics. There are dozens of backbone architectures, most of them have not been men­
tioned in this thesis. The feature extraction is an active research field, new backbones are
designed every year. Testing new backbones on our model is definitively a good way to
improve performance. An example of a new good candidate to test is the EfficientNet_B
networks [56]. EfficientNets rescale the ResNet architecture for better performance.
The training parameters of our model are extracted from the work developed in [1]. How­
ever, our modifications could have changed the optimum parameters. A study of the
learning rates, the size batches could improve the training. Particularly, a study of other
loss functions seems promising. Thus, in recent detection models, the L1­smooth function
performing localisation loss is often replaced by a IoU­based localisation loss function.
Generalisation of detected objects
Our model is specialised in logo detection, but it can also detect other objects with lower
performance.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
62
==PAGE:69==
Figure 6.4: Example of flower detection
It might be interesting to expand the training to include other types of objects, such as
product sold by the companies. Marketing service of companies might expect to detect
their products and not only their logos on images from social medias. A one­shot model
extended to product detection is of great interest for market analysis on social medias.
6.5
Summary
The validation phase has allowed to design a new efficient model which respects the re­
quirements. The model adapts well to small modifications of logo, and succeeds in detect­
ing logos in challenging natural scene images. Very small logos and big logo modification
are more problematic. Some potential improvements are suggested to continue this work,
including testing new backbone architectures and generalisation to product detection.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
63
==PAGE:70==
7
Conclusion
A lot of progress has been made during this master thesis towards a fast logo detection
on CPU. The OS2D model was very promising but it was not adapted to object detection
on CPU. The integration of the Resnet18 feature extractor significantly increased time
performance while keeping good evaluation metrics. The time consuming image pyra­
mid representation has been modified and optimized from 7 levels to 3 levels. Finally,
we proposed an efficient method tuning a threshold for each logo from few positive im­
ages. The implemented modifications improved time performance on CPU and evaluation
metrics, our model outperforms the current OCR­based solution and the original OS2D
model. The good performance, the discussions with future users on the design, the API
implementation and the deployment to production validate the model for practical use.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
64
==PAGE:71==
Bibliography
[1]
Anton Osokin, Denis Sumin, and Vasily Lomakin. OS2D: One­Stage One­Shot Ob­
ject Detection by Matching Anchor Features. 2020. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/
2003.06800.pdf.
[2]
Hang Su, Xiatian Zhu, and Shaogang Gong. Open Logo Detection Challenge. 2018.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1807.01964v3.pdf.
[3]
Jonathan Hui. mAP (mean Average Precision) for Object Detection. 2018. URL:
https://jonathan-hui.medium.com/map-mean-average-precision-for-object-detection-
45c121a31173.
[4]
Xinyu Zhou et al. EAST: An Efficient and Accurate Scene Text Detector. 2017. URL:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1704.03155.pdf.
[5]
David Su. weighted­levenshtein 0.2.1. 2018. URL: https://pypi.org/project/weighted-
levenshtein/.
[6]
Wikipedia. Levenshtein distance. 2021. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levenshtein_
distance#Computing_Levenshtein_distance.
[7]
Alexander Sage et al. LLD ­ Large Logo Datasetr. 2017. URL: https://data.vision.
ee.ethz.ch/sagea/lld/.
[8]
Wikipedia. Favicon. 2021. URL: https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Favicon.
[9]
Yehezkel Lamdam, Jacob T. Shawartz, and Haim J. Wolfon. Object detection by
affine invariant matching. 1990.
[10]
T. Gevers and A.W.M. Smeulders. Color based object recognition. 1999. URL: https:
//citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.21.2506&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
[11]
Daniela Hall, Olivier Riff Fabien P´elisson, and James L. Crowley. Brand Identifica­
tion Using Gaussian Derivative Histograms. 2003. URL: http://crowley-coutaz.fr/
jlc/papers/Hall_ICVS.pdf.
[12]
Bethea Davida. Bag of Visual Words in a Nutshell. 2018. URL: https://towardsdatascience.
com/bag-of-visual-words-in-a-nutshell-9ceea97ce0fb.
[13]
David G. Lowe. Distinctive Image Features from Scale­Invariant Keypoints. 2004.
URL: https://www.cs.ubc.ca/~lowe/papers/ijcv04.pdf.
[14]
Raluca Boia et al. Logo Localization and Recognition in Natural Images Using Ho­
mographic Class Graphs. 2016. URL: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?
doi=10.1.1.717.9015&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
[15]
Marçal Rusinol and Josep Llados. Efficient Logo Retrieval Through Hashing Shape
Context Descriptors. 2010. URL: http://www.cvc.uab.cat/~marcal/pdfs/DAS10a.pdf.
[16]
Wikipedia. Feature extraction. 2021. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Feature_
extraction.
[17]
Wikipedia. Convolutional neural network. 2021. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Convolutional_neural_networ.
[18]
Renu Khandelwal. Mitosis detection in breast cancer pathology images by combin­
ing handcrafted and convolutional neural network features. 2014. URL: https://
www.researchgate.net/figure/Architecture-of-the-CNN-model-The-CNN-architecture-
comprises-3-layers-two-consecutive_fig1_266734716.
[19]
Renu Khandelwal. Convolutional Neural Network: Feature Map and Filter Visual­
ization. 2021. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/convolutional-neural-network-
feature-map-and-filter-visualization-f75012a5a49cr.
[20]
Kaiming He et al. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 2015. URL: https:
//arxiv.org/pdf/1512.03385.pdf.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
65
==PAGE:72==
[21]
Prakash Jay. Understanding and Implementing Architectures of ResNet and ResNeXt
for state­of­the­art Image Classification: From Microsoft to Facebook [Part 1]. 2018.
URL: https://medium.com/@14prakash/understanding-and-implementing-architectures-
of-resnet-and-resnext-for-state-of-the-art-image-cf51669e1624.
[22]
SIMONE BIANCO, REMI CADENE ANDLUIGI CELONA, and PAOLO NAPOLE­
TANO1. Benchmark Analysis of Representative Deep Neural Network Architec­
tures. 2018. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.00736.pdf.
[23]
Andrew G. et al. MobileNets: Efficient Convolutional Neural Networks for Mobile
Vision Applications. 2017. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1704.04861.pdf.
[24]
Mark Sandler et al. MobileNetV2: Inverted Residuals and Linear Bottlenecks. 2019.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1801.04381.pdf.
[25]
Olga Russakovsky et al. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. 2015.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1409.0575.pdf.
[26]
Ross Girshick et al. Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and se­
mantic segmentation. 2014. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/r-cnn-fast-r-cnn-
faster-r-cnn-yolo-object-detection-algorithms-36d53571365e.
[27]
Rohith Gandhi. R­CNN, Fast R­CNN, Faster R­CNN, YOLO — Object Detection
Algorithms. 2018. URL: https://towardsdatascience.com/r-cnn-fast-r-cnn-faster-r-
cnn-yolo-object-detection-algorithms-36d53571365e.
[28]
M Everingham et al. The PASCAL Visual Object Classes Challenge 2007 (VOC2007)
Results. 2007. URL: http://www.pascal- network.org/challenges/VOC/voc2007/
workshop/index.html.
[29]
Ross Girshick. Fast R­CNN. 2015. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1504.08083.pdf.
[30]
Shaoqing Ren et al. Faster R­CNN: Towards Real­Time Object Detection with Re­
gion Proposal Networks. 2016. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1506.01497.pdf.
[31]
Israfil Ansari† et al. Recognition of Car Manufacturers using Faster R­CNN and
Perspective Transformation. 2018. URL: https://www.koreascience.or.kr/article/
JAKO201829562509753.pdf.
[32]
Joseph Redmon et al. You Only Look Once: Unified, Real­Time Object Detection.
2018. URL: https://pjreddie.com/media/files/papers/yolo.pdf.
[33]
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. YOLO9000: Better, Faster, Stronger. 2016. URL:
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1612.08242.pdf.
[34]
Wikipedia. YOLOv3: An Incremental Improvement. 2021. URL: https://fr.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Favicon.
[35]
Jing Wang et al. LogoDet­3K: A Large­Scale Image Dataset for Logo Detection.
2020. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2008.05359.pdf.
[36]
Ayan Kumar et al. A Deep One­Shot Network for Query­based Logo Retrieval. 2019.
URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1811.01395.pdf.
[37]
Universitat Ausburg University. FlickrLogos. 2019. URL: https://www.uni-augsburg.
de/en/fakultaet/fai/informatik/prof/mmc/research/datensatze/flickrlogos/.
[38]
Ting­I Hsieh et al. One­Shot Object Detection with Co­Attention and Co­Excitation.
2019. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1911.12529.pdf.
[39]
Gregory R. Koch. Siamese neural networks for one­shot image recognition. 2015.
[40]
Ignacio Rocco, Relja Arandjelovic, and Josef Sivic. Convolutional neural network
architecture for geometric matching. 2017. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1703.05593.
pdf.
[41]
Ignacio Rocco1, Relja Arandjelovic, and Josef Sivic. End­to­end weakly­supervised
semantic alignment. 2018. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1712.06861.pdf.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
66
==PAGE:73==
[42]
Marian George and Christian Floerkemeier. Recognizing Products: A Per­exemplar
Multi­label Image Classification Approach. 2014. URL: http://www.vs.inf.ethz.ch/
publ/papers/mageorge_products_eccv2014.pdf.
[43]
Jaderberg M et al. Spatial transformer networks. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NIPS). 2015. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1712.06861.pdf.
[44]
Wikipedia. Pyramid (image processing). 2021. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Pyramid_(image_processing).
[45]
Pytorch. HINGEEMBEDDINGLOSS. 2021. URL: hhttps://pytorch.org/docs/stable/
generated/torch.nn.HingeEmbeddingLoss.html.
[46]
Xinshao Wang et al. Ranked List Loss for Deep Metric Learning. 2019. URL: https:
//openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2019/papers/Wang_Ranked_List_Loss_
for_Deep_Metric_Learning_CVPR_2019_paper.pdf.
[47]
Pytorch Team. ResNet. 2021. URL: https://pytorch.org/hub/pytorch_vision_resnet/.
[48]
Filip Radenovic. CNN Image Retrieval in PyTorch: Training and evaluating CNNs
for Image Retrieval in PyTorch. 2020. URL: https : / / github . com / filipradenovic /
cnnimageretrieval-pytorch.
[49]
Anton Osokin. Code for ”OS2D: One­Stage One­Shot Object Detection by Matching
Anchor Features”. 2020. URL: https://github.com/aosokin/os2d.
[50]
PyTorch Serve Contributors. Torchserve. 2020. URL: https://pytorch.org/serve/.
[51]
Nicolás Metallo. Deploy your PyTorch model to Production. 2018. URL: https://
medium.datadriveninvestor.com/deploy-your-pytorch-model-to-production-f69460192217.
[52]
1 The Linux Foundation. Production­Grade Container Orchestration. 2021. URL:
https://kubernetes.io/fr/.
[53]
The Scipy community. scipy.optimize.fmin. 2021. URL: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/
scipy/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.fmin.html.
[54]
The Scipy community. scipy.stats.norm. 2021. URL: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/
scipy/reference/generated/scipy.stats.norm.html.
[55]
The Scipy community. scipy.optimize.brentq. 2013. URL: https://docs.scipy.org/
doc/scipy-0.13.0/reference/generated/scipy.optimize.brentq.html#scipy.optimize.
brentq.
[56]
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. EfficientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for Convolu­
tional Neural Networks. 2019. URL: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1905.11946.pdf.
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
67
==PAGE:74==
A
Cross­validation results
A.1
ResNet18 backbone
Parameters
Metrics
Scales
Threshold
Precision
Recall
F1score
F0.5score
F0.25score
Latency(s)
FIXED
0.723
0579.
0.0.612
0.665
0.640
MEAN_BASED
0.762
0.525
0.584
0.667
0.625
MIN_MAX
0.805
0.545
0.624
0.703
0.796
[0.4, 1]
PDF_DIF
0.724
0.615
0.640
0.684
0.620
1.72
FB1
0.791
0.54
0.61
0.695
0.685
FB0.5
0.797
0.525
0.602
0.693
0.682
FB0.25
0.797
0.525
0.602
0.693
0.695
FIXED
0,665
0,715
0,645
0,65
0,534
MEAN_BASED
0,803
0,615
0,667
0,735
0,693
MIN_MAX
0,846
0,625
0,71
0,766
0,829
[0.5, 0.9, 1.3]
PDF_DIFFF
0,767
0,665
0,697
0,732
0,742
4,02
FB1
0,812
0,68
0,711
0,757
0,739
.
FB0.5
0,82
0,645
0,69
0,749
0,755
FB0.25
0,82
0,645
0,69
0,749
0,755
FIXED
0,688
0,670
0,639
0,660
0,575
MEAN_BASED
0,832
0,67
0,7
0,761
0,658
MAX_MIN
0,848
0,625
0,71
0,768
0,838
5.32
[0.4, 0.7,
1, 1.4]
PDF_DIFF
0,798
0,7
0,715
0,75
0,735
FB1
0,828
0,650
0,710
0,770
0,783
FB0.5
0,859
0,625
0,703
0,779
0,812
FB0.25
0,859
0,625
0,703
0,779
0,812
Table A.1: Cross validation for the model with the ResNet18 backbone
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
68
==PAGE:75==
A.2
ResNet34 backbone
Parameters
Metrics
Scales
Threshold
Precision
Recall
F1score
F0.5score
F0.25score
Latency(s)
FIXED
0,555
0,675
0,561
0,546
0,455
MEAN_BASED
0,743
0,550
0,565
0,628
0,577
MAX_MIN
0,840
0,525
0,621
0,717
0,836
[0.4, , 1]
PDF_DIFF
0,696
0,580
0,600
0,645
0,572
2.34
FB1
0,794
0,550
0,596
0,675
0,662
FB0.5
0,793
0,520
0,576
0,665
0,648
FB0.25
0,806
0,515
0,580
0,674
0,65
FIXED
0,469
0,780
0,537
0,487
0,369
MEAN_BASED
0,762
0,595
0,617
0,675
0,627
MIN_MAX
0,855
0,630
0,706
0,779
0,861
[0.5, 0.9, 1.3]
PDF_DIFF
0,768
0,660
0,682
0,724
0,679
5,77
FB1
0,803
0,610
0,654
0,721
0,680
FB0.5
0,809
0,610
0,656
0,725
0,684
FB0.25
0,809
0,610
0,656
0,725
0,684
FIXED
0,453
0,820
0,533
0,474
0,355
MEAN_BASED
0,795
0,630
0,656
0,716
0,671
MIN_MAX
0,861
0,650
0,726
0,792
0,877
[0.4, 0.7,
1, 1.4]
PDF_DIFF
0,766
0,675
0,686
0,722
0,678
7.48
FB1
0,815
0,625
0,671
0,740
0,690
FB0.5
0,821
0,620
0,670
0,742
0,692
FB0.25
0,821
0,620
0,670
0,742
0,692
Table A.2: Cross validation for the model with the ResNet34 backbone
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
69
==PAGE:76==
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
70
==PAGE:77==
B
Examples of logo detection
Logo
Images
Threshold=0.504
True positive
True positive
False negative
Threshold=0.4617
True negative
True positive
True positive
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
71
==PAGE:78==
Logo
Images
Threshold=0.5011
True negative
True positive
True positive
Threshold=0.4948
True positive
True positive
False positive
Logo detection using deep learning algorithms
72
==PAGE:79==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
https://www.compute.dtu.dk/
