==PAGE:1==
Spatial perception of gain dependent group
delay differences in binaural hearing aids
using minimum phase processing
Master Thesis
Hearing Systems
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Spatial perception of gain dependent group delay differences in binaural hearing
aids using minimum phase processing
Master Thesis
July, 2021
By
David Gröblbauer
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 352,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.hea.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months in the Hearing Systems research group,
Department of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in col­
laboration with WS Audiology Denmark A/S, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
David Gröblbauer ­ s182277
Signature
Date
ii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Modern hearing aids (HAs) utilize minimum phase filters in order to achieve a low latency
signal path. The use of minimum phase filters results in the smallest possible group de­
lay for any given transfer function. The group delay, however, becomes non­linear and
is unique for a given magnitude response. Differently shaped gain curves for a left and
right ear signal will therefore produce a binaural group delay difference. This can be
interpreted as an artificially induced interaural time difference (ITD). The present study
investigates how minimum phase processing in a binaural HA setting affects naturally
occurring ITDs. An objective analysis suggests that the use of minimum phase filters
might introduce ITD distortions between ±0.2 ms or changes in perceived azimuth of up
to ±20◦. A spatial release from masking (SRM) experiment has been conducted to in­
vestigate if a minimum phase processed stimulus would be subject to the aforementioned
ITD distortions, hence impair masker separation and negatively affect the speech recep­
tion threshold (SRT) when compared to a linear phase processed stimulus. It has been
suggested that when presented with a low­pass stimulus, listeners rely heavily on ITDs
for sound localisation. By low­pass filtering the stimuli in the present SRM experiment, we
would like to emphasize the impact of potential ITD distortions. The results show no differ­
ence between the minimum phase processing condition and the linear phase processing
condition. The statistical analysis of the SRTs suggest that minimum phase processing
does not adversely affect spatial cues. A closer look at the between­subjects variation
facilitates a discussion about performance of different listener groups and the role that
informational masking could play in producing the results we see.
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my supervisors Abigail Anne Kressner,
Lars Dalskov Mosgaard and Torsten Dau. Thank you for the growth and the learning you
facilitated over the course of this thesis. You provided all the support I needed, while giving
me the freedom to explore at my own pace. I admire your expertise and the enthusiasm
you have for the field of hearing science.
I am grateful to WS Audiology A/S for providing the idea for this thesis and entrusting me
with this project. Special thanks to Adam Westermann for providing the GUI I used in the
experiment and for the steady supply of helpful ideas.
I would also like to thank Rikke Skovhøj Sørensen who was always happy to help and
provided valuable training, so I could offer the best possible experience for my test par­
ticipants. I would like to extend my gratitude to all the subjects who patiently participated
in my experiment.
Finally, thank you Mama, Papa, Eva and Maria for your trust and unconditional support.
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theory
3
2.1
Minimum phase filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Group delay and phase delay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Gain dependent group delay
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methods
7
3.1
Stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Objective analysis of ITD distortions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Experimental procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5
Statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4
Results
15
4.1
Objective analysis of ITD distortions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.2
SRM experiment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
Discussion
21
5.1
Implications and limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6
Conclusions
23
Bibliography
25
A Objective analysis of ITD distortions
27
B Full set of individual test results
30
CONTENTS
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In hearing aid (HA) fittings using an open earmold, both the processed sound and the
direct sound are transmitted into the ear canal. The sum of processed and direct sound
results in a comb filtering of the signal. The comb filtering negatively affects the sound
quality and is often perceived as tinny sounding.
In order to mitigate this effect, some commercial HAs utilize minimum phase processing.
The use of minimum phase filters results in the smallest possible group delay for any
given transfer function. For most types of hearing loss and the associated amplification
needs, this minimal delay in the processed sound can result in a very low latency signal
path. This significantly reduces the comb filter effect, and therefore, improves the sound
quality of the hearing aid.
However, many traditional HAs are realized using processing equivalent to dynamic linear
phase filtering as opposed to minimum phase processing. Linear phase filters result in
a constant delay across the entire frequency spectrum. Minimum phase filters, however,
result in group delay that is not constant over frequency nor time and varies depending
on the gain. The phase response of a minimum phase filter is unique for a given mag­
nitude response. This characteristic is essential for the design of the present study. In
a binaural HA setting, gain differences between the two ears can result in two different
phase responses and consequentially different group delay at each ear. The sound from
a source located to the right of the head reaches the right ear before it reaches the left ear.
The brain relies heavily on this interaural time difference (ITD) to localize sound sources
in space. The aforementioned binaural group delay difference can be interpreted as an
artificially induced ITD.
The main purpose of the present study is to investigate how minimum phase processing in
a binaural HA setting affects naturally occurring ITDs and what influence it has on spatial
perception. We are specifically interested in the case of closed HA fittings. When the
HAs are used with a closed earmold, the user is presented with the processed sound
only. Therefore, the brain only has access to the altered ITD cues.
Several studies show an improvement in speech intelligibility when a speech target and
competing sounds were spatially separated (e.g. Dirks et al. 1969; Bronkhorst et al. 1988).
This effect is commonly referred to as spatial release from masking (SRM). A measure to
quantify the improvement in speech intelligibility is the signal­to­noise ratio (SNR) of the
target speech with respect to the competing sounds (maskers) that yields a 50 % intelli­
gibility of the target speech (Best et al. 2013). This measure is termed speech reception
threshold (SRT).
An SRM experiment has been designed to investigate if the spatial separation between
target and masker that enables listeners to reach a certain SRT is diminished when stimuli
are processed with minimum phase filters as compared to processing with conventional
linear phase filters.
According to the Duplex Theory of sound localization, listeners rely heavily on the ITD
when localizing low­pass pure tone stimuli (Macpherson et al. 2002). In a virtual sound
localisation task, Macpherson et al. (2002) found that when presented with a low­pass
stimulus, Listeners gave high weight to ITDs and low weight to ILDs. Since SRM relies on
listener having access to spatial cues, we decided to incorporate these findings into the
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1
==PAGE:10==
study design. By low­pass filtering the stimuli in the present SRM experiment, our goal is
to emphasize the impact of potential ITD distortions.
2
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
==PAGE:11==
2
Theory
We want to investigate how minimum phase processing can introduce binaural group
delay differences and how this affects spatial cues such as the ITD. This section provides
a theoretical background for the more intricate concepts and signal processing techniques
used in the present study.
2.1
Minimum phase filter
The following describes how cepstrum analysis is used to derive the finite impulse re­
sponse (FIR) minimum phase filters used in the present study. The derivation closely
follows the method described in Oppenheim et al. (1989, Ch.12).
A characteristic of minimum phase filters is that all zeros of their transfer function lie inside
the unit circle. The complex cepstrum incorporates two opposing characteristics. The
strictly causal part ˆx[n > 0] corresponds to zeros inside the unit circle (minimum phase
characteristic). The strictly acausal part ˆx[n < 0] corresponds to zeros outside the unit
circle (maximum phase characteristic). (Oppenheim et al. 1989).
The complex cepstrum is defined as the inverse Fourier transform of the natural logarithm
of the transfer function of our desired transfer function G(ejω),
ˆx[n] = F−1{
log(G(ejω))
}
(2.1)
= F−1{
log(|G(ejω)|) + j arg(G(ejω))
}
(2.2)
= F−1{
log(|G(ejω)|)
}
+ F−1{
j arg(G(ejω))
}
.
The real part of the complex cepstrum is referred to as the real cepstrum and is defined
as the inverse Fourier transform of the natural logarithm of the magnitude of our transfer
function. The real cepstrum is independent of the phase of G(ejω). The goal is to derive
an expression that allows to compute the minimum phase filter from the gain magnitude
characteristics alone.
cx[n] = F−1{
log(|G(ejω)|)
}
.
(2.3)
Considering Equation (2.2), the real cepstrum can be rewritten as
cx[n] = 1
2 · F−1{
log(G(ejω)) + log(G(ejω)∗)
}
= 1
2 ·
(
F−1{
log(G(ejω))
}
+ F−1{
log(G(ejω)∗)
})
.
Using the relation F
{
f[−n]
}
= F(ω)∗, the real cepstrum can be expressed as a function
of the complex cepstrum,
cx[n] = 1
2 · (ˆx[n] + ˆx[−n]) .
(2.4)
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
3
==PAGE:12==
Given that G(ejω) is the transfer function of a minimum phase filter we can assume that
the strictly acausal part of the complex cepstrum ˆx[n < 0] must be 0. Consequently, ˆx[n]
and ˆx[−n] overlap only at n = 0. As a result, Equation (2.4) can be inverted so that the
complex cepstrum can be expressed in terms of the real cepstrum,
ˆxmin[n] = cx[n] · (2u[n] −δ[n])
= cx[n] · lmin[n] ,
(2.5)
where u[n] is the unit step function and δ[n] is the Kronecker delta. lmin[n] can be applied
as a window function. The derivation up until this point assumes an infinite discrete Fourier
transform. In practice, we are processing finite signals which are implicitly assumed to be
periodic, requiring a window that takes the form
lmin,finite[n] = 2u[n] −δ[n] −δ[N −n] ,
(2.6)
where N is the length of the minimum phase filter and n ∈[−(N −1) : N]. The coef­
ficients of the desired minimum phase filter hmin[n] can now be computed by inverting
Equation (2.1)
F−1{
exp(F
{
ˆxmin[n]
}
)
}
= F−1{
exp( ˆXmin(ejω))
}
= F−1{
Xmin(ejω)
}
= hmin[n] .
(2.7)
Figure 2.1 shows a diagrammatic representation of how Equations (2.3), (2.6) and (2.7)
are combined to provide the closed­form computation of the minimum phase filter coeffi­
cients.
Figure 2.1: Closed­form calculation of the minimum phase filter coefficients using cep­
strum analysis. Input G(ejω) is the desired gain function. Output hmin[n] are the corre­
sponding minimum phase filter coefficients.
4
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Group delay and phase delay
When filtering a signal, the group delay and phase delay are a measure for how much
certain parts of the signal are delayed in time. (Blauert et al. 1978) When filtering an
amplitude modulated signal, the carrier wave is delayed by the phase delay, while the
envelope of the signal is delayed by the group delay. Both τg and τϕ are frequency­
dependent. If ϕ(ω) is the phase response of a filter H(ejω), the group delay τg and the
phase delay τϕ are defined as
τg(ω) = −∂ϕ(ω)
∂ω
(2.8)
τϕ(ω) = −ϕ(ω)
ω
(2.9)
2.3
Gain dependent group delay
Section 2.1 describes that a desired magnitude response needs to be provided when
designing the minimum phase filter. This property is very useful, because it allows for a
minimum phase filter and a linear phase filters with the same magnitude response. We
design the linear phase filter first, take its discrete Fourier transform (DFT) and use it
as the input to the closed­form solution in Figure 2.1. This produces the corresponding
minimum phase filter.
The phase response of a minimum phase filter is not constant over frequency nor time and
varies depending on the gain of its magnitude response. However, to illustrate the poten­
tial impact of minimum phase processing, ITD distortions are first assessed without the
complexity of the dynamics. Figure 2.2 compares signals between left ear and right ear
(L,R) processed with both linear phase filters and minimum phase filters (LIN, MIN). Con­
sidering a binaural HA setting, the top panel shows two minimum phase transfer functions
representing different amplification for the left and right ear signals. It is worth noting, that
the phase response of a minimum phase filter is unique for a given magnitude response.
Choosing two differently shaped gain curves, will result in two different phase responses
and consequentially different group delay and phase delay. The group and phase delay
is computed for the minimum phase filters as well as for their corresponding linear phase
filters. The two middle panels show how in the minimum phase condition different fre­
quency components experience different delay. As expected, the delay is different in the
left ear and right ear signals. In the linear phase condition the delay is constant and there
is no difference between the left and right side. The bottom panel shows the difference
between the group delay curves and phase delay curves, respectively. The delay of the
right ear signal is subtracted from the delay of the left ear signal. This is interpreted as
an artificially induced ITD and can potentially interfere with naturally occurring ITDs. The
plot shows ITDs of up to 0.3 ms. Depending on head size and azimuth angle of the sound
source, natural ITDs range between ±0.7 ms.
The effect in Figure 2.2 is informally validated by filtering a speech sentence from the
Danish hearing in noise test (HINT) (Nielsen et al. 2011) with the gain curves in the top
panel. Presented on a pair of stereo headphones, the minimum phase processed sound
is noticeably shifted to the left when compared to the linear phase processed sound.
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
5
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.2: Gain dependent group delay differences of minimum phase filters. Upper
panel shows an example of two differing gain functions to amplify a left ear signal and
right ear signal, respectively. The two middle panels show the group delay and phase
delay of the minimum phase filters for their respective gain functions (MINL and MINR).
For reference, the (constant) group and phase delay of the corresponding linear phase
filters are added (LINL and LINR). The bottom panel shows the difference in group delay
and phase delay, interpreted as an ITD. All delays are given in milliseconds.
6
CHAPTER 2. THEORY
==PAGE:15==
3
Methods
We established the hypothesis that minimum phase processing in HAs can potentially
distort ITD cues and thereby negatively affect spatial perception. In order to test this
hypothesis, a spatial release from masking (SRM) experiment is designed. We want
to investigate if the spatial separation that enables listeners to reach a certain speech
reception threshold (SRT) is diminished when stimuli are processed with minimum phase
filters as compared to processing with conventional linear phase filters. The following
sections describe the methods used in the design, execution and analysis of the present
study.
3.1
Stimuli
The following sections describe the techniques applied to process the stimuli used in the
objective analysis as well as in the SRM experiment.
3.1.1
Target speech material
The target speech material used in the present study are sentences from the Danish
sentence test Dantale II (Wagener et al. 2003). The test sentences consist of a subset
of the 5000 most frequent danish words and were specifically designed to measure SRT
in noise. All sentences have the same syntactical structure consisting of a name, verb,
numeral, adjective and object. Semantically, the sentences are unpredictable.
3.1.2
Maskers
For the maskers we use the same speech material taken from the Danish sentence test
Dantale II (Wagener et al. 2003). Two masker configurations are used in the present
study. The reference configuration in which the target and maskers are co­located at
an azimuth angle of 0◦is referred to as co­located maskers (co­loc.). In the spatially
separated configuration, the target remains located at 0◦azimuth, while the maskers are
located symmetrically at an azimuth angle of ±30◦. This configuration is referred to as
spatially separated maskers (separ.). Figure 3.1 shows a diagrammatic representation
of the masker configuration. The objective analysis of ITD distortions in Figure 4.1 was
taken into consideration when designing the separated masker configuration. The analy­
sis suggests ITD fluctuations between ±0.2 ms or changes in azimuth of up to ±20◦. We
considered maskers at ±30◦to be separated enough to facilitate adequate SRM, but still
close enough to potentially be affected by any artificially induced ITD distortions.
3.1.3
Spatialization
In order to realize the masker configurations shown in Figure 3.1 in a headphone based
listening experiment, it is necessary to virtually spatialize the sound sources. A full 3D
set of head­related transfer functions (HRTFs) for in­ear and HA microphones on a head
and torso simulator (HATS) was kindly made available for research use in psychoacous­
tics by Oreinos et al. (2013). Special care was given to preserve the phase properties of
the measurements which makes it ideal for the present application, where we investigate
potential effects of time and phase distortion. The HRTFs are sampled at a frequency of
fs = 44 100 Hz. Arguments are given in radians and positive angles are defined coun­
terclockwise. Impulse responses of length 256 are stored in 6 channels. In the present
study only channel 1 (Left in ear HATS Microphone) and channel 2 (Right in ear HATS Mi­
crophone) are used. Only azimuth angles are used in the experiment, such that elevation
remains at 0◦at all times.
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.1: Masker configuration in the headphone based listening experiment. Virtually
spatialized sound sources as perceived by the listener. (a) shows the co­located masker
configuration used as reference for the SRM. (b) shows the separated masker configura­
tion.
3.1.4
Compression
Sensorineural hearing loss is often associated with a reduced dynamic range, resulting
from an elevation of the threshold in quite but a demotion of the uncomfortable level (May
et al. 2018). To map the input signals into the available range of sound levels, HAs require
some form of compression. The amount of hearing loss and the dynamic range of residual
hearing varies with frequency. For this reason, HAs use multichannel compression (Khing
et al. 2013).
The compressor used in the present study was developed by Ole Hau (Widex A/S) and
is part of the Better hEAring Rehabilitation (BEAR) project (Hammershøi 2019).
The compressor is built around a 15 band filter bank with center frequencies at
fc ∈[128, 220, 348, 489, 634, 796, 1002, 1264, 1594, 2006, 2530, 3213, 4155, 5688, 8720] Hz.
(3.1)
The bandwidth of the filter bank is approximately 1/3­octaves for the 11 mid­frequency
bands and 1/2­octave for the remaining 2 upper and 2 lower bands. The envelope of the
individual bands is estimated based on the low pass filtered square of the signal. The
envelope is transformed to the log domain and passed through the percentile estimator
that effectively controls the attack and release characteristics of the compression system.
If the output is below the envelope, it increases with a fixed rate (attack speed). If the out­
put is above the envelope, it decreases with a fixed rate (release speed). The percentile
estimate is used to calculate the desired insertion gain (IG) in the input­gain function of
the compressor. The gain function is a broken stick non­linearity with a single knee point
used to set the IG for normal speech levels. The upper and lower slopes of the function
are defined to meet the target gains for soft and loud speech. A compression threshold
(CT) is calculated using a maximum gain function, setting the upper limit for the desired
gain. The original version of the compressor applies the IG to the individual frequency
bands and sums them together to form the compressed output signal. To allow for the de­
sign of the LIN and MIN filter in the present study, the compressor was modified. Instead
of computing the compressed output signal, the IG is extracted for further processing. A
standard gain prescription NAL­NL2 (National Acoustic Laboratories) (Keidser et al. 2011)
is used to fit the compressor. The main effect of the present study is dependent on bin­
aural gain differences. We want to avoid a scenario where the main effect turns out to be
8
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
==PAGE:17==
absent due to a conservative choice of parameters. Therefore, fast compression is cho­
sen with an attack speed of 1700 dB/s and a release speed of 200 dB/s. To illustrate the
behaviour of the compressor, Figure 3.2 shows the gain targets for a flat and moderately
sloping hearing loss at three speech input levels.
Figure 3.2: The left panel shows the N2 standard audiogram of a flat and moderately
sloping hearing loss (Bisgaard et al. 2010). The right panel shows the NAL­NL2 insertion
gain targets at three speech input levels (55, 65 and 80 dBSPL).
3.1.5
Minimum phase filter generation
Generating the minimum phase filter uses cepstrum analysis to derive FIR minimum
phase filters as described in Section 2.1. The experimental design requires the com­
parison of a minimum phase processing condition (MIN) to a linear phase processing
condition (LIN). To facilitate a reliable experiment, it is important to have good correspon­
dence between the two transfer functions. The following describes how the linear phase
filter and minimum phase filter are designed to have the same magnitude response.
The IG extracted from the compressor contains 15 frequency channels for every sample
of the stimulus. By iterating over the samples, the LIN and MIN filters are designed and
applied on a per­sample basis. During the experiment, a continuous presentation of stim­
uli is required. In order to reduce processing time to a reasonable level of approximately
2 s per presentation, down­sampling by a factor of 64 is applied. The filter coefficients are
only updated in every 64th iteration. No audible artifacts were introduced.
We start by designing the LIN filter and use it as the basis of the MIN filter. As described in
Section 2.3, this ensures that both filters have the same magnitude response. The Matlab
function fir2 implements a frequency sampling­based FIR filter design. We specify a
filter order of N = 256 and the frequency­magnitude characteristics defined by the 15
center frequencies fc in Equation (3.1) and the 15 IG values per sample. fir2 ensures
a magnitude response with steep but smooth transitions and returns the linear phase
filter coefficients. To design the MIN filter, a MATLAB function makeMinPhase is written
to implement the signal path shown in Figure 2.1. The function takes the DFT of the
linear phase filter coefficients as input and returns the corresponding minimum phase
filter coefficients hmin[n]. Depending on the processing condition that is required for a
given experimental run, either the LIN or the MIN filter is applied to the stimulus sample.
3.1.6
Low­pass filter
Since we are interested in the effect that minimum phase processing has on ITD cues, we
decided to evoke a listening condition where subjects utilize ITD cues more than ILD cues
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
9
==PAGE:18==
when localizing sound sources. It has been shown that listeners rely heavily on ITD cues
and less on ILD cues when presented with low­pass (LP) filtered stimuli (e.g., Macpherson
et al. 2002). Therefore, a linear phase FIR LP filter is designed to remove the spectral
content above 1 kHz from the stimulus. To ensure that the auditory system of the listener
can not access the attenuated high frequency (HF) content, a broadband noise masker
is added to the stimulus. The signal power of this noise masker is chosen low enough to
minimize interference with the desired low frequency (LF) content. Figure 3.3 shows the
power spectra of the filtered stimulus and masker.
Figure 3.3: Power spectra of the low­pass filtered stimulus and noise masker. The speech
signal is LP filtered in order to evoke a listening condition where subjects utilize ITD cues
more than ILD cues, when localizing sound sources. The spectral content above 1 kHz
is removed from the stimulus (orange curve). A broadband noise signal is added to mask
the attenuated HF content (yellow curve). The unfiltered stimulus is shown for reference
(blue curve).
3.2
Objective analysis of ITD distortions
With the full processing chain for the stimuli established, the static ITD analysis in Sec­
tion 2.3 can now be expanded to investigate the dynamic effects in the system. We noticed
that the phase delay is the more conservative measure when compared to the group de­
lay. In order to avoid overstating the extent of potential ITD distortions, we decided to
use the phase delay instead of the group delay for the following analysis. The MATLAB
function phasedelay takes the minimum phase filter coefficients as an input and returns
the phase delay of the filter. When processing the stimuli, the phase delay data is col­
lected on a per­sample basis in parallel with the minimum phase filter generation. This
process is computationally expensive and is not applied during the listening experiment.
The recorded phase delay of the right ear signal is subtracted from the phase delay of the
left ear signal and interpreted as an artificially induced ITD (see Figure 4.1). To estimate
the extent to which these distortions might influence the masker separation in the SRM
experiment, the ITDs are translated to azimuth angles. Figure 3.4 shows a schematic
representation of the path difference of a lateralized sound reaching the ears. An approx­
imation for the azimuth angle is computed as follows. Taking the difference between the
10
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
==PAGE:19==
phase delay for the left ear and right ear signals and dividing by the sampling frequency
yields the ITD in seconds.
ITD = (PDL −PDR) · fs
(3.2)
The path difference in meters is calculated as
d = ITD · cs ,
(3.3)
where cs = 343 m
s is the speed of sound. Simplifying the expression for the path difference
(Figure 3.4) yields
d = rθ + r sin θ ∼r sin θ + r sin θ
(3.4)
= 2r sin θ ,
(3.5)
and allows to solve for an approximation of the azimuth angle in radian
θrad = arcsin d
2r .
(3.6)
Converting to degrees yields
θdeg = θrad · 360
2π .
(3.7)
Figure 3.4: Path difference (d = rθ + r sin θ) of a lateralized sound reaching the ears.
The objective analysis of ITD distortions aided the design of the SRM experiment and can
be seen in Section 4.1.
3.3
Experimental procedure
In a headphone­based SRM experiment, speech intelligibility is determined by measur­
ing SRTs under two different processing conditions (LIN, MIN), in two different masker
configurations (co­loc., separ.), resulting in four experimental conditions. Throughout the
experiment, the masker level stays at 55 dB. The target level starts at 65 dB and follows
an adaptive 1­up­1­down staircase procedure to determined the SRT at which the listener
is able to understand 50% of the words correct. No feedback is provided during testing.
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
11
==PAGE:20==
In each presentation, the target sentence starts with the keyword ”Anders”. Among that
subset of sentences, the target is randomly selected. The maskers are selected to ensure
a different sentence and speaker.
The experiment starts with a training round in which the subject can get familiar with the
test paradigm. During the training round, the researcher is present in the listening booth
to assess if the subject understands the framework of the experiment or needs more
instructions or more training. After completing the training round, the researcher leaves
the booth and starts the first trial, in which the four experimental conditions are presented
to the listener in random order. This first round takes 30–40 minutes whereupon the
subject is encouraged to take a 10 minute break to regain concentration. The second
round is a retest of the four experimental conditions in random order. All experiments are
conducted in a double­walled sound insulated listening booth, using Sennheiser HD­650
circumaural headphones. The frequency response of the headphones is equalized using
a calibration filter. A computer running a MATLAB graphical user interface (GUI) is used to
collect listener feedback. The GUI used in the experiment was kindly provided by Adam
Westermann (Widex A/S) and can be seen in Figure 3.5. The four sections containing
10 words each corresponds to the syntactical structure of the Dantale II speech material.
From top to bottom, the listener has to pick a verb, numeral, adjective and object for every
presentation.
Figure 3.5: Graphical user interface to collect listeners feedback in the SRM experiment.
3.4
Participants
Eleven listeners (nine female and two male, ages 20–31 years, mean 26.8 years) par­
ticipated in the experiments conducted for the present study. All listeners were normal
hearing (NH) with an audiometric threshold lower than 20 dB at octave frequencies from
250 Hz to 8 kHz. The listeners were native Danish speakers and received an hourly
compensation for their participation. All participants provided informed consent and all
experiments were approved by the Science­Ethics Committee for the Capital Region of
12
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
==PAGE:21==
Denmark (reference H­16036391).
For six participants, audiometric screening was performed in the beginning of the session
prior to the actual experiment. The remaining five listeners were recruited from NOAH, a
DTU database with people interested in participating in hearing research. Data from re­
cent audiometric screening was available for these subjects and was not measured in the
beginning of the session. To use the additional time available in these sessions, the test­
ing protocol was extended to measure SRTs at ±45◦masker separation as well. Due to
the small sample size, these additional results were not considered in the statistical anal­
ysis. They are, however, included in the full set of individual test results for all subjects in
Appendix B.
3.5
Statistical analysis
The statistical analysis of both the SRTs and the SRM scores (SRTs relative to reference
condition co­loc.) is performed by fitting a linear mixed effects model to the data. The
model incorporates both fixed effects and random effects. The fixed­effects terms are the
processing condition, the masker configuration as well as the test repetition. The partic­
ipants are defined as a random­effects term in the model. The analysis was conducted
in the software environment R, using the lme4 package (Bates et al. 2015). The addi­
tional package lmerTest (Kuznetsova et al. 2017) provides a model selection process that
allows for backwards elimination of random­effects terms as well as fixed­effects terms.
The model is analysed with a type III analysis of variance (ANOVA) using Satterthwaite’s
method to approximate the denominator degrees of freedom. For the post­hoc analy­
sis, the emmeans package (Lenth 2021) uses estimated marginal means to allow for a
pairwise within­factor comparisons. To correct for multiple comparisons, the resulting p­
values were adjusted using the Tukey method. A significance level of α = 0.05 is used to
report significant results.
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
13
==PAGE:22==
14
CHAPTER 3. METHODS
==PAGE:23==
4
Results
The following sections describe the results of the objective ITD analysis and the results
gained in the SRM experiment along with a statistical analysis.
4.1
Objective analysis of ITD distortions
After processing the speech stimuli as described in Section 3.1, an analysis is conducted
to investigate the effect that minimum phase processing has on spatial perception. The dif­
ference in the non­linear phase delay between the left and the right ear can be interpreted
as an artificially introduced ITD. The ITD is translated to an azimuth angle as described
in Section 3.2. The two color bars in the bottom panel in Figure 4.1 allow to read the
plot both as presenting ITDs in ms and the corresponding azimuth angle in degree. The
middle panel shows the IG extracted from the compressor for all 15 frequency channels.
The stimuli amplitude before and after compression can be seen in the top panel. This
analysis is conducted at an SNR of −6 dB (target speech level to masker level) because
this resembles a realistic SRT, that is commonly reached during SRM experiments (e.g.
Wagener et al. 2003). The analysis has been repeated at several different SNRs between
6 dB to −10 dB and shows a similar effect (see Appendix A). Throughout the 2.5 s stim­
uli, the minimum phase filtering introduces ITD fluctuations between ±0.2 ms that can be
interpreted as inducing changes in the perceived azimuth of up to ±20◦.
4.2
SRM experiment
Figure 4.2 shows SRT scores in dB for all eleven subjects (S1–S11) measured in the four
experimental conditions. Each subject was tested twice (Test/Retest) in each condition.
Using a linear mixed effects model (see Section 3.5), the factor Test/Retest was eliminated
in the stepwise deletion of fixed effects, showing that there is no significant difference
between the SRTs collected during test and retest [F(1, 73) = 0.1848, p = 0.669]. The
data presented in the following is averaged over the results from test and retest. The full
set of individual test results for all subjects can be seen in Appendix B.
There is a noticeable difference in SRT when comparing the co­located masker configu­
ration to the separated masker configuration. The majority of subjects reached a negative
SRT when target and masker were spatially separated. In contrast, subject S5, S6 and
S7 experienced little to no release in the separated configuration. In the co­located con­
figuration results range from 2 dB to 6 dB. In the separated configuration the variance
between subjects is noticeably higher and the scores range from −8 dB to 8 dB.
Figure 4.3 shows the SRT for all subjects in the four experimental conditions summa­
rized in boxplots. Individual data points are plotted as numerals, color­coordinated with
the data in Figure 4.2. The numbers 1–11 correspond to subject­IDs S1–S11. A type
III Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with Satterthwaite’s method shows a significant differ­
ence between the SRT scores measured in the four experimental conditions shown in
Figure 4.3 [F(3, 74) = 50.004, p < 0.0001]. A Tukey corrected post hoc comparison re­
vealed that in a pairwise comparison only the masker location (co­loc., separ.) had a
significant effect on the SRT scores. The model showed a significant difference between
conditions (LIN,co­loc.)­(LIN,separ.) [t(74) = 9.026, p < 0.0001], conditions (LIN,co­loc.)­
(MIN,separ.) [t(74) = 8.668, p < 0.0001], conditions (LIN,separ.)­(MIN,co­loc.) [t(74) =
8.644, p < 0.0001] and conditions (MIN,co­loc.)­(MIN,separ.) [t(74) = 8.287, p < 0.0001].
The processing condition (LIN, MIN) has no significant effect on the SRT scores measured
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
15
==PAGE:24==
with spatially separated maskers [t(74) = −0.358, p = 0.984]. There is also no significant
effect of the processing condition on the SRT scores measured with co­located maskers
[t(74) = 0.381, p = 0.981].
The SRM scores are calculated as the difference between the SRTs measured with co­
located maskers and SRTs measured with spatially separated maskers. This is done
with respect to the individual conditions (LIN, MIN). Figure 4.4 shows SRM scores for
all subjects summarized in boxplots. The individual data points are plotted as numerals
on top of each condition, corresponding to subject­IDs. The factor processing condition
(LIN, MIN) was eliminated in the backward reduced model selection process. There is no
significant effect of processing condition on SRM [F(1, 31) = 0.742, p = 0.396].
In order to investigate potential differences between subjects, we show the difference
in SRM that individual listeners experienced between the two processing strategies. To
specifically show subjects that benefit from condition LIN, we subtract SRM scores in
condition MIN from SRM scores in condition LIN. In Figure 4.5 this SRM difference is
plotted against the absolute SRM in condition LIN. A subset of 4 listeners (S1, S2, S6
and S10) experience 2–3.5 dB more SRM in condition LIN as compared to condition MIN.
The subjects that experienced the biggest SRM difference between conditions also have
relatively high SRM overall.
16
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.1: Objective analysis of ITDs introduced by minimum phase filtering. Signal
amplitude before and after compression (top panel). IG extracted from the compressor
for 15 frequency channels (middle panel). ITD in ms and azimuth angle in degree can be
interpreted with two corresponding color bars (bottom panel).
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 4.2: SRTs for eleven subjects measured in dB. Results from test and retest are av­
eraged in the four experimental conditions: LIN or MIN indicate the linear phase process­
ing condition and minimum phase processing condition, respectively; co­loc. or separ.
indicate the co­located and the separated masker configuration, respectively.
Figure 4.3: SRTs across eleven listeners in the four experimental conditions summarized
in boxplots. The mean in each condition is marked with a red + symbol. The boxplots show
the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles, as well as whiskers that cover all data except outliers.
Outliers are marked with circles. Statistically significant differences between conditions
are reported with *** (p<0.001). The individual data points are plotted as numerals on top
of each condition. The numerals are color­coordinated with the data in Figure 4.2 and the
numbers 1–11 correspond to subject­IDs S1–S11.
18
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.4: SRM scores (SRTs relative to reference condition co­loc.) across 11 listeners
comparing processing condition (LIN, MIN) summarized in boxplots. The overall mean in
each processing condition is marked with a red + symbol. The boxplots show the 25th,
50th, and 75th percentiles, as well as whiskers that cover all data except outliers. Outliers
are marked with circles. Individual data points are plotted as numerals on top of each
condition, corresponding to subject­IDs.
Figure 4.5: Difference in SRM that individual listeners experienced between the two pro­
cessing strategies plotted against absolute SRM in condition LIN. Data points are plotted
as numerals, corresponding to subject­IDs. Cluster with biggest SRM differences are
circled in red.
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
19
==PAGE:28==
20
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
==PAGE:29==
5
Discussion
The main purpose of the present study was to investigate how minimum phase processing
in a binaural HA setting affects naturally occurring ITDs and what implications this has on
spatial perception. The following is a discussion of the associated observations, their
limitations and potential implications.
The objective analysis of ITD distortions supports the hypothesis that there could be a
perceptual effect, introduced by binaural group delay differences. Minimum phase filtering
introduces ITD fluctuations between ±0.2 ms that can be interpreted as inducing changes
in the perceived azimuth of up to ±20◦. However, the results from the SRM experiment
suggest that there is no difference between the minimum phase processing condition and
the linear phase processing condition. The statistical analysis of the SRT scores show
that minimum phase processing does not adversely affect spatial perception.
The results in Figure 4.5 are interesting as they show that there is a subset of listeners
who showed decreased SRM in the minimum phase processing condition, compared to
the linear phase processing condition. A closer look at the between­subjects variation
reveals that the listener group in question exhibits both high SRM scores as well as a better
performance in the linear phase processing condition. Westermann et al. (2017) suggests,
that differences in test subject performance might be due to informational masking (IM)
effects.
5.1
Implications and limitations
The compressor used to process the stimuli was set up to have a level estimation with
an attack speed of 1700 dB/s and a release speed of 200 dB/s. These setting result
in a relatively fast compression. The main effect investigated in the present study (gain­
dependent group delay differences) is dependent on the application of different gain at the
two ears. The choice of fast compression helps to facilitate this effect. It is worth noting,
that a more compressive system might not accurately reproduce the effect of minimum
phase processing in a real HA. Furthermore, it can introduce audible artifacts at signal
locations of rapid level changes. This could be perceived as a clicking sound and might
have negatively affected the SRTs measured in the experiments.
In an experiment like this, certain effects are inevitable and can hardly be controlled for.
The listeners motivation and attention can substantially affect the measurements. Another
factor is the training effect during the experiment. Even though this can be mitigated
by providing adequate training, it is possible that some irregularity in the data can be
accounted for by the subject gaining a better understanding or changing their approach
during the experiment.
Considering the full set of individual test results in Appendix B, we can see that a subset of
participants was tested in an additional condition with a masker separation of ±45◦. Due
to the small sample size, these additional measurements were omitted in the statistical
analysis. The results do however look interesting, considering that 4 out of the 5 listeners
tested in the ±45◦configuration have higher SRM in the linear phase condition. It is worth
considering to replicate the experiment at a masker separation of ±45◦.
Low­pass filtering the stimuli was a well­founded design choice and could have aided
in emphasizing the impact of potential ITD distortions. However, removing the spectral
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
21
==PAGE:30==
content above 1 kHz also increased the overall difficulty of the experiment. Consider­
ing the effect of the broadband and high­pass stimulus in Macpherson et al. (2002) and
their associated listener weighting of spatial cues, it would be interesting to replicate the
experiment with different stimuli types.
Considering these implications and limitations, it would be very interesting to see the
SRM experiment in the present study replicated, especially on a larger scale. Testing
at a masker separation of ±45◦could yield new insight. Furthermore, it is possible that
the distinction between the two listener groups might become more pronounced withing
a bigger sample size.
22
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
==PAGE:31==
6
Conclusions
The present study investigates how minimum phase processing in a binaural HA setting
affects ITDs and consequently spatial perception. The objective analysis suggest that
minimum phase processing could potentially distort ITD cues. However, the results from
the listening experiment show no difference between the minimum phase processing con­
dition and the linear phase processing condition. The statistical analysis of the SRT scores
suggest that minimum phase processing does not adversely affect spatial perception. Al­
though a subset of listeners in the current study showed decreased SRM in the minimum
phase processing condition, the majority of subjects did not experience a performance
decrease in the minimum phase processing condition.
A healthy human auditory system is surprisingly robust in demanding scenarios. It is pos­
sible that future research reveals that the auditory system is robust against binaural group
delay differences as well. Until then, further research investigating the effects of minimum
phase processing needs to be conducted. With portable smart devices becoming indis­
pensable in recent years, it is no surprise that HAs too will be held to an increasingly high
standard in terms of usability and sound quality. The features of minimum phase pro­
cessing techniques in HAs seem promising and increasing market acceptance could be
the natural progression. If so, naturally more and more research will be oriented towards
investigating this technology.
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSIONS
23
==PAGE:32==
24
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSIONS
==PAGE:33==
Bibliography
Dirks, Donald D and Richard H Wilson (1969). “The effect of spatially separated sound
sources on speech intelligibility”. In: Journal of speech and hearing research 12.1,
pp. 5–38.
Bronkhorst, AW and R Plomp (1988). “The effect of head­induced interaural time and level
differences on speech intelligibility in noise”. In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America 83.4, pp. 1508–1516.
Best, Virginia et al. (2013). “An energetic limit on spatial release from masking”. In: Journal
of the Association for Research in Otolaryngology 14.4, pp. 603–610.
Macpherson, Ewan A. and John C. Middlebrooks (2002). “Listener weighting of cues for
lateral angle: The duplex theory of sound localization revisited”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 111.5, p. 2219. ISSN: 00014966. DOI: 10.1121/1.1471898.
Oppenheim, Alan V. and Ronald W. Schafer (1989). Discrete­time signal processing. Si­
mon Schuster. ISBN: 0­13­216771­9.
Blauert, Jens and P Laws (1978). “Group delay distortions in electroacoustical systems”.
In: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 63.5, pp. 1478–1483.
Nielsen, Jens Bo and Torsten Dau (2011). “The Danish hearing in noise test”. In: Interna­
tional journal of audiology 50.3, pp. 202–208.
Wagener, Kirsten, Jane Lignel Josvassen, and Regitze Ardenkjær (2003). “Design, op­
timization and evaluation of a Danish sentence test in noise: Diseño, optimización y
evaluación de la prueba Danesa de frases en ruido”. In: International Journal of Audi­
ology 42.1, pp. 10–17. DOI: 10.3109/14992020309056080. eprint: https://doi.org/10.
3109/14992020309056080. URL: https://doi.org/10.3109/14992020309056080.
Oreinos, Chris and Jörg Buchholz (Sept. 2013). “Measurement of a Full 3D Set of HRTFs
for In­Ear and Hearing Aid Microphones on a Head and Torso Simulator (HATS)”. In:
Acta Acustica united with Acustica 99. DOI: 10.3813/AAA.918662.
May, Tobias, Borys Kowalewski, and Torsten Dau (2018). “Signal­to­Noise­Ratio­Aware
Dynamic Range Compression in Hearing Aids”. In: Trends in Hearing 22. ISSN: 23312165.
DOI: 10.1177/2331216518790903.
Khing, Phyu P., Brett A. Swanson, and Eliathamby Ambikairajah (2013). “The effect of
automatic gain control structure and release time on cochlear implant speech intelligi­
bility”. In: PLoS ONE 8.11. ISSN: 19326203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082263.
Hammershøi, Dorte (May 2019). “A study of better hearing rehabilitation in Denmark (the
BEAR project)”. English. In: null ; Conference date: 22­05­2019 Through 25­05­2019.
URL: http://www.efas.ws/.
Keidser, G. et al. (2011). “The NAL­NL2 Prescription Procedure”. In: Audiology Research
1.1, pp. 88–90. ISSN: 2039­4349. DOI: 10.4081/audiores.2011.e24.
Bisgaard, Nikolai, Marcel S.M.G. Vlaming, and Martin Dahlquist (2010). “Standard Audio­
grams for the IEC 60118­15 Measurement Procedure”. In: Trends in Amplification 14.2,
pp. 113–120. ISSN: 10847138. DOI: 10.1177/1084713810379609.
Bates, Douglas et al. (2015). “Fitting Linear Mixed­Effects Models Using lme4”. In: Journal
of Statistical Software, Articles 67.1, pp. 1–48. ISSN: 1548­7660. DOI: 10.18637/jss.
v067.i01. URL: https://www.jstatsoft.org/v067/i01.
Kuznetsova, Alexandra, Per B. Brockhoff, and Rune H. B. Christensen (2017). “lmerTest
Package: Tests in Linear Mixed Effects Models”. In: Journal of Statistical Software,
Articles 82.13, pp. 1–26. ISSN: 1548­7660. DOI: 10.18637/jss.v082.i13. URL: https:
//www.jstatsoft.org/v082/i13.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
25
==PAGE:34==
Lenth, Russell V. (2021). Emmeans: Estimated marginal means, aka least­squares means.
URL: https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=emmeans..
Westermann, Adam and Jörg M Buchholz (2017). “The effect of nearby maskers on
speech intelligibility in reverberant, multi­talker environments”. In: The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 141.3, pp. 2214–2223.
26
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:35==
A
Objective analysis of ITD distortions
Figures A.1 to A.4 show the full analysis to investigate the effect that minimum phase
processing has on spatial perception (see Section 4.1). The analysis has been repeated
at different SNRs between 6 dB to −10 dB and shows that throughout the 2.5 s stimuli,
the minimum phase filtering introduces ITD fluctuations between ±0.2 ms that can be
interpreted as inducing changes in the perceived azimuth of up to ±20◦.
Figure A.1: Objective analysis of artificially introduced ITDs at an SNR of +6 dB.
APPENDIX A. OBJECTIVE ANALYSIS OF ITD DISTORTIONS
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure A.2: Objective analysis of artificially introduced ITDs at an SNR of 0 dB.
Figure A.3: Objective analysis of artificially introduced ITDs at an SNR of ­6 dB.
28
APPENDIX A. OBJECTIVE ANALYSIS OF ITD DISTORTIONS
==PAGE:37==
Figure A.4: Objective analysis of artificially introduced ITDs at an SNR of ­10 dB.
APPENDIX A. OBJECTIVE ANALYSIS OF ITD DISTORTIONS
29
==PAGE:38==
B
Full set of individual test results
Figures B.1 to B.11 show the individual results for all subjects as measured in the SRM
experiment. Data includes SRT scores for test and retest. SRM is computed from the
mean of test and retest.
Figure B.1: Experimental results for subject S1.
Figure B.2: Experimental results for subject S2.
30
APPENDIX B. FULL SET OF INDIVIDUAL TEST RESULTS
==PAGE:39==
Figure B.3: Experimental results for subject S3.
Figure B.4: Experimental results for subject S4.
APPENDIX B. FULL SET OF INDIVIDUAL TEST RESULTS
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure B.5: Experimental results for subject S5.
Figure B.6: Experimental results for subject S6.
32
APPENDIX B. FULL SET OF INDIVIDUAL TEST RESULTS
==PAGE:41==
Figure B.7: Experimental results for subject S7.
Figure B.8: Experimental results for subject S8.
APPENDIX B. FULL SET OF INDIVIDUAL TEST RESULTS
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure B.9: Experimental results for subject S9.
Figure B.10: Experimental results for subject S10.
34
APPENDIX B. FULL SET OF INDIVIDUAL TEST RESULTS
==PAGE:43==
Figure B.11: Experimental results for subject S11.
APPENDIX B. FULL SET OF INDIVIDUAL TEST RESULTS
35
==PAGE:44==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 352
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. (+45) 45 25 39 50
https://www.hea.healthtech.dtu.dk
