==PAGE:1==
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors
in the FGE magnetometer
Master Thesis
DTU Space
National Space Institute
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
Master Thesis
June, 2021
By
Anders Sonesson
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, National Space Institute, Elektrovej , Building 328, 2800 Kgs. Lyn­
gby Denmark
www.space.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis (30 ECTS) has been prepared over five months at the National Space Institute,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of
Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Anders Sonesson ­ s160080
Signature
Date
19/06/2021
ii
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The FGE magnetometer is produced and used by the National Space Institute at the
Technical University of Denmark, which is used for geomagnetic observations worldwide.
It currently uses three LDC­A20 sensors by Pandect, which have worked well for many
years. However, with the creation of the INTERMAGNET one­second standard in 2014,
the requirements for the sensors have become higher, and potential substitute sensors
are being investigated. Therefore, this thesis contains a series of measurements on a
new sensor made by researchers at the Czech Technical University in Prague with race­
track cores, which on paper promise to be better than the old FGE sensors. The results
will be compared with the old sensors and the INTERMAGNET one­second standard.
The noise measurements gives a noise level at 0.1 Hz of 11.6, 9.8, and 20.8 pT/
√
Hz
for the X, Y, and Z of the racetrack sensors, respectively, which is close to the INTER­
MAGNET requirement of ≤10 pT/
√
Hz and better than the original sensors. The phase
group delay is stable between 1­12ms for the Racetrack sensors, which is better than the
more unstable time delay in the LDC sensors that range between 1­40ms, and is close
to the ≤10ms requirement in the standard. The combined temperature coefficient for the
X, Y, and Z output of the Racetrack instrument and electronics is 0.66, 0.14, and 0.44
nT/°C respectively, which is somewhat higher than the requirement in the standard of
0.25 nT/°C and the 0.3 nT/°C for the original sensors. Because of difficulties in iso­
lating the different components contributing to the temperature coefficient, further tests
are recommended. The long­term drift has been estimated to be 8.2 nT/year, which is
more than the 5 nT/year of the INTERMAGNET standard and the 3 nT/year of the FGE
magnetometer with the LDC sensors. As only a short duration of data has been used in
this estimation, again, further tests should be carried out for a more accurate result. The
Racetracks sensors have shown promising results in some areas and some less favor­
able results in others. Therefore, the Racetracks sensors may be a suitable replacement
for the LDC sensors. Despite their promising noise performance, longer duration tests
of the temperature coefficient and long­term drift are required to obtain a more complete
picture.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Supervisors:
Lars William Pedersen, Engineer, National Space Institute, DTU
Chris Finlay, Professor, National Space Institute, DTU
I would like to sincerely thank Lars and Chris for making it possible to do this thesis, and
second of all, for all the help and guidance along the way. Thank you, Lars, for the much­
needed help with instrumentation and test setups in your workshop and Brorfelde. It has
been a lot of fun to work with you with plenty of hands­on work.
Big thanks to Anna Naemi Willer for help with baseline calculations. Thank you, Lars and
Anna, for sharing the precious, infamous, and delicious smørrebrødsmadder (open­face
sandwiches) from Brorfelde!
iv
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
FGM
Fluxgate Magnetometer
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
INTERMAGNET
International Real­time Magnetic Observatory Network
GIN
Geomagnetic Information Node
IMO
INTERMAGNET Magnetic Observatory
IGRF
International Geomagnetic Reference Field
PSD
Power Spectral Density
ASD
Amplitude Spectral Density
BFSL
Best Fit Straight Line
TBL
Terminal Base Linearity
DI measurement
Declination­Inclination measurement
BDV
Budkov magnetic observatory
PPM
Proton Precision Magnetometer
BFE
Brorfelde magnetic observatory
LSB
Least Significant Bit
ENOB
Effective number of bits
TD
Temperature Dependence
F
Magnetic total intensity
H
Magnetic horizontal intensity
B
Magnetic flux density
X
Magnetic intensity towards geographic North
Y
Magnetic intensity towards geographic East
Z
Magnetic vertical intensity
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background Theory
3
2.1
Geomagnetic Field Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Fundamentals of the Geomagnetic Field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
INTERMAGNET
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Magnetic Sensors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Fluxgate Sensor
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.6
Sensor Specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.7
Instrumentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
2.8
Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.9
Declination ­ Inclination Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3
Methodology and Measurement System
25
3.1
Calibration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.2
Noise Measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3.3
Linearity Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.4
Frequency Response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.5
Temperature Dependency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
3.6
Long Term Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4
Measurement Results
37
4.1
Noise Measurement Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.2
Linearity Test Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.3
Frequency Response
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.4
Temperature Dependency Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.5
Long Term Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
5
Discussion
61
6
Conclusion
65
Bibliography
67
A Pandect LDC­A20 sensor ­ Datasheet
71
B C3MAG user manual v6.20 DTU
77
C Matlab Code
82
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
Earth’s magnetic field is ever­changing, with variations ranging from local second long
pulsations to the eleven­year variations from the sunspot cycle and all the way to geo­
magnetic reversals that occur on average a few times per million years. For scientists to
investigate these variations, which can tell us a lot about the Earth, Sun, and everything
in between, we need reliable instruments that can quantify the magnetic field, i.e. magne­
tometers. Different kinds of magnetometers are used for applications ranging from smart­
phones and metal detectors to sensors for spacecrafts. For research­oriented ground
stations, it is common to use a tri­axial fluxgate magnetometer (FGM). One such FGM,
the FGE magnetometer, is made and sold by the National Space Institute at the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU), which is sold to geomagnetic observatories worldwide. The
FGE is reliable and very stable and uses three Vaquier type fluxgate sensors A. These
sensors have worked reliably for years, but new and better technologies become avail­
able as technology advances. Researchers at the Czech Technical University in Prague
have managed to produce low­noise and high­stability fluxgate sensors with planar oval
racetrack cores [1], which, on paper, sounds like a good and better substitute for the cur­
rent Vaquier type fluxgate sensors in the FGE. The racetrack cores can be seen in figure
1.1, besides the old LDC sensor, in between two secondary coils on quartz tubes.
Figure 1.1: The old LDC A20 sensor and two
of the new racetrack cores in between two
quarz tubes with the secondary coil.
Therefore, the purpose of this thesis is to
demonstrate whether or not the new race­
track fluxgate sensors are suitable for use
in the FGE magnetometer. To determine
this, a series of tests will be performed on
both the new racetrack and old Vaquier
sensors.
The tests include noise mea­
surements, linearity tests, frequency re­
sponse tests, tests to determine temper­
ature dependence on sensors and elec­
tronics, and a stability estimation. The re­
sults from these tests will then be com­
pared with international standards for geo­
magnetic observatories. The goal is not to
produce specifications for each sensor that
would be accurate enough for publication
in a datasheet, which would require better
preparation and setups for each test. The
results would likely change if the sensors
were fitted in an FGE ready for commercial
use, while changes to the electronics are
also very likely. Rather, it gives an early in­
dication of the suitability of these new sen­
sors and if they are worthy of further devel­
opment into the FGE magnetometer.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
1
==PAGE:12==
2
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:13==
2
Background Theory
2.1
Geomagnetic Field Sources
Multiple sources contribute to the measured magnetic field at Earth’s surface. They can
generally be divided into internal and external sources, as seen in figure 2.1. Secular
Variations are changes in the magnetic field that takes place over a year or more and
reflect the movement of materials in the Earth’s interior. More rapid changes have their
origins in the magnetosphere or ionosphere. Figure 2.2 shows the amplitude spectrum of
Earth’s magnetic field.
Internal sources:
• Crust: As material can only be magnetized if the temperature is below the Curie­
temperature of around TC ≈500°C and as the temperature is about 600°C at a depth
of 20 km, there exists no magnetized material below this depth, and this marks the
limit of the crustal region. The magnetic field from the crustal region contributes on
average about 3% to the total magnetic field of the earth.
• Mantle: As the temperature in the mantle is above the Curie­temperature and as
there is no movement in the materials, it is a non­magnetic region. Because of
time­varying changes in the magnetic field, currents are induced in the electrically
conducting mantle, which contributes to the total magnetic field.
• Core: The outer core of the Earth is composed of molten iron, and because of
thermal convection, currents produce a magnetic field that contributes by more than
94% of the total magnetic field.
External sources: The geomagnetic variations on shorter time scales can be linked to
the external sources, and an overview of the different variations can be seen in figure 2.3.
Some of the variations are caused by the solar wind interacting with the magnetosphere
and ionosphere. Others are caused by the rotation of the earth in the solar system [2].
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
3
==PAGE:14==
Figure 2.1: Sources contributing to the magnetic field measured near the Earth’s surface.
After Olsen and Stolle (2012). [2]
Figure 2.2: Amplitude spectrum of the Earth’s magnetic field showing individual sources.
[3]
4
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.3: Classification of periodic geomagnetic variations. [4]
2.2
Fundamentals of the Geomagnetic Field
The magnetic field B can be described in a local Cartesian coordinate system by the three
independent elements X, Y, and Z, where the X component is parallel to the direction to­
wards the geographic North, the Y component is towards the geographic East and Z is
vertical down. Besides these three, it is also common to use four more geomagnetic ele­
ments, the horizontal intensity, H, the total intensity, F, the declination, D and inclination,
I. To fully describe the magnetic field, three independent elements are necessary, like
(X,Y,Z), (H,D,F) and (Z,H,D). The elements can be seen in figure 2.4 and their relation­
ships are given by equations 2.1.
H =
p
X2 + Y 2
F =
p
X2 + Y 2 + Z2
X = H · cos(D)
Y = H · sin(D)
Z = F · sin(I) = H · tan(I)
tan(D) = Y /X
tan(I) = Z/H
(2.1)
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.4: Illustration of the geomagnetic elements.[2]
The term ”magnetic field” is used for both the magnetic field strength, H, and the magnetic
flux density, B. The difference between the two is in how they account for magnetization.
The relationship between H and B in a vacuum is given by,
B = µ0H
(2.2)
where µ0 is the vacuum permeability constant in free space. The relationship in a material
is given by,
B = µ0(H + M)
(2.3)
where M is the magnetization that arises by an internal magnetic source, or it can be
induced by an applied external magnetic field. Magnetic materials are either classified
as being Soft or Hard, where hard materials are dominated by permanent magnetization,
and the magnetization in soft material is dominated by induction. In soft materials, the
magnetization is approximately linear:
M = χH
(2.4)
where χ is the susceptibility of the material. In a soft material we therefore get
B = µ0(H + M) = µ0(1 + χ)H = µrµ0H = µH
(2.5)
where µr is the relative permeability.
2.3
INTERMAGNET
To study the different sources of the Earth’s magnetic field, it is necessary to obtain very
accurate magnetic field measurements over a range of time scales. For this reason, geo­
physical observatories have been build all around the world with tightly controlled con­
ditions. It is common for these observatories to include a vector magnetometer, like a
fluxgate magnetometer, as well as a scalar magnetometer, like a proton magnetometer.
In order to coordinate worldwide magnetic observation standards, the International Real­
time Magnetic Observatory Network (INTERMAGNET) was founded. The consortium re­
ceives data from 153 (As per 2021) observatories, where most are maintained by national
6
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:17==
research institutes and universities [5]. The observatories must send their data within 72
hours to Geomagnetic Information Nodes (GIN), which are seen in figure 2.5 together with
the active observatories as of 2019. For an observatory to be an INTERMAGNET Mag­
netic Observatory (IMO), it is necessary for the observatory to provide one­minute mag­
netic field data, and they must try to meet a set of data quality recommendations. Aside
from the one­minute standard, there’s also a newer one­second standard that ensures an
even better minimum quality of data. The standard specifications are compared in table
2.1. Notice that accuracy, thermal and long­term stability are missing in the one­second
standard, but it is safe to assume that they are not lower for the one­second standard.
Furthermore, several recommendations for the absolute measurements exist. Absolute
measurements are magnetic field data in universal physical constants without system­
atic instrumentation error. These recommendations cover the frequency of the absolute
measurements, the setup, and the internal and external conditions of the observatory.
Two important data products derived from the INTERMAGNET data are the International
Geomagnetic Reference Field (IGRF) and magnetic indices. The IGRF is a numerical
model of the magnetic field generated by the Earth’s geodynamo. It is revised every five
years because of the slow secular variations to stay as accurate as possible. The IGRF
is used by scientists in studies of local magnetic anomalies and studies of space weather.
It is also used by private and commercial entities that use the geomagnetic field for ori­
entation information [6]. The magnetic indices are measures of magnetic disturbances
that occur over periods of less than a few hours. These indices measure variations that
originate in the magnetosphere and ionosphere, and some are designed to quantify spe­
cific physical processes. They are used across many disciplines in geomagnetism, e.g.,
removing disturbed time data in studies of Earth’s deep interior, induction studies of the
crust and mantle, and studies of the physics of the space and the upper atmosphere [7].
It is important to use instruments and sensors that are able to live up to high requirements
as with better instruments at the individual observatories, the better the data, the better
the derived products, and the better the scientific research is possible.
Figure 2.5: Map of INTERMAGNET observatories and GINs in 2019. [8]
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
7
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.1: INTERMAGNET one­minute and one­second requirements. [9] [10]
One­Minute
One­Second
General specifications
Resolution
0.1 nT
1 pT
Amplitude range
≥±4000 nT High Lat.
≥±4000 nT High Lat.
≥±3000 nT Low Lat.
≥±3000 nT Low Lat.
Pass band
D.C. to 0.1 Hz
D.C. to 0.2 Hz
Accuracy
±5 nT
Thermal stability
0.25 nT/ C°
Long term stability
5 nT/year
Time­stamp accuracy
(centred on the UTC second)
0.01s
Phase response
(Maximum group delay)
±0.01s
Maximum filter width
25 seconds
Pass Band Specifications
[DC to 8mHz (120s)]
Noise level
≤100pT RMS
Maximum offset
±2.5 nT
Maximum component
scaling plus linearity error
0.25%
Maximum component
orthogonality error
2mrad
Maximum Z­component
verticality error
2mrad
Pass Band Specifications
[8mHz (120s) to 0.2Hz]
Noise level
≤10pT/√Hz at 0.1 Hz
Maximum gain/attenuation
3dB
Stop Band Specifications
[≥0.5 Hz]
Minimum attenuation
in the stop band (≥0.5Hz)
50dB
8
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:19==
2.4
Magnetic Sensors
Carl Friedrich Gauss was the first to create a magnetometer that was able to measure the
absolute magnetic intensity in 1832. It was a primitive device that consisted of a perma­
nent magnet suspended in mid­air. Since then, multiple types of magnetic sensors have
been invented. An overview of the application range for the different sensors is seen in
figure 2.6. A more detailed comparison can be seen in table 2.2. From the table, it is clear
why the fluxgate sensor is a good choice for geophysical magnetic surveys. It has good
linearity and noise specifications while having a dynamic range that covers the Earth’s
magnetic field [11]. As seen in the figure, induction coils have a broad application range,
and are also robust. However, because the dimensions of the coils need to be very large
for good sensitivity, induction coils are often not practical for geophysical applications.
Figure 2.6: Typical application range for typical magnetic field sensors, with Earth’s mag­
netic field strength range (25­65 µT) as reference.[11]
Table 2.2: Magnetic Sensor Performance Comparison. The table clearly shows the ben­
efits of using fluxgate sensors with good performance in noise, linearity, and accuracy.
[12]
Sensor Type
Vector /
Cost
Noise
Power
Linearity
Accuracy
Dynamic
Scalar
Range
Fluxgate
Vector
Moderate
Excellent
Low­
Excellent
Good
Wide
to 1.3pT
Moderate
AMR
Vector
Low
Fair
Low
Poor
Poor
GMR
Vector
Low
Poor
Low
Poor
Poor
GMI
Vector
Low
Poor
Low
Poor
Poor
Wide
SDT
Vector
Low
Fair
Low
Poor
Poor
Hall Effect
Vector
Low
Poor
Low
Poor
Poor
SQUID
Vector
High
Best
High
Fair
Fair
Narrow
sub pT
Overhauser
Scalar
High
Good
High­
Excellent
Best
Low
Moderate
Optically
Scalar
Highest
Good
High
Excellent
Very good
Moderate ­
Pumped
10pT
Good
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
9
==PAGE:20==
2.5
Fluxgate Sensor
2.5.1
Fluxgate Principle
A fluxgate sensor consists of a primary coil that is wound around a core of permeable
material and a secondary coil that surrounds the inner coil and is used for sensing. The
secondary coil is labeled Signal in figure 2.7. The primary coil is fed an alternating current
that is large enough in order to drive the core into plus and minus saturation. The primary
winding is wound so that each core half has opposite polarity, and the flux will, under no
applied external magnetic field, cancel each other out. If there’s a magnetic field applied,
the external field will cause an imbalance between the two core halves. The result is a sig­
nal that depends on the magnitude of the applied external field along the axis of the core,
and its polarity. Several factors can affect the signal from the secondary winding, which
includes the magnetic permeability of the core, number of turns in the sense winding, and
sensor geometry.
Figure 2.7: Basic principle of a Vacquier fluxgate sensor. Two high permeable rods with
the primary windings around and the secondary coil output is labeled ”Signal” and is
looped around the two rods.[12]
The signal is converted to a DC voltage that depends on the applied external magnetic
field, as illustrated in figure 2.8. The left and right images show the fluxgate voltages with­
out and with an external magnetic field applied, respectively. In the case of no applied
external field, the two half cores of the sensor will go into and come out of saturation simul­
taneously (2.8.b). This means that there will be no change of flux in the sense windings
and therefore no induced voltage. If a field is applied, the core half that generates a field
with an opposite direction than the applied external field will go out of saturation sooner,
while the core half with a field in the same direction as the applied external field will come
out of saturation later. This means that during the saturation/desaturation phase, there
will be a time where the fields from the core halves will not cancel out, and there will be
a net field (Figure 2.8.c right) in the same direction as the applied external field, which
is picked by the secondary sense coil. The changes in flux will induce a voltage which
means that the induced voltage will have a frequency of twice the drive frequency (Figure
2.8.d right) [13]. The phase and the size of these induced voltage spikes can be inter­
preted and give information about the direction and magnitude of the external field. By
using a tuning capacitor in parallel with the sense coil to ensure resonance at the right
frequency, the sensitivity can be increased [14].
10
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.8: Voltage and magnetic field vs. time graphs showing the basic signal principle
of a fluxgate sensor with and without an external field.[15]
The fluxgate electronics contain a feedback loop that will ensure that the core is at a zero
field. The circuit uses a synchronous detector to detect the even harmonics of the signal
from the coils. This signal is then integrated by using an analog integrator which outputs
a voltage that depends on the magnetic field through the core. The signal is then fed back
to the core in order to drive it to zero. A diagram of the basic operations of the fluxgate
electronics can be seen in figure 2.9.
To have a fluxgate sensor with low noise and a consistent offset, the core needs to be in
deep saturation while keeping the power consumption to a minimum. The driver for the
primary coil usually consists of an R/C network (R2 and C4 on figure 2.9), a MOSFET,
and an oscillator that outputs in the 10 to 30 kHz range. When the core is in the region of
high permeability, the impedance will be high, which makes the C4 capacitor charge. The
impedance of the primary coil will then become very low when the core goes into saturation
which will make the capacitor discharge through the coil. This produces a short burst of
current in the primary winding, which makes the core go even deeper in saturation.
This process ensures that the core is deep in saturation with a minimum of power con­
sumption and that the saturation timing is stable and that it is somewhat independent of
the temperature of the core and the drive voltage for the coil. The timing of saturation has
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
11
==PAGE:22==
Figure 2.9: Diagram of typical fluxgate electronics.[12]
a big impact on the generated second harmonic signal. It is therefore very important to
keep it constant for the synchronous detector to work as intended, as this has an impact
on the sensor’s offset and the 1/f noise level.
The secondary coil is both used for sensing the even harmonics of the frequency used
for driving the primary coil and for the feedback to ensure the core is driven to zero. The
harmonics are AC signals, and the feedback signal is DC, which is what makes it possible
to use the coil for both. The secondary coil is AC coupled with the preamplifier via the C3
capacitor for sensing.
The feedback to the secondary coil cancels out the measured applied external magnetic
field by providing a current that creates a field in the opposite direction. As the current,
and the current to field relationship, is known for this coil, it is possible to estimate the
external field. It is therefore important for the dimensions of the coil not to change with
temperature or in other predictable ways.
Another important characteristic of fluxgate sensors is their susceptibility to crossfield ef­
fects, which includes a change in offset, sensing direction, sensitivity, or a decrease in
linearity caused by cross fields that are fields perpendicular to the sensing direction. It is
therefore not a simple misalignment of the sensor from the desired axis [12].
2.5.2
Fluxgate Sensor Technologies
There are primarily three criteria by which a sensor’s quality is judged, its zero­offset stabil­
ity/accuracy, its 1/f noise, its bandwidth, and crossfield effects. Several sources contribute
to variation in these criteria, and one of the big ones is the core itself. With careful man­
ufacturing, material selection, and geometry design, it is possible to affect the important
criteria. Generally, there are two types of cores, parallel and orthogonal, named after the
orientation between the sensing magnetic field and the excitation magnetic field. Three
common types of parallel fluxgate cores are the ring, rod, and racetrack core geometry
seen in figure 2.10. Two common orthogonal cores are the wire­core and the cylindrical
core.
12
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.10: A ring core, rod, and racetrack sensor geometry.[12]
Ring core sensors are easy to manufacture, are very rugged, and have low power con­
sumption, making them the most commonly used core for fluxgate sensors. Rod core
sensors or their variant, Vacquier sensors, are often used when susceptibility to cross­
fields and linearity is important. Racetrack sensors are not used very often as they are
challenging to manufacture. However, they give good combined results when considering
power consumption, noise, and crossfield effects, as they are a compromise with low de­
magnetization like in a rod core and low power and noise like in the ring core. An overview
of the different characteristics for each core type can be seen in table 2.3 [12].
Table 2.3: Fluxgate sensor Geometry Performance Characteristics. [12]
Characteristic Evaluated
Fluxgate Sensor Type
Ring Core
Rod / Förster
Racetrack
Noise (RMS/√Hz @ 1 Hz)
6 ­ 20 pT
15 – 50 pT
4 to 12 pT
<8­10 pT typical
<25 pT typical,
<10 pT typical
0.7” dia. core
1.25” L
1.25” L
Drive Power
Lowest 2 cores
Highest 3 cores
Moderate 3 cores
Manufacturability
Best
More Difficult
Most Difficult
Zero Stability vs. Temperature
Good
Excellent
Very Good
Ruggedness
Very Good
Excellent
Good
Temp. Coefficient
Good
Excellent
Very Good
­ Scale Factor
Full Scale Linearity
<± .005% to 1G
<± .0018% to 5G
<± .0018% to 3G
Cost
Lowest
Intermediate
Highest
Crossfield Immunity
Good
Excellent
Very good
2.6
Sensor Specifications
2.6.1
Noise
All electronic systems have some sort of noise which is generally undesired. In fact, any­
thing that is not considered a signal could be defined as noise. Noise is a relative term that
depends on the specific situation. Fluctuations due to the ionosphere–magnetosphere
would, for example, be considered noise in ground magnetic surveys.
Noise is often described in terms of Noise Power Spectral Density (PSD), with units of
the form mV 2/Hz, or the Noise Amplitude Spectral Density (ASD), with units of the form
mV /
√
Hz, which is simply the square root of the PSD [16]. Sometimes the entire spec­
trum is not of interest, and the noise will be given at a specific frequency, for example,
mV /
√
Hz @ 1 Hz. The PSD is normalized to the frequency bin width, which ensures that
the duration of the data will not change the amplitude of the result. It can be expressed in
two ways. Either as the average of the squared magnitude of the Fourier transform, over
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
13
==PAGE:24==
a large time interval;
Sx(f) = lim
T→∞
1
T




Z T/2
−T/2
X(t)e+i2πft dt

2


(2.6)
where T is the time interval, or as the Fourier transform of the auto­correlation function:
Sx(f) =
Z ∞
−∞
Rx(τ)e−i2πfτ dτ
(2.7)
In this thesis, I use the pwelch from Matlab to produce a PSD. In order to measure a PSD,
an infinitely long sample of the data would be needed, which means it is only possible
to estimate a PSD with a finite length sample. A simple periodogram is a bad estimate
of this. pwelch uses Welch’s method, which reduces the variance of the periodogram by
breaking the time series into overlapping segments. A modified periodogram is computed
for each segment, and they are then averaged to produce an estimate of the PSD [17].
If the PSD of a magnetometer was only dependent on 1/f noise it would be possible to
estimate the noise at any frequency based on the noise level at any other frequency by
e2
1 = e2
2
f2
f1
(2.8)
where e is the noise amplitude and f is the frequency. Noise at the INTERMAGNET noise
amplitude limit of 10 pT/
√
Hz at 0.1 Hz, will with pure 1/f noise correspond to a noise of
≈80 pT/
√
Hz at 1/600 Hz (10 min.).
The RMS noise is simply the square root of the area under the PSD:
eRMS =
sZ f2
f1
PSD(f)df
(2.9)
If the noise is purely 1/f noise, the total RMS noise will be given by
e2
RMS =
Z f2
f1
e2
2
f2
f df = e2
2f2(ln(f2) −ln(f1))
(2.10)
For a band that is defined by the minimum time window in the INTERMAGNET specifi­
cation of 10 min. between 1.6949 mHz and 0.1 Hz, and with a noise of 10 pT/
√
Hz, the
RMS noise for pure 1/f noise would be eRMS ≈40.8 pT RMS. This is somewhat lower
than the maximum value in the INTERMAGNET specification of 100 pTRMS. In reality,
noise in the low frequencies is not only comprised of 1/f noise. There are multiple sources
as thermal noise, anthropogenic noise, component drift, and more [9].
There will be multiple sources of noise, which can be divided into internal and external
sources based on their origin relative to the sensor itself. The shape of the noise spectrum
tells us about the type of noise and its origin. Different kinds of noise that are relevant to
fluxgate sensors are covered in the following sub­sections.
14
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:25==
Thermal Noise
This is the most common noise as it arises from the thermal motion of charged particles.
It is present in all conductors, and the only way to affect the noise is by changing the
temperature, the bandwidth, or the resistance of the device. The thermal noise power,
voltage, and current can be calculated by these equations.
Thermal noise power:
PJ(rms) = kT∆f
(2.11a)
Thermal noise voltage:
VJ(rms) =
p
4kTR∆f
(2.11b)
Thermal noise current:
iJ(rms) =
r
4kT∆f
R
(2.11c)
where k is Boltzmann’s constant, T is the temperature, R is the resistance, and ∆f is the
Effective Noise Bandwidth. Thermal noise is White Noise as its spectrum is constant with
frequency, and its distribution is that of a zero­mean Gaussian [18].
[19] developed a model for the white noise of a fluxgate core and predicts a theoretical
lower white noise level of less than 100 fT/
√
Hz for a fluxgate with the size of 0.01
cm3 is possible. The lowest white noise level measured at the time of the article was
around 1 pT/
√
Hz. However, thermal noise is not of great importance in geophysical
measurements, as in the lower frequencies, it is the 1/f noise, also known as flicker noise,
that is the most dominant.
Flicker Noise
Flicker noise is observable in practically all electronics, which has a 1/f power spectral
density. Since it is present in so many systems, a huge amount of 1/f noise data has been
collected, despite this, a physical mechanism for the noise has yet to be identified, and it
is one of the old unsolved problems in physics. Flicker noise can be characterized by the
PSD function:
Sx(ω) = C/ω
(2.12)
where ω is the frequency and C is a constant. The integrated power between ω1 and ω2
is
Px(ω1, ω2) = 1
2π
Z ω2
ω1
Sx(ω) dω = C
2πln
ω2
ω1

(2.13)
From this, we can see that for the same frequency ratio, the power will be the same. This
means that the noise power in any decade, whether it is 0.1 Hz to 1 Hz or 10 Hz to 100
Hz, will be the same, and 1/f is therefore scale invariant [20].
All fluxgate sensors show a certain amount of 1/f noise with a typical ”knee”, or frequency
corner, at around 1 Hz. Higher quality sensors can have the ”knee” point at approximately
0.2 to 0.5 Hz, which matters depending on the application. It is therefore important for each
component in the fluxgate electronics to produce as low noise as possible. An illustration
of flicker noise, thermal noise, and frequency corner can be seen in figure 2.11 [12].
[22] found that the main noise in orthogonal fluxgates is not coming from the electronics,
but a big part of it is magnetic in origin and comes from the core itself.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
15
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.11: ASD that illustrates Flicker and Thermal noise.[21]
Barkhausen Noise
Figure 2.12:
Magnetization as a function
of magnetic field intensity where the small
jumps shows Barkhausen noise.[23]
Barkhausen noise comes from the process
of magnetization in ferromagnetic materi­
als. When an applied external magnetic
field is varied smoothly, the magnetization
curve will have random discontinuous in­
crements. It is caused by discrete changes
in the ferromagnetic domains and gives
a magnetization curve, as seen in figure
2.12.
According to [24], the noise from the
Barkhausen effect is an important fac­
tor in determining the sensitivity that can
be obtained in Single Layer and Bi­Layer
Permalloy Thin Film Cores. According to
[25] the Barkhausen effect may have been
contributing to a high noise floor in the data
from their racetrack fluxgate core.
According to [19] and [26], a single domain fluxgate core would have the thermal equilib­
rium magnetic fluctuations as the limiting noise as the motion of the domain walls would
not be present.
2.6.2
Sensitivity
Sensitivity is the slope of the input/output curve of the sensor. For a fluxgate sensor, it is
the number of Volts the sensor will output for each Tesla of input (V/T). [27] estimates the
sensitivity of their racetrack fluxgate in open­loop configuration to be:
S ≈4nseckAsecfµeff
(2.14)
where nsec is the number of turns on the secondary coil, k is a factor that accounts for
the total external flux density is mixed to all higher even harmonics of f, Asec is the cross­
section area of the secondary coil, and µeff is the effective relative permeability. From this,
16
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:27==
we can see that we can increase the sensitivity of a sensor by increasing the number of
turns on the secondary coil, choosing a drive frequency as high as possible, increase the
size of the secondary coil or use a more permeable material for the core. These changes
will naturally come with their own issues, and thus the benefits and disadvantages must
be weighed.
2.6.3
Stability
Stability is the degree of change in a sensor’s output over time. The more constant the
output over time, the more stable the sensor. Instability, also called drift, can be caused
by aging of components or a change in the sensor environment and can be given in how
much the baseline moves over a year, e.g., nT/yr. To account for this, if possible, the
drift can be modeled, and the data be corrected, or at certain intervals, the sensor can be
re­calibrated.
A major source of instability is the movement of the instrument pier, which isn’t specific to
fluxgate magnetometers but affects them nonetheless [28]. The most common cause of
this movement is frost in the ground and rainfall [29].
2.6.4
Linearity
Figure 2.13:
Methods for determining non­
linearity of sensor. Brown is the BFSL, blue is
the TBL, red is the sensor output response.[30]
An important characteristic of a trans­
ducer, like a fluxgate, is its linearity,
which deals with the shape of the in­
put/output curve of the sensor. Linear­
ity is usually specified in a percentage
of nonlinearity which is given by
Nonlinearity(%) = Din(max)
INf.s.
× 100
(2.15)
where Din(max) is the maximum input
deviation and INf.s. is the maximum
full­scale input[31].
There are two ways of specifying the
linearity error.
One is the Best Fit
Straight Line (BFSL) method which is
done with reference to a least­squares
fit straight line. The other is the Termi­
nal Base Linearity (TBL) which is determined by making a straight line between the two
data endpoints. Both methods are illustrated in figure 2.13.
2.6.5
Thermal Stability
Thermal stability deals with the change of offset, sensitivity, and noise with varying tem­
peratures. These changes can happen for several reasons; the materials of the fluxgate
dilates with temperature and can lead to stress in the core, dilation of materials surround­
ing the sensor, temperature sensitivity of electronic components, and thermal change of
susceptibility. Therefore, this can be improved by careful selection of materials, ensuring
mechanical stability in the sensor surroundings, and correcting the data in real­time with
independent instruments [32].
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
17
==PAGE:28==
2.7
Instrumentation
2.7.1
FGE Magnetometer
Figure 2.14: Drawing of the magnetometer assembly. [33]
To deal with the baseline
drift caused by movements
in the foundation of the ob­
servatories, O. Rasmussen
and E. Kring Lauridsen de­
veloped an instrument with
three fluxgate sensors fixed
in a marble cube that is
suspended by two crossed
flexible strips of phosphor­
bronze.
The movement of
the marble cube is damp­
ened by a little fan extend­
ing from the pendulum into a
container filled with viscous
silicone oil.
A drawing of
the assembly can be seen
in figure 2.14 [28]. Electron­
ics with a 16­bit ADAM­4017
ADC have been designed in­
house and are sold with the
instrument.
The sensor has traditionally
been the LDC­A20 by Pan­
dect and is a Vacquier type
fluxgate sensor with an exci­
tation frequency of 1600 Hz.
It has been modified with a
new secondary coil in order
to reduce the effect of any
magnetic field that is not par­
allel with the sensor. Some
specifications of the old sen­
sor in the instrument can be
seen in table 2.4. More infor­
mation about the sensor is available in the datasheet in appendix A.
2.7.2
C3MAG Racetrack Fluxgate Magnetometer
The C3MAG is a triaxial magnetometer with analog and digital output with a 100 Hz band­
width. It was developed by the Czech Technical University in Prague and the Czech Space
Research Centre / BD Sensors – Space division. The electronics, seen to the left in figure
2.15, features an analog output and digital output from a 24­bit simultaneously sampled
A/D converter. The sensor core is of an oval racetrack shape that has been cut by a
pico­second UV laser. The electronics version used in this project is the C3MAG 0041,
and the sensor versions are the RTQ1220_XX (EW,NS,vert). The sensors have differ­
ent sensitivities due to a different number of windings in the secondary pick­up coil, with
the Y sensor having the largest sensitivity, which gives a better resolution but a smaller
measurement range. This is beneficial for some sensors depending on the location of the
18
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:29==
instrument as the amount of variation in each axis is different. However, it does mean
that the sensors have to be specifically made for each instrument location, which requires
more work. The user manual and calibration constants can be found in appendix B.
Janošek et al. measured magnetic noise lower than 6 pT/
√
Hz @ 1 Hz at the BDV
observatory on a quiet day with the Racetrack sensors and a 24­bit 200­Hz A/D converter.
Their ASD is seen in figure 2.16 [1].
Figure 2.15: The C3MAG magnetometer. Electronics to the left and a box with three
sensors to the right. [34]
Figure 2.16: ASD of the magnetic noise at the BDV observatory with new racetrack sen­
sors. [1]
Table 2.4: FGE and C3MAG specifications. [34][35]
FGE
C3MAG
Sensitivity
100 ­1000 nT/V
7519 nT/V nominally (analog out)
Noise ­ Analog output
5pT/√Hz@1Hz
Noise ­ Digital output
40pT/√Hz@0.1Hz
30pT/√Hz@1Hz (ADC limitation)
Measurement range
±64 000 nT
±75000 nT
Temperature range
0 to 60°C
­40 to +85°C
Temp. coeff. of sensor:
<0.3 nT/°C
Temp. coeff. of electronics:
<0.1 nT/°C
Temp. coeff. combined:
<0.1 nT / °C
Long time drift:
<3 nT/year
Linearity ­ Analog output
10 ppm
Linearity ­ Digital data
50 ppm
AD Converter
16 Bit
24 BIt
Sampling speed
Up to 10 Hz
Up to 250 Hz
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
19
==PAGE:30==
2.7.3
Mingeo ObsDaq 24­bit ADC
To digitize the analog output from the C3MAG electronics, we use the Mingeo ObsDaq
24­bit fast A/D delta­sigma converter. We will use the ADC in the free­run mode, where
the built­in digital filter runs continuously and is not synchronized. This means that the
output will experience small offsets and errors originating from the internal clock in the
ObsDaq.
We will use raw 128 Hz data and 1 Hz filtered data with a two step Gaussian FIR filter in the
ObsDaq in the measurements in this thesis. The filter employs a high sampling rate digital
filter to reduce the 128 Hz to 16 Hz and a low sampling rate digital filter to transform the
16 Hz to 1 Hz data. The filter was investigated by L. Pedersen and L. Merenyi in [36], and
they found that the filter fulfills the demands in the INTERMAGNET one­second standard
where the pass band is from DC to 0.2 Hz with a maximum attenuation/gain of 3 dB and
where the stop band is 0.5 Hz with a minimum attenuation of 50 dB [9]. Figure 2.17
illustrates the filter borders and the test data from Pedersens and Merenyis experiments.
Figure 2.17: Magnitude plot of INTERMAGNET filter demands. blue shaded borders mark
out the very narrow band between 0.2Hz and 0.5Hz where the INTERMAGNET filter has
to attenuate with 50 db. the four curves show the FGE response with different filtering:
A: FGE analog output without any filter, b: FGE analog output with normal 1 Hz lowpass
filter, C: FGE analog output with PLASMON FIR filter (1 Hz data filtered from 128 Hz data),
D: FGE analog output with PLASMON FIR filter (128 Hz data). [36]
20
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:31==
2.8
Calibration
There are three kinds of parameters that need to be accounted for that are relevant for
a tri­axis orthogonal fluxgate magnetometer. These are the zero position parameter, or
offset, sensitivity parameter, and orthogonal parameter [37].
The raw magnetic reading can be defined as
R = [R1R2R3]T
(2.16)
The parameters can be be divided up into instrumentation parameters and magnetic in­
terference, which are defined as:
Instrumentation parameters [38]
Sensor offset:
O = [O1 O2 O3]T
(2.17a)
Sensitivity/Scale factor:
S =


S1
0
0
0
S2
0
0
0
S3


(2.17b)
Orthogonalization matrix:
P =


p11
p12
p13
p21
p22
p23
p31
p32
p33


(2.17c)
Magnetic interference
Hard iron:
bhi = [bhi1 bhi2 bhi3]T
(2.18a)
Soft iron:
Asi =


a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33


(2.18b)
The full magnetic field vector, F = [F1 F2 F3] = [FZ FY FX]T is then given by
F = SP (AsiR + bhi) + O
[39]
(2.19)


F1
F2
F3

=


S1
0
0
0
S2
0
0
0
S3




p11
p12
p13
p21
p22
p23
p31
p32
p33






a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33




R1
R2
R3

+


bhi1
bhi2
bhi3






O1
O2
O3


(2.20)
2.8.1
Calibration in the Literature
Various methods for magnetometer calibration have developed. One type of calibration
is using a non­magnetic turntable to turn the instrument like the old compass swinging
method was used to calibrate a compass for heading determination [40] or measuring the
output of the instrument in a full horizontal rotation, which is a simple way of giving the
offset and scale [41]. The downside of these is that a full 3D calibration is not possible,
and soft iron and misalignment parameters are not calibrated. In order to extend the
calibration to include triaxial magnetometers, it is possible to build a rig that would allow for
three offset parameters, three sensitivity parameters, and three non­orthogonality angles
to be determined in the Earth’s magnetic field, as it was done in [42]. This method requires
that the magnetometer rotate to a number of predetermined positions, which makes both
time­consuming and susceptible to magnetic field gradients. Furthermore, the diurnal
variations of the Earth’s magnetic field should be logged, which introduces uncertainty
because of the field difference between the site of logging and calibrating.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
21
==PAGE:32==
Another group of calibration methods is done by using a triple­axis Helmholtz coil as done
in [43]. These have the benefits of not requiring the magnetometer to move and not need
to cancel out the Earth’s field, as it is in the method used in [44]. However, it does require
a triple­axis Helmholtz coil and time to calibrate it.
Yet another group of calibration methods attempts fit a 3D ellipsoid: [45] [46] [47] [48] [49].
These methods minimize a cost function in order to estimate the calibration parameters.
Just like in [42], the magnetometer is spun around to cover the shape of an ellipsoid. The
intrinsic errors will distort the shape of the ellipsoid, as seen in figure 2.18. With the right
calibration parameters, the measured points will lie on a sphere with the radius equalling
the norm of the magnetic magnitude. These methods are easy to use and inexpensive to
use, but they are not able to calibrate for misalignment between the platform and sensor
as this doesn’t change the shape of the sphere but only rotates it [50].
To do a complete tri­axis calibration of a magnetometer, the ellipsoid­fitting algorithms
can be used together with inertial sensors, like accelerometers and gyroscopes, to run
a maximum likelihood or least­squares calibration process [51] [52] [53] [54] [55] [56].
However, this still requires the magnetometer to be spun around to cover a sphere, and
the algorithm computations can get heavy.
Figure 2.18: The ellipsoid of the red measurement data will be fitted to lie on the sphere
with a radius of Earth’s magnetic field magnitude. [47]
22
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:33==
2.9
Declination ­ Inclination Measurement
A Declination­Inclination (DI) measurement attempts to determine an accurate full de­
scription of the magnetic field using a proton precision magnetometer (PPM) and a single
axis vector magnetometer mounted on a theodolite. With a full description of the mag­
netic field, baseline values can be determined for three­axis fluxgate variometers nearby
in order to correct baseline drift for these instruments.
The measurement is done by making four measurements for each of the angles, where
the vector magnetometer is flipped and turned 180° to take into account the unknown
angles between the vector magnetometer and the theodolite. The following equations are
simplified as there are several constants and conversions involved in the full calculations.
After having determined the declination and inclination, we can now determine the base­
lines. For the H baseline, H0, we start by adjusting the inclination to account for small
accuracy errors during measurements:
Iadjusted = Imeasured −sin−1(Error/PPM)
(2.21)
where the error is the field strength when the vector magnetometer is orthogonal to the
inclination of Earth’s magnetic field and PPM is the full field measurement which is equal
to F. The calculated value of H is
Hcalculated = F · cos(Iadjusted)
(2.22)
We then get the baseline by
H0 =
q
H2
calculated −HE2var −HNvar
(2.23)
where HEvar and HNvar is the north and east data from the variometer.
The Z baseline, Z0, is simply calculated by
Zcalculated = F · sin(Iadjusted)
(2.24)
Z0 = Zcalculated −Zvar
(2.25)
where Zvar is the measured z value from the variometer.
For the declination baseline, we start by estimating the angle between True North and the
theodolite north by using a reference point with a known azimuth:
AzTheodolitenorth/TrueNorth = AzTrueNorth/Reference −AzTheodolitenorth/Reference
(2.26)
We then simply add the measured declination to get the baseline:
D0 = Dmeasured + AzTheodolitenorth/TrueNorth
(2.27)
To then calculate H,D and Z, the following equations are used:
H =
p
(H0 + HNvar)2 + HE2var
D = D0 + atan2(HEvar, H0 + HNvar)
Z = Z0 + Zvar
(2.28)
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
23
==PAGE:34==
24
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:35==
3
Methodology and Measurement System
The Racetrack cores were installed in the
quartz tubes that also were used for the old
Vacquier cores, as they have an extremely
low coefficient of thermal expansion. These
tubes have then been installed in a new ver­
sion of the FGE magnetometer, where the
only real difference between the new and
old version is that the new uses four high
tensile strings for eliminating tilt instead of
the flexible strips of phosphor bronze.
Figure 3.1: Block diagram of the setup with
analog and digital output from the C3MAG
electronics.
Figure 3.2: The new version of the FGE
magnetometer with the racetrack sensors
installed in the marble cube.
Instead of
phosphor­bronze strips, high­tensile strings
are used and are attached to an aluminium
ring.
In the following experiments, both the ana­
log and digital output of the C3MAG elec­
tronics will be used. The analog output was
connected to the ObsDaq 24­bit A/D con­
verter, and the block diagram can be seen
in figure 3.1. From here on, the old LDC
sensors are referred to as FGE sensors and
the new racetrack sensors, simply as Race­
track sensors. The whole instrument con­
struction with sensors and electronics is re­
ferred to as the Racetrack instrument.
To begin with, the Racetrack instrument was
calibrated both with the digital and analog
output of the C3MAG electronics. After this,
a series of tests were executed in order to
compare the Racetrack sensors with the FGE
sensors and to determine if they can live
up to the INTERMAGNET one­second stan­
dard. Some of the tests were performed in
a workshop at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU). Others were performed at
Brorfelde (BFE) magnetic observatory that
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
25
==PAGE:36==
is installed with a 2­axial, H and Z field, Helmholtz coil system, a three­component fluxgate
variometer, a proton magnetometer and a DI­fluxgate magnetometer placed in different
non­magnetic huts. BFE is located on the island of Sjælland in Denmark, away from any
major sources of magnetic interference.
The Matlab scripts used to calculate the results in the following tests are either very spe­
cific or replicable from the test descriptions and will therefore not be included in this thesis.
However, short calculation examples for the noise calculations are included in appendix
C.
3.1
Calibration
It is important to do a calibration of the instrument in order to correct the data with the
right parameters. The calibration parameters given by the manufacturer may not be valid
anymore as the Racetrack sensors have been handled multiple times and installed in our
instrument with extra wires and circuitry added in between the sensors and the electronics.
Two different methods of calibration are used for calibrating the sensors with digital and
analog output. The first calibration was done in the Helmholtz coil system at BFE and
the method used was developed by Ole Rasmussen. Using this method, we estimate
not only the offsets and sensitivities but also the sensor angles for the orthogonalization
matrix mentioned back in equation 2.17c. Following this method also allows us to level the
instrument and marble cube properly. Instead of following the same method to calibrate
the data from the analog output, we chose to compare the data with an already established
and calibrated FGE magnetometer at BFE with the correct baseline values determined by
a recent DI measurement. This allowed us to save time as we already had determined
the sensor angles and had leveled the instrument.
3.1.1
Calibration in Helmholtz Coils ­ Digital Output
To start with, the marble cube with the sensors was leveled by adjusting a number of
screws, adding some weight, and repeatedly turning on and off the Helmholtz coils, en­
suring that the contribution from the perpendicular field was minimized. The strength of
the Z­field was adjusted so that the difference between what the Racetrack Z sensor out­
puts when the Z­field is turned off and on is below 100 nT. This obviously introduces
an error source, especially when the values have not been adjusted with the calibration
parameters yet.
In the following, X, Y , and Z refer to the output of the X, Y, and Z Racetrack sensors.
The direction subscripts (N, W, E, S, NE, NW, SE, SW) refer to the direction that the
instrument is facing, and the subscript ON and OFF refers to the state of the Z­coils. E.g.,
XNON means the output from the X sensor when the instrument is facing north and the
Z­coils are ON.
The sensitivities are estimated by:
Sensitivity (X sensor):
Sx = Hfest + Hfest
XNON −XSON
(3.1a)
Sensitivity (Y sensor):
Sy = Hfest + Hfest
YWON −YEON
(3.1b)
Sensitivity (Z sensor):
Sz = ZfresOF F −ZfresON + ZfresOF F −ZfresON
ZWOF F −ZWON + ZEOF F −ZEON
(3.1c)
26
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:37==
Hfest refers to the estimated value of the H­field field inside the coils at the time of mea­
surement, from the earth’s magnetic field. It is estimated by
Hfest =
p
X′2 + Y ′2
(3.2)
where X′ and Y ′ is the X and Y sensor output from a calibrated FGE magnetometer close
by.
Zfres is the resulting value of the Z­field inside the coils at the time of measurement. It is
estimated by
ZfresOF F
=Zfest = Z′
(3.3a)
ZfresON
=Zfest −Zcest
(3.3b)
=Z′ −Zcest
(3.3c)
=Z′ −UZ · CZ
(3.3d)
=Z′ −UZ · (CZ′ · (1 −(T −20) ∗Tc/1000000))
(3.3e)
where Z′ is the Z sensor output from a calibrated FGE magnetometer close by. Zfest
refers to the estimated value of the Z­field field inside the coils at the time of measurement
from the earth’s magnetic field. Zcest is the estimated field that the Z­coils create, UZ is
the voltage applied to the Z­coils, CZ is the coil constant given in nT/V, CZ′ is the coil
constant at 20°C, T is the temperature in the hut during measurements in Celcius, Tc is
the temperature coefficient given in ppm/°C.
The offsets are estimated by:
Offset (X sensor):
Ox = (XNON + XSON ) · Sx −Hfest + Hfest
2
(3.4a)
Offset (Y sensor):
Oy = (YWON + YEON ) · Sy −Hfest + Hfest
2
(3.4b)
Offset (Z sensor):
Oz = (ZNOF F + ZWOF F + ZSOF F + ZEOF F ) · Sz −(4 · Zfest)
4
(3.4c)
The sensor misalignment angles are illustrated in figure 3.3 and given by the following
equations.
Angle to XY plane for X sensor (mrad):
αx = (−XNON + XNOF F −XSON + XSOF F ) · Sx + Hfest −Hfest −Hfest + Hfest
Zfest + Zfest
(3.5)
Angle to XY plane for Y sensor (mrad):
αy = (−YNON + YNOF F −YSON + YSOF F ) · Sy + Hfest −Hfest −Hfest + Hfest
Zfest + Zfest
(3.6)
Angle to ZY plane for Z sensor (mrad):
βz = (ZNOF F −ZSOF F ) · Sz −(ZfresOF F −ZfresOF F )
Hfest + Hfest
(3.7)
Angle to ZX plane for Z sensor (mrad):
αz = (ZWOF F −ZEOF F ) · Sz −(ZfresOF F −ZfresOF F )
Hfest + Hfest
(3.8)
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
27
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.3: Angle parameters. [43]
For the combined misalignment error of the X and Y sensor in the XY plane, a few ele­
ments needs to defined:
Error in XY plane for X sensor (nT):
cx = (XNON −XSON ) · Sx −Hfest −Hfest
2
(3.9)
Error in XY plane for Y sensor (nT):
cy = (YNON −YSON ) · Sy −Hfest −Hfest
2
(3.10)
Average error in XY plane for X and Y sensor (nT):
cxy = cx + cy
2
(3.11)
Calibrated X, Y and H values (nT):
XXSE
=XSEOF F · Sx −Ox
(3.12a)
Y YSE
=YSEOF F · Sy −Oy
(3.12b)
XXNW
=XNWOF F · Sx −Ox
(3.12c)
Y YNW
=YNWOF F · Sy −Oy
(3.12d)
Misalignment error of the X and Y sensor in the XY plane from the NW and SE directions
(mrad):
βxySE
=−(Hfest + cxy)2 −XX2
SE −Y Y 2
SE
XXSE · Y YSE · 2
· 1000
(3.13a)
βxyNW
=−(Hfest + cxy)2 −XX2
NW −Y Y 2
NW
XXNW · Y YNW · 2
· 1000
(3.13b)
(3.13c)
28
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:39==
The combined misalignment error of the X and Y sensor in the XY plane is thereby (mrad):
βxy = βxySE + βxyNW
2
(3.14)
The equations for the X and Y sensor angle to the XY plane should in fact be
Output error = sin(α) · Z field −H field −cos(α) · H field
(3.15)
however the difference in the resulting angles between the used and real equations is
down to four powers of magnitude smaller then the values, which makes the deviation
irrelevant compared to the precision possible with this calibration method and the required
precision of the calibration parameters.
The data from the measurements are seen in table 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3. We had to do two sets
of measurements as the Y sensor reached its measurement range for the measurements
marked in red in table 3.1. The number of LSBs (Least Significant Bit) for a 24 bit ADC
is 224 = 16777216LSBs while the number of LSBs used for the measurements in red are
1370LSB/nT · (5542nT + 5668nT) = 15357700LSB. The difference in LSB count could
be because of a slightly lower Effective number of bits (ENOB) for the ADC. This changes
the notation, but the above equations were still used as described.
Table 3.1: Calibration data. The measurements in red indicate the measurements where
the Y sensor reached its measurement range, and they are therefore not used.
Date:
17/03/21
Start time:
11:07
End time:
11:16
Z field:
∼0 nT
I = ­364.7 mA
Direction
Z coils
X (nT)
Y (nT)
Z (nT)
North
On
17282
2
51
Off
17233
4.5
45656
West
On
­2
5542
156
Off
­25
5542
45582
South
On
­18003
­5
129
Off
­18019
­15
45594
East
On
­2
­5668
32
Off
­25
­5667
45669
Table 3.2: Calibration data. Z field ON under all measurements.
Date:
17/03/21
Start time:
11:16
End time:
11:20
Z field:
∼0 nT
I = ­364.7 mA
Direction
X (nT)
Y (nT)
South East
­12978
­5824
South West
­12920
5386
North West
12277
5689
North East
12001
­5525
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
29
==PAGE:40==
Table 3.3: Calibration data. Z field ON under all measurements. X field ON under all
measurements to ensure that the y­sensor do not exceed its measurement range.
Date:
17/03/21
Start time:
11:48
End time:
11:55
Z field:
∼0 nT
I = ­364.7 mA
X field:
∼5000 nT
I = 380 mA
Direction
X (nT)
Y (nT)
North
4654
6
North West
3245
3475
West
­20
4961
South West
­3917
3485
South
­5393
28
South East
­4034
­3462
East
27
­4992
North East
3158
­3546
North
4652
54
As the digital output read from the C3MAG software has already been calibrated with the
parameters specified by the manufacturer, our results indicate how well they fit. There­
fore, the sensitivity from the manufacturer will be multiplied with the unitless scale factor
from our calibration, and our offsets are subtracted from their offsets. The manufacture’s
calibration parameters are seen in table 3.4. Our calibration results are seen in table 3.5,
which indicates the scale factor and offset correction that the manufacture’s calibration
parameters should be adjusted with. The estimated values are therefore seen in table
3.6. The misalignment errors of the sensors in the marble cube are given in table 3.7.
During the normal procedure of building the FGE magnetometer, X and Y sensors will be
matched depending on their internal core alignment, which ensures a low βxy misalign­
ment error. This procedure could not be followed for the Racetrack instrument as we only
had one set of Racetrack sensors available, which means that the βxy misalignment error
is rather large. The reason for the low misalignment errors for the rest of the angles is
due to the leveling that was done at the beginning of the calibration procedure.
Table 3.4: Sensitivity and Offset calibration parameters from the manufacturer.
X
Y
Z
S (LSB/nT)
195
­1370
141
O (nT)
156.4
­26.5
­31.9
Table 3.5: Sensitivity and Offset calibration parameters from our calibration at BFE.
X
Y
Z
S (Scale factor)
0.9749
1.0054
1.0379
O (nT)
­352
­16
78
Table 3.6: Adjusted Sensitivity and Offset calibration parameters from the sensor manu­
facturer by a new calibration in BFE.
X
Y
Z
S (LSB/nT)
190.1
1377.4
146.3
O (nT)
­191.6
­42.4
47.3
The data from the digital output in the following experiments will be calibrated with the
calibration parameters in table 3.6.
30
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:41==
Table 3.7: Misalignment errors from calibration in radians and arc minutes.
αx
αy
βz
αz
βxy
Radian (mrad)
­0.7
­0.1
1.8
­2.6
10.6
Minute of arc (’)
­2.41
­0.34
6.19
­8.94
36.44
This method of calibration is assumed to be inferior to some of the newer calibration meth­
ods using ellipsoid fitting and inertial sensors that have been described in the previous
chapter. This is because, in the newer methods, there are more data points compared
with the 2 data points in our calibration for calculating offset and sensitivity. Furthermore,
our calibration is based on an estimation of the resulting field inside the coils, which may
not be accurate if the coil constant has changed or there are other disturbances. The soft
iron calibration constants are not estimated in our calibration method, but as the materi­
als in the instrument have been carefully selected to be non­magnetic, it is assumed that
the influence would be smaller than other uncertainties. Uncertainties of values in our
calibration and the accuracy of the different methods have not been estimated.
3.1.2
Calibration by Reference FGE Magnetometer ­ Analog Output
Instead of using the same method with the analog data, it was calibrated with another
FGE instrument that has already been calibrated and is known to give accurate values.
As the FGE instrument is a relative vector magnetometer, it measures the magnetic field
relative to a certain baseline that can vary due to reasons mentioned previously in section
2.6.3. In order to calibrate these baselines, a DI measurement was made at BFE.
After the reference FGE instrument was calibrated with new baseline values, the FGE
and Racetrack sensor outputs were plotted against each other, and a straight line was
fitted. The sensitivity and offset were adjusted until the line had a slope of one and a zero
offset, and the result can be seen in table 3.8. This does, however, not take into account
the inter­sensor misalignment and the angle between two instruments. As the angles are
estimated to be small, it is accurate enough for the following experiments. The calibration
parameters given by the manufacturer, seen in table 3.9, are a bit different from our results
which is likely because of the extra wire and circuitry that have been added in between
the sensors and the electronics in order to fit the sensors into the instrument. Figure 3.4
shows the total magnetic intensity FGE magnetometer data from BFE plotted against the
total magnetic intensity Racetrack instrument data calibrated by the parameters in table
3.8. A linear fit on the data gives a slope of 0.998 and an offset of 0.1 nT, which The data
from the analog output using the ObsDaq, will be calibrated with these values.
Table 3.8: Sensitivity and offset of Racetrack sensors from the analog output when com­
pared with an established FGE magnetometer during a period with constant temperature
for the Racetrack instrument.
Sensitivity (nT/V)
Offset (nT)
Racetrack X (Analog)
4209.1
151.5
Racetrack Y (Analog)
­610.4
427.4
Racetrack Z (Analog)
5695.4
700.6
Table 3.9: Sensitivity and offset of Racetrack sensors from the analog output estimated
by the manufacturer.
Sensitivity (nT/V)
Offset (nT)
Racetrack X (Analog)
4310.3
32.3
Racetrack Y (Analog)
653.6
8.2
Racetrack Z (Analog)
5952.4
196.4
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
31
==PAGE:42==
Figure 3.4: Data from the FGE magnetometer at BFE plotted against the data from the
Racetrack instrument calibrated with the parameters in table 3.8. The data is a 156 hours
long and a few larger spikes over and under the daily variations. A linear fit gives a slope
of 0.998 and an offset of 0.1 nT.
3.2
Noise Measurements
It is important for the sensor to have a noise level as low as possible as this makes it pos­
sible to study even smaller magnetic fluctuations. The effect of noise at high frequencies
is not so important as it can be filtered, but it is investigated in the following non the less.
Noise measurements of data from the Racetrack sensors with both digital and analog
output of the C3MAG electronics and the FGE sensors with the FGE electronics digitized
with the ObsDaq will be performed. In order to estimate the self­noise of the sensors and
electronics, the measurements were done in a zero field cylinder with seven layers of u­
metal in order to cancel out the influence of the Earth’s magnetic field and anthropogenic
sources. A short analysis of the sensor noise when the instruments are placed at BFE,
where they mainly experience the Earth’s magnetic field and a 50 Hz contribution from
the power lines, will also be performed.
Figure 3.5 shows a diagram of the setup for the noise measurements and the linearity
tests. For the noise measurements, the frequency generator and coil are not used.
Figure 3.5: Diagram of the setup for the noise measurements in the zero­field cylinder
and the linearity tests. For the noise measurements, the frequency generator was not
used.
32
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:43==
3.3
Linearity Test
Linearity is an important parameter of a sensor as the less linear the sensor output is, the
more the output will be scaled at different field strengths. If the exact linearity profile is
known, the linearity error can be corrected, but it is preferred to have a sensor with a low
linearity error. The following test was done at a workshop at DTU.
The linearity was tested using a 16 bit Agilent 33522a frequency generator outputting a 1
Hz square wave to a coil (The red coil on figure 3.5) wherein the sensors lay. The coil and
sensors were placed in a zero­field cylinder to minimize outside noise. The reason for
not using a DC current for the coil is that it would magnetize the zero­field cylinder, which
is undesirable. The input voltage amplitude was increased in steps, and the maximum
and minimum of the square output wave were averaged from 30 seconds of data for each
input step. A straight line was then fitted to these averages. As the frequency generator
has a maximum output of 20 Vpp and because of the available exciter coil, data from the
full measurement range of the X sensor was not possible. For this reason, the test was
also done on the Y­sensor as it has a different number of windings and the measurement
range is much smaller.
3.4
Frequency Response
The frequency response was measured by driving a coil with a frequency generator with a
fixed voltage amplitude. The sensors were placed in this coil, and the analog output from
the Racetrack electronics and the output from the FGE electronics were monitored on an
oscilloscope. By changing the frequency and measuring the amplitude and phase shift of
the output, the frequency of the sensors was measured. Figure 3.6 shows the setup for
this test.
Figure 3.6: Diagram of the setup for the frequency response tests.
3.5
Temperature Dependency
Fluxgate sensors are temperature­dependent as the materials of the sensor, and the rest
of the instrument can expand and subtract depending on the surrounding temperature and
thus change the geometry ever so slightly. To take this temperature dependence (TD)
into account for the geomagnetic data, it would be necessary to know the temperature
in the sensors and know the TD, or to know the temperature outside of the instrument
and then model the TD. The problem with the former solution is that it is difficult to place
a temperature sensor inside the fluxgate sensor, and this would also likely give issues
with noise, among other things. The problem with the latter solution is that the sensor is
placed in a marble cube with a certain thermal mass, and the instrument is enclosed in an
acrylic dome which makes the modeling difficult as the output will also be dependent on
the rate of change of the temperature. It would likely also require a new model for each
new room/location where the instrument is installed. Because of these reasons, it is much
easier to use a sensor and electronics with a low TD. Therefore, the individual TD of the
instrument and the electronics will be determined. Furthermore, the effect of temperature
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
33
==PAGE:44==
on noise and sensitivity will also be investigated. The tests were performed at a thermally
controlled and insulated hut at BFE.
To determine the TD, the instrument with the Racetrack sensors is placed in an insulated
hut at BFE equipped with electric heaters and thermostats to control the temperature.
Temperature sensors are located at different heights in both rooms, and the sensor from
which data is used in this section is located at the same height as the Racetrack instrument
in the middle of the room. The hut consists of two rooms that can be thermally isolated by
closing a door and installing insulation. The north room is where the Racetrack instrument
is located, and the south room is where the electronics are. Figure 3.7 shows a diagram
of the temperature hut.
Figure 3.7: Diagram of the temperature hut
at BFE. Temperature sensors are hung from
the ceiling.
Three tests will be done:
1. Same temperature for instrument
and electronics. The temperature
in the hut will be set on a seven­day
period sine wave with a minimum of
15°C and a maximum of 35°C, con­
trolled by the thermostat and relay for
the electric heaters.
2. Constant temperature for the elec­
tronics and varying temperature
for the instrument.
The instru­
ment and electronics are thermally
isolated. The room with the electron­
ics is kept at a constant temperature
of 20 °C, and the room with the in­
strument will follow the same temper­
ature curve as the previous test.
3. Varying temperature for the elec­
tronics and constant temperature
for the instrument.
The tempera­
ture in the room with the electron­
ics is put on a 24­hour period sine
wave with the same minimum and
maximum as the previous tests. The
room with the instrument is kept at a
constant temperature of 20 °C.
Furthermore, the temperature’s effect on noise and sensitivity will also be investigated.
The reason for using a seven­day period for the tests where the temperature of the room
with the instrument is varied is because of the thermal mass of the instrument and the
acrylic dome preventing a thermal equilibrium from being reached fast. By making the
period seven days, the instrument will have enough time to reach equilibrium with the
surrounding air. In the case of varying the temperature for the room with the electronics,
the temperature period can be shorter as the electronics are much more exposed and will
reach equilibrium quickly.
The Racetrack instrument was placed on a level pillar facing the same direction as a per­
manently established FGE instrument at BFE. The angle between the two instruments is
34
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:45==
calculated to be 10 mrad which is the same magnitude as the combined error of the Race­
track X and Y sensors in the horizontal plane. The angle between the two instruments will
therefore not be tried compensated for, as we lack the information of the individual angle
of the X and Y sensors in the horizontal plane, and as the angle between the instruments
is small enough to give a good estimate of the TDs.
A DI measurement was done, as described in section 2.9, in order to calculate the correct
baselines for the established FGE variometer. The data from the Racetrack instrument
was then calibrated against the FGE data as described in the calibration section. By
subtracting the data from the established FGE from the Racetrack instrument, it is possible
to remove the daily variations of Earth’s magnetic field. What is left is the change in
the magnetic field due to the temperature differences and minor local variations in the
magnetic field.
3.6
Long Term Stability
To estimate the stability of the sensors, it is necessary to compare the output data from the
Racetrack sensors with a reference. One such reference could be the PPM at BFE. By
subtracting the PPM data from the Racetrack data, we get the Closing Error (CE), which
is simply the difference between related measurements to a true or fixed value, which
in this case is the PPM data. We use the same data from the TD measurement as this
our longest continuous measurement with a predictable temperature. By subtracting the
slope of the linear fit of the temperature in the hut with the Racetrack instrument for the
same time multiplied with the TD found earlier, we get the estimation of the stability slope
for the Racetrack instrument. This does not take into account a potential drift in the PPM,
but it is assumed small and therefore not important in this estimate.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
35
==PAGE:46==
36
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:47==
4
Measurement Results
The following section contains the results from the different tests and discussions on the
data. The next chapter contains a further discussion of the results, and table 6 in the
conclusion chapter includes a summary of the main results.
4.1
Noise Measurement Results
4.1.1
Noise Measurement in Zero­Field Cylinder
Figure 4.1 shows test data from the Racetrack sensors from the analog output and dig­
itized with the ObsDaq, and test data from the LDC sensors with the FGE electronics.
Figure 4.2 shows the test data from the Racetrack sensors with the digital sensors. It can
be seen that Racetrack sensors from the analog output experience a slight daily variation,
which most likely is due to daily variations in the room temperature where the cylinder was
located. This is not seen in the data from the FGE sensors, which could be because they
have a lower TD than the Racetrack sensors, as seen in section 4.4.
(a) Racetrack X
(b) FGE X
(c) Racetrack Y
(d) FGE Y
(e) Racetrack Z
(f) FGE Z
Figure 4.1: Calibrated data from the Racetrack and LDC sensors in a zero­field cylinder.
Magnetic field strength as a function of the time of day. 43.12 hours. Raw 128 Hz data.
The solid purple temperature graph is the temperature of the temperature sensor in the
ObsDaq, and the dotted line is the temperature from the FGE sensor inside the zero­field
cylinder.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
37
==PAGE:48==
(a) Racetrack X
(b) Racetrack Y
(c) Racetrack Z
Figure 4.2: Calibrated data from the Racetrack sensors with the digital output from the
C3MAG electronics, in a zero­field cylinder. Magnetic field strength as a function of the
time of day. 17.95 hours. Raw 206.5 Hz data.
Similar for the three data sets is that the measured field slowly increases, which could
be because of a slowly increasing temperature in the sensors. The temperature profile
before the displayed portion of data had an increasing temperature, so it could be that the
sensors needed time to warm up. The ASDs of the three zero­field cylinder data sets are
seen in figures 4.3, 4.4, and 4.5.
Figure 4.3: ASD of 43.12 hours of data from the FGE LDC sensors in a zero­field cylinder
with the FGE electroncis. Raw 128 Hz sampling from ObsDaq. Lowpass filter in FGE
electronics is clearly visible. Noise @ 0.1 Hz around 30­40 pT/
√
Hz for the three sensors.
38
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.4: ASD of 43.12 hours of data from the Racetrack sensors in a zero­field cylinder
with the analog output of the C3MAG electronics and digitized with the ObsDaq ADC. Raw
128 Hz sampling. Noise @ 0.1 Hz around 10­20 pT/
√
Hz. Spikes are of unknown origin.
Figure 4.5: ASD of 17.97 hours of data from the Racetrack sensors in a zero­field cylinder
with the digital output of the C3MAG electronics. Raw 206.5 Hz sampling. Noise @ 0.1
Hz around 10­20 pT/
√
Hz.
The ASDs are estimated using Welch’s method. The plots only show ASD data down to
10−2Hz as the more segments Welch’s method use, the less noisy the plot is at higher
frequencies, but the effects of the Hanning window used will begin to be visible at lower
frequencies. As the data sets are relatively short and in order to see the higher frequen­
cies, these are the axis limits. In the next section, an ASD with longer test data in BFE is
shown.
In figure 4.3, with the ASD of the FGE sensor output, the lowpass filter of the FGE elec­
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
39
==PAGE:50==
tronics is visible. Besides the 50 Hz contribution, the ASD is very smooth, indicating that
the sensors and electronics are not very susceptible to outside noise sources. The ASD
of the Racetrack sensors with analog output clearly shows a number of repeating spikes
of unknown origin. 50 Hz is not a multiple of the spike frequencies. The ASD of the Race­
track sensors with digital output show much more noise spikes at higher frequencies. A
clear difference between the Racetrack and FGE sensors is that for the Racetrack sen­
sors, the noise for each X, Y, and Z sensor has a different magnitude, while for the FGE
sensors, the noise magnitude is the same. This stems from the way that the two systems
implement the sensitivity. The Racetrack sensors require the different sensitivities to be
multiplied on the output data, as each sensor has a different number of windings on the
secondary coil. In contrast, the FGE sensors have the same number of windings and
require changes in resistors in the feedback loop in the electronics. However, even with­
out the sensitivities multiplied on the racetrack outputs, the noise levels are still different,
despite M. Janošek et al stating that; ”[...] the sensors in the triplet perform equally well”
[1], regarding the noise levels of the Racetrack sensors. Another difference between the
three graphs is that the FGE sensors exhibit more 1/f noise than the Racetrack sensors.
The analog Racetrack output appears to have lower thermal noise compared with the
digital output.
Table 4.1: Noise levels @ 1 Hz and 0.1 Hz estimated
from the ASD of the data from the Racetrack and FGE
sensors in a zero­field cylinder. RMS noise estimated
from the PSD between 2.1 mHz ­ 8 mHz, and RMS
noise if the noise was pure 1/f noise.
Racetrack
Analog/ObsDaq
Racetrack
Digital
FGE
Noise @ 1 Hz ( pT
√
Hz)
X
3.9
7.5
11.2
Y
2.9
2.8
13.6
Z
6.4
11.6
11.2
Noise @ 0.1 Hz ( pT
√
Hz)
X
11.6
13.1
30.6
Y
9.8
8.5
37.3
Z
20.8
23.0
43.9
RMS noise (pT)
X
4.79
4.79
10.02
Y
3.99
3.83
12.60
Z
8.34
9.56
18.63
RMS noise of pure 1/f noise (pT)
X
4.65
4.73
9.46
Y
3.84
3.53
12.77
Z
8.27
7.79
17.9
As shown previously in table 2.1,
the INTERMAGNET one­second
standard requirements for the
noise is ≤10pT/
√
Hz at 0.1 Hz
and ≤100pT RMS noise in the
passband (DC to 8mHz) for a pe­
riod of at least 10 minutes. The
RMS values were calculated by
equation 2.9, and the noise at 0.1
Hz was simply estimated from the
ASD at 0.1 Hz.
The results for
the Racetrack and FGE sensors
are seen in table 4.1, where it can
be seen that that all three data
sets live up to the RMS noise re­
quirements.
However, only the
Racetrack Y sensor lives up to
the noise requirement at 0.1 Hz.
The measured RMS noise is just
above the value of an RMS of
pure 1/f noise as calculated from
equation 2.10, which also can be
seen in table 4.1. This is as ex­
pected as the zero­field cylinder
should remove most of the out­
side magnetic interference.
40
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:51==
4.1.2
Noise Measurement at BFE
Figure 4.6 shows Racetrack X and FGE X sensor data from a period of constant temper­
ature in a hut at BFE. Figure 4.7 shows the ASD of the Racetrack data, and figure 4.8
shows an ASD of data over the same period from the established FGE magnetometer
at BFE. From 0.2 Hz, the effects of the Gaussian fir filter in the ObsDaq are visible. In
the 0.05­0.2 Hz frequency range, it is clear that the Racetrack sensors have a lower self­
noise which makes it possible to see some variations in the Earth’s magnetic field that
is not visible in the FGE data. For frequencies below 0.05 Hz, the two ASDs are very
similar as they are dominated by the natural variations in Earth’s field. This similarity is
also seen in that the RMS noise between 2.1mHz ­ 8mHz is 252.00 pT and 252.79 pT for
the Racetrack and FGE sensors, respectively.
The same spikes are visible in the ASD from BFE as in the ASD from the zero­field cylin­
der, which could indicate that the origin of the spikes is from the ObsDaq as there shouldn’t
be any other major noise sources at BFE other than 50 Hz. The spikes do not appear to
be at the same frequencies as observed in the ASD from the manufacturer in figure 2.16.
Figure 4.6: Plot of the magnetic field strength measured by the Racetrack X and FGE
X sensors at BFE used in the noise measurements in this subsection. The two curves
coincide very well, which is expected from the decently calibrated Racetrack sensors.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
41
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.7: ASD of Racetrack data with the instrument at a constant temperature of 23.6
°C and located at BFE. 113.3 hours. Filtered from raw 128 Hz to 1 Hz by Gaussian fir filter
in the ObsDaq. Noise @ 0.1 Hz around 10­20 pT/
√
Hz.
Figure 4.8: ASD of FGE data from BFE at constant temperature. 113.3 hours. Filtered
from raw 128 Hz to 1 Hz by Gaussian filter in the ObsDaq. Noise @ 0.1 Hz around 30­50
pT/
√
Hz.
42
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:53==
4.2
Linearity Test Results
Figure 4.9 shows the linearity data and seems to display a similar deviation for the Race­
track and FGE sensor at 4.5V and 5V, which could possibly be due to some effect in the
frequency generator. If we remove these two measurements and the first measurement
of the FGE, we get the data plot in figure 4.10. Here it is clear that the FGE sensor ex­
hibits some non­linearity, while the Racetrack sensor looks more linear. By defining the
linearity as the deviation from the best fit straight line (BFSL), as illustrated in figure 2.13,
we estimate linearities as seen in table 4.2.
From these results, it is evident that the accuracy of the frequency generator is too low to
give useful results, as the C3MAG datasheet specifies the linearity of the analog output
to be 10 ppm. In fact, the datasheet of the frequency generator states it has an amplitude
accuracy of ±1% [57], which is equivalent to ±244nT. From our measurements it is clear
that the accuracy of the frequency generator is better than the value stated in its datasheet,
however, still low for the purpose of this test. Despite the low accuracy of the frequency
generator, the Racetrack sensor does seem to be more linear than the FGE sensor. In
this test, the ObsDaq ADC was used with the analog output from the C3MAG, and its
linearity is expected to be less than these results. It can, however, be concluded that the
linearity of the Racetrack sensors is < 195.7 ppm.
Figure 4.9: Deviation from straight line fit vs input voltage for the Racetrack and FGE X
sensors.
Table 4.2: Linearity results.
Non­Linearity (ppm)
Racetrack X
< 195.7
Racetrack Y
< 328.9
FGE X
< 620.1
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
43
==PAGE:54==
Figure 4.10: Deviation from straight line fit vs. input voltage for the Racetrack and FGE X
sensors. Data points removed.
The Y sensor seems to lose its linearity when the core is approaching its measurement
range, as seen in figure 4.12. This could explain the weird behavior of the Y sensor
during the calibration. The sensor seems to lose its linearity between 3870 nT and 5165
nT. This might also be because the sensor does not have time to stabilize within the
half of a second the square 1 Hz wave is at the extremes, as it is near the limit of its
measurement range. The maximum measurement range is the 5542 nT seen in figure
4.12 where the line flattens. Figure 4.11 shows the deviation from a straight line fit for
the linearity measurements on the Y sensor. However, again, we do not get close to the
expected nonlinearity because of the low accuracy of the frequency generator.
Figure 4.11: Deviation from straight line fit vs.
input voltage for the Racetrack Y sensor.
Figure 4.12: Racetrack Y sensor linearity.
44
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:55==
4.3
Frequency Response
The bode plot from the test can be seen in figures 4.13 and 4.14. The measurements
were stopped at 100 Hz as the signal got too noisy on the oscilloscope, and frequencies
above that are not used.
The FGE electronics had the following scale factors X: 3020 nT/V, Y: 157 nT/V, and Z:
5850 nT/V. This difference in scale factor changes the frequency response, which is the
reason for the big difference in magnitude and phase delay for the three FGE sensors, as
was seen in [36]. The three Racetrack sensors have corner frequencies at around 20­30
Hz, making it well clear of the 1 Hz data.
The time delay is seen in figure 4.15, which also shows the effects of the different scale
values as the FGE Y sensor has a much larger time delay than the others. The phase
delay measurements below 1 Hz were imprecise, which is also seen in the erraticity of the
data. Between 1­100 Hz, the time delay does, however, appear to be stable and below
10 ms.
Figure 4.13: Magnitude plot as a function of frequency for the Racetrack and FGE sensors.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
45
==PAGE:56==
Figure 4.14: Phase plot as a function of frequency for the Racetrack and FGE sensors.
Figure 4.15: Time delay as a function of frequency. The time delays for the three racetrack
sensors are relatively stable and close to 10ms, while the FGE Y sensor has a clearly
unstable time delay.
46
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:57==
4.4
Temperature Dependency Results
4.4.1
Same Temperature for Instrument and Electronics
The difference between the data from the established FGE instrument and the Racetrack
instrument in this test can be seen in figures 4.16, 4.17, and 4.18. The plots clearly show
the seven­day period temperature sine wave and thus the TD of the Racetrack instrument
and electronics. Day 5 to day 12 were magnetically disturbed days which is also visible
in the plots as either the local difference in the magnetic field was larger or the response
to the disturbed data is different between the two sensor types. It is also clear that the Z
sensor has substantially less noise than the two other sensors, which can be seen in the
ASDs in the noise section earlier.
Figure 4.16: Difference in the magnetic field readings from the established FGE and the
Racetrack instrument. Filtered from raw 128 Hz to 1 Hz by Gaussian filter in the ObsDaq.
seven­day temperature sine wave clearly visible. X sensor.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
47
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4.17: Difference in the magnetic field readings from the established FGE and the
Racetrack instrument. Filtered from raw 128 Hz to 1 Hz by Gaussian filter in the ObsDaq.
seven­day temperature sine wave clearly visible. Y sensor
Figure 4.18: Difference in the magnetic field readings from the established FGE and the
Racetrack instrument. Filtered from raw 128 Hz to 1 Hz by Gaussian filter in the ObsDaq.
seven­day temperature sine wave clearly visible. Z sensor
Figures 4.19, 4.20 and 4.21 shows the smoothed difference of the FGE and Racetrack
instruments together with the smoothed temperature data from a temperature sensor next
to the Racetrack instrument. By adjusting the scale of the difference data, it is possible
to match it to the temperature data and thereby estimate the TD. As shown in the graphs,
the bottom of the temperature sine wave is disturbed by the outside natural temperature
variations at BFE. This means that the full sine wave is not visible, which makes it more
difficult to estimate the scale value for the difference data i.e., the TD. If the full sine
48
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:59==
wave were visible, it would have been ideal to make a curve fit on the difference and
temperature data and then compare the parameters of the two fits or plot the temperature
against the difference and make a linear fit. Instead, the scale factor, offset and phase
of the difference data have been manually estimated as this is thought to give the best
result under the circumstances. The difference data in each plot have been shifted a
small amount to the left for the seven­day period sine waves to overlap. However, what
continues to be a mystery is that the small peaks in the difference data, i.e. the natural
temperature variations, seem to coincide with the peaks in the temperature data for the X
sensor. On the other hand, for the Y sensor, the small peaks seem to be lagging behind
the temperature data, and for the Z sensor, the peaks are positioned before the peaks in
the temperature data. If this is because of temperature differences inside the instrument
or some other reason is not yet known. In figure 4.21, it can be seen that the natural
variations in the temperature in the bottom of the sine wave correspond very well with the
difference data when the phase shift is taken into account. The FGE instrument is kept
at a stable temperature with only small fluctuations on sunny days. The results are seen
in table 4.3. As the output of each sensor has been multiplied by their sensitivity factor,
it would be reasonable to assume that the magnitude of the TD of each sensor would
correlate with the sensors’ respective sensitivities. This seems to be the case for the X
and Y sensor as the TD divided by the sensitivity is 0.16V /°C and 0.23V /°C for the X and
Y sensors, respectively. However, for the Z sensor, this value is 0.08V /°C, which means
that there is more to the difference in temperature coefficients than simply the sensitivities.
Figure 4.19: Difference in the magnetic field readings from the established FGE and the
Racetrack instrument plotted with the temperature next to the Racetrack instrument. X
sensor.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
49
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.20: Difference in the magnetic field readings from the established FGE and the
Racetrack instrument plotted with the temperature next to the Racetrack instrument. Y
sensor.
Figure 4.21: Difference in the magnetic field readings from the established FGE and the
Racetrack instrument plotted with the temperature next to the Racetrack instrument. Z
sensor.
50
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:61==
Table 4.3:
Combined temperature dependence of the three Racetrack sensors, the
C3MAG electronics and the ObsDaq.
Temperature
dependency (nT/°C)
Racetrack X
0.66 ±0.05
Racetrack Y
0.14 ±0.01
Racetrack Z
0.44 ±0.03
4.4.2
Constant Temperature for the Electronics and Varying Temperature
for the Instrument
Figure 4.22 shows the temperatures in the north and south rooms. The temperature
sensors are located roughly in the middle of each room. Figures 4.23, 4.24, and 4.25
show the temperature in the north room plotted with the difference between the Racetrack
and FGE data for the X, Y, and Z sensors.
Figure 4.22: Temperatures in the north and south rooms. The north room is following
a seven­day sine temperature wave, while the south room is attempted to be kept at a
constant temperature but is affected by sunny days heating the room.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
51
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.23: Temperature in the north room plotted with the difference in B between Race­
track and FGE sensors for the X sensors.
Figure 4.24: Temperature in the north room plotted with the difference in B between Race­
track and FGE sensors for the Y sensors.
52
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:63==
Figure 4.25: Temperature in the north room plotted with the difference in B between Race­
track and FGE sensors for the Z sensors.
4.4.3
Varying Temperature for the Electronics and Constant Temperature
for the Instrument
Figure 4.26 shows the temperatures in the north and south rooms. Figures 4.27, 4.28
and 4.29 shows the temperature in the south room plotted with the difference between
the Racetrack and FGE data for the X, Y and Z sensors.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
53
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.26: Temperatures in the north and south rooms. The south room is following a
1­day sine temperature wave, while the south room is attempted to be kept at a constant
temperature, but is affected by sunny days heating the room.
Figure 4.27: Temperature in the south room plotted with the difference in B between
Racetrack and FGE sensors for the X sensors.
54
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.28: Temperature in the south room plotted with the difference in B between
Racetrack and FGE sensors for the Y sensors.
Figure 4.29: Temperature in the south room plotted with the difference in B between
Racetrack and FGE sensors for the Z sensors.
4.4.4
Separation and Explanation of Temperature Dependency
Looking at the graphs from the variation of the temperature for the sensors and electronics,
it is difficult to immediately make sense of their TDs. This is because the TD visible in the
graphs is a combination of rotations of the sensors in the instrument and the TD of the
sensors by themselves. For figure 4.23, we see a large instrument TD for the X sensor,
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
55
==PAGE:66==
which can be explained by the sensor’s own TD and possibly a tilt around the Y­axis. This
tilt would have a much larger impact on the X sensor output compared with the Z sensor
output as the Z field is much larger than the X field. The Z sensor in figure 4.25 appears
to have only a very small negative TD on the instrument temperature but a large TD on
the temperature of the electronics. The small TD of the instrument temperature could be
explained by the fact that a tilt around the X or Y axis would not affect the Z sensor output
by much, and a rotation around the Z axis should not affect the output at all. The TD of
the Z sensor should, therefore, primarily show the TD on the electronics. The graph of
sensor Y in figure 4.24 shows a small TD on the instrument temperature, which could be
explained by a rotation around the Z­axis as this would affect the Y sensor the most as
the Y field is by far the smallest.
In figure 4.27, we see the same large TD of the instrument for the X sensor. There appears
to a very small negative TD on the temperature of the electronics, seen by the small drops
in output when the temperature of the electronics is high. For the Y sensor in figure 4.28,
there appears to be a small TD of the temperature of the electronics but no clear TD
of the instrument temperature. Figure 4.29 shows a clear TD on the temperature of the
electronics and no TD on the temperature of the instrument for the reasons described
earlier.
To better see the TD in figure 4.25, we subtract the temperature in the south room multi­
plied by the TD constant we found earlier. This gives us the result in figure 4.30, where it
is somewhat easier to see the TD on the instrument temperature for the Z sensor.
Figure 4.30: The temperature in the north room plotted with the difference in B between
Racetrack and FGE sensors for the Z sensor. The difference in B have been corrected
by subtracting the temperature in the south room multiplied with the TD on the electronics
for the Z sensor listed in table 4.5, 0.42 (nT/°C)
Based on these graphs, the TDs are estimated in table 4.4 and 4.5. The uncertainties are
high because of the difficulty of determining the relevant variations.
56
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:67==
Table 4.4: TD of the three Racetrack sensors and the instrument.
Temperature
dependency (nT/°C)
Racetrack X
0.73 ±0.05
Racetrack Y
0.21 ±0.02
Racetrack Z
­0.13 ±0.03
Table 4.5: TD of the electronics for each Racetrack sensor.
Temperature
dependency (nT/°C)
Racetrack X
­0.07 ±0.02
Racetrack Y
0.11 ±0.01
Racetrack Z
0.42 ±0.05
4.4.5
Temperature Effect on Noise
According to the background theory of noise explained in the previous chapter, the effect
of temperature changes should be most visible at higher frequencies above the frequency
corner in figure 2.11, where the flicker noise is less prominent. Unfortunately, only 1 Hz
data has been recorded at BFE with varying temperatures. However, in the following, the
temperature effect on the noise at lower frequencies will be investigated.
By subtracting the Racetrack data from data from the established FGE instrument at BFE,
as in the previous section, and plot it with the temperature, we get the plot seen in figure
4.31 for the X sensor. The temperature data is from the ObsDaq, as the rest of the temper­
ature sensors had not been turned on at this point. Here it is clear that the sensor output
difference follows the temperature neatly with a scale factor of 0.62nT/°C, except for rapid
temperature variations. There is, however, a deviation from the temperature around day
five, which could stem from the fact that the temperature data is from the ObsDaq that is
positioned at the bottom of the hut. The air temperature in the hut is assumed to be a little
stratified, as the floor is cooling down the lower air layers.
To determine the effect of temperature on the noise, two sections of data have been
chosen where the temperature is somewhat constant and at two different values. This
gives us two temperatures to estimate the effect from. Ideally, it should be done with
multiple different temperatures, preferably in a zero­field cylinder, but with the scope and
purpose of this project, two will suffice.
The two sections are visible in red in figure 4.31, and the mean of temperature in the high
and low sections are 53.4°C and 23.6°C respectively. The sections are both 113.2 hours
long.
The ASDs of the data from the two sections are visible in figures 4.32 and 4.33. The spec­
tra look very similar, except for small differences from the natural variations. The noise
at 0.1 Hz is very similar. The noise RMS values for the sensors between the frequencies
1.7391­8.000 mHz (10 min.) are seen in table 4.6. The noise appears to be very similar
in the two sections, as expected from the theory.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
57
==PAGE:68==
Figure 4.31: Difference in the magnetic field readings from the established FGE and the
Racetrack instrument plotted with the temperature in the bottom of the hut. The sections
of data used for the high and low temperatures are also plotted. X sensor.
Figure 4.32: ASD of the three Racetrack sensors during a 113.2 hour period with 53.4°C
in the hut. Filtered from raw 128 Hz to 1 Hz by Gaussian filter in the ObsDaq.
58
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:69==
Figure 4.33: ASD of the three Racetrack sensors during a 113.2 hour period with 23.6°C
in the hut. Filtered from raw 128 Hz to 1 Hz by Gaussian filter in the ObsDaq.
Table 4.6: RMS noise for high and low temperature section of data.
RMS noise for
HIGH temperature
section (pT RMS)
RMS noise for
LOW temperature
section (pT RMS)
Racetrack X
228.2
252.0
Racetrack Y
214.6
164.6
Racetrack Z
53.1
47.8
4.4.6
Temperature Effect on Sensitivity
To estimate the effect of temperature on the sensitivity, the Racetrack data from the two
temperature sections were simply calibrated individually to the FGE instrument data. The
results are seen in table 4.7. The results show a slight negative correlation between the
temperature and the sensitivity. This can likely be explained by the temperature coefficient
of the resistance of the copper wire in the sensor, as [58] also concludes.
Table 4.7: Temperature dependence on the sensitivity for the Racetrack sensors.
Low temperature (23.6°)
sensitivity (nT/V)
High temperature (53.4°)
sensitivity (nT/V)
Sensitivity per degree
(nT/V/C°)
Racetrack X
4209.1
4066.9
­4.77
Racetrack Y
610.4
609.6
­0.03
Racetrack Z
5695.4
5533.4
­5.44
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
59
==PAGE:70==
4.5
Long Term Stability
The closing error, as described in section 3.6, is seen in figure 4.34 with a linear fit. The
slope of the linear fit is slightly positive as the measurements were done in spring with
rising temperatures. The combined TD for the instrument is calculated by multiplying the
mean of the Racetrack sensors output with the respective TD determined in the previous
section and dividing with the full field:
TDcombined = Xmean · 0.66 nT
°C + Ymean · 0.14 nT
°C + Zmean · 0.44 nT
°C
p
X2mean + Y 2
mean + Z2mean
(4.1)
The stability slope for the Racetrack instrument is therefore estimated to be
SlopeStability = SlopeCE −SlopeTemperature · TDcombined
= 3.700 · 10−7 nT
s −1.711 · 10−7 °C
s · 0.640nT
°C
= 2.605 · 10−7 nT
s
(4.2)
By multiplying the slope with a year, we get an estimate of the long­term stability to be
2.605 · 10−7 nT
s · 1year = 8.2 nT
year.
Figure 4.34: Closing error plotted with a linear fit. The seven­day period temperature
variation of the hut with the Racetrack instrument is clearly visible affecting the output
with an amplitude of around nT.
60
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:71==
5
Discussion
The purpose of this thesis is not to provide high accuracy specifications for the sensors,
which means that multiple things could be changed to improve the accuracy of the results.
In this section, the changes and improvements for each test and data processing that,
in retrospect, would have benefited the results including improvements that would have
required more time and access to other equipment will be commented upon.
Calibration
The calibration method used in this thesis gives three offset parameters, three sensitivity
parameters, and five sensor angles where one of them is the horizontal angle between
the X and Y sensors. If all six angles were known, as shown on figure 3.3, it would have
been beneficial to correct for these angles to get higher accuracy in all measured field
components. Furthermore, if time had allowed, it could have been interesting to undertake
the ellipsoid­fitting algorithm with inertial sensors as mentioned in section 2.8.1.
Noise Measurements
Although the Racetrack sensors’ noise does not fully live up to the very demanding IN­
TERMAGNET one­second standard, it is a significant improvement from the FGE sensors,
which would certainly benefit the final data product. Even if the three Racetrack sensors
were three copies of the Racetrack Z sensor, the noise would still be far better than that
of the FGE sensors. Even though there is a benefit of having sensors with low noise, it is
not the most crucial parameter [36], which means that despite two of the sensors do not
comply with the standard, they can still be used.
Uncertainties of ±2pT/
√
Hz and ±0.5pTRMS for the noise level at 0.1 Hz and the RMS
noise, respectively, are estimated based on the variance in the ASDs.
For the noise measurements in the zero­field cylinder, it would have been interesting to
make the measurements over a longer period of time in order to estimate noise levels at
even lower frequencies. It would also have been good to place the zero­field cylinder in
the temperature hut at BFE to better control temperature fluctuations.
It could also have been interesting to remove the lowpass filter in the FGE electronics to
better compare the thermal noise between the FGE and Racetrack sensors. The spikes
visible in the ASDs from the analog output of the C3MAG electronics and digitized with
the ObsDaq, are so far of unknown origin and should be investigated further.
Linearity Test
Despite the difficulty of determining the nonlinearity error to a high degree of accuracy
in this thesis, it is clear that the Racetrack sensors have better linearity than the FGE
sensors. The nonlinearity error for both the Racetrack and FGE sensors live up to the
2500 ppm requirement in the INTERMAGNET one­second standard. However, the lin­
earity specification is not the most important aspect of the sensors as they are used in a
stationary instrument where the variations that the sensors experience are confined to a
small field strength range. The specification would be a lot more important if the sensors
were used in a rotating instrument. None the less, in order to improve the linearity mea­
surements, it would have been beneficial to use another method for linearity testing as the
output of the frequency generator was not stable enough for this purpose. The frequency
used could also advantageously be lowered to give the generator more time to stabilize.
One alternative method could be to place the sensors in the Helmholtz coils at BFE, vary
the field produced by the coils in steps meanwhile measuring the Earth’s field close by,
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
61
==PAGE:72==
and then calculate the field experienced by the sensors. However, this would require
some more time for alignment and calculations. Another way could be to use a more
stable frequency generator.
Frequency Response
In the results, it is clear that the ”knee” of the magnitude and phase plots for the Racetrack
sensors are well clear of the 1 Hz data, which is necessary for accurate measurements at
this frequency. The time delay plot also shows that the time delay for the Racetrack sen­
sors is relatively stable and below the 10 ms limit in the INTERMAGNET one­second stan­
dard. The FGE Y sensor does not seem to possess these characteristics, which means
that using the Racetrack sensors would be an improvement in this regard. Because of
the imprecision in the oscilloscope used for the measurements, the results would have
benefited from using a better oscilloscope. That together with a more accurate frequency
generator would lead to more accurate results and would also mean that it would be pos­
sible to produce a bode plot that includes the higher frequencies as well in order to see
the full frequency response, instead of the bode plot in figure 4.13 and 4.14, where the
measurements stop at 100 Hz.
Temperature Dependency
The TD results and the following discussion of the individual contribution of sensor rota­
tions, electronics, and sensors to the overall system TD show the importance of sepa­
rating the various contributions with multiple tests. The TDs estimated are perhaps not
a good representation of the individual TD contribution as there were unfortunately too
many variables in the tests performed in this thesis. They do, however, give an indication
of the TDs which seem to be very high in comparison with the < 0.3 nT/°C and < 0.1
nT/°C for the sensors and electronics, respectively, in the FGE, and the 0.25 nT/°C of
the INTERMAGNET standard. The TDs seem large for both the instrument and sensors
and the electronics depending on the sensor.
It is interesting why the TD of the electronics vary as much as they do for the different
sensors. Comparing the TDs of the instrument and sensors and the electronics with the
combined TD of the whole setup does not seem to add up entirely. Besides the difficulty
of separating the various contributions, this could also be due to the fact that a higher
temperature range was used for the separate TD determination of the instrument and
electronics, than with the combined system TD determination. This was done to avoid
the outside daily variations affecting the low temperature part of the inside temperature
curve in the warming spring weather. It is possible that there could be some effects that
only had an affect at higher temperatures, or perhaps even some of the effects are non­
linear. To properly compare the measurements, a similar temperature profile would likely
be beneficial.
To further explore the TDs, it would be important to start with a test determining the TDs
of only the sensors. This could be accomplished by placing the sensors in a zero­field
cylinder inside a environmental test chamber in order to ensure no magnetic variations
based on outside sources, which should negate the effect of the sensor changing angles
in compared to the field, and to tightly control the temperature. By placing the sensors
in a coil in the zero­field cylinder or by placing the sensors in the Helmholtz coils at BFE
and carefully controlling the field experienced by the sensors, it would also be possible to
determine the TD at different discrete magnetic field strengths. Having the TDs of only
the sensors would make it easier to determine the TDs for the electronics and then the
entire instrument.
The temperature tests in the hut at BFE would have benefited from using higher tempera­
ture ranges to avoid the outside daily variations to influence the inside temperature. The
62
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:73==
temperature hut could also be better insulated in order to prevent this problem. However,
that would make the cooling of the hut slower and thus require tests with longer tem­
perature curves. This would have resulted in a more accurate temperature dependency
assessment. If the temperature curve were free of outside influence, it would have been
possible to fit a straight line to the temperature vs. difference in B plot.
The temperature’s effect on the sensitivity is somewhat high, which means care will need
to be taken when choosing the allowed temperatures for the instrument location. Un­
fortunately, due to time constraints, the same measurement was not done on the FGE
magnetometer, so a comparison is not possible. For an accurate comparison, the FGE
sensors would also need to be tested in isolation and installed in the Racetrack instrument
to isolate the effects of thermal expansion of the instrument materials.
Stability
A stability error of 8.2 nT
year is high when compared with the stability error of the FGE mag­
netometer of 3 nT
year. It is important with a low stability error as the lower it is, the longer the
time between calibrations with absolute measurements can be, or the smaller the error
will be. The result tells us something about the stability of the sensors, but the potential
drift of PPM and the possible error in the TD measurements have not been accounted
for. Together with the short data segment used, these issues make it difficult to estimate
an uncertainty for this measurement. It could be as high as ±8 nT
year for a 95% confidence
level. Further TD tests and longer data sets are needed for a more accurate assessment
of the long­time stability.
Further Tests
Besides the tests performed in this thesis it could also have been interesting to investigate
the crossfield sensitivity of the sensors. The crossfield sensitivity is a parasitic sensitivity
to orthogonal magnetic fields, which is nonlinear and difficult to suppress. The crossfield
sensitivity should be significantly lower for racetrack sensors [59].
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
63
==PAGE:74==
64
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:75==
6
Conclusion
By completing a series of tests, it has been possible to estimate several specifications
for the Racetrack sensors and compare them with the FGE sensors and the INTERMAG­
NET standards. Table 6 on the next page summarizes these specifications. The noise
measurements clearly show that the Racetrack sensors produce less noise than the FGE
sensors despite not entirely living up to the INTERMAGNET one­second standards. The
linearity measurement could not estimate the lower limit of the linearity error for the Race­
track sensors because of poor choice of instrumentation. Still, it was possible to show
that the linearity error was not only lower than the requirements of the INTERMAGNET
standards but also lower than that of the FGE sensors. The frequency response mea­
surements show that the drop­off in the magnitude happens well beyond 1 Hz. The group
delay for the phase response is measured to be just above the 10ms requirement in the
standard for some of the frequencies. The delay is, however, relatively stable, which is
most important. For more precise measurements, a different selection of instrumentation
would be necessary. The temperature dependency measurements, carried out during this
thesis, show a larger temperature coefficient for the Racetrack sensors than the FGE sen­
sors and the INTERMAGNET standard. However, further tests are required to properly
isolate the different contributions to the temperature coefficients. It is difficult to conclude
anything definitive from the tests reported here regarding the temperature dependencies,
but the results seem to indicate that in order to improve the temperature dependencies
of the whole Racetrack system, it would be necessary to make an effort to improve the
electronics as well as the instrument. However, it is important to consider that the instru­
ment version used for these measurements is not a version of the FGE magnetometer
that is commercially available at the moment and potentially needs more tests regarding
the strings that the marble cube is elevated by. The tests carried out here do, however,
indicate that the isolated Racetrack sensors may have a low temperature coefficient. The
stability measurement indicates that the long­term drift for the Racetrack sensors is larger
than the requirements in the INTERMAGNET standard and larger than that of the FGE
sensors. However, this number is based on a 24­day long data set that had to be cor­
rected from temperature fluctuations, which means that this estimation’s accuracy is not
great. Further tests with an extended data set are required for a better estimation of the
stability.
While not entirely living up to the INTERMAGNET one­second standard, the Racetrack
sensors is an improvement over the LDC sensors used at the moment in the FGE mag­
netometer in some of the specifications. Further tests are needed to clarify the situation
regarding other specifications due to high uncertainties in the tests carried out during the
limited time available for this thesis. Despite that further tests are required, it seems the
quality of the data product from the FGE magnetometer would benefit from switching to
the Racetrack sensors, with potentially more focus on temperature and long­term drift
compensation being required depending on the results of the further tests.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
65
==PAGE:76==
Table 6.1: Combined results table.
FGE
specifications
C3MAG
specifications
INTERMAGNET
One­minute
standard
INTERMAGNET
One­second
standard
FGE
measurements
Racetrack
instrument
measurements
Noise @ 0.1 Hz (pT/√Hz)
40
≤10
X: 30.6 ±2
Y: 37.3 ±2
Z: 43.9 ±2
X: 11.6 ±2
Y: 9.8 ±2
Z: 20.8 ±2
Noise level in
pass band (pT RMS)
≤100
X: 10.02 ±0.5
Y: 12.60±0.5
Z: 18.63±0.5
X: 4.79±0.5
Y: 3.99±0.5
Z: 8.34±0.5
Linearity ­
Analog output (ppm)
10
2500
<620.1
<195.7
Phase response (ms)
±10
1­40
1­12
Resolution (pT)
100
1
ADAM ADC: 40
ObsDaq ADC: 1
X: 4.2
Y: 0.6
Z: 5.7
Temp. coeff. of
sensor (nT/°C):
<0.3
X: 0.73 ±0.05
Y: 0.21 ±0.02
Z: ­0.13 ±0.03
Temp. coeff. of
electronics (nT/°C):
<0.1
X: ­0.07 ±0.02
Y: 0.11 ±0.01
Z: 0.42 ±0.05
Temp. coeff.
combined (nT/°C):
<0.1
0.25
X: 0.66 ±0.05
Y: 0.14 ±0.01
Z: 0.44 ±0.03
Long time drift (nT/year):
<3
5
8.2
66
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:77==
Bibliography
[1]
M Janošek et al. “Low­noise magnetic observatory variometer with race­track sen­
sors”. In: IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng 108.012026 (2016).
[2]
C. Finlay and N. Olsen. Lectures Notes in Geomagnetism MSc Course 30740. DTU
Space ­ Technical University of Denmark, 2020.
[3]
C. G. Constable and S. C. Constable. “Satellite magnetic field measurements: ap­
plications in studying the deep earth”. In: The State of the Planet: Frontiers and
Challenges in Geophysics (2004), pp. 147–159.
[4]
N. Olsen. “Natural Sources for Electromagnetic Induction Studies”. In: Encyclopedia
of Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism (2007), pp. 696–700.
[5]
JJ. Love. “Magnetic monitoring of Earth and space”. In: Physics Today 61 (2).31
(2008).
[6]
International Association of Geomagnetism and Working Group V­MOD Aeronomy.
“International Geomagnetic Reference Field: the eleventh generation”. In: Geophys­
ical Journal International 183.3 (2010).
[7]
Remick K.J. Love J.J. “Magnetic Indices”. In: Gubbins D., Herrero­Bervera E. (eds)
Encyclopedia of Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism. Springer, Dordrecht (2007).
[8]
A. D. Gvishiani et al. “Geoinformatics and Systems Analysis in Geophysics and
Geodynamics”. In: Physics of the Solid Earth 55.1 (2019), pp. 33–49.
[9]
Lead author: Chris Turbitt. INTERMAGNET Definitive One­second Data Standard.
2014. URL: https://intermagnet.github.io/docs/technical/im_tn_06_v1_0.pdf.
[10]
Edited by: Benoît St­Louis. INTERMAGNET TECHNICAL REFERENCE MANUAL.
INTERMAGNETc/o British Geological Survey Murchison House Edinburgh: Addison­
Wesley, 2012.
[11]
S. TUMANSK. “Modern magnetic field sensors – a review”. In: PRZEGLĄD ELEK­
TROTECHNICZNY 89.10 (2013).
[12]
S.W. Billingsley Eva M. Wakefield*. “Fluxgate Magnetometers”. In: PRZEGLĄD ELEK­
TROTECHNICZNY ().
[13]
How a fluxgate works. 2021. URL: https://www.imperial.ac.uk/space-and-atmospheric-
physics / research / areas / space - magnetometer - laboratory / space - instrumentation -
research/magnetometers/fluxgate-magnetometers/how-a-fluxgate-works/.
[14]
P. Ripka et al. “Sensitivity and Noise of Wire­Core Transverse Fluxgate”. In: IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS 46.2 (2010).
[15]
C. Kwisanga. “SQUID Geomagnetic Signal Analysis andModelling of Schumann
Resonances in theEarth­Ionosphere Cavity”. In: Dissertation presented for the De­
gree of Doctor of Philosophy in the Faculty of Engineeringat Stellenbosch University
(2016).
[16]
Michael Cerna and Audrey F. Harvey. The Fundamentals of FFT­Based Signal Anal­
ysis and Measurement. National Instruments, 2000.
[17]
MathWorks. pwelch ­ Welch’s power spectral density estimate. 2021. URL: https:
//se.mathworks.com/help/signal/ref/pwelch.html#btu33sc.
[18]
Tim J. Sobering. Noise in Electronic Systems. SDE Consulting, 1999.
[19]
J. G. Deak R. H. Koch and G. Grinstein. “Fundamental limits to magnetic­field sen­
sitivity of flux­gate magnetic­field sensors”. In: Appl. Phys. Lett. 75.24 (1999).
[20]
Yoshihisa Yamamoto. Fundamentals of Noise processes. Cambridge University Press,
2004. Chap. Chapter 9.
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
67
==PAGE:78==
[21]
K S Brazovskii et al. “Practical considerations on detectability of electrically active
nanoparticles in environmental samples”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and En­
vironmental Science 408 (2020).
[22]
I. Sasada M. Butta. “Sources of Noise in a Magnetometer Based on Orthogonal
Fluxgate Operated in Fundamental Mode”. In: IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 48.4
(2012).
[23]
Wikipedia. Barkhausen effect. 2021. URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barkhausen_
effect.
[24]
E.W. Hill G.P. Farrell. “The limit of fluxgate sensitivity due to Barkhausen noise for
single layer and bi­layer permalloy thin film cores”. In: IEEE Transactions on Mag­
netics 31.6 (1995).
[25]
D. M. Miles et al. “A hybrid fluxgate and search coil magnetometer concept using
a racetrack core”. In: Geoscientific Instrumentation Methods and Data Systems 7.4
(2018), pp. 265–276.
[26]
J.G. Deak; R.H. Koch; G.E. Guthmiller; R.E. Fontana. “Dynamic calculation of the
responsivity of monodomain fluxgate magnetometers”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics 36.4 (2000), pp. 2052–2056.
[27]
C. Hinnrichs; J. Stahl; K. Kuchenbrandt; M. Schilling. “Dependence of sensitivity
and noise of fluxgate sensors on racetrack geometry”. In: IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics 37.4 (2001), pp. 1983–1985.
[28]
E. Krin gLauridsen O. Rasmussen. “Improving baseline drift in fluxgate magnetome­
ters caused by foundation movements, using band suspended fluxgate sensors”.
In: Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors 59.1­2 (1990), pp. 78–81.
[29]
“Magnetic results magnetometers caused by foundation movements, using band
suspended fluxgate sensors”. In: Brorfelde Geomagnetic Observatory (1985).
[30]
Robert Lukat. Pressure Transmitter Accuracy and Pressure Transmitter Non­Linearity:
Not the Same Thing. 2018. URL: https://blog.wika.us/knowhow/pressure-transmitter-
accuracy-and-non-linearity/.
[31]
Sensor Terminology. 2021. URL: https://www.ni.com/da-dk/innovations/white-
papers/13/sensor-terminology.html#section--1871749417.
[32]
P. Ripka M. Butta. “TEMPERATURE STABILITY OF SENSITIVITY AND OFFSET IN
COIL­LESS FLUXGATE SENSORS”. In: Journal of ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
61.7 (2010).
[33]
FLUXGATE MAGNETOMETER, Model FGE version K2 Manual. Lyngby, Denmark:
DTU Space, National Space Institute, Revision 01/04­2016.
[34]
Digital triaxial magnetometer with high resolution – C3MAG, datasheet v 2018.
Czech Technical University in Prague, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, BD Sen­
sors – Space division, CSRC.
[35]
Anna Naemi Willer. 3­axis Fluxgate Magnetometer Model FGE. 2016. URL: https:
/ / www . space . dtu . dk / english / research / instruments _ systems _ methods / 3 - axis _
fluxgate_magnetometer_model_fgm-fge.aspx.
[36]
L. Merenyi L. W. Pedersen. “The FGE Magnetometer and the INTERMAGNeT 1
Second Standard”. In: J. Ind. Geophys. Union 2.4 (2016), pp. 30–36.
[37]
S. Wei et al. “Recent Progress of Fluxgate Magnetic Sensors: Basic Research and
Application”. In: Sensors 21.4 (2021).
[38]
C3MAG ­ User manual v6.20 DTU. Czech Technical University in Prague.
[39]
Gerard Marull Paretas. A way to calibrate a magnetometer. 2021. URL: https://
teslabs.com/articles/magnetometer-calibration/#mjx-eqn-eq_s.
[40]
LL.D. NATHANIEL BOWDITCH. THE AMERICAN PRACTICAL NAVIGATOR. Bethesda,
Maryland: NATIONAL IMAGERY and MAPPING AGENCY, 2002.
68
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:79==
[41]
Michael J. Caruso. “Applications of Magnetoresistive Sensors in Navigation Sys­
tems”. In: SAE Technical Paper 970602 (1997).
[42]
P. Kaspar V. Petrucha. “Calibration of a Triaxial Fluxgate Magnetometer and Ac­
celerometer with an Automated Non­magnetic Calibration System”. In: IEEE Sen­
sors (2009).
[43]
A. Zikmund et al. “Precise calibration method for triaxial magnetometers not re­
quiring Earth’s field compensation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and
Measurement 64.5 (2015), pp. 1242–1247.
[44]
T. Risbo et al. “Measurement Science and Technology Ørsted pre­flight magne­
tometer calibration mission”. In: Measurement Science and Technology 14.5 (2003).
[45]
D et al Gebre­Egziabher. “Calibration of strapdown magnetometers in magnetic field
domain”. In: Aerosp. Eng. 19 (2006), pp. 87–102.
[46]
G.H. Foster C.C.; Elkaim. “Extension of a two­step calibration methodology to in­
clude nonorthogonal sensor axes”. In: IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 44 (2008).
[47]
V et al Renaudin. “Complete triaxis magnetometer calibration in the magnetic do­
main”. In: J. Sens. 2010 (2010).
[48]
W. Wu Y.; Shi. “On calibration of three­axis magnetometer”. In: IEEE Sens. J. 15
(2015), pp. 6424–6431.
[49]
A. et al Olivares. “Automatic determination of validity of input data used in ellipsoid
fitting MARG calibration algorithms”. In: Sensors 13 (2013), pp. 11797–11817.
[50]
D. Yang et al. “Complete Tri­Axis Magnetometer Calibration with a Gyro Auxiliary”.
In: Sensors (Basel) 17.5 (2017).
[51]
M. et al Kok. “Calibration of a magnetometer in combination with inertial sensors”.
In: Sensors 17.1223 (2017), pp. 787–793.
[52]
J.F. et al Vasconcelos. “Geometric approach to strapdown magnetometer calibration
in sensor frame”. In: IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 47 (2011), pp. 1293–1306.
[53]
Z. Li X.; Li. “A new calibration method for tri­axial field sensors in strap­down navi­
gation systems”. In: Meas. Sci. Technol. 23 (2012), pp. 2852–2855.
[54]
S. et al Salehi. “A practical in­field magnetometer calibration method for IMUs”. In:
In Proceedings of the IROS Workshop on Cognitive Assistive Systems, Vilamoura,
Algarve, Portugal (2012), pp. 39–44.
[55]
N. et al Ammann. “A novel magnetometer­accelerometer calibration based on a
least squares approach”. In: In Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference
on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), Denver, CO, USA (2015), pp. 577–585.
[56]
Y.X. et al Liu. “Novel calibration algorithm for a three­axis strapdown magnetome­
ter”. In: Sensors 14 (2014), pp. 8485–8504.
[57]
30 MHz Function/Arbitrary Waveform Generators, Data sheet. URL: https://www.
keysight.com/dk/en/assets/7018-02567/data-sheets/5990-5914.pdf.
[58]
P. Sebbes et al. “FLUXGATE MAGNETOMETER FOR TEMPERATURES UP TO
180°C”. In: Journal of ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING 61.7 (2010), pp. 21–23.
[59]
P. Ripka et al. “Crossfield effect in magnetic sensors”. In: SENSORS, 2009 IEEE
(2009).
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
69
==PAGE:80==
70
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:81==
 
 
 
A
Pandect LDC­A20 sensor ­ Datasheet
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
71
==PAGE:82==
 
 
 
72
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:83==
 
 
 
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
73
==PAGE:84==
 
 
 
74
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:85==
 
 
 
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
75
==PAGE:86==
 
76
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:87==
 
1
C3MAG - User manual v6.20DTU 
Magnetometer components 
 
1. Sensor head – consists of a triaxial sensor configuration fixed in a fiberglass holder in a 
fiberglass sensor box; the sensor cable with D-SUB 9-pin connector. The sensor head 
can be thus positioned far away from the electronics, allowing for lower noise. 
2. Signal conditioning electronics with two interfaces: sensor-head connector  and Power-
RS232 connector (both D-SUB 9) 
3. Interface cable – one side is connected to the signal conditioning electronics, the other 
side features 2 pigtail connectors: power +RS232 and analog-out (D-SUB 9). 
 
I/O Interfaces 
Power 
The instrument needs a stable (ideally regulated) power supply to ensure best performance.  
The polarity of the power supply voltage must be strictly observed – although there are fusible 
protections, failure to do so may result in permanent damage of the instrument, mainly for 
high-output power sources. The polarity is clearly marked (red/black for positive and black wire 
for negative), there are also text notes on the wiring.  
 
Input voltage is permissible in the range of 10.5- 13.8 VDC (allows for direct operation from a 
lead-acid rechargeable battery or 4S-LiFePo) 
Sensor connector  
The sensor interface should not be modified in any way; additional cable extension may result 
in malfunction of the device (due to detuning of the fluxgate signal conditioning circuit or 
insufficient excitation level). It can be provided on request with a subsequent recalibration. 
1
2
3
B
C3MAG user manual v6.20 DTU
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
77
==PAGE:88==
 
2
 
RS232 (pigtail cable) 
The instrument uses standard RS232 interfaces with ASCII coding. 
Serial port settings:  115 200 Baud, 1 stop bit, no parity bit 
 
The device is delivered with a plain RS232 DB-9 connector, so it may be necessary to use. a 
USB/RS232 converter. The cable should not be extended above 10 meters due to the 
transmission speed – in that case, serial-USB, serial-Ethernet or serial-fiber optics adapters 
should be used. A straight 232 cable or USB/serial converter can be used, no wire crossing is 
necessary. 
 
Pin number (DB9 F)
Function
2 
TXD RS232 (magnetometer output) 
5 
GND RS232 
3 
RXD RS232 (magnetometer input) 
 
*please note that the GND_POWER and GND RS232 are galvanically interconnected in the instrument 
through a common mode choke and so they should not be short circuited outside of the instrument. 
The instrument case is at GND_POWER potential. 
 
An optical RS232 extender is recommended for long connections also because of avoiding 
possible lightning damage. 
 
Analog-out (pigtail cable) 
Analog voltages for all three channels are available independently on the state of the A/D converter 
(stopped or streaming).  
 
Pin number (DB9 M)
Function
6,7,8,9 
Analog GND 
3 
CH1 - Z 
4 
CH2 - Y 
2 
CH3 - X 
 
Data format 
 
The instrument returns semicolon separated, CSV-ready data in raw units (LSB of the AD 
converter) – 3 columns of magnetic field vector components, 1 column of relative temperature 
reading (temperature of the voltage reference). Please note the reverse direction of the axes. 
 
[Z];[Y];[X];[temp]; 0x0A 
 
In example: 
 
-7427699;+6778495;+6769256;+1237531;0x0A 
-7427637;+6778502;+6769275;+1237522;0x0A 
 
0x0A (line feed) is not visible in standard terminals.  
We recommend for serious usage the Realterm terminal program or your own software. 
 
Recalculation to magnetic field values is possible using the standard 0.5%-precision calibration 
(see section Calibration and Annex of the manual).  
78
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:89==
 
3
Operating commands 
 
After applying power, the instrument waits for an external command. 
The device accepts only following three ASCII commands (no need to send CR+LF): 
 
C1
One sample – the instrument sends one data set over the RS232 
interface 
CN
Continual measurement – the instrument immediately starts to 
send data sets at a nominal data rate of 206.5 Sa/s 
CS
Stop (continuous) measurement 
 
It is strongly recommended to use the continuous mode of sampling for serious measurements 
(CN command). Operation with C1 command in slow software loops will result in aliasing 
effects, mainly for mains-power frequencies and other noise. 
Quick start-up 
 
1. Attach sensor head to fixture of your choice (there are 4 mounting holes) or simply lay it 
at the position of the experiment. 
2. Connect the sensor head to the magnetometer electronics box. Secure the connection. 
3. Connect the power supply (ideally backed-up with 12V battery). Observe the polarity. 
4. Connect the serial cable of the USB/Serial converter to the computer. 
5. If using USB/serial, go to hardware-properties and find the COMxx number. 
6. Run any serial terminal communication program (e.g. Hyperterminal, RealTerm etc.), 
connect to the serial port with 115200, N,1. Enter following command:  CN 
7. There should be data-sets streaming from the at 206.50 Sa/s (use CS to stop the data 
stream) 
8. Record your data & analyze it. 
Calibration 
 
The sensor was calibrated using pre-calibrate Helmholtz-coils system, and the calibration 
values are provided with 0.5% uncertainty. Better calibration is available on request. 
 
Let us define the raw magnetic readings from the instrument as: R= [R1 R2 R3]T (LSB). 
 
We shall then also define : 
 
Offsets:             
 
O= [O1 O2 O3]T  (LSB) 
Sensitivities:     
 
S= [S1 S2 S3] T   (LSB/T) 
Orthogonalization matrix  P= [p11... p33]     (-) 
 
The magnetic field vector F=[F1 F2 F3] = [FZ FY FX]T in Tesla units is then calculated as follows: 
 
















































3
3
2
2
1
1
3
2
1
33
32
31
23
22
21
13
12
11
3
2
1
1
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
)
(
O
R
O
R
O
R
S
S
S
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
p
F
F
F
O
R
S
P
F
 
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
79
==PAGE:90==
 
4
The instrument also measures the temperature of the voltage reference REF5025, which is 
uncalibrated (the fourth column of the serial output). Use the temperature channel readings 
with your own calibration. 
Magnetometer software 
The instrument can be operated with any software that can handle a RS232 terminal 
connection and parse ASCII data (e.g., Realterm). If CTUMAGViewer software was delivered 
with the magnetometer, see the screenshot below for its operation.  
 
 
  
In the software, set the appropriate serial port, the filename and directory for logging, observe 
the user offsets (default 0) and press RUN (maroon arrow in the Figure).The calibration 
coefficients are delivered with the software and can be any time altered – the reside in the files 
SCALES.TXT and OFFSETS.TXT. Also, orthogonality corrections as of matrix P are saved in 
ORTHO.TXT. They should be modified by the user accordingly, depending on the 
sensor/calibration used. 
 
The three components and its total are calculated and displayed in two graphs; also PSD 
spectrum is depicted. “User offsets” serve for setting temporary offsets for display.  
 
User can set filtering (need to enable) or averaging (default, simply set AVG N to zero to 
disable averaging), if averaging is selected and N=0, then raw data are displayed. The PSD 
spectrum is never altered by any filtering. 
 
If Save to this file? is pressed/green, the software starts logging the data (raw data) to one file.  
The header contains the calibration constant and offsets for later use. The default folder is the 
actual Documents folder of windows, different directory can be set but the software needs to 
be started again to reflect changes. Please note that the software logs raw data at the full 
speed (206.50 Sa/s), recalculation as shown in section Calibration is to be done afterwards.  
 
The file data format is tab-separated (see Serial output data format), with extra first column of 
(UTC) Timestamp, it can be easily imported i.e. in Excel or MATLAB. Use following code for 
importing time to MATLAB time: 
 
data=load(‘data.txt’);  
 
time=data(:,1)/86400+365*1905+97; 
tt = datetime(time,'ConvertFrom','datenum'); 
80
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:91==
 
1
_____________________________________________________________________ 
 
Electronics: C3MAG 0041 
Sensor:  
 RT1 0105  (single-axis race-track sensor) 
 
 
 
f-3dB:   30 Hz 
 
Digital output 
Channel 
- 
2 (Y) 
- 
Offset [LSB] 
- 
9000 
- 
Sensitivity 
[LSB/T] 
- 
-533.6841+9 
- 
 
Analog output 
Channel 
- 
2 (Y) 
- 
Offset [mV] 
- 
11.5 
- 
Sensitivity [V/T] 
- 
636034 
- 
 
 
 
Calibration date: 
19.05.2020 
 
 
 
 
Sensor:  RTQ1220_XX (EW,NS,vert) - single-axis race-track sensor in quartz tubes 
 
 
Digital output 
Channel 
1 (NS,X) 
2 (EW,Y) 
3 (vert,Z) 
Offset [LSB] 
-4500 
-36300 
30500 
Sensitivity (5%) 
[LSB/T] 
195e9 
137e10 
141e9 
 
Analog output 
Channel 
1 (NS,X) 
2 (EW,Y) 
3 (vert,Z) 
Offset [mV] 
7.5 
12.5 
33.0 
Sensitivity (5%) 
[V/T] 
232e3 
1.53e6 
168e3 
 
 
 
 
 
Calibration date: 
17.12.2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annex end__________________ 
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
81
==PAGE:92==
C
Matlab Code
1
% ASD Calculation Example
2
Fs = 128;
3
x = RaceX;
4
y = RaceY;
5
z = RaceZ;
6
nx = max(size(x));
7
na = 24;
8
w = hann(floor(nx/na)); %window
9
[PSDx,RFx] = pwelch(x,w,nx/25,[0.0001:0.001:64],Fs);
10
[PSDy,RFy] = pwelch(y,w,nx/25,[0.0001:0.001:64],Fs);
11
[PSDz,RFz] = pwelch(z,w,nx/25,[0.0001:0.001:64],Fs);
12
ASDx = sqrt(PSDx);
13
ASDy = sqrt(PSDy);
14
ASDz = sqrt(PSDz);
15
16
17
% RMS Calculation Example
18
F = griddedInterpolant(RF,PSD);
19
fun = @(t) F(t);
20
q = integral(fun, RF(LowerLimit), RF(UpperLimit));
21
RMS_noise = sqrt(q);
82
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
==PAGE:93==
Suitability of new racetrack fluxgate sensors in the FGE magnetometer
83
==PAGE:94==
”It is not knowledge, but the act of learning, not possession, but the act of acquiring, not being
there, but getting there, which grants the greatest enjoyment.”
­ Carl Friedrich Gauss
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej , Building 328
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.space.dtu.dk/
