==PAGE:1==
Machine
Learning
For
Motion
Tracking
During MRI With The Help Of An EEG-
System
Master Thesis
DTU Health Technology
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Machine Learning For Motion Tracking During MRI With The Help
Of An EEG-System
Master Thesis
July, 2021
By
Steen Lyngø Sørensen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must
include the customary bibliographic citation, including author
attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds plads,
building 345C, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
ii
Abstract
CapTrack is a novel method for motion tracking during magnetic resonance
imaging, developed at Danish Technical University and Danish research center
for magnetic resonance at Hvidovre hospital. CapTrack uses a modified EEG
cap to record signals induced by gradient switching during image acquisition.
Using regression methods these signals can be used to train a model that
can be used for motion tracking. In this project I implement a new linear
model, compared to the one currently used in the CapTrack motion tracking.
Additionally I implement a feedforward neural network, called DiffNet, and
support vector regression to determine whether the accuracy of the motion
tracking can be improved and whether the time spent recording training data
can be optimized. The results show that the New linear model is superior to
the original linear model when used on navigator scans, the same tendency was
not found as clearly when used on structural 3D-Gradient Echo scans. The
DiffNet improved on the accuracy of the motion tracking, but not as much as
was expected. The same was seen when testing the support vector regression.
I conclude that non-linear models do not improve the accuracy of the motion
tracking significantly compared to linear models, and that there is a benefit
in using a structured approach when acquiring training data.
==PAGE:5==
iii
Acknowledgements
Steen Lyngø Sørensen, MSc Civil Engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis template.
Supervisors: Lars G. Hanson, Associate Professor, Department of Health
Technology, Technical University of Denmark
Kristoffer Hougaard Madsen, Associate Professor, Department of Applied
Mathematics and Computer Science. Technical University of Denmark
I would like to thank my supervisors for the extraordinary dedication and
support in making this thesis. For the inspiring conversations and discussions,
and good spirits throughout the work with the thesis.
A special thank you to Phd. student Malte Laustsen for answering my many
questions and help with tasks throughout my work with the thesis.
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Structure of Thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Magnetic Resonance Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Motion in MRI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Motion Tracking Using an EEG-Cap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Feedforward Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.5
Bayesian Optimisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Active Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.7
Support Vector Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Methods
23
3.1
”New” Linear Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Neural network for Motion Tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
Support Vector Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.4
Variance Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.5
Data Recording . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.6
Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Results
33
4.1
Performance on Navigator Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Performance on Structural Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3
Confidence in Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.4
Active Learning using Variance Reduction . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5
Discussion
41
5.1
Linear Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Machine Learning Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.3
Motion Corrected Images
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
5.4
Structured Training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
6
Conclusion
45
Bibliography
47
A Appendix
51
A.1 Train data size - Navigator data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:8==
vi
CONTENTS
A.2 Full experiment results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
A.3 Variance Reduction figures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Motion artifacts is a prevalent challenge in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
By using motion tracking during image acquisition it is possible to correct the
images being recorded and reduce the impact of motion artifacts on the image
quality. A novel method for motion tracking during MRI has been developed
at Danish Technical University (DTU) and the Danish research centre for
magnetic resonance at Hvidovre hospital, called CapTrack [1]. CapTrack uses
electrodes on an EEG cap to record voltages induced by gradient switching
during image acquistion. The signal recorded with the EEG cap is correlated
to the head position of the subject being scanned. Using regression methods it
is possible to learn the relation between the EEG cap signal and head position,
that can be used to calculate head-position estimates during the scan. This
makes it possible to perform motion correction on the recorded images and
improve the quality of MR images compromised by motion.
Machine learning algorithms are algorithms that are able to learn from data.
In supervised learning a model is trained using labeled data, resulting in a
model that is able to predict the expected result from new data. There are a
large variety of machine learning models tailored at learning different types of
models. CapTrack as presented in the manuscript by Laustsen et. al. [1], uses
a least squares linear regression model to learn the relation between EEG cap
signal and head position.
In this project I investigate different types of regression methods to try and im-
prove on the performance of the motion tracking achieved using CapTrack. By
implementing non-linear models it is possible to model non-linearities present
for large motion and non-rigid motion, which would improve the accuracy of
the motion tracking. In this project I will investigate whether a neural net-
work model can learn these non-linearities and improve the motion tracking
accuracy of CapTrack. I will implement a feed forward neural network and
try to tailor it for the specific regression task. I will also implement a Support
Vector Regression model, as it is an agile type of machine learning that can
be tailored to learn a range of different models.
The goal is to implement both linear and non-linear regression models and test
them on different kinds of MR data, to get a better understanding of the rela-
tion between the signal recorded from the EEG cap and head position. I will
perform experiments to determine which regression model performs the best
when implemented to solve this specific task. Furthermore i want to investi-
gate how much training data is needed for the regression models, and whether
a structured acquisition of training data is better than random selection.
==PAGE:10==
2
Introduction
1.1
Structure of Thesis
The aim of the first part of the thesis is to provide suﬀicient background
knowledge for the subsequent investigation of machine learning methods im-
plemented during the project. Hence the first part includes an introduction
to the following subjects:
1. Magnetic resonance imaging and motion correction.
2. Motion tracking using CapTrack.
3. Feedforward neural networks, support vector regression and bayesian
optimization of hyperparameters.
4. Active Learning and how it can be applied to machine learning algo-
rithms.
The second part of the thesis details more specifically how the machine learning
models were implemented in this project and what choices were made during
implementation.
In the end of the second part, the data recorded for the
project is detailed as well as the experiments that were performed to compare
the models.
In the last part of the project I present the results obtained from the experi-
ments, and discuss what the results show.
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
This section serves to introduce background knowledge and definitions of the
concepts used in this project in order to aid understanding of the methods
implemented.
2.1
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
The following is a short introduction to the principles of Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (MRI). The descriptions are kept short, and only basic topics rel-
evant for understanding the principle behind motion correction in Magnetic
resonance imaging are mentioned.
MRI is based on the phenomenon of nuclear magnetic resonance. Nuclei with
an odd number of protons and/or an odd number of neutrons, has a nuclear
spin angular momentum [2]. Collections of identical nuclei are called nuclear
spin systems. It is the interaction between these spin systems and magnetic
fields, that give rise to the signals used to generate MR images [3]. There are
three basic magnetic fields interacting with the spins: the main field, called B0,
Radiofrequency (RF) field, called B1 and the linear gradient field, G. When
B0 is applied, the spins partially align along the direction of the magnetic field,
called longitudinal direction, and they resonate at what is called the Larmor
Frequency. When the B1 field is applied in the transverse direction, an RF-
pulse tuned to the resonant frequency of the spins, excites the spins away from
equilibrium. The excitation tips the spins with some flip angle, depending on
the strength and duration of the RF-pulse, and the spins start precessing in
the transverse plane at the Larmor frequency. The precessing spins, generate
an electromotive force in a receiver coil. The signal induced in the receiver
coils is what is used to generate the images [2]. The gradient fields are smaller
magnetic fields used to slightly change the strength of the magnetic field in x,y
or z directions. The magnetic field still points in the longitudinal direction,
but the spatial change in field strength, changes the frequency of the spins
depending on their spatial location. If we have a volume in the presence of
both the B0 and a gradient field along the same direction as the B0 field, by
applying an RF pulse with a specific frequency, or bandwith of frequencies,
we only excite the part of the volume that has the same resonant frequency
as the frequency of the RF pulse. This is called selective excitation, which is
used for slice selection when you want a 2D image, from a specific part of a
3D volume [2].
Following the slice selection, the gradient is turned off and we now have a slice
or plane of excited spins, orthogonal to the gradient. All the spins in the plane
==PAGE:12==
4
Background
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2.1: (a) still image of spins following phase encoding. (b) still image of
spins during frequency encoding/readout. (c) figure showing the k vector resulting
from teh phase and frequency encoding show in (a) and (b). (Figures from [2])
precess with the same frequency and has the same phase. In order to perform
imaging the spins have to be spatially encoded. This is done using gradients.
Typically the z-gradient is used in slice selection, and the x and y gradients
are used for encoding. If we apply the y gradient for a short amount of time,
and then turn it off again, the spins in the excited plane will still precess
with the same frequency (since no gradient is active) but the phase of the
spins will vary across the plane, as shown in figure 2.1a. This is called phase
encoding, and the direction of the gradient used is called the phase encoding
direction. The remaining gradient is called the frequency encoding gradient.
Frequency encoding is active during readout from the receiving coils. Figure
2.1b shows the spins in the plane during readout. Looking at figure 2.1b we
see a wave pattern in the plane, in the direction from the bottom left to the
top right. If we think of 2d fourier space, we can imagine this wave as a vector
in fourier space with a direction and size depending on how long the phase and
frequency encoding gradient were active or how strong the gradient fields are.
In MRI this fourier space is called k-space. The goal when performing MRI is
to suﬀiciently sample k-space to be able to reconstruct the image. The beauty
of MRI is that the signal recorded from the receive coils are in fourier space, so
the image can be reconstructed by using a 2d fourier transformation. At any
point during readout, the signal generated in the receive coil is proportional
to how well the structure being imaged matches the pattern generated in the
imaging plane by the phase and frequency encoding gradients. The longer the
gradients are active, or stronger the gradient is, the further out in k-space
we move. The Field of View (FOV) in a MR image is determined by how
densely we sample k-space, the image resolution is determined by how far out
in k-space we move. It is important to note that we do not have access to
infinitely strong gradients, therefore moving in k-space takes time. We have
to sample k-space in order to generate an image, but k-space is sampled one
line at a time.
This is why motion during image acquistion is a problem.
Movement during k-space sampling shifts the magnetization we have worked
so hard to encode in exactly the desired way, and creates artifacts in the final
image. Also most 3d imaging sequences acquires the volume slice by slice,
which again takes time, and is another opportunity for subject motion to
generate problems when reconstructing the image volume.
==PAGE:13==
2.2 Motion in MRI
5
2.2
Motion in MRI
Image artifacts due to subject motion continues to be a prevalent problem
in MR imaging. Especially in high resolution imaging where scan times are
longer, subject motion is a main limiting factor in the quality of the images
being captured [4]. In clinical settings, subject motion during image acquisi-
tion, can directly impact the diagnostic quality of the images. Images can be
so corrupted that repeat scans are necessary, or the artifacts present in the
image will require the medical professional to be able to distinguish between
artifacts and the structure of interest [5]. Motion is especially a problem when
dealing with subjects who either do not understand the need for lying still,
such as children or elderly, or subjects who are not able to, due to pain or fear
[4]. Besides the clinical implications, motion is also a challenge that is preva-
lent in research. With the use of higher field strength scanners and acquisition
of very high resolution images, subject motion is a main factor in limiting scan
time, and therefore spatial resolution [4]. A study from 2015 estimated that
subject motion in MR imaging increases the cost of MRI examinations with
around $150.000 per scanner, per year. In summation motion artifacts in MR
images impacts cost, clinical applications and research applications.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: Example of motion artifacts in MRI. Images are from the scans per-
formed during this project, with me as the subject. (a) MR image without motion
artifacts. (b) image of same subject with motion artifacts.
Motion can be described as rigid or non-rigid. In this project the focus is on
motion correction of brain images, and brain movement is mainly rigid body
motion and can be accurately described using 6 degrees of freedom (DOF); 3
for translation and 3 for rotation [1]. The following sections are focused on
the topic of rigid body motion correction of brain images. Some of the motion
correction methods mentioned below can be adapted to be used for other parts
of the body where rigid motion occurs, but is not the focus of this project.
2.2.1
Motion tracking methods
Through the years many different methods have been developed to either
limit or correct motion artifacts. The main way to limit motion artifacts is by
==PAGE:14==
6
Background
reducing scan times, but at a point, further reduction will start to negatively
impact resolution, contrast and signal to noise ratio [5]. Motion correction
methods require a way to track subject motion during acquisition. Motion
tracking can be split into 3 main groups: navigator methods, optical methods
and field detection methods [4]. Navigator methods are the traditional way of
tracking subject motion. Navigators are extra MR measurements interleaved
in the image acquisition sequence. Navigators can be tracked either in k-space
or image space [4]. K-space navigators repeatedly sample parts of k-space and
quantify translation and rotation of the subject by comparing measurements
of rotation and phase shift in the k-space data. Much of the research in k-
space navigators is focused on finding the best ways to sample k-space to be
able to accurately quantify motion in all 6 degress of freedom. Examples of
k-space trajectories used in motion tracking are orbital trajectories performed
in orthogonal 2d-planes, 3d spherical trajectories or ”cloverleaf” shaped 3d
trajectories [6]. Finding an eﬀicient way of sampling k-space is important as
it shortens the free time needed in the imaging sequence to interleave the
navigator sequence.
Image based navigators record low resolution images,
or image volumes, which can be registered against each other to determine
motion between each recorded volume. A typical choice is multiple 2d EPI
images or 3d EPI volumes, which is well suited due to the fast acquisition
time [7].
Where the k-space navigators measure changes in the frequency
domain and translate them to the spatial domain, image based navigators
measure motion directly in the spatial domain. An advantage of image based
navigators is that you can define a region of interest to perform motion tracking
on, thereby avoiding areas with non rigid motion influencing the tracking [4].
The advantage of navigator methods for motion tracking is that they do not
require any additional equipment, either externally or attached to the subject,
to perform the motion tracking. The main disadvantage of navigator methods
is that they take time to record, and have to be interleaved in the imaging
sequence. This means that navigators are not suited for all types of imaging
sequences as it requires a sequence with unused time for the navigator to be
placed into [4]. Additionally there is a balance between the quality of the
navigator and the amount of time it takes to record as well as limiting spin
history effects on the imaging sequence.
Optical tracking methods use a camera system to track subject motion either
by using markers attached to the skin, markerless systems tracking facial fea-
tures or using structured light. The use of an external tracking system that is
not directly connected to the imaging sequence allows for high frequency track-
ing [8]. One of the challenges with the marker systems is attaching markers in
a way that it is ensured the markers follow the skull movement and not just
the skin, since it can change with facial expressions. When using a completely
separate system to track motion there are challenges in accurately getting the
motion estimates from the camera frame of reference to the scanner frame of
reference. Also with camera systems there are line-of-sight limitations due to
the size of the scanner bore and the use of head coils [9].
Field detection methods are a way of tracking motion by using the spatial
characteristics of the gradient fields [1]. Field detection methods require the
use of NMR field probes, also called active markers, comprised of small RF
coils surrounding liquid samples, such as gadolinium doped water [10]. The
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Motion in MRI
7
field probes are fixed to the subject, for instance on a head band, to ensure
they correctly follow the subject movements. 3 probes, creating 3 points in 3d-
space are suﬀicient to track motion in 6 DOF, when dealing with rigid body
motion.
The tracking is performed similarly to the navigator methods by
interleaving a small tracking sequence in the imaging sequence. The tracking
sequence consists of a low angle excitation pulse, followed by a gradient echo
readout which is repeated for 3 orthogonal directions.
The FID measured
from the receive coil of each probe will have a unique dominant frequency
based on its location along each of the 3 gradient directions [10]. The main
advantages of field detection methods compared to the optical methods is
that the position tracking is performed in the scanner frame of reference,
and it is not limited by line-of-sight restrictions.
Some disadvantages are
the need to use external hardware attached to the subject to perform the
tracking, which can increase prescan setup time, and the need for specific
tracking sequences to be interleaved in the imaging sequence. Here it should
be noted that methods have been developed that use only the native imaging
sequence, but the method is still sequence dependent [11].
2.2.2
Motion correction
There are two ways to perform motion correction in MR imaging: Prospective
and retrospective. Retrospective motion correction is done during the recon-
struction of the image. The image acquisition is performed without any regard
to potential motion. Knowledge about motion during acquisition, achieved us-
ing one of the methods mentioned above, is used to correct k-space data before
the image is reconstructed. Retrospective motion correction is based on the
fourier properties linking k-space and image space. A translation in image
space is represented by a linear phase shift in k-space, and similarly a rotation
in image space is represented by a rotation in k-space [5]. Performing retro-
spective motion correction, first the phase of each point in k-space is altered
according to the measured/calculated translation. Depending on the tempo-
ral resolution of the motion tracking, either segments or individual lines of
k-space are grouped together as having experienced some known motion. By
performing the phase correction first it is ensured that the center of image
space and k-space is aligned, before the rotation is applied [5]. Each point,
or segment of k-space, is rotated around the center of k-space according to
the rotation measured in the motion tracking. An example of a retrospective
motion corrected k-space can be seen in the left image in Figure 2.3. It can
be seen that, after the rotation of lines in k-space, the sampling density is not
uniform. This can lead to local Nyquist violations due to gaps in the sam-
pling. These gaps can be filled using a partial parallel imaging approach, like
GRAPPA [12]. If the measured rotations are small, gaps in the k-space data
can be ignored [13]. The final step in the retrospective motion correction is
gridding of the transformed k-space data, since a rectilinear grid is necessary
for the Fast Fourier Transform [5]. This can be done using interpolation, such
as the 3d Non Uniform FFT used in [13] and [1].
Prospective motion correction takes an opposite approach to motion correc-
tion. Where retrospective motion correction records k-space data and then
corrects for the measured motion, prospective motion correction uses the mea-
sured motion to correct the scanners FOV and then records k-space data in
==PAGE:16==
8
Background
Figure 2.3: Differences in k-space during image reconstruction between retrospective
and prospective motion correction (Figure from [4])
the newly defined FOV. This results in an acquisition of k-space data with-
out any need for transformation before reconstruction, as shown on the right
in Figure 2.3. For rigid body motion, prospective motion correction involves
changing the scanners pulse sequence to correct for translation and rotation,
so the imaging volume follows the object [4]. For translation in the frequency
encoding and slice selection direction, the transmit and receive RF center fre-
quency is changed. Whereas translation in the phase encoding direction can
be compensated for, by changing the receiver phase [5]. The FOV can be cor-
rected for rotation by changing the gradients such that the directions of the
slice selective, phase and frequency encoding gradients are kept constant com-
pared to the imaging object. This is done by updating each gradient direction
to be a combination of the x,y and z gradients [4]. In prospective motion cor-
rection it is important to be aware of the frequency of the position estimates
and how it relates to the acquisition sequence. There will be some delay from
the time the position of the subject is estimated until the pulse sequence can
be modified, due to processing of motion tracking data, data transfer and gra-
dient recalculation [5]. If this latency is too high it can result in the FOV of
the scanner lagging behind the actual motion of the subject. Latency is more
problematic with large and fast motion. Some prospective methods monitor
the amount of motion that has happened during acquisition and if it exceeds
some threshold then that part of the image is reacquired. This is a good way
to avoid the problems related to latency but re-acquisition of image data is not
suitable for all types of sequences [4]. An advantage of retrospective correction
over prospective correction is that the uncorrected image data is also available.
If there is an error in the motion tracking, prospective correction will result in
unusable images, where with retrospective methods, the original image data
can be used, or the motion estimates can be corrected before image reconstruc-
tion. Additionally prospective methods require some alterations to the pulse
sequence to allow for updating the FOV. A retrospective correction method
using external motion tracking can be performed without any changes to the
pulse sequence. An advantage of prospective motion correction is it avoids
the k-space density problems, such as Nyquist violations, that can occur with
retrospective motion correction as the scanners FOV is adapted to ensure it
follows the subject. Similarly with prospective correction it is ensured that
the subject stays in the FOV[4]. Prospective correction methods is also able to
==PAGE:17==
2.3 Motion Tracking Using an EEG-Cap
9
limit the impact of spin history effects that occur with through plane motion.
Spin history effects is a prevalent problem in MR imaging and is not easily
corrected with retrospective methods [5].
2.3
Motion Tracking Using an EEG-Cap
Since 2011 researchers at DTU and Danish Research Centre for Magnetic
Resonance, have been developing a motion correction method for MRI using
a modified EEG-cap [14]. The version of the system used in this project and
described below is the one used in the manuscript by Laustsen et al. titled
”Tracking of rigid head motion during MRI using an EEG system” [1].
This motion correction method performs motion tracking with an EEG-cap
that is modified by attaching carbon wire loops, called CapTrack. The motion
tracking uses the spatial dependence of gradient field changes during image
acquisition. Gradient switching induces voltages in the carbon wire loops di-
rectly related to the spatial position of the subjects head. The motion tracking
is performed without any sequence modifications. The only additional hard-
ware used is the modified EEG-cap and a sampling system. Before scanning
the EEG-cap is positioned on the subjects head, and a short calibration scan is
performed to determine the relation between head position and the inductive
changes measured with the cap[1]. The following is a shortened description of
the method described in the manuscript by Laustsen et. al. [1].
2.3.1
CapTrack Motion Tracking
From Faraday’s law, it follows that the gradient induced signal, vi(t), in a
single wire loop, i, is a weighted sum of gradient contributions [1]
vi(t) = wix
∂˜Gx(t)
∂t
+ wiy
∂˜Gy(t)
∂t
+ wiz
∂˜Gz(t)
∂t
+ ηi(t) = ˙e
G(t)wi + ηi(t) (2.1)
Where ˙e
G(t) =
h
∂˜Gx(t)
∂t
, ∂˜Gy(t)
∂t
, ∂˜Gz(t)
∂t
i
refers to filtered versions of gradient
waveform time derivatives, and ηi(t) is measurement noise.
The weights,
wi = [wix, wiy, wiz]T , depend on loop geometry, position and orientation[1].
From equation 2.1 it can be seen that the output from each wire loop, vi(t) =
[v1(t), v2(t), ..., vI(t)], is a weighted sum of filtered gradient waveform deriva-
tives, described by wi. A set of weights, w, can be estimated from a signal
recorded from all wire loop channels with matrix inversion of equation 2.1.
Changes to the estimated weights, ∆w, reflect changes to subject head posi-
tion, and can therefore be used for motion tracking. However before motion
tracking can be done it is necessary to determine the gradient waveforms, ˙e
G(t),
and the wire loop orientation dependency of w [1]. The gradient waveforms
depend on the imaging sequence, and the wire loop orientation dependency
will be different for each person, due to varying head size and mounting of
the EEG-cap. Therefore the EEG-cap motion correction method consists of
3 separate scans. A phantom pre-scan, to determine the gradient waveforms
for the desired target scan sequence. A short calibration scan with the subject
wearing the cap in the scanner to determine wire loop orientation depencies.
And finally the target scan.
==PAGE:18==
10
Background
2.3.2
Phantom pre-scan
During the phantom pre-scan the gradient waveforms are measured using the
EEG-cap attached to a stationary phantom positioned in the scanner. The
target sequence is run on the scanner with only one of the three gradient axes
(Gx, Gy, Gz) turned on at a time, and with the RF transmitter disabled. The
sequence is then repeated for each of the gradient axes. All wire loop channels
measure the same waveform but with different amplitude according to equa-
tion 2.1. The gradient waveform is then determined using a singular value
decomposition (SVD) across all wire loop channels. Once determined the gra-
dient waveform can be used for all scans using that same target sequence. The
phantom pre-scan can be performed at any time and the gradient waveform
stored, to be used with the chosen target sequence for any future scans.
2.3.3
Calibration scan
The calibration scan is a short scan performed for each subject, just before
the target scan. This is necessary as subject head sizes and mounting position
of the EEG-cap will vary between subjects. The aim of the calibration scan
is to determine wire loop orientation dependencies for the specific positions of
wire loops that will be used in the target scan. The calibration scan is a rapid
3-D encoded EPI sequence. Motion parameter estimates are calculated using
a rigid body realignment procedure of the calibration images, and changes to
gradient weights are calculated based on measurements of the output from the
eeg-cap. (more details?)
The relation between gradient weights and head position is then expressed as:
∆w = A ∆r + ϵ
(2.2)
Where ∆w is the change in weights from a reference position, and ∆r =
[∆x, ∆y, ∆z, ∆θ, ∆ϕ, ∆ψ]T is relative deviation in head position expressed in
6 dimensions: 3 cartesian translations and 3 euler angles.
The matrix A
contains partial derivatives of the weights with respect to head position pa-
rameters. and ϵ are the residual errors, assumed to be independent, identically
distributed Gaussian. A is estimated by minimizing the residual error in equa-
tion 2.2 using least squares regression for a number of calibration positions[1].
2.3.4
Target scan
The last of the three scans is the target scan, where the actual imaging se-
quence is used. During the target scan the EEG-cap outputs, V (t), are mea-
sured and combined with the gradient waveforms ˙e
G(t), found during the
phantom pre-scan, the gradient weights can be calculated using equation 2.1.
Knowing the change of gradient weights throughout the imaging sequence
makes it possible to estimate the head position throughout the scan, using the
relation found during the calibration scan, by matrix inversion of equation 2.2
[1].
The motion estimates are applied retrospectively to correct k-space samples,
before image reconstruction.
Time interpolation is performed to give one
motion estimate per line of k-space, and each line of k-space is transformed
and regridded using a non-uniform Fourier transformation.
==PAGE:19==
2.4 Feedforward Neural Network
11
2.4
Feedforward Neural Network
Feedforward Neural Networks are the quintessential type of Deep Learning
model. Feedforward Neural Networks are a type of Artifical neural network.
Artificial Neural Networks got their name because of the inspiration drawn
from neuroscience, when they were first created [15]. Artificial Neural Net-
works are made up of a network of units, typically referred to as neurons, each
taking multiple inputs and outputting individual activation values, similar to
the function of biological neurons [15]. A network is made up of layers of neu-
rons where the neurons in each layer perform computations in parallel. The
output of each neuron is then fed forward to the following layer, as an input
to all neurons in that layer. This process continues until the network input
has passed through all layers of the network and reached the final, output
layer. Feedforward neural networks only propagate data forward through the
network unlike Recurrent Neural Networks that includes feedback connections
where outputs of the model are fed back into itself.
Feedforward Neural Networks are most commonly applied in a supervised
learning application. Supervised learning algorithms are presented with la-
beled datasets, where each input is associated with a label or target value. In
supervised learning the labeled data is used as training data for the algorithm,
to determine the best model via optimization for the given labeled data. The
trained model can then be used for prediction when given new unlabeled data
[16]. In the following sections the individual parts of a simple feedforward
neural network will be introduced, as shown in figure 2.4, and it will be shown
how the network calculates an output, the forward model, and optimizes the
network through backpropagation.
Figure 2.4: Diagram of a simple feed forward neural network, with 1 hidden layer
(z), w are network weights, x are network inputs, y are network outputs, x0 and z0
are bias terms. (Figure from [17])
2.4.1
Forward model
The forward model is the forward propagation of an input through the network
ending with calculation of outputs. The feedforward network shown in figure
2.4 is a three layer network. It contains an input layer with D neurons, a
hidden layer with M neurons and an output layer with K neurons. The first
step in the forward model is to calculate a weighted linear combination of the
==PAGE:20==
12
Background
inputs, x1...xD, and the weights, w(1)
ji , connecting the input layer to the hidden
layer. j = 1, 2, ..., M denotes the neuron in the layer being connected to and
i = 0, 1, ..., D, the neuron in the previous layer being connected from. x0 and
z0, in the input and hidden layer are bias neurons. Bias neurons are set to
always be 1 and enable modelling a constant offset in the output.
aj =
D
X
i=0
w(1)
ji xi
(2.3)
The superscript (l) indicates the layer of the network. aj is called the activation
of neuron j and it is transformed using a nonlinear activation function h.
zj = h(aj)
(2.4)
zj is the output from the hidden layer and similar to equation 2.3 is combined
with outputs from the other neurons in the hidden layer to give the output
neuron activations.
ak =
M
X
k=0
w(2)
kj zj
(2.5)
where k = 0, 1, ..., K, and K is the number of outputs from the network. The
output values are calculated by applying another activation function so that
yk = h(ak)
(2.6)
Activation functions play a key role in enabling Neural Networks to approxi-
mate nonlinear functions. If the activation function applied in the hidden layer
is a linear function, then the network is composed of a number of successive
linear transformations that all together is itself a linear transformation [17].
Therefore Neural Networks use nonlinear activation functions in the hidden
layers to enable modeling of nonlinearities in the outputs from hidden layers.
The most common activation functions in hidden layers are Rectified Linear
Units (ReLU)
zj = max{aj, 0}
(2.7)
and the Logistic Sigmoid, σ.
zj = σ(aj) =
1
1 + e−aj
(2.8)
Rectified linear units are very similar to linear units, as the gradient is con-
stant for positive inputs, which makes them easier to optimize. The difference
between the two is just that a ReLU outputs zero across half its domain [15].
Often the hyperbolic tangent is used in place of the logistic sigmoid. The two
are closely related as: tanh(aj) = 2σ(2aj)−1, but the hyperbolic tangent typ-
ically performs better than the logistic sigmoid since it resembles the identity
function for values close to zero, where tanh(0) = 0 and σ(0) = 1
2. This means
that for small activations, training a network using the hyperbolic tangent is
similar to training a linear model [15]. An important property of activation
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Feedforward Neural Network
13
functions is they have to be differentiable since this is a key part of network
training, as will be shown in the section on backpropagation.
The activation functions used in the output layer are typically different than
the ones used in the hidden layers. The choice of output activation function
depends on the type of predictions the network is designed to make.
For
regression tasks the activation function is simply the identity such that
yk = ak
(2.9)
For Binary classification networks the logistic sigmoid can be used, and for
multiclass classification networks most often a softmax function is used. The
softmax outputs the probability distribution for each of the possible classes.
All together the forward model of a regression network with one hidden layer,
with input vector x and weights and biases vector w can be written as [17]
yk(x, w) =
M
X
k=0
w(2)
kj h(
D
X
i=0
w(1)
ji xi)
(2.10)
2.4.2
Backpropagation
The forward pass through the network is just a series of sums and multiplica-
tions, and is how a fully trained network is used to predict some output. An
unknown input is given to the network and after passing through the forward
model, the network gives it prediction for that input. But to train the network
and optimize its ability to correctly predict an output, we need to optimize
the values of the weights and biases. This is done in the backpropagation.
The first thing that is needed is a loss function. The loss function compares
the prediction of the network to the known ”true” value associated with an
input, and gives a value showing how wrong the network is in its prediction.
The terms loss function and cost function are used interchangeably, but gen-
erally the loss function is the error for a single training example, and the cost
function is a sum of errors, found with the loss function, over a full training
set. The cost function can also contain regularization terms in addition to the
loss function.
For regression networks the most common loss function is the Mean Square
Error (MSE), where for classification networks the most used loss function is
the cross entropy or negative log-likelihood.
The goal of training af neural network is to minimize the cost function E(w).
For the MSE loss function this means minimizing the expression
E(w) = 1
N
N
X
n=1
∥y(xn, w) −tn∥2,
(2.11)
where y(xn, w) is the networks prediction given input xn and weights, w and
tn is the known true target value. This can be done using gradient descent,
where we iterate through the minimization process, making adjustments to
weights along the way until a local minima is reached where the gradient of
the loss function, ∇E(w), is zero.
==PAGE:22==
14
Background
The simplest way to use gradient descent is for each iteration in the min-
imization process to take a small step in direction of the negative gradient
[17]
w(τ+1) = w(τ) −η∇E

w(τ)
,
(2.12)
where τ is the iteration index and η is the learning rate, which is an expression
of how big a step we take in the direction of the negative gradient. Gradient
descent passes all the available data through the network calculates the mean
loss, then calculates the gradient and adjusts the weights. Gradient descent
can quickly become computationally expensive with larger datasets since the
weights are adjusted only after the loss has been calculated for every point
in the dataset.
A variation on gradient descent is the stochastic gradient
descent, where instead of using all the data for each iteration, the weights are
adjusted after every individual data point has been passed through the network
[15].
Often Stochastic gradient descent is implemented using minibatches,
where the training data is sampled into smaller batches that is then used to
calculate gradient of the loss function and updating the weight. Minibatch
stochastic gradient descent acts as a compromise between the slow meticulous
updates performed when using gradient descent, and the fast, but slightly
noisy updates you get from stochastic gradient descent.
The challenge when minimizing the cost function is to calculate the gradient.
It is done by calculating the derivatives of the error function, or cost function,
with respect to the weights in each layer, by propagating the errors backwards
through the network, hence the name backpropagation. If we consider the
derivative of E with respect to a specific weight wji, we know from earlier
that a change in wji contributes to change in E, only via summed input aj.
By applying the chain rule for partial derivatives we get
∂E
∂wji
= ∂E
∂aj
∂aj
∂wji
(2.13)
Using the notation δj for the first derivative, and what we saw in equation 2.5
we get
∂En
∂wji
= δjzi,
(2.14)
meaning that the update to the weight is calculated by multiplying the value δ
from the output end of the weight and z from the input end of the weight[17].
The value for z, we know from the forward model, but we still need to know
how to calculate δ. Variations in activations in layer j, give variations in E,
only through the activations in the following layer k. Written using the chain
rule
δj = ∂E
∂aj
=
X
k
∂E
∂ak
∂ak
∂aj
,
(2.15)
where the sum is over all neurons k that are connected to unit j. The first
set of derivatives in the sum we already know, as it is δk for the layer further
down the stream in the network. This is why the derivatives are calculated
backwards through the network as the derivatives in one layer depend on the
values from the following layer. The second set of derivatives in equation 2.15
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Feedforward Neural Network
15
can be found by looking at the relations established in the forward model in
equations 2.5 and 2.4. we get [17]
∂ak
∂aj
= wkjh′(aj),
(2.16)
which results in the following backpropagation formula [17]
δj = h′(aj)
X
k
wkjδk
(2.17)
This tells us that the value δ for a specific hidden unit can be found by prop-
agating δ’s backwards from units from layers further down the network. It all
starts with the δ’s from the output layer, which is simply the difference be-
tween the prediction made in the forward model, and the target values known
from the training set. From there the derivatives for each unit in each layer
can be found by moving backwards from the output layer.
2.4.3
Overfitting and regularization
A main challenge in training neural network, and in all machine learning in
general, is that the trained model has to be able to perform well on new,
unseen data, based on what it has learned from the training data, known as
generalization [15]. During training we can compute the error between the
prediction and the known true value using the loss function, this is known
as training error. When the trained model is then used to predict based on
some previously unseen data we can calculate the test error or generalization
error. In figure 2.5 the common relationship between training error, estimated
generalization error and a model’s capacity is shown. In feed forward neural
networks, capacity can be thought of as the size of the network, how many
hidden layers and neurons are used. It can be seen that with increasing ca-
pacity the training error will keep falling as the model fits better and better to
the training data. The generalization error on the other hand will at first fall,
then reach a plateau before beginning to increase again. With low capacity the
trained model is not able to accurately capture the relationship in the data,
this is known as underfitting. With a large capacity however the trained model
basically remembers the training data and does not generalize to new data, so
we see a divergence between the training error and generalization error called
overfitting [15]. The challenge is to build a network than can extract enough
information from the training data to get a low test error without overfitting
to the training data.
==PAGE:24==
16
Background
Figure 2.5: Figure showing relationship between training error and generalization
error as a function of model capacity.
The optimal capacity is shown with a line
between the underfitting and overfitting zones (Figure taken from [15])
Implementing methods aimed at improving the generalization error but not
the training error is known as regularization. In neural networks overfitting
is a prevalent problem and therefore many different regularization methods
have been created.
A common approach when designing a neural network
is to make a network with a tendency to slightly overfit the data, and then
use regularization methods to try and make the generalization error of the
network as low as possible. One of the most commonly used regularization
methods is L2 regularization also called weight decay or ridge regression. L2
regularization is implemented by adding a term to the cost function shown in
equation 2.11 so the cost function becomes [17]
eE(w) = E(w) + λ
2 wTw
(2.18)
The L2 norm of the weight matrix is added to the cost function together with a
regularization coeﬀicient, λ. This penalizes large weights, since larger weights
after being multiplied by λ will increase the value of the cost function.
Another common way to regularize a neural network is by using early stop-
ping.
Early stopping is a regularization method where an estimate of the
generalization error is monitored throughout training, often by removing a
part of the training data to be used as validation data. By testing the model
on the validation data throughout training, it is possible to get an estimate
of the generalization error by calculating the validation error. Overfitting can
happen if a network is trained on a training set for too many epochs, but by
continuously calculating the validation error, training can be stopped when
the validation error stops improving.
The final regularization technique that will be described is called dropout.
Dropout is a technique that limits overfitting by approximately combining
exponentially many neural network architectures [18]. Dropout refers to tem-
porarily removing a neuron from the network during training as shown in
Figure 2.6, where for each training iteration a neuron is retained with some
probability, p. This is implemented in the forward model of the network by
multiplying the output vector, z(l), from a layer, l, with a vector, r(l), of same
==PAGE:25==
2.4 Feedforward Neural Network
17
size with values sampled from the bernoulli distribution.
r(l)
j
∼bernoulli(p),
(2.19)
˜z(l) = r(l) z(l)
(2.20)
Where ˜z is the dropout layer output. Most commonly p is in the range 0.5−1,
where 1 is the same as training a neural network without dropout [18].
(a) Standard neural net
(b) After applying dropout
Figure 2.6:
Simplified representation of dropout in feedforward neural network.
(Figure from [18])
Training a network with dropout is similar to training an ensemble of networks,
each of slightly varying size. In ensemble methods a number of different net-
works are fully trained and then all the predictions are averaged to give a final
prediction. A network with dropout is similar in the way that for each train-
ing iteration the network changes, as each neuron i not active in all iterations.
This means that a large number of different networks are trained a little bit
throughout the training. At test time however it is not feasible to average the
prediction from such a large number of different networks, so a simple approx-
imate average method is used instead. At test time a single network without
dropout is used for prediction but all the weights in the network are scaled
down by multiplying their value with the dropout probability, p. This ensures
that the expected output for each hidden unit is the same as the actual input
at test time [18].
The advantages of dropout is that since each hidden neuron is trained in many
different models throughout the training iterations it forces each neuron to be
able to perform well regardless of which other hidden neurons are present in
the model [15]. A neuron can not rely on its neighboring neurons to fix its
mistakes [18]. Dropout has been shown to lower the generalization error of
many different kinds of neural networks [18], but there are some disadvan-
tages in regards to computation load and training time. A neural network
using dropout effectively reduces the size of the network being trained so to
offset that networks using dropout require hidden layers with more neurons
[18]. Also since the model being trained is changing every iteration dropout
introduces some noise in the gradients compared to normal gradient descent
which results in networks using dropout often requiring more training itera-
tions to minimize the gradient [15]. It is however important to note that the
noise on the gradient helps with the regularization of the network, and can
==PAGE:26==
18
Background
improve the generalization of the network, by avoiding local minima and/or
overtraining.
2.5
Bayesian Optimisation
Bayesian optimization is a method that can be used to estimate optimal hyper
parameters for problems that are otherwise diﬀicult to optimize. For instance
a function f(x) where we can not compute a gradient to use in gradient de-
scent, or even a function that does not have a mathematical representation,
where evaluation of a point is expensive or time consuming, thereby making
random searching for optimal parameters unfeasible. This kind of functions,
that can only be observed through point evaluations can be called ”black box”
functions. Many machine learning algorithms fall within this categorization
of ”black box” functions.
Optimizing hyper parameters for machine learn-
ing algorithms such as neural networks can be a diﬀicult task but Bayesian
optimization is a method that can be used to solve this task [19].
In optimization problems we generally want to find a value x∗that maximizes
a function f(x) on some bounded set X.
x∗= arg max
x∈X f(x)
(2.21)
What makes Bayesian optimization special is it creates a probabilistic model
for f(x) and use this model to make decisions about where in X to make a
new observation of the function f(x) [19]. When using a probabilistic model
we make some assumptions about the prior distribution of the function, and
by sampling a few initial points we can calculate a posterior distribution from
which we can make a decision. The posterior distribution is found as
P (f | D1:t) ∝P (D1:t | f) P(f)
(2.22)
Where D1:t contains the sampled points of function f(x) and f is the unknown
function [20]. The decision about what point to sample next is made using an
acquisition function on the calculated posterior. When performing Bayesian
Optimization there are two choices to be made: first is choosing a probabilistic
model to give a prior over functions that can express assumptions about the
function being optimized. This model allows us to create a posterior from the
unobserved points. Secondly selecting an acquisition function that based on
the posterior, helps us determine the best point to make a new observation.
A Gaussian Process is a convenient choice as a probabilistic model. Gaussian
processes are defined as a ”collection of random variables, any finite number
of which have a joint gaussian distribution” [21]. We can write a gaussian
process as [21]
f(x) ∼GP
 m(x), k
 x, x′
(2.23)
Where m(x is the mean function and k (x, x′) is the covariance function. In
Bayesian Optimization we use gaussian process for predicting a function f(x).
By using the Gaussian Process on a set of, M, points (xm, f(xm))M
m=1, then
for each x ∈X we get that f(x) is gaussian distributed with respect to
N
 µ(x), σ2(x)

, where µ(x) is the posterior predictive mean and σ2(x) is
the posterior predicted variance we get from the covariance function of the
Gaussian process [20], as shown in figure 2.7a.
==PAGE:27==
2.5 Bayesian Optimisation
19
(a) Gaussian Process fit on samples
(b)
Acquisition function values (in green)
shown for the Gaussian Process
Figure 2.7: Figures showing how acquisition functions are used on a gaussian pro-
cess, for selecting the next point to be sampled. Blue line is the mean of the gaussian
process prediction of function f(x). Red Line is the underlying true function. Blue
bands are the standard deviation of the gaussian process. Green band is the results
from the acquisition function (Figures taken from [20])
The acquisition function uses the prediction of the mean and variance of f(x)
to make a decision about what point to observe next to try and find the
value x∗that maximizes the function. The acquisition function tries to find a
balance between exploitation and exploration. Exploitation values the points
we have already sampled and can be seen as a desire to look where the mean is
high, where exploration values areas of the function we have not yet sampled
more and can be seen as a desire to look where the uncertainty or variance is
high. The most commonly used acquisition functions are Upper Confidence
Bound (UCB), Probability of Improvement (PI) and Expected Improvement
(EI). UCB is the simplest of the acquisition functions and is written as [19]
UCB(x) = µ(x) + κσ(x)
(2.24)
Where the value κ, selected by the user, balances exploitation and exploration.
A high value of κ increases emphasis on exploration and a low value emphasizes
exploitation more. PI looks for the point in x that has the highest probability
of improving the output of f(x) with respect to the current largest observed
value. EI on the other hand calculates the value of that expected improvement
with respect to the largest observed value [20]. The Expected Improvement
for each point x ∈X is calculated using the equation [20]
EI(x) =
 (µ(x) −f (x+)) Φ(Z) + σ(x)ϕ(Z)
if σ(x) > 0
0
if σ(x) ≤0
(2.25)
where x+ is the best observed point, Φ is the Cumulative distribution function
and ϕ is the probability density function.
In figure 2.7b the output from the Acquisition function is shown in the bottom
of the figure in green, with the optimal next point to be observed marked with
an orange triangle. Depending on the acquisition function that is used, the
shape of the acquisition function output will change, and the point calculated
as the best possible next point will also be different.
When a probabilistic model as well as an acquisition function has been chosen
then the steps for using Bayesian Optimization in practice are as follows [20]
==PAGE:28==
20
Background
1. initial sampling of points xi from input space X.
2. Calculate values f(xi) using black box function.
3. Fit Gaussian Process on the available samples.
4. Compute acquisition function for all points x ∈X.
5. Select the point x∗that maximizes the acquisition function
6. use black box function to calculate f(x∗) and add (x∗, f(x∗)) to set of
samples.
7. Repeat steps 3-6 until desired result or all available points have been
selected.
If Bayesian Optimization is used to optimize hyper parameters in a Neural
Network, normally the generalization error would be used as the output trying
to be optimized. In this case it turns into a minimization problem but the
math would be the same, one could just set the value to be maximized to be
the negative value of f(x). EI has been shown to perform well in minimization
problems and to be better behaved than PI [19].
2.6
Active Learning
In Machine Learning active learning is a strategy used to choose optimal points
to from a set of unlabeled data, to enable the model to learn quickly and
eﬀiciently. Active learning is ideal for situations where a set of data points is
available, but querying for the label of each datapoint is expensive, in either
time or resources [22]. If we consider a pool of unlabeled datapoints and a
model trained on some subset of data with known labels. For classification
problems the goal of active learning is to determine the point, x∗in the pool
where our model is least confident in its prediction. One of the most used
ways to determine this confidence is called Query by Committee, where a
committee of models is trained on the labeled data, and then the point with
the largest disagreement in predictions between the committee members is
queried for its label and added to the available, labeled training data [23]. In
regression problems the goal of active learning most commonly is to determine
the point in the pool that will minimize the Expected Mean Square Error of
the prediction [24].
This can also be done using a Query By Committee
approach where the variance in the predictions of the committee members is
used to determine the optimal next point to add to the training data. Another
method to minimizing the expected error of a model is suggested in [24]. The
Mean Square Error of a prediction, ˆy, on a point x can be expanded into three
parts as follows
E

(ˆy −y)2 | x

E

(y −E[y | x])2
+ (ED[ˆy] −E[y | x])2 + ED
h
(ˆy −ED[ˆy])2i
(2.26)
According to [24], the first term on the right hand side is the variance of y
give x. This is the noise and does not depend on the model or on the training
data. The second term is the squared bias of the model. If we assume that
the model is approximately unbiased then this term is equal to zero. The
==PAGE:29==
2.7 Support Vector Regression
21
third term is the variance of the model. Therefore if we want to minimize
the Expected Mean Square Error of the model, we can look for a point x∗
that minimizes the variance of the model [24]. In Active Learning this would
be implemented by estimating the variance of the model given each point i
the pool, and adding the point that would reduce the variance of the model
the most. This type of active learning is called variance reduction. There are
other common methods for performing active learning but they will not be
presented here.
2.7
Support Vector Regression
Support Vector Regression (SVR) is an extension to the Support Vector Ma-
chine Classification algorithm (SVM). In SVM training data is treated as data
points in a multidimensional feature space, and computes a hyperplane in this
feature space that splits the data points to correctly classify as many data
points as possible based on what side of the hyperplane they are on. The
hyperplane is optimized by maximizing the margin between so called support
vectors, which can be seen as the edge cases or data points closest to the hy-
perplane. SVR works very similarly, but contrary to SVM the hyperplane in
SVR is computed, so that the predicted values of the training data, has at
most a deviation of ϵ from their actual values as illustrated in figure 2.8. The
hyperplane is optimized by minimizing the band (or tube in higher dimen-
sional space) defined by ϵ to be as narrow as possible, while still containing
most of the data points. Put simply, SVM computes a band that contains no
data points, and SVR computes a band that, in the simplest case, contains all
data points.
Figure 2.8: Figure showing how SVR fits a model to points, with flatness measure
epsilon, and slack variable xi. (Figure taken from [25])
If we look at the simplest case, a linear SVR model, suppose we have a training
data set, (x1, y1), ..., (xl, yl), where xi is the input, and yi is the target output.
The linear function, f, is then [25]
y = f(x) = wT x + b,
(2.27)
where w is the weight vector. The SVR approximation of f is then an op-
timization problem, trying to find the narrowest tube centered around the
surface, called flatness of f, while minimizing the prediction error. this can by
==PAGE:30==
22
Background
done by minimizing the norm of w. The approximation of f is then written
as [25]
min
w
1
2∥w∥2
subject to
 yi −wT xi −b ≤ε
wT xi + b −yi ≤ε
(2.28)
From this we see that the simplest case of SVR is a linear regression, with
an ϵ-insensitive loss function.
One common loss function is the linear loss
function defined as
L(y, f(x)) =

0
if |y −f(x)| ≤ε
|y −f(x)| −ε
otherwise
(2.29)
ϵ is an important factor. A small value of ϵ lead to a narrow tube, and low
tolerance for errors, a large value leads to a wide tube with a higher error
tolerance [25]. The approximation of f shown in equation 2.28 is only feasible
for data without outliers, where a function f exist that approximates all input
points. It is therefore common to introduce slack variables, ξ and ξ∗, to make
the model more robust to outliers. The approximation in equation 2.28 is then
extended to include the slack variable [25]
min
w
1
2∥w∥2 + C
l
X
i=1
(ξi + ξ∗
i )
subject to



yi −wT xi −b
≤ε + ξi
wT xi + b −yi
≤ε + ξ∗
i
ξi, ξ∗
i
≥0
(2.30)
where C is a regularization parameter, also called Box Constraint, that deter-
mines how much weight should be put on minimizing the flatness of f, and
prediction errors. A large C-value emphasizes minimizing prediction errors,
and a small C-value emphasizes flatness.
So far i have shown a method to use SVR to approximate linear functions.
By using a kernel function, SVR can also approximate nonlinear functions. A
kernel function is used to transform input data to a higher dimensional space,
called kernel space, where the function can be approximated with a hyper-
plane. In machine learning this is called the ”Kernel trick”. By introducing a
kernel function φ(x) the linear function, f, shown in equation 2.27 becomes
y = f(x) = wT φ(x) + b
(2.31)
The approximation in equation 2.30 remains the same just with φ(xi) substi-
tuted in for xi. There are many different kernel functions, but the most widely
used are Polynomial kernels and Radial Basis Functions. The use of kernels
to transform data into kernel space, and then fit a linear model is attractive,
as it is easier, computationally, than learning a nonlinear surface.
==PAGE:31==
3
Methods
The main goal of this project is to try to improve on the CapTrack motion
tracking outlined in section 2.3 from the manuscript by Laustsen et.al [1].
More specifically the regression analysis of the relation between the gradient
weights and the motion of the brain detailed in section 2.3.3.
The goal is
to investigate if other methods could be implemented to better learn this
relationship during the calibration scan to then get more accurate motion
estimates during the target scan. In [1] it is assumed that there is a linear
relation between the changes in the induced signal in the coils of the EEG
cap and the head position. In this project a neural network is implemented
to investigate whether there is some non-linearity in that relation that can be
modeled using a neural network. Furthermore a Support Vector Regression
(SVR) is implemented to examine how that will perform in comparison to the
linear and neural network approaches. In the following i detail the methods
used in this project as well as the implementation of these methods. I will then
describe the data collected in connection with the project and finally outline
the experiments performed.
3.1
”New” Linear Method
During the work with the project I experimented with different ways to im-
prove on the linear method as it is outlined in section 2.3. One of the exper-
iments which showed an improvement in the performance was to invert the
way the relation between change in gradient weights, ∆w, and head position,
∆r, is expressed when determining the wire loop orientation dependencies as
detailed in section 2.3.3. I instead express the relation as
∆r = ∆w B + ϵ
(3.1)
The difference from the way the relation is expressed in section 2.3.3 is that ∆r
and ∆w has been switched. Since the goal of the motion correction method
is to estimate the head position it seems more intuitive to learn the relation
in this way. What this change means is that the error is assumed to be on
∆r instead of on ∆w as originally stated in [1]. Writing the relation in a way
where the regression minimizes the error on the head position variable seems
like the best choice.
To perform the regression for the New linear method as written in equation
3.1 the estimated residual error can be written as
e = ∆r −∆w ˆB,
(3.2)
==PAGE:32==
24
Methods
Where ˆB is the estimate of B. Assuming that the error is independent and
normal distributed, N
 0, σ2In

, then we have
∆r | ∆w ∼N

∆w ˆB, σ2In

,
(3.3)
this means the likelihood function of ∆r given ∆w is [26]
p(∆r | ∆w) =
 2πσ2−n/2 exp

−1
2σ2 (∆r −∆w ˆB)T (∆r −∆w ˆB)

(3.4)
If we then take the logarithm of this and find the maximum likelihood with
respect to ˆB, we find that it is the same as minimizing the sum of squares
(∆r −∆w ˆB)T (∆r −∆w ˆB), [26]. So if we differentiate the log likelihood
with respect to σ2, equate to zero and solve for ˆB we get the normal equations
for the least squares problem [17]
ˆB = (∆wT ∆w)−1∆wT ∆r,
(3.5)
which can also be written as [17]
ˆB = ∆w† ∆r,
(3.6)
where, †, represents the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse.
When using this linear method in the motion correction, ˆB is estimated using
a training dataset recorded during the calibration scan, in the following way
ˆB = ∆w†
train ∆rtrain
(3.7)
Here ∆rtrain are the changes in head position found using the navigators in
the calibration scan. ∆wtrain are the changes to gradient weights calculated
from the measured signal from the EEG cap during the calibration scan.
The prediction of the head movement during the target scan, ∆rtarget, is then
calculated as
∆rtarget = ∆wtarget ˆB,
(3.8)
where ∆wtarget are the changes to gradient weights calculated from the mea-
sured EEG cap signal during the target scan.
3.2
Neural network for Motion Tracking
As described in section 2.3 the CapTrack motion tracking system uses the
signal recorded with the EEG cap and image-based navigators to learn the
relation between the change in the induced signal and head position. A neural
network can be created that takes the gradient weights as inputs and outputs a
change in head position. Using supervised learning the network can be trained
to learn the relation between the two.
The signal recorded from the EEG cap, during the short calibration scan, is
used as training data, and the motion estimates generated by the navigators
is used as training targets. The fact that the training data is recorded while
==PAGE:33==
3.2 Neural network for Motion Tracking
25
Figure 3.1: process diagram showing training of DiffNet. Yellow blocks are data
inputs, Blue blocks are Linear model, Green blocks are Neural Network
the subject is in the scanner limits how much training data is available. It
is desired to keep the setup and calibration part of the subjects time in the
scanner as short as possible, and spend as much time as possible actually
performing the target scan. The challenge is creating a neural network that
is able to generate a reliable model with small amount of training data. In
the article by Laustsen et. al. [1] it is shown that the linear method performs
quite well. Therefore due to the constraints in the amount of training data
and knowledge of the linear model being a decent approximation I decided
to create what I call a Difference Net, will be referred to as DiffNet in the
following. The idea behind it is that instead of training a neural network to
learn the ”full relation” between the gradient weights and head position, a two
step approach was implemented. First the linear model is used to calculate
a linear fit between the gradient weights and head position. The estimated
head position from the linear model is then subtracted from the ”known true”
head position found using the navigators. The training target of the neural
network then becomes the difference between the head position found using
navigators and the linear model. This means that the DiffNet is used to learn
a correction to the linear model.
The neural network was implemented using the ”Deep Learning Toolbox” in
Matlab with the function ”TrainNetwork”. The function requires the training
data and training targets, a ”Layer”-input defining the architecture of the
network, and an ”Options”-input defining the training options of the network,
such as the optimization function, learning rate and similar parameters.
3.2.1
DiffNet Overview
The following description uses the notation as if the New Linear method is
used as highlighted in section 3.1, but DiffNet was also implemented to work
with the Original Linear method as described in section 2.3.3. The first step
in training the difference net is to fit the linear model on the training data and
training targets recorded during the calibration scan. The training data are
the changes to gradient weights, ∆wtrain, calculated from the signal recorded
from the EEG cap, and the training targets are the changes in head position,
∆rtrain, calculated from the navigators. Using equation 3.7 and 3.8 the linear
==PAGE:34==
26
Methods
prediction for the training data, ∆rlin−train, is found as
∆rlin−train = ∆wtrain B
(3.9)
The linear prediction is subtracted from the navigator positions to give the
training targets for the neural network. The loss function, E(θ), that has to
be minimized during the training of the network is then
E(θ) = 1
N
N
X
n=1
∥y(∆wn
train, θ) −(∆rn
train −∆rn
lin−train)∥2,
(3.10)
where N is the number of points in the training set, and θ are the weights
and biases of the network at that iteration of training. The minimization is
done using an ADAM optimizer [27]. ADAM is short for ADAptive Moment
estimation, and is a variation of stochastic gradient descent with momentum.
Momentum helps accelerate optimization algorithms in the relevant direction,
by using knowledge from previous update steps. Momentum adds a fraction of
the update vector from the previous step to the current update. This means
that momentum increases the learn rate of the current step if the gradient
has the same direction as the gradient in the previous step [28]. Methods like
momentum are also called adaptive learn rate methods. ADAM uses adaptive
learn rate, but where momentum updates all parameters of the network with
the same learn rate, ADAM calculates individual adaptive learn rates for each
parameter based on the first and second moments of the gradient [27]. ADAM
performs well in settings with noisy gradients, such as networks with strong
regularization or small minibatch size. ADAM is one of the standard options of
optimization algorithm available for Matlab’s ”TrainNetwork” function. The
initial learn rate used by the ADAM optimizer was found using Bayesian
optimization, as described in the following section.
As mentioned earlier the amount of training data available in the motion cor-
rection system is not very abundant, in order to keep the calibration scan as
short as possible. When working with smaller datasets overfitting is a con-
cern. Therefore I implemented regularization methods in the difference net
in an attempt to limit overfitting. I experimented with a number of differ-
ent regularization methods and ended up using early stopping combined with
dropout, as described in section 2.4.3. Early stopping is implemented by ex-
tracting a random selection of 15% of the training set to be the validation
data.
The validation data is given as input to the training options in the
”TrainNetwork” function. The ”Validation Frequency”, how often the vali-
dation error is calculated, is set to be every 25 iterations of training. The
”Validation Patience”, the number of times that the training error can be
lower than the validation error before training is stopped, is set to 5. These
values were found by testing different values and comparing prediction scores.
The dropout probability, the probability a specific neuron is excluded from a
training iteration, is found through bayesian optimization. The best perfor-
mance was found with dropout between the hidden layer and the output layer,
with a dropout probability of 0.2.
3.2.2
Bayesian Optimization of Network Parameters
Bayesian optimization (as described in section 2.5), is implemented by using
the ’bayesopt’ function in Matlab [29]. The function lets you define ’Opti-
==PAGE:35==
3.2 Neural network for Motion Tracking
27
mizable Variable’s and an objective function. The ”bayesopt” function then
iterates through different combinations of the optimizable variables in an at-
tempt to minimize the objective function. I used the Mean Absolute Difference
(MAD) between the prediction of the trained network on a test set and the
test targets, as the objective function that is minimized. The reasoning behind
using MAD when predicting on a test set is that, that is what is used in the
manuscript by Laustsen et. al. [1] to quantify performance. The Bayesian
optimization used in matlab uses Expected Improvement as the acquisition
function. The function is initialized with a range of possible values for each
”Optimizable Variable”. The range for each type of optimizable variable was
determined based on literature and earlier experiments. I performed several
runs of bayesian optimization to determine the best combination of values
for: Number of hidden layers, number of neurons in each layer, drop rate for
dropout layers and initial learning rate.
A key part of designing a feedforward neural network is selecting a suitable
network size, meaning the number of hidden layers, and the size of each of
the hidden layers. It can be diﬀicult to find the best combination with trial
and error or random search, since each parameter in the network influences
the rest of the parameters in the network. For instance if the dropout rate
is increased you are essentially training smaller networks, so often this results
in larger layer sizes being better. Bayesian optimization is a way to make an
informed choice of what is the best balance between parameters knowing that
the space of possible combinations was searched in a structured way.
3.2.3
DiffNet architecture
DiffNet is a Feed Forward Neural Network.
The EEG cap has 8 channels
each with a 3 dimensional weight vector wi = [wix, wiy, wiz]T as discussed in
section 2.3.1. The rigid body head motion is described in 6 dimensions in
total, 3 translation dimensions and 3 rotation dimension. The input layer to
the neural network has 24 neurons to fit the gradient weights, and the output
layer has 6 neurons to match the head motion parameters. The activation
function for the hidden layer is the hyperbolic tangent. Hyperbolic tangent
was chosen as it performed better than ReLU in preliminary experiments. The
layers implemented in DiffNet is shown in figure 3.2. The final architecture of
the difference net after using bayesian optimization was:
• Input layer with 24 neurons
• Output layer with 6 neurons
• 1 hidden layer with 70 neurons
• tanh activation function
• dropout with a dropout probability of p = 0.2, between hidden layer and
output layer.
• Mean square error as the loss function
• ”ADAM” optimization function with an initial learn rate of 0.01
Due to the relatively small size of the network, training the network is fast.
This allowed me to train a small ensemble of 10 models, and averaging the
==PAGE:36==
28
Methods
Figure 3.2: Layers in DiffNet
predictions as a way to increases the stability of the predictions.
3.3
Support Vector Regression
I want to implement a different machine learning algorithm than the feed-
forward neural network as a point of comparison, on what is the best way
to perform the regression analysis needed in the motion tracking. Support
Vector Regression is an agile method that can be used for a range of different
regression tasks due to the different kernels available.
Support Vector Re-
gression was implemented using the ”fitrsvm” function in Matlab [29]. The
function allows the user to select a kernel and specify parameters for the ϵ-
insensitive band and Box Constraint detailed in equation 2.30 in section 2.7.
After experimenting with different kernels the best performance is seen when
using a linear kernel. The values for box constraint and ϵ is determined us-
ing Bayesian optimization, one of the optimization methods available in the
”fitrsvm” function in Matlab. Matlab’s SVR implementation is not suited for
multidimensional outputs, so it is implemented by learning a model to predict
each dimension of output separately. This means that 6 different SVR models
are trained, each with individual values for box constraint and ϵ.
Output dimension
Box Constraint
ϵ
X translation
0.16
0.02
Y translation
37.5
0.11
Z translation
1.74
0.06
X rotation
0.02
0.0001
Y rotation
0.63
0.002
Z rotation
31.0
0.0001
Table 3.1: Box constraint and ϵ values for each output dimension determined using
Bayesian Optimization
3.4
Variance Reduction
I want to investigate whether a more structured movement pattern during
acquisition of training data, will reduce the amount of training data that is
needed to achieve a good head position estimate, compared to just random
movement. To do this I implemented a version of active learning called vari-
ance reduction that is shortly described in section 2.6. The variance reduction
is implemented for the new linear model described in section 3.1. I imple-
mented a pool based sampling approach, where i consider a training dataset
as a pool, U, of available data points. The active learning process starts with
a randomly selected set of M, datapoints, D = (xm, ym)M
m=1, since there is
==PAGE:37==
3.5 Data Recording
29
a minimum requirement for the amount of data needed to perform the linear
regression. The model is trained on the data in, D, then iteratively the data-
point in the pool, that will reduce the variance of the model the most, is found,
and added to D. This is repeated until the desired prediction performance has
been reached or there are no points left in the pool. Calculating the variance
of the linear model for each of the available points in the pool is the key part
of implementing variance reduction. For a Linear regression model the Fisher
Information Matrix, FI, can be written as
FI = xT x
(3.11)
Where x is the matrix of p, variables and M points from the training set,
D.
An approximation of the variance of the model can then be found by
calculating the determinant of the inverse Fisher information Matrix, this is
called the generalized variance [30]. Using this, the variance of the model if a
point, ˜x, in the pool is added to the training data, D, can be calculated as
varD(˜x) = |(FI + ˜xT ˜x)−1|
(3.12)
Where the sum in the expression is equal to the Fisher information matrix of
the model if ˜x is included. The point, x∗, in the pool, U, that will reduce the
variance of the model the most, can be found as the point that minimizes the
general variance of the model.
x∗= arg min
˜x∈U varD(˜x)
(3.13)
In Optimal Design this is called D-optimality [30]. For each step in the learning
process we can find the point that is most optimal to add to the model, based
on how much it reduces the variance of the model by repeating equations 3.11
- 3.13.
3.5
Data Recording
Data used in the project was recorded at Danish Research Centre for Magnetic
Resonance at Hvidovre Hospital. I was the subject in the scanner, and Ph.D.
student Malte Laustsen helped with setting up the CapTrack motion tracking
system, mounting the EEG cap and running the scanner. The setup and types
of scans are similar to what is presented in the article by Laustsen et. al. [1].
The scanner used was a 3T Phillips MRI system of the model Achieva, using
a 32 channel head coil. A total of seven scans were performed: five 3D EPI
Navigator scans (will be called ”Navigator scans” from now on) and two 3D-
GRE scans with interleaved 3D EPI navigators. The 3D EPI Navigator scans
are examples of calibration scans for the motion correction method, and the
3D-GRE scans are the target scans. The Phantom pre-scan used to determine
Gradient waveforms for each scan sequence (as described in section 2.3.2), had
been performed at an earlier time and will not be detailed in the following.
Each 3D EPI Navigator sequence has a 2◦flip angle, echo time (TE) of 5.8ms
and repetition time (TR) of 14.0ms with a volume acquisition time of 0.46s.
Each of the navigator scans were performed with different types of motion.
==PAGE:38==
30
Methods
An overview of the length and motion type for each of the Navigator scans is
shown in table 3.2.
3D EPI
Navigator Scan
Total Scan Time [s]
Number of Samples
Type of Movement
1
184
400
slow, small
2
184
400
slow, big
3
184
400
fast, small
4
184
400
fast, big
5
552
1200
slow, start big,
gradually decrease
Table 3.2: Overview of 3D EPI scans performed
3D GRE
Structural Scan
Total Scan Time [s]
Number of Samples
Type of Movement
1
420
240
random intermittent
movement
2
420
240
no movement
Table 3.3: Overview of 3D GRE scans performed
The 3D GRE scans (will be called structural scans from this point) are made
up of T1-weighted 3D spoiled Gradient Echo structural sequences, also known
as FLASH-sequences. The sequence has a flip angle of 14◦, TE of 3ms and
TR of 6.5ms with a volume acquisition time of 1.6s. The structural scans has
interleaved navigator sequences, identical to the sequences used during the
navigator scans, to get a navigator based position estimate to use as compar-
ison of motion tracking eﬀicacy between the EEG cap and Navigators. The
flip angle of the navigator sequence is kept low to minimize its impact on the
target sequence, and the navigators has low resolution to keep acquisition time
low.
Prior to entering the scanner i had the EEG cap mounted, and after being
positioned in the scanner the cap was connected to the EEG sampling sys-
tem. Then each of the seven scans were performed one after the other, while
communicating with Malte Laustsen, who was running the scanner, between
scans to make sure that each scan looked correct, and the data recorded from
the EEG cap looked normal.
3.6
Experiments
I perform a number of experiments to compare the different regression models
against each other and to determine which of the models used in the project
performs better. the experiments are split into four categories:
1. Performance on navigator-data
2. Performance on structural-data
==PAGE:39==
3.6 Experiments
31
3. Confidence in prediction
4. Active learning using variance reduction
for the first three categories of experiments i tested 5 different methods: The
Original Linear method as described in [1] and section 2.3, the New Linear
method detailed in section 3.1, two versions of the DiffNet, one learning a
correction to the Original linear method (will be referred to as DiffNet-Orig),
and one learning a correction to the New Linear method (will be referred to
as DiffNet-New) and finally a Support Vector Regression method.
3.6.1
Performance on Navigator-Data
In this category of experiments i compare models that are both trained and
tested on the navigator datasets detailed in table 3.2. In these experiments I
select navigator datasets for training and testing that have similar movement
patterns, meaning models that are trained on data with big movements are
also tested on data with big movements and vice versa. It is important to
note that models are never used to predict on the same dataset it was trained
on. When models are trained on navigator dataset 1 and 3 they are used
to predict on navigator dataset 1, 3 and 5.
When models are trained on
navigator dataset 2 and 4 they are used to predict on navigator dataset 2 and
4. The first experiment in this category compares the performance of each
of the regression methods when they are tested on all the available samples
in a training dataset.
Each model is trained on all 400 samples of one of
the navigator datasets in table 3.2, and then each model is used to make a
prediction using the gradient weights from one of the other navigator datasets.
The second experiment in this category is aimed at seeing how well each model
performs with varying amounts of training data. The models are first trained
on 25 randomly selected datapoints. The size of the training dataset is then
incrementally increased by selecting 10 random samples from the remaining
datapoints. At each increase of the size of the training data the models are
tested on another dataset, to show how well each model performs when given
a certain amount of training data. Since it is a desire to keep the calibration
scan as short as possible this experiment is used to try to determine if there
is some number of training samples that should minimally be used.
3.6.2
Performance on Structural-Data
To highlight the performance of each model on structural data, the same ex-
periments highlighted above are performed. Each model is still trained on one
of the navigator datasets, but is then used to predict on one of the structural
scans listed in table 3.3. Additionally the predicted head movement calcu-
lated using each of the 5 models is used to reconstruct the structural images
by performing retrospective movement correction. All other experiments in
the project calculates the performance of each of the models based on how
close it gets to the head positions determined using navigators. By recon-
structing images it is possible to compare how well each model manages to
capture the movement present during the scan. Thereby not using navigator
head positions as the ”ground truth” but the quality of the motion corrected
image as the measure of performance. The image quality is determined by
==PAGE:40==
32
Methods
calculating Average Edge Strength (AES) of the image, which is a standard
measure of image sharpness [1]. The image reconstruction and calculation of
AES is performed with help from Ph.d. student Malte Laustsen.
3.6.3
Confidence in Prediction
This experiment is performed to show the robustness of the different models,
when trained on similar but slightly varying datasets. The training datasets
are created using Bootstrapping. Bootstrapping is a resampling method where
a range of datasets is created by random sampling with replacement from a
source. In the experiment i use one of the navigator datasets listed in table
3.2 as the source to create a number of sampled datasets. I create 500 sampled
datasets, train the five different models on each one and test the trained models
on a different navigator dataset. This allows me to calculate the standard
deviation of the predictions for each model.
3.6.4
Active Learning using Variance Reduction
The final experiment is used to investigate whether training can be optimized
by using a more structured movement pattern during acquisition of training
data in the calibration scan, compared to free random movement. To do this
i use an active learning approach as detailed in section 3.4. This experiment
is done on two models of the New Linear method. One model is similar to
experiment two in the first category of experiments, where a model is trained
on increasing amounts of training data, where each new sample added to
the training data is randomly selected. The second model is also trained on
increasing amounts of training data, but each new sample added to the training
data is selected using variance reduction. The two models start with the same
25 samples from a navigator dataset, since the linear method and variance
reduction method i not stable with less than 25 samples. The full experiment
is repeated 100 times to be able to calculate the average performance of each
model.
==PAGE:41==
4
Results
In the following i present the results of the experiments performed in this
project detailed in section 3.6.
The results are split into four parts where
results will be shown and explained in each part.
4.1
Performance on Navigator Data
In these experiments i test how well each of the methods perform when trained
and tested on Navigator Data.
Table 4.1 lists Mean Absolute Difference for each model when trained and
tested on pairs of Navigator datasets. The models are trained on all 400 sam-
ples of the navigator data. The results in the table are split into experiments
with Navigator dataset with small movement and big movement, with the
mean of all experiments calculated in the last column. It can be seen that the
Original linear model performs the worst, while the other models are quite
similar in performance. DiffNet-Orig and SVR perform best on average across
the experiments. A table containing results from all experiments is available
in the appendix as table A.1.
Regression model
Small movement
Big movement
Mean
Original Linear
0.443
0.489
0.458
New Linear
0.149
0.172
0.157
DiffNet-Orig
0.144
0.165
0.151
DiffNet-New
0.149
0.169
0.156
SVR
0.144
0.167
0.152
Table 4.1: Mean Absolute Difference of each regression model trained and tested on
Navigator Scans. Training data size of 400 samples.
Figure 4.1 shows the fit in each of the 6 degrees of freedom of the New Linear
method when trained on Navigator dataset 1 and tested on Navigator dataset
5 compared to the head movement estimated from the navigators for Navigator
dataset 5.
Figure 4.2 shows the mean performance of the different models when trained,
and tested on navigator data, for varying sizes of training datasets. Perfor-
mance is expressed as Mean Absolute Difference between Navigator positions
and predicted positions averaged over all 6 degrees of freedom. The plotted
values are the average of 4 experiments, each being run 100 times. All models
perform better when trained on more data. The original linear model has
the poorest performance for nearly all sizes of training data. The New Linear
==PAGE:42==
34
Results
Figure 4.1: Plot showing prediction of the New Linear model compared to the head
positions found using Navigators in each of the 6 degrees of freedom. The blue line is
Test target from Navigators, Red line is the prediction of the New linear Model. MAD
is shown for each of the 6 degrees of freedom.
==PAGE:43==
4.2 Performance on Structural Data
35
model and DiffNet-New follow each other very closely at nearly all sizes of
training data. DiffNet-Orig and the SVR performs the best and very simi-
larly at most sizes of training data. All models, except the Original Linear,
improve rapidly in the beginning before leveling off around a training datasize
of 150 samples. Figures for the individual experiments averaged in the figure
for different combinations of train and test datasets can be seen in appendix
A.1
Figure 4.2: Mean Absolute Difference of test prediction compared to test target, for
changing size of training data set. Blue line is Original Linear Model, Red line is New
linear Model, Yellow line is Difference Net trained on original linear model, Purple
line is Difference Net trained on original linear model, Green line is Support Vector
Regression
4.2
Performance on Structural Data
Table 4.2 lists the average MAD for models trained on navigator scans and
tested on either structural scan 1 (with movement) or structural scan 2 (no
movement). The Diffnet-Original performs best on average when tested on
the scan with movement. whereas the Original Linear method performs best
on average when tested on the scan without movement.
Results from all
individual experiments are available in the appendix as table A.2 and A.3.
Regression model
Move
Still
Mean
Original Linear
0.264
0.074
0.169
New Linear
0.252
0.096
0.174
DiffNet-Orig
0.238
0.077
0.157
DiffNet-New
0.249
0.094
0.172
SVR
0.245
0.099
0.172
Table 4.2: Mean Absolute Difference of each regression model trained on Navigator
scan and tested on structural scan. Training data size of 400 samples.
Figure 4.3 shows two figures from the traindata size experiment, for models
trained on navigator data, and tested on structural data. The MAD gets lower
==PAGE:44==
36
Results
with more training data for all models except the DiffNet-Orig in figure 4.3b.
For both experiments the New Linear model and the DiffNet-new are very
similar for most traindata sizes, with the DiffNet being slightly better with
more samples in figure 4.3b. The Original Linear model is best of all models
in figure 4.3b, and the worst of all models in figure 4.3a.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: Mean Absolute Difference of test prediction compared to test target, for
changing size of training data set. (a) Models trained on navigator dataset 1, tested
on structural dataset 1. (b) Models trained on navigator dataset 2, tested on structural
dataset 1. Blue line is Original Linear Model, Red line is New linear Model, Yellow
line is Difference Net trained on original linear model, Purple line is Difference Net
trained on original linear model, Green line is Support Vector Regression
Table 4.3 list the average improvement to Average Edge Strength (AES) for
an image retrospectively corrected using the predicted head movement from
each model. For the structural scan with movement (move) the models were
trained on navigator data 1 and for the structural scan without movement
(still) the models were trained on navigator dataset 3. SVR performed the
best in terms of AES score for the scan with movement, Navigators were best
for scan without movement.
Figure 4.4 shows examples of motion corrected images for structural scan
with movement. Motion correction was performed using the prediction from
each of the trained models. The images are horizontal slices taken from the
==PAGE:45==
4.3 Confidence in Prediction
37
Average Edge Strength
improvement [%]
Move
Still
Navigators
12.5
6.2
Original Linear
10.5
3.5
New Linear
11.8
2.3
DiffNet-Orig
12.1
5.0
DiffNet-New
11.2
3.0
SVR
12.8
2.1
Table 4.3: Average edge strength - improvement [%], compared to uncorrected image
for structural scan with movement and without movement (Still) respectively.
volume of images used to calculate the AES in table 4.3. It can be seen that
all models improve on the image quality, and the SVR reduces the ringing
artifacts slightly more than the other models.
(a) Uncorrected
(b) Original Linear
(c) New Linear
(d) DiffNet-Orig
(e) DiffNet-New
(f) SVR
Figure 4.4: images from motion corrected volumes. images are selected parts of a
mid-brain slice in horisontal plane. (a) is the uncorrected image as it was recorded
during structural scan 1. (b)-(f) are motion corrected images using the predictions
from each of the trained models.
4.3
Confidence in Prediction
Figure 4.5 is a validation of bootstrap sampling for estimating standard devi-
ation in predictions. It is a plot of the estimated Probability Density Function
(PDF) for a single point in the test data, compared to a normal distribution
with the same mean and standard deviation as what was calculated in the
bootstrap sampled experiment. It can be seen that the shapes of the PDF’s
are very similar.
==PAGE:46==
38
Results
Figure 4.5: Plot of estimated Probability Density Function using bootstrap sampled
data, and a normal distribution with the same mean and standard deviation, for a
single point in the predictions on the test data.
Figure 4.6: Standard deviation in prediction for New Linear Model when trained
on Navigator data 2 and tested on Navigator data 4. Each figure plots the standard
deviation at different amplitudes of motion.
The mean standard deviation for the
specific dimension is listed above the each figure.
Figure 4.6 shows the standard deviation of predictions at different amplitudes
of motion for each of the 6 DOF. The largest standard deviation is observed
in Y-translation with average deviation of 0.15mm in the predictions. The
smallest standard deviation is observed in Z-translation, with average devia-
tion of 0.07mm in the predictions. The figure shows a higher density of points
==PAGE:47==
4.4 Active Learning using Variance Reduction
39
in the middle range of amplitudes in all dimensions, due to those being more
prevalent in the data. Table 4.4 lists the mean standard deviation of several
runs of the experiment. The Original Linear method has the largest average
standard deviation on average and the Diffnet-Orig has the lowest average
standard deviation.
Regression model
Mean Standard Deviation
Original Linear
0.18
New Linear
0.14
DiffNet-Orig
0.12
DiffNet-New
0.14
SVR
0.16
Table 4.4: Mean Standard Deviation calculated for each regression model. Values
are the mean of four experiments training and testing on different Navigator datasets.
4.4
Active Learning using Variance Reduction
Tabel 4.5 lists the average results from 6 experiments comparing random data
selection to active learning using variance reduction. It can be seen that for
smaller sizes of training data the variance reduction performs better than
the random selection, with the difference of performance decreasing as more
samples are added.
Figure 4.7 shows the results of two experiments comparing active learning
using variance reduction and random selection of training data. It can be seen
that in both experiments the variance reduction helps the Linear regression
learn faster, than the random selection. From a training data size of around
120-150 samples, the two selection methods are similar from that point on.
Figures showing all experiments with variance reduction are available in the
appendix A.3
Number of samples
50
75
100
125
150
Random selection
0.250
0.200
0.183
0.175
0.169
Variance reduction
0.217
0.195
0.178
0.177
0.173
Table 4.5: Average performance for different number of training samples for models
using random selection and variance reduction respectively. Values are the average of
6 experiments.
==PAGE:48==
40
Results
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7:
Mean Absolute Difference of test prediction compared to test target,
for New Linear model trained with random selection, and with active learning using
variance reduction (a) Models trained on navigator dataset 1, tested on navigator
dataset 5. (b) Models trained on navigator dataset 3, tested on navigator dataset 5.
Blue line is Variance reduction method, Red line is random selection
==PAGE:49==
5
Discussion
In this section i will discuss the results presented in the previous section. I first
evaluate the results of the two linear models, and how they compare. Then
i evaluate the results from the neural network and SVR model. I will then
discuss the differences seen between using navigators as the ”ground truth”
and using AES, and how that influences the results that was presented. finally
i will shortly evaluate the active learning experiments.
5.1
Linear Models
In figure 4.2 and table 4.1 it can be seen that the New Linear model performs
better than the Original Linear model when tested on Navigator datasets.
The Original Linear model on average has a 2.9 times higher MAD than the
New Linear model. However when the linear models are tested on structural
data the results are not as conclusive. The MAD of the models are very sim-
ilar when predicting on the structural scan with movement, and the Original
model performs better when predicting on the structural scan without move-
ment. However as shown in figure 4.3 the Original Linear model performed
the best out of all models in some experiments with structural data, and the
worst in other. In the appendix there is a table with results from all the ex-
periments with structural data (table A.2 and A.3) where it can be seen that
the Original model gives better results on 2 of the 4 experiments performed
with the structural data with movement, and in all 4 experiments when tested
on the data without movement.
Looking at the average edge strength in table 4.3, using the New linear model
results in more improvement on the scan with movement, whereas the Original
linear model improves the images more for the scan without movement. It
should however be noted that due to the varying results when testing on
structural data it might vary which of the models is better depending on the
training dataset, but that was not tested. The AES results compare well with
what was shown in [1]. In their experiments the navigators were on average
slightly better than the linear model, at improving the images. The difference
between AES improvement when using navigators and linear models that is
found in this project is similar to what was found in [1]. They did however
see overall larger improvements when performing motion correction on scans
with movement.
When comparing the two linear models, it is also interesting to note the dif-
ference in standard deviation seen in table 4.4. The New linear model has a
mean standard deviation of 0.14 across all experiments whereas the Original
==PAGE:50==
42
Discussion
Linear model has a mean standard deviation of 0.18. This means the New
linear model is slightly more robust to small changes to the dataset, compared
to the Original linear model. I do not have an explanation for why this is, but
find it to be an interesting observation. It should also be noted that the stan-
dard deviation of the predictions are quite similar across different amplitudes
of movement (figure 4.6). There is for example no tendency of the models
being more uncertain in their predictions at the extremes.
I have shown in this project that the New linear model is superior to the Origi-
nal linear model when trying to predict on Navigator data. But there is some-
thing that influences how well it predicts on the structural scans. Whether
this is due to eddy currents or some sequence related effects is not known, but
it would be an interesting topic for future studies.
5.2
Machine Learning Models
Across all the navigator experiments the SVR and Diffnet-Orig performed the
best out of all the models tested. The two models are better at all traindata
sizes as shown in figure 4.2. On average across all experiments the Diffnet-Orig
is slightly better than SVR. Diffnet-New barely does anything to the perfor-
mance on navigator data compared to the New Linear model though it does
perform slightly better than the linear model on data with large movement.
It is interesting that the Diffnet-Orig performs so well on navigator data when
I have shown that the Original Linear model performs quite poorly. At first
I thought that this performance was due to non-linearities being modeled by
the Diffnet that was not found using the linear model. But after testing the
New linear model and the SVR, with a linear kernel, I no longer believe this to
be the case. One possible explanation could be that the original linear model
does not capture some tendency in the data, that can then be learned by the
Diffnet. The New linear model on the other hand seems to fit the data quite
well, which maybe leaves the Diffnet-New to mainly try and learn noise or
outliers in the data, leading to the Diffnet not being able to improve a lot on
the New Linear model. Given this hypothesis it makes sense that the linear
kernel SVR generally performs better than the least squares regression in the
New Linear model, as SVR is more robust to outliers in the data. Due to
the fact that the New Linear model and SVR, with a linear kernel, performs
so well i do not believe that there are a lot of non-linearities present in the
relationship between the gradient weights and head position.
As mentioned above the New linear model had a lower mean standard devi-
ation in its predictions compared to the Original linear model. It is however
interesting that the DiffNet-Orig has a lower mean standard deviation than
the DiffNet-New. It should also be noted that the two DiffNet models had a
lower mean standard deviation in predictions than the SVR. In a way the fact
that the SVR model has a higher mean standard deviation than the New lin-
ear model contradicts what i stated before, about SVR being more robust to
outliers in the data. I am however not sure if my reasoning here is correct and
am also not sure if bootstrap datasampling is the correct way to investigate
this.
In future research it might be interesting to try more robust linear regression
==PAGE:51==
5.3 Motion Corrected Images
43
models such as Huber regression, to investigate whether outliers are having
an influence on the linear models.
The very individualized values for box
constraint and ϵ for the SVR model, found using Bayesian optimization (table
3.1), might mean that the SVR model is overfitting on the specific type of
data used in this project. It would be necessary to test the model on other
datasets to get a better understanding of whether that is the case.
Due to the data i had available in this project, as well as the slightly confusing
tendencies seen in the performance of the models on the structural data, I
mainly tried to create machine learning models that performed well on navi-
gator data. This may have resulted in me developing models that had a ten-
dency to overfit on the navigator data during training and thereby losing some
generalization performance when those models were tested on non-navigator
sequences. It could be a topic for future research to try and develop models
better at generalizing for non-navigator sequences. Also it would be interest-
ing to test the models on other types of imaging-sequences to see whether the
performance of the models would be similar to what was shown on the 3d-EPI
sequences used in this project.
5.3
Motion Corrected Images
Firstly the results in table 4.3 show that the use of CapTrack for motion cor-
rection in MR images works, as is also shown in the article by Laustsen et. al
[1]. The AES results for the scan that was supposed to be without movement,
shows that even though i tried to remain still during the scan there was still
some movement present that could be corrected using the motion correction
methods. This emphasizes the usefulness of a motion correction system for
MRI. The motion tracking models tested in this project all improve the quality
of motion corrupted images. The results in table 4.3 show that all the models
perform similarly to the interleaved navigators. The Original linear model has
the lowest AES score but is only 2%-points worse than the navigators. The
SVR was the only tested model that had a better AES score than the navi-
gators. It is interesting that the SVR ended up being the best in AES-score
when the DiffNet-Orig actually had a better MAD for the scan used to cal-
culate the AES. similarly the DiffNet-New had a better performance than the
New linear model when comparing MAD scores, but the New linear model had
0.6%-point better AES score than DiffNet-New. These results show the differ-
ence between using Navigators as the ”ground truth” to estimate performance
and using a more objective score, such as actual image improvement. It shows
that the models that perform the best at predicting a navigator sequence is not
necessarily the best at predicting the actual movement that occurred during
the image acquisiton.
The AES results shows that Captrack is a promising motion correction method.
It performs similarly to Navigators, but contrary to navigators it can be used
with most imaging sequences without the need for sequence modification.
Looking at the corrected images in figure 4.4 it is clear that the images used in
this project were quite severely influenced by motion artifacts. The corrected
images show that Captrack is not some magic thing that can turn a bad image
into a perfect image, but it is able to improve on motion compromised images.
==PAGE:52==
44
Discussion
5.4
Structured Training
The results shown in figure 4.7 show that it is possible to train a model to
be good at predicting head position faster than by just using free random
movement.
The Variance reduction method is quite a simple approach to
active learning, but I think it does well in showing that there might be a
benefit in having a more structured approach to recording training data. The
results indicate that there might be a benefit to developing a system that can
tell the subject how to move their head during the calibration scan. In my
opinion the datasize experiments, as well as the active learning experiments
show, that there is potential for reducing the amount of training data needed
to train a decent model.
The datasize experiments in figure 4.2 show the
improvement of the model really slows down from around 200 samples. this
fact combined with the ability to get a better fit using structured training
data acquisition, leads me to believe the duration of the calibration scan can
be made quite short.
==PAGE:53==
6
Conclusion
In this project i have presented and tested a new approach to the regression
modeling currently used with CapTrack [1]. I presented a new linear model
that outperformed the original linear model when tested on navigator data.
Furthermore i implemented and tested two machine learning approaches, a
feedforward neural network i named DiffNet, and a support vector regres-
sion model. All the implemented models improved the quality of a motion
corrupted structural scan following motion correction.
DiffNet did slightly
improve on the linear models it was designed to replace, but not a significant
amount. Due to the performance exhibited by linear models and SVR, with
a linear kernel, I conclude there is not a high degree of non-linearities present
in the relation between gradient weights and head position in the CapTrack
motion tracking method. I also showed that utilizing a structured training
approach can improve on the eﬀiciency of how training data is acquired.
==PAGE:54==
46
Conclusion
==PAGE:55==
Bibliography
[1]
M. Laustsen, M. Andersen, R. Xue, K. H. Madsen, and L. G. Hanson,
“Tracking of rigid head motion during mri using an eeg system,” sub-
mitted, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://resources.drcmr.dk/www/Docs/
FLASHretroMoCo_15_07_2021.pdf.
[2]
D. G. Nishimura, Principles of magnetic resonance imaging. Stanford
University, 1996.
[3]
J. L. Prince and J. M. Links, Medical imaging signals and systems.
Pearson Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, 2006, pp. 407–483.
[4]
J. Maclaren, M. Herbst, O. Speck, and M. Zaitsev, “Prospective motion
correction in brain imaging: A review,” Magnetic resonance in medicine,
vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 621–636, 2013.
[5]
F. Godenschweger, U. Kägebein, D. Stucht, U. Yarach, A. Sciarra, R.
Yakupov, F. Lüsebrink, P. Schulze, and O. Speck, “Motion correction in
mri of the brain,” Physics in Medicine & Biology, vol. 61, no. 5, R32,
2016.
[6]
N. White, C. Roddey, A. Shankaranarayanan, E. Han, D. Rettmann,
J. Santos, J. Kuperman, and A. Dale, “Promo: Real-time prospective
motion correction in mri using image-based tracking,” Magnetic Reso-
nance in Medicine: An Oﬀicial Journal of the International Society for
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 91–105, 2010.
[7]
M. D. Tisdall, A. T. Hess, M. Reuter, E. M. Meintjes, B. Fischl, and A. J.
van der Kouwe, “Volumetric navigators for prospective motion correction
and selective reacquisition in neuroanatomical mri,” Magnetic resonance
in medicine, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 389–399, 2012.
[8]
R. Frost, P. Wighton, F. I. Karahanoğlu, R. L. Robertson, P. E. Grant,
B. Fischl, M. D. Tisdall, and A. van der Kouwe, “Markerless high-
frequency prospective motion correction for neuroanatomical mri,” Mag-
netic resonance in medicine, vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 126–144, 2019.
[9]
J. M. Slipsager, A. H. Ellegaard, S. L. Glimberg, R. R. Paulsen, M. D.
Tisdall, P. Wighton, A. van der Kouwe, L. Marner, O. M. Henriksen,
I. Law, et al., “Markerless motion tracking and correction for pet, mri,
and simultaneous pet/mri,” Plos one, vol. 14, no. 4, e0215524, 2019.
[10]
M. B. Ooi, S. Krueger, W. J. Thomas, S. V. Swaminathan, and T. R.
Brown, “Prospective real-time correction for arbitrary head motion using
active markers,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine: An Oﬀicial Journal
of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, vol. 62,
no. 4, pp. 943–954, 2009.
[11]
A. Aranovitch, M. Haeberlin, S. Gross, B. E. Dietrich, B. J. Wilm, D. O.
Brunner, T. Schmid, R. Luechinger, and K. P. Pruessmann, “Prospec-
tive motion correction with nmr markers using only native sequence el-
==PAGE:56==
48
BIBLIOGRAPHY
ements,” Magnetic resonance in medicine, vol. 79, no. 4, pp. 2046–2056,
2018.
[12]
M. A. Griswold, P. M. Jakob, R. M. Heidemann, M. Nittka, V. Jellus, J.
Wang, B. Kiefer, and A. Haase, “Generalized autocalibrating partially
parallel acquisitions (grappa),” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine: An
Oﬀicial Journal of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in
Medicine, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 1202–1210, 2002.
[13]
D. Gallichan, J. P. Marques, and R. Gruetter, “Retrospective correction
of involuntary microscopic head movement using highly accelerated fat
image navigators (3d fatnavs) at 7t,” Magnetic resonance in medicine,
vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 1030–1039, 2016.
[14]
M. Vestergaard, J. Schulz, R. Turner, and L. G. Hanson, “Motion track-
ing from gradient induced signals in electrode recordings,” in Proceedings
of the ESMRMB 28th Annual Meeting. Leipzig, Germany, 2011.
[15]
I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press,
2016, http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[16]
S. L. Brunton and J. N. Kutz, Data-Driven Science and Engineering:
Machine Learning, Dynamical Systems, and Control. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2019. doi: 10.1017/9781108380690.
[17]
C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer,
2006.
[18]
N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhut-
dinov, “Dropout: A simple way to prevent neural networks from overfit-
ting,” The journal of machine learning research, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1929–
1958, 2014.
[19]
J. Snoek, H. Larochelle, and R. P. Adams, “Practical bayesian optimiza-
tion of machine learning algorithms,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 25, 2012.
[20]
F. Bergamin and K. H. Madsen, note on Bayesian Optimization. DTU,
2021.
[21]
C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for Machine
Learning. The MIT Press, Nov. 2005, isbn: 9780262256834. doi: 10.
7551/mitpress/3206.001.0001. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
7551/mitpress/3206.001.0001.
[22]
D. A. Cohn, Z. Ghahramani, and M. I. Jordan, “Active learning with sta-
tistical models,” Journal of artificial intelligence research, vol. 4, pp. 129–
145, 1996.
[23]
P. J. H. Jørgensen and K. H. Madsen, Active Learning Lecture Notes.
DTU, 2021.
[24]
D. A. Cohn, “Neural network exploration using optimal experiment de-
sign,” Neural networks, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 1071–1083, 1996.
[25]
F. Zhang and L. J. O’Donnell, “Support vector regression,” in Machine
Learning, Elsevier, 2020, pp. 123–140.
[26]
F. Hayashi, “Econometrics. 2000,” Princeton University Press. Section,
vol. 1, pp. 47–49, 2000.
[27]
D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[28]
S. Ruder, “An overview of gradient descent optimization algorithms,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.04747, 2016.
==PAGE:57==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
49
[29]
MATLAB, 9.9.0.1538559 (R2020b). Natick, Massachusetts: The Math-
Works Inc., 2020.
[30]
A. C. Atkinson, “Optimal design,” Wiley StatsRef: Statistics Reference
Online, pp. 1–17, 2014.
==PAGE:58==
50
BIBLIOGRAPHY
==PAGE:59==
A
Appendix
Sections with additional results that is not included in the main thesis but
was deemed informative enough to include for the interested reader.
A.1
Train data size - Navigator data
(a)
(b)
==PAGE:60==
52
Appendix
(c)
(d)
Figure A.1: Mean Absolute Difference of test prediction compared to test target,
for changing size of training data set. (a) Models trained on navigator dataset 1,
tested on navigator dataset 5. (b) Models trained on navigator dataset 3, tested on
navigator dataset 5.(c) Models trained on navigator dataset 2, tested on navigator
dataset 4. (d) Models trained on navigator dataset 4, tested on navigator dataset
2. Blue line is Original Linear Model, Red line is New linear Model, Yellow line is
Difference Net trained on original linear model, Purple line is Difference Net trained
on original linear model, Green line is Support Vector Regression
==PAGE:61==
A.2 Full experiment results
53
A.2
Full experiment results
Regression model
Train on 1
Test on 5
Train on 3
Test on 5
Train on 1
Test on 3
Train on 3
Test on 1
Train on 4
Test on 2
Train on 2
Test on 4
Original Linear
0.506
0.406
0.491
0.370
0.485
0.494
New Linear
0.170
0.142
0.170
0.114
0.166
0.178
Diffnet-Orig
0.150
0.131
0.176
0.118
0.160
0.171
Diffnet-New
0.168
0.139
0.176
0.113
0.166
0.172
SVR
0.150
0.135
0.167
0.124
0.160
0.174
Table A.1: Results from all experiments on Navigator Data
Regression model
Train on 1
Test on Move
Train on 2
Test on Move
Train on 4
Test on Move
Train on 5
Test on Move
Original Linear
0.328
0.208
0.254
0.266
New Linear
0.239
0.262
0.272
0.237
Diffnet-Orig
0.234
0.244
0.235
0.238
Diffnet-New
0.243
0.249
0.266
0.236
SVR
0.237
0.244
0.255
0.242
Table A.2: Results from all experiments on Structural Data with movement
Regression model
Train on 2
Test on Still
Train on 3
Test on Still
Train on 4
Test on Still
Train on 5
Test on Still
Original Linear
0.079
0.074
0.072
0.071
New Linear
0.111
0.090
0.094
0.089
Diffnet-Orig
0.110
0.100
0.092
0.095
Diffnet-New
0.077
0.077
0.085
0.068
SVR
0.106
0.089
0.094
0.089
Table A.3: Results from all experiments on Structural Data without movement
==PAGE:62==
54
Appendix
A.3
Variance Reduction figures
(a)
(b)
==PAGE:63==
A.3 Variance Reduction figures
55
(c)
(d)
==PAGE:64==
56
Appendix
(e)
(f)
Figure A.2: Results from Variance reduction experiments. Each figure shows the
mean absolute difference for increasing sizes of training data, for random selection
and active learning using variance reduction. (a) Models trained on navigator dataset
1, tested on navigator dataset 3. (b) Models trained on navigator dataset 1, tested
on navigator dataset 5.(c) Models trained on navigator dataset 2, tested on navigator
dataset 4. (d) Models trained on navigator dataset 4, tested on navigator dataset 2.
(e) Models trained on navigator dataset 3, tested on navigator dataset 1. (f) Models
trained on navigator dataset 3, tested on navigator dataset 5. Blue line is Variance
reduction, Red line is random selection
==PAGE:65==
A.3 Variance Reduction figures
57
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds plads, building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
