==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Analysis of static vs dynamic sourcing
in e-commerce distribution with time
slotting
Transport and Logistics
Author:
Ionut-Adrian Alexandru
DTU Supervisor:
Stefan Ropke
ORTEC Supervisor:
Nathan Clerkx
August 1, 2021
==PAGE:2==
Transport and Logistics
Summary
Abstract
1
Chapter 1: Introduction
2
1.1 E-commerce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2 Attended Home Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Chapter 2: Problem Formulation
6
2.1 Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2 Research Objective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
Chapter 3: Research Context
9
3.1 About ORTEC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2 Time Slotting Business Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3 ORTEC Optimization Services - Time Slot Service
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4 ORTEC Optimization Services - Routing Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Chapter 4: Literature
15
4.1 Attended Home Delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.2 Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing with Time Windows
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3 Assignment and Clustering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Chapter 5: Solution Approach
22
5.1 Integer Linear Programming Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2 Greedy Heuristic - Depot Weight Balancing Assignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3 Handling Unknown Demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Chapter 6: Experimental Design
33
6.1 Time Slot Booking Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2 Simulation Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.3 Experimental Design - Assignment Methods under Known Demand
. . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.4 Experimental Design - Assignment Methods under Unknown Demand . . . . . . . . . .
38
Chapter 7: Computational Experiment Results
39
7.1 Experiment Results - Assignment Methods under Known Demand . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7.2 Experiment Results - Assignment Methods under Unknown Demand . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.3 Experiment Results - Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Chapter 8: Conclusion and Recommendations
48
8.1 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
8.2 Recommendations for Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
8.3 Recommendations for Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
1
==PAGE:3==
Transport and Logistics
Abstract
The results of this research paper reveal an interesting aspect of the Attended Home Delivery
Problem: the fact that there are quantiﬁable advantages when choosing to source delivery orders from
a ﬁxed supply location. The intuition implies that leaving the delivery order sourcing as dynamic
provides more space for ordering customers that are requesting time slots. By dynamic, we refer here
to the possibility of a customer to book a time window in a route from any of the available depots.
The long travel legs that can appear as a result of applying such a strategy are normally deterred
by cheapest insertion measures when booking a time slots and route optimization when planning the
order. Given the assumption that dynamic assignment would always try to plan a customer, and there
are no screening methods in place when actively providing the time slots, such long legs of delivery
can occur. Although not revealed as being a generic context, it can be debated that in most cases,
Attended Home Delivery Problems will be constrained by delivery capacity. Such is the case with
this research, where the historically based data always presents a higher customer demand than the
available supply.
In this paper speciﬁc static assignment methods, under a multi-depot context have been developed,
tested and analysed in comparison with the dynamic strategy. Although there are other means to
expand the research, the current paper manages to provide insight for continuing on the topic
1
==PAGE:4==
Transport and Logistics
Chapter 1: Introduction
This chapter begins with an introductory description of the practice of e-commerce and the in-
dustry characteristic strategy for performing the last-mile delivery: attended home delivery (AHD).
Further we will explore the challenges an e-retailer, and especially an e-grocer, can face when it comes
implementing attended home delivery services.
1.1 E-commerce
Over the last decades, given the increasing ease of establishing an online presence, most retailers
have adopted the e-commerce distribution channel, reaching to approximately 10% of the global retail
landscape (Snoeck et al.
2020).
This opened the possibility of servicing customers that are not
in the proximity of the retailer’s physical stores. Furthermore, by servicing the customers that are
located anywhere within the coverage area (area the e-retailer covers for distribution), the retailer can
provide access to a larger variety of products; for example high margin products that are often in
low demand and deemed not proﬁtable to occupy shelf space can now be provided to the interested
customer segment. While this example describes traditional retailers that implement e-commerce,
steadily there have been many retailers that function only online. This has contoured the operational
segment of e-retail. In Berning, Ernst, and Hooker (2005), where the discussion is focused on e-grocers,
a denomination is provided for the two type of retailers: Bricks&Clicks for the traditional retailers
that adopt e-commerce and Pure Play for the retailers that start and function only via the e-commerce
channel. For the Pure Play retailers and grocers a couple of challenges arise: identifying the correct
segment of market that would be willing to purchase their services and deﬁning eﬃcient methods for
implementing the provided services.
First attention to this trend started with at the beginning of the millennia with the emergence of
Pure play grocers such as Peapod and Webvan where the former became a success story mentioned
in most of the AHD literature, while the latter did not manage to implement eﬃcient strategies in
order to remain relevant. In paper such as «» where the two mentioned e-grocers are analyzed, the
need for creating well-deﬁned strategies and identifying the correct customer segment are brought to
attention. If we are to investigate how the e-commerce adoption impacts businesses, we discover the
following dimensions:
• Reaching the customer - Some business models have moved completely to using the e-commerce
channels, Pure Play, removing the need for maintaining a physical store. Others make use of
e-commerce features such as the ordering portal and move the routing responsibility to the
customer’s end, i.e. cases where a customer can order all his products online and get notiﬁed
with a cut-oﬀtime for when he can come and pick up the order. This is a type of service that
some Bricks&Clicks e-retailers can oﬀer. The most common method of reaching the customer,
regardless of the type of e-retailer is home delivery: attended or unattended.
• Storage cost impact - For business that fully move to the online channel, storage costs can become
easier to estimate since stock can be centralized at distribution centers or warehouses. In the
case of maintaining an online and physical store, we can remark an advantage when it comes
to the reaction of the supply chain, especially for the last-mile delivery: the physical stores can
also act as sourcing points for the customer orders.
• Distribution cost impact - In the case of unattended delivery, the distribution cost can be easier
2
==PAGE:5==
Transport and Logistics
to estimate given the fact that you will not promise the customer a given day of delivery, and
thus, if a particular order will not ﬁt properly in the distribution plan it can be moved to another
day. Planning and route optimization is thus improved and easier to perform. In the case of
attended delivery, since the time window constraint is introduced, the distribution cost is harder
to estimate. It becomes even harder if the time windows for delivery that a customer can select
are variate, i.e. including very short time slots like 1hour or 30 minutes. Additionally some
e-retailers provide the option for changing the order amount with several days or hours before
the promised delivery, complicating the problem further.
To conclude, the movement to online has created new opportunities for the retail businesses while
also introducing a totally new distribution challenges. While most business can promise a lead time for
their customers, retailers will ﬁnd it diﬃcult to move forward in the online business without oﬀering
the attended home delivery service. The need to oﬀer attended home delivery is characteristic for the
e-grocer, where the products oﬀered most often require handling at the delivery point.
This paper will further focus on the AHD problem as whole and review certain methods and
strategies that can be applied to improve it.
1.2 Attended Home Delivery
Attended home delivery (AHD) represent a service model crucial to the success of any e-grocer
business. Implementation of the model can bring an increase in service for the end customer, but
creates a challenge in performing the last-mile delivery.
Attended home delivery has become a common practice for most retailers that move into the online
environment.
The products delivered from the online retailers and e-grocers are in large amount
comprised by food and beverage that cannot be left unattended upon completion of delivery. As a
result, the retailer needs to make sure that the customer is present at home, or any location he would
like to receive the goods at, and it should be made at the customer’s time convenience; it cannot be
expected for the customer to be available at all times during a day, thus the possibility to control the
interval of delivery is granted to the customer. The customer can thus control the time of delivery via
the process of time slot booking, where a customer is oﬀered the option to select from a list of time
slots provided by the retailer’s ordering portal. E-grocers provide a variety of time windows, ranging
from 1 hour up to 6 hours. Price incentives are used to deter customers from always choosing the most
attractive time slots, usually the narrow ones. Regardless of the strategies used, the time slot booking
service is applied as a screening process to avoid accepting higher demand volumes than what can be
accommodated.
Further in this section we bring attention to the time slot booking process as viewed from the
customer perspective. The time slot booking is embedded in the online shopping service oﬀered by
the retailer, and is designed as an interactive measure for the customer to select from a list of days
and time windows of delivery. In Figure 1.1 we present the succession of step a customer would take
when using the online shopping service.
Following the process, the customer usually logs in to a retailer’s online portal (or enters as a
guest) where he proceeds to select desired products. Some e-retailers require the customer to have
a minimum basket value in order to proceed with the order, or imply an extra cost for low value
orders. This is a revenue management strategy employed to avoid having to deliver low proﬁtable
3
==PAGE:6==
Transport and Logistics
Figure 1.1: Time slot booking process - Customer perspective
orders. Upon ﬁnishing the purchasing, the customer would select a delivery address: the address can
be either a pre-existing location if the customer is a frequent user of the service, or manually validated
input of address. Similar to low order amounts, surcharges can be applied for customers that are too
far away from a distribution center or depot. Usually, e-grocers deﬁne speciﬁc zones of delivery, each
diﬀerentiated by a certain price. Once the delivery address is validated, the retailer oﬀers a list of
time slots to the customer for a selected future date of delivery. The customer can browse any possible
future delivery day and will always be prompted with the available time slots for that day. There
are case where an e-grocer can oﬀer time slots for the same day if the distribution is structured in
waves of delivery (morning and afternoon waves) and the existing delivery routes can handle the extra
customer order. In Figure 1.2 we provide an example of a time slot list for a given day of delivery.
Figure 1.2: Example of oﬀered time slots for a selected day of delivery
Note that time slots can have diﬀerent presets such as duration, availability and cost.
After
choosing a time slot and getting a conﬁrmation from the portal, the customer completes his order
and logs oﬀ. The delivery schedule that includes the customer order is made in such a way that the
selected time slots are always respected. Violating the time window constraint can be felt both ways,
i.e. decrease in customer service and extra cost of delivery. Cases where early delivery or late delivery
lead to the customer not being home and resulting in having to return and reschedule the customer
order, occur rarely. Additionally, the driver can interact via phone calls or messages with the customer
4
==PAGE:7==
Transport and Logistics
to ensure that the delivery is completed. As additional measures, the retailer would provide an update
notiﬁcation to the customer reminding him of the upcoming delivery, or even the possibility of tracking
his delivery step by step. This last aspect is most common in food delivery services, where attended
home delivery is predominantly used.
Moving forward, this research will analyse strategies to improve the time slot booking process, i.e.
improving proﬁtability and maintaining customer service level. One such strategy is the sourcing of
customer orders. Intuition would imply, that in the e-grocers supply chain, the ability to service the
customer from any depot enhanced by the constant re-optimization of the delivery schedule, would
greatly improve the overall revenue and proﬁtability. To validate this intuition, this research will focus
on the static sourcing of orders, and analyse what advantages such a strategy can bring to the time
slot booking and attended home delivery process.
5
==PAGE:8==
Transport and Logistics
Chapter 2: Problem Formulation
In this chapter, the problem statement will be described and based on this the research objective
of the paper will be established.
2.1 Problem Statement
The attended home delivery service model provides the customers with the possibility of receiving
goods at their own convenience. While this increases the service level and satisfaction, it creates a
logistic impediment for the e-retailer. Both the last mile delivery and time slot booking process are
heavily inﬂuenced by the availability of the delivery routes. The main constraints that would render
a route not being able to accept a delivery order are the vehicle capacity and the available work time.
While the impact for the distribution side of the problem is directly evident, for the time slot booking
process it requires a more in depth analysis.
When a time slot is calculated it should always be done based on the available ﬂeet for a certain
day of delivery. Any other decision than this can lead to the rescheduling of deliveries or would require
the use of extra capacity. Extra capacity often generates planning cost that exceed the cost of delivery
performed with the available resources. The available ﬂeet can be owned, contracted or a mix of the
two. There are businesses that rely solely on Third Party Logistics (3PL) to perform their distribution.
To avoid the previously mentioned problem, time slot calculation will have to take into account both
the order quantity and the location of the customer. This will bottle down to minimizing the cost of
inserting the customer order into a route for the predeﬁned list of time slots. While ordering online,
a customer would expect to have little to now waiting time when receiving the list of time slots. This
would imply that the method used to determine the time slot list needs to be as fast as possible.
After the customer accepts the time slot, his order needs to be included in the planned vehicle routing
schedule. The Vehicle Routing Problme (VRP) is deﬁned as a NP-hard combinatorial optimization
problem (Toth and Vigo 2002) for which, the problem size might exclude the usage of exact algorithms
for solving it. Heuristic approaches are best suited in both the time slot booking process and the last
mile delivery optimization.
Having stated the main problems that a retailer can encounter while implementing attended home
delivery, we now focus on a sub-problem derived from the previous statements. The context of the sub-
problem require the route scheduling to be performed in a multi-depot environment. The emerging
problem consist in the type of sourcing a customer order will get when booking and routing are
performed. For the dynamic order sourcing, all orders, regardless of customer location, can be serviced
from all depots. As a result arriving customers will be oﬀered time slots based on all the depot route
availability. This could lead to cases where the customer’s closest depot cannot accommodate the
desired time slot, while a further away depots can. Since the sourcing is dynamic, the desired time
slot will be provided as oﬀer from the far away depot after the calculation. This will lead to longer
delivery legs for the delivery schedule and can create operationally infeasible route, i.e. vehicle routing
does not always encompass all the constraints and shortcomings a delivery route will encounter while
being executed. Issues such as congestion, driver unfamiliarity with the delivery area, parking fees will
impact the total duration of the route and changes in the delivery ETA (estimated time of arrival).
In the case of static sourcing, a customer will be assigned to designated depot or set of depots. Aside
from creating shorter delivery legs, this also helps to avoid searching the problem solution space for
unnecessary insertion points, such as checking for inserting the customer in routes of other non-assigned
6
==PAGE:9==
Transport and Logistics
depots. For the static sourcing two underlying problems arise regarding:
• capacity - capacity becomes limiting if the assignment is not properly performed and depots
might not be able to service suﬃcient customers to keep the necessary customer levels. This
could end up in having low performing routes.
• route duration - more customers leave the booking process due to their assignment, for cases
where the assigned depot routes cannot reach in due time the delivery.
Both issues mentioned above lead to providing less time slots to the customer and as a result less
customers orders will be booked and planned. If the decision is to use static assignment, to maintain
the eﬃciency of the booking process, we would need to perform the assignment as a pre-process step
and provide the result as input for the time slot and route calculation. The pre-processing setup
would have to take into account historical data and make sure that demand of the delivery regions is
correctly estimated for the upcoming delivery dates.
Since the stated problem of customer sourcing impacts both the time slots booking process and
the delivery schedule, we further analyse methods and algorithm that perform well under the current
context. The two methods of assignment, dynamic and static will be compared together, and scenarios
under which either of them could be useful will be laid out. To help us in structuring the problem, in
the next section we deﬁne the research objective.
2.2 Research Objective
The research objective can be formulated as follows:
"Develop and analyse static assignment methods that can be used in improving the result of the attended
home delivery problem under the context of multi-depot distribution. The static and dynamic assign-
ment methods will be compared qualitatively and working scenarios for the mentioned strategies will be
determined. Further, the research will deﬁne a method of implementation for the static assignment if
proven to be eﬃcient."
The research will be conducted with the help and resource provided by ORTEC BV. ORTEC time
slotting and routing services will be used while developing, simulating and analyzing various cases of
the problem. The methods employed in this research will be tested with real e-retailer historical data,
under the below main assumptions:
• The context of planning with be multi-depot is the main focus of this paper. Single depot context
already deﬁnes that customers can be served by only one depot.
• Customer demand is always greater than the available depot capacity. Customers that leave the
booking process, either because they have not received a time slot or the time slot they require
is no longer available, are kept in the tested data.
• Customer behavior will be simulated while performing experiments as a rank based selection
from multiple time slot preference or a single preference per customer.
To better understand the research, a set of research question will have to be addressed in this
paper. Questions regarding the research context and methods of testing and validation will be put
forth:
7
==PAGE:10==
Transport and Logistics
• How does ORTEC Time Slotting Service currently works ?
• How does ORTEC Vehicle Routing algorithm will be used ?
• what are the practical considerations for the proposed assignment method in the context of the
attended home delivery ?
Next, while surveying the literature, we deﬁne the main subject of interest for our research: At-
tended Home Delivery (AHD), Multi Depot Vehicle Route with Time Windows (MDVRPTW), As-
signment and Clustering methods:
• how is attended home delivery problem handled in literature?
• what are the main challenges for attended home delivery?
• how can changing the depots sourcing impact the attended home delivery problem?
• what are the challenges for the distribution models in the MDVRPTW case?
• how does literature treat assignment and clustering methods?
Further, we need to address the methods used to resolve the problem stated by the current research:
• what considerations are required when deﬁning assignment in the context of the MDVRPTW?
• how will the new assignment method satisfy the practical requirements?
• can exact algorithms or heuristic approaches be used to build the assignment methods?
Validation of the implemented methods is addressed next and we deﬁne how well they perform in
the context of the given problem:
• what KPI set can deﬁne best the Attended Home Delivery Problem?
• can static assignment outperform dynamic assignment in the context of the current research?
• are the proposed assignment methods robust?
• under what type of scenarios would static assignment work best?
Finally we provide practical and theoretical insight regarding the research output as well as possible
future research steps that will expand the problem:
• what are the main insight of this research?
• is there a way to apply the methods of assignment to existing time slot booking processes?
• can the problem be expanded for future research?
8
==PAGE:11==
Transport and Logistics
Chapter 3: Research Context
In this chapter a broader discussion about the ORTEC Time Slotting Solution business process is
approached. Additionally, information regarding the ORTEC Time Slotting (TS) and Route Services
(RS) used in the research will be presented.
3.1 About ORTEC
The research is conducted in collaboration with ORTEC BV, a worldwide operation software and
consultancy company. Having been operational for over 40 years and with presence in 13 countries,
ORTEC manages to cover industries such as Retail & Wholesale, Transportation, Professional and
Technical Services, Production and Sports Analytics. To better improve the mentioned industries,
ORTEC provides both software and consulting in areas of route optimization, workforce scheduling,
tactical and strategic planning, analytics and more.
The current research project is conducted in collaboration with the ORTEC Technology (OT)
business unit. The OT subdivision under which the current research was supervised has the scope of
exploring new innovations for the existing ORTEC routing software or concluding with new software
overall.
3.2 Time Slotting Business Process
In this section, a particular business process for time slot booking is described. The model presented
here is emulated based on the ORTEC Time Slotting Solution. Figure 3.1 is created based on the
Customer Ordering process explained in section Chapter 1, Section 1.1, and is expanded with the
background services for time slot calculation (Time Slot Service) and the route optimization (Routing
Service). The ﬁgure focuses on the process of time slotting having as entry the arriving customer
(E-comm Portal - order creation) and outputs the distribution plan for a given future delivery day.
Customers arrive in the system and book time slots over a time horizon of multiple days until the
cut-oﬀtime is reached.
Further we will deﬁne the succession of step from the input of the process to the end output. The
retains all booked and planned order in a delivery schedule plan, here called Plan State. The Plan
Stat records all the events a customer or particularities of the system would trigger.
• customer ﬁlls the basket and selects the delivery location - once the decision to move towards
purchasing, the action triggers the Time Slot Service.
• the Time slot Service checks the current delivery schedule (plan state) for all the available
routes and calculate all possible time slots for the submitted order (based on order amounts and
location). Note that for the ﬁrst arriving customer the plan state is empty and all possible time
slots will be oﬀered.
• time slot calculation is done by inserting the given order to all possible routes in the existing
plan and then revealed to the customer.
• availability of the time slots can be placed through various mechanisms of screening. For example:
if a particular estimated time slot capacity is close to depletion or the arriving customer is
accessing the time slot booking in a certain time of day when it is expected for this particular
9
==PAGE:12==
Transport and Logistics
Figure 3.1: Time Slotting Business Process - Diagram
time slot to be more desirable, the mechanism will make the time slot unavailable.
• moving forward, once the customer agrees upon a time slots and conﬁrms it, the order is inserted
into the delivery schedule (cheapest insertion)
• the processing of arriving customers, time slot calculation and order to time slot acceptance
continues until the cut-oﬀtime for the planning day in question is reached (usually, e-retailers
leave to possibility to order for a speciﬁc day up to 12 hours before the delivery should happen)
• during the process run, the routing service might be called upon based on a particular service
(i.e. after a particular number of arriving customers or after a given time interval before the
cutoﬀtime)
• a ﬁnal routing optimization is performed once the cutoﬀtime is reached with the sole purpose
of reducing the overall plan cost
Additional detail for the TSS and RS will be provided in the following sections.
3.3 ORTEC Optimization Services - Time Slot Service
As mentioned in the previous section, the TSS is called whenever a customer requests a time
slot oﬀer or when the customer selects and books a time slot from that oﬀer. In the time slot oﬀer
requests, TSS calculates, based on the customer data, all feasible insertion points into existing routes.
Feasibility of insertion is subjected to whether the customer demand can be accommodated in the
available route capacity, and the additional travel time created by inserting the new customer will not
10
==PAGE:13==
Transport and Logistics
violate the time windows of the already booked and planned customers.
Moving forward we will exemplify how TSS resolves insertion and provides time slots. To simplify
the example, two existing routes are evaluated. The routes can only accommodate customers with the
following time windows: Orange Route time windows between 17:00 and 19:00 and Green Route time
windows between 17:00 and 18:00. Additionally, in this example we will not take into account the
capacity constraint. In Figure 3.2 a representation of these routes starting from a depot (triangle),
servicing customers (circles) and ending at the depot, is shown.
The location of the customer is
marked with blue, which means the customer is not yet planned. For each edge forming the routes the
traveling time is provided. To simplify the case even more, the service time at each customer location
is considered 0.
Figure 3.2: Time Slotting Service - Arriving Customer
Following the arrival of the new customer the best position of inserting the new customer in the
new routes is calculated. In Figure 3.3 and Figure 3.4 we show the travel time generated by inserting
the customer in either of the routes. Capacity wise, the customer ﬁts in both routes. The dashed
line represent the edges created by inserting the new customer and their associated travel time. The
position in each route is calculated based on cheapest insertion. Before the new customer is inserted
the route travel time for the Orange Route is 50 minutes and 46 minutes for the Green Route. Inserting
the new customer in the Orange Route, in the cheapest location will result the travel time of the route
increasing to 72 minutes, while inserting the customer in the Green Route will increase its travel time
to 58 minutes. Given these results, the TSS will result in providing the new customer with both time
slots. Let us assume that the time slots available in the TSS are of 1 hour only and do not overlap.
This will result the customer being provided with time slots 17:00 - 18:00 and 18:00 - 19:00.
Based on the time slot choice, TSS will insert the customer in the cheapest location possible. If
the customer selects time slots 17:00 - 18:00, both routes can accommodate the customer. In this
case, the customer will be inserted into Route Green since it will increase the overall travel time by
12 minutes as opposed to the 22 minutes for inserting the customer in Route Orange. If the customer
select time slots 18:00 - 19:00 the only position available to maintain feasibility will be Route Orange.
Note, if Route Green can continue to serve new customers after 18:00, the possibility of inserting the
new customer as last in route is considered. Given that it is much cheaper to insert it in the Orange
routes this insertion possibility is overlooked.
11
==PAGE:14==
Transport and Logistics
Figure 3.3: Time Slotting Service - Inserting into Orange Route
Figure 3.4: Time Slotting Service - Inserting into Green Route
3.4 ORTEC Optimization Services - Routing Service
The cheapest insertion method used in TSS will only consider the value of inserting a customer at
a given instant, t. This will result in sub-optimal routes and also decrease the number of possible time
slots oﬀered. To avoid creating ineﬃcient routes, the Routing Service (RS) is called. RS implements
a particular vehicle routing solution deﬁned within the ORTEC suite of algorithms and will improve
the overall route costs.
In Figure 3.4 and Figure 3.5 we provide a representation of the initial state and optimization result
respectively. We use the previous example made for exemplifying the TSS request, to show possible
improvements. Similarly to the previous example, the customers planned in Route Orange have time
slots between 17:00 and 19:00 and the customers planned in Route Green have time slots between
17:00 - 18:00. The customers planned in the Green Route can also be planned in the Orange Route
given the possible time window overlap. In Figure 3.5 it can be seen that the plan can be improved
with 3 minutes by moving one customer from Green Route to Orange Route.
The RS can be called in via diﬀerent strategies. One strategy will call upon RS after a given time
interval, i.e. every 10 minutes. Another strategies is to call the RS after a certain number of customers
12
==PAGE:15==
Transport and Logistics
Figure 3.4: Routing Service - Before RS call
Figure 3.5: Routing Service - After RS call
are booked, i.e. every 100 customers. During the RS calculation, new customers can arrive and will
be assigned as booked and planned in the plan state (active delivery schedule). The RS result will
be merged with the plan state and can result in conﬂicting insertions. There are additional strategies
employed to resolve these conﬂicts such as re-calling the RS optimization or doing cheapest insertion
for the conﬂicting customers in the current plan state. Even after such actions are executed, there is a
small possibility the some booked customers will not be planned. To solve customers coming in close
to the end of the booking horizon and also to try and improve the overall plan, a last optimization
call of RS will be performed. This will help improve the overall plan cost, and creates a window
for inserting booked but not planned customer. The ﬁnal delivery schedule output will be used in
execution.
The RS uses a conﬁgurable algorithm and can be tuned and adapted to the type of vehicle routing
problem it needs to solve. For this research the RS employ the following heuristic structure:
• objective function - main objective item is the maximization of the number of orders planned,
followed by the schedule plan cost and total duration of the plan. Additional secondary objective
can be added, but are not signiﬁcant for this research.
13
==PAGE:16==
Transport and Logistics
• construction heuristics - initial solution is created based on particular priority of orders and trips.
In the case of time slot booking, the construction will include orders to the plan one by one, as
they arrive. When RS is called for optimization, construction is already made by the booking
process.
• local search heuristics - move, swap, cross exchange and 2opt functions are used to improve the
solution. Improvement criteria for each can diﬀer depending on the objective function, but in
this case we use the driving time.
• ruin and recreate heuristics - adapted from the ALNS algorithm presented in Ropke and Pisinger
(2004). Methods of destruction up to a percentage of orders, and re-planned into better place
in the solution are used. To keep the methods fast, a termination criterion is provided based on
the number of iterations were no improvement was attained.
In this chapter we have succinctly described how the optimization services used further in the
research perform. The two mentioned services will be used in discrete event simulator developed by
ORTEC and will be used for experimentation purposes.
14
==PAGE:17==
Transport and Logistics
Chapter 4: Literature
In this section, the literature and methodology used will be described. To better exemplify the
static assignment in the attended home delivery problem, the structure of this chapter will be as
follows: ﬁrstly, the attended home delivery problem will be introduced, followed up by the literature
overview of the mathematical problem for the research context, the Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing
Problem with Time windows (MDVRPTW) and concluding with mentioning some of the existing
assignment approaches and clustering methods used in practice.
4.1 Attended Home Delivery
Starting with the work of Campbell and Savelsbergh (2005) where the practice of using time slots in
AHD is described, and continued in Agatz et al. (2007), where the main challenges and opportunities
in AHD are explained, the approach for solving the AHD problem is deﬁned as being strictly connected
with the usage of time slots. As a result, one of the main concerns of the AHD problem is the ability
to provide eﬃcient time slots to the ordering customers in such a way that proﬁtability is maximized.
Campbell and Savelsbergh (2005) continue to mention that said proﬁtability can be increased by
dynamically assessing whether a new customer order can be provided with a set of time slots, based
on the already planned routes. While proﬁtability and decreasing the last-mile delivery cost represent
an important factor, Agatz et al. (2007) brings forth the concern the diﬃculty of maintaining service
levels.
A summary of the AHD research is well presented in the work of Snoeck et al. (2019), where
speciﬁc extensions of the problem are viewed based on the existing industry trends. The paper makes
an initial reference to Agatz et al.
(2008) by underlying last mile delivery revenue management
decisions, meant to balance the time slot availability and improve overall proﬁtability. Snoeck et al.
(2019) manages to create a categorization of the past researches based on four criteria: control policy,
decision time-frame, routing model and customer choice model. Control policy inﬂuences the demand
ﬂow and can be implemented as pricing control policies and quantity control policies. Pricing control
policies determine the price point per each time slot, providing more attractiveness to some time slots
and detracting from others. Quantity control policy is applied to determine the availability of a time
slot by reducing the number of time slots or closing a speciﬁc time slot all together. This is done either
dynamically or given a preset criteria. The decision time-frame is regarded as static or dynamic, and
deﬁnes the time slots allocation to zones of delivery. The routing model refers mostly to the means
of solving the last mile delivery problem given the provided time slots, and it is most often solved
via VRP heuristics. Klein et al. (2018) solves the vehicle routing using seed-based approximation
algorithms while in Yang and Strauss (2017) a continuous approximation algorithm are considered.
Customer choice models are deﬁned to anticipate and simulate the reaction of a customer when being
presented with the list of time slots. Most common choice model used is the Multinomial logit, with
particular versions of it found in the works of Asdemir et al.(2009) or Yang et al. (2016). A literature
overview stating the previously mentioned factors described in Snoeck et al. (2019) can be seen in
Table 4.1
Agatz et al. (2007) brings forth the concern of maintaining service at a desired level while trying
to decrease the overall distribution and planning cost. If we are to better understand their approach,
it is best to address the key opportunities for AHD mentioned in their paper: Time Slot Schedule
Design, Dynamic Time Slotting and Dynamic Pricing. Time Slot Schedule Design focuses mainly
15
==PAGE:18==
Transport and Logistics
Control
Time-frame
Routing
Customer choice
Campbell and Savelsbergh (2005)
Quantity
Dynamic
VRP Heuristics
Exogenous probability
Campbell and Savelsbergh (2006)
Price
Dynamic
VRP Heuristics
Exogenous probability
Asdemir et al. (2009)
Price
Dynamic
-
Multinomial logit
Agatz et al. (2011)
Quantity
Static
Continuous approximation
Take whatever available
Hernandez et al. (2014)
Quantity
Static
VRP Heuristics
Exogenous probability
Ehmke and Campbell (2014)
Quantity
Dynamic
VRP Heuristics
Exogenous probability
Cleophas and Ehmke (2014)
Quantity
Dynamic
VRP Heuristics
Exogenous probability
Klein et al. (2019)
Price
Static
Seed-based approximation
Non-parametric rand-based
Yang et al. (2016)
Price
Dynamic
VRP Heuristics
Multinomial logit
Klein et al. (2018)
Price
Dynamic
Seed-based approximation
Multinomial logit
Yang and Strauss (2017)
Price
Dynamic
Continuous approximation
Multinomial logit
Table 4.1: Overview of Last Mile Delivery Revenue Management Literature (Snoeck et al., 2019)
on the method of generating time slots that would appease the customers.
Designing time slots
is approached as strategic and tactical decisions, similarly to determining the ﬂeet size or area of
distribution.
The method is heavily inﬂuenced by two separate set of decisions: determining the
service level per region, most often by zip codes, and deﬁning the available time slots per region.
When deﬁning the time slots, the number of available time slots per week, length of the time slots,
the time slot interval and the cost of delivery are promoted as the main operational considerations.
From the customer perspective, these considerations are viewed as service requirements. Additionally,
determining the zone of distribution before designing the time slots seem to be an important aspect in
Hernanedz et al. (2014). When discussing the time slot length, most studies approach industry based
sizes, similarly to what an e-grocer would oﬀer as a service: Walmart oﬀers two-hour overlapping time
windows, while Peapod would oﬀer from two to six hours in range (Snoeck et al., 2019).
Moving to the next level of detail, when deﬁning the time slots per region it is crucial to properly
estimate the demand of a distribution area.
In Agatz et al.
(2006) demand is viewed as being
known for each region and evenly distributed over the set of oﬀered time slots. Although presented as
assumptions, the modeling of demand is backed up by historical data. Yang et al. (2016) uses normal
distribution over historical date in their study, while Asdemir et al (2009) and Ehmke and Campbell
(2014) propose an uniform distribution. Other approaches often simplify the AHD the problem either
due to the need of easily explaining the conceptual model or due to the lack of data. Campbell and
Savelsbergh (2006) test their model using synthetically generated data for the customer location and
demand. Customer arrival time is also derived from historical data. Campbell and Savelsbergh (2006)
use an uniformly distributed arrival time of customers, while other studies apply time dependent
Poisson arrivals (Yang et al., 2016) or randomly distributed (Klein et al., 2018).
Although not focusing on all the elements of the AHD problem as stated in the literature, this
research paper will contain applications of the dynamic time slot allocation under predeﬁned distribu-
tion zones; customer to depot assignment. Similarly to most literature researches, customer location,
demand and arrival time is extracted from historical data. Applying a static assignment to the cus-
tomer order sourcing will inﬂuence the time slot availability and the overall plan cost, apparently in
equal measures. Since the current research focuses on the AHD problem in a multi-depot context, the
impact of the static assignment will have its biggest eﬀect when performing the vehicle routing part
of the overall process.
16
==PAGE:19==
Transport and Logistics
4.2 Multi-Depot Vehicle Routing with Time Windows
In the previous section, as part of the overview provided by Snoeck et al. (2019), the routing model
was presented as essential in addressing the AHD problem by eﬃciently solving the underlying Vehicle
Routing Problem (VRP). The Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP), initially deﬁned in the work of Clarke
and Wright (1964), and derived from the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) introduced by Dantzig
and Ramser (1959), is deﬁned as the scheduling of vehicles over a transportation network, visiting
customer locations of particular demand. The VRP commonly has as objective the minimization of
the travel cost. The cost here can be formulated either as function of travel distance, or a composite of
travel distance and travel time. The problem can be deﬁned as having multi-objective by introducing
the need to minimize the number of vehicles. The usage of this secondary objective is usually dependant
on the type of business and vehicle ﬂeet management.
For the attended homed delivery case, given the need of providing customers with particular time
slots, a more generalized version of the VRP is used: VRP with time windows (VRPTW). It is worth to
mention that all versions of the VRP are actually generalized version of the Capacitated VRP (CVRP).
In operational planning, an important VRP constraint is represented by the capacity of the vehicle.
Following the survey on the VRP made by Braekers et al. (2016), several other variations of the VRP
and CVRP can be distinguised: Heterogenous Fleet VRP (HFVRP), VRP with Pickup and Delivery
(VRPPD), VRP with backhauls (VRPB), Periodic VRP (PVR), Multi-depot VRP (MDVRP). The
latter will become the focus of this paper, given the fact that the studied case uses the multiple depots
with limited capacity in the AHD distribution.
Although the MDVRP has not received similar attention as the other variations of VRP, can be
modeled based on Renauld et al. (1996) as graph formulation :
• G = (V, E), a directed graph with V as the set of vertices and E as the set of edges (arcs)
connecting the graph vertices
• Vc = {c1, c2, ..., cp}, list of p customer vertices, partition of V
• Vd = {d1, d2, ..., dq}, list of q depot vertices, partition of V
• E = {(vi, vj) : vi, vj ∈Vc ∪Vd, i/ = j} set of edges
• for each vertex vi part of Vc there is an associated demand qi and service time si
• for each edge (vi, vj) there is an associated non-negative cost cij interpreted as travel time or
distance, or a function of both
• all vehicles starting at the depot vertices Vd have homogeneous capacity Q
• preset duration D of the vehicle route
Although the initial formulation present by Renaud et al. (1996) takes into account only a single
depot where the routes start from and end at, the set of vertices can be split into customer vertices
and depot vertices so that it will include the multi-depot dimension. In this case all routes will start
at vertex vi as part of Vd. Another diﬀerence in formulation is the number of vehicles. The objective
of the model remains similar to other VRP formulations: minimization of the total cost of all routes.
17
==PAGE:20==
Transport and Logistics
Since the AHD problem needs to include time windows, the model of MDVRPTW is put into
perspective. A comprehensive model was proposed in Bae and Moon (2016), that includes two types
of visits: deliveries and installations. To better suit the AHD problem, in the below presented model,
the installations requirements are excluded:
min
J
X
j
FjZj +
N
X
i
N
X
j
K
X
k
CTktijxijk +
K
X
k
J
X
i
I
X
j
CFkxijk
(1)
s.t.
N
X
i
xijk =
N
X
i
xjik
∀j ∈N, k ∈K
(2)
K
X
k
N
X
i
xijk = 1
∀j ∈I
(3)
J
X
i
I
X
j
xijk ≤1
∀k ∈K
(4)
N
X
i
xijk ≤Zj
∀j ∈I, ∀k ∈K
(5)
I
X
i
N
X
j
dixijk ≤qk
∀k ∈K
(6)
aj ≥ai + wdi + tij + M(
K
X
k
xijk −1)
∀i ∈N, j ∈I
(7)
rk ≥ajk ≥ai + wdi + tij + M(xijk −1)
∀i ∈I, j ∈J, k ∈K
(8)
ei ≤ai + wdi ≤li
∀i ∈I
(9)
aj = wdj = 0
∀j ∈J
(10)
xijk ∈0, 1
∀i, j ∈N, k ∈K
(11)
Zj ∈0, 1
∀j ∈J
(12)
For the above model is deﬁned that I is the set of all delivery vertices and J the set of all depot
vertices. N is the set of all vertices deﬁned as N = I ∪J, while K is the set of all available delivery
vehicles. The model also deﬁnes a set of costs: Fj as the ﬁxed handling cost for each depot j, CFk as
the ﬁxed cost per stop per vehicle k and CTk as transportation cost per vehicle k subjected to tij which
represents the travel time between node i and node j. Parameters deﬁning the delivery locations are
as follows: ei is the earliest time to service customer i, li is the latest time to service customer i, di
is the demand at customer i. Parameters deﬁning the vehicle are setup as qk which is the capacity of
vehicle k and rk which is the maximum duration of vehicle k. The constraints of the model can be
summarized as below:
• the objective function minimizes the ﬁxed handling cost at the depot every depot j, Fj, vehicle
k ﬁxed cost per stop CFk, and the travel time cost per vehicle k, CTk
• constraint number (2) and (3) deﬁnes the ﬂow preservation constraint and respectively prohibits
an customer to be visited more than once
18
==PAGE:21==
Transport and Logistics
• constraint (4) deﬁnes whether a vehicle k is assigned to a particular depot
• constraint (5) guarantee that a vehicle will be assigned to a depot if the depot is open, Zj = 1
• constraint (6) deﬁnes that the vehicle capacity is respected
• constraints (7) - (9) deﬁne that the arrival ai and waiting time wdi are properly computed while
also respecting each customer time window [ei li]
• constraint (10) deﬁnes the depot times and constraints (11) - (12) the necessary decision variables
of xijk, meaning customer i is delivered by vehicle k while via vertex j, respectively Zj which
deﬁnes whether the depot is open or not
The model ﬁts with the current research with exception of the ability to keep a depot closed or
open. Bae and Moon (2016) continues to solve their version of MDVRPTW, by deﬁning a heuristic
method that would ﬁrst assign customers to depots and deﬁne the initial route setup via a construction
heuristic method. The used heuristic is similar to the nearest neighbor heuristic (NNH) as presented
in Reinelt (1994). Similarly, Giosa et al. (2002) provides several heuristic methods for deﬁning which
customer will be assigned to which depot, but uses a heuristic version inspired directly from Clarke
and Wright (1964). In this case the problem transforms from a MDVRP to a SDVRP.
Advanced heuristics such as Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search (ALNS) have been tested as
framework against several variants of VRP including the MDVRP in Pisinger and Ropke (2005).
Other studies, such as Wang (2013) employ particular type of algorithms inspired from nature; cellu-
lar ant algorithm. Bae and Moon (2016) also employ a genetic algorithm for solving the MDVRPTW
to compare with their heuristic approach. Exact algorithms for the MDVRP under capacity and route
length constraints were employed by Contardo and Martinelli (2014) by using vehicle ﬂow formula-
tion, solved by cutting planes method and set-partitioning formulations solved by column-and-cut
generation.
Further, we will discuss methods found in literature for solving the MDVRPTW via the ’cluster
ﬁrst, route second’ approach. To be precise the cluster ﬁrst part of the approach will be expanded
upon in the next section, as basis for deﬁning the static assignment algorithms used in this paper.
With the assignment calculated as the ﬁrst step, the second step will be solved as a Single-Depot
VRPTW.
4.3 Assignment and Clustering
After introducing methods of solving the MDVRPTW, we further focus on the assignment of cus-
tomers to depots or routes of the ’cluster ﬁrst, route second’ approach. The assignment problem viewed
from the perspective of the customer to depots assignment, can be deﬁned as a weighted bipartite
graph where the sum of the edges connecting the vertexes is minimized. One such assignment is rep-
resented by the Hungarian Method introduce in Kuhn (1955). Later in Munkres (1957) an assignment
algorithm based on the Hungarian Method is generalized and used to solve the transportation problem.
In Gillett and Johnoson (1973) the ﬁrst assignment heuristic, called sweep-assignment, is performed
for the multi-depot case, and later Bodin et al. (1983) addresses the multiple Traveling Salesman
Problem (mTSP) as being solved using, among exact algorithms, assignment based heuristics.
Further, the work of Giosa et al.
(2002) will be revisited, which provides information on the
19
==PAGE:22==
Transport and Logistics
the cluster ﬁrst, route second approach for solving the MDVRPTW. The paper overviews several
algorithms that try to solve customer to depot assignment. Assignment through urgency methods
is reviewed as well as clustering methods. The urgency is deﬁned as the priority of customer to be
assigned to a designated depot, closest or of minimum utilization. The paper reviews six urgency
assignment methods:
• parallel assignment - priority of each customer is calculated considering all depot distances.
Customer is assigned to the closest depot.
• simpliﬁed assignment - priority is calculated as regret distance, meaning the diﬀerence between
the second closest and the closest depot to each customer. The customer is assigned to the
closest depot.
• sweep assignment - priority is calculated similarly to the the simpliﬁed assignment, but instead
of looking at the second closest depot for each customer, the depot with the highest unsatisﬁed
demand is determined. The customer will be assigned to the depot with low utilization.
• cyclic assignment - cyclically assigning each customer to its closest already assigned neighbor.
In the initial step, all depots get are assigned with the closest customer
• coeﬃcient propagation clustering - deﬁning assignment coeﬃcient for depots and assigned cus-
tomers that will attract unassigned customers
• three criteria clustering - customers are included to a cluster via particular criteria: average
distance to clusters, variance of the average distance to the customers assigned to the clusters
and the closest customer from each cluster
In the work of Lam and Mittenthal (2013) a version of capacitated hierarchical clustering heuristic
is approached. The problem is formulated as a Multi-depot Location Routing Problem (MDLRP)
that considers the decision of warehouse location and vehicle routing in a single period. Similarly to
normal MDVRP, the problem proposed here can be decomposed in several formulation. Although
the ﬁrst part of the decomposed problem is determining the location of the depots, the assignment of
customer to depot and customer to route is reviewed. Lam and Mittenthal (2013) reminds of the risk
of transportation cost increase for the approach ’route ﬁrst, cluster second’.
Clustering methods have been used in literature to create warehouse distribution areas (Bednar
and Strohmeier, 1979). In this paper a version of the k-means clustering is performed, from the family
of clustering algorithm developed in the early 50s . Clusters are deﬁned as result of an agglomeration
process, characterized by ﬁrs creating centers of gravity that will attract customers, usually based on
distance. Other variables can be included such as weight to improve the assignment. A categorization
of weighted clustering algorithm is provided in the work of Ackerman et al. (2016).
Additional constraints used in forming clusters and assignments have been considered further.
Barreto et al. (2009) studies a sequential heuristic to solve the Capacitated LRP, in which the ﬁrst
problem to solve is constructing groups of customers given a vehicle limit, followed by determining
which route will be assigned to which customer group. Assigning the routes to the distribution centers
is performed as the last step. Zhang et al. (2007) address MDVRP with constrained ﬂeet size for
each depot. Similarly to previous methods of solving MDVRP, the problem is decomposed in separate
decision stages. The ﬁrst stage heuristic covers assigning customers to depots. Route construction is
20
==PAGE:23==
Transport and Logistics
Partitional
Hierarchical
Weight
Sensitive
k-means, k-medoids
k-median, min-sum
Ward’s method
Bisecting k-means
Weight
Considering
Ratio-cut
Average linkage
Weight
Robust
Min-diameter
k-center
Single-linkage
Complete-linkage
Table 2: Clustering algorithm classiﬁcation (Ackerman et al., 2016)
managed via Nearest-Neighbor and Sweep Method Algorithms. Recalling the approach of Giosa et al.
(2002) for handling the MDVRPTW, two of the provided methods, address the assignment via cluster
creation.
The research in question makes use of heuristic assignment methods similar to the ones presented
in literature, while clustering is deﬁned as a method of aggregation to ensure that assignment methods
can more easily be used in the implementation of AHD.
21
==PAGE:24==
Transport and Logistics
Chapter 5: Solution Approach
In this chapter we will discuss the solution approach implemented for the static assignment of
customers to depots. The two reviewed methods are based on an Integer Programming Model and a
Greedy Heuristic Algorithm. Additionally we review the methods for assignment of arriving customers
in an unknown demand context by using cross-validation over the available data.
5.1 Integer Linear Programming Model
To address the assignment of customers to depot as mentioned in Chapter 3, as part of the cluster
ﬁrst route second approach to decomposing the MDVRPTW, we employ an integer linear programming
model (ILP). The model is formulated as a variation of the Assignment Problem, where in a weighted
bipartite graph a matching needs to be obtained and the weight sum of the used edges is minimized.
In our case, the bipartite graph is deﬁned by the customer and depot matching with the weight
edge deﬁned as the distance. In graph formulation, each customer vertex will be characterized by the
demand, while the depot vertex by the depot capacity. Since the goal is to have a complete assignment
and due to the fact that the studied case will always present more demand and supply, leading to
an unbalanced assignment problem, each depot will have the possibility to employ extra capacity.
To avoid using too much extra capacity per depot, a penalty cost will be applied for extra units of
capacity used.
Moving forward the Assignment Problem for distribution area creation is deﬁned:
min
X
i∈C
X
j∈D
(xijTC + yijCC)
(13)
s.t.
X
j∈D
xij = 1
∀i ∈C
(14)
X
i∈C
xijqi ≤DCj + ECj
∀j ∈D
(15)
X
i∈C
yijqi = ECj
∀j ∈D
(16)
xij ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈C, ∀j ∈D
(17)
yij ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈C, ∀j ∈D
(18)
ECj ≥0
∀j ∈D
(19)
Given a set of customers C and a set of depots D, the above mathematical formulation can be
explained as follows:
• xij is a binary decision variable that is equal to 1 if customer i will be serviced by depot j and
0 otherwise.
• yij is a binary decision variable that is equal to 1 if customer i will be serviced by depot j by
utilizing extra capacity.
• ECj is decision variable that is equal to the number of extra capacity used by depot j to fulﬁll
demand qij.
22
==PAGE:25==
Transport and Logistics
• the objective of the model (13) is required to minimize the overall cost per customer to depot
connection, TCij, and the cost incurred by the extra capacity required at the depot level, CCj.
• constraint (14) makes sure that a customer i will always be serviced by a single depot j
• constraint (15) ensures that the sum of demand per depot will not exceed the sum of existing
depot capacity DCj and extra capacity ECj
• constraint (16) deﬁnes that the sum of customer demand dij that require extra capacity is equal
to the computed extra capacity ECj
The above ILP model will minimize the assignment cost of customers to depots while also trying to
minimize the penalty for using extra capacity. When deﬁning the extra capacity cost CC, we need to
take into account the eﬀect this will have on the minimization of the customer to depot transportation
cost TC. If the CC has a small enough value, the objective will be weighted on the assignment of
customer to depot; for example, if the CC is close to 0 and TC is setup as a function of the distance
between the customer location and the depot location, the resulting assignment will be geographically
compact, and extra capacity will be overused. This can also have an eﬀect that some depots will
end up using less than their standard capacity. Note that this is unlikely to happen in cases where
demand is less than the supply. If such is the case, this will lead is similar result to the example where
extra capacity CC is small enough to not inﬂuence the objective function. To avoid this, variable yij
is introduced to deﬁne the extra capacity cost for each assignment leg. It could be argued that just
using ECj would suﬃce to provide penalty for the extra capacity. The reason behind using yij is to
be able to deﬁne CC as function of distance, and that it should only apply to the customers assigned
to be served with extra capacity. Additionally it creates the possibility to setup the extra capacity
cost CC as a ﬁxed value per stop. This being said, in the current research we try to emulate the cost
as follows:
TC = α distanceij
∀i ∈C, ∀j ∈D
(20)
CC = β distance2
ij
∀i ∈C, ∀j ∈D
(21)
For the Transportation Cost TC the usage of customer to depot distance is intuitive, since we
want customer i to be serviced by its closest depot j. For the Capacity Cost CC we defer to a cost
equal to the square distance in order to avoid the usage of too much extra capacity. Since variable
yij is used, the cost will exclusively be applied to the customers serviced by extra capacity. α and β
are speciﬁc cost function parameters that can be changed to inﬂuence whether we put emphasis on
reducing distance or reducing extra capacity. In the examples and computations to follow, the values
of α and β are set to 1.
In order to better visualize the assignment, a synthetic case of customers and depots was created.
Similarly to the previous stipulation, we take into account a case where demand is greater than the
supply, in this case, depot capacity. The depots are named as Dep_1, Dep_2, Dep_3, and Dep_4
respectively. The depot capacity is modeled as fraction of the biggest depot capacity. For the present
example, Dep_1 and Dep_4 are setup as having a third of the capacity of Dep_2, while depot Dep_3
capacity represent two thirds of Dep_2 capacity. The same synthetic case will be used further for
23
==PAGE:26==
Transport and Logistics
visual exempliﬁcation.
Figure 5.1: Synthetic Visual Case - ILP Assignment - version 1
In Figure 5.1 we can see that the assignment is mostly centered around the depots as a result of
the TC being setup equal to the customer to depot distance. A clear issue observed is that the ILP
creates geographical overlapping assignments. The overlap happens due to the cost setup used in the
objective function. The squared distance used in the Capacity Cost will try to minimize the used extra
capacity overall, but it will result into trading highly weighted customers to the nearest depot that can
cover it by using normal capacity. For example the extra capacity for Dep_4 will be heavily penalized
if the assignment moves too far away from the depot. Depots with higher capacity, Dep_2 and Dep_3
will cover more area and thus will create the overlap with the smallest depots. The advantage of this
method is that the assignment will try to distribute extra capacity to all depots relative to each depot’s
position. We can see in the table attached to Figure 5.1 the utilization percentage of each depot as
well as the average customer weight (demand). To better refer to this method later on, we denote it
as ILP1.
In order to alleviate the diﬃculty of deﬁning a realistic penalty cost of extra capacity, an adapted
version of ILP1 will be formulate. In this version the extra capacity cost will be removed and the
ILP model will be adapted in such a way that it will make sure that all depot capacity is used. It
is important that all capacity is used ﬁrst and then remaining unassigned customers to their closest
depots. As a result a new variant of the ILP model is formulated below. For a better reference later
on, this method will be denoted as ILP2.
24
==PAGE:27==
Transport and Logistics
min
X
i∈C
X
j∈D
xijTC
(22)
s.t.
X
j∈D
xij = 1
∀i ∈C
(23)
X
i∈C
xijqi ≤DCj + bECj
∀j ∈D
(24)
X
i∈C
xijqi ≥bDCj
∀j ∈D
(25)
xij ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈C, ∀j ∈D
(26)
b =



0,
if P
i∈C qi < P
j∈D DCj
1
otherwise
(27)
ECj ≥0
∀j ∈D
(28)
Adjusting the initial algorithm would require the following changes
• objective function will only minimize the customer to depot cost TC
• yij is a binary decision variable that is equal to 1 if customer i will be serviced by depot j by
utilizing extra capacity.
• we introduce a new parameter b that takes value 1 if the sum of customer demand q is greater
than the sum of depot capacity DC
• in constraint (25) we ensure that the entire depot capacity will be used in case the sum of
customer demand is greater than the sum of depot capacity, not including the extra capacity.
The above model makes sure that all the depot capacity will be utilized in the case where demand
is greater then depot capacity. The Transportation Cost is setup similarly to ILP1, and thus it is
expected that the geographical assignment will fare better than in the previous version. Similarly to
ILP1 and using the same synthetic data, we try to visualize the assignment case in Figure 5.2.
Here it can be noticed that the intuition of generating proper geographical assignment is conﬁrmed.
There are some small overlapping customers, but this is most likely generated by the constraint of
having all the available capacity used. It can be observed that the the largest overlap is generated by
Dep_2 which uses no extra capacity. The depots that exceed their normal capacity create well-deﬁned
and equidistant borders as seen in the example of Dep_3 and Dep_4. The disadvantage here is that
the extra capacity used is hardly balanced. It can be argued that in the process of time slot booking,
given a uniformly distribution of the arriving customer, customers arriving in the area of Dep_4 will
have less and less available time slots as time progresses due to its capacity being ﬁlled up faster, while
areas covered by Dep_1 or Dep_2 can still be able to accommodate new customers. This assumption
will be test in this paper experiments, Chapter 8.
The lack of balanced extra capacity per depot mentioned previously can signiﬁcantly hinder the
eﬃciency of the assignment when used in the time slot booking process. This can be amended by
changing the Transportation Cost to also include the customer demand as fraction of the assigned
25
==PAGE:28==
Transport and Logistics
Figure 5.2: Synthetic Visual Case - ILP Assignment - Version 2
depot. This will ensure that assigning a customer of particular demand (weight) to a low capacity
depot will be more expensive than assigning it to a high capacity depot. The cost will still be setup
as a cost function as seen below:
TC = α distanceij
qi
DCj
∀i ∈C, ∀j ∈D
(29)
Figure 5.3: Synthetic Visual Case - ILP Assignment - Version 2
The new assignment will create geographically convex areas as seen in Figure 5.3. Since the cost
is deﬁned as a function of distance and fraction of depot capacity, the far away customers will be
assigned to the depots with higher capacity. This can be seen for depots Dep_2 and Dep_3. We
can observe in the table attached to Figure 11 that utilization exceeds for most of the depots except
Dep_1. This can assumed due to its geographical position, in this case close to all other depots. To
better refer to this method further, we will denote it as ILP3.
The three version of the ILP presented here will later be used in this paper’s experiments, Chapter
26
==PAGE:29==
Transport and Logistics
7, with the aforementioned cost structure. The resulting assignment is meant to inﬂuence the time slot
booking process eﬃciency and implicitly the available time slots arriving customers will be provided
with, but it cannot be determined whether it will improve the overall solution. It is expected that
balancing the extra capacity will intuitively create suﬃcient availability of time slots for the customers,
but the uncertainty of demand and customer location will have to be addressed further.
5.2 Greedy Heuristic - Depot Weight Balancing Assignment
In this section we will present a new method for customer to depot assignment based on a greedy
heuristic algorithm. This was the most common method use when deﬁning customer to depot alloca-
tion as part of the ’cluster ﬁrst, route second’ approach. The algorithm presented further bares some
resemblance to the sweep algorithm presented in Giosa et al.(2002). As seen previously in the ILP
methods of assignment, balancing the extra capacity used for each depot could not be attained. The
goal of the heuristic is to be able to assign customers equally based on a workload balancing value for
every depot. The balancing value used in this case will be setup as the capacity utilization or assigned
weight of each depot.
balanceV aluej =
P xijqi
DCj
∀j ∈D
(30)
This will ensure that that every step of the heuristic, the depot with the lowest utilization will be
selected as assignment depot for the next customer. The result will provide an equal assignment of
customer demand to depot capacity for all depots and thus managing to balance the extra capacity.
initialization:
UC ←C
AC ←C\UC
while UC ̸= ∅do
D∗←min{balanceV alue(D)}
C∗←max{regretV alue(UC)}
C∗←assign(D∗)
AC ←AC ∪C∗
UC ←UC\C∗
end
Algorithm 1: Depot Weight Balancing
Given the above pseudocode, the greedy heuristic creates a list of unassigned customers and loops
until the the list is empty and all customers are assigned to a depot. As mentioned previously, in
every iteration a depot is selected based on the lowest balancing value. Following, the regret value
for each customer to be assigned to the selected depot is calculated. The customer with the highest
regret value from the list of unassigned customers is selected and gets assigned to the selected depot.
The depot’s balancing value is updated based on the new customer. Next, the assigned customer is
removed from the list of assigned customers and the algorithm proceed with the next iteration if the
27
==PAGE:30==
Transport and Logistics
list of unassigned customer is not empty. Bellow we deﬁne the regret function used in the heuristic:
regreti = distanceij∗−min{distanceij}
∀j ∈D\D∗
(31)
In the Figure 12 we observe the state of assignment at several selected iterations steps.
Figure 5.4: Synthetic Visual Case - Greedy Heuristics Assignment - Iterations
In order to better visualize the greedy heuristic assignment, the previously used synthetic case will
be used. To better exemplify, a snapshot of the assignment was made at a particular value of the
load balance value. In Figure 5.4, at iteration 0, the customers will be setup as unassigned (in the
image the color orange). At 10% balance value the assignment behaviour can be observed. Since at
every iteration we look for the depot with the lowest balance value, we can regard the behavior as
depots attracting customers. The regret distance employed will make sure that customers closer to
D∗but farther from the other depots will be assigned ﬁrst. In the current example, all depots besides
Dep_1 have their assignment progressing towards the edge of the map. Dep_1, due to its central
positioning will apparently assign customer in the depot proximity. At balance value 50%, we can
observe Dep_1 having exhibiting the same assignment progression as the other depots: toward the
map edges. Further, if the balance value is greater than 100% , depots with high capacity will start
to assign customer in diﬀerent areas of the map. This can be seen for Dep_2, where a small pocket
of customer between Dep_1 and Dep_3 that are not connected to the main area of the depot. As a
result the area deﬁned by the depot becomes less convex. Even so, these customers are equidistant
to other customers at the edge of the map. As the algorithm progresses, smaller depots will get fewer
and fewer customers.
Moving forward, in order to enhance the result of the Depot Weight Balancing algorithm we will
make use of a Swap function.
The function is meant swap customer to depot assignment values
between customers.
The ﬁrst customer used in the swap tuple will be selected as having highest
28
==PAGE:31==
Transport and Logistics
distance deviation from all the customers assigned to each depot. The second customer will be setup
as the closest customer to depot D
′ for which the assignment is included in D\D
′ , where D
′ is the
depot assigned to the ﬁrst selected customer. This is repeated for all depots in D\D
′. If a swap
does not improve the overall assignment distance, the algorithm moves to the next customer with the
highest distance deviation.
initialization
iteration = 1
AD = P P distanceijxij
NS ←∅
while iteration ≤iterations do
C
′ ←getCustomer(max{distanceijxij −distancemean)} Ci ∈C\NS, Dj ∈D
D
′ ←getDepot(C
′)
C” ←getCustomer(min{distanceij)} Ci ∈C, Dj ∈D\D
′
D” ←getDepot(C”)
if swapDepotsTotalDistance(C
′, C”) ≤AD then
swapDepots(C
′, C”)
AD = swapDepotsTotalDistance(C
′, C”)
NS ←∅
else
NS ←NS ∪C
′
end
end
Algorithm 2: Distance Deviation Swap
The above pseudocode begins by initializing the distance cost AD which consist of the summed
customer to assigned depot distance. In order to manage further swaps a list of customer will be
created NS, that will hold the failed swap C
′ customers. The algorithm iterates over a given number of
iterations which are tuned further in the Experimental design Chapter. In the iteration ﬁrst we select
the customer with the greatest distance deviation value relative to the assigned depot. Whether a
customer is assigned to a depot is deﬁned by the variable xij (similar to the variable in the ILP model).
The function getCustomer() retrieves the customer C
′, while getDepot() will return the assigned depot,
D
′. The second customer C” is selected from the list of customers that are not assigned to depot D
′,
based on the shortest calculated distance to depot D
′.
Function swapDepotsTotalDistance() will
calculate the expected total distance cost for the swap between C
′ and C”.
If the value returned
by this function is lower than the initially calculated function, the swap is executed with function
swapDepots(), the distance cost AD is updated and the list failed swap C
′ customers is emptied. If
the returned value of the swapDepotsTotalDistance() is higher than AD the swap is not performed
and NS is update to include customer C
′. This will enable to move to the next customer with the
highest distance deviation.
The above algorithm will, in short, search for all the customers that are too far away from their
assigned depot and try to exchange them with nearby customer with diﬀerent assignment. The result
is expected to slowly aggregate customer around the depots. Another expected outcome is that the
29
==PAGE:32==
Transport and Logistics
depot weight balance will change at a slow rate since we are only performing swaps. This will reduce
the chance of having signiﬁcantly underutilized depot capacity.
Figure 5.5: Synthetic Visual Case - Greedy Heuristics Assignment - Swap
Using the synthetic representation case, a short comparison can be performed between the initial
state of the assignment, post using the greedy heuristic method, and after applying the above men-
tioned swap heuristic to improve the assignment in terms of transportation cost. It can be observed
that after the swap heuristic is applied, there is a trade of customers made between all participating
depots. While Dep_3 and Dep_4 mainly keep to the initial assignment, depots Dep_1 and Dep_2
exchange a signiﬁcant number of customers. The previously mentioned disconnected pocket of Dep_2
customer remains almost unchanged. This could be as a result of fast convergence of the swap func-
tion. Another aspect to point out is that although aﬀected by the swap, the depot capacity usage still
remain fairly balanced.
In Chapter 7, the greedy heuristic assignment will be experimented on both with and without
applying the swap function. To better diﬀerentiate, we denote the version of the greedy assignment
ran without the swap function as Depot Weight Balance Version 1 (DWB1) and ran with the swap
function as Depot Weight Balance Version 2 (DWB2).
5.3 Handling Unknown Demand
The previously mentioned methods require as input data regarding the customer and depot lo-
cation, customer order quantity and depot capacity.
While the depot location and capacity have
constant values across historical data sets, the information of customer location and demand diﬀers
depending on two demand inﬂuenced scenario: known demand and unknown demand.
The know demand scenario has the customer order quantity and location provided simultaneously
with the depot capacity and location. This will make use of the previously mentioned methods as
30
==PAGE:33==
Transport and Logistics
they are deﬁned, in order to assess the improvement provided by a single day of distribution. Having
customer information before his arrival in the booking system is not available for real implementation
cases of the time slot booking service. Analyzing on a particular day helps deﬁne some measure of
robustness of the used methods and an understanding of possible improvements.
The unknown demand scenario is implemented in order to evaluate the gaps of the assignment
methods. In the process of booking, given that the customer information is recorded at a particular
instant, the above methods cannot be applied directly on the available historical data sets. For this
scenario we take into account cross-validation.
Cross-validation here is meant to create a unique
assignment from multiple historical days, constituting the training set. The test set will be selected
as single historical day, set apart from the training set in order to avoid selection bias. While the
training set will be subjected to the assignment methods, the test set will consider diﬀerent methods
of assignment which will be explained below.
The result of applying the assignment methods to the training set will be an assignment template.
The assignment template can be deﬁned as an area covering a zone of distribution from where cus-
tomers are likely to arrive. An arriving customer will need to be assigned to a territory and therefor
to a depot before being provided with a time slot. The given assignment to depot will inﬂuence both
the calculation of time slots to provide as well as the possible insertion locations in the plan, where
other customer orders are already booked.
First method employed is done by aggregating the training set into clusters.
To perform this
we use the weighted K-means clustering approach. The weight feature provided here is the demand
registered at each customer location. Below we can denote the objective function of the K-means, Z,
that is tasked with minimizing the variation of the distance between customers C and centroids K.
Z =
n
X
i=1
k
X
j=1
||xi −cj||2
∀i ∈C, ∀k ∈K
(32)
Since the objective of the K-means is to create k clusters for which the total intra-cluster variance
is minimized, the output will contain sets of customers assigned to high density areas. The output
will be deﬁned by the number of resulting centroids, each having the weight of the assigned customer
to centroid. This re-scale of the initial data set will be used to create the assignment template by
subjecting it to either of the assignment methods.
The second method will make use of the entire training set as reference for incoming customers.
For each new customer, the n nearest training set neighbours will be determined. To method used here
will be setup as a simple heuristic and does not have the same setup as k-nearest neighbours algorithm.
The assignment for the n nearest neighbors for each incoming customer will be checked and the depot
with the highest assignment count from the selection will be assigned to the new customer.
The
pseudocode for the n nearest neighbour algorithm can be seen below:
31
==PAGE:34==
Transport and Logistics
initialization:
C∗←NewCustomer
n = 15
NC ←getNNearestNeighbours(c, n)
D∗←max{groupBy(getDepot(NC)).count()}
C∗←assign(D∗)
Algorithm 3: N Nearest Neighbors
For the N Nearest Neighbors assignment algorithm we ﬁrst initialize C∗with the information of
demand and location for the test customer (arriving customer in the time slot booking process). Next
the number of neighbours n is arbitrarily set to 15 and we get the list of the n training set customers
NC closest to C∗. Next, we count the occurrence of each depot assignment for the customers in NC.
The depot with the highest D∗count will become the assignment for customer C∗. The presented
method requires parameter tuning of the number of neighbors, and should be conﬁgured diﬀerently for
all studied cases. To simplify our experiments, out of several empirical tests we have select arbitrarily
the value of 15 nearest customers.
Similar approach is used to the K-means value k.
Template
assignment can be enhanced further with geofencing strategies, i.e. deﬁning a threshold area for all
customers and checking the customers within the given area. Similarly to our proposed algorithm,
tuning of the threshold parameter would be required.
32
==PAGE:35==
Transport and Logistics
Chapter 6: Experimental Design
In this chapter we will focus on the experimental design and key components used to validate the
experiment results. In order to properly validate the implemented assignment methods, a discrete-
event simulator will be used. Both the discrete-event simulator and the used data will be described
further.
6.1 Time Slot Booking Simulation
The simulation model used in the upcoming experiments is created and managed by an ORTEC
Technologies sub-unit and implements the ORTEC services regarding time slotting and vehicle routing
as mentioned in Chapter 3. The simulation model is based on the model introduced in Visser et al.
(2019).
The main purpose of the simulation model is to help reveal how creating a customer to depot
assignment as pre-processing step for the time slot booking process can inﬂuence the two main concerns
of AHD stipulated in literature: proﬁtability (or overall cost) and customer service level. Given the
use of the ORTEC routing service (RS), it is easy to deﬁne KPIs regarding proﬁtability. Information
such as plan distance, duration and overall cost represent the main output of RS. The cost setup used
in the simulation model and its services is derived from industry standards and is split into: cost
per distance, cost per hour and cost per route. To make it easier to compare experiment cases, we
adopt as main KPIs the average distance per planned customer and average driving time per planned
customer. It is not entirely useful to use overall cost or overall distance, since these KPIs might decrease
signiﬁcantly if less customers are planned. Moving further, to address the service level, we look for
the number of customer booked and planned at the end of the time slot simulation. Additionally we
register the average number of time slots oﬀered per customer to see how eﬃciently the Time Slotting
Service (TSS) can satisfy customer preferences. TSS always oﬀers a predeﬁned number of time slots,
regardless of the customer preference. Nevertheless, if at any time t the routes cannot accommodate a
particular time slot from the redeﬁned list, TSS will exclude it from the set of time slots oﬀered to the
customer. In the dynamic assignment case, time slot availability for an arriving customer is calculated
versus all depots and their routes, regardless of customer location. In the static assignment case, the
availability of time slots will be deﬁned per depot.
The simulation model redacts all t moments of customers booking a time slot until a predeﬁned
cutoﬀtime T. The general structure of the simulation model with its corresponding events, is as
follows:
• TSS Oﬀer Request Event: after the arrival of the customer in the system, a request for time
slots is generated
• TSS Oﬀer Response Event: system provides the customer with the available time slots.
• TSS Booking Request Event: customer performs time slot booking based on a given prefer-
ence(s).
• TSS Booking Response Event: customer receives conﬁrmation that the selected time slot was
accepted.
• TSS Booking Apply Event: system includes the customer booking and update the delivery
33
==PAGE:36==
Transport and Logistics
schedule.
• RS Request Event: if condition for route optimization is fulﬁlled, a route optimization request
is generated.
• RS Response Event: the RS returns the optimization result.
• RS Apply Event: the optimization result is merged with the existing delivery schedule.
The Time Slot Simulator uses data ﬁles of particular setup, called instances. Each instance present
planning information for the customers, depots, routes and a predeﬁned list of available time slots,
while conﬁguration information for TSS and RS will be provided separately. The TSS strategy used in
the conﬁguration ﬁle is setup to oﬀer all time slots if available in the planned schedule. For the RS, a
predeﬁned heuristic script is provided with information regarding the re-optimization frequency. For
all our experiments, the planned schedule will be re-optimized after n booked customers.
Figure 6.1: Discrete Event Simulator for Time Slot Booking - Event Diagram
In Figure 6.1 a representation of the discrete simulator events is provided. The diagram puts in
perspective the arrival of customers during the booking horizon, from t = 0 until the cut-oﬀtime t = T.
The TSS events are performed without queuing. In contrast, RS events are executed concurrently.
TSS and RS event are processed independently from each other. The simulation model provides as
output all the discrete steps executed during the simulation, from the time an arriving customer is
requesting time slots until the customer selects a particular time slot and is included into the planning
schedule. The output also contains the route optimization events in sequence of their execution to
give a compelling evolution of the entire plan. The ﬁnal set of routes is provided in a planned delivery
schedule ﬁle. The planned schedule ﬁle is comprised of a hierarchical setup of routes that contain all
their planned orders (customers). For each of customer order,information such as ETA and distance
34
==PAGE:37==
Transport and Logistics
travelled is retained.
To summarize on the KPIs extracted from the simulation model and deﬁne the ﬁt of our tested
models we select the average distance per planned customer and average driving time per planned
customer as proﬁtability indicators and number of booked customer, number of planned customers
and average number of time slots oﬀered as service level indicators. Looking back to Chapter 5,
the assignment methods can also yield a KPI value that can be followed in the experiments: the
used depot capacity as percentage of the available capacity. This will not determine nor predict the
eﬃciency of the assignment method in the time slot booking process, but it will provide some insight
regarding the number of booked customers. The intuition would suggest that if used the capacity is
close to or passes 100% for all depots, the number of arriving customers can be maintained as in the
dynamic assignment case.
6.2 Simulation Data
In the previous section we have mentioned that the data used in our experiments is comprised of
a set of data ﬁles called instances. The planning information contained in the instances is derived
from an European e-retailer historical data for a given day of planning. The planning information
is consistent of customer and customer order information, route information as well as simulation
prerequisites. The simulation information contains the start and end of the booking horizon, t = 0
respectively t = T. In Figure 5.2 we show the arrival frequency of the customers during the booking
horizon.
Figure 5.2: Simulation Data: Customer Arrival (ORTEC Time Slot Simulation Insights)
The customer data contains information about the customer location, customer simulation arrival
time, customer preference and customer order. The customer order contains information regarding
the quantity units, service duration, and vehicle type restrictions called capabilities. The capability
can be described as a type of equipment requirement, and can be setup with either the value of
’required’ or ’forbidden’. For example, an order with frozen products can only be transported by a
truck with controlled temperature, and as a result the truck would have to present the same capability
for frozen products as ’available’. For the ’forbidden’ value it will imply the opposite eﬀect. For our
simulation, the ’available’ capability will be present at route level. The same capability will be used to
setup the assignment, i.e. customer order x will have a capability named Dep_1 = required and the
routes starting from Dep_1 will contain the same capability, Dep_1 = available. Moving further, the
35
==PAGE:38==
Transport and Logistics
customer preference can be setup with a single time slot preference or a list of time slots preferences.
To mimic the customer behavior, for the case of multiple preferences, for each customer in part the
preferences will contain a ranking. In the simulation the customer will select the time slots with the
highest rank that is provided by the TSS. The route information will contain the route start and end
locations, earliest start date time and latest ﬁnish end date time, as well as the vehicle capacity and
available capabilities. Additional information regarding the type of vehicle used, a speed factor and a
cost set per route with the previously mentioned cost items.
The main data used in the experiments is comprised from 10 data instances for 5 diﬀerent historical
days.
«The customer data sets used for this research is generated from historical data, meaning
that although the customer locations and arrival distribution is provided, the demand of customers is
uniformly distributed over the booking period based.» The routes and customer orders will not contain
assignment capabilities in the initial instances. The routes used are homogeneous with the following
setup:
• vehicle type - van
• vehicle capacity - same for all routes
• cost set - industry standard of cost per route, cost per distance and cost per traveled duration
• vehicle speed - average segments speed given from the map provider
The 10 mentioned instances will contain the 5 historical days for each preference type: single
preference, denoted onePref, and multiple preference, denoted allPref.
The allPref instances will
have the customers setup will all the time slots TSS can provide, while onePref will contain a single
preference, derived from the actual selection of the customers in the historical data. For both allPref
and onePref cases, the simulation will be run with the same 7 time slots. The time slots have lengths
between 2 and 4 hours and present 1 hour overlap between them.
Some description of the used
instances can be seen in Table 3.
Case
Preference
Number
of Customers
Time Slot Booking
Horizon (days)
Number
of depots
1
allPref, onePref
3558
21
7
2
allPref, onePref
3502
21
7
3
allPref, onePref
3479
21
7
4
allPref, onePref
3749
21
7
5
allPref, onePref
3172
21
7
Table 6.1: Used Data Set - Large Sample, Large Depots
In order to assess the performance of the assignment model under diﬀerent data conﬁguration, such
as smaller and more compact zones of delivery, fewer depots, diﬀerent geographical consideration, and
also to remove the bias created from using a single data set for building the assignment methods, we
test the best methods reveled in the experiments with a new data set. The new data set contains 10
instances with similar setup as for the base data set.
36
==PAGE:39==
Transport and Logistics
Case
Preference
Number
of Customers
Time Slot Booking
Horizon (days)
Number
of depots
1
allPref, onePref
1584
21
4
2
allPref, onePref
2140
21
4
3
allPref, onePref
2132
21
4
4
allPref, onePref
1855
21
4
5
allPref, onePref
1701
21
4
Table 6.2: Used Data Set - Small Sample, Small Depots
6.3 Experimental Design - Assignment Methods under Known Demand
In this section we setup the experiment premise for the assignment of customer to depot under the
case of known demand. Since we are looking at each arriving customer as appearing in the tested data
set, we consider the number of customers and the customer demand qi as being known. Similarly, the
customer location is beforehand know. The same set of data is run through the simulation with the
current dynamic setup which will be used as comparison basis.
All ILP models presented in Chapter 4, ILP1, ILP2, and ILP3, are coded in Julia and computed
using the GLPK solver to return variable xij values to determine whether customer i is assigned to
depot j. The GLPK solver or GNU Linear Programming Kit is a package intended for solving large-
scale linear programming models and mixed integer programming models. Each data instance will
be subjected to the three ILP methods and updated with the customer to depot assignment. The
enriched instances will be used in the experiment as explained in the previous section.
Reviewing the methods we mention that the ILP1 model includes the penalty cost CC for each
extra xij that generates extra capacity for depot j. This should deter the model from using too much
extra capacity. In contrast, ILP2 and ILP3 are setup to exclude the extra the penalty cost CC and
focus on creating the assignment by constraining the model to always use the entire available depot
capacity and then assign, based on the objective function, remaining unassigned customers yij, to
extra capacity. The diﬀerence between ILP2 and ILP3 stands in the diﬀerent transportation cost TC
used in the objective function.
Further we apply the same processing of the instances using the two greedy heuristic assignment
methods mentioned in Chapter 5. The heuristic methods have been coded in Python 1.3 and run on
copies of the non altered data instances. DWB1 and DWB2 will both be ran under the same premise
of known demand. The diﬀerence between the two methods is in the usage of the swap heuristic
presented in the previous chapter as part of the DWB2 method. The swap function is meant to adjust
the geographical assignment in the case of DWB2 by reducing the overall mean assignment distance
per depot. In Figure 6.3 we remark the convergence of the swap function in relation to the mean
assignment distance per depot over 1000 iteration. Although the function converges rather fast, to
avoid having missed some valuable exchanges we arbitrarily select the number of iterations to 5000.
As mentioned in the previous section, the method with the best KPIs set out of the used exper-
iments will be ran with the smaller data set described in Table 6.1. This should provide additional
insight on the ﬁt of the implemented method.
37
==PAGE:40==
Transport and Logistics
Figure 6.3: Convergence of the swap function
6.4 Experimental Design - Assignment Methods under Unknown Demand
In this section we put the basis of the experiments run under unknown demand.
In the real
booking process of the e-retailer, customer demand and location is not known before hand and as
a result we need to recalculate the customer to depot assignment based on the historical data and
perform the assignment as the customer arrives in the system. As explained in Chapter 5, we perform
cross validation for each data instance, where the other instances are setup as training data. The
assignment performed on the training data will deﬁne an assignment template. The template will
geographically assign a new arriving customer from the test instance disregarding their demand. Note
that the template based assignment is separated from the time slot simulation as if the customer
ﬁrst arrives in the pre-processing step his address and then proceeds to request time slots. In future
implementations it would be useful to embed the template based assignment in the simulation tool as
an active step. This will open possibilities for altering the assignment in exceptional cases where the
expected demand is far greater for a particular area and suﬃciently lower for a neighbouring area.
The experiments will be denoted with the name of each method followed by the UD suﬃx standing
for unknown demand. Experiments ILP2UD, ILP3UD and DWB2UD will be run with the 10 men-
tioned instances. ILP2UD will have the template based assignment constructed based on the K-means
approach, while ILP3UD and DWB2UD will use the n nearest neighbours algorithm explained in
Chapter 5. Similarly with the known demand experiments, the method with the best result will be
run over the smaller data sample.
38
==PAGE:41==
Transport and Logistics
Chapter 7: Computational Experiment Results
In this chapter the experiment results will be analyzed while putting into perspective the perfor-
mance of the assignment methods as well as possible applications and implementations ﬂaws. The
experiments are performed as mentioned in Chapter 6.
7.1 Experiment Results - Assignment Methods under Known Demand
For this set of experiments we run both the dynamic and static assignment case. The dynamic case
would imply running the non-altered instances in the time slot simulator and capturing the results.
The experimental conﬁguration is the same for all assignment methods.
Preference
Strategy
Method
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
allPref
Dynamic
-
3257.8
3255.2
93.38
6.45
17592.53
6.90
5.41
7.64
allPref
Static
ILP1
3219.4
3217.4
92.33
6.33
16561.69
6.95
5.15
6.38
-1.18%
-1.16%
-1.85%
0.77%
-4.76%
-16.46%
onePref
Dynamic
-
3269.2
3268.2
93.75
6.55
14981.52
5.93
4.59
6.90
onePref
Static
ILP1
3212.8
3211.2
92.15
6.43
14760.51
6.18
4.60
5.78
-1.73%
-1.74%
-1.78%
4.29%
0.18%
-16.18%
allPref
Dynamic
-
3257.8
3255.2
93.38
6.45
17592.53
6.90
5.41
7.64
allPref
Static
ILP2
3214.8
3212.6
92.17
6.32
16412.85
6.94
5.11
6.20
-1.32%
-1.31%
-2.06%
0.59%
-5.46%
-18.75%
onePref
Dynamic
-
3269.2
3268.2
93.75
6.55
14981.52
5.93
4.59
6.90
onePref
Static
ILP2
3209.8
3209.2
92.09
6.43
14609.06
6.15
4.56
5.64
-1.82%
-1.81%
-1.91%
3.70%
-0.80%
-18.22%
allPref
Dynamic
-
3257.8
3255.2
93.38
6.45
17592.53
6.90
5.41
7.64
allPref
Static
ILP3
3257.2
3255
93.38
6.45
15827.59
6.46
4.87
6.22
-0.02%
-0.01%
-0.10%
-6.34%
-10.01%
-18.50%
onePref
Dynamic
-
3269.2
3268.2
93.75
6.55
14981.52
5.93
4.59
6.90
onePref
Static
ILP3
3251.8
3250.2
93.24
6.51
14106.72
5.71
4.34
5.72
-0.53%
-0.55%
-0.60%
-3.59%
-5.41%
-17.04%
allPref
Dynamic
-
3257.8
3255.2
93.38
6.45
17592.53
6.90
5.41
7.64
allPref
Static
DWB1
3236.6
3234.8
92.79
6.36
18261.61
7.13
5.65
5.32
-0.65%
-0.63%
-1.41%
3.35%
4.50%
-30.35%
onePref
Dynamic
-
3269.2
3268.2
93.75
6.55
14981.52
5.93
4.59
6.90
onePref
Static
DWB1
3245
3243.8
93.05
6.50
16290.03
6.30
5.03
5.03
-0.74%
-0.75%
-0.83%
6.33%
9.44%
-27.12%
allPref
Dynamic
-
3257.8
3255.2
93.38
6.45
17592.53
6.90
5.41
7.64
allPref
Static
DWB2
3258.4
3256.8
93.43
6.44
15953.79
6.53
4.90
5.37
0.02%
0.05%
-0.24%
-5.27%
-9.36%
-29.65%
onePref
Dynamic
-
3269.2
3268.2
93.75
6.55
14981.52
5.93
4.59
6.90
onePref
Static
DWB2
3260.2
3259.4
93.50
6.53
14123.95
5.76
4.34
4.86
-0.28%
-0.27%
-0.34%
-2.75%
-5.55%
-29.58%
Table 7.1: Average KPI comparison for Time Slot Simulation with Dynamic and Static Assign-
ment under Known Demand
In Table 7.1 we present all previously stipulated KPIs with some additional information regarding
the percentage of planned customers and the total planned distance. The values presented here are
deﬁned as averages of all instances grouped by preference type. All resulting KPI values are compared
with the dynamic run, where a positive percentage for the number of booked customer, number of
planned customers and average number of time slots oﬀered will represent an improvement, while for
the driving time, distance per planned customer and average optimization runtime, an improvement
is attained under a negative percentage. In other words we want the static methods to increase or
maintain the service level and decrease the overall plan cost. Further we go through points of insight
and discuss the eﬃciency of the methods based on the stated KPI set.
As ﬁrst insight we can observe that in all cases of ILP methods used for static assignment, we
manage to book and plan less customers. ILP1 and ILP2 methods are worse than the dynamic case
by up to 2% for the studied data, while ILP3 manages to close the gap to half of a percentage in the
onePref experiment run and less that a tenth of percentage in the allPref case. It is expected that
39
==PAGE:42==
Transport and Logistics
onePref experiments would turn out to have worse results than in the allPref case due to the single
choice of time slots the customer performs. If at time t the customer that arrives in the booking
system is assigned to a depot for which either of the available routes cannot ﬁt the customer’s single
desired time slot, he will leave the system without a booking. Similarly for the allPref case, but it
requires for the assignment depot of a customer to not be able to accommodate any of the predeﬁned
time slots. In both cases, TSS returns 0 time slots. This aspect can be seen in the lower value of
average number of time slots provided in the simulation; the max value of this KPI is equal to the
maximum number of time slots the simulations runs with: in our case 7. Moving further, while the
distance per planned customer improves for all ILP methods, the driving time decreases only for ILP3.
This could be explained if we follow the assignment visual output of the synthetic case presented in
Chapter 5, where area overlaps are created. This can result in having singled out customers planned
far away from the depot, same as in the dynamic case. ILP3 for a change, present a geographically
sound customer to depot allocation, similar to the example seen in the example case of Chapter 5.
Examples of these long routes can be seen in the Conﬁdential Appendix 3.
Moving to the heuristic assignment methods, we notice that the booked and planned customer gap
is almost closed, an even reaching better results on average, for the DWB2 allPref experiment run.
Similar thing happens with the number of time slots oﬀered, where the diﬀerence is less than half of
a percent. When looking at the duration and distance per customer KPI, we notice that DWB1 does
not manage to improve the planned schedule. This is an expected behavior since the Depot Weight
Balance heuristic creates far away assignments for cases where the diﬀerence between depot capacity
is signiﬁcantly large. In our case, Depot 1 has almost 12 times more capacity than depot 4. This can
also be seen in the synthetic case of presented in Chapter 5.
Method
Depot
Utilization
(%)
Allocated
Customer Demand
Total
Depot Capacity
Average
Assignment distasnce
ILP1
Depot1
1.00
42600.00
42600.00
32932.36
ILP1
Depot2
1.14
8925.60
7800.00
9980.20
ILP1
Depot3
1.25
10515.80
8400.00
10462.83
ILP1
Depot4
1.06
3819.60
3600.00
4244.35
ILP1
Depot5
1.02
7961.20
7800.00
7982.54
ILP1
Depot6
1.11
18652.00
16800.00
18017.60
ILP1
Depot7
1.09
4594.80
4200.00
3975.89
ILP2
Depot1
1.00
42600.00
42600.00
32495.82
ILP2
Depot2
1.60
12496.60
7800.00
13075.82
ILP2
Depot3
1.07
8983.20
8400.00
8929.50
ILP2
Depot4
1.00
3602.80
3600.00
4171.10
ILP2
Depot5
1.00
7800.60
7800.00
8104.49
ILP2
Depot6
1.02
17146.20
16800.00
16912.38
ILP2
Depot7
1.06
4439.60
4200.00
3906.67
ILP3
Depot1
1.04
44390.40
42600.00
48839.70
ILP3
Depot2
1.00
7800.60
7800.00
9079.71
ILP3
Depot3
1.03
8691.00
8400.00
9675.07
ILP3
Depot4
1.00
3600.80
3600.00
4076.92
ILP3
Depot5
1.00
7800.80
7800.00
9164.52
ILP3
Depot6
1.23
20584.20
16800.00
24542.38
ILP3
Depot7
1.00
4201.20
4200.00
4708.42
Table 7.2: Depot Utilization - Static Assignment ILP Methods
Before running the simulation we record the following intermediate experiment KPIs: Allocated
Customer Demand and Average Assignment Distance per depot.
The allocated demand provides
some insight whether during the simulation, suﬃcient customer will be accepted by each depot to
40
==PAGE:43==
Transport and Logistics
reach the 100% utilization. Needless to say, due to the uncertainty of customer arrival, the demand
allocation cannot predict the performance of the assignment method. If we take into account the
average assignment distance per depot we could reason that this might provide some prediction of the
methods performance. Counter intuitively, the best performing method after the simulation is ILP3
which in Table 3 generates signiﬁcantly more distance. For future research it would be best to create
a virtual travel cost for each assigned customer that could also help improve the heuristic assignment
methods. This cost would have to be setup in such a way that it could be considered as an upper
bound of the simulation result, i.e. we do not expect all assigned customers to be planned.
Figure 7.1: Data Instance 1, allPref - Route Capacity over time per Depot
In Figure 7.1, we show the evolution of depot capacity usage during the booking horizon for one
of the data instances under the dynamic and static case (ILP1). We can clearly see here the change
from MDVRPTW to SDVRPTW. The dynamic graph shows moments in time where capacity of a
certain depot decreases, meaning that the RS optimization has found a better solution by re-assigning
customers to a route of a diﬀerent depot. In the static graph, the expected outcome of only having
capacity usage increase is conﬁrmed. In order to visualize the eﬀect of intermediate optimization steps
performed by the RS we include Figure 7.2 in the analysis. Here we can see the progression of route
eﬀective duration during the booking process. Eﬀective duration is calculated as the sum of route
availability duration minus the route working time (driving and service time). It can be seen that
optimization runs do manage to improve route duration for the static assignment case and that there
are far less steep slopes than in the dynamic case. This reinforces the expectancy that the static
case will plan fewer long travel leg customers. An insight drawn from here is that the tested data is
primarily deﬁned by a capacity constraint given that the eﬀective route duration is not fully depleted.
The intuition of creating the assignment based on demand or order weight has helped in this case,
but it would be interesting to see how the method would fare under cases where route duration is the
main constraint.
41
==PAGE:44==
Transport and Logistics
Figure 7.2: Data Instance 1, allPref - Eﬀective Route Duration over time per Depot
An additional insight is the improvement in runtime of the RS optimization. The average opti-
mization time in the table is calculated as the mean value of time collected from all the RS responses
captured by the discrete event simulator. Creating a customer to depot assignment as a pre-requisite
for the route optimization turns the multi-depot problem into a single-depot problem. Intuitively we
can say that the heuristics tasked to solving the problem has less options to consider when performing
inserts, moves, swaps, etc. The same thing can also be said for the TSS time slot oﬀering which per-
forms a cheapest insertion, although in this case the time is small enough in either case to not make a
diﬀerence. To further investigate the performance improvement that static assignment can bring, we
test a selected data instance by fully splitting it into smaller instances. The resulted instances are run
in separate simulation an action that creates a degree of parallelism. As a result both TSS and RS
treat less data separately in solving the vehicle routing problem. The result of this experiment can be
seen in Table .
Preference
Depot
Method
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
onePref
Depot 1
DWB2S
1528
1527
85.45
5.97
8921.88
6.90
5.84
1.74
onePref
Depot 2
DWB2S
280
280
87.77
6.14
934.91
5.00
3.34
0.21
onePref
Depot 3
DWB2S
304
304
88.63
6.18
1039.47
5.19
3.42
0.25
onePref
Depot 4
DWB2S
131
131
88.51
6.28
479.13
5.24
3.66
0.09
onePref
Depot 5
DWB2S
282
282
96.25
6.73
720.28
4.35
2.55
0.24
onePref
Depot 6
DWB2S
600
600
88.37
6.18
1375.61
3.85
2.29
0.63
onePref
Depot 7
DWB2S
151
151
83.89
5.85
473.10
5.40
3.13
0.09
Preference
Strategy
Method
onePref
Dynamic
-
3274
3273
87.30
6.09
15323.18
6.00
4.68
6.72
onePref
Static
DWB2S
3276
3275
87.36
6.19
13944.37
5.67
4.26
3.15
0.06%
0.06%
1.58%
-5.52%
-9.05%
-53.14%
onePref
Static
DWB2
3275
3273
87.30
6.10
14181.48
5.73
4.33
4.92
onePref
Static
DWB2S
3276
3275
87.36
6.19
13944.37
5.67
4.26
3.15
0.03%
0.06%
1.53%
-1.12%
-1.73%
-35.96%
Table 7.3 Average KPI comparison for Time Slot Simulation with Dynamic and Static Assignment
under Known Demand - Split case
The initial intuition of applying a static assignment for customer to depots in the AHD problem
would imply worse results than what we have gained from the mentioned experiments. Changing the
problem from multi-depot to single-depot indeed creates less availability of time slots for the arriving
customers, but the diﬀerence is not big enough to deter us from pursuing further research in the static
assignment case. A small improvement experiment was performed for the last optimization call of the
42
==PAGE:45==
Transport and Logistics
Preference
Strategy
Method
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
SDVRP
allPref
Dynamic
-
3257.8
3255.2
93.38
6.45
17592.53
6.90
5.41
7.64
allPref
Static
DWB2
3258.4
3256.8
93.43
6.44
15953.79
6.53
4.90
5.37
0.02%
0.05%
-0.24%
-5.27%
-9.36%
-29.65%
onePref
Dynamic
-
3269.2
3268.2
93.75
6.55
14981.52
5.93
4.59
6.90
onePref
Static
DWB2
3260.2
3259.4
93.50
6.53
14123.95
5.76
4.34
4.86
-0.28%
-0.27%
-0.34%
-2.75%
-5.55%
-29.58%
SDVRP + MDVRP ﬁnal optimization
allPref
Dynamic
-
3257.8
3255.2
93.38
6.45
17592.53
6.90
5.41
7.64
allPref
Static
DWB2
3258.4
3256.8
93.43
6.44
15472.32
6.38
4.76
5.37
0.02%
0.05%
-0.24%
-7.49%
-12.08%
-29.65%
onePref
Dynamic
-
3269.2
3268.2
93.75
6.55
14981.52
5.93
4.59
6.90
onePref
Static
DWB2
3260.2
3259.8
93.50
6.53
13801.78
5.65
4.24
4.86
-0.28%
-0.26%
-0.34%
-4.73%
-7.70%
-29.58%
Table 7.5: Average KPI comparison for Time Slot Simulation with Dynamic and Static Assign-
ment under Known Demand
time slot booking process. If we recall, in Chapter 3 we mentioned that at the end of the booking
horizon a ﬁnal optimization call is performed to further reduce the distance and travel time of the
plan, given that new customer exist in the plan state (active delivery schedule) that have only been
inserted with the cheapest insertion algorithm. To improve the ﬁnal optimization further, we re-run
it for the DWB2 method experiment without the depot assignment constraint. The improvement of
duration and distance per planned customer can be seen in Table 7.5.
While distance per planned customer improves by 2 to 3 % there is also a small change in the
number of planned customers. In the process the time slot booking there are cases where customers
perform a concurrent request, or a conﬂict between the optimized plan sent by the RS and the current
plan occurs that cannot be resolve. As a result there is a small number of customers that will receive a
booking but will not be planned. In real life cases, the e-grocer would either try to manually ﬁt these
customers in to the plan, with the risk of creating a tighter schedule of delivery for some of the routes,
or employ extra capacity such as a courier. As the latter decision will impact the overall proﬁtability
of the plan, the former decision can impact the service level: a tighter delivery schedule can lead to
early or late deliveries. The new method of solving the problem as a SDVRP during the booking
horizon and MDVRP after the booking horizon is worth pursuing as a possibility for implementation.
As a last step of this experiment set, we overview the eﬃciency of our best method, in this case
the methods used in DWB2 and we run it over a smaller sample data. The data instances still contain
real historical data, but for a diﬀerent region, with less depots, less demand and diﬀerent geographical
considerations. For this experiment, denoted DWB3, we also run the dynamic assignment simulation
for the new data set.
The resulting KPIs are encompassed in Table 6.
We can observe that the
methods which performed rather well in the larger sample experiments, here it only manages to be as
good as the dynamic run, albeit a small gap for all KPIs. This could be due to the high density of
the tested region, i.e. customers are closer to the depots and each other and customers can be fairly
easy to deliver from either of the depots without create very long travel legs.
43
==PAGE:46==
Transport and Logistics
Preference
Depot
Method
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
allPref
Dynamic
SS_SD
1671.4
1671
89.69
6.20
5670.21
5.56
3.40
2.45
allPref
Static
DWB3
1655.8
1655.6
88.76
6.11
5616.18
5.61
3.39
2.17
-0.93%
-0.92%
-1.48%
0.85%
-0.07%
-11.72%
onePref
Dynamic
SS_SD
1672.8
1672.6
89.75
6.27
4967.17
4.91
2.97
2.29
onePref
Static
DWB3
1661.2
1661
89.01
6.20
4942.65
4.97
2.98
1.99
-0.69%
-0.69%
-1.00%
1.25%
0.11%
-13.00%
Table 7.4: Average KPI comparison for Time Slot Simulation with Dynamic and Static Assign-
ment under Known Demand - Small Sample DWB3
After seeing the experiment results under the known demand context, several methods have re-
vealed a good ﬁt. Although we cannot yet predict from the assignment result how the simulation
would run, additional implementations steps can be include in future research to cover this aspect.
Further we will look over how the implemented assignment methods perform in the context of unknown
demand.
7.2 Experiment Results - Assignment Methods under Unknown Demand
For this set of experiments we compare the dynamic experiment result ﬁrst observed in Section 6.1
with the static assignment experiments under unknown demand. Like previously mentioned we have
selected the best results methods to be run under unknown demand. The resulting data has the same
preset as in Section 6.1.
Before moving further with the analysis and insights, we remind that the assignment template
was computed diﬀerently for the given methods. ILP2UD assignment templates were created by ﬁrst
aggregating the training data with the K-means algorithm and subjecting the new data to the ILP2
assignment method. For ILP3UD and DWB2UD the templates are created by using the entire training
set. In all cases new arriving customer are assigned based on the n nearest neighbor algorithm.
In table 7 we can observe the resulting KPIs of the 3 mentioned experiment runs. ILP2UD provides
a clear insight regarding the usage of the K-means algorithm in creating the assignment templates.
The main reason of the bad results of this experiment is due the misuse of the algorithm and lack
of tuning of the K parameter. For this experiment K was arbitrarily set to 300 cluster after several
empirical tests. The test were performed and analyzed brieﬂy based on the visual ﬁt of geographical
assignment. While capacity was nicely distributed across the depots as a result of the ILP (assignment
was done with a value of k = 300 centroids), after performing the NNN algorithm, the main depot
capacity utilization decreased from 100% to around 77%. This experiment prompted the introduction
of depot capacity utilization as intermediate KPI for the assignment method, as seen in Section 7.1.
Also, the poor results of this experiment run has steered the attention from using K-means clustering
to deﬁne the assignment template, but can be consider for future research, in cases where data samples
are too large to be able to solve them with exact algorithms.
44
==PAGE:47==
Transport and Logistics
Preference
Strategy
Method
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
allPref
Dynamic
-
3257.8
3255.2
93.38
6.45
17592.53
6.90
5.41
7.64
allPref
Static
ILP2UD
2884.8
2877.4
82.52
5.60
30355.52
10.63
10.56
5.52
-11.45%
-11.61%
-13.20%
54.11%
95.30%
-27.72%
onePref
Dynamic
-
3269.2
3268.2
93.75
6.55
14981.52
5.93
4.59
6.90
onePref
Static
ILP2UD
2892.2
2886
82.78
5.78
26611.74
9.28
9.22
5.23
-11.53%
-11.69%
-11.82%
56.57%
100.82%
-24.08%
allPref
Dynamic
-
3257.8
3255.2
93.38
6.45
17592.53
6.90
5.41
7.64
allPref
Static
ILP3UD
3210.4
3208.2
91.97
6.36
15428.41
6.42
4.82
6.06
-1.45%
-1.44%
-1.49%
-6.89%
-10.92%
-20.59%
onePref
Dynamic
-
3269.2
3268.2
93.75
6.55
14981.52
5.93
4.59
6.90
onePref
Static
ILP3UD
3203.6
3202.4
91.80
6.41
13906.83
5.72
4.35
5.48
-2.01%
-2.01%
-2.12%
-3.52%
-5.28%
-20.60%
allPref
Dynamic
-
3257.8
3255.2
93.38
6.45
17592.53
6.90
5.41
7.64
allPref
Static
DWB2UD
3245.6
3244.6
93.05
6.42
15889.89
6.50
4.90
5.27
-0.37%
-0.33%
-0.54%
-5.72%
-9.35%
-30.97%
onePref
Dynamic
-
3269.2
3268.2
93.75
6.55
14981.52
5.93
4.59
6.90
onePref
Static
DWB2UD
3244.4
3243.6
93.02
6.50
14095.49
5.75
4.35
4.86
-0.76%
-0.75%
-0.82%
-3.04%
-5.25%
-29.45%
Table 7.5: Average KPI comparison for Time Slot Simulation with Dynamic and Static Assign-
ment under Unknown Demand
Next, we notice that ILP3UD, although a bit worse than ILP3 results shown in Section 7.1 still
presents a lower than 2% gap on the booked and planned customers.
For this unknown demand
case, only the NNN algorithm was used. Additionally, distance and duration per planned customer
is signiﬁcantly improved. DWB2UD experiment results manage to maintain the KPIs close the what
DWB2 has provided: signiﬁcantly decreasing the gap for the service level KPIs and improving the
proﬁtability KPIs. Similarly to the known demand experiment runs, the runtime of the optimization
algorithm is signiﬁcantly decreased when compared with the dynamic case.
Figure 7.3: Data Instance 1, allPref - Eﬀective Route Duration over time per Depot
Looking at the evolution of depot capacity and route eﬀective duration over time in the unknown
demand experiment, Figure 7.3, we notice similar behavior as in the case of known demand. In all
data instance cases, the graphs provide similar insights, exception making some changes in the slope of
the capacity graph, i.e. some depots ﬁll faster than others due to the uncertainty of customer arrival
time and demand.
Similarly as in Section 7.1, we run an unknown demand experiment for the small sample. The
results are shown in Table . It would seem that under the unknown demand case the methods fares a
bit worse with having distance increase by at most 2.4 %. This creates a highlight that the assignment
45
==PAGE:48==
Transport and Logistics
methods do not perform well for smaller and more compact zone. The new small sample geographical
representation can be seen in Conﬁdential Appendix 3.
Preference
Depot
Method
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
allPref
Dynamic
SS_SD
1671.4
1671
89.69
6.20
5670.21
5.56
3.40
2.45
allPref
Static
DWB3
1663.6
1663.2
89.25
6.14
5710.65
5.65
3.44
2.17
-0.47%
-0.47%
-1.07%
1.56%
1.23%
-11.72%
onePref
Dynamic
SS_SD
1672.8
1672.6
89.75
6.27
4967.17
4.91
2.97
2.29
onePref
Static
DWB3
1665
1664.6
89.31
6.22
5063.84
5.03
3.04
1.99
-0.47%
-0.48%
-0.71%
2.40%
2.40%
-13.00%
Table 7.6 Average KPI comparison for Time Slot Simulation with Dynamic and Static Assignment
under Unknown Demand - Small Sample DWB3UD
An additional insight can be seen in Figure 7.4 where we present the average number of booked
customers per day. It is interesting to observer that although the static assignment accommodates less
customers in some of the days, it has the ability to provide more time slots than the dynamic close to
the end of the booking horizon.
Figure 7.4: Booked customer per day - dynamic (main sample) and static assignment (DWB2UD)
The methods employed in the unknown demand experiment runs provide a valuable insight regard-
ing the possibility of implementing static assignment methods as part of the time slot booking process
of an e-grocer or e-retailer. The methods used in this paper cannot be regarded as an oﬀ-the-shelf ﬁt
for any e-grocers and would required custom tailored conﬁguration. Using the assignment methods
as tactical analysis tool to provide the assignment templates used in the booking process can prove
useful.
7.3 Experiment Results - Summary
In this section we will summarize the brief insights gathered from the experiment results. ILP3 and
DWB2 with their respective unknown demand cases have prompted good results. A small trade-oﬀ
is made in terms of planned and booked customers, but with signiﬁcant improvement in the driving
duration and distance. Additionally changing the model for route optimization from MDVRPTW to
SDVRPTW brings improvements in terms of performance by speeding up the optimization runtime
by up to 30% for concurrent RS calls and up to 50% for parallel RS calls. To better view the best
46
==PAGE:49==
Transport and Logistics
methods, we introduce the following radar plots, where a solution improves towards the edge of the
plot.
Figure 7.4: Best Assignment Methods - Unknown Demand
Figure 7.5: Best Assignment Methods - Unknown Demand
47
==PAGE:50==
Transport and Logistics
Chapter 8: Conclusion and Recommendations
In this chapter we will present a set of conclusions based on the insights gathered in Chapter 7.
Additionally, future improvements of the developed methods will be succinctly covered as well as a
possible way of implementation of the static assignment in the e-grocer time slot booking process.
8.1 Conclusions
In this research we have approached a problem that has not received too much attention in past
researches, especially in the context of time slot booking.
Assignment methods are often used in
practice for large optimization cases or cases where strategic or tactical studies are required to deﬁne,
among resource requirements, the location of depots, the coverage area of delivery for each depot as
well as preset routes. The preset routes or master routes have ﬁxed structure and are often used in
retail delivers of B2B (Business to Business).
For the e-retail or e-grocer segment, where B2C (Business to Customer) deliveries are the main
focus, master routes are not a good ﬁt. As a result the distribution is deﬁned as dynamic: routes
are created ad-hoc, and sourcing (supply) points for orders are left free. With the help of advanced
and business speciﬁcally tailored heuristic algorithms, distribution plans become eﬃcient. Same thing
was observed while performing the experiments that in most cases, when it comes to the number of
planned customer, the dynamic strategy has an upper hand. Even so, the greedy heuristic assignment
methods tried in experiment DWB2 has managed to close the gap for these KPIs. On the other hand,
we have managed to prove that with the static strategy, for some of our proposed methods, planned
distance and travel time is most of the time improved. Since for the AHD problem and time slot
booking process we require the heuristic methods to provide fast results, static assignment seems to
be better suited. Transforming the problem from a multi-depot context, as it is used in the dynamic
assignment strategy, into single-depot can improve the response of both routing optimization and time
slot calculation. If we set a threshold that the dynamic assignment optimization runtime is the upper
bound, and conﬁgure the heuristic algorithms to run up until that threshold is reached, there is a
chance of also increasing the number of booked and planned customers. This would be either due to
the fact that we perform faster solution searches or the algorithm is enhanced to try more solutions.
Regardless of the apparent improvements brought by the static assignments in combination with
the time slot booking process, there are some clear gaps that could be addressed in future researches.
Intuitively, it was expected that we would automatically oﬀer less time slots to the arriving customers
and was proven by the experimental result to be true. Additionally, it seems that static sourcing does
not work well with smaller sample cases. The main data set we have created the experiments on,
covers a large area of distribution with signiﬁcantly more depots. Given the case future proposals
would need to address the expected demand and setup of distribution areas in such a way that static
sourcing would present a ﬁt for all scenarios. For the moment, we deem it eﬃcient for large area of
distributions. Furthermore, ﬁxing customer to depot assignment will not work well if the expected
demand decrease suddenly for some depots, and increases for others. This can create a big gap in
the number of booked and planned customers since the depot area experiencing less demand will
automatically be underused. Thus poor estimation of future demand, either to insuﬃcient historical
data or ineﬃcient forecasting, can leave the static assignment strategy undesired.
To summarize, the static assignment strategies, especially ILP3 and DWB2 are a good ﬁt for the
studied case, and can be considered on par with the dynamic assignment. For a visual representation
48
==PAGE:51==
Transport and Logistics
of these methods used in this research, revisit Chapter 7, section 7.3. Further we will have a look
into implementation possibilities of the developed methods in a real case scenario as well as future
possibilities of research on the topic.
8.2 Recommendations for Implementation
Based on the result of the experiments, the methods presented in this research can be taken into
account for implementation in a real scenario of attended home delivery. As it is currently stated,
the methods can be used in the planning process at tactical level. Based on historical and forecast
data, the assignment methods can be deﬁned as territory assignment. The valuable insight extracted
from such a tactical study will enhance the overall operational planning by estimating the distribution
coverage area of each depot. The result would then be transformed into assignment templates and
used in the time slot booking process. Although it has been shown that for small and more dense areas
the improvements provided by the static assignment do not signiﬁcantly improve the plan, decision
for resource or route reassignment to depots can be made with future developments.
The practice of territory assignment is currently used in many industries, where a deﬁnition of
predeﬁned routes or set of routes is required. One example would be the parcel and courier business,
where although the distribution is done from a single depot or sorting center, route areas need to be
deﬁned in advance. The static assignment can increase the number of stops each route performs as
well as provide a signiﬁcant speed up of the sorting process (knowing to which car a parcel should
go based on the assigned area). We can determine some similarities here, since parcel and courier
business can provide attended home delivery as an additional service. Given the case, the assignment
methods proposed can be adjusted and applied to other cases where the requirement is to increase the
number of planned orders while decreasing the overall cost.
8.3 Recommendations for Future Research
Future research approaches can be extracted from the disadvantages presented previously for the
static assignment strategy and also by removing some of the assumptions.
Removing the assumption of always having more demand than capacity and steering the problem
towards testing under constraint of duration can be a way forward. For this case it would be required
to have a suﬃcient number of customers that it would be impossible for the available routes to plan
all of them due to lack of time. For this research we would have to review both exact and heuristic
algorithms presented in this paper. One clear change could be in the depot balancing value used
in the greedy heuristic algorithm, i.e. instead of using depot capacity we would use eﬀective route
availability. This would also imply deﬁning a cost parameter that would help improve the solution.
Having this in mind, the heuristic methods can be enhanced with additional heuristic structures such
as a move function or just improve the existing swap function to perform both actions of move and
swap. A more interesting problem appears when revenue is available for all customer order, or if we
can deﬁne the weight as being directly correlated with revenue. Experimenting on this will provide
additional insight on the proﬁtability loss by not planning some of the customers.
Having mentioned the implementation of assignment template, we can devise several methods to
enhance this. Take for example the case where demand suddenly increases for some areas and decreases
for others. To avoid the issue that this setup would create, a mechanism embedded in the time slot
service (TSS) that would keep track of the active delivery schedule and the utilization of the depots.
49
==PAGE:52==
Transport and Logistics
If a certain threshold is reached for any depot, the next arriving customer, that would normally be
assigned to it, can be redistributed to the neighboring depot. Another option would be to leave the
customer unassigned. This will incur dynamic assignment and transform the problem into a hybrid
version of the two discussed strategies.
50
==PAGE:53==
Transport and Logistics
References
Andre Snoeck, Daniel Merchan, and Matthias Winkenbach.
Revenue management in last-mile
delivery: state-of-the-art and future research directions.
Transportation Research Procedia, 2020.
ISSN 2352-1465. The 11th International Conference on City Logistics, Dubrovnik, Croatia, 12th -
14th June 2019.
Niels A.H. Agatz, Moritz Fleischmann , Jo A.E.E. van Nunen, 2008, European Journal of Opera-
tional Research 187 (2008) 339–356
Niels Agatz, Ann Campbell 2013, Moritz Fleischmann, Jo Nunen, and Martin Savelsbergh. Rev-
enue management opportunities for internet retailers. Journal of Revenue Pricing Management
Cleophas, C., Ehmke, J.F., 2014. When Are Deliveries Proﬁtable?: Considering Order Value and
Transport Capacity in Demand Fulﬁllment for Last-Mile Deliveries in Metropolitan Areas. Business
and Information Systems Engineering 6, 153–163.
Hernandez, F., Gendreau, M., Potvin, J.Y., 2014.
Heuristics for Time Slot Management: A
Periodic Vehicle Routing Problem View.
Technical Report.
Technical Report CIRRELT-2014-59,
CIRRELT, Montreal.
Agatz, N., Campbell, A.M., Fleischmann, M., Savelsbergh, M., 2011. Time Slot Management in
Attended Home Delivery. Transportation Science 45, 435–449.
Agatz, N., Campbell, A.M., Fleischmann, M., Savelsbergh, M., 2008. Challenges and opportunities
in attended home delivery, in: The vehicle routing problem: Latest advances and new challenges.
Springer, pp. 379–396.
Yang, X., Strauss, A.K., 2017. An approximate dynamic programming approach to attended home
delivery management. European Journal of Operational Research 263, 935–945.
Yang, X., Strauss, A.K., Currie, C., Eglese, R.W., 2016. Choice-based demand management and
vehicle routing in e-fulﬁllment. Transportation Science 50, 473–488.
Ehmke, J.F., Campbell, A.M., 2014.
Customer acceptance mechanisms for home deliveries in
metropolitan areas. European Journal of Operational Research 233, 193–207.
Marco Lam, John Mittenthal, 2013, Capacitated hierarchical clustering heuristic for multi depot
location-routing problems, International Journal of Logistics Research and Applications, 16:5, 433-444
Chih-Ping Chiang, The Fixed Routes Assignment Considering Fluctuant Customer Demand
Canrong Zhang, Zhihai Zhang, Li Zheng, Linning Cai, 2007, The Assignment of Customers in
Multi-depot Vehicle Routing Problem with Fleet Size Constraint for Each Depot, Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Automation and Logistics
Sergio Barreto, Carlos Ferreira, Jose Paixaao, Beatriz Sousa Santos, 2007, Using clustering analysis
in a capacitated location-routing problem, European Journal of Operational Research 179 (2007)
968–977
Margareta Ackerman, Shai Ben-David, Simina Branzei, David Loker, 2016, Weighted Clustering
51
==PAGE:54==
Transport and Logistics
ID Giosa, IL Tansini, IO Viera, 2002, New assignment algorithms for the multi-depot vehicle
routing problem, Journal of the Operational Research Society (2002) 53, 977–984
Florent Hernandez, Michel Gendreau, and Jean-Yves Potvin. 2017. Heuristics for tactical time
slot management: a periodic vehicle routing problem view. International Transactions in Operational
Research
Nielsen, 2017. A look at the evolving e-commerce landscape. URL: http://www.nielsen.com
Toth, P.; Vigo, D., eds. (2002). The Vehicle Routing Problem. Monographs on Discrete Mathe-
matics and Applications.
Røpke, Stefan; Pisinger, David, 2004, An Adaptive Large Neighborhood Search Heuristic for the
Pickup and Delivery Problems with Time Windows
Heechul Bae, Ilkyeong Moon, 2016, Multi-depot vehicle routing problem with time windows con-
sidering delivery and installation vehicles, Applied Mathematical Modelling 40 (2016) 6536–6549
Claudio Contardo, Rafael Martinelli, 2014, A new exact algorithm for the multi-depot vehicle
routing problem under capacity and route length constraints, Discrete Optimization 12 (2014) 129-
146
Prat Boonsam, Nanthi Suthikarnnarunai, 2011, Assignment Problem and Vehicle Routing Problem
for an Improvement of Cash Distribution
James Munkres, Algorithms for the Assignment and Transportation Problems, 1975, Journal of
the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
L. Bodin, M. Ball, R. Dial, 1983, Routing and Scheduling of vehicles and crews, Comput.& Ops
Res. Vol. IO. No. 2, PP. 6341. 1983
Bruce Golden, Larry Levy, Roy Dahl, 1981, Omega, Volume 9, Issue 4, 1981, Pages 439-441
Casie Berning, Stan Ernst, and Neal H. Hooker, 2005, Are E-Grocers Serving the Right Markets?,
A publication of the American Agricultural Economics Association
Quinten Cederhout. The impact on the ﬁnal delivery schedule of diﬀerent procedures that handle
arriving customers during route optimization in a real-time dynamic time slot management system.
Master’s thesis, Delft University of Technology.
Thomas Visser, Niels Agatz, and Remy Spliet 2019. Simultaneous customer interaction in online
mbooking systems for attended home delivery. Technical Report ERS-2019-011-LIS, ERIM report
series research in management Erasmus Research Institute of Management
F.R. Akkerman 2021, Delivery Cost Approximations for Dynamic Time Slot Pricing, Master thesis,
University of Twente
52
==PAGE:55==
Transport and Logistics
Appendix 1: Time Slot Simulation Results
In the current Appendix we include the experimental output with additional information. Tables
A1 to A10 provide information regarding the experiment runs per instance.
Preference
Strategy
Instance
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
onePref
Dynamic
1
3359
3357
3558
94.35
6.59
14366.87
5.66
4.28
7.38
onePref
Dynamic
2
3366
3365
3502
96.09
6.72
14653.27
5.70
4.35
7.26
onePref
Dynamic
3
3256
3255
3479
93.56
6.54
14805.32
5.88
4.55
6.95
onePref
Dynamic
4
3274
3273
3749
87.30
6.09
15323.18
6.00
4.68
6.72
onePref
Dynamic
5
3091
3091
3172
97.45
6.81
15758.98
6.40
5.10
6.16
allPref
Dynamic
1
3332
3330
3558
93.59
6.44
18558.79
7.07
5.57
7.86
allPref
Dynamic
2
3354
3352
3502
95.72
6.62
16981.93
6.52
5.07
7.95
allPref
Dynamic
3
3250
3248
3479
93.36
6.44
17948.30
6.97
5.53
7.67
allPref
Dynamic
4
3271
3264
3749
87.06
6.03
17026.91
6.76
5.22
7.99
allPref
Dynamic
5
3082
3082
3172
97.16
6.73
17446.74
7.17
5.66
6.70
Table A1: Dynamic Assignment LS_LD - Experiment Results per data ﬁle
Preference
Strategy
Instance
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
onePref
Static
1
3289
3286
3558
92.36
6.45
15323.71
6.26
4.66
5.72
onePref
Static
2
3319
3318
3502
94.75
6.60
14602.29
5.96
4.40
6.35
onePref
Static
3
3188
3187
3479
91.61
6.40
14362.92
6.10
4.51
5.56
onePref
Static
4
3193
3190
3749
85.09
5.95
14046.45
6.01
4.40
5.62
onePref
Static
5
3075
3075
3172
96.94
6.77
15467.18
6.58
5.03
5.65
allPref
Static
1
3289
3285
3558
92.33
6.31
16954.84
6.96
5.16
6.77
allPref
Static
2
3325
3323
3502
94.89
6.51
16849.13
6.84
5.07
6.77
allPref
Static
3
3202
3200
3479
91.98
6.30
16080.22
6.84
5.03
6.38
allPref
Static
4
3195
3195
3749
85.22
5.86
15629.32
6.69
4.89
6.11
allPref
Static
5
3086
3084
3172
97.23
6.67
17294.94
7.42
5.61
5.86
Table A2 : Static Assignment ILP1 - Experiment Results per data ﬁle
Preference
Strategy
Instance
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
onePref
Static
1
3281
3281
3558
92.21
6.43
15302.62
6.27
4.66
5.83
onePref
Static
2
3294
3293
3502
94.03
6.56
14836.04
6.04
4.51
5.58
onePref
Static
3
3207
3206
3479
92.15
6.44
14006.38
5.97
4.37
5.98
onePref
Static
4
3196
3195
3749
85.22
5.94
13516.75
5.86
4.23
5.54
onePref
Static
5
3071
3071
3172
96.82
6.75
15383.52
6.59
5.01
5.26
allPref
Static
1
3284
3280
3558
92.19
6.28
17113.59
7.08
5.22
6.26
allPref
Static
2
3313
3311
3502
94.55
6.49
16503.53
6.78
4.98
6.00
allPref
Static
3
3202
3201
3479
92.01
6.30
15901.11
6.81
4.97
6.61
allPref
Static
4
3213
3209
3749
85.60
5.88
15510.81
6.67
4.83
6.85
allPref
Static
5
3062
3062
3172
96.53
6.63
17035.24
7.35
5.56
5.29
Table A3 : Static Assignment ILP2 - Experiment Results per data ﬁle
Preference
Strategy
Instance
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
onePref
Static
1
3000
2990
3558
84.04
5.89
28253.33
9.44
9.45
5.28
onePref
Static
2
2912
2903
3502
82.90
5.80
25045.67
8.80
8.63
5.07
onePref
Static
3
2911
2905
3479
83.50
5.81
27480.66
9.38
9.46
5.21
onePref
Static
4
2911
2908
3749
77.57
5.39
26424.40
9.13
9.09
5.38
onePref
Static
5
2727
2724
3172
85.88
6.00
25854.62
9.64
9.49
5.23
allPref
Static
1
2916
2907
3558
81.70
5.51
30756.64
10.61
10.58
5.43
allPref
Static
2
2974
2965
3502
84.67
5.78
29558.38
10.17
9.97
5.71
allPref
Static
3
2934
2927
3479
84.13
5.69
30527.68
10.49
10.43
6.03
allPref
Static
4
2906
2901
3749
77.38
5.25
30653.39
10.63
10.57
5.72
allPref
Static
5
2694
2687
3172
84.71
5.77
30281.53
11.24
11.27
4.71
Table A4: Static Assignment ILP2UD - Experiment Results per data ﬁle
53
==PAGE:56==
Transport and Logistics
Preference
Strategy
Instance
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
onePref
Static
1
3330
3329
3558
93.56
6.51
16722.02
6.31
5.02
5.46
onePref
Static
2
3332
3331
3502
95.12
6.66
16272.53
6.12
4.89
5.27
onePref
Static
3
3238
3236
3479
93.02
6.49
16032.31
6.22
4.95
4.93
onePref
Static
4
3249
3248
3749
86.64
6.06
15965.14
6.22
4.92
4.98
onePref
Static
5
3076
3075
3172
96.94
6.76
16458.15
6.63
5.35
4.48
allPref
Static
1
3320
3318
3558
93.25
6.37
18808.63
7.14
5.67
5.72
allPref
Static
2
3322
3321
3502
94.83
6.51
18080.39
6.90
5.44
5.66
allPref
Static
3
3233
3230
3479
92.84
6.36
17937.86
7.03
5.55
5.19
allPref
Static
4
3244
3242
3749
86.48
5.92
17648.32
6.98
5.44
5.12
allPref
Static
5
3064
3063
3172
96.56
6.64
18832.84
7.59
6.15
4.90
Table A5: Static Assignment DWB1 - Experiment Results per data ﬁle
Preference
Strategy
Instance
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
onePref
Static
1
3346
3346
3558
94.04
6.56
14318.35
5.74
4.28
5.13
onePref
Static
2
3345
3344
3502
95.49
6.68
13998.93
5.58
4.19
5.07
onePref
Static
3
3248
3247
3479
93.33
6.51
13738.15
5.66
4.23
4.80
onePref
Static
4
3275
3273
3749
87.30
6.10
14181.48
5.73
4.33
4.92
onePref
Static
5
3087
3087
3172
97.32
6.79
14382.84
6.11
4.66
4.36
allPref
Static
1
3343
3341
3558
93.90
6.45
16494.25
6.58
4.94
5.76
allPref
Static
2
3347
3347
3502
95.57
6.59
15942.73
6.37
4.76
5.52
allPref
Static
3
3246
3245
3479
93.27
6.42
15629.93
6.46
4.82
5.45
allPref
Static
4
3267
3262
3749
87.01
6.00
15640.44
6.41
4.79
5.43
allPref
Static
5
3089
3089
3172
97.38
6.73
16061.61
6.86
5.20
4.70
Table A6: Static Assignment DWB2 - Experiment Results per data ﬁle
Preference
Strategy
Instance
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
onePref
Static
1
3337
3337
3558
93.79
6.55
14223.26
5.65
4.26
5.02
onePref
Static
2
3348
3348
3502
95.60
6.69
14126.30
5.58
4.22
5.09
onePref
Static
3
3222
3222
3479
92.61
6.46
13962.60
5.72
4.33
4.87
onePref
Static
4
3278
3274
3749
87.33
6.10
13945.34
5.68
4.26
4.94
onePref
Static
5
3037
3037
3172
95.74
6.69
14219.96
6.10
4.68
4.41
allPref
Static
1
3337
3336
3558
93.76
6.46
16437.05
6.53
4.93
5.47
allPref
Static
2
3357
3357
3502
95.86
6.61
15528.84
6.21
4.63
5.55
allPref
Static
3
3221
3220
3479
92.56
6.38
15656.36
6.45
4.86
5.16
allPref
Static
4
3273
3271
3749
87.25
6.01
16046.52
6.50
4.91
5.39
allPref
Static
5
3040
3039
3172
95.81
6.62
15780.68
6.84
5.19
4.79
Table A7: Static Assignment DWB2UD - Experiment Results per data ﬁle
Preference
Strategy
Instance
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
onePref
Static
1
1576
1576
1584
99.49
6.97
4924.01
5.08
3.12
2.07
onePref
Static
2
1726
1726
2140
80.65
5.64
5070.79
4.89
2.94
2.43
onePref
Static
3
1750
1750
2132
82.08
5.72
4935.81
4.72
2.82
2.42
onePref
Static
4
1671
1670
1855
90.03
6.29
4866.97
4.84
2.91
2.26
onePref
Static
5
1641
1641
1701
96.47
6.71
5038.28
5.04
3.07
2.25
allPref
Static
1
1580
1580
1584
99.75
6.94
5334.43
5.54
3.38
2.14
allPref
Static
2
1726
1725
2140
80.61
5.56
5511.65
5.36
3.20
2.75
allPref
Static
3
1740
1739
2132
81.57
5.62
5882.00
5.53
3.38
2.56
allPref
Static
4
1668
1668
1855
89.92
6.23
5716.86
5.63
3.43
2.47
allPref
Static
5
1643
1643
1701
96.59
6.66
5906.13
5.75
3.59
2.35
Table A8: Dynamic Assignment SS_DS - Experiment Results per data ﬁle
54
==PAGE:57==
Transport and Logistics
Preference
Strategy
Instance
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
onePref
Static
1
1555
1555
1584
98.17
6.86
4972.45
5.20
3.20
1.73
onePref
Static
2
1730
1729
2140
80.79
5.62
5258.01
5.03
3.04
2.05
onePref
Static
3
1724
1723
2132
80.82
5.63
5123.46
4.88
2.97
2.12
onePref
Static
4
1679
1679
1855
90.51
6.29
4960.70
4.95
2.95
1.92
onePref
Static
5
1637
1637
1701
96.24
6.71
5004.58
5.08
3.06
1.88
allPref
Static
1
1560
1560
1584
98.48
6.82
5540.50
5.73
3.55
1.88
allPref
Static
2
1725
1725
2140
80.61
5.53
5647.97
5.49
3.27
2.37
allPref
Static
3
1721
1720
2132
80.68
5.54
5704.04
5.47
3.32
2.38
allPref
Static
4
1675
1674
1855
90.24
6.18
5951.58
5.78
3.56
2.09
allPref
Static
5
1637
1637
1701
96.24
6.60
5709.18
5.77
3.49
2.04
Table A9: Static Assignment DWB3 - Experiment Results per data ﬁle
Preference
Strategy
Instance
Number of
booked
customers
Number of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Percentage of
planned
customers
Average number
of
time slots oﬀered
Total planned
distance
Driving time
per
planned customer
Distance
per
planned customer
Average
optimization
runtime
in minutes
onePref
Static
1
1527
1527
1584
96.40
6.74
4605.41
5.09
3.02
1.90
onePref
Static
2
1732
1731
2140
80.89
5.62
5132.04
4.91
2.96
2.10
onePref
Static
3
1745
1745
2132
81.85
5.69
5147.18
4.91
2.95
2.09
onePref
Static
4
1678
1678
1855
90.46
6.30
4979.12
4.93
2.97
1.94
onePref
Static
5
1624
1624
1701
95.47
6.65
4849.49
5.04
2.99
1.92
allPref
Static
1
1530
1530
1584
96.59
6.69
5208.69
5.66
3.40
1.99
allPref
Static
2
1721
1720
2140
80.37
5.52
5705.83
5.51
3.32
2.39
allPref
Static
3
1732
1732
2132
81.24
5.55
5839.25
5.48
3.37
2.23
allPref
Static
4
1673
1673
1855
90.19
6.21
5923.14
5.80
3.54
2.14
allPref
Static
5
1623
1623
1701
95.41
6.59
5403.98
5.60
3.33
2.09
Table A10: Static Assignment DWB3UD - Experiment Results per data ﬁle
55
==PAGE:58==
Transport and Logistics
Appendix 2: Assignment Methods Results
Tables A12 to A14 provide the customer demand allocation per depot for each of the used methods.
Table A15 provides information of the depot capacity allocation after the simulation runs.
Method
Depot
Utilization
(%)
Allocated
Customer Demand
Total
Depot Capacity
Average
Assignment distasnce
ILP1
Depot1
1.00
42600.00
42600.00
32932.36
ILP1
Depot2
1.14
8925.60
7800.00
9980.20
ILP1
Depot3
1.25
10515.80
8400.00
10462.83
ILP1
Depot4
1.06
3819.60
3600.00
4244.35
ILP1
Depot5
1.02
7961.20
7800.00
7982.54
ILP1
Depot6
1.11
18652.00
16800.00
18017.60
ILP1
Depot7
1.09
4594.80
4200.00
3975.89
ILP2
Depot1
1.00
42600.00
42600.00
32495.82
ILP2
Depot2
1.60
12496.60
7800.00
13075.82
ILP2
Depot3
1.07
8983.20
8400.00
8929.50
ILP2
Depot4
1.00
3602.80
3600.00
4171.10
ILP2
Depot5
1.00
7800.60
7800.00
8104.49
ILP2
Depot6
1.02
17146.20
16800.00
16912.38
ILP2
Depot7
1.06
4439.60
4200.00
3906.67
ILP3
Depot1
1.04
44390.40
42600.00
48839.70
ILP3
Depot2
1.00
7800.60
7800.00
9079.71
ILP3
Depot3
1.03
8691.00
8400.00
9675.07
ILP3
Depot4
1.00
3600.80
3600.00
4076.92
ILP3
Depot5
1.00
7800.80
7800.00
9164.52
ILP3
Depot6
1.23
20584.20
16800.00
24542.38
ILP3
Depot7
1.00
4201.20
4200.00
4708.42
Table 1: Depot Utilization - Static Assignment ILP Methods
Method
Depot
Utilization
(%)
Allocated
Customer Demand
Total
Depot Capacity
Average
Assignment distasnce
DWB1
Depot1
1.06
45314.80
42600.00
38867.79
DWB1
Depot2
1.06
8303.40
7800.00
7202.24
DWB1
Depot3
1.06
8945.40
8400.00
7625.25
DWB1
Depot4
1.07
3845.60
3600.00
3240.32
DWB1
Depot5
1.07
8311.60
7800.00
7205.99
DWB1
Depot6
1.06
17870.40
16800.00
15272.06
DWB1
Depot7
1.07
4477.80
4200.00
3810.15
DWB2
Depot1
1.08
46107.20
42600.00
39633.88
DWB2
Depot2
1.06
8303.60
7800.00
7187.38
DWB2
Depot3
1.06
8935.40
8400.00
7593.60
DWB2
Depot4
1.04
3747.00
3600.00
3160.75
DWB2
Depot5
0.98
7617.00
7800.00
6548.54
DWB2
Depot6
1.06
17882.00
16800.00
15317.00
DWB2
Depot7
1.07
4476.80
4200.00
3782.64
Table A12: Demand Allocation per Depot - Static Assignment Heuristic Methods
Method
Depot 1
Depot 2
Depot 3
Depot 4
Depot 5
Depot 6
Depot 7
Dynamic
0.99
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.96
ILP1
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.98
0.99
0.98
ILP2
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.98
0.99
0.98
ILP2UD
0.78
0.98
0.98
0.90
0.89
0.98
0.95
ILP3
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
ILP3UD
0.98
0.95
0.93
0.95
0.96
0.99
0.95
DWB1
0.99
0.99
0.96
0.94
0.97
0.99
0.95
DWB2
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.96
0.99
0.98
DWB2UD
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.97
0.95
0.99
0.98
Table A14: Average depot utilization for the assignment methods
56
==PAGE:59==
Transport and Logistics
Method
Depot
Utilization
(%)
Allocated
Customer Demand
Total
Depot Capacity
Average
Assignment distasnce
ILP2UD
Depot1
0.78
33060.80
42600.00
73837.25
ILP2UD
Depot2
1.54
12016.90
7800.00
27056.47
ILP2UD
Depot3
1.52
12791.20
8400.00
27883.50
ILP2UD
Depot4
1.14
4100.30
3600.00
9500.91
ILP2UD
Depot5
1.09
8505.70
7800.00
18825.66
ILP2UD
Depot6
1.19
19955.10
16800.00
42669.69
ILP2UD
Depot7
1.58
6639.00
4200.00
13630.43
ILP3UD
Depot1
1.02
43337.00
42600.00
48401.00
ILP3UD
Depot2
1.01
7850.20
7800.00
9013.05
ILP3UD
Depot3
1.00
8436.60
8400.00
9526.01
ILP3UD
Depot4
1.01
3641.80
3600.00
4282.14
ILP3UD
Depot5
1.01
7897.40
7800.00
9063.23
ILP3UD
Depot6
1.29
21695.00
16800.00
25180.03
ILP3UD
Depot7
1.00
4211.00
4200.00
4621.27
DWB2UD
Depot1
1.08
46057.20
42600.00
51829.02
DWB2UD
Depot2
1.06
8262.20
7800.00
9375.22
DWB2UD
Depot3
1.07
8998.80
8400.00
9895.76
DWB2UD
Depot4
1.03
3722.00
3600.00
4231.77
DWB2UD
Depot5
0.99
7690.40
7800.00
9041.30
DWB2UD
Depot6
1.06
17874.40
16800.00
20319.09
DWB2UD
Depot7
1.06
4464.00
4200.00
5126.74
Table A13: Demand Allocation per Depot - Static Assignment UD Methods
Method
Preference
Depot 1
Depot 2
Depot 3
Depot 4
Depot 5
Depot 6
Depot 7
Dynamic
allPref
0.99
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.95
Dynamic
onePref
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.97
ILP1
allPref
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.98
0.99
0.98
ILP1
onePref
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.97
0.98
0.99
0.98
ILP2
allPref
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.98
0.99
0.98
ILP2
onePref
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.97
0.98
0.99
0.98
ILP2UD
allPref
0.77
0.97
0.97
0.82
0.94
0.99
0.93
ILP2UD
onePref
0.78
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.84
0.98
0.96
ILP3
allPref
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.98
ILP3
onePref
0.98
0.99
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.98
ILP3UD
allPref
0.99
0.95
0.93
0.95
0.96
0.99
0.95
ILP3UD
onePref
0.98
0.95
0.93
0.95
0.96
0.99
0.95
DWB1
allPref
0.99
0.99
0.96
0.94
0.97
0.99
0.94
DWB1
onePref
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.93
0.97
0.99
0.95
DWB2
allPref
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.96
0.99
0.99
DWB2
onePref
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.96
0.99
0.98
DWB2UD
allPref
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.97
0.95
0.99
0.98
DWB2UD
onePref
0.99
0.99
0.97
0.97
0.95
0.99
0.98
Table A15: Average depot utilization for the assignment methods per preference types
57
