==PAGE:1==
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures,
failure and homogenization
Master Thesis
DTU Materials and Manufacturing Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
Master Thesis
July, 2021
By
Siddharth Singh Chauhan
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Anker Engelunds
Vej 1, Building 101A, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This master thesis report has been prepared over six months at the Section for
Materials and Manufacturing Engineering, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree of
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Siddharth Singh Chauhan - s192166
Signature
31-07-2021
Date
ii
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The design of complex lattice structures requires advanced modelling techniques,
whereby the control of several lattice’s parameters can show different mechanical
properties such as high fatigue resistance, tensile strength, and compressive
strength. The mechanical properties of lattices can be adjusted by changing the
unit cell, its volume fraction, orientation and size. The aim of this thesis is to study
the manufacturing imperfections and tensile behaviour of the lattice structures using
3D digital image correlation (DIC) and finite element modelling (FEM), acquiring a
deeper understanding of the failure process. Different failure modes are observed
depending on the volume fraction, which is captured using non-linear finite element
simulations and DIC measurements. Furthermore, homogenization and periodic
boundary conditions (PBCs) are utilised to gain insight on the plastic anisotropy of
the cubic unit cell. Good agreement is found between the experimental and the
numerical results.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor, Konstantinos Poulios for giving me the opportu-
nity to work on such a highly relevant topic, and providing me with superior guidance
and excellent support. I gratefully acknowledge him for valuable discussions and
sharing his code for generating periodic boundary conditions.
I would also like to thank Kinga Solmo for providing me with experimental data for
SLM lattices, her constant assistance, and constructive discussions.
I am highly grateful to Anna Halina Danielak for making the 3D printing of polymer
parts possible. I also appreciate the guidance, and support extended by Christian
Frithiof Niordson during the course of my project.
The resources and funding from DTU under project number: 76562-20 are also
gratefully acknowledged.
Lastly, I extend my thanks to my parents and Ishita Sinha, whose encouragement
and support aided me to complete my thesis.
iv
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background
3
2.1
Lattice structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
Strut lattice structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
Plate lattice structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Triply Periodic Minimum Surface lattice structures
. . . . .
4
2.2
SLM process for lattice structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2.1
Mechanical properties of SLM lattice structures . . . . . . .
5
2.2.2
Process parameters and their effects on the lattice structures
7
2.2.3
Geometric defects in SLM lattice structures . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
3D CAD modelling of lattice structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.1
Parametric/Explicit 3D CAD modelling . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3.2
Implicit 3D CAD modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Numerical modelling of lattice structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4.1
Finite element analysis (FEA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.2
ANSYS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4.3
Homogenization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4.4
Periodic boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methodology
15
3.1
3D CAD modelling of lattice structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.2
Printing of metal lattice structures using SLM . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.3
Tensile testing of SLM printed lattice structures using 3D DIC mea-
surements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.4
Calibration of image measurement technique . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.5
Image measurements of SLM printed lattice structures . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Numerical modelling of nominal and SLM printed metallic lattice
structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6.1
Software
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6.2
Meshing or mesh generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6.3
Material modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.6.4
Application of boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.6.5
Simulation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.7
Homogenization study on unit cell
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.8
Application of periodic boundary conditions on unit cell . . . . . . .
34
3.9
Failure mechanism analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.9.1
Material modelling for failure mechanism analysis
. . . . .
36
3.10 3D printing of polymer lattice structures using SLA . . . . . . . . .
36
3.11 Tensile testing of SLA printed polymer lattice structures . . . . . .
36
3.12 Numerical modelling of nominal geometry of polymer lattice structures 38
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
v
==PAGE:8==
4
Results and Discussions
39
4.1
Simulations of nominal and refined models
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Tensile test results for SLM printed lattice structures and simulations
of refined models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.3
Homogenization study on unit cell
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.4
Application of periodic boundary conditions on unit cell . . . . . . .
45
4.5
Failure mechanism analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.6
Tensile test results for SLA printed polymer lattice structures and
nominal simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5
Conclusion
50
Bibliography
53
Appendices
55
vi
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Additive manufacturing (AM) allows the fabrication of lightweight and complex
structures, which is not achievable by the traditional manufacturing processes
[Maconachie et al. 2019]. The selective laser melting (SLM) process is additive
manufacturing for metallic components with high printing accuracy compared to
other AM processes. It is utilised to manufacture complex lattice structures using
the computer-aided design (CAD) data. The process is highly dependent on the
print direction, laser power, layer thickness and other printing parameters. Slight
variation in these parameters while printing a complex lattice structure can cause
undesired changes in tolerances, volume fraction, porosity, and similar geometrical
deviations. This can eventually change the mechanical properties of the printed
specimen and render undesirable effects.
In this project, high-definition Direct Image Correlation (DIC) measurements and
numerical modelling techniques are used on full lattice structures to understand the
effects of these geometrical deviations. These lattice structures comprise different
unit cells such as SC, BCC, OCTET at different volume fractions, orientations,
and unit cell sizes. The numerical results are further compared with experimental
results extracted from Quasi-static tensile testing. The numerical modelling is also
refined to consider the inaccuracies in the printed geometry.
Lattice structures consist of repeating open-celled unit cells. The volume fractions
of each type of these cells define the structure’s stiffness, fatigue resistance,
tensile strength, compressive strength, and other mechanical properties. The
simulation of a single unit cell can be understood as a microcosm of full lattice
simulations. These computationally inexpensive simulations give a great insight
into the behaviour of a much larger lattice structure.
A lattice structure can be categorised based on its mechanical response as being
bending-dominated or stretch dominated. Bending-dominated structures provide
better support when used in bending applications, whereas stretch-dominated
lattice structures provide better tensile applications. The widely investigated strut
lattices comprise mainly of simple cubic (SC), body centred cubic (BCC), face cen-
tred cubic (FCC), octet and combinations of these lattices. According to Tancogne-
Dejean, Spierings, and Mohr 2016, these meta-materials are well known for their
elastic anisotropy, and it has been demonstrated that SC and BCC lattice structures
are suitable for bending applications. In contrast, FCC and octet lattices are known
for their stretching-dominated meso-structural response.
Changing the lattice parameters, such as the number of unit cells, size, strut
thickness, and unit cell type, specially tailored structures can be manufactured
to exhibit different mechanical properties. This also gives designers a greater
geometrical control, which can help in light-weighting and topologically optimisation
applications.
Despite the technological advances in SLM, it still faces challenges, such as micro-
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
1
==PAGE:10==
structural defects and mechanical anisotropy. There is also a general lack of
understanding of the process-property relationship [Charmi et al. 2020]. According
to Maconachie et al. 2019, the tensile behaviour of SLM-produced lattice structures
remains an area requiring further research.
This study addresses the following research questions:
(i) The effect of varying volume fractions, unit cell size and unit cell orientation
on the tensile properties of the lattices —both metal and polymer —having
different types of unit cells such as SC, BCC, and OCTET.
(ii) The deviations in SLM-printed geometry from nominal geometry and their
effect on the tensile properties of the lattice structures of the metal.
(iii) The analysis of different failure mechanisms, such as necking and shear band
formation in metallic lattice structures.
(iv) The investigation of cubic truss lattice structures having isotropic elastic
properties by applying homogenization study.
(v) The comparison of plastic anisotropy of various unit cells using periodic
boundary conditions.
The aim of this thesis are to perform the numerical modelling of different lattice
structures to estimate the tensile properties of both metal and polymer test speci-
mens. Additionally, it is to analyse various failure mechanisms for studying crack
propagation and shear band formation in metal lattices, to confirm the isotropy of
theory-based unit cell lattice designs through homogenization study. Finally, to
employ periodic boundary conditions for understanding the plastic anisotropy of
different types of unit cells.
2
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:11==
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Lattice structures
Cellular structures serve as an attractive option for many design applications such
as light-weighting, due to their high specific strength and stiffness [Gibson 1998].
Lattice structures are a type of cellular material formed by regular repeating unit
cells in the whole structure. This gives designers and engineers much more control
over the specific design requirements [Yan et al. 2013]. They can be categorised
according to their mechanical response, either bending or stretch dominated. They
can have either 2.5D or 3D geometry.
The most common types of lattice structures are discussed below.
2.1.1
Strut lattice structures
The strut lattice structure is a commonly used lattice structure in engineering appli-
cations, because the simplicity of the strut-based lattice structure gives engineers
the freedom to alter the lattice’s design to enhance the structure’s mechanical
properties.
It comprises nodes(n) and struts (p). A node is a joint where two or more struts
meet, and strut is a link member that connects two nodes [P.Syam et al. 2018]. In
simpler terms, it consists of struts that are connected in different orientations to
form different unit cells of a lattice.
The most common unit cells of strut lattices are simple cubic (SC), body-centred
cubic (BCC), face-centred cubic (FCC), and OCTET, or several variations with a
combination of two types of strut structures. This thesis focuses on the combination
of SC-BCC and SC-OCTET cells, as shown in Figure 3.1.
The strut based topology of these lattices is characterised by their Maxwell number
M, which is dependent on the number of struts and nodes or s and n, respectively
[Deshpande, Fleck, and Ashby 2001].
M = s −3n + 6
(2.1)
If M < 0, too few struts support the structure in tensile loading conditions. Hence,
the structure is bending-dominated. When M ≥0, the structure can create an
equilibrium when axially loaded, and no bending occurs at nodes, making this type
of structure stretch-dominated.
Using proper techniques and mechanical evaluation, engineers can design isotropic
lattices. It is also important to remember that if a unit cell is isotropic in the elastic
region, it does not mean that it will be isotropic in the plastic region of deformation
[Tancogne-Dejean and Mohr 2018].
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
3
==PAGE:12==
2.1.2
Plate lattice structure
The plate or shell lattice structures are types of lattices where the unit cell comprises
plates rather than struts. These types of lattices have shown superior elastic
properties compared to strut-based lattice structures with similar volume fractions.
However, it is difficult to manufacture using powder-based AM systems due to the
lack of space for powder removal compared to the open-cell strut lattice structures.
In liquid-based 3D printing, such as the stereolithography (SLA) process, excess
liquid is trapped inside the structure. Open-celled plate structures have also been
designed with circular holes for powder or liquid removal.
According to [Tancogne-Dejean, Diamantopoulou, et al. 2018], the isotropic plate
lattices are three times stiffer than optimum trusses of the same relative density.
Thus, it is clear that even if they respond in an ideal stretch-dominated manner,
the isotropic truss lattices cannot compete with plate lattices of equal density.
2.1.3
Triply Periodic Minimum Surface lattice structures
The Triply Periodic Minimum Surface (TPMS) lattice structures are non-self-
intersecting mathematical isosurfaces of mean zero curvature such as Schoen
gyroid, Schwartz diamond, and Neovius. These structures are very similar to
the bone structure and have high fatigue, shock resistance, and specific energy
absorption. Furthermore, in TPMS, the previous layer supports the next layer,
making the manufacturing of such lattices easier than that of the strut-based lattice
structures.
2.2
SLM process for lattice structures
The selective laser melting technology facilitates manufacturing the parts with
complex geometry, which are quite challenging to produce using traditional manu-
facturing processes. The SLM, also known as laser powder bed fusion (LPBF), was
developed in Fraunhofer Institute for Laser Technology, Germany, in the 1990s.
Since then, the process has been adopted widely due to its ability to produce highly
functional parts in metal with relatively low porosity.
The SLM process utilises a layer of metallic powder spread across the surface of
a build plate. A galvanometer directs a laser beam across this surface to melt the
metal powder depending on the component’s design, fusing it with the layer below.
The build plate is then lowered, and the process is repeated until the fabrication of
the component is complete [Olaf et al. 2006]. The ease of manufacturing and rapid
production with short throughput times with only a few manufacturing processes
for the SLM process makes it so popular. Engineers can directly use the CAD data
to manufacture the parts.
The advantages of SLM include the ability to produce near fully dense, complex
components with high resolution and superior mechanical properties compared
to those produced by traditional manufacturing processes. However, certain
disadvantages, such as manufacturing minimum feature size is constrained by the
minimum laser spot size, micro-structural defects, porosity, thermal distortion of the
components due to rapid cooling, and deviation in tolerances, make it challenging
to implement and replace the traditional manufacturing processes such as CNC
milling and turning processes, which can meet very tight tolerance demand.
4
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:13==
2.2.1
Mechanical properties of SLM lattice structures
Lattice structures exhibit high yield strength, high elastic modulus, and similar
mechanical properties. The mechanical properties of one unit cell are recurrent
across a lattice structure. Therefore, the lattices are called meta-materials. The
mechanical properties of the lattice structures are expressed in terms of relative
density, which is expressed as (ρ∗/ρs) where ρ∗is the ratio of apparent density of
the cellular structure and ρs is the density of cellular structure’s material [Zadpoor
2019]. The orientation of the unit cell plays an essential role in the mechanical
properties of the lattices.
Most mechanical testing performed on the lattices is in compression that is simpler
than testing specimens in tension. A more complicated design of the lattices is
required to perform tensile testing. Testing in tensile requires lattices to have a
variable thickness where it is thick at the ends and thin in the middle so that the
specimen’s tensile strength can be measured in the centre. This provides the most
accurate results and prevents failure due to pre-loading of the specimen during
tensile test, where the lattices can break at the gripping and lattice interface. Three
main mechanical properties of the lattice structures are discussed below.
2.2.1.1
Compressive performance
The compressive performance of the lattice structures is susceptible to the type of
unit cell utilised, i.e., SC, BCC, FCC or OCTET. The mechanical response, i.e.,
bending or stretch dominated is critical to the compressive performance of lattices
[Maconachie et al. 2019]. The unit cell’s size plays also an essential role in the
lattice’s compressive performance, as the unit cell’s size increases the slenderness
of the strut and the buckling tendency increases [Leary et al. 2018].
2.2.1.2
Fatigue performance
The fatigue performance of lattice structures is essential for many applications.
It is found that the fatigue life increases with the increase in relative density of
the lattice, but cell topology affects the fatigue life [Zargarian et al. 2019]. More
research is required in the lattice structures’ fatigue performance as this area is an
unexplored field.
2.2.1.3
Tensile performance
The tensile performance of the lattice structure is essential for many aerospace
and biomedical applications. The lattice, which is stretch-dominated, performs
better under tensile loading conditions than bending-dominated structures. The
loading direction also plays an essential role in the tensile performance of the
lattices. The relative density improves the tensile performance. Different unit cells
have shown different effects on the tensile behaviour of the lattices, with relative
density being the most important criteria. The size and orientation of the unit cells
also play a role in improving the tensile properties of the lattice.
This thesis focuses on analysis of tensile behaviour of different lattice structures
of both metal and polymer. The test specimens used in this project are made of
austenitic stainless steel, 316L and industrial blend polymer resin.
Tensile tests are used to characterise the elastic and plastic deformation of materi-
als. They show a good measure of their behaviour during statically applied stress.
In many materials, yielding is gradual, so the elastic limit is ill-defined. Instead,
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
5
==PAGE:14==
proof stress is universally identifiable as the stress corresponding to a plastic strain
of 0.002. As plastic deformation dominates and continues, the shear stress also
increases through work hardening. The strain hardening effect can be seen clearly
on the stainless steel in the Figure 2.1 when the material deforms plastically.
The engineering stress-strain curve obtained from tensile tests does not show the
actual mechanical property of the material. The true stress-strain curve is higher
than the obtained engineering stress curve because they are calculated using the
instantaneous dimensions.
To account for area changes, the instantaneous load F per unit of actual area A is
found for true stress:
σ = F
A
(2.2)
The true strain gives a more accurate description of the change in length dL of the
sample length L0, about its instantaneous length L:
ε = ln L
L0
(2.3)
A power-law relationship for ductile materials can often express true stress-strain.
σ = Kεn
(2.4)
Where n is the strain hardening exponent, K is the strength coefficient, σ ,and ε
are the actual stress and strain values.
The strain hardening occurs due to pile-up and entanglement of dislocations, which
hinder dislocation movements as they progress. In addition, the reorientation of
grains during plastic straining can increase the resistance to deformation. As a
result, more stress is needed to cause the same deformation. However, when
critical stress reaches, the dislocations may pass through the grain boundaries.
Figure 2.1: Typical stress strain curve for stainless steel
6
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:15==
As a result, the strain-hardening rate decreases, eventually leading to failure of
the specimen.
2.2.2
Process parameters and their effects on the lattice
structures
Process parameters of SLM play an essential role in the mechanical properties
of the final lattice. Many factors, such as powder size, chemical composition,
particle distribution, laser exposure, laser scan speed, and layer thickness, affect
the SLM-manufactured structures. In addition, strength and dimensional accuracy
are highly dependent on laser power, making manufacturing highly dependent
on processing parameters. Further research is necessary to characterise the
relationship between process parameters and mechanical properties of the final
lattice structure.
2.2.3
Geometric defects in SLM lattice structures
SLM- fabricated lattice structures are prone to many manufacturing defects, which
can be caused by sub-optimal process parameters during printing. Since the
SLM manufacturing technique utilises a laser to melt the metallic powder, residual
stresses formed during manufacturing can also cause geometrical defects. The
staircase effect is another form of geometrical error which is common in AM
processes, including SLM.
These defects have significant implications for the mechanical properties of the final
lattice structure as they compromise the tensile strength, compressive strength,
fatigue performance, and elastic modulus. The geometrical errors can also affect
the functionality of the lattice as they change the volume fraction, relative density,
affect dimensional accuracy, and produce inconsistent parts which might be out of
desired tolerance zone. Therefore, it is essential to study these defects and improve
the process parameters such that more precise parts can be manufactured.
The limitations of the SLM process can lead to discrepancies between the as-
designed and as-manufactured structural geometries, which could be due to
shrinkage after printing and attachment of unmelted particles. Therefore, both
nominal and fabricated components are often reported in the literature. These
defects can be non-uniform. For example, parts manufactured using SLM have
significant discrepancies between the CAD and the printed specimens since some
areas might have a build-up of material, and some areas might lack material. The
position of the melt pool can also create discrepancies. To compensate for this
error, the scan vectors can be shifted inwards. However, applying this method may
still result in an error where the melt pool size increases, constraining the minimum
feature size. The inclusions of these defects in the finite element models showed
a decrease in mechanical performance consistently. [M.Dallago et al. 2018]
Engineers may reduce these defects by improving the process parameters, but
many factors involved in the geometrical defects make them inevitable. For this rea-
son, much research needs to be conducted on accounting defects in the numerical
modelling of SLM lattice structures to predict their behaviour accurately.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
7
==PAGE:16==
2.3
3D CAD modelling of lattice structures
The 3D CAD modelling of lattice structures is an essential step before the part
is ready for experimental testing and numerical modelling. Two major modelling
techniques used to create 3D models are as follows:
• Parametric/Explicit 3D CAD modelling.
• Implicit 3D CAD modelling.
2.3.1
Parametric/Explicit 3D CAD modelling
Parametric modelling or feature-based modelling is a process that can change
the shape of the model geometry as soon as the dimensional value is changed. It
is implemented using a global coordinate system. A script is used to define the
surface of the feature, which creates the model’s shape where a closed surface
represents a solid volume.
The challenge with parametric modelling is that since it captures where every
single piece of geometry is in the 3D space, it has exhaustive information that can
make the models very big, which increases the time to generate these models and
increases computational resources.
2.3.2
Implicit 3D CAD modelling
Implicit modelling is enormously powerful and offers considerable potential for
engineering design. Moreover, it has an advantage in specific modelling tasks
involving complex geometry. The main advantage of the implicit modelling tech-
nique is that it uses mathematical equations to define the structures rather than
explicitly defining the model’s surfaces.
A lattice structure with a varying thickness is challenging to design using parametric
modelling software such as SolidWorks. Using an implicit modelling technique
makes designing such a lattice structure easier for designers because the variability
of the lattice can be controlled using a set of mathematical equations.
When considering the next generation of manufacturing using 3D printing, the
applications such as nTopology become quite appealing as it offers much more
freedom and still captures all the granular details in the structure. It can be helpful
in the manufacturing of the lattices because the stiffness of the lattice can be
controlled more precisely compared to parametric modelling without taking too
much computational power, space, or time. Additionally, the design freedom can
improve performance in terms of weight, stress, fluid flow, and heat transfer.
2.4
Numerical modelling of lattice structures
The general principle of modelling is to obtain information related to the response
of a system when specific loading conditions are applied and then use the result
for making decisions and understanding the experiment, providing validation to
the results, and understanding different failure mechanisms. Likewise, creating a
numerical model of lattice structures subjected to tensile loading and predicting the
structural response involve highly non-linear behaviour and different failure mech-
anisms of the material. However, the finite element method (FEM) is widely used
8
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:17==
in static structural problems, where non-linear analysis with complex geometries
and boundary conditions are applied.
2.4.1
Finite element analysis (FEA)
FEA is a powerful computational tool applied to find approximate solutions which
otherwise require initial investment and sophisticated testing mechanisms. Sev-
eral mechanical problems including tensile and compressive behaviour of certain
specimens, impact testing and metal forming operations require an FEA solution
before manufacturing substantial parts. FEA can also be used to predict the be-
haviour of complex geometries. However, as the problem grows in size or becomes
more intricate, the computational requirements and time consumption increase
significantly.
A global system equation of motion computes the force for static problems resulting
from a specific displacement in matrix notation in FEA.
[K]{u} = {F}
(2.5)
Where [K] is the system’s stiffness matrix, {u} is the displacement vector, and
{F} is the force vector. Inertial and damping responses are ignored. The process
representation of numerical problem with FEM can be divided into three phases: i)
pre-processing, ii) solution processing and iii) post-processing, as shown in Figure
2.2.
Figure 2.2: Finite element modelling analysis approach
2.4.2
ANSYS
The construction of solutions to engineering problems using FEA requires devel-
oping a computer program based on FEA formulation or using a commercially
available program based on the FEA formulation such as ANSYS. The ANSYS
program is a powerful, multi-purpose analysis tool used in various engineering
disciplines and applications. It is, however, essential to consider few questions
beforehand:
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
9
==PAGE:18==
• What is the type of problem?
• How much detail should be included in the problem?
• How much refined the mesh needs to be?
• What is the time dependence of the problem?
• Non-linearity.
• What are the modelling idealisations/ simplifications?
ANSYS program is capable of simulating problems in a wide variety of disciplines.
In this project, we will focus on static structural analysis.
The static structural analysis comprises deformation, stress, strain fields, and
reaction forces in a solid body.
2.4.2.1
Non-linearity
A non-linear structural behaviour may arise because of geometrical and material
non-linearities and changes in boundary conditions and structural integrity.
If the structure undergoes large displacements compared to its smallest dimension
and rotations to such an extent that its original dimensions, position, and loading
direction change significantly, geometrical non-linearities will arise. In this case,
large deflection and rotation analysis become necessary.
A linear material model is a good approximation if the material exhibits a nearly
linear stress-strain curve up to the proportionality limit. However, after that limit,
i.e., onset of plastic deformation, the material starts exhibiting non-linear behaviour.
A typical non-linear stress-strain curve of ductile material is shown in Figure 2.1.
2.4.2.2
Modelling considerations
To reduce computational time, minor details which do not influence the results
should not be included in the FEA model. For example, minor details like gripping
part of the lattice structure that was utilised in tensile testing can be removed in
numerical model to improve the geometrical symmetry in the model and reduce
computational time.
2.4.2.3
Symmetry conditions
If the model under consideration exhibits symmetry in geometry, material properties,
and loading, it is computationally advantageous to model only a representative
portion. If the symmetry observations are to be included in the model generation,
the physical system must exhibit symmetry in all the following:
• Geometry.
• Material properties.
• Loading.
• Degree of freedom constraints.
The different types of symmetries exhibited by lattice structures are as follows:
Axisymmetry: Axisymmetry is the symmetry about a central axis, as exhibited by
structures such as a sphere, straight pipes, cones, circular plates, and domes.
10
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.3: Quater-symmetry in the model
Rotational symmetry: A structure possesses rotational symmetry when it is made
up of repeated segments arranged about a central axis. An example would be a
turbine rotor.
Planar symmetry: When one-half of the structure is a mirror image of the other
half, a planar or reflective symmetry exists. In this case, the planar symmetry is
located at the surface of the mirror.
Translation symmetry: Repetitive or translational symmetry is when a structure
is made up of repeated segments, and the features are equally spaced.
Symmetry in material properties, loading, and displacements: Once the sym-
metry in geometry is observed, the exact symmetry plane or axis should also be
valid for the material properties, loading (forces, pressure, etc.), and constraints.
It is important to note that all kinds of symmetries must be observed before applying
the boundary conditions. For example: A homogeneous, isotropic square plate with
a hole at the centre under horizontal loading, as shown in Figure 2.3, has an octant
(1/8th) symmetry in both geometry and material concerning horizontal, vertical,
and diagonal axes. However, loading is symmetrical for horizontal and vertical
axes only. Therefore, a quarter of the structure is required in the modelling of the
solution. If the applied load varies in the vertical direction variably or progressively,
the loading becomes symmetrical for the vertical axis only. Thus, although the
geometry exhibits octant symmetry, half-symmetry is necessary to construct the
solution. Typically, symmetry produces better results, leading to a more refined,
more detailed model than would otherwise be possible for an entire structure.
2.4.2.4
Mesh density
A large number of elements provide a better approximation of the solution. However,
in some cases, an excessive number of elements may increase the round off error.
Therefore, the mesh must be adequately fine or coarse in the appropriate regions of
interest. How fine or coarse the mesh should be in such regions is another crucial
question. Unfortunately, definitive answers to the questions about mesh refinement
are not available since it is entirely dependent on the specific physical system
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
11
==PAGE:20==
considered for the study. Therefore, it is important to run a mesh convergence
study to understand the optimum mesh size to reduce the computation time.
2.4.3
Homogenization
Homogenization is a technique to estimate the influence of unit cell parameters on
a large lattice structure when simulating the full model is difficult since it contains
millions of elements. This technique is useful and can cut down simulation time
from a large lattice structure to a single unit cell which is very simple and can
depict the behaviour of the large lattice structure. It represents a unit cell as
a representative volume element (RVE), and the unit cell behaves like a meta-
material with its own material properties that can represent a whole volume of
lattice structure comprising the same unit cell.
It is great when sorting out the overwhelming decision of all the different geometries,
with many different parameters such as strut angle, strut thickness, relative density,
etc. It can be helpful in doing a pre-design check for eligible unit cell candidate
designs for isotropy, stiffness in certain directions and coming up with a decision
a lot quicker. For example, a simple cubic unit cell will have greater stiffness
properties along the direction of the beams. However, when the same unit cell
is converted into an octet unit cell, the stiffness properties become completely
different. Hence, the octet unit cell reflects isotropic behaviour due to triangulation
in the geometry. Therefore, a homogenization study is crucial when selecting a
unit cell for the lattice structure.
2.4.4
Periodic boundary conditions
The periodic boundary conditions stipulate that opposite pairs of edges or surfaces
on the boundary of an RVE should deform identically under a given loading history.
The PBC essentially prevents the constraint of enforcing edges to remain planar
after deformation. They demand that the left boundary deformation profile be
similar in shape and value to the right boundary deformation profile. A similar
deformation pattern is also expected for top and bottom boundaries.
According to Okereke and Keates 2018, the periodic boundary condition can be
defined mathematically through a model variable, ζ:
ζNa
x,y = ζNb
x,y on boundary Ωk
(2.6)
where Na and Nb are nodes that are kinematically linked to opposite edges and
also where k = Left, Right, Top and Bottom.
The implication of the Equation 2.6 is that all the nodes on one edge must match
with the corresponding nodes on the opposite edge. The two corresponding edges
must have been tied kinematically. Meshing plays an essential role for periodic
boundary conditions to be satisfied. ANSYS has a meshing option to create
periodic boundary conditions (Match Control) which is used to create symmetric
mesh on opposite sides but it has a limitation to perform match control on all 6
faces.
Hence, the PBC implementation for displacement of the reference nodes can be
written as:
12
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.4: A 2D RVE with with nodes reference for creating PBC
UNB (x,y) = UNA(x,y) ⇒UNB (x,y) −UNA(x,y) = 0
(2.7)
UNC (x,y) = UND(x,y) ⇒UNC (x,y) −UND(x,y) = 0
(2.8)
where UNA(x,y) is nodal displacement vector of node NA in x- and y- axes. Also,
UN2(x,y) = UN1(x,y) ⇒UN2(x,y) −UN1(x,y) = 0
(2.9)
UN4(x,y) = UN1(x,y) ⇒UN4(x,y) −UN1(x,y) = 0
(2.10)
The above equations enforce the implementation of the mathematical formulation
of PBCs. The PBCs play an important role in modelling lattice structures owing
to the fact that the structure repeats itself periodically means that the solution will
also be periodic.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:23==
3
Methodology
This chapter comprises experimental work and numerical modelling. The following
experiments were performed by K.Solmo et al. 2021:
(i) 3D CAD modelling of lattice structures.
(ii) Printing of metal lattice structures using SLM.
(iii) Tensile testing of SLM printed lattice structures using 3D DIC measurements.
The following experiments and numerical modelling were performed in this thesis:
(i) Calibration of image measurement technique.
(ii) Image measurements of SLM printed lattice structures.
(iii) Numerical modelling of nominal and SLM printed metallic lattice structures.
(iv) Homogenization and PBCs on unit cell.
(v) Failure analysis.
(vi) 3D printing of polymer lattice structures using SLA.
(vii) Tensile testing of SLA printed polymer lattice structures.
(viii) Numerical modelling of nominal geometry of polymer lattice structures.
3.1
3D CAD modelling of lattice structures
The 3D CAD modelling was performed primarily in nTopology by K.Solmo et al.
2021.
The lattice structures were designed with the gripping part to ensure proper loading
conditions and gradient changes of the rod diameter were designed to avoid failure
at the junction of the gripping block and the lattice structure. It also helped to
control the strain and prevent fracture. Therefore, each specimen consisted of a
uniform lattice with a target volume fraction at the centre of the specimen and a
gradient of the increasing diameter of strut diameter towards the solid blocks.
The elastic isotropic lattices were designed based on the work of Tancogne-Dejean
and Mohr 2018. The isotropy condition for a combination of simple cubic (SC),
body centred cubic (BCC), and OCTET lattices were calculated using:
CSC
3
+ CBCC
9
+ COCTET
6
= ρ∗
5
(3.1)
The unit cell volume fractions of the SC, BCC, and OCTET lattices were, respec-
tively, denoted by:
CSC + CBCC + COCTET = ρ∗
(3.2)
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
15
==PAGE:24==
From 3.1 and 3.2 we calculated the volume fraction for two special cases.
1. Combining SC and BCC: (COCTET = 0). Therefore, CSC = ρ∗−CBCC leading
to CBCC = 3
5ρ∗
2. Combining SC and OCTET: (CBCC = 0); COCTET = 4
5ρ∗
Besides the different unit cell types, the objective was to examine different volume
fractions, unit cell sizes and orientations. The main models that were taken into
consideration were SC-BCC and SC-OCTET type of lattice structures with 10%,
20%, and 30% volume fractions with 4.5 mm unit cell size. However, initial studies
showed that SC-BCC lattice with a 10% volume fraction had questionable quality.
Moreover, the printing of SC-OCTET lattice with a 10% volume fraction was even
more difficult as the minimum strut diameter had reached 0.4 mm.
All the printed geometries are illustrated in the Figure 3.2. The different orientations
of SC-BCC lattice with a 20% volume fraction were also printed at [110] and [111]
and the different sizes of the unit cell at 3 and 6 mm had also been investigated.
The nominal dimensions for lattice structures derived from this experiment by
K.Solmo et al. 2021 is tabulated in the Table 3.2.
3.2
Printing of metal lattice structures using SLM
The SLM printing and tensile experiments were performed by K.Solmo et al. 2021
and the experiment data acquired was used as a basis for the numerical modelling
in this thesis.
The lattice structures were printed by the SLM280 LPBF system using AISI 316L
metal powder material, both of which were supplied by SLM Solutions Group
AG. The specimens were glass blasted to remove any aberrations after printing
to create a much better surface for DIC measurements. A total of nine lattice
(a) SC-BCC
(b) SC-OCTET
Figure 3.1: Selected isotropic lattices composed of SC, BCC, and OCTET elemen-
tary cubic lattices
16
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.1: SLM printing parameters
Speed [mm/s]
Laser power [W]
Hatch distance [mm]
Layer height [mm]
700
235
0.12
0.06
structures were printed, as shown in the Figure 3.2. Each lattice was printed twice
for repeatability in experimental results, except SC-BCC 30%, which was only
printed once.
The printing parameters are given in the Table 3.1.
Figure 3.2: LPBF 316L lattice structures (a) SC-BCC 10%, (b) SC-BCC 20%, (c)
SC-BCC 30%, (d) SC-OCTET 20%, (e) SC-OCTET 30%, (f) SC-BCC 3 mm, (g)
SC-BCC 6 mm, (h) SC-BCC [110] , (i) SC-BCC [111]
3.3
Tensile testing of SLM printed lattice
structures using 3D DIC measurements
The tensile test experiments of SLM printed lattice structures using 3D DIC mea-
surements were carried out by K.Solmo et al. 2021.
The tensile test experiments were carried out using MTS 312.21 100 kN servo-
hydraulic tensile testing machine. A high-speed DIC system was used to monitor
the deformation and failure behaviour and establish full field deformation charac-
terisation of the test specimen.
3.4
Calibration of image measurement technique
In order to justify the image measurements performed on SLM printed lattice
structures, a calibration study was performed to show the accuracy and precision
of the measurement.
Length of the calibration object was measured using SolidWorks which set the
base for the image measurement. The CAD model was rendered using perspective
view to imitate a camera-like image of the printed lattice structure.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 3.3: Measurement of calibration object in SolidWorks and the rendered
model for image measurement
Figure 3.4: Image measurement using ImageJ software.
The length of the rendered model was then measured and the scale was set, i.e.,
3370.958 pixels = 138 mm. After setting the scale, four unit cells were measured
where one unit cell size = 4.5 mm. The resultant 18.041 mm was close to the
nominal result, i.e., 18 mm.
18
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:27==
3.5
Image measurements of SLM printed lattice
structures
The image measurements were performed on SLM printed lattice structures in order
to create refined models during this project, the image measurements in this project
used ImageJ software. A Java-based image processing program developed by
the National Institutes of Health and the Laboratory for Optical and Computational
Instrumentation. The image was captured from 12 Megapixel Aramis 3D camera
system; the greyscale image provided a basis for measurement. The ImageJ
implemented a variety of techniques to enhance the image measurement.
The image measurement was performed during this project on the SLM printed
geometry of lattice structures to consider the deviations in printed geometry from
nominal geometry. Additionally, the transverse and longitudinal strut of SC unit cell
were measured individually to consider the geometrical deviations due to printing
orientation of the lattice structures. The image measurement was performed with
12 repetitions to get precise measurement results.
Figure 3.5: Image measurement on SC-BCC 20% using ImageJ, (a) Calibration and
scale setting, (b) BCC strut measurement, (c) Longitudinal SC strut measurement,
(d) Transverse SC strut measurement
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
19
==PAGE:28==
The workflow is stated as:
• Process →Subtract Background: This filter removed the unevenly illuminated
background.
• Process →Noise →Despeckle: This filter removed granular noise from the
image.
• Analyse →Measure: Selected line and measured the distances.
• Repetitive measurements were taken before setting the calibration scale.
• Analyse →Set Scale: This option was used to set a calibration scale for
further measurements.
• Results →Summarise: This option was used to calculate the mean and
standard deviations for several measurements.
Hence, two sets of lattice structures were obtained. One with nominal geometry
and the other with printed geometry. The specifications of both sets of lattice
structures are tabulated below for comparison.
Figure 3.6: Manufacturing defects in (i) SC-BCC 20% [6mm] (left), and (ii) SC-BCC
[110] lattices after printing (right).
20
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:29==
Table 3.2: Specifications of lattice structures with nominal dimensions
Nominal
geometry
SC dimension
(mm)
BCC/
OCTET
dimension
(mm)
Volume
fraction
(%)
Unit-cell
size
(mm)
Miller
indices
SC-BCC 10%
0.615
0.5
10
4.5
1,0,0
SC-BCC 20%
0.88
0.72
20
4.5
1,0,0
SC-BCC 3mm
0.66
0.48
20
4.5
1,0,0
SC-BCC 6mm
1.18
0.965
20
6
1,0,0
SC-BCC [110]
0.88
0.72
20
4.5
1,1,0
SC-BCC [111]
0.88
0.72
20
4.5
1,1,1
SC-BCC 30%
1.1
0.905
30
4.5
1,0,0
SC-OCTET 20%
0.615
0.590
20
4.5
1,0,0
SC-OCTET 30%
0.755
0.74
30
4.5
1,0,0
Data derived from Section 3.1 by K.Solmo et al. 2021.
Table 3.3: Specifications of lattice structures with printed specimen dimensions
Printed
geometry
SC
trans-
verse
dim.
(mm)
SC
longi-
tudinal
dim.
(mm)
BCC/
OCTET
dimension
(mm)
Volume
fraction
(%)
Unit
cell
size
(mm)
Miller
indices
SC-BCC 10%
0.639
0.638
0.558
10
4.5
1,0,0
SC-BCC 20%
0.812
0.906
0.818
20
4.5
1,0,0
SC-BCC 3mm
0.723
0.689
0.512
20
3
1,0,0
SC-BCC 6mm
1.109
1.242
1.015
20
6
1,0,0
SC-BCC [110]
0.963
1.257
0.760
20
4.5
1,1,0
SC-BCC [111]
0.93
0.93
0.73
20
4.5
1,1,1
SC-BCC 30%
1.114
0.988
1.072
30
4.5
1,0,0
SC-OCTET 20%
0.778
0.698
0.716
20
4.5
1,0,0
SC-OCTET 30%
1.114
0.988
1.072
30
4.5
1,0,0
Data derived from image measurements of printed lattice structures during this project.
The manufacturing defects formed in the printed lattice with the largest 6 mm unit
cell size had thinner or even broken trusses perpendicular to the build direction
due to large bridge distance, as illustrated in Figure 3.6. The build direction was
vertical as shown in the Figure 3.6.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
21
==PAGE:30==
3.6
Numerical modelling of nominal and SLM
printed metallic lattice structures
In this thesis, numerical modelling was performed to create a model that simu-
lated the behaviour of actual tensile testing of SLM printed lattices. The test was
performed to create an accurate model, demonstrating the actual deformation,
fracture and other related material characteristics.
Two simulations were performed, one with nominal dimensions of the lattices and
the other with the refined models of lattice structures which closely resembled the
printed lattices. Both the simulations were compared, a full result analysis of which
can be found in the Section 4. In addition, the modelling comprised necessary
assumptions, choices, and justifications to create a functioning model.
The numerical modelling and simulation were made possible through the software,
nTopology, ANSYS, and ANSYS Mechanical APDL- Batch mode to provide reliable
models and assure that the results are as accurate as possible. The modelling was
performed by applying the FEM, which divided the domain of physical problems
into a specific number of discrete points.
The lattice structure was constrained and subjected to a tensile load in the longitu-
dinal direction, and a force vs displacement graph was acquired.
3.6.1
Software
ANSYS was utilised in this thesis to perform the required finite element compu-
tations related to the lattice structures’ tensile strength and non-linear behaviour.
The software, ANSYS and nTopology, were utilised for pre-processing purposes
where the input data for ANSYS Mechanical APDL solver was created and edited in
ANSYS workbench. In this thesis, non-interactive ANSYS batch mode was utilised
where the input file was created using ANSYS workbench and was submitted
using commands to the ANSYS Mechanical APDL program. Linux based ANSYS
Mechanical system was used to solve the simulation using HPC (high-performance
cluster) to minimise computation time. Batch mode was handy as the jobs could
be run without any input.
3.6.2
Meshing or mesh generation
The structures were meshed with solid elements mathematically represented by
parametric geometry, which defined the material’s properties preserved through
deformations and other non-linear behaviour of the model. The finite element
volume meshing was done in nTopology software, creating a tetrahedral mesh for
robustness for both the geometries. A typical mesh generated from nTopology is
shown in Figure 3.7.
3.6.2.1
Mesh generation using nTopology
The ANSYS workbench’s input files for the batch ANSYS Mechanical APDL were
created using the mesh file from the nTopology.
The following steps were used to create mesh in nTopology:
(i) Mesh from Implicit Body option was selected after creating the implicit body
in nTopology with a feature size of 0.25 mm and adaptivity of 0.25 mm.
22
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:31==
(ii) Remesh Surface block was used to remesh the surface with an edge length
of 0.25 mm with Triangle shape elements with a span angle of 30 degrees,
the growth rate of 2, and the feature angle of 45 degrees. The minimum edge
length was chosen to be 0 mm.
(iii) After re-meshing the implicit body, Robust Tetrahedral Mesh block was se-
lected to create tetrahedral elements with an edge length of 0.25 mm and
regularity factor of 10 for creating robust tetrahedral mesh elements.
(iv) FE Volume Mesh block was chosen to convert the volume mesh created by
Robust Tetrahedral Mesh block into finite element volume mesh with quadratic
geometric order.
(v) Export FE Mesh block was used to export the FE volume mesh created to
ANSYS workbench compatible CDB file format.
(vi) The file was imported using the External Model option in ANSYS workbench
and boundary conditions. The input file was prepared.
The number of mesh elements for both nominal and printed lattices are depicted
in the Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: The number of mesh elements for nominal and printed geometry in
lattice models.
Geometry
Nominal geometry
mesh elements
Printed geometry
mesh elements
SC-BCC 10%
459714
478354
SC-BCC 20%
761052
795948
SC-BCC 3mm
844681
901390
SC-BCC 6mm
737372
753539
SC-BCC [110]
2102904
2413798
SC-BCC [111]
4078261
4218279
SC-BCC 30%
1056928
1086269
SC-OCTET 20%
890756
1062921
SC-OCTET 30%
1175013
1218205
3.6.2.2
Mesh convergence study
Before the model was used to simulate the experimental results, it was subjected
to a mesh convergence study.
Figure 3.7: Meshing performed using nTopology on 1/8th model of full lattice
structure.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
23
==PAGE:32==
The mesh convergence study was conducted to strike a balance between the
mesh size and computational time because an excessive number of elements in
the structure might increase the round off error and computational time. On the
other hand, a coarsely defined mesh might not produce accurate results.
The mesh was increased by a factor; the solutions were then compared until the
mesh size had no effect on the result analysis of the model. If there were still a
noticeable difference between the solutions, the process continued until convergent
solutions were established.
However, parameters such as stress or strain sometimes misled as there were
singularities in the system that increased the stress indefinitely. To tackle this
problem a force-displacement graph was plotted as a mesh convergence study,
as shown in Figure 3.8.
Figure 3.8: Mesh convergence test for SC-BCC 10% lattice structure
The meshing performed in nTopology provided little control over the meshing
parameters. The only feasible option for creating an excellent tetrahedral mesh
was using Robust Tetrahedral Mesh block in nTopology. This option created
tetrahedral mesh, but how the edge length affected the mesh was not clear as
the software did not have a good workflow for meshing complex lattice structures.
Putting an edge length more than certain pre-defined mesh elements did not
change the mesh size much as the software ensured that the mesh was equally
distributed with equal-sized tetrahedral elements. Therefore, several elements
were demonstrated with the largest considerable edge length to the smallest, and
the results were compared against one another.
The different edge lengths of 0.25 mm and 0.5 mm were compared, as shown in
Figure 3.9. The 0.25 mm edge length comprised 460,000 elements and 0.5 mm
edge length corresponded to 188,000 elements.
The mesh convergence was performed on two different mesh sizes. One was very
24
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:33==
fine and the other was the maximum edge length allowed by the nTopology software,
irrespective of edge length in the input parameter. It showed that nTopology’s
Robust Tetrahedral Mesh did an excellent job when producing good quality mesh
because it tried to create identical tetrahedral elements throughout the volume of
the structure. Due to this reason, there was a very little difference in the result of
two very different meshes. The element size of 0.25 mm was chosen, and all the
specimens were meshed with the same edge length.
Figure 3.9: Mesh comparison between 0.25mm edge length on the (left) and
0.5mm edge length on the (right)
3.6.3
Material modelling
Material modelling involved choosing a predetermined material model within the
ANSYS Engineering Data Sources that corresponded to the material applied in the
experiments, i.e., Stainless steel 316L, as it was the choice of materials for metal
AM powder materials. The material model was primarily performed in ANSYS
pre-processing section.
Two material models were examined to simulate the tensile experiment test:
(i) Isotropic elasticity material model.
(ii) Non-linear Isotropic Hardening Voce Law with Hill Yield Criterion.
Both the material models were used simultaneously since they corresponded to
real-world materials, which exhibited elastic and plastic responses when loaded.
The first model, which was isotropic elasticity, was chosen until the yielding started
in the material. Subsequently, non-linear behaviour was captured using Non-linear
Isotropic Hardening Voce Law. The chosen material model for non-linear behaviour
of the material was calculated using a test specimen (dog bone) that was chosen
for the experiment. True stress and true strain graph obtained from the experiment
were then compared with the available Non-linear Isotropic Hardening Voce Law,
and the closest fit possible was chosen to model the material. The material model
was chosen based on the feasibility of the model to simulate the experiment tests.
Comparative values are listed in the Table 3.5 below.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 3.5: Stainless steel 316L material properties
Density (ρ)
[kg/mm2]
7.75e-06
Young’s modulus (E)
[MPa]
1.95e5
Poisson’s ratio (ν)
0.25
Bulk modulus
[MPa]
1.35
Shear modulus
[MPa]
78000
Failure strain (εf)
[%]
30
Coefficient of thermal
expansion (C-1)
1.7e5
Initial yield stress
[MPa]
480
Linear coefficient
[MPa]
700
Exponential coefficient
[MPa]
120
Exponential saturation parameter
80
3.6.3.1
Isotropic elasticity material model
The Isotropic Elasticity Model used in this thesis in ANSYS was based on the
linear elasticity mathematical model of how test specimens deformed and became
internally stressed due to prescribed loading conditions. Isotropic elasticity material
model was used to capture the linear part of stress-strain curve until yielding.
The required input data when applying the Isotropic Elasticity material model were
the following:
• Density.
• Young’s modulus.
• Poisson’s ratio.
• Bulk modulus.
• Shear modulus.
• Coefficient of thermal expansion.
26
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:35==
3.6.3.2
Non-linear Isotropic Hardening Voce Law with Hill Yield Criterion
The Non-linear Isotropic Hardening Voce Law was tested for capturing the non-
linear behaviour of the lattices. The stress-strain curve obtained using the Voce
parameters was matched with that of the experimented test specimen, as shown
in Figure 3.10. The obtained Voce parameters were used to model the material in
the ANSYS workbench. Failure was not explicitly derived in this model. However,
it still captured localisation and softening behaviour which were associated with
failure material models. The Voce parameters were obtained from fitting the most
appropriate curve to the experimental results and were applied to give a more
accurate approximation of the actual mechanical properties of the material. Finding
the exact value was not straightforward as the fitted curve varied with strain. The
curve was fitted for the high strain of up to 30%.
The input parameters required when applying this model were as follows:
• Initial yield stress.
• Linear coefficient.
• Exponential coefficient.
• Exponential saturation parameter.
The following equation specified the Voce hardening law for non-linear isotropic
hardening behaviour:
R = k + R0εpl + R∞(1 −e−bεpl)
(3.3)
where:
k = elastic limit
R0, R∞, b = material parameters characterising the isotropic hardening behaviour
of materials
εpl = equivalent plastic strain
The constitutive equations were based on linear isotropic elasticity, the von Mises
yield function and the associated flow rule.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.10: Comparison between curve fitted non linear isotropic voce model vs
the experiment results)
The anisotropic Hill potential theory was used in the material model along with the
Non-linear Isotropic Hardening Voce Law to account for the anisotropic yield of
the material. When this criterion was used with the isotropic hardening option, the
yield function was given by:
f{σ} =
p
{σ}T[M]{σ} −σ0(¯εp)
(3.4)
where:
σ0 = reference yield stress
¯εp = equivalent plastic strain
and when used with the kinematic hardening option, the yield function took the
form:
f{σ} =
p
({σ} −{α})T[M]({σ} −{α}) −σ0
(3.5)
The material was assumed to have three orthogonal planes of symmetry. It was
also assumed that the material coordinate system was perpendicular to these
planes of symmetry. The following was the plastic compliance matrix [M]:
[M] =


G + H
−H
−G
0
0
0
−H
F + H
−F
0
0
0
−G
−F
F + G
0
0
0
0
0
0
2N
0
0
0
0
0
0
2L
0
0
0
0
0
0
2M


28
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:37==
F, G, H, L, M, and N were material constants and were determined experimentally.
They were defined as:
F = 1
2
 1
R2
yy
+
1
R2
zz
−
1
R2
xx

(3.6)
G = 1
2
 1
R2
zz
+
1
R2
xx
−
1
R2
yy

(3.7)
H = 1
2
 1
R2
xx
+
1
R2
yy
−
1
R2
zz

(3.8)
L = 3
2
 1
R2
yz

(3.9)
M = 3
2
 1
R2
xz

(3.10)
N = 3
2
 1
R2
xy

(3.11)
The yield stress ratios Rxx, Ryy, Rzz, Rxy, Ryz, Rxz were specified during the thesis
and were calculated as:
Rxx = σy
xx
σ0
(3.12)
Ryy = σy
yy
σ0
(3.13)
Rzz = σy
zz
σ0
(3.14)
Rxy =
√
3σy
xy
σ0
(3.15)
Ryz =
√
3σy
yz
σ0
(3.16)
Rxz =
√
3σy
xz
σ0
(3.17)
where:
σy
ij = yield stress values
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
29
==PAGE:38==
The Hill-48 parameters were obtained with the constraint of transverse isotropy,
and the yield stresses in shear isotropy were assumed. Therefore, the plastic
yield criterion could only capture the different normal yield stress parallel and
perpendicular to the building direction (BD). The yield stress perpendicular to the
building direction was approximately 4% higher than parallel to BD.
The hill parameters are shown in the Table 3.6 below:
Table 3.6: Hill-48 material parameters
Material
Parameters
F
G
H
L
M
N
0.50
0.50
0.42
1.50
1.50
1.50
3.6.4
Application of boundary conditions
The boundary conditions were applied to the model to keep its position fixed within
the domain and prevent rigid body motion. The constraints were applied to simulate
the experimental situation where the lattice structure was fixed on one end, and
tensile load was applied on the other end. The models were created assuming
absolutely no friction or sliding of the structure. Frictionless support was used at
the plane of symmetry to simulate the full model most accurately. For the 1/8th
model, the three faces were given frictionless supports, and the other end was
given a displacement controlled boundary condition. The gripping part of the lattice
structure was removed in the simulation compared to the experiment’s model to
save computation time.
Since the mesh file was created in nTopology and the boundary conditions were
applied in the ANSYS workbench, the nodes were selected to apply boundary
conditions using named selection, where the node selection was performed using
worksheet functionality in ANSYS workbench. This provided an accurate selection
of nodes compared to manually selecting the nodes. The entity type was selected
as a mesh node, and a criterion using X, Y, or Z coordinates was chosen, using
correct operators such as less than or greater than a specific value. This provided
an accurate selection of nodes since all the elements and nodes were located in a
global coordinate system. The different named selections were created depending
on the application of the boundary condition. For friction-less support boundary
conditions, the transverse direction component was set to zero, and the other
two components were selected to be free. In fixed support, all the components
X, Y, and Z were chosen to be zero. The input file was created using ANSYS
workbench to solve the simulation using ANSYS Mechanical APDL non-interactive
batch mode on the HPC at DTU.
Although ANSYS workbench offered several meshing features such as adaptive
meshing, sizing, and face meshing options, it was not feasible to use them in this
project because of the complexity of the lattice structure generated by nTopology.
Additionally, some limitations of the software did not allow exporting the model into
a STEP file for doing the pre-processing in ANSYS workbench. Therefore, the
mesh was generated entirely in nTopology and exported as a CDB format to the
30
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:39==
ANSYS workbench, where it was then included in the model using the External
Model feature in the ANSYS workbench.
The models created for this project were solid volumes meshed with tetrahedral
elements. The 1/8th models were meshed with a very fine mesh of 0.25 mm,
encompassing 800,000 nodes and more for heavier models. With the half model,
the element size of 0.3 mm was chosen.
3.6.4.1
Load modelling
All the loading conditions were displacement controlled. All the specific structures
were defined where the loading conditions were required. The model was divided
at the plane of symmetry if it had one, as explained in Section 2.4.2.3 (Symmetric
conditions).
Small load steps were explicitly chosen for load modelling to avoid any conver-
gence issues in the simulation. Three different steps were chosen. The first step
comprised 3 seconds with 30 sub-steps; the second step comprised 8 seconds
with 30 sub-steps; and in the end, the third step was the longest, with 60 seconds
and 50-100 sub-steps to capture the non-linear behaviour of the lattice structure
while avoiding any convergence issue. The large deformation feature was turned
on to take any non-linearity of the geometry into account.
3.6.4.2
Model symmetry
The models under consideration exhibited repetitive features in their geometry,
and the loading location was also symmetrical. Therefore, it was efficient to
introduce symmetry in the models to reduce computational time by simulating only
an octant. The validity of this assumption was checked by running a full lattice
model simulation and comparing the results with that of the octant model with the
plane of symmetries.
All the successive modelling was performed with an octant modelling except the
models where symmetry was not found, as shown in Table 3.7.
Figure 3.11: Boundary conditions for symmetric lattice models
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
31
==PAGE:40==
Table 3.7: Symmetries across different lattice structures.
Lattices
1/8th symmetry
1/2nd symmetry
No symmetry
SC-BCC 10%
x
x
SC-BCC 20%
x
x
SC-BCC 3mm
x
x
SC-BCC 6mm
x
x
SC-BCC [110]
x
x
SC-BCC [111]
x
x
SC-BCC 30%
x
x
SC-OCTET 20%
x
x
SC-OCTET 30%
x
x
It was essential to create a test through visual mirroring of the image to ensure
that the model exhibits geometrical symmetry.
3.6.5
Simulation
The main focus of this experiment was to capture the non-linearity in the SLM
printed metallic lattice structures. The numerical model simulated a full lattice
structure under a tensile experiment. The scenario is illustrated in Figure 3.12.
1/8th of a full lattice structure was simulated to reduce computational time. The
octant models were symmetrical and hence, result for a full lattice structure was
extracted.
The setup illustrated in Figure 3.12 is the exact setup used during the tensile
experiment of LPBF 316L samples, where the lattice structure was constrained
using hydraulic grips on one end, and the tensile load was applied on the other
end.
The notations A (negative Z direction, XY plane), B (positive Y direction, XZ
plane), and D (positive X direction, YZ plane) in Figure 3.12 show the frictionless
support boundary condition, and the C (negative X direction, YZ plane) shows the
displacement controlled tensile loading.
3.6.5.1
Nominal lattice structures’ simulation
The first set of lattice structures simulated for tensile properties were with nominal
dimensions. The calculation of individual cell strut diameter was performed using
the Equations 3.1 and 3.2, while keeping the total volume fraction constant de-
pending on the lattice structure. The lattice structures were fulfilling the geometric
continuity (C0), which stands for point to point continuity. The mesh constituted of
tetrahedral mesh, the data of which is illustrated in Table 3.4.
3.6.5.2
Refined lattice structures simulation
The refined lattice structures’ simulations were performed in order to determine
tensile properties to consider deviations in the actual printed lattices from nominal
due to manufacturing defects, which was apparent when looked through high-
resolution DIC images and tensile tests results from the experiment, as elaborated
in 4.2. The printing of nominal lattice structures did not always result in the actual
printed geometry, there was a slight deviation which affected the functionality and
tensile properties of the printed lattice structures. Therefore, the printed geometry
32
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:41==
Figure 3.12: Boundary conditions on SC-BCC 20% 1/8th model for simulating
tensile experiment setup
was considered and the deviation and its effect on the final specimen’s mechanical
behaviour were checked. A reference DIC image was used in the unloaded state
for each lattice type for measuring the printed dimension.
3.7
Homogenization study on unit cell
The homogenization study was performed in nTopology to calculate the homog-
enized elastic properties of a unit cell. The homogenization simulation applied
deformation in principle directions and all three shear cases and the results were
used to calculate the equivalent elastic properties of the unit cell in the form of
a general 6 x 6 elasticity tensor. The study was valuable when there was little
information about the loads on the system.
The workflow for the homogenization study using nTopology is as follows:
(i) The unit cell was imported as implicit body in nTopology.
(ii) Mesh from Implicit Body command was used to convert the implicit body into
a surface mesh.
(iii) Remesh Surface command was used to remesh an existing surface mesh into
finer elements. The edge length was selected to be 0.25 mm, with Triangle
shape elements, at span angle of 30 °, with growth rate of 2, feature angle of
45 °, and minimum feature size was chosen to be 0.05 mm.
(iv) Robust Tetrahedral Mesh option was chosen to convert the surface mesh into
a volume mesh.
(v) The tetrahedral volume mesh was converted into finite element (FE) volume
mesh using FE Volume Mesh option.
(vi) FE Solid Model command was chosen to convert the FE mesh into a solid
model. The FE volume mesh created was chosen as Solid mesh in FE Solid
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
33
==PAGE:42==
Model. The material chosen was Stainless Steel 316.
(vii) Homogenization Unit Cell option was selected and FE Solid Model was chosen
as Unit Cell Model. The design volume was created to encompass the unit
cell size.
(viii) Homogenization results were extracted.
3.8
Application of periodic boundary conditions
on unit cell
The periodic boundary condition simulation was performed in the ANSYS work-
bench to show and compare the stress-strain curve for each unit cell used in this
study. In order to apply the periodic boundary conditions, the option of Static
Structural analysis system was chosen.
Figure 3.13: Unit cell and the boundary conditions for the periodic boundary
conditions.
The material modelling was performed same as described in Section 3.6.3.2.
Meshing was done with 0.1 mm element size with quadratic element order. Match
control was also done on two principle YZ planes to create periodic mesh before
applying PBC. Named selection were created for all the faces of the unit cell, 35
number of steps were chosen under analysis settings. And strain was applied on
one vertex in x direction with strain of up to 0.01. Force reaction and displacement in
the loading direction was extracted from the results and the engineering stress and
strain graphs were plotted. Different unit cell’s anisotropic yielding was compared.
ANSYS Mechanical APDL commands were used in this study to simulate a periodic
boundary condition using the Equation 2.6 as a basis. The APDL commands were
developed in collaboration with K. Polious in K.Solmo et al. 2021.
34
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:43==
3.9
Failure mechanism analysis
The failure mechanism in some of the lattice structures were investigated upon
experimentation and DIC measurements. A 12 MP Aramis 3D camera system
supplied by GOM International was used. The mechanism of failure of 3D lattice
structures was complex, but computational models contributed to its enhanced
understanding. The mechanical response under tensile loading was investigated
and different failure mechanisms were assessed. Progressive failure was simulated
numerically and stress distributions in the model were correlated with the observed
damage mechanisms from the experiment.
Figure 3.14: 3D mesh with two damaged struts in SC-BCC 20% [6mm] for crack
propagation
The complex structure that characterised the lattice structure and manufacturing
defects potentially activated different damage mechanisms, besides the necking
fracture, which were expected to be responsible for the failure of specimen loaded
in tensile condition. The damage initiation and evolution process were modelled
using the Gurson model along with Voce Isotropic Hardening Law.
Table 3.8: Gurson model parameters for the reference case.
Material parameter
Value
Initial yield strength
210 MPa
Initial porosity
0.01
First Tvergaard-Needleman constant
1.5
Second Tvergaard-Needleman constant
1
Third Tvergaard-Needleman constant
2.25
Critical porosity
0.08
Failure porosity
0.2
Data derived from Tvergaard and Needleman 1984.
The modelling for failure was performed using a crack initiation technique where
one or two trusses were removed to initiate the failure mechanism. It was based
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
35
==PAGE:44==
on the assumption that the printed specimen had manufacturing defects due to
bridge effects during the SLM 3D printing process. The modelling was done on
the half model to capture the failure mechanism accurately compared to the 1/8th
model with symmetric boundary conditions. The model was meshed with 0.3 mm
edge length with tetrahedral meshing option in nTopology. ANSYS workbench
was used to create the input file for ANSYS Mechanical APDL solver.
3.9.1
Material modelling for failure mechanism analysis
The classical micro-mechanics-based Gurson model and Voce Isotropic Hardening
Law were used to represent the growth of the void to final failure in the end. Void
coalescence model from Tvergaard and Needleman 1984 was used to accelerate
void growth at a critical porosity fc. The void volume fraction, f, represented
the softening effect due to the evolution of spherical micro-voids. For f = 0,
the material model reduced to that of conventional J2-flow material [Felter and
Nielsen 2017]. The Gurson model was introduced to decrease the stiffness of
the material model so that localisation could occur more easily than in the normal
isotropic hardening material model. The model was run with parallel execution on
an arbitrary number of CPUs to reduce the computation time.
3.10
3D printing of polymer lattice structures
using SLA
The material chosen for SLA 3D printing of lattice structure was SLA-Industrial
Blend from FunToDo resins. The resin was extremely hard and maintained its
structural integrity while being exposed to very low and high temperatures. The 3D
printing of the lattice structure was done using Peopoly Moai SLA 3D printer which
was supplied by AM (Additive Manufacturing Lab) at B421, Technical University of
Denmark. The 3D printer had a build volume of 130 X 130 X 180 mm3, capable of
5 µm layer height, and resolution with laser spot size of 70 µm. The slicing was
done using Ultimaker Cura to generate the G-code for the 3D printer. The printed
parts were washed in an ultrasonic bath for 10 minutes to remove any uncured
resin. The part was then post-processed in a UV chamber at 45 °C for curing the
left out resin.
The different SLA printed lattices are shown in Figure 3.15.
3.11
Tensile testing of SLA printed polymer lattice
structures
The tensile test experiments for polymer specimens were carried out using Instron
5965 tensile testing machine with 5 kN of maximum load. The machine was
capable of 0.05 mm/min as a minimum displacement rate. The displacement rate
for the experiment was chosen to be 1 mm/min, while the data was recorded every
500 milliseconds. The Blue Hill Universal application was used to conduct the
tensile test and set up the machine.
36
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:45==
Table 3.9: Process parameters for SLA 3D printer
Parameter
Values
Layer height [mm]
0.06
Infill density [%]
70
Infill pattern
Lines
Speed [mm/s]
120
Build plate adhesion
None
Washing time [mins]
10
Table 3.10: Material properties of the resin used for the SLA process.
Viscosity [mPa.s]
Hardness shore D
Density [g/cm3]
Shrinkage [%]
UV cure [nm]
95
75
1.05
0.5
225-415
The machine was equipped with screw action grips. Therefore, the grips were
fastened using a torque wrench to avoid any slippage during the tensile test. While
no DIC measurements were used in this experiment, the deformation was recorded
for DIC measurements through software-based DIC.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
Figure 3.15: SLA printed lattice structures (a) SC-BCC 10%, (b) SC-BCC 20%,
(c) SC-BCC 3 mm, (d) SC-BCC 6mm, (e) SC-BCC 30%, (f) SC-BCC [110], (g)
SC-BCC [111], (h) SC-OCTET 10%, (i) SC-OCTET 20%, (j) SC-OCTET 30%
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
37
==PAGE:46==
Figure 3.16: Tensile test setup for SLA printed polymer lattice structures (left),
fractured SLA printed polymer lattice structure after tensile testing (right).
3.12
Numerical modelling of nominal geometry of
polymer lattice structures
In this thesis, numerical modelling was performed to create a model that simulated
the behaviour of actual tensile testing of SLA printed polymer lattice structures.
The methodology followed for the nominal geometry of polymer lattice structures
were the same as mentioned in Section 3.6.
The isotropic elasticity material model was chosen to represent the polymer material.
For simplicity ABS plastic was chosen from the engineering data sources in ANSYS
workbench. The same boundary conditions were applied as described in Section
3.6.4. In the simulation, a 1/8 model was created for the quasi-static simulations
to represent the loading conditions of the experiments due to symmetry boundary
conditions in order to save time for simulation. Therefore, only elastic part of the
stress-strain curve was modelled in the numerical modelling. The meshing was
performed using nTopology. Tetrahedral mesh elements were used with element
size of 0.5 mm.
The numerically predicted force-displacement curves from the simulation were
then compared to the experimental results.
38
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:47==
4
Results and Discussions
Initially, the results from the full model simulations of nominal and refined lattice
simulations are compared. Subsequently, the tensile test results of the SLM
lattices derived from the experiment by K.Solmo et al. 2021 are compared with the
simulations of refined models. After that, the results from homogenization study
on unit cell, application of periodic boundary conditions and failure mechanism
analysis are derived. Lastly, tensile test results of the SLA lattices derived from the
experiment are compared with the nominal geometry of polymer lattice structures’
simulations. Simultaneously, the discussion of the results is also carried out in this
section.
4.1
Simulations of nominal and refined models
The simulations of nominal and refined models are compared with one another to
understand the deviation from nominal geometry to the actual printed geometry
of the lattice structures. Figure 4.1 depicts that the refined models show a higher
tensile strength of the lattice structure as compared to the result of the nominal
models’ simulation in all the cases. It is due to the increase in dimensions of the
lattices in case of refined model simulation.
(a) SC-BCC and SC-OCTET lattice struc-
tures with different volume fractions
(b) SC-BCC lattice structures with 20% vol-
ume fractions
Figure 4.1: Comparison between force-displacement curves from the nominal
dimensions simulation to the image measurement/refined models’ simulation of
the lattice structures
A substantial difference is observed in the SC-OCTET 20%, SC-BCC [110]. This
is followed by SC-BCC 20% and SC-BCC 3mm with the second-highest devia-
tions when nominal and refined models’ simulations are compared. All the other
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
39
==PAGE:48==
simulation results are relatively close to one another due to a slight deviation from
the nominal and refined models.
Figure 4.2: Von mises stress [MPa] for nominal models at 5 mm displacement. (a)
SC-BCC 10%, (b) SC-BCC 20% (c) SC-BCC 3mm, (d) SC-BCC 6mm, (e) SC-BCC
[110], (f) SC-BCC [111], (g) SC-BCC 30%, (h) SC-OCTET 20%, (i) SC-OCTET
30%
In the Figure 4.1a, the refined model simulation of SC-OCTET 20% shows stronger
response compared to nominal SC-BCC 30%. This shows that there could be
some errors from the image measurements performed, since several factors were
playing a role in the measurements such as: Angle of the camera during taking
the still image, lighting conditions, etc. Hence, it can be implied that SC-OCTET
20% image measurement simulation is an outlier and does not follow the trend of
the strength of lattice structure. The trend is otherwise consistent in nominal and
experiment results, i.e., all the SC-OCTET 20% lattices are weaker than SC-BCC
30% lattice structures.
Figure 4.1a shows that SC-BCC 10% is the weakest lattice structure, understand-
ably having the lowest volume fraction of them all. It is followed by SC-BCC 20%,
SC-OCTET 20%, SC-BCC 30%, and SC-OCTET 30% volume fractions. It is also
interesting to note from the Figure 4.1b that SC-BCC 3mm nominal simulation
shows the same force-displacement curve when compared to SC-BCC [110]. How-
ever, in refined model simulation, SC-BCC [110] from Figure 4.1b is much stronger
than SC-BCC 3mm result. It could be because of the manufacturing errors from
the SLM process due to the orientation of the unit cell to the build plate, which is
also demonstrated in the Table 3.3. It is clearly visible that one diagonal truss is
almost 42.8% larger than the nominal value, as shown in Table 3.2.
Even though all the lattice structures are of the same volume fraction in the Figure
40
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:49==
4.1b, there is a difference in the force-displacement curves of the lattices. This is
due to size and orientation of the unit cell. The numerical results agree well with
the analytical estimates for the [110] directions, while there is a consistently lower
yield stress for weaker [100] and [111] directions. The nominal simulation suggests
that SC-BCC 6mm has higher yield stress compared to SC-BCC 3mm. This shows
that larger unit cell has better tensile response. However, the difference is not
significant enough to consider this statement absolutely precise.
Figure 4.3: Von mises stress [MPa] for refined models at 5 mm displacement. (a)
SC-BCC 10%, (b) SC-BCC 20% (c) SC-BCC 3mm, (d) SC-BCC 6mm, (e) SC-BCC
[110], (f) SC-BCC [111], (g) SC-BCC 30%, (h) SC-OCTET 20%, (i) SC-OCTET
30%
From the refined models’ simulation (Figure 4.1b), we can observe that SC-BCC
[111] is the weakest of the SC-BCC 20% volume fraction lattices. It is followed by
SC-BCC 20%, SC-BCC 6mm, SC-BCC 3mm, and finally, the strongest SC-BCC
[110]. However, if we consider the nominal geometry, we find that the increasing
trend for the force-displacement curve is SC-BCC [111], SC-BCC 20%, SC-BCC
[110], SC-BCC 3mm, and SC-BCC 6mm.
4.2
Tensile test results for SLM printed lattice
structures and simulations of refined models
In the Figure 4.4, the uniaxial tensile test experiments containing two repetitions are
compared with the FEM simulations performed using the printed specimen-based
refined models, as discussed in Section 3.6.5.2. The experiment shows excellent
repeatability with regard to the strength and the stiffness. This shows that the
printed specimens, even though not accurate to the nominal geometrical models,
are precise.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
41
==PAGE:50==
The experiment results in the case of 30% volume fractions for both SC-BCC and
SC-OCTET show that the strength of the printed lattice structures is higher than
the FEM simulation results. The same trend is also observed in the SC-BCC [111]
lattice structure. This is an indication that there could be extra melted regions that
might have increased the strength of the lattice structure.
(a) SC-BCC 10%, 20%, and 30%
(b) SC-BCC 20% [3mm], [4.5mm], and
[6mm] unit cell size
(c) SC-BCC 20% [100], [110], and [111] ori-
ented unit cells
(d) SC-OCTET 20%, and 30%
Figure 4.4: Comparison between force-displacement curves from the tensile test
and FEM simulations, using the dimensions from the printed specimen
The Table 4.1 shows the ultimate load for each lattice structure. It can be seen
that there is a percentage difference of 18.27% in the case of SC-BCC 111. The
second case with the most deviation is the SC-BCC 30% and the SC-OCTET 30%.
In all the other cases, the percentage difference between the experiment and the
simulation is less than 10%. The deviation between experiment and simulation
can be explained by various factors, such as errors while manufacturing the lattice
structures, limitations in the applied material modelling, etc.
42
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:51==
Table 4.1: Ultimate tensile load of the lattice structures for experiment and FEM
simulation from refined models’ simulation
Printed
geometry
Ultimate load
(kN)
(Experiment)
Ultimate load
(kN)
(Simulation)
Percentage
difference
(%)
SC-BCC 10%
8.73
9.42
7.60
SC-BCC 20%
19.48
21.25
8.69
SC-BCC 3mm
22.77
22.78
0.04
SC-BCC 6mm
23.71
22.69
4.40
SC-BCC [110]
25.09
25.92
3.25
SC-BCC [111]
19.41
16.16
18.27
SC-BCC 30%
36.30
31.58
13.91
SC-OCTET 20%
29.97
32.35
7.64
SC-OCTET 30%
46.78
40.90
13.41
The SC-BCC [111] of both experiment and refined numerical model show weaker
tensile response. This is because of the orientation of the SC-BCC unit cell in
SC-BCC [111], which is also visible in the Von-mises stress plot in Figure 4.3
(e) & (f). Despite the fact that the volume fraction of SC-BCC [111] is 20%, it is
consistently weaker than its counterparts. This is because the BCC unit cell is
oriented such that the load is carried only by two longitudinal struts. In comparison,
the SC unit cell does not engage equally. This reduces the tensile strength of the
SC-BCC [111] lattice structure. Interestingly, SC-BCC [110] has the highest tensile
strength because all the struts of its unit cell are equally engaged when loaded in
tension.
When comparing the refined model simulation with the experiment, we find that
the SC-BCC [111] has the most deviation of 18.27%. This behaviour can be
explained from the Figure 4.7. It is visible from the equivalent total strain plot that
SC-BCC[111] has only two struts to carry the load in [111] direction. SC-BCC [100]
unit cell has four load-carrying struts. In the case of SC-BCC [110], all the struts
carry the load equally, which makes this loading orientation better than the other
two.
4.3
Homogenization study on unit cell
The homogenization study is performed in nTopology to understand the anisotropy
of the lattice unit cells with different volume fractions as shown in Figure 4.5. This
study only considers elasticity. It is once again verified from the Young’s modulus
data that the SC-BCC 30% has higher stiffness as compared to the SC-OCTET
20%. This is also verified from the experiment and the nominal simulations. The
stiffness of the unit cell is depicted in visual form in the Figure 4.5 where the sphere
represents an isotropic response of the unit cell.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
43
==PAGE:52==
(a) SC-BCC 10%
(b) SC-BCC 20%
(c) SC-BCC 30%
(d) SC-OCTET 20%
(e) SC-OCTET 30%
Figure 4.5: Homogenization result for different unit cell with Young’s modulus and
directional response
Homogenization study is in good agreement with the trend observed from the
tensile test experiment and the nominal simulation results. It means that SC-BCC
10% has the lowest stiffness, followed by SC-BCC 20%, SC-OCTET 20%, SC-BCC
30% and the unit cell with the highest stiffness is SC-OCTET 30%.
44
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:53==
4.4
Application of periodic boundary conditions
on unit cell
The periodic boundary conditions simulation is performed using ANSYS workbench
and Mechanical APDL to obtain the engineering stress and strain for the respective
unit cells which is illustrated in the Figure 4.6a. It is clear that the SC-OCTET 30%
unit cell is the strongest, which is confirmed through several experimental and
simulation results. The trend remains the same even with the periodic boundary
conditions, i.e., SC-OCTET 30%, followed by SC-BCC 30%, SC-OCTET 20%,
SC-BCC 20%, and finally the lowest volume fraction SC-BCC 10% volume fraction
unit cell. A sharp yield point is observed whenever the rod direction coincides with
the direction of loading. In contrast, a smoother transition from purely elastic to
plastic is observed when the least amount of the rods are aligned with the direction
of loading. In case of FCC lattice structure, we observe a smooth transition since
most of the trusses are not in the direction of loading. This is not the case with
SC-BCC lattice unit cells.
For the unit cell SC-BCC 20% volume fraction, as shown in Figure 4.6b, the yield
stress trend is in good agreement with nominal simulation and experiment results.
SC-BCC [110] has consistently greater yield stress compared to the weaker [100]
and [111] directions.
It is important to mention that the representative volume element (RVE) should
only be used as preliminary design, and it will not give exact experimental result
from the full lattice structure.
(a) SC-BCC and SC-OCTET unit cells with
different volume fractions
(b) SC-BCC 20% unit cell with [100],[110],
and [111] orientation
Figure 4.6: Engineering stress strain curve for uniaxial tension (FEA results) for
different relative volume fractions using periodic boundary conditions for SC-BCC
and SC-OCTET unit cells
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
45
==PAGE:54==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.7: Equivalent total strain of SC-BCC 20% unit cell at different orientation.
(a) SC-BCC [100], (b) SC-BCC [110], (c) SC-BCC [111]
4.5
Failure mechanism analysis
The Figure 4.8 shows the results obtained from the 3D DIC measurements and
the refined models’ simulation. The results show good agreement between one
another. However, it is essential to note that even though 3D measurements are
used, DIC is unable to capture the 3D oriented lattices for some cases. This might
be due to several factors such as the illumination of the specimen, speckle pattern,
etc. Figure 4.8 (c) shows a shear band formation due to the different thicknesses
of the SC strut in the SC-BCC [110] lattice structure, visible in both DIC and FEM
results. This is also shown in Figure 3.6 (ii). Since SC unit cell is rotated by 45°,
the effect translates into a shear band formation.
A specific case is studied for the failure mechanism and shear band formation.
Both of which are clearly visible during tensile testing of the specimen in the Figure
DIC
FEM
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.8: Equivalent total strain maps of (a) SC-OCTET 20%, (b) SC-BCC [111],
(c) SC-BCC [110] and (d) SC-BCC 6mm lattice structures obtained by DIC and FE
models at 5 mm displacement
46
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:55==
4.9 (b). The chosen SC-BCC 6mm lattice structure has two geometrical defects
and it is demonstrated by the two broken struts in the lattice structure. This is
elaborated in the Section 3.9.
The Figure 4.9 (c) shows the equivalent total strain for the SC-BCC 6mm lattice
structure at 7mm of displacement and 0.45 strain. The simulation illustrates that
there is a possibility of a shear band formation due to the broken struts in the lattice
structure. It can be seen that the shear band starts forming from top right strut
and it travels to the third strut in the bottom. Finally, the failure shifts back to the
right because the strut with minimum strut diameter is present in the centre of the
lattice.
The force-displacement curve of SC-BCC 6mm-SHEAR, which represents the
simulation performed on two broken struts, matches the experimental result. This
is shown by SC-BCC 6mm-EXP curve, as displayed in the Figure 4.9 (a). It is
clear that the shear band model shown in Figure 4.9 (c) closely resembles the
experiment, which is shown in the Figure 4.9 (b).
Figure 4.9: (a) Force-displacement graph for image measurement/refined models’
simulation, experiment, and shearband simulation on SC-BCC 6mm model, (b)
Failure mechanism captured using DIC: Equivalent total strain map of SC-BCC
6mm lattice structure with shear band formation, (c) Fracture propagation in BCC
20% [6mm] lattice structure during tensile test.
From the failure mechanism simulation it is safe to assume that the shear band
formation can occur due to several factors in a lattice structure. They are as follows:
(i) Geometrical defects.
(ii) Material defects.
(iii) Porosity in the lattice.
(iv) Manufacturing defects.
(v) Loading direction.
(vi) Type of unit cell, orientation, and size.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
47
==PAGE:56==
4.6
Tensile test results for SLA printed polymer
lattice structures and nominal simulation
The uniaxial tensile test experiments are compared with the linear FEM simulation.
The force-displacement curve of the same is represented in the Figure 4.10. It is
important to note that the parts manufactured by SLA 3D printing do not have the
exact volume fractions. Moreover, the deviations in geometry are increasing as
the volume fractions increase.
(a) SC-BCC 10%, 20%, and 30%
(b) SC-BCC 20% [3mm], [4.5mm], and
[6mm] unit cell size
(c) SC-BCC 20% [100], [110], and [111] ori-
ented unit cells
(d) SC-OCTET 20%, and 30%
Figure 4.10: Comparison between force-displacement curves from the tensile test,
and FEM simulation for polymer specimens
The experiment results from the SC-OCTET 10%, SC-OCTET 20%, and SC-BCC
30% show the most significant deviations from the simulation result. The result
for SC-BCC 3mm, SC-BCC 6mm, SC-BCC [110], and SC-BCC [111] show good
correlation between simulation and experiment result. The polymer material shows
a brittle behaviour with very little non-linearity.
48
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:57==
The polymer parts are printed using the SLA rather than FDM (Fused deposition
modelling) 3D printing technology to ensure high precision of the parts. However,
after further investigation it is quite apparent that the printed parts are not true to the
nominal geometry and have some deviations. Therefore, it is recommended to per-
form the manufacturing of polymer parts with even higher precision manufacturing
technique such as SLS (selective laser sintering). The most important criteria for
manufacturing with 3D printing technology lies in the control of process parameters
for ensuring that the parts are printed within certain acceptable tolerance limit.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
49
==PAGE:58==
5
Conclusion
In this project tensile experiments are carried out on 3D lattice structures with differ-
ent volume fractions and geometrical parameters, and simulations are performed
on nominal and refined geometry. The elementary unit cells such as: simple cubic,
body-centred cubic, and octet lattices are combined in a way that the isotropy
elasticity is met as suggested by Tancogne-Dejean and Mohr 2018.
The DIC measurements and the force-displacement graphs from the experiments
are compared to the simulation results. The computed values from the DIC mea-
surements and simulations are accurate to a large extent. However, difficulties
arise with the specimens where the trusses in the lattices are rotated in the 3D
space, because it has made the DIC measurements challanging. Manufactur-
ing defects are encountered after the printing of lattice structures and corrective
measures are taken to simulate the lattice closest to the experiment as much as
possible through the image measurements. The tensile experiments are also per-
formed on polymer specimens printed by SLA, and the experimental and nominal
simulation results are compared using force-displacement plots.
The 3D models are created with the nTopology implicit modelling software, pre-
processing is performed using ANSYS workbench, and solved using ANSYS
Mechanical APDL solver in batch mode. The numerically and experimentally
obtained values are compared for validation.
Homogenization and periodic boundary conditions are applied on the unit cell mod-
els to get a better understanding of the anisotropy and the mechanical behaviour
of each unit cell.
Failure mechanisms of some of the lattice structures with the possibility of shear
band formation are discussed. The models are created with geometrical imperfec-
tions to initiate a shear band formation.
Future work and suggestions
There are multiple factors in each aspect in this project that can be improved further,
here are some ideas for the future work. i.e. AM of complex lattice structures is
an emerging field, therefore there are several factors in this project that can be
further investigated. Hereby a few suggestions are summarised:
• The calibration of the 3D printing could be performed both in SLM and SLA
3D printing technologies to understand the accuracy and precision of each
manufacturing process. The parts could be manufactured closer to the
nominal geometry with the understanding of tolerance of the manufacturing
process.
• Different unit cells such as a combination of three could be incorporated in
order to form an extensive data and mechanical properties of each unit cell
can be studied in more detail.
50
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:59==
• Extensive material testing of the test samples could provide a greater insight
in order to incorporate much accurate material models.
• Computer tomography (CT) scanning could be performed to understand the
deviations from the nominal geometry. The accurate model predictions could
close the deviation between experiment and simulation results. Also, it could
be helpful to quantify the porosity in each lattice structure, which can render
helpful findings for the damage material model.
• Polymer specimens could be printed with more precise manufacturing meth-
ods to enhance the understanding of the mechanical properties of lattice
structures in polymer material.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
Charmi, A., R. Falkenberg, L. Ávila, and G. Mohr (2020). “Mechanical anisotropy
of additively manufactured stainless steel 316L: An experimental and numerical
study”. In: URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msea.2020.140154.
Deshpande, V.S., N.A. Fleck, and M.F. Ashby (2001). “Effective properties of the
octet-truss lattice material”. In: URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5096(01)00010-
2.
Felter, C.L. and K.L. Nielsen (2017). “Assisted crack tip flipping under Mode I thin
sheet tearing”. In: URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.euromechsol.2017.01.009.
Gibson, L. J. (1998). “Modelling the Mechanical Behaviour of Cellular Materials”.
In: URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/0921-5093(89)90154-8.
K.Solmo, S.S. Chauhan, C.F. Niordson, and K.Poulios (2021). “Uniaxial tensile be-
haviour of elastically isotropic truss lattices produced by additively manufactured
316L”. In:
Leary, Martin, Maciej Mazur, Hugh Williams, Eric Yang, and Ahmad Alghamdi
(2018). “Inconel 625 lattice structures manufactured by selective laser melting
(SLM): Mechanical properties, deformation and failure modes”. In: URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2018.06.010.
M.Dallago, F. Zanini, S. Carmignato, and D. Pasini (2018). “Effect of the geometrical
defectiveness on the mechanical properties of SLM biomedical Ti6Al4V lattices”.
In: URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prostr.2018.12.027.
Maconachie, Tobias, Martin Leary, Bill Lozanovski, and Xuezhe Zhang (2019).
“SLM lattice structures: Properties, performance, applications and challenges”.
In: URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2019.108137.
Okereke, Michael and Simeon Keates (2018). “Finite Element Applications”. In:
URL: https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783319671246.
Olaf, Rehme, Claus, and Emmelmann (2006). “Rapid manufacturing of lattice
structures with selective laser melting”. In: URL: https://doi.org/10.1117/12.
645848.
P.Syam, Wahyudin, Wu Jianwei, Bo Zhao, Ian Maskery, Waiel Elmadih, and
Richard Leach (2018). “Design and analysis of strut-based lattice structures for
vibration isolation”. In: URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2017.09.010.
Tancogne-Dejean, Thomas, Marianna Diamantopoulou, Maysam B. Gorji, Colin
Bonatti, and Dirk Mohr (2018). “3D Plate-Lattices: An Emerging Class of Low-
Density Metamaterial Exhibiting Optimal Isotropic Stiffness”. In: URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1002/adma.201803334.
Tancogne-Dejean, Thomas and Dirk Mohr (2018). “Elastically-isotropic truss lattice
materials of reduced plastic anisotropy”. In: URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsolstr.
2017.12.025.
Tancogne-Dejean, Thomas, Adriaan B. Spierings, and Dirk Mohr (2016). “Additively-
manufactured metallic micro-lattice materials for high specific energy absorption
under static and dynamic loading”. In: URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.
2016.05.054.
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
53
==PAGE:62==
Tvergaard, V. and A Needleman (1984). “Analysis of the cup-cone fracture in a
round tensile bar”. In: URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/0001-6160(84)90213-X.
Yan, Chunze, Liang Hao, Ahmed Hussein, Simon Lawrence Bubb, Philippe Young,
and David Raymont (2013). “Evaluation of light-weight AlSi10Mg periodic cellular
lattice structures fabricated via direct metal laser sintering”. In: URL: http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2013.12.004.
Zadpoor, Amir A. (2019). “Mechanical performance of additively manufactured
meta-biomaterials”. In: URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2018.12.038.
Zargarian, Ali, Mohsen Esfahanian, Javad Kadkhodapour, Saeid Ziaei-Rad, and
Delaram Zamani (2019). “On the fatigue behavior of additive manufactured
lattice structures”. In: URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tafmec.2019.01.012.
54
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:63==
Appendix A
Generated mesh from nTopology for different
lattices
Figure 1: (a) SC-BCC 10%, (b) SC-BCC 20%, (c) SC-BCC 3mm, (d) SC-BCC
6mm, (e) SC-BCC 30%, (f) SC-BCC [110], (g) SC-BCC [111], (h) SC-OCTET 20%,
(i) SC-OCTET 30%
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
55
==PAGE:64==
Appendix B
Equivalent total strain maps for refined models
Figure 2: Equivalent total strain maps for refined models at 5 mm displacement (a)
SC-BCC 10%, (b) SC-BCC 20%, (c) SC-BCC 3mm, (d) SC-BCC 6mm, (e) SC-BCC
30%, (f) SC-BCC [110], (g) SC-BCC [111], (h) SC-OCTET 20%, (i) SC-OCTET
30%
56
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
==PAGE:65==
Non-linear modelling of 3D lattice structures, failure and homogenization
57
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 1, Building 101A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
