==PAGE:1==
 
 
Autonomous Indoor Exploration 
Author: Rolf Pihl s144016 
Supervisor: Matteo Fumagalli 
Master Thesis (30 ETCS) 
July 2021 
 
==PAGE:2==
Autonomous Indoor Exploration
Master Thesis
(30 ETCS)
Author
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
Supervisor
Associate Professor Matteo Fumagalli
July 31, 2021
==PAGE:3==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
Abstract
Exploring and navigating unknown indoor environments can be very dan-
gerous.
This project explores the possibilities of assisting ﬁrst responders
with an autonomous system, that is capable of mapping and navigating an
unknown indoor space. The aim of this project is to develop and implement
the software for an autonomous mobile platform, that can map and navigate
an indoor environment, such as the tunnels of DTU. The objectives are: (1)
to research, develop and implement the hardware and software for perception
of the autonomous system; (2) to develop and implement the algorithms for
mapping, planning and navigation in an unknown indoor environment; (3)
to test the developed system in an indoor environment, such as the DTU
subterranean tunnels.
The ﬁrst aim explored and evaluated multiple industry standard sensors,
and the best solution for perception is found to be a combination of visual
and inertial odometry. The second aim required the system to use the sensor
data, in order to locate and map its surroundings, and then plan a path to
an observation point. The localization and mapping was implemented using
visual odometry, and was tested to have an accuracy matching the manufac-
tures speciﬁcations. A pathﬁnder algorithm was designed, which takes the
challenges of indoor navigation into account while planning the path to a new
observation point.
Although the ﬁnal aim of a full system test was not achieved, all the
modules that were implemented were tested and functioned satisfactory. The
project managed to research all the required steps needed to implement an
autonomous exploration system, which sensors are viable, and the algorithms
needed to map, localize and plan navigation.
Page 1 of 29
==PAGE:4==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
Contents
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Safety in Unknown Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
”1 Challenge, 2 Competitions, 3 Subdomains” . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
The aim . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Perception and Mapping
6
2.1
System Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Perception Sensors
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Stereo Vision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.2
Structured Light
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
LIDAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.5
External Beacons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.6
Combined Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.3
SLAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Planning Stage
16
3.1
Occupancy Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Pathﬁnder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4
Implementation and Results
20
5
Project Complications
24
Page 2 of 29
==PAGE:5==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
6
Future Work
25
6.1
ROS Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.2
Drone Test Flight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.3
Optimized Search Priority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
7
Conclusion
27
Page 3 of 29
==PAGE:6==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
1
Introduction
Exploring and navigating unknown indoor areas can be very dangerous, and lead to
personal injury or death. But in the case of emergencies, person rescue or operators
in hostile environments, it can be necessary to operate in enclosed unknown areas.
1.1
Safety in Unknown Areas
In June and July 2018, a soccer team of 12 boys and their trainer got trapped when
they explored the Tham Luang cave in Thailand. A monsoon ﬂooding blocked oﬀ
the entrance of the cave and prevented the group from getting out. Cave diving has
an extreme lethality and therefore the divers on the rescue team only thought that
the group had 10 percent chance to survive. For days rescuers worked for more than
12 hours a day in the caves. They tried to pump water out of the cave and drill
into the mountainside, to ﬁnd cracks into the cave system. Divers tried to ﬁnd their
way forward in total darkness, searching for the boys in each cavern. The divers
minimized their use of oxygen and reserves, by shutting the tanks oﬀwhen they
surfaced, to make it last longer. In the ninth cavern, and after 10 days, roughly 3.2
km route to the entrance of the cave, they found the group. After two weeks the
boys were rescued out, during this remarkable rescue operation, the former Thai
navy diver, Saman Gunan, died during an oxygen supply mission, where he did not
have enough oxygen on his way back out of the cave (Bourne JR., 2019; Fieldstadt,
2018; Saﬁand Goldberg, 2018; Winsor, 2018).
In the complex cave system near the Mississippi River in Saint Paul, has eight
people died since the 1980s. In the late 1800s the caves were originally made and
used for storage. Today most of the caves are not maintained, only a few larger
caves are ventilated and can be used for events. The caves present several conﬁned-
space hazards for people who enter, nearly zero visibility and can have a lethal
amount of carbon monoxide. Since an incident in 2004 where three teens died from
carbon monoxide poisoning, many caves entrance have been blocked by concrete to
prevent new incidents. Though people ﬁnd other ways to enter the caves, often by
digging through the soft limestone around the concrete cover. Rescuers have many
challenges; some cave entrances can be very narrow and almost impossible to pass,
Page 4 of 29
==PAGE:7==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
that they cannot put on their self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) on until
they reach larger openings. The cave’s conﬁguration contains branches in many
directions; therefore, rescuers use a long clothesline, which they trail behind them
as they move through the caves. The SCBA only supply 30 minutes of air support,
which gives problem when some rescuers ignore this and needs to be ordered out of
the cave. Communication also becomes extremely challenging when rescuers must
go far in the cave system. Their hardwired phone system is only approximately 90
meters long, and the wireless radios cannot penetrate the cave walls. For every 15
to 30 meters, one rescuer with a radio stays behind so daisy-chained communication
can be used between the surface and the rescuers (Ackerberg, 2017; Rutkowski,
2019).
1.2
”1 Challenge, 2 Competitions, 3 Subdomains”
The DARPA Subterranean (SubT) Challenge looks for innovative technologies to
rapidly map, navigate and search underground environment. These should be able to
be used under time sensitive combat operations and/or disaster response scenarios.
The challenge consists of two complementary competitions: The Systems and the
Virtual Competition. The Systems Competition needs to create and demonstrate
a physical system, with focus on advancing and evaluate the solution in a realistic
environment. The Virtual Competition must compete in a simulation-based environ-
ment, they need to create software and algorithms using virtual models for systems,
environments, and terrain. There will be three circuit events where the teams will
compete: “Tunnel systems”, “Urban Underground” and “Cave Networks”. After
the three preliminary Circuit Events, there will be a ﬁnal challenge, an environment
with diverse challenges where all three subdomains will be incorporated. The SubT
Challenge started in September 2018 and expected to ﬁnished in September 2021
(Chung, n.d.; DARPA, n.d.).
Page 5 of 29
==PAGE:8==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
1.3
The aim
This project will attempt to research and develop the basis for an autonomous
exploration system, that can assist ﬁrst responders and operators with enhanced
situational awareness. Inspired by SubT Challenge, the system needs to be fully
autonomous and able to navigate and map unknown indoor environments such as
tunnel systems, urban undergrounds and cave networks. By having an autonomous
system assist in situational awareness, it both reduces the tasks of valuable workforce
and reduces the risk of injury or death of ﬁrst responders or operators.
The aim of this project is to develop and implement the software for an autonomous
mobile platform, to allow it to map and navigate the tunnels of DTU. The objec-
tives are: (1) to research, develop and implement the hardware and software for
perception of the autonomous system; (2) to develop and implement the algorithms
for mapping, planning and navigation in an unknown indoor environment; (3) to
test the developed system in an indoor environment, such as the DTU subterranean
tunnels. The end goal is a functioning system that can map and navigate a small
portion of the DTU tunnel networks.
2
Perception and Mapping
In order for the system to navigate and map unknown indoor environments, the
system will need three main components. The ﬁrst component is perception sensors
that allow the system to gather information based on its surroundings and the
system itself. The second component is the heart of the system, consisting of an on
board micro controller which is tasked with processing the sensor data. The sensor
data is used to both map out the environment around the system and localize the
systems position in the environment. When map data and position is determined,
the core is then tasked to determine a path for the system to move, in order to
obtain additional map data. The ﬁnal component is the locomotion, which can be
a ground, aerial or underwater drone. This mobile platform will allow the system
to traverse through the space based on the paths given by the previous component.
Page 6 of 29
==PAGE:9==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
2.1
System Structure
The system is split up into three core components: perception, planning and loco-
motion. By splitting the system up into three distinct cores, it allows easier ways
to adjust and test each individual component separated from the remaining compo-
nents.
The perception component gathers information from the systems surroundings, and
utilizing simultaneous localization and mapping algorithms (SLAM), allows the sys-
tem to both map its surroundings and estimate its position in the environment.
Though working in an unknown enclosed space introduces several constraints on
which sensors are viable for such a task.
The map and positional data is then sent to the planner section, which will detect
unknown edges on the map, and estimate the best path from the systems current
location to the nearest observation point. The ideal observation point is the closest
known free space, from which the system is able to observe the unknown edge of the
current known map. As the map gets updated, new observation points and paths
will be created.
The paths will then be sent to the locomotion using position control.
Position
control is a simple but reliable movement command for mobile systems, sending a
path vector to the mobile platform, such that it just has to follow the given path.
Position control is common both in ground, aerial and underwater drones.
With these three components chained together, the system is able to observe its
surroundings and its own position, generate map data, ﬁnd new observation points
and plan a path in order to observe the next unknown. This process is then repeated
until the area of operation is fully explored or if there are no more unknown spaces
on the map.
The three components will be connected through ROS (Robot operating system),
as seen in Figure 1, which is an open source software which allows multiple compo-
nents to interface with a linux computer. ROS can interface with most sensors, and
retrieve measurement data in a format that can then be transferred to other sub-
systems. The planning component is done using Matlab, and by interfacing Matlab
Page 7 of 29
==PAGE:10==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
Figure 1: Flowchart showing the structure and tasks of the three core components
combined in ROS.
to the ROS core, Matlab is able to get all the positional data needed to perform the
planning and pathﬁnding stage. Finally, the path vectors can be sent from Matlab
through the ROS core, and then sent to the locomotive component.
2.2
Perception Sensors
In order for an autonomous system to navigate and map any environment, it needs
sensors to perceive its surroundings. These sensors can either measure externally
from the system or internally on the system, and a combination of these will in
most cases be needed to make a robust system. Since the system needs to navigate
unknown space, all the sensors need to be mounted on and operated by the mobile
system. This provides two core constraints in weight and power usages. This section
will describe and discuss the most common sensors used to perform mapping and
navigation.
2.2.1
Stereo Vision
Stereo vision utilizes two horizontally displaced cameras to obtain two diﬀering views
of the same scene, similar to human binocular vision. By comparing the position of
Page 8 of 29
==PAGE:11==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
the same object in the two images, it is possible to triangulate the position of the
object in the scene relative to the stereo camera as seen in Figure 2. In order to
determine the position of an objective in the scene, the sensor wall and focal length
of the camera needs to be known. These two parameters are given by the camera
speciﬁcations. With these two core values, it is possible to construct a directional
vector from each camera lens to the pixel position of the objective.
These two
vectors are then projected out, and the position they intersect will be the estimated
position of the detected object (Horn, 1986).
Figure 2: Stereo vision uses two cameras mounted in a known location. The two
cameras will track the scene for features, and triangulate the position of common
features between both cameras.
Stereo vision have great beneﬁts in high resolution 3d scans and be aﬀordable at the
same time. It is also possibly to color the scanned data for additional scene data.
The main drawback of the stereo vision is the fact it is a passive external sensor,
which means it is completely scene dependant. In some cases the sensor will not be
Page 9 of 29
==PAGE:12==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
able to determine corresponding points in the two images, for example on a blank
featureless wall. And as a passive sensor, it is also light dependant and because of
this highly sensitive to light exposure (Horn, 1986).
Finding the conjugated points in a 3d space across two images, is the key problem
in stereo vision, and is known as the correspondence problem. Common methods
utilize gray level matching and edge matching. In the case of gray level matching,
the two scenes are compared for similar brightness levels to ﬁnd matching points.
The edge matching method utilizes high pass ﬁlters to detect changes in the scene,
and compares the edge features of the two images (Horn, 1986).
2.2.2
Structured Light
Structured light takes an active sensor approach to the same concept as the stereo
vision. But instead of just depending on detecting similar features across two images,
the structured light method emits a known pattern of light, as seen in Figure 3,
that can be detected by a single camera or the same stereo camera setup as described
earlier. The structured light comes in a variety of conﬁgurations, ranging from bands
of colors light to mesh patterns of laser points. The key is that the structured light
is much easier to correlate between the two cameras, because instead of looking for
features in the scene, the cameras are just trying to detect the known projected
feature (Horn, 1986).
The position of the light reﬂecting of a surface is determined in a similar way to the
passive stereo vision. Either correlating the light point between the two cameras, or
using the structured light itself as one of the directional vectors. In the later case, a
single camera can be suﬃcient, when detecting a certain point from the structured
light, it is possible to triangulate that point if its origin is known. Which in this
case it will be, as the light source is ﬁx mounted next to the camera (Horn, 1986).
In the case of featureless scenes, the structured light applies features to the scene,
and assists the stereo vision in detecting featureless surfaces. Structured light also
assists in low light environments (Horn, 1986).
Page 10 of 29
==PAGE:13==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
Figure 3: A structured light sensor behaves similar to a stereo vision sensor, but
instead of a second camera, it is replaced with a projector or laser, that emits a
pattern that can be recognized by the primary camera. The emitted pattern is known
and can be detected and triangulated to ﬁnd the estimated position the light reﬂects
on.
2.2.3
LIDAR
LIDAR or ”laser imaging, detection, and ranging” is a common method utilizing
coded laser light to determine the distance from the sensor to a surface. It functions
as an active external sensor, that emits a coded laser light, and measures the return
time to determine the distance from the sensor to the detected surface as seen in
Figure 4. Each laser and receiver is set up with a known directional vector, when
combined with the returned distance measurement, can be transformed into a point
cloud of surface data (Siegwart et al., 2011).
The LIDAR method is a very accurate method to measure distance, but is limited
Page 11 of 29
==PAGE:14==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
Figure 4: A LIDAR sensors emits either multiple or a single sweeping laser, that
estimates the distance to a point based on time traveled. The angle of the laser is
known, and with the distance known the point of reﬂection can be determined.
to only detecting point within the resolution of the sensor, which will usually be
lower than that of a stereo camera or structured light. But what the LIDAR lacks
in resolution it makes up for in accuracy. The laser light is not as scene dependant
as the stereo vision, and with an active light source, it is not dependant on the
lighting conditions (Siegwart et al., 2011).
2.2.4
Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU)
An Inertial measurement unit (IMU) is a common sensor used to estimate the rel-
ative position, velocity and acceleration of a moving vehicle. This is done by com-
bining three orthogonal accelerometers and gyroscopes, in order to achieve the six
degree-of-freedom (DOF) pose of the vehicle: position (x, y, z) and orientation (roll,
Page 12 of 29
==PAGE:15==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
pitch, yaw). An IMU sensor is able to estimate the velocity, if the initial speed is
known (Scaramuzza and Zhang, 2019; Siegwart et al., 2011).
In order to get the acceleration of the system, the gyroscope data is integrated to
estimate the vehicle’s orientation, and the three accelerometers are used to estimate
the instantaneous acceleration of the vehicle. The acceleration data is then trans-
formed based on the current estimated position of the vehicle and the gravity vector.
Then the gravity vector is subtracted, and the acceleration can be determined in
all three directions (ax, ay, az). The velocity can also be estimated by integrating
the reoriented acceleration over time and adding the initial velocity. By knowing
the initial position as well, it is possible to estimate the position of the vehicle by
integration over time again (Scaramuzza and Zhang, 2019; Siegwart et al., 2011).
Although the IMU is able to estimate the velocity and position of the vehicle, it
is extremely sensitive to measurement errors in both the accelerometers and gyro-
scopes. All IMU estimations for velocity and position will start to drift over time.
This is because both sensors are integrated over time, and in the case of the ac-
celerometer, integrated twice over time. This will cause any measurement error to
be added to the estimation, and result in the measurements drifting from the true
values. In order to remedy these errors with measurements, it is required to use
external measurements that are able to observe known objects with a given position
(Scaramuzza and Zhang, 2019; Siegwart et al., 2011).
2.2.5
External Beacons
An elegant solution to localization is to use passive or active beacons to ﬁnd the
position of the vehicle. These will either allow the robot to identify a certain beacon
in a known spot, or be fed information about the robot’s location directly. One such
example could be the global positioning system (GPS), that consists of multiple
satellites functioning as active beacons (Siegwart et al., 2011).
Although these systems are ideal for operating in known or open areas, an unknown
indoor area does not allow these systems to assist the robot. GPS signals might not
be able to pass accurate data to the robot, if any data is even possible. And since
the area is unknown, it won’t be possible to use beacons, as no known beacon will
Page 13 of 29
==PAGE:16==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
be in the area of operation (Siegwart et al., 2011).
2.2.6
Combined Solution
All sensors have clear ways to perform localization, but still introduces a drawback
that leads to drift or errors in the measurements. But even though no sensor can ful-
ﬁll the requirements for precise localization and mapping, a hybrid system utilizing
multiple sensors is possible.
Visual odometry and inertial odometry are complementary sensors, meaning they
are able to make up for each others drawback. This combination is known as Visual-
Inertial odometry (VIO), and is currently the only viable alternative to GPS and
LIDAR odometry for achieving accurate state estimations (Grunnet-Jepsen et al.,
2020; Scaramuzza and Zhang, 2019).
As described in the earlier sections, visual odometry allows the system to corrects it
position over time and relocate the system when it encounters previous location. But
visual odometry is not ideal for detecting movement, especially with depth movement
or when the observed scene repeats itself without detectable features. Finally, visual
odometry both have two main time constraints. The ﬁrst time constraint comes
from the camera, as in order to achieve clear pictures, the camera sensor needs time
to be exposed with suﬃcient light. Secondly, the image analysis algorithm is very
resource intensive in computational power (Grunnet-Jepsen et al., 2020; Scaramuzza
and Zhang, 2019).
Table 1: Comparison of beneﬁts between visual and inertial odometry. This table
is from Grunnet-Jepsen et al. (2020).
Visual Odometry
IMU Odometry
Update Frequency
Low
High
Stability over Timer
High
Low
Scene Dependent
Yes
No
Re-localization
Yes
No
CPU Utilization
High
Low
Page 14 of 29
==PAGE:17==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
Inertial odometry is signiﬁcantly less resource intensive, and can provide sensor
readings at a much higher rate than visual odometry. The IMU is ideal for detecting
sudden shifts in movement and rotation, but quickly accumulates drift over time
(Grunnet-Jepsen et al., 2020; Scaramuzza and Zhang, 2019).
The stereo camera and IMU can compliment each others drawbacks in a combined
system as seen in Table 1. The IMU allows the system to detect accurate changes
in movement along with a high update rate, while the stereo camera provides drift
correction by comparing the current scene measurements with stored scene data.
2.3
SLAM
Currently the IMU is able to detect changes in position and orientation, and the
active stereo vision can scan the current environment as a point cloud. The SLAM
algorithm is tasked to combine consecutive point cloud observations to a continu-
ous map. Each individual point cloud contains observations in system coordinates,
meaning in relations to the robot, and not the system position in the world coordi-
nates. In order to combine the diﬀerent point clouds, they need to be oﬀset by the
systems own position, in order to transform all the points from system coordinates
into world coordinates (Siegwart et al., 2011).
(a) The system detects a corner, which
can be tracked as a known point.
(b) As the system traverse the tunnel,
the corner feature detected in (a) assists
in estimating the position of the system.
Figure 5:
Example of SLAM using a scene feature to maintain an accurately
estimated position
Page 15 of 29
==PAGE:18==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
The IMU detects movement of the system, but is still accumulating drift. But by
using data from earlier observations, it is possible to compare the previous observa-
tions with the current, and correct any drift in the IMU measurements. A common
method is to compare features between the two scenes. So when the robot moves
in a certain direction and is measured by the IMU, and drift can be corrected by
comparing the movement of the IMU with the shift of a feature in the scene as seen
in Figure 5 (Siegwart et al., 2011).
The system can still encounter issues when traversing simple scenes. This is caused
by the degrees of freedom of the features in the scene. For example, a sharp corner
is a much better feature to track than the surface of a ﬂat wall. But in the case
of a smooth tunnel, the system will mostly rely on the IMU to determine distance
travelled, while using the walls to correct the orientation as seen in Figure 6.
Finally, if the system is to accumulate drift, it can correct previous measurements
if it is able to recognize an earlier scene Siegwart et al. (2011).
Figure 6: In this scene there is no prominent feature to assist the drone in esti-
mating depth. The walls assist the system in estimating orientation and one axis,
but must rely on the IMU in order to estimate the distance traveled down the tunnel.
3
Planning Stage
As the system is able to locate itself and map the surroundings in a point cloud,
the next step is for the system to determine the next observation point. The system
needs to ﬁnd the closest observation point and plan a path for the system to travel
along.
Page 16 of 29
==PAGE:19==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
3.1
Occupancy Map
Having the data in a point cloud structure is not suﬃcient in order to utilize tradi-
tional search and planning algorithms. The data will need to be transformed into a
grid based structure. Each point in the grid can have one of three possible states:
occupied space, free space and unknown space. Knowing the diﬀerence between free
and unknown space is crucial when planning a safe path for the system. In the case
of autonomous exploration, the system also needs to known what places lack being
mapped (Hornung et al., 2013).
A basic grid structure is not ideal to create a map of an unknown space, since it has
a speciﬁc grid size. If the drone were to discover a new area outside of the current
grid, the entire grid would have to be transferred from the old grid to a new one
with appropriate size, which takes up a lot of valuable memory space. The basic
grid structure also lacks dynamic scaling, as the grid needs a high enough resolution
to accommodate the point cloud data, but having to search on a pixel by pixel basis
at a high resolution takes a lot of computational power (Hornung et al., 2013).
Figure 7: This ﬁgure shows the three dimensional representation (left) and tree
structure (right) of an octree. The tree both holds free (white square) and occupied
(black square) space, with the mixed upper cells (grey circle). This ﬁgure is from
Hornung et al. (2013).
Instead of using a grid based map, the system will utilize an octo map, which utilizes
the dynamic octree data structure, as illustrated in Figure 7. An octo map is build
up by subdividing each space into eighths. This means that the root of the tree will
Page 17 of 29
==PAGE:20==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
have eighth children, of which will have eight children each. The initial root can
either cover a certain area of space or the entire area of operations, and can then
be endlessly sub divided to increase the resolution. The subdivision is then limited
by the desired maximum resolution. The data from the point cloud can then be
inserted into the octree, by going down the branches from the root, indicating if
a given leaf in the tree is considered occupied space or free space (Hornung et al.,
2013).
If a point lies outside the initial space covered by the root, the size of the grid can
easily be increased by moving the current root down and introduce a new root on
top. This makes the current inserts from the initial root a child of the new root,
and the new measurements can be inserted into the new children of the new root.
Compared to the size increase of the traditional grid, the increase of an octo map is
signiﬁcantly faster, and all existing data does not need to be reallocated (Hornung
et al., 2013).
With this data structure, it is possible to keep all the acquired data in a grid with
high resolution, but when it comes to planning a path for the system, it can be
scaled up to better suit the size of the system traversing the map. This is done by
marking the branches with a state based on the states of the branch’s children. For
example, if all children of a given node are marked as free space, the node itself can
also be marked as free space. In the case of occupied space, the node’s upper nodes
can be marked as occupied if any of the children nodes are marked as occupied space
(Hornung et al., 2013).
3.2
Pathﬁnder
With the map being generated, the system has to ﬁnd the closest known point,
that can observe unknown space. The ﬁrst step is to determine which known space
is viable for the system to travel. In order to ﬁnd the safe known space, all the
occupied space is inﬂated by the radius of the system and a set safety margin. For
example, if the system is 10 centimeters in radius and can not get any closer to
an occupied space than 10 centimeters, then all the known occupied spaces will be
inﬂated by 20 centimeters.
Page 18 of 29
==PAGE:21==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
(a) The system is occupying known
space, and is tasked to scan the other
side of the unknown boarder (red dots).
(b) The safety margin (red area) is ap-
plied and the observation vector is found
(blue dots).
(c) The system navigates through the
safe space to the closest point on the ob-
servation vector (blue dots).
(d) The system then scans (black dots)
and maps the new space as it reaches
the observation vector.
Figure 8: This sequence illustrates the steps taken by the system, in order to ﬁnd
the unknown space, ﬁnd a safe observation point, navigate to it and then scan the
new area. This sequence is then repeated.
The second step is to ﬁnd the boarder between known free space and the unknown
space. With this boarder establish, the system must link the unknown boarder to
the safe open space determined earlier. In order to link an unknown point on the
boarder to a safe open space, the system needs to be able to draw a vector between
the two points without crossing through known occupied space or unknown space.
Page 19 of 29
==PAGE:22==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
This observation vector will also have a minimum required distance, based on a
second safety margin for observation. This margin is based on how close the system
can be to an unknown space. An upper distance limit is also required based on the
sensor depth accuracy. The safe points that fall under this vector and within the
safety margin and sensor range, are marked as observation points. The same vector
is also used to give the system the observation orientation when it arrives to the
observation point.
With the safe navigation space and observation points determined, the third step is
to perform a breadth ﬁrst search along the safe space, and ﬁnd the closest observation
point. The ﬁnal step is to create the required path vectors, that can be sent to a
mobile platform using position control. An illustrated example of the pathﬁnder
can be seen in Figure 8.
4
Implementation and Results
The sensor provided for this project is an Intel Realsense 435 depth camera. The
realsense 435 consists of two parallel ﬁsh eye cameras, giving the camera a wide ﬁeld
of view, and an IR projector used to project structured light. The realsense utilizes
both stereo camera and IR grid to perceive the depth of the scene, and has an
inbuilt CPU to process the depth analysis, and exports the point cloud and images
for feature tracking (Intel RealSense, 2021).
The application RTAB-Map (Real-Time Appearance-Based Mapping) is used to
perform the mapping and localization with the realsense 435. RTAB-Map uses a
graph-based SLAM algorithm that is compatible with both stereo, structured light
and LIDAR sensors. The SLAM tests were performed using a stand alone version
of RTAB-Map, but is also compatible with ROS (Labb´e and Michaud, 2018; Labb´e,
n.d.).
In RTAB-Map it is possible to see the features being tracked in the scene, and how
the SLAM algorithm uses these features to localize the camera in the scene across
multiple measurements. This is displayed in Figure 9.
Page 20 of 29
==PAGE:23==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
Figure 9: RTAB-Map displaying the tracked features between two measurements.
The system uses edge detection to ﬁnd the features. This is clear from the many
tracking points between the back wall and duvet, and no tracking points on the blank
wall.
The Realsense seem to do ﬁne measurements between one to two meters, but as
seen on the far wall, it starts to give a wave like pattern. This inaccuracy is most
likely caused due to the very narrow ﬁeld of view at far distances, which causes even
minor errors in measurements to inﬂict high inaccuracy. The far wall also contains
transparent boxes, which also distorts the measurements further.
Figure 10: The raw point cloud data from the RTAB-Map scan. The position of
the realsense camera is marked with the triple axis, and its scan path is marked with
the light blue vector path.
Page 21 of 29
==PAGE:24==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
Scan data is saved in a custom ﬁle for RTAB-Map, which holds all the observed
data like the point clouds as seen in Figure 10, localization and raw images from
the entire sequence. This format is not compatible with Matlab or ROS, but the
point clouds along with localization can be exported in the standard format PLY.
The exported ﬁle is then imported into Matlab.
(a) The point cloud displayed in mat-
lab.
(b) Point cloud inserted into an occu-
pancy map with a voxel count of 50 per
meter.
(c) Point cloud inserted into an occu-
pancy map with a voxel count of 10 per
meter.
(d) The occupied space of the low voxel
map have been expanded by the safety
margin of 20 cm.
Figure 11: The point cloud is inserted into an occupancy map. The occupancy
map resolution can be scaled to the desired scale, and safety margins can be applied.
The point cloud is then inserted into an occupancy map as seen in Figure 11, which
can be scaled to the desired resolution (voxels per meter). The occupancy map sets
Page 22 of 29
==PAGE:25==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
the probability of a voxel being occupied depending on how many observations are
inserted into each voxel.
The occupancy map gives a good presentation of the
scanned environment, and the scaling along with safety margin inﬂation functions
correctly.
Figure 12:
Two clear points are selected from each corner, which are used to
determine the distance between the left wall and the shelf. The distance is calculated
to be 2.05 meters, while the real world distance is 2.10 meters
In order to test the accuracy of the SLAM algorithm, the distance is measured
between the left wall and the shelf down the main back wall. The distance between
the left wall and the shelf is measured to be 2.1 meters in real life. Using the tools
in Matlab to analyse the point cloud, two points are selected from the corners of the
back wall and the shelf and left wall as seen in Figure 12. The distance from the
point cloud is found to be 2.05 meters, using the values from Table 2, resulting in
the total error of 0.05 meters or 2.4 %.
Page 23 of 29
==PAGE:26==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
Table 2: Coordinates of the edge on the left wall and shelf
X
Y
Z
Left Wall
1.3632
0.4655
0.2749
Shelf
1.1128
-1.5714
0.3225
5
Project Complications
During this project the most common sensors were discussed, and the realsense 435
was implemented and used to perform visual odometry SLAM. It proved to be very
similar to the given speciﬁcations, with an accuracy around 2% with a scan distance
between one and two meters. The system also managed to perform a fair feature
detection, and track these across multiple sensor samples. But the sensors available
during this project, lacked the second main sensor in the form of an IMU. The
realsense cameras were branded with having IMUs build in, but only appear to be
available on newer modules, and not the ones available at DTU.
Another issue with hardware occurred with the initial realsense F200 camera lend
by DTU. This camera, although being from 2015, was already outdated to the point
it was no longer supported by the realsense SDK 2.0. And the SDK that did support
the realsense F200 was no longer available through oﬃcial or reliable sources. This
did result in the test scans being delayed, due to an extensive troubleshooting period
before the lack of support was noticed.
A third issue with the project occurred while trying to implement the test modules
directly with ROS. ROS is a powerful tool, but with lack of Linux experience caused
some trouble during setup. ROS is now supported on windows as well, but guides
and documentation is written almost exclusively for Linux. This caused some delays
while trying to ﬁgure out which platform was the best to proceed with. The decision
was to implement ROS on Linux, as it had the most documentation, although
it meant learning a new operating system. But even though ROS was correctly
installed and tested on the Linux system, the realsense repository appeared to no
longer be supported, as all the documentation pointing to the ROS-realsense and
realsense repositories did not return the realsense packages.
Page 24 of 29
==PAGE:27==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
With the ROS implementation of the system dragging out for too long, the ﬁnal
decision was to ﬁnd the same programs in a stand alone format, and test the system
features with separated modules. For example, RTAB-Map is able to perform SLAM
with the realsense 435 and export the point cloud in a format that can be used by
Matlab. But it meant there was no option in running both the RTAB-Map SLAM
and Matlab simultaneously and continuously.
Although Matlab is a powerful tool and allows working with occupancy maps, it did
not provide the same features as the intended system for occupancy maps, which
was meant to be Octomap which is a ROS extension.
Finally, this project was started and later restarted during the Covid-19 pandemic,
which meant that work space was limited to work from home, and it was more
diﬃcult getting good feedback, as online communication simply does not match the
beneﬁts of physical discussion in a lab. Although the Covid-19 restrictions were
lifted towards the end of the project, the project was already rewritten into focusing
on methods and sensors that could be researched and tested from home.
6
Future Work
6.1
ROS Implementation
The ideal task to continue with after this project is making a full ROS implementa-
tion. All components and software tools used in this project have ROS compatibility.
RTAB-Map, Realsense SDK and Matlab are all powerful tools that have ROS in-
terfaces or ROS packages, and the realsense 435 is also supported by ROS through
the SDK and RTAB-Map.
Additionally a ROS implementation would allow an external IMU unit or a Realsense
435I to perform visual and inertial odometry, compared to RTAB-Map standalone,
which only utilizes visual odometry.
As a ﬁnal feature, ROS would allow all the components to act together as an active
system, and can be connected to any position control platform that supports ROS
interfacing.
Page 25 of 29
==PAGE:28==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
6.2
Drone Test Flight
The follow up task to a full ROS implementation, is to test the system with either
a simulated or physical system. In case of a simulated system, the robot simulator
Gazebo is ideal for this task, as it both includes the tools for multiple robots and
three dimensional environments, and can interface directly with ROS. This means
that both the SLAM and planner module can be tested fully along with the simu-
lation.
The ﬁnal test is then to implement the system onto a physical mobile platform, such
as a quad drone with position control.
6.3
Optimized Search Priority
Exploring unknown space provides a unique diﬃcult challenge, as there is no clear
optimal way to explore the unknown. However, there are ways to improve the system
beyond a simple breadth ﬁrst or A-star search algorithm. Firstly the observation
points can be adjusted, such that an observation point with a bigger view of un-
known space can have higher priority than an observation point with a small view
of unknown space.
If the system is to determine the size of an indoor network, it can be set to ignore
unknown areas that are completely surrounded by known space, as a maximum size
of the unknown space can be determined from the surrounding known space.
Lastly, the task of mapping an indoor area is not limited to be performed by a single
drone. RTAB-Map already allows multiple sensors to feed data into the data set,
meaning multiple mobile systems can assist each other in mapping a bigger unknown
environment. By combining the data between the drones, they can assist each other
in correcting drift in their measurements.
Page 26 of 29
==PAGE:29==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
7
Conclusion
The goal of the project was to research, develop and implement an autonomous
system that can map and navigate an unknown indoor environment. Although the
system did not get fully implemented in ROS, all the components needed to reach
the ﬁnal goal are documented and tested as the situation allowed.
The ﬁrst aim of the project was to research and implement the perception sensors
that would allow the system to observe the environment. Multiple industry standard
sensors were discussed, and the ﬁnal solution is found to be a combination of visual
and inertial odometry. These two sensor types are complimentary sensors, with the
stereo camera and structured light allowing the system to perceive its surroundings,
while the IMU assists in predicting the movement of the system when no key features
can be tracked by the visual odometry.
The second aim required the system to use the sensor data, in order to locate and
map its surroundings, and then plan a path to an observation point. The localization
and mapping was implemented using visual odometry, and was tested to have an
accuracy matching the manufactures speciﬁcations.
A pathﬁnder algorithm was
designed, which takes the challenges of indoor navigation into account while planning
the path to a new observation point.
Although the ﬁnal aim of a full system test was not achieved, all the modules that
were implemented were tested and functioned satisfactory. The project managed
to research all the required steps needed to implement an autonomous exploration
module, which sensors are viable, and the algorithms needed to map, localize and
plan navigation.
Page 27 of 29
==PAGE:30==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
References
Ackerberg, R. (2017), ‘Teens rescued from St. Paul caves with a deadly history’,
FOX 9 Minneapolis-St. Paul .
URL:
https://www.fox9.com/news/teens-rescued-from-st-paul-caves-with-a-
deadly-history
Bourne JR., J. K. (2019), ‘Meet the team of cave divers, National Geographic 2019
Adventurer of the Year’.
URL:
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/adventure/article/thai-rescue-cave-
divers
Chung, T. H. (n.d.), ‘DARPA Subterranean (SubT) Challenge’.
URL: https://www.darpa.mil/program/darpa-subterranean-challenge
DARPA (n.d.), ‘DARPA Subterranean Challenge’.
URL: https://www.subtchallenge.com/
Fieldstadt, E. (2018), ‘Cave rescue of boys soccer team in Thailand - CBS News’.
URL: https://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/thai-cave-rescue-thailand-boys-soccer-
team/
Grunnet-Jepsen, A., Harville, M., Fulkerson, B., Piro, D., Brook, S. and Radford, J.
(2020), ‘Introduction to Intel R⃝RealSenseTM Visual SLAM and the T265 Tracking
Camera’.
URL: https://dev.intelrealsense.com/docs/intel-realsensetm-visual-slam-and-the-
t265-tracking-camera
Horn, B. K. P. (1986), Robot Vision, ﬁrst edn, MIT Press.
Hornung, A., Wurm, K. M., Bennewitz, M., Stachniss, C. and Burgard, W. (2013),
‘OctoMap: An Eﬃcient Probabilistic 3D Mapping Framework Based on Octrees’,
Autonomous Robots .
URL: http://octomap.github.com.
Page 28 of 29
==PAGE:31==
Rolf Pihl (s144016)
Intel RealSense (2021), ‘Depth Camera D435 – Intel R⃝RealSenseTM Depth and
Tracking Cameras’.
URL: https://www.intelrealsense.com/depth-camera-d435/
Labb´e, M. (n.d.), ‘RTAB-Map — Real-Time Appearance-Based Mapping’.
URL: http://introlab.github.io/rtabmap/
Labb´e, M. and Michaud, F. (2018), ‘RTAB-Map as an Open-Source Lidar and Visual
SLAM Library for Large-Scale and Long-Term Online Operation’, Field Robotics
.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1002/rob.21831
Rutkowski, E. (2019), ‘First Responders Describe Cave Rescues in Saint Paul —
AIHA’, AIHA .
URL:
https://www.aiha.org/news/ﬁrst-responders-describe-cave-rescues-in-
saint-paul
Saﬁ, M. and Goldberg, J. (2018), ‘Former Thai navy Seal diver Saman Kunan dies
inside cave from lack of air — Thailand — The Guardian’.
URL:
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/jul/06/former-thai-navy-seal-
diver-saman-kunan-dies-from-lack-of-air-inside-cave
Scaramuzza, D. and Zhang, Z. (2019), ‘Visual-Inertial Odometry of Aerial Robots’,
Springer Encyclopedia of Robotics .
Siegwart, R., Nourbakhsh, I. R. and Scaramuzza, D. (2011), Introduction to Au-
tonomous Mobile Robots, second edn, MIT Press.
Winsor, M. (2018), ‘Former Thai Navy SEAL died wanting to ’bring the boys back
home’ - ABC News’.
URL:
https://abcnews.go.com/International/thai-navy-seal-died-wanting-bring-
boys-back/story?id=56409867
Page 29 of 29
==PAGE:32==
DTU Electrical Engineering 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Technical Univ ersity  of  Denmark 
Ørsteds Plads 
Building 348 
DK-2800 Kgs. Ly ngby
Tel: (+45) 45 25 38 00 
www.elektro.dtu.dk 
 
