==PAGE:1==
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye
movement sleep
Master Thesis
by Katrin Birna Johannesdottir
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
 
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
Master Thesis
by Katrin Birna Johannesdottir
August, 2021
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis is submitted to DTU Department of Health Technology, Technical University
of Denmark, in partial fulﬁllment for the degree of Master of Science (MSc) in Biomedical
Engineering.
This thesis is made in collaboration between DTU Health Tech, Stanford School of Medicine,
and Rigshospitalet Glostrup. It was prepared over the spring and summer semester of 2021,
from March 1st to August 1st 2021 and accounts for 30 ECTS points.
The thesis has been supervised by Dr.
Helge B. D. Sørensen, associate professor and
team leader at the Department of Health Technology at DTU; Dr. Emmanuel Mignot,
Craig Reynolds professor of Sleep Medicine at Stanford School of Medicine; and Dr. Poul
Jennum, professor in clinical neurophysiology and sleep medicine at Rigshospitalet.
Katrin Birna Johannesdottir - s193086
Signature
Date
ii
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Sleep and rapid eye movement sleep are important factors in the survival and sustenance
of human life. However, little is known about the control of REM sleep. This exploratory
thesis attempts to ﬁnd genetic associations between three REM sleep phenotypes, and
single nucleotide polymorphisms of the genome in a sample of 4,135 European subjects
across four independent cohorts.
A genome-wide association study was performed for
the three phenotypes, REM sleep amount (in minutes and percentage), and REM sleep
latency. Three diﬀerent association models were created for each phenotype, with the dif-
ference being the number, and type of covariates. The baseline model included age, sex,
body mass index, and ancestry, the second model added REM sleep reducing medication,
habitual sleep duration, and depression, and the third model added an apnea-hypopnea
index, alcohol, and caﬀeine intake, as well as smoking. In total, a meta-analysis of the
association models returned 37 suggestively (p < 1E-5) or genome-wide (p < 5E-8) sig-
niﬁcant associations, over 19 chromosomes. The baseline models of REM sleep amount
being the only ones that returned a genome-wide signiﬁcant association. The suggestive
signiﬁcance of the associations indicates that they might become genome-wide signiﬁcant
in a larger sample. Tissue expression pathway analysis returned no relevant gene associa-
tions. A meta-analysis, with additional cohorts, will be conducted in the coming months,
with hopes of identifying genome signiﬁcant associations.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would ﬁrst and foremost like to thank my main supervisor Helge B.D. Sørensen for
his guidance and the support he has shown me.
Not only in this project, but in all
collaboration we have had in the past two years.
I would also like to thank my co-supervisor Emmanuel Mignot, for introducing me to the
world of genetics, for his valuable input, and for allowing me to work on this thesis in his
lab at Stanford School of Medicine. I would also like to thank my other co-supervisor Poul
Jennum, for his valuable input and guidance throughout this project.
Special thanks go out to Aditya, and Vicente from Emmanuel’s lab for teaching me the
knowledge I needed for this project, and always being available when I had questions.
I also want to thank Livia, and Haoqi from Harvard-MIT for their input and ideas in
our weekly meetings, and for being available to answer my questions and listen to my
reﬂections.
I would like to thank Andreas, and Umaer, the Ph.D. students in the lab, as well as
Magnus, and Katarina, my fellow M.Sc students in this collaboration. For their support
in my project, as well as for their friendship, our travels, and the experiences we had.
Extra special thanks to Katarina, and all the cups of coﬀee we drank while we discussed
life within and outside this project.
A big shout-out to my dream team, Embla and Jóna. My best friends and fellow students
that have accompanied me through the last ﬁve years of our studies. We did this together,
I am immensely proud of us and extremely thankful for having you in my life.
Finally, I would like to thank my family. To my aunt and namesake, Kata, for always
having my back, and encouraging me to push myself out of my comfort zone. To my
mom and dad who have always believed in me, encouraged me to follow my dreams, and
supported me through everything I have done. I love you very much, and I thank you
from the bottom of my heart.
iv
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
2.1
A hypnogram showing the distribution of sleep stages throughout a polysomnog-
raphy recording. The W represent wakefulness, REM is rapid eye move-
ment sleep, and N1, N2, N3 represent the respective stages of non-rapid eye
movement sleep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1
The ethnic structure of the 1000 Genomes dataset mapped by its ﬁrst two
principal components (PC) from a multidimensional scaling analysis. AFR
stands for African, AMR for admixed American, EAS for East Asian, EUR
for European, and SAS for South Asian. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
6.1
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep percentage genetic
associations for the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear
regression model was adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, and ancestry. The higher
horizontal line indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and
the lower one indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
. . . . . .
27
6.2
A regional plot of the rs2750055 SNP on chromosome 10 from table 6.1
. .
28
6.3
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep percentage asso-
ciations for the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear
regression model was adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, ancestry, habitual sleep
duration, REM sleep suppressing medication, and depression. The higher
horizontal line indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and
the lower one indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
. . . . . .
28
6.4
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep percentage asso-
ciations for the MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts.
The linear regres-
sion model was adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, ancestry, habitual sleep du-
ration, REM sleep suppressing medication, depression, apnea-hypopnea
index, smoking, alcohol intake, and caﬀeine.
The higher horizontal line
indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and the lower one
indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
v
==PAGE:8==
6.5
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep minutes genetic as-
sociations for the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear
regression model was adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, and ancestry. The higher
horizontal line indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and
the lower one indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
. . . . . .
31
6.6
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep minutes genetic as-
sociations for the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear
regression model was adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, ancestry, habitual sleep
duration, REM sleep suppressing medication, and depression. The higher
horizontal line indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and
the lower one indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
. . . . . .
32
6.7
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep minute associations
for the MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear regression model
was adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, ancestry, habitual sleep duration, REM
sleep suppressing medication, depression, apnea-hypopnea index, smoking,
alcohol intake, and caﬀeine. The higher horizontal line indicates genome-
wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and the lower one indicates suggested
signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.8
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep latency genetic as-
sociations for the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear
regression model was adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, and ancestry. The higher
horizontal line indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and
the lower one indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
. . . . . .
34
6.9
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep latency associations
for the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear regression
model was adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, ancestry, habitual sleep duration,
REM sleep suppressing medication, and depression. The higher horizontal
line indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and the lower
one indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5. . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.10 A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep latency associations
for the MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear regression model
was adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, ancestry, habitual sleep duration, REM
sleep suppressing medication, depression, apnea-hypopnea index, smoking,
alcohol intake, and caﬀeine. The higher horizontal line indicates genome-
wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and the lower one indicates suggested
signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
vi
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
5.1
Demographics of the European subjects in the Ostoeoporotic Fractures in
Men (MrOS) study, the Wisconsin Sleep cohort (WSC), the Stanford Sleep
Cohort (APOE), and the Stanford Technology Analytics and Genomics in
Sleep cohort (STAGES). BMI stands for body mass index and REM for
rapid eye movement, min for minutes, and IQR for interquartile range. . . .
17
5.2
Covariates of the three GWAS models. BMI: body mass index, REM: rapid
eye movement, SNRI: Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors,
SRRI: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, AHI: Apnea-hypopnea index.
19
6.1
Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep percentage, model
1, genetic association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts.
Covariates of model 1 can be found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome,
rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the
eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta the magnitude
and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size. . . .
27
6.2
Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep percentage, model
2, genetic association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts.
Covariates of model 1 can be found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome,
rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the
eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta the magnitude
and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size. . . .
29
6.3
Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep percentage, model
3, genetic association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts.
Covariates of model 1 can be found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome,
rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the
eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta the magnitude
and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size. . . .
30
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
vii
==PAGE:10==
6.4
Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep minute, model 1,
genetic association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. Co-
variates of model 1 can be found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome,
rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the
eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta the magnitude
and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size. . . .
31
6.5
Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep minute, model 2,
genetic association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. Co-
variates of model 1 can be found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome,
rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the
eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta the magnitude
and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size. . . .
32
6.6
Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep minute, model 3,
genetic association of the MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. Covariates
of model 1 can be found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome, rsID the
SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the eﬀect
allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta the magnitude and
direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size.
. . . . .
33
6.7
Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep latency, model 1,
genetic association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. Co-
variates of model 1 can be found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome,
rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the
eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta the magnitude
and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size. . . .
34
6.8
Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep latency, model 2,
genetic association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. Co-
variates of model 1 can be found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome,
rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the
eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta the magnitude
and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size. . . .
35
6.9
Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep latency, model 3,
genetic association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. Co-
variates of model 1 can be found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome,
rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the
eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta the magnitude
and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size. . . .
36
6.10 Tissue expression of known eQTL genes modulated by the most signiﬁcant
top SNPs from tables 6.1 - 6.9. Rsid indicates the SNP reference number,
P-value the signiﬁcance of the association between the gene and tissue, NES
the normalised eﬀect size. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
viii
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:11==
6.11 Statistically signiﬁcant, p-value < 0.05, results of MAGMA gene tissue ex-
pression in the REM sleep association models. Beta is the eﬀect size, beta
std the standard deviation of the eﬀect size and se the standard error. REM
stands for rapid eye movement, and EBV for Epstein-Barr virus. . . . . . .
39
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
ix
==PAGE:12==
List of Abbreviations
1KG 1000 Genomes
ACh Acetylcholine
AFR African
AHI Apnea-hypopnea index
AMR Admixed American
APOE Stanford Sleep cohort
BMI Body mass index
CARe Candidategene Association Resource consortium
CPAP Continuous positive airway pressure
DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid
EAS East Asian
ECG Electrocardiography
EEG Electroencephalography
EMG Electromyography
EOG Electro-oculography
EUR European
GWAS Genome-wide association study
HRC Haplotype Reference Consortium
HWE Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium
LD Linkage disequilibrium
MAF Minor allele frequency
MDS Multidimensional scaling
MGH Massachusetts General Hospital
MrOS Outcomes of Sleep Disorders in Older Men cohort
NREM Non-rapid eye movement sleep
OSA Obstructive sleep apnea
PC Principal component
PCA Principal component analysis
PLM Periodic leg movements
PSG Polysomnography
QC Quality control
REM Rapid eye movement
rsID SNP identiﬁcation number
SAS South Asian
SHHS Sleep Heart Health study
SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism
STAGES Stanford Technology Analytics and Genomics in Sleep cohort
SWS Slow wave sleep
WSC Wisconsin Sleep Cohort
x
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:13==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Project approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Physiological Background
3
2.1
Sleep Physiology and Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Importance of REM sleep . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Polysomnography (PSG) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Genetics and GWAS background
7
3.1
Fundamentals of genetics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Genetics of sleep and sleep disorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Genome-wide association studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Literature review
13
4.1
GWAS: state of the art
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
REM sleep: state of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5
Methods
17
5.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5.2
Covariate selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.3
Data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.4
Linear regression using SNPTEST
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.5
Meta-analysis using META
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.6
Gene mapping and tissue expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6
Results
26
6.1
Genome-wide associations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
6.2
SNP-gene associations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Gene mapping and tissue expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
xi
==PAGE:14==
7
Discussion
41
7.1
Meta-analysis and association strength . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
7.2
Top SNP gene associations and tissue expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.3
MAGMA gene mapping and tissue expression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7.4
Shortcomings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7.5
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
8
Conclusion
46
Bibliography
47
A
55
A.1 Keyword search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
A.2 Code Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
xii
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Sleep is one of the pillars of human survival and function, it plays a role in cognitive
function, tissue regeneration, memory, metabolism, and disease. Sleep and sleep disorders
also have a large impact on the healthcare system, and public health in general. This
is both due to pathologies, and the chaotic, fast-paced lifestyle of the 21st century [1].
Sleep is split into two types of sleep, non rapid eye movement (NREM), and rapid eye
movement sleep (REM). NREM is further subdivided into three stages, making the total
number of sleep stages four, all with diﬀerent functions and characteristics [2]. REM sleep
is characterized by dreaming, rapid eye movements, as well as muscle atonia. It has a
variety of known functions, such as cognition, control of emotions, genetic expression, and
disease [3, 1]. Although sleep has been associated with many diseases, and comorbidities,
very little is known about the controlling mechanisms of sleep and the factors that inﬂuence
it.
Genetics can be used to determine the origin, heritability, and control of certain phenotypes
or traits. Components of the genome can be used to describe this, e.g. chromosomes, genes,
loci, alleles, base pairs, or single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Chromosome pairs
are the structures inside all human cells that house genes, units of heritability, made up of
sequences of genetic material. Loci are ﬁxed positions on the chromosome, and an allele
is an alternative form of a gene at a given locus. SNPs are the variation of bases at a
single position, expressed in terms of alleles. These SNPs can be used to create models
that determine connections of the genome to expressed traits observed in humans [4, 5,
6].
1.1
Problem statement
Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) aim to ﬁnd associations between single nu-
cleotide polymorphisms and traits such as diseases and genetic expressions. These asso-
ciations are then used to mark a region of the human genome that inﬂuences the risk of
that speciﬁc disease. A variety of sleep disorder GWAS have been performed, e.g. linking
genes to insomnia, daytime sleepiness, the circadian rhythm, sleep eﬃciency, and snoring.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
1
==PAGE:16==
These studies have largely been based on qualitative data self-reported from patients.
This thesis is an exploratory study that aims to use GWAS to ﬁnd genetic associations
to sleep parameters from quantitative nocturnal polysomnography (PSG) data with the
main objective being genetic control of REM sleep. The sample size will be around 5,000
PSGs in four cohorts. The Outcomes of Sleep Disorders in Older Men (Mr.OS) cohort,
the Wisconsin Sleep cohort (WSC), the Stanford Technology Analytics and Genomics
in Sleep cohort (STAGES), and the Stanford Sleep Cohort (APOE). A recent study by
Leary et al. found that REM sleep duration could be used as a predictor of mortality
based on three independent cohorts, making this research objective a valuable link in
better understanding the mechanism of REM sleep. The genetic control of quantitative
REM sleep has never before been investigated, making this exploratory study incredibly
exciting.
1.2
Project hypothesis
• There are SNPs associated with nocturnal polysomnography-derived REM sleep
amount (percentage and number of minutes).
• There are SNPs associated with nocturnal polysomnography derived REM sleep
latency.
1.3
Project approach
The following project goals were deﬁned as:
• To review current literature with regards to previously performed GWAS analysis
of sleep and sleep disorders.
• To perform data preparation and quality control on genotype data from four separate
independent cohorts. Done to prepare data for GWAS.
• To perform an analysis to determine the covariates of REM sleep. These will be
added as confounders in the linear regression model.
• To run a linear regression to determine the association between genetic loci/SNPs
and the REM sleep phenotypes described in the project hypothesis.
• Perform a meta-analysis to combine results of linear regressions from all cohorts.
2
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Physiological Background
2.1
Sleep Physiology and Architecture
Sleep makes up around one-third of the life span of a human and is split into two distinct
sleep stages, NREM, and REM sleep. NREM sleep further subdivides into stages, N1,
N2, and N3. The two stages alternate 4-6 times throughout the night and REM cycles
become progressively longer as the night progresses, the ﬁrst one being around ten minutes
and the ﬁnal cycle about one hour [2]. NREM sleep is characterized by decreased muscle
tone, breathing frequency, heart rate, blood pressure, and metabolic rate. All of which
clocking in their lowest value during the slow wave sleep periods of NREM. REM sleep,
in turn, increases blood pressure, heart rate, and metabolism to levels similar to those
of wakefulness. REM sleep is characterized by dreaming, muscle atonia, or temporary
paralysis, as well as rapid, and rolling eye movements [3].
The sleep-wake cycle is regulated by the circadian rhythm, a nearly 24 hour cycle that is
unique to every person and determines daily habitual behavior. Sleep is brought on by
ﬂuctuations in the activation of neurotransmitters, namely glutamate and acetylcholine
(ACh) in the brain stem [7, 8].
NREM sleep is brought on by nerve ﬁring patterns
using the GABA nerve transmitter in the basal forebrain. The pattern exhibits a sleep-
on, wake-oﬀpattern. The GABA neurons combined with neurons protecting cholinergic,
GABAergic, and glutamatergic neurons increase their ﬁring in conjunction with cortical
activation. REM sleep is brought on by increased ﬁring of cholinergic, REM-on, neurons
and a decrease in ﬁring from norepinephrine and serotonin neurons [8].
2.2
Importance of REM sleep
REM sleep has been linked to cognitive processes, emotional control, as well as disease and
inﬂammation. REM sleep deprivation has been found to aﬀect the immune response, with
one human study ﬁnding that REM sleep deprivation resulted in decreased serum levels
of the antibody IgA [9]. Another study found that rats subject to 72 hours of REM sleep
deprivation had elevated levels of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and biomarkers [10]. REM
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
3
==PAGE:18==
sleep has previously been causally linked to memory consolidation in rodent models, and
more recently been linked to contextual memory consolidation through REM activated
adult born neurons in humans [11, 12]. Abnormally low REM sleep and abnormally long
REM sleep latency have been found to be connected to dementia. To further elaborate, one
study found approximately 9% increase in the risk of incident dementia with each percent
reduction of REM sleep [13]. Furthermore, REM sleep has been found to have an impact on
memory consolidation, where one study found that REM sleep promotes the consolidation
of emotional memories [14]. Another study found a selective correlation between emotional
source memory and frontal theta lateralization (REM sleep), and a third study found a
link between REM sleep theta activity and emotional memory consolidation. [15, 16].
REM sleep also has a cardiovascular implication, with studies on obstructive sleep apnea
(OSA) showing that REM sleep is correlated with hypertension, non-dipping of nocturnal
blood pressure, and insulin resistance, even in patients who don’t have OSA (Apnea-
Hypopnea Index < 5/hr) [17, 18, 19]. A recent study found REM sleep to be associated
with increased mortality risk, with a 13% higher all-cause mortality rate with every 5%
reduction in REM sleep over a period of 11.9, 12.1, or 20.8 years, depending on the cohort
tested [20, 21].
2.3
Polysomnography (PSG)
2.3.1
Measuring devices
Sleep, sleep stages, and quality of sleep can be quantiﬁed by performing a polysomnog-
raphy study. It assesses wakefulness, sleep stages, respiration, cardiopulmonary function,
and sleep movements. It is an important tool in the diagnosis of sleep disorders such
as sleep apnea, restless leg syndrome, periodic leg movements (PLM), and REM sleep
behavior disorder. The study is generally conducted in a sleep laboratory and includes
electroencephalography (EEG), electro-oculography (EOG), and chin muscle electromyo-
graphy (EMG) that are used for sleep staging. Airﬂow recorded through a nasal cannula,
respiratory eﬀort measured by chest- and abdominal bands, and oxygen saturation from
ﬁnger pulse oxymetry are used to score sleep-disordered breathing. Finger pulse oxymetry
also provides insight into sleep hypoxemia unrelated to apnea-hypopnea events.
Limb
EMG channels are placed on the legs to monitor limb movements, single channel electro-
cardiography (ECG) to monitor cardiac signals, and a snore channel round oﬀthe list of
monitoring devices. Video and audio PSGs are also state of the art in most sleep laborato-
ries to further monitor sleep behavior. When continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
is being administered to patients with OSA, a C-ﬂow channel can be added to monitor
the airﬂow for continuous adjustment [22].
2.3.2
Scoring of PSG data
From the PSG data, the sleep stages are determined by changes in brain wave activity
derived from the EEG, EOG, and chin EMG channels [2].
Wakefulness: During eye-open wakefulness, as indicated by the EOG, the EEG shows
4
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:19==
waves of alpha and beta activity, though predominately beta. As the eyes close and a
person becomes sleepy, alpha waves take over. An epoch is considered to be wakefulness if
the EOG indicates that the eyes are closed, and more than half of the waves are categorized
as alpha [2].
Stage N1: Stage N1 is a short sleep stage where the alpha waves are replaced by lo-
amplitude-mixed activity.
Muscle tone is present in skeletal muscles and breathing is
regular [2].
Stage N2: During the N2 stage activity is slower but has bursts of activity in the form of
K-complexes and sleep spindles. With the K-complexes indicating a transition into deeper
sleep [2].
Stage N3: The N3 stage is the deepest sleep stage and is characterized by slow delta
waves. Waking up from N3 sleep includes a period of mental fogginess called sleep inertia
[2].
REM sleep: During REM sleep, the EEG shows a similar activity as wakefulness. Skele-
tal muscles become atonic except for the diaphragmatic breathing muscles and eyes that
remain in movement. The EOG shows a rapid movement of the eyes in a mirroring motion
[2].
The scoring of the PSG data into sleep stages, and events, is traditionally performed by
sleep technicians. The sleep stages are compiled in a hypnogram that depicts the duration
and distribution of sleep stages. An example of a hypnogram can be seen in ﬁgure 2.1.
Figure 2.1:
A hypnogram showing the distribution of sleep stages throughout a
polysomnography recording. The W represent wakefulness, REM is rapid eye movement
sleep, and N1, N2, N3 represent the respective stages of non-rapid eye movement sleep
The nature of the PSG makes it diﬃcult to obtain uniform scoring between technicians.
There is often inter scorer variability between sleep technicians, with one meta-analysis
of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine standard ﬁnding an overall sleep scoring
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
5
==PAGE:20==
agreement of 76% but it depended on sleep stage, study center, and the underlying disorder
of the patient [23]. Furthermore, Arnardottir et al. found that in Europe there is a lack of
uniform standards for scoring PSG data, which can also cause non-uniformity in scoring
[24]. This has opened the door for automatic scoring of PSG data using e.g. machine, and
deep learning methods [25, 26].
6
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 3
Genetics and GWAS background
Genetics is a study of genes, how they function, and how they interact. Genes are the
basis of how traits and carried from generation to generation. They can also be inﬂuenced
by behavior or the environment [4].
3.1
Fundamentals of genetics
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is the basis of the biological processes in the body. The
DNA double helix strand is made up of four types of bases, adenine (A), thymine (T),
guanine (G), and cytosine (C). They match up, T to C and G to A to form base pairs. The
DNA strand winds around itself to form chromosomes, large units of about 50-250 million
base pairs. Human cells have two sets of chromosomes, one from each parent, and each cell
has 23 pairs of chromosomes. The chromosomes pares are split into 22 autosomes (1-22)
and one pair of sex chromosomes (XX or XY). On each chromosome, there are multiple
genes, specialized unique sequences of bases that carry recipes for coding proteins. Genes
are fundamental units of heredity, or how genetic heritage is passed from biological parent
and child. The genes make up around 29% of the genome, with the rest being composed
of non-coding regions that provide i.a. structure and regulation. Even though all cells of
the human body contain the full genome, each cell only uses select genes to form proteins
for their function [4].
A person’s genotype is their complete genetic makeup, and their phenotype is the presen-
tation of the genotype, e.g. an appearance trait or disease. In terms of genetics, phenotype
and genotype are often meant for speciﬁc loci or locations in the genome and a distinct
trait or set of traits. Genotypes can e.g. be formed by diﬀerent sets of alleles resulting
in diﬀerent presentations. Alleles are alternative forms of genes that exist in the same
locus or position in the genome. Blood types are an example of this, where pairs of alleles
make up the AA, BB, AB, AO, BO, and OO categories. In that case, the A and B alleles
for AO and BO are dominant, while the O allele is recessive, resulting in a phenotypic
presentation of an A or B blood type, respectively. In this case AA, BB phenotypes are
homozygous, while the AO, BO phenotypes are heterozygous [5].
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
7
==PAGE:22==
SNPs, on the other hand, are base pair variations in a speciﬁc point in the genome [6].
This means that at a certain position in the genome most individuals have an A base,
while a small percentage has T in its place. In that case, the SNP at this position has
two alleles, A or T. A SNP with two alleles can then have three diﬀerent genotypes,
e.g. AA, TT, or AT [27]. Variants in the genome are not considered SNPs unless there
are at least two alleles that have frequencies of more than 1% in a large and unrelated
population. Most SNPs only have two alleles, as the likelihood of a two-point mutation
to happen at the same base pair position is extraordinarily low. This is why SNPs have
been used to map population history by identifying SNP alleles among existing and past
populations. SNPs are also commonly used as polymorphic markers to study associations
between markers and an expression of a trait or disease [6]. Sometimes groups of genetic
variants are repeatedly inherited from parent to child, these groups are called haplotypes
[28]. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) then describes the co-occurrence of this haplotype at
a given site in the genome, indicating that it occurs less or more often than what would
be expected if it were dictated by random chance. LD can be quantiﬁed as the squared
correlation coeﬃcient between two variants [29, 30].
These analyses of genetic variation are termed population genetics, and they are based
on the Hardy-Weinberg law. This law is maintained as long as population size is large,
mating is random, and mutation, selection, and migration are negligible. If these laws are
not obeyed, allele and genotyping frequencies may change from generation to generation
[31].
3.2
Genetics of sleep and sleep disorders
Few genes have been identiﬁed in the relation to sleep, apart from ones controlling the
circadian clock. In recent years more comprehensive genealogical studies of sleep and sleep
disorders have been emerging [32]. Genes controlling the feedback loop of transcription
in the circadian clock of all mammalian cells have been identiﬁed and dubbed the "clock"
genes [33]. Some genes have been linked to certain sleep disorders such as narcolepsy, rest-
less leg syndrome, and periodic leg movements. Predisposing genetic factors for narcolepsy
have been identiﬁed most commonly as an allele in the HLA gene complex of chromosome
6, HLA DQB1*0602 [34]. Genetic markers related to periodic leg movements in sleep have
been identiﬁed on the BTBD9, GLO1, DNAH8, MEIS1, and MAP2K5/SKOR1 genes [35,
36]. Similarly, for restless leg syndrome, variants of the PTPRD, BTBD9, and MEIS1
genes have been identiﬁed [37]. A speciﬁc gene has not yet been associated with insomnia,
but a variety of studies have identiﬁed genome signiﬁcant loci that are correlated to it [38,
39]. Many of these associations have been identiﬁed through GWAS.
3.3
Genome-wide association studies
GWAS aim to ﬁnd the connection between genetic risk factors and a phenotypic trait,
disease, or variation in behavior. This is done by using SNPs, whose allele frequencies
vary as a function of the phenotype in question. Associations then point to the biological
8
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:23==
control behind this phenotypic expression. When analyzing genetic data it is important
to follow rigorous quality control (QC) steps to ensure that the associations made are
relevant and signiﬁcant [27].
3.3.1
Genotyping
To run a GWAS, the subject’s DNA needs to be genotyped. It is a process where the
genetic variants of individuals are mapped, most often done through microarrays. Once
the DNA has been harvested, from e.g. blood or saliva, multiple copies of it are made
through ampliﬁcation. Genotyping is performed by cutting the ampliﬁed DNA into small
pieces and placing them on a chip. The chip is a small glass slide that has been coated
in microscopic beads that are each attached to a DNA probe. This chip usually contains
around one million genetic variants and each probe is attached to a ﬂuorescent material
that emits light when the probe binds to part of the DNA on the chip. By doing this
the genetic variants of a person can be mapped. Genotyping is not the same method as
whole genome sequencing, where each base in the genome is mapped out, which is a more
expensive and time-consuming process [40].
3.3.2
Software
QC and general pre-processing of data for GWAS can be done through a variety of software.
The most commonly used one being PLINK, an open-source analysis toolset. Another
option is to use QCTOOL, SNPTEST, IMPUTE, and GTOOL, which are a set of packages
developed by the University of Oxford. R can also be used, although designated genetic
data analysis software is often user-friendlier and more suitable [27].
3.3.3
Data format
The most common data format is the PLINK format, it reads both data in a binary and
a text format. For the text format the ﬁles extensions are *.ped, and *.map ﬁles The
*.ped ﬁles include information on the individuals and their phenotypes, while the .map
ﬁles contain information on the genetic variants i.e. their genotypes. PLINK ﬁles also
have a binary format, *.bed, *.bim, and *.fam. The *.bed ﬁle is a binary version of the
SNP information from the *.ped ﬁle, while the *.bim and *.fam ﬁles have information
on the physical position of genetic markers and subject-related data, respectively [27].
The format used for the University of Oxford packages is called the Oxford format and
includes ﬁle extensions of *.sample, *.gen, and *.bgen. The *.gen ﬁles have information
on genotypes, including chromosome, position, SNP identiﬁcation number (rsID), and
alleles [41]. The *.bgen ﬁle is a binary version of the *.gen ﬁle that allows for eﬃcient
manipulation and computations. Both ﬁles allow storage of directly genotyped data, as
well as imputed data [42]. The *.sample ﬁles store information on subjects, including
covariates and phenotypes. One other ﬁle type worth mentioning is the *.vcf extension,
which is traditionally used to store imputed genotype data [41].
3.3.4
Pre-imputation quality control
Pre-imputation QC is an important step in any GWAS because genetic data is naturally
imperfect. This can be due to poor quality of the DNA samples, errors in genotyping,
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
9
==PAGE:24==
contamination, and sample mix-ups, to name a few. Important factors to keep in mind
when performing QC are individual and SNP missingness, sex discrepancy, minor allele
frequency (MAF), Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE), heterozygosity, relatedness, and
population stratiﬁcation [27].
Figure 3.1: The ethnic structure of the 1000 Genomes dataset mapped by its ﬁrst two
principal components (PC) from a multidimensional scaling analysis.
AFR stands for
African, AMR for admixed American, EAS for East Asian, EUR for European, and SAS
for South Asian.
When ﬁltering on missingness, SNPs that are missing in a large portion of subjects, and
SNPs with a low genotype call are removed. SNP ﬁltering should be done on a stringent
threshold of around 2%. Individuals with low genotype calls are removed at a similar
threshold as the SNPs. Sex discrepancy between recorded sex and the sex based on the
X chromosome heterozygosity/homozygosity rates needs to be checked, as it can indicate
a mix-up of samples. Males should have an X chromosome heterozygosity estimate > 0.8
and women should have a value < 0.2. Filtering on MAF is done to exclude very rare
variants, as they do not have enough power to detect an SNP-phenotype association. MAF
thresholds usually vary from 1-5%. The Hardy-Weinberg law is the basis of population
genetics, therefore it is important to make sure the population being investigated fulﬁlls
it. This is done by ﬁltering out subjects who do not fulﬁll the HWE, commonly excluding
an HWE p-value < 1E-10 in cases and < 1E-6 in controls for binary traits and < 1E-6
in quantitative traits. Individuals with very high or low heterozygosity rates should be
removed as they indicate sample contamination or inbreeding. An adequate threshold is
10
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:25==
around three standard deviations away from the heterozygosity rate mean of the sample.
Related individuals should be removed from the sample as relatedness can interfere with
the association analysis. Identity by descent is calculated, and individuals of relatedness
above a certain pi-hat threshold are removed. A pi-hat score often ﬁltered on is > 0.2,
excluding individuals that are at most second-degree relatives [27].
Population stratiﬁcation needs to be controlled for because genetic material diﬀers based
on ancestry and ethnicity i.e. allele frequencies diﬀer from subpopulation to subpopulation.
This leads to the possibility of false positive associations or masking of true positive ones.
One way of controlling for population stratiﬁcation is to run a multidimensional scaling
(MDS) analysis or a principal component analysis (PCA) which computes correlation and
dissimilarities between subjects. The MDS analysis determines the average genome-wide
proportion of alleles that any two individuals share and uses them to calculate quantita-
tive indices or principal components (PCs) of genetic variation for every subject. These
components are then plotted to group individuals of genetic similarity. To determine the
ancestry of subjects in a given sample their PCs can be plotted superimposed onto the
PCs of a population with a known ethnic structure e.g. HapMap or 1000 Genomes (1KG)
[27]. A graphical example can be seen in ﬁgure 3.1, where the ﬁrst and second PCs for
the 1KG sample are plotted.
3.3.5
Imputation and post-imputation quality control
Because genotyping chips have a limited number of probes, the whole genome can not be
genotyped. Imputation both increases the power of the GWAS and is also extremely useful
for combining association results across studies that have been genotyped on diﬀerent plat-
forms or chips [43]. The imputation is performed by statistically mapping, e.g. by linear
interpolation, the genotypes or SNPs that have not been genotyped [44]. Reference panels
of known haplotypes or gene clusters are used for the mapping, examples of which are the
1000 Genomes Project, Haplotype Reference Consortium (HRC), or HapMap haplotypes
[43, 45].
After imputation, QC also needs to be implemented because the imputation quality can
vary and MAF is recalculated as the number of variants has now been increased. For
this reason, it is important to ﬁlter on imputation quality score, often called info or R2.
Exclusion of poor quality imputations should be done below a threshold of 3-9%. Post-
imputation MAF is ﬁltered on the same value as the pre-imputation MAF, 1-5% [46].
3.3.6
Linear/logistic regression
To run the association between the genotypes and phenotype in question, whether that
be a binary or quantitative phenotype, a logistic or linear regression model is respectively
implemented. Appropriate covariates are also added to the regression, with basic models
including sex, age, BMI, and PCs as proxy variables for population stratiﬁcation. The
association produces p-values that indicate the signiﬁcance of the association. A consensus
in the ﬁeld for genome-wide signiﬁcance threshold is 5E-8 on European populations, and
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
11
==PAGE:26==
1E-8 for African populations [27]. A Manhattan plot can then be made with the negative
logarithm of the p-values plotted against the genomic location or chromosome that the
association belongs to [47]. Regional plots can also be made of statistically signiﬁcant
associations, it is a closer look at the area of the genome surrounding the associated SNPs.
They display the strength and extent of the association relative to genomic position, local
LD, and position of genes in the region [48].
3.3.7
Meta-analysis
When GWAS of multiple studies are being analyzed, they can be merged using a meta-
analysis to increase the power of the association [49]. Imputation is essential to meta-
analysis as it allows for data imputed on diﬀerent chips to be combined for added statistical
power by way of an increased number of samples and variants [43, 49].
12
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 4
Literature review
Genetic research on quantitative PSG features has not been widely performed. When
looking up "Genome-wide association study + polysomnography" on PubMed, 17 results
are produced.
14 of those results had quantitative PSG phenotypes.
Their methods
included the genetic association of OSA, accelerometer-based sleep duration and quality,
narcolepsy, sleep spindle amplitude, REM sleep behavior disorder, restless leg syndrome
and insomnia, sleep duration in mice and humans, and snoring. Here, four GWAS papers,
and two REM sleep related papers are detailed. A list of keywords used for the literature
review can be found in appendix A.1.
4.1
GWAS: state of the art
Genome-wide association analysis of self-reported daytime sleepiness
identiﬁes 42 loci that suggest biological subtypes
Nature communications - 2019 - Wang et.al [50]
Introduction: This work presents the identiﬁcation of genetic variants associated with
excessive daytime sleepiness and groups them into subtypes associated with sleepiness.
Furthermore, they highlight relevant biological processes and reveal a shared genetic back-
ground with other diseases. Identiﬁed 37 genome-wide signiﬁcant loci.
Methods: Data from 452,071 participants of European ancestry from the UK biobank.
The four self-reported daytime sleepiness categories were treated like a continuous variable
using a linear mixed regression model adjusted for age, sex, genotyping array, 10 principal
components, ancestry, and genetic relatedness matrix.
Results: Found 37 genome-wide signiﬁcant loci (p < 5E-8) With the most signiﬁcant
association being within the gene KSR2, a gene associated with multiple physiological
pathways relevant to sleep and metabolism. Other novel loci were found within or near
genes associated with sleep disorders, PLCL1, GABRA2, BTBD9, HTR7, and RAI1.
Metabolic traits, GCKR, SLC39A8, and psychiatric traits, AGAP1 and CACNA1C.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
13
==PAGE:28==
Genome-wide analysis of insomnia in 1,331,010 individuals identiﬁes new risk
loci and functional pathways
Nature genetics - 2019 - Jansen et.al [38]
Introduction: Used a large genetic association sample (n = 1,331,010) to detect novel loci
and gain insight into the pathways, tissue, and cell types involved in insomnia complaints.
Identiﬁed 202 loci implicating 956 genes through positional, expression quantitative trait
loci, and chromatin mapping.
Methods: Performed meta-analysis on the GWAS results of self-reported insomnia and
morningness in the UK biobank (n = 386,533) and 23andMe cohorts (n = 944,477).
Results: The meta-analysis identiﬁed 11,990 genome-wide signiﬁcant SNPs (p < 5E-
8), and 248 independent lead SNPs (r2 < 0.1) located in 202 genomic risk loci. Genes
implicated in insomnia were also identiﬁed. MEIS1 on chromosome 2 know to be involved
in insomnia, LRGUK on chromosome 7 which has previously been linked to type 2 diabetes
and autism spectrum disorder (both disorders with prominent insomnia).
BTBD9 on
chromosome 9 was also identiﬁed and is part of a pathway that regulated the circadian
rhythm and has been associated with restless leg syndrome, PLM disorder, and Tourette
syndrome.
GWAS identiﬁes 14 loci for device-measured physical activity and sleep
duration
Nature communications - 2018 - Doherty et.al [51]
Introduction: Performed a genome-wide analysis on objective sleep duration data from
91,105 Caucasian subjects of European descent. Identiﬁed two novel and six known loci
associated with sleep duration.
Methods: Data was collected for seven days from wrist worn activity trackers with a
built-in accelerometer. Sleep duration was derived using statistical machine learning from
the raw data. For the genome analysis, a linear mixed model analysis was used to adjust
for population structure and relatedness. Covariates of assessment, center, genotyping
array, age, age2, and season were added as covariates. Novel loci were identiﬁed if their
index SNPs fell outside 400 kb of a known SNP.
Results: The two genome-wide signiﬁcant novel loci for sleep duration were found near
the MAPKAP1 and AUTS2 genes, with a p-value of 2.3E-10 and 3.9E-9 respectively. The
six known loci were found near the PAX8-AS1, MEIS1, LOC10192851, MAPK8IP1P2,
OLFM2, and DPYD genes, with a p-value of 5E-9. Of the known loci identiﬁed three loci
are associated with short sleep (near PAX8-AS1, MEIS1, and MAPK8IP1P2) and one
locus with long sleep duration (near PAX8-AS1)
Common variants in DRD2 are associated with sleep duration: the CARe
consortium
Human Molecular Genetics - 2016 - Cade et.al [52]
Introduction: Investigated the association between sleep duration and genetics across a
14
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:29==
multi-ethnic US population, Aiming to understand the etiology of sleep duration, which
is known to impact the morbidity of cardiovascular diseases, and provide insights into
pharmacogenetic approaches for improving alertness and sleep.
Methods: The discovery sample included data from over 25,000 individuals of European,
African, Hispanic, and Asian ancestries from seven cohorts participating in the Candidate
gene Association Resource (CARe) Consortium. Not all cohorts included polysomnog-
raphy data, for those who didn’t, self-reported sleep traits were used. Genotypes were
imputed and quality control was performed. A basic model of covariates included age,
age2, sex, age multiplied by sex, and 10 principal components. A second model included
alcohol, smoking, years of education, and retirement status; and a third model included
BMI, BMI2, depression, hypertension, and snoring.
Results: A SNP (rs17601612) in the dopamine D2 receptor gene (DRD2) was identiﬁed
as being signiﬁcantly associated with sleep duration, with a p-value of 9.8E-7. The con-
ditional analysis found a second signal from DRD2 which had an opposite eﬀect on sleep
duration. The lead DRD2 gene signal had previously been shown to be associated with
schizophrenia and longer sleep duration.
4.2
REM sleep: state of the art
Association of Rapid Eye Movement Sleep With Mortality in Middle-aged
and Older Adults
JAMA Neurology - 2020 - Leary et.al [20]
Introduction: Investigated the association between REM sleep and mortality in two
diﬀerent independent cohorts and found that a decreased percentage of REM sleep was
associated with greater risk of all-cause, cardiovascular, and other non-cancer related
mortality. The ﬁndings suggest that percentage of REM sleep may be an emerging easy
to interpret aging biomarker.
Methods: The two investigated cohorts were the Outcomes of Sleep Disorders in Older
Men (MrOS) Sleep Study (n = 2675) and Wisconsin Sleep Cohort (WSC) (n = 1386).
Cox proportional hazard models were used to assess the associations. Two models were
built using clinical knowledge and empirical covariate selection for each cohort.
Results: For the MrOS cohort, after adjusting for covariates, there was a 13% higher
all-cause mortality rate for every 5% reduction in REM sleep. For the WSC there was a
17% increase in all-cause mortality for every 5% reduction in REM sleep.
Slow wave and REM sleep deprivation eﬀects on explicit and implicit
memory during sleep.
Neuropsychology - 2016 - Casey et.al [53]
Introduction: Investigated whether the deprivation of slow wave sleep (SWS) or rapid
eye movement (REM) sleep over an entire night would have a speciﬁc eﬀect on consolida-
tion in explicit and implicit memory tasks. Found that REM sleep deprivation adversely
aﬀected verbal recall but did not aﬀect short-term and working memory or measures of
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
15
==PAGE:30==
verbal implicit memory.
Methods: Polysomnography measurements were performed on 19 participants over three
consecutive nights. Sleep stages were observed in real-time and disrupted when they oc-
curred. The Corsi blocks were used to assess a short-term spatial-span forgetting task,
spacial grids were used for episodic visuospatial recall tasks, the verbal memory recall
task assessed factual recall, spatial context memory, and temporal context memory. Vi-
sual priming was assessed using a Lexical decision task. The Karolinska sleepiness scale,
as well as the Morningness-Eveningnes questionnaire, were administered.
Results: REM sleep (2p= .52) deprivation adversely aﬀected explicit verbal recall. Nei-
ther SWS nor REM sleep deprivation aﬀected aspects of short-term or working memory
and did not aﬀect measures of verbal implicit memory.
These state of the art papers show that GWAS have been successful in ﬁnding genetic
components related to various phenotypic traits.
16
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 5
Methods
5.1
Datasets
Data for obtained from four independent cohorts, the MrOS study, WSC, APOE, and
STAGES cohorts. Data were included for patients that were of European ancestry and
had undergone a PSG study, as well as DNA genotyping. Summary statistics of the study
population can be found in table 5.1.
Table 5.1: Demographics of the European subjects in the Ostoeoporotic Fractures in Men
(MrOS) study, the Wisconsin Sleep cohort (WSC), the Stanford Sleep Cohort (APOE),
and the Stanford Technology Analytics and Genomics in Sleep cohort (STAGES). BMI
stands for body mass index and REM for rapid eye movement, min for minutes, and IQR
for interquartile range.
MrOS
WSC
STAGES
APOE
Subjects
n
2169
464
1064
438
Demographics
Age
µ ± σ
76 ± 5
59 ± 8
47 ± 15
47 ± 14
Sex (% male)
n (%)
2169 (100%)
262 (56%)
412 (45%)
254 (58%)
BMI
µ ± σ
27.2 ± 3.8
31.5 ± 6.9
31.3 ± 8.7
27.0 ± 6.9
Phenotypes
REM sleep
amount (min)
µ ± σ
69.6 ± 28.3
59.3 ± 27.8
59.0 ± 37.4
60.2 ± 30.2
REM sleep
amount (%)
µ ± σ
19.2 ± 6.6
15.9 ± 6.3
11.9 ± 7.1
16.2 ± 6.9
REM sleep
latency (min)
µ1/2 (IQR)
82.0 (137.0-58.0)
105.0 (166.4-73.5)
110.5 (190.5-65.5)
116.0 (192.0-78.5)
5.1.1
MrOS cohort
The MrOS cohort is an observational, longitudinal cohort of older men, originally designed
to determine risk factors for osteoporosis, fractures, and prostate cancer in men. Recruit-
ment and baseline studies took place over 27 months from 2000-2002, with a follow-up in
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
17
==PAGE:32==
2005 [54]. 5,994 men, 65 and older, were enrolled from six clinics in the United States
(Birmingham, Alabama; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Palo Alto, California; Monongahela
Valley, Pennsylvania; Portland, Oregon; and San Diego, California). Inclusion criteria
included being able to walk unassisted and had not undergone bilateral hip replacement
[55]. The MrOS Sleep study is an ancillary cohort of the parent MrOS study. It included
3,135 subjects, whose qualitative and quantitative sleep data was recorded between 2003
and 2005. Subjects using CPAP or BiPAP machines, snoring/sleep apnea mouthpieces
and oxygen therapy were excluded [56].
Of the 3,135 men, 207 did not complete the overnight sleep study and 56 were missing
sleep stage data [57]. 463 subjects were missing genotypes, and 267 were of non-European
ancestry leaving 2,169 participants who contributed to data analysis.
5.1.2
WSC cohort
The WSC is an ongoing longitudinal population study of the causes, consequences, and
natural history of sleep disorders [58]. The study was established in 1988 by mailing a
survey to 6,000 state-agency employees of Wisconsin. 3,513 subjects from the age of 30-60
were enrolled in the original study after having completed the survey. Follow-up surveys
were conducted every ﬁve years [58, 59].
A subsection of 1,549 subjects agreed to undergo in-lab nocturnal polysomnography mea-
surements every four years. Of the 1,549 who agreed to have sleep studies, 22 were excluded
because they had inadequate sleep data and two died the same year as the sleep study
[57]. 1002 subjects were missing genotype data or were of non-European ancestry, and 12
were excluded because they worked a night shift, making the ﬁnal cohort 513 subjects of
European ancestry.
5.1.3
STAGES cohort
The Stanford Technology Analytics and Genomics in Sleep (STAGES) is a study initiated
in 2018 and prematurely terminated in 2020. The cohort was designed to improve under-
standing and characterization of sleep disorder phenotypes on a large scale. The subjects
answered a detailed sleep survey and had blood samples drawn. The physiological test
included actigraphy measurements, psychometric testing, a PSG, and a 3D craniofacial
scan [60].
5,879 subjects were originally enrolled in the study and had their DNA genotyped, a
subset of 1,239 subjects had complete PSG data. Subjects were excluded because their
sleep study included the use of a CPAP machine, were of non-European ancestry, or were
shift-workers, making the ﬁnal cohort for data analysis 1,064.
5.1.4
APOE cohort
The Stanford Sleep cohort (APOE) is a patient based cohort made up of sleep-disordered
patients visiting the Stanford Sleep Disorders Clinic from 1999-2007 [61, 62]. 1,008 subjects
18
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:33==
were enrolled in the study, 351 subjects had incomplete PSG data, 13 were shift workers,
and 206 were non-European, making the ﬁnal cohort for data analysis 438 subjects.
5.2
Covariate selection
Covariates of REM sleep for the GWAS regression were identiﬁed in the literature and
using rationale. Three covariate models were generated and can be found in table 5.2.
Table 5.2: Covariates of the three GWAS models. BMI: body mass index, REM: rapid
eye movement, SNRI: Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, SRRI: Selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, AHI: Apnea-hypopnea index.
Covariates
Model 1
age, sex, BMI, ethnicity.
Model 2
Model 1 + habitual sleep duration (weeknight if available),
REM reducing agents (antidepressant use, tricyclic, SNRI,
SRRI, benzodiazepines), depression.
Model 3
Model 2 + AHI, smoking, alcohol intake, caﬀeine intake.
Model 1 is a basic model traditionally run as a baseline model. The ﬁrst four PCs are
used as proxy variables for ancestry. Variables for model 2 were chosen as elements that
have an impact on REM sleep. Habitual sleep duration was added because it can point to
sleep deprivation, which results in disruptive sleep cycles, that aﬀect REM sleep. Antide-
pressants, serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI), selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SRRI), tricyclic antidepressants, and benzodiazepines are known for
decreasing REM sleep amount and all but benzodiazepines increase REM sleep latency
[63, 64]. Depression has also been known to reduce REM sleep amount [65]. Model 3
includes the addition of variables that may have a milder eﬀect on REM sleep. AHI is
determined by the number of apnea or hypopnea events i.e. breathing cessations per hour
of sleep, indicating the presence of sleep apnea. It results in unrestful sleep, which impacts
the quality of sleep, and consequently the quality of REM sleep. Alcohol, caﬀeine, and
smoking are all known to have some eﬀect on REM sleep [66, 67, 68].
5.3
Data preparation
Previously, genotypes from all cohorts had been put through pre-imputation QC and
imputed against the 1KG reference build 37/hg19. The raw genotypes were subject to
stringent QC, individuals and variants with missingness > 0.05, related individuals with
identity by descent, pihat, > 0.2, and variants with HWE p-value < 1E-06 were ex-
cluded. Ethnicities were validated using the HapMap and 1KG phase 3 reference geno-
types. HapMap was used for MrOS, APOE, and WSC, while 1KG was used for STAGES.
Genetic PCs were extracted using MDS with PLINK and PC plots were visually inspected
for outliers and unexpected deviations. After the QC steps, the genotypes were phased one
chromosome at a time with shapeit() using the build 37 coordinate system of the human
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
19
==PAGE:34==
genome. The phased haplotypes were then subject to imputation against the 1KG phase
3 genome in 1-megabyte chunks for each chromosome, using IMPUTE2 with a custom
pipeline designed in the Mignot lab at Stanford School of Medicine. Output ﬁles were on
the Oxford format of *.gen, and *.sample, one ﬁle per chromosome.
For all cohorts, the genotypes and phenotypes had subject identiﬁcation numbers (IDs)
on diﬀerent formats and they needed to be linked. Python 3.6.8 was used to link the
phenotype values to the genotype IDs using translation ﬁles. Using this linking informa-
tion, phenotype and covariate ﬁles were created based on the model variables from table
5.2. To prepare the genotypes the *.gen ﬁles were converted to *.bgen ﬁles to ease the
computational load. This was done using QCTOOLS 2.0.1 on a chromosome basis.
The REM sleep phenotypes were extracted from PSGs manually annotated by sleep tech-
nicians for the APOE, MrOS, and WSC cohorts. The manually annotated PSGs of the
STAGES cohort were insuﬃcient and automatic sleep stage scoring was implemented.
Automatic sleep staging algorithms have previously shown good agreement with manual
scoring [25]. The scoring algorithm used was a previously published algorithm from Ole-
sen et al [69]. Available (https://github.com/Stanford-STAGES/deep-sleep-pytorch). REM
sleep percentage was calculated as REM sleep in minutes divided by total sleep in minutes,
and REM sleep latency was deﬁned as the number of minutes from sleep onset to the ﬁrst
epoch of REM sleep.
To extract European subjects, a k-means clustering algorithm was implemented using
Rstudio 1.2.5019.
The built-in function, kmeans, uses Euclidean distance to minimize
the distance between a point and its assigned cluster. First, the algorithm initializes the
cluster centers by randomly sampling the input. Next, the nearest point to each center or
cluster is assigned to it, and a new center for the two-point cluster is calculated based on
their mean. Then the rest of the points are assigned to the clusters based on the shortest
Euclidean distance to the cluster center, whose position is updated every time a point is
added to the cluster. During the pre-imputation QC, the PCs had been mapped using an
MDS analysis through PLINK and the reference genome of HapMap/1KG merged with
the genotypes of the cohort. The reference genomes have self-reported ancestry and their
ancestry falls into sub-cohorts e.g. British in England and Scotland or Japanese in Tokyo,
Japan. For easier interpretation the sub-cohorts were merged into ﬁve super populations,
African (AFR), Admixed American (AMR), East Asian (EAS), European (EUR), and
South Asian (SAS). The ﬁrst two PCs of the reference genome subjects were used to
train the k-means algorithm, and the number of clusters was set to ﬁve, the same as the
number of super populations. The trained algorithm was then used to predict the ancestry
of the subjects from each database. The resulting EUR subjects were plotted against the
HapMap/1KG data to check for outliers before they were exported to a text ﬁle.
Next, the *.sample ﬁles for each cohort were prepared from the phenotype, EUR, covariate,
20
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:35==
and the PCA/MDS ﬁles. To run the association, each *.sample ﬁle needed to be ordered
in the same way it was imputed. To make sure the order was uniform Rstudio’s built-
in function join, set to left, was used to assign the phenotypic and covariate values to
the correct subject IDs.
Empty columns were set to "NA", for "Not available".
Non-
EUR subjects and shift-workers had their phenotypic values set to "NA" to exclude them
from the analysis. One APOE subject had an abnormally high REM sleep amount, they
were determined an outlier, and their phenotypic value set to "NA". The ﬁrst row of the
*.sample ﬁles was coded as ’C’ for columns of continuous variables, ’D’ for dichotomous
variable, ’P’ for a continuous phenotype, and ’B’ for a binary phenotype.
Not all variables were coded in the same way for all cohorts. Age above 79 years in the
STAGES cohort was reported as >=79 and was recoded to 79 years for this analysis. Sex
was coded as a dichotomous variable, 1 for male and 2 for female. If a value for BMI was
not available, it was calculated as weight/height2. Habitual sleep duration was coded as a
continuous variable of the number of hours of sleep usually slept per night. For the WSC
cohort, habitual sleep duration was chosen as habitual weeknight sleep, although habitual
weekend sleep was also reported. For the APOE cohort, habitual sleep was reported as
categorical variables, 1 for less than four hours, 2 for four to ﬁve hours, 3 for six hours,
4 for seven hours, and 5 for more than eight hours. These variables were recoded into
number of hours, 1 was set to four hours, 2 to ﬁve hours, 3 to six hours, 4 to seven
hours, and 5 to eight hours. Medication was coded as a binary variable and assigned as
1 if a subject was prescribed one or more of the REM reducing medication in table 5.2.
Depression was coded as a binary variable, 1 for presence and 0 for absence. For the
WSC cohort, depression was reported on a continuous scale based on the Zung self-rating
depression scale. Traditionally, a score of 50 is used as a threshold for depression, even
though the recommended cut-oﬀpoint is 40 [70]. A threshold of 50 was chosen for this
analysis and those with a score above 50 were recoded to 1, and those below to 0. The
MrOS cohort did not report diagnosed depression, use of anti-depressants was used as a
proxy variable. The AHI index is coded as a continuous variable. For MrOS, AHI was not
directly reported so the respiratory disturbance index at 3% desaturation or arousal was
used as a proxy variable. Smoking was coded as a binary variable, 1 for current smokers,
and 0 for non-smokers. Alcohol intake was coded as a continuous variable of the number
of alcoholic units consumed per day. Caﬀeine was coded as a continuous variable of the
number of caﬀeinated beverages consumed 2-4 hours before going to bed. If shift work was
not provided as a binary variable it was transformed to one. For the APOE cohort shift
work was reported as never, rarely, sometimes, usually, or always. Those who reported
shift work as usually or always were excluded. For the STAGES cohort, shift work was
reported in time of day of shift start and end. Subjects were excluded if they worked for
periods longer than 12 hours, and/or outside of 7 AM-9 PM. The WSC cohort reported
shift work as day shift, night shift, rotating shift, and non-applicable. Those who reported
working a night or rotating shift were excluded. MrOS did not report shift work.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
21
==PAGE:36==
5.4
Linear regression using SNPTEST
Before running the linear regression, the normality of the phenotypes was checked because
the linear regression model of SNPTEST assumes a normal distribution of phenotypes.
This was done in three ways using Rstudio, ﬁrstly the ﬁrst two PCs were plotted for the
EUR subjects and colored by their phenotype, next a histogram was plotted using the
built-in function hist, and ﬁnally QQ plots were made to visually assess normality. Linear
regression models have a normality assumption, however for large sample sizes (above
20 subjects), the mean should always be normal, according to the central limit theorem.
SNPTEST v.2.5.4-beta3 was used to run the association analysis. *.sample and *.bgen
ﬁles for each cohort and model were used as input to the SNPTEST software, which ran
a linear regression to determine the association between the geno- and phenotypes. An
equation for the linear regression model is the following:
y = xβ1 + β0 + ϵ
(5.1)
where y is the continuous phenotype or REM sleep in minutes, REM sleep percentage,
and REM sleep latency, in this analysis. x is the SNP genotype at a given locus, β1 is the
eﬀect size or the parameter that represents the strength of association between the SNP,
x, and the phenotype, y. It also describes the direction of the eﬀect. β0 is the intercept
term or the bias. ϵ is the part of the phenotype, y, not explained by the SNP, x, i.e. the
covariates of the phenotype. The regression maps the phenotype against one of the three
possible genotypes at a given location in the genome, and then a line of best ﬁt is added.
When the association is run, the output is the p-value of each SNP in the association,
the β1 coeﬃcient, and the standard error. To calculate the p-values of the association an
F-score needs to be calculated ﬁrst. The F-score is calculated as follows:
F = SSMean −SSFit
SSFit
(5.2)
where SSMean is the sum of the squared distance of an observation from the mean phe-
notype value, and SSFit is the sum of squared distances from an observation to the line of
best ﬁt. Another way of looking at the F-score is the variation in the phenotype, explained
by the genotype divided by the variation in the phenotype, not explained by the genotype.
This F-score is then converted to a p-value by comparing it to a probability distribution of
F-values generated in a way that assumes there was no relationship between the genotype
and the phenotypic trait. The p-value is then calculated as:
P −value = Fabove
Fdist
(5.3)
Where Fabove is the proportion of the F-score probability distribution higher than the
observed F-score, and Fdist is the entire F-score probability distribution. The β1 coeﬃcient
22
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:37==
is the slope of the line of best ﬁt i.e. the eﬀect size, and the standard error is the standard
error of the β1 eﬀect size.
SNPTEST oﬀers ﬁve diﬀerent models, additive, dominant, recessive, general, and het-
erozygote. For this analysis an additive model was chosen which measures the independent
eﬀect of an allele on a locus, this was done by setting the ﬂag frequentist to 1. The
SNPTEST ﬂag use_raw_phenotypes was used for the REM sleep percentage and REM
sleep minute phenotypes, while the quantile_normalise_phenotypes ﬂag was used to
normalise the REM sleep latency phenotypes as their distribution was more skewed. The
method ﬂag was set to score, which uses a missing data likelihood score test. This method
allows the linear model to take imputed data into account by using a quadratic approxi-
mation around β = 0 to get the log of the missing data likelihood, which is then used to
estimate the variance of the score statistic. The association analysis was performed per
chromosome for all cohorts in chunks of 10,000 bases. After the associations had been
made, the results were ﬁltered, and those with imputation quality, R2 > 0.4, and MAF
> 0.01 were kept for meta-analysis. This was repeated for all three phenotypes, and then
for all three models.
5.5
Meta-analysis using META
META version 1.7 was used to run the meta-analysis of the models. META oﬀers three dif-
ferent meta-analysis methods, an inverse-variance method based on a ﬁxed-eﬀects model,
an inverse-variance method based on a random-eﬀects model, and a z-statistic based
method.
The method chosen for this analysis was the inverse-variance method based
on a ﬁxed-eﬀects model. It combines the outcomes of each cohort in the following way:
ZMETA = βMETA
σMETA
(5.4)
where βMETA is calculated by:
βMETA =
!
i βi/(λiσ2
i )
!
i 1/(λiσ2
i )
(5.5)
and
σMETA =
"
1
!
i 1/(λiσ2
i )
(5.6)
where i is the i-th cohort, λi is the genomic control estimate of the i-th cohort, and βi
is the eﬀect size of the i-th cohort. This model was chosen as it is applicable when the
same phenotype and measurement scale are used in each cohort. The genomic control
estimate, λ, is used to control for population stratiﬁcation and is calculated for each
cohort. A z-score is calculated for each association in the cohort, by dividing the eﬀect
size by its standard error, z = β1/se. The z-score is then squared to create a chi-squared
distribution for the cohort. This cohort chi-squared distribution is then compared to a chi-
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
23
==PAGE:38==
squared distribution with a signiﬁcance level of 0.5 and 1 degree of freedom. The genomic
control is then quantiﬁed by ﬁnding the median of the cohort chi-squared divided by the
comparison chi-squared. For this analysis, the genomic control estimate indicated minimal
genomic inﬂation (λ = 1.001-1.01) and was therefore not added to the meta-analysis.
Furthermore, input to the META software included the use_info_column and threshold
ﬂags set to 0.4 to ensure that only SNPs of adequate imputation quality were included in
the meta-analysis. Finally, association ﬁles from SNPTEST for each cohort were added
with the cohort ﬂag. This was repeated for all three phenotypes, and then for all three
models. Meta-analysis on model 3, only included the MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts,
because the APOE cohort did not have alcohol, caﬀeine, and smoking phenotypes avail-
able. Before interpretation of the results, the META output ﬁles were concatenated after
the exclusion of SNPs that only occurred in one of the cohorts. Manhattan plots were
generated using Rstudio by plotting the negative logarithm of the SNPs’ p-value against
its genomic position.
FUMA was used to run a SNP2GENE analysis. FUMA is an open-access platform created
at VU University Amsterdam that combines 18 biological data repositories and tools to
process GWAS summary statistics and provide a variety of annotations [71]. Output ﬁles
from META were ﬁltered to only include relevant columns of, chromosome, position, rsid,
eﬀect allele, non-eﬀect allele, p-value, eﬀect allele frequency/MAF, eﬀect size, and eﬀect
size standard error. Input settings for the SNP2GENE analysis were determined based
on association strength observed from the Manhattan plots and most values were kept as
default except for maximum p-value of lead SNP was set to 1E-5, minimum MAF was
set to 0.01, and maximum distance between LD blocks to merge into a locus was set to
500 kb. Results from the FUMA analysis, in conjunction with the Manhattan plots, were
used to identify top SNPs by looking at high p-values, the number of unique SNPs within
a genomic locus, and regional plots. FUMA was also used to perform a MAGMA analysis
to determine biological pathways and functional categories of associated genes. GTEx
portal (https://www.gtexportal.org) was further used to investigate known genetic control
and eQTL tissue expression of the top SNPs from the meta-analysis. Example scripts
used for the methods can be found in appendix A.2
5.6
Gene mapping and tissue expression
The MAGMA gene set analysis feature in FUMA uses curated gene sets to perform gene-
property analysis to test relationships between tissue-speciﬁc gene expression proﬁles and
disease-gene associations. This gene-property analysis is created using the following re-
gression model.
Z ∼β0 + EtβE + AβA + BβB + ϵ
24
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:39==
Where Z is the gene-based Z-score converted from the gene based P-value, B is a matrix
of technical confounders included by default, Et is the gene expression value of a testing
tissue type ,c, and A is the average expression across tissue types in a data set deﬁned as:
Et =
n
#
i
log2(ei + 1)/n
and
A =
N
#
j∈T
Ej/N
where n is the number of samples in a tissue type t, ei is the expression value of a
sample in the tissue type t, N is the number of tissue types in a data set and T =
{tissue type 1, tissue type 2, ..., tissue type N}. A one-sided test of βE > 0 is performed
which tests the positive relationship between tissue speciﬁcity and genetic association of
genes.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
25
==PAGE:40==
Chapter 6
Results
The WSC genotypes were genotyped on two diﬀerent chips, Aﬀymetrix 6.0 and 500K.
After extraction of subjects with available geno- and phenotypes from the data on the
500K chip, 95 remained. SNPTEST requires 100 subjects to run an association, hence the
49 EUR subjects on the 500K chip were omitted. Making the total number of individuals
included in the SNPTEST association and meta-analysis 4135 subjects.
6.1
Genome-wide associations
A SNPTEST meta-analysis was performed for all three phenotypes, REM sleep percentage,
REM sleep amount in minutes, and REM sleep latency. The three models from table
5.2 were consequently run for all phenotypes. Manhattan plots were generated for each
phenotype and model and can be found in ﬁgures 6.1-6.10.
6.1.1
REM sleep percentage: meta-analysis
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of the REM sleep percentage genetic associations
of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts, adjusted for the covariates of model 1
in table 5.2, was generated and can be seen in ﬁgure 6.1
26
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.1: A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep percentage genetic
associations for the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear regression
model was adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, and ancestry. The higher horizontal line indi-
cates genome-wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and the lower one indicates suggested
signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
Using results from the FUMA analysis, and ﬁgure 6.1, lead SNPs with signiﬁcant associ-
ations or ones of suggested signiﬁcance were identiﬁed. They can be found in table 6.1
along with their chromosome number, non-eﬀect allele, eﬀect allele, MAF, p-value, eﬀect
size, standard eﬀect size error, and nearest gene. Genome-wide signiﬁcance is deﬁned as
p-value < 5E-8 and suggested signiﬁcance as p-value < 1E-5. SNP support was estimated
by visually inspecting regional plots generated using FUMA.
Table 6.1: Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep percentage, model 1,
genetic association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts.
Covariates of
model 1 can be found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome, rsID the SNP identiﬁcation
number, alleleA the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect
allele frequency, beta the magnitude and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error
of the eﬀect size.
chr
rsID
alleleA
alleleB
MAF
P-value
beta
se
nearestGene
4
rs186519358
C
A
0.0268
6.64E-07
3.6742
0.7390
GYPA
7
rs10257635
A
C
0.1879
2.62E-06
0.9240
0.1967
AC011288.2
9
rs10960691
C
G
0.0964
8.62E-06
1.1527
0.2591
TYRP1
10
rs2750055
T
C
0.3002
3.68E-08
-0.9200
0.1671
RP11-342D11.3
17
rs238230
T
C
0.4125
5.18E-06
0.7205
0.1581
CAMTA2
18
rs17525
A
G
0.3986
9.36E-06
0.7038
0.1588
RN7SL97P
19
rs4932932
C
T
0.1183
8.87E-06
-0.9620
0.2165
AC003973.4
As table 6.1 shows seven SNPs were identiﬁed as having associations above the suggested
signiﬁcance threshold. The rs2750055 SNP on chromosome 10 reaches genome-wide signif-
icance. When looking at ﬁgure 6.1, it looks like the rs2750055 lead SNP is an independent,
unsupported variant. However, a regional plot of the area, shows a cluster of SNPs in LD
with the lead SNP, see ﬁgure 6.2.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
27
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.2: A regional plot of the rs2750055 SNP on chromosome 10 from table 6.1
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of the REM sleep percentage associations of the
APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts, adjusted for the covariates of model 2 in table
5.2, were generated and can be seen in ﬁgure 6.3
Figure 6.3: A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep percentage associations
for the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts.
The linear regression model was
adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, ancestry, habitual sleep duration, REM sleep suppressing
medication, and depression. The higher horizontal line indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance
of p-value < 5E-8, and the lower one indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
Using results from the FUMA analysis, and ﬁgure 6.3, lead SNPs with signiﬁcant associ-
ations or ones of suggested signiﬁcance. They can be found in table 6.2 along with their
chromosome number, non-eﬀect allele, eﬀect allele, MAF, p-value, eﬀect size, standard
eﬀect size error, and nearest gene. SNP support was estimated by visually inspecting
regional plots generated using FUMA.
28
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:43==
Table 6.2: Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep percentage, model 2,
genetic association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts.
Covariates of
model 1 can be found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome, rsID the SNP identiﬁcation
number, alleleA the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect
allele frequency, beta the magnitude and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error
of the eﬀect size.
chr
rsID
alleleA
alleleB
MAF
P-value
beta
se
nearestGene
1
rs847734
T
A
0.1889
1.53E-07
-1.0279
0.1958
PTGER3
3
rs7374922
T
G
0.1928
6.97E-06
0.8528
0.1897
RP13-685P2.8
4
rs186519358
C
A
0.0268
1.06E-06
3.5781
0.7331
GYPA
7
rs10257635
A
C
0.1879
4.83E-07
1.0015
0.1990
AC011288.2
9
rs10962622
G
C
0.1779
4.48E-06
0.9849
0.2147
BNC2
10
rs2750055
T
C
0.3002
1.56E-07
-0.8829
0.1683
RP11-342D11.3
19
rs146406511
C
A
0.0666
3.29E-06
1.2524
0.2692
LILRB2
As table 6.2 shows, seven signiﬁcant or suggestively signiﬁcant associations were identiﬁed
after correcting for covariates of model 2 in table 5.2. Four SNPs remain suggestively
signiﬁcant after the addition of REM related covariates and two novel were added. The
rs2750055 SNP, which reached genome-wide signiﬁcance in model 1, dropped below the
genome-wide signiﬁcance threshold after the covariate addition.
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of the REM sleep percentage genetic associations
of the MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts, adjusted for the covariates of model 3 in table
5.2, were generated and can be seen in ﬁgure 6.4 The meta-analysis of model 3 did not
include APOE as the cohort had missing covariate variables, making the study cohort for
the 3rd model 3,697 subjects.
Figure 6.4: A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep percentage associations
for the MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear regression model was adjusted
for, age, sex, BMI, ancestry, habitual sleep duration, REM sleep suppressing medication,
depression, apnea-hypopnea index, smoking, alcohol intake, and caﬀeine.
The higher
horizontal line indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and the lower one
indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
29
==PAGE:44==
Using results from the FUMA analysis, and ﬁgure 6.4, lead SNPs with signiﬁcant associ-
ations or ones of suggested signiﬁcance. They can be found in table 6.3 along with their
chromosome number, non-eﬀect allele, eﬀect allele, MAF, p-value, eﬀect size, standard
eﬀect size error, and nearest gene. SNP support was estimated by visually inspecting
regional plots generated using FUMA.
Table 6.3: Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep percentage, model 3,
genetic association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts.
Covariates of
model 1 can be found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome, rsID the SNP identiﬁcation
number, alleleA the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect
allele frequency, beta the magnitude and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error
of the eﬀect size.
chr
rsID
alleleA
alleleB
MAF
P-value
beta
se
nearestGene
2
rs62204063
T
G
0.3231
9.43E-06
-1.0241
0.2312
RP11-212J19.1
3
rs7374922
T
G
0.1928
7.71E-06
0.9664
0.2161
RP13-685P2.8
3
rs1908533
T
C
0.1153
3.24E-06
-1.237
0.2657
RP11-501O2.1
7
rs10257635
A
C
0.1879
6.51E-07
1.0105
0.2031
AC011288.2
11
rs143945632
A
C
0.0765
7.16E-06
1.7406
0.3878
AP001024.1
12
rs74329695
G
A
0.0676
5.78E-07
-1.946
0.3893
SRRM4:RP11-364C11.2
17
rs62077860
C
T
0.3598
5.59E-06
-0.7899
0.1739
RP11-156L14.1:MARCH10
19
rs146406511
C
A
0.0666
2.00E-06
1.3205
0.2778
LILRB2
As table 6.3 shows, eight SNPs with suggestively signiﬁcant associations were identiﬁed,
none reaching genome-wide signiﬁcance.
30
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:45==
6.1.2
REM sleep amount in minutes: meta-analysis
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of the REM sleep minutes genetic associations of
the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts, adjusted for the covariates of model 1 in
table 5.2, were generated and can be seen in ﬁgure 6.5
Figure 6.5: A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep minutes genetic associa-
tions for the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear regression model was
adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, and ancestry. The higher horizontal line indicates genome-
wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and the lower one indicates suggested signiﬁcance of
p-value < 1E-5.
Using results from the FUMA analysis, and ﬁgure 6.5, lead SNPs with signiﬁcant associ-
ations or ones of suggested signiﬁcance were identiﬁed. They can be found in table 6.4
along with their chromosome number, non-eﬀect allele, eﬀect allele, MAF, p-value, eﬀect
size, standard eﬀect size error, and nearest gene. SNP support was estimated by visually
inspecting regional plots generated using FUMA.
Table 6.4: Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep minute, model 1, genetic
association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. Covariates of model 1 can be
found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome, rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA
the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta
the magnitude and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size.
chr
rsID
alleleA
alleleB
MAF
P-value
beta
se
nearestGene
1
rs10912181
A
G
0.3091
4.27E-07
-3.678
0.7274
RP5-925F19.1
2
rs141360941
A
AT
0.016
8.82E-06
11.5981
2.6097
TRIM54
6
rs6938361
A
G
0.3598
6.68E-06
3.0911
0.6864
TRAPPC3L
10
rs2750055
T
C
0.3002
3.10E-08
-3.9294
0.7098
RP11-342D11.3
11
rs35793328
G
T
0.3320
6.54E-07
3.4671
0.6970
FAM76B
20
rs112723315
C
A
0.0288
7.12E-06
10.1669
2.2643
TASP1
As table 6.4 shows, six SNPs were identiﬁed as being suggestively or genome-wide signiﬁ-
cant. Similar to the ﬁrst REM sleep percentage model, the rs2750055 SNP on chromosome
10 reaches the genome-wide signiﬁcance threshold.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
31
==PAGE:46==
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of the REM sleep minute genetic associations of
the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts, adjusted for the covariates of model 2 in
table 5.2, were generated and can be seen in ﬁgure 6.6
Figure 6.6: A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep minutes genetic asso-
ciations for the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear regression model
was adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, ancestry, habitual sleep duration, REM sleep suppressing
medication, and depression. The higher horizontal line indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance
of p-value < 5E-8, and the lower one indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
Using results from the FUMA analysis, and ﬁgure 6.6, lead SNPs with signiﬁcant associ-
ations or ones of suggested signiﬁcance were identiﬁed. They can be found in table 6.5
along with their chromosome number, non-eﬀect allele, eﬀect allele, MAF, p-value, eﬀect
size, standard eﬀect size error, and nearest gene. SNP support was estimated by visually
inspecting regional plots generated using FUMA.
Table 6.5: Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep minute, model 2, genetic
association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. Covariates of model 1 can be
found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome, rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA
the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta
the magnitude and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size.
chr
rsID
alleleA
alleleB
MAF
P-value
beta
se
nearestGene
4
rs6847436
C
T
0.3569
9.33E-06
3.2280
0.7283
AC142293.3
10
rs2750055
T
C
0.3002
3.76E-07
-3.7805
0.7441
RP11-342D11.3
11
rs35793328
G
T
0.3320
8.25E-06
3.2669
0.7327
FAM76B
16
rs4459532
C
T
0.0328
1.84E-06
9.0089
1.8887
HS3ST2
20
rs75860129
A
G
0.0288
1.56E-06
11.0614
2.3029
TASP1
As table 6.5 shows, ﬁve SNPs were found to be suggestively or genome-wide signiﬁcant
when adding REM sleep covariates to the REM sleep minute association. No SNPs reached
the genome-wide signiﬁcance threshold. The rs2750055 SNP which reached genome-wide
signiﬁcance for model 1, dropped below the genome-wide signiﬁcance threshold after the
additions of REM sleep covariates in model 2.
32
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:47==
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of the REM sleep minutes genetic associations of
the MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts, adjusted for the covariates of model 3 in table
5.2, were generated and can be seen in ﬁgure 6.7
Figure 6.7: A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep minute associations
for the MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear regression model was adjusted
for, age, sex, BMI, ancestry, habitual sleep duration, REM sleep suppressing medication,
depression, apnea-hypopnea index, smoking, alcohol intake, and caﬀeine.
The higher
horizontal line indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and the lower one
indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
Using results from the FUMA analysis, and ﬁgure 6.7, lead SNPs with signiﬁcant associ-
ations or ones of suggested signiﬁcance were identiﬁed. They can be found in table 6.6
along with their chromosome number, non-eﬀect allele, eﬀect allele, MAF, p-value, eﬀect
size, standard eﬀect size error, and nearest gene. SNP support was estimated by visually
inspecting regional plots generated using FUMA.
Table 6.6: Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep minute, model 3, genetic
association of the MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. Covariates of model 1 can be found
in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome, rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA the
non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta
the magnitude and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size.
chr
rsID
alleleA
alleleB
MAF
P-value
beta
se
nearestGene
2
rs151268005
T
G
0.1292
6.49E-06
5.1000
1.1309
RBM44
4
rs6847436
C
T
0.3569
9.40E-06
3.3288
0.7513
AC142293.3
10
rs2750055
T
C
0.3002
4.33E-07
-3.8468
0.7612
RP11-342D11.3
16
rs4459532
T
C
0.0328
5.77E-06
8.6883
1.9159
HS3ST2
20
rs75860129
A
G
0.0288
6.43E-06
10.5298
2.3338
TASP1
As table 6.6 shows, six SNPs were identiﬁed to be suggestively signiﬁcant, with none reach-
ing the genome-wide signiﬁcance threshold. The same SNP, from model 2, on chromosome
16 comes the closest to being genome signiﬁcant and has a large eﬀect size, however its
MAF is very low.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
33
==PAGE:48==
6.1.3
REM sleep latency: meta-analysis
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of the REM sleep latency genetic associations of
the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts, adjusted for the covariates of model 1 in
table 5.2, were generated and can be seen in ﬁgure 6.8
Figure 6.8: A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep latency genetic associa-
tions for the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear regression model was
adjusted for, age, sex, BMI, and ancestry. The higher horizontal line indicates genome-
wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and the lower one indicates suggested signiﬁcance of
p-value < 1E-5.
Using results from the FUMA analysis, and ﬁgure 6.8, lead SNPs with signiﬁcant associ-
ations or ones of suggested signiﬁcance were identiﬁed. They can be found in table 6.7
along with their chromosome number, non-eﬀect allele, eﬀect allele, MAF, p-value, eﬀect
size, standard eﬀect size error, and nearest gene. SNP support was estimated by visually
inspecting regional plots generated using FUMA.
Table 6.7: Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep latency, model 1, genetic
association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. Covariates of model 1 can be
found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome, rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA
the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta
the magnitude and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size.
chr
rsID
alleleA
alleleB
MAF
P-value
beta
se
nearestGene
5
rs333536
C
A
0.4016
2.29E-06
0.1071
0.0227
Y_RNA
7
rs62457382
T
C
0.2356
1.31E-06
0.1265
0.0261
VWC2
8
rs35149104
A
G
0.0517
2.23E-06
-0.2416
0.0511
CTD-2501M5.1
13
rs1926526
C
T
0.2803
9.85E-06
0.1058
0.0239
MYO16
14
rs72673206
T
C
0.1521
4.81E-06
-0.1387
0.0303
MDGA2:MDGA2
19
rs12151269
C
T
0.2654
6.24E-06
0.1209
0.0268
CCDC124
20
rs6082363
T
C
0.2942
6.29E-06
0.1116
0.0247
ZNF877P
As table 6.7 shows, seven suggestively signiﬁcant SNP associations were identiﬁed, with
none reaching the genome-wide signiﬁcance threshold.
34
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:49==
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of the REM sleep latency associations of the
APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts, adjusted for the covariates of model 2 in
table 5.2, were generated and can be seen in ﬁgure 6.9
Figure 6.9: A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep latency associations for
the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear regression model was adjusted
for, age, sex, BMI, ancestry, habitual sleep duration, REM sleep suppressing medication,
and depression. The higher horizontal line indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance of p-value
< 5E-8, and the lower one indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
Using results from the FUMA analysis, and ﬁgure 6.9, lead SNPs with signiﬁcant associ-
ations or ones of suggested signiﬁcance were identiﬁed. They can be found in table 6.8
along with their chromosome number, non-eﬀect allele, eﬀect allele, MAF, p-value, eﬀect
size, standard eﬀect size error, and nearest gene. SNP support was estimated by visually
inspecting regional plots generated using FUMA.
Table 6.8: Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep latency, model 2, genetic
association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. Covariates of model 1 can be
found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome, rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA
the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta
the magnitude and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size.
chr
rsID
alleleA
alleleB
MAF
P-value
beta
se
nearestGene
3
rs34449143
C
T
0.0696
5.54E-06
0.2245
0.0494
PTPRG
5
rs333536
C
A
0.4016
7.59E-06
0.1078
0.0241
Y_RNA
7
rs62457389
T
A
0.3400
9.18E-06
0.1119
0.0252
VWC2
8
rs35149104
A
G
0.0517
6.93E-06
-0.2412
0.0536
CTD-2501M5.1
17
rs11657868
G
A
0.2600
1.15E-06
-0.1308
0.0269
CALCOCO2
As table 6.8 shows, ﬁve SNPs were identiﬁed as being suggestively signiﬁcant, with none
reaching the genome-wide signiﬁcance threshold. One SNP remains after the addition of
REM sleep related covariates when compared to model 1. On chromosome 8 there are
SNPs that share a closest gene in models 1 and 2, the lead SNP however, is not the same
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
35
==PAGE:50==
one.
A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of the REM sleep latency genetic associations of
the MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts, adjusted for the covariates of model 3 in table
5.2, were generated and can be seen in ﬁgure 6.10
Figure 6.10: A Manhattan plot for the meta-analysis of REM sleep latency associations
for the MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. The linear regression model was adjusted
for, age, sex, BMI, ancestry, habitual sleep duration, REM sleep suppressing medication,
depression, apnea-hypopnea index, smoking, alcohol intake, and caﬀeine.
The higher
horizontal line indicates genome-wide signiﬁcance of p-value < 5E-8, and the lower one
indicates suggested signiﬁcance of p-value < 1E-5.
Using results from the FUMA analysis, and ﬁgure 6.10, lead SNPs with signiﬁcant asso-
ciations or ones of suggested signiﬁcance were identiﬁed. They can be found in table 6.9
along with their chromosome number, non-eﬀect allele, eﬀect allele, MAF, p-value, eﬀect
size, standard eﬀect size error, and nearest gene. SNP support was estimated by visually
inspecting regional plots generated using FUMA.
Table 6.9: Lead SNPs from the meta-analysis of the REM sleep latency, model 3, genetic
association of the APOE, MrOS, STAGES, and WSC cohorts. Covariates of model 1 can be
found in table 5.2. Chr indicates chromosome, rsID the SNP identiﬁcation number, alleleA
the non-eﬀect allele, alleleB the eﬀect allele, MAF the minor or eﬀect allele frequency, beta
the magnitude and direction of eﬀect size, and se the standard error of the eﬀect size.
chr
rsID
alleleA
alleleB
MAF
P-value
beta
se
nearestGene
17
rs58376900
C
G
0.2376
4.66E-06
-0.1318
0.0288
SUMO2P17
As table 6.9 shows, only one SNP association reached suggestive signiﬁcance but didn’t
reach the genome-wide signiﬁcance threshold. When comparing to model 2, there is a
separate suggestively signiﬁcant SNP on chromosome 17.
36
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:51==
6.2
SNP-gene associations
Each of the 37 unique top SNPs was looked up using GTExportal to see if they had control
over speciﬁc genes and what tissue type those genes have been associated with. 19 of the
37 were found to have control of known genes. The results for the SNPs with a suggested
signiﬁcance of a p-value > 1E-6 and known gene control were gathered and can be seen
in table 6.10.
Rsid, gene symbol, a p-value of the tissue expression gene association,
normalized eﬀect size, and tissue name are reported.
As table 6.10 shows, that two of the most signiﬁcant top SNPs from tables 6.1 - 6.9
had known control over genes. The rs35793328 SNP was associates with three genes and
signiﬁcantly expressed in 37 tissue types. The largest positive eﬀect is observed in the
adrenal gland, skeletal muscle, sun exposed skin, and the esophagus, while the largest
negative eﬀect is seen in the aorta. The rs2750055 SNP was associated with two diﬀerent
genes and expressed in four diﬀerent tissue types. The only positive eﬀect of that gene is
observed for the aorta, and the most negative eﬀect was found to be in pancreas tissue.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
37
==PAGE:52==
Table 6.10: Tissue expression of known eQTL genes modulated by the most signiﬁcant
top SNPs from tables 6.1 - 6.9. Rsid indicates the SNP reference number, P-value the
signiﬁcance of the association between the gene and tissue, NES the normalised eﬀect size.
rsid
Gene Symbol
P-Value
NES
Tissue
CEP57
3.30E-55
0.37
Skin - Sun Exposed (Lower leg)
CEP57
1.40E-53
0.38
Muscle - Skeletal
CEP57
6.30E-44
0.32
Adipose - Subcutaneous
CEP57
4.00E-40
0.35
Skin - Not Sun Exposed (Suprapubic)
CEP57
7.40E-31
0.37
Esophagus - Mucosa
MTMR2
5.30E-26
-0.39
Artery - Aorta
CEP57
3.30E-22
0.27
Breast - Mammary Tissue
FAM76B
1.00E-21
-0.18
Whole Blood
CEP57
1.00E-20
0.33
Colon - Transverse
CEP57
1.00E-20
0.24
Nerve - Tibial
CEP57
1.40E-19
0.4
Pancreas
MTMR2
2.70E-19
-0.24
Artery - Tibial
CEP57
2.30E-18
0.21
Thyroid
CEP57
9.10E-18
0.2
Adipose - Visceral (Omentum)
CEP57
6.80E-17
0.2
Lung
MTMR2
2.00E-16
-0.25
Testis
CEP57
1.30E-14
0.44
Adrenal Gland
MTMR2
1.40E-14
-0.22
Nerve - Tibial
rs35793328
CEP57
1.50E-14
0.35
Stomach
CEP57
1.60E-13
0.26
Heart - Left Ventricle
CEP57
2.20E-13
0.21
Esophagus - Muscularis
CEP57
1.40E-11
0.24
Heart - Atrial Appendage
CEP57
2.10E-10
0.29
Cells - EBV-transformed lymphocytes
CEP57
5.00E-10
0.14
Artery - Tibial
CEP57
8.10E-10
0.24
Esophagus - Gastroesophageal Junction
CEP57
3.90E-09
0.24
Spleen
CEP57
3.50E-08
0.22
Colon - Sigmoid
FAM76B
4.20E-08
0.091
Thyroid
CEP57
4.40E-08
0.45
Minor Salivary Gland
CEP57
8.20E-08
0.099
Cells - Cultured ﬁbroblasts
MTMR2
3.40E-07
-0.15
Muscle - Skeletal
CEP57
2.40E-06
0.24
Small Intestine - Terminal Ileum
MTMR2
2.70E-06
-0.21
Artery - Coronary
CEP57
3.10E-06
0.29
Liver
FAM76B
3.90E-06
0.085
Skin - Not Sun Exposed (Suprapubic)
MTMR2
1.20E-05
-0.1
Lung
MTMR2
5.90E-05
-0.12
Thyroid
RP11-479G22.8
2.60E-06
-0.28
Pancreas
rs2750055
ITGB1
0.000047
0.1
Artery - Aorta
RP11-479G22.8
7.7E-05
-0.16
Adipose - Subcutaneous
RP11-479G22.8
2.20E-04
-0.15
Whole Blood
38
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:53==
6.3
Gene mapping and tissue expression
FUMA was used to perform a MAGMA gene property analysis for tissue speciﬁcity of
the REM sleep phenotypes. It assesses whether there is a positive relationship between
tissue speciﬁcity and the genetic association of genes. Phenotypes and models with tissue
expression p-values < 0.05 can be seen summarized in table 6.11
Table 6.11: Statistically signiﬁcant, p-value < 0.05, results of MAGMA gene tissue expres-
sion in the REM sleep association models. Beta is the eﬀect size, beta std the standard
deviation of the eﬀect size and se the standard error. REM stands for rapid eye movement,
and EBV for Epstein-Barr virus.
REM sleep percentage - model 3
Variable
P-value
beta
beta std
se
Pituitary
0.048
0.0146
0.0271
0.0088
REM sleep minutes - model 1
Variable
P-value
beta
beta std
se
Pancreas
0.0046
0.0215
0.0360
0.0083
Whole Blood
0.0349
0.0101
0.0182
0.0055
REM sleep minutes - model 3
Variable
P-value
beta
beta std
se
Cells EBV-transformed lymphocytes
0.0465
0.0082
0.0178
0.0049
REM sleep latency - model 1
Variable
P-value
beta
beta std
se
Brain Putamen basal ganglia
0.0007
0.0248
0.0421
0.0078
Brain Caudate basal ganglia
0.0011
0.0237
0.0409
0.0077
Brain Nucleus accumbens basal ganglia
0.0016
0.0219
0.0380
0.0075
Brain Substantia nigra
0.0030
0.0232
0.0399
0.0084
Brain Hypothalamus
0.0095
0.0186
0.0320
0.0079
Brain Hippocampus
0.0102
0.0181
0.0306
0.0078
Brain Amygdala
0.0145
0.0168
0.0285
0.0077
Brain Anterior cingulate cortex BA24
0.0173
0.0150
0.0264
0.0071
Brain Frontal Cortex BA9
0.0390
0.0119
0.0219
0.0068
Brain Spinal cord cervical c-1
0.0442
0.0144
0.0259
0.0085
Brain Cortex
0.0468
0.0117
0.0214
0.0070
REM sleep latency - model 3
Variable
P-value
beta
beta std
se
Brain Substantia nigra
0.0283
0.0161
0.0278
0.0085
Brain Putamen basal ganglia
0.0333
0.0143
0.0244
0.0078
According to the results in table 6.11, only ﬁve of the nine association models had a sta-
tistically signiﬁcant tissue expression. The tissue expression is seen throughout the body,
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
39
==PAGE:54==
in the blood, pancreas, brain, and immune system. Most of the statistically signiﬁcant
tissue associations come from the ﬁrst REM sleep latency model and are predominantly
located in the brain.
40
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:55==
Chapter 7
Discussion
7.1
Meta-analysis and association strength
In total, the meta-analysis identiﬁed 37 unique SNPs that reached suggestive or genome-
wide signiﬁcance across 19 chromosomes. There was only one SNP that reached genome-
wide signiﬁcance in two of the models. The rs2750055 SNP on chromosome 10 from the
REM sleep percentage and REM sleep minute models number 1. The signiﬁcance level
of the rs2750055 SNP dropped after the addition of REM sleep covariates, suggesting the
association might be a false positive. However, if they are true, an increased sample size
would allow them to reach the genome-wide signiﬁcance level. This is because the sample
size is one of the determining factors of the statistical power of a study [72]. In theory, this
is true for all of the 37 suggestively signiﬁcant associations found throughout the diﬀerent
models. Some of them might reach genome-wide signiﬁcance with an increased sample
size.
For REM sleep percentage two SNPs remained suggestively signiﬁcant after the addi-
tion of REM sleep covariates in model 2, rs186519358 on chromosome 4, rs10257635 on
chromosome 7, and rs2750055 on chromosome 10. The addition lowered the association
signiﬁcance of rs186519358 (p-value 6.64E-07 to 1.06E-06) and rs2750055 (p-value 3.68E-08
to 1.56E-07), while increasing the association signiﬁcance of rs10257635 (p-value 2.62E-06
to 4.83E-07). As for the SNPs identiﬁed on chromosome 19, rs4932932 in model 1, and
rs146406511 in model 2, they do not originate from the same signal in the chromosome, as
they are not in LD (R2 = 7.0E-04). For the addition of the covariates in model 3, one SNP
remained suggestively signiﬁcant from model 1, and three from model 2. The rs10257635
SNP association, which was also observed in model 2, showed even more signiﬁcance in
model 3 (p-value 6.51E-07). Meaning, this association could prove to be true in a larger
sample. Of the other two SNPs from model 2, the rs7374922 SNP had decreased associ-
ation signiﬁcance (p-value 4.48E-06 to 7.71E-06), and rs146406511 had (p-value 3.29E-06
to 2.00E-06) an increased one after the addition of model 3 covariates.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
41
==PAGE:56==
For REM sleep in minutes, two SNPs remained suggestively signiﬁcant after the addition of
covariates in model 2, rs2750055 on chromosome 4, and rs35793328 on chromosome 11. For
both models, suggestively signiﬁcant SNPs were found on chromosome 20, rs112723315,
and rs75860129. They were not in strong LD (R2 = 0.5647) and likely didn’t originate
from the same signal.
The rs2750055 SNP association decreased in signiﬁcance from
model 1 to model 2 (p-value 3.10E-08 to 3.76E-07), similar to its behavior for REM sleep
percentage. This was expected as the REM sleep percentage and REM sleep minutes
are highly interconnected phenotypes, REM sleep percentage is calculated using REM
sleep in minutes. For model 3, one SNP association remained from model 1, and three
carried over from model 2. The rs2750055 SNP remained from model 1, with association
signiﬁcance decreasing (p-value 3.10E-08 to 4.33E-07).
From model 2, the rs6847436,
rs2750055, and rs75860129 SNPs remained suggestively signiﬁcant. With the rs6847436
SNP decreasing slightly in association signiﬁcance (p-value 9.33E-06 to 9.40E-06), and the
rs2750055, and rs75860129 decreasing in signiﬁcance (p-value 3.76E-07 to 4.33E-07 and
1.56E-06 to 6.43E-06, respectively).
For REM sleep latency two SNPs remained suggestively signiﬁcant after the addition of
REM sleep covariates of model 2, rs333536 on chromosome 5, and rs35149104 on chro-
mosome 8. The rs333536 SNP decreased in association signiﬁcance between the models
(p-value 2.29E-06 to 5.54E-06), and the same can be said for the rs35149104 SNP (p-value
2.23E-06 to 6.93E-06). With the addition of the REM sleep covariates of model 3, no
SNP remained suggestively signiﬁcant from model 2 or model 1. For the third model
rs58376900 on chromosome 17 was deemed suggestively signiﬁcant. When taking a closer
look at model 2, rs11657868 on chromosome 17 is in high LD with the rs58376900 SNP
from model 3, R2 = 0.8749, meaning they likely originate from the same signal in the
chromosome.
The lack of genome-wide signiﬁcance can also indicate that REM sleep has a complex
interconnected genetic control i.e. polygenic, instead of a single locus or gene.
7.2
Top SNP gene associations and tissue expression
For the gene association and eQTL tissue expression, two of the SNPs with association sig-
niﬁcance above a p-value of 1E-6 had known gene associations, rs35793328 and rs2750055.
The rs35793328 SNP was found to modulate three genes, CEP57, FAM76B, and MTMR2.
CEP57 has a high positive normalized eﬀect in the skin, skeletal muscles, esophagus, minor
salivary gland, and adrenal gland, as well as a high negative normalized eﬀect in the aorta.
According to the USCS genome browser, it encodes for the cytoplasmic protein Translokin,
which localizes to the centrosome and assists in microtubular stabilization. FAM76B does
not have a particularly high eﬀect in any of the eQTL tissue samples and doesn’t have
known functions. The MTMR2 gene has a mostly negative normalized eﬀect on the tissue
expression in the aorta, tibial artery, coronary arteries. It is a protein-coding gene that is
a part of the myotubularin family of phosphoinositide lipid phosphatases. The rs2750055
42
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:57==
SNP was found to modulate two separate genes, RP11-479G22.8, and ITGB1. RP11-
479G22.8 has a negative normalized eﬀect on the pancreas, adipose tissue, and blood. It
is a long non-coding RNA strand, it is technically not a gene as it doesn’t take part in
protein-coding. The ITGB1 gene has a very small positive eﬀect on aorta tissue expression
and is known to be associated with arteries and cultured ﬁbroblasts.
It is important to take into consideration that none of the SNPs were genome-wide sig-
niﬁcant after the addition of REM sleep covariates, meaning that these tissue expression
results are likely not related to REM sleep.
7.3
MAGMA gene mapping and tissue expression
The MAGMA gene mapping did not show signiﬁcant tissue expression for all models.
Signiﬁcant expression was found in the third REM sleep percentage model, and the ﬁrst
and third REM sleep minute and latency models. For the third REM sleep percentage
model, the only signiﬁcant tissue expression was found in the pituitary. The pituitary
gland is located at the base of the brain and has a dual function of carrying endocrine and
nerve signals. Its endocrine section secretes endocrine hormones such as, growth hormone,
prolactin, follicle stimulating - and luteinizing hormone, thyroid stimulating hormone,
and adrenocorticotrophic hormone.
Its neural part secreted oxytocin, and vasopressin
[73]. The ﬁrst REM sleep minutes model showed expression in pancreas and whole blood
tissue.
The pancreas is an organ of the digestive system and has both endocrine and
exocrine functions.
Its endocrine functions include the secretion of glucagon, insulin,
somatostatin, and pancreatic polypeptide. Its exocrine function includes the secretion of
pancreatic juice, an important part of the digestive process [74]. The blood is a vital
part of the body’s function, it transports oxygen, nutrients, and toxins to and from the
lungs and respiring tissue. It also helps maintain homeostasis, prevents hemorrhaging,
and produces immune responses [75].
For the third REM sleep minutes model, EBV-
transformed lymphocyte tissue expression was observed. EBV-transformed lymphocytes
are Epstein-Barr transformed lymphocytes that are often used in cell lines as a resource
for functional genomic studies in humans [76].
The most tissue expression was found for the ﬁrst REM sleep latency model. All of the
tissue expression was found in the brain, with the most signiﬁcant one in the putamen and
caudate basal ganglia. The basal ganglia have subcortical nuclei that play a part in e.g.
motor control, cognitive function, and psychoaﬀective behaviors. Basal ganglia pathology
is associated with Parkinson’s and Huntington’s disease [77]. The substatia nigra is a
midbrain nucleus that is considered to be the primary input into the basal ganglia and
critical to its functions [78]. The hypothalamus is a part of the brain’s limbric system and
is responsible for the control of autonomic and endocrine functions of the body through
signaling [79]. The hippocampus is a brain structure of the frontal lobe and plays a role
in learning and memory [80]. The amygdala is a nucleus in the temporal lobe, it is known
to be associated with emotional response, fear, and anxiety [81]. The anterior cingulate
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
43
==PAGE:58==
cortex or the Brodmann area 24, has been known to have involvement in motor control
and attention. The Brodman area 9 of the frontal cortex is known to control executive
functions, the C-1 spinal cord is the section of the spine at the ﬁrst vertebrae, and the
brain cortex is the outer layer of the brain that houses its neurons and is responsible for
the cognitive process and the conscious mind [82, 83, 84]. The second REM latency model
had no signiﬁcant tissue expression, but the third one had expression in the substantia
nigra, and the putamen basal ganglia.
Because there were no genome-wide signiﬁcant SNP associations, the MAGMA tissue
expression may show a more realistic tissue expression, compared to the eQTL. This is
because MAGMA groups together the suggestively signiﬁcant SNPs and can look at their
cumulative eﬀect.
7.4
Shortcomings
The largest shortcoming of this analysis is the sample size. The meta-analysis will be
replicated in the fall with additional data from the HypnoLaus, Stanford Sleep Heart
Study (SHHS), and MGH cohorts. The HypnoLaus is a Swiss cohort originally recorded to
analyze sleep-disordered breathing in 2,121 subjects [85]. The SHHS is a prospective cohort
study originally collected to study sleep-disordered breathing and OSA. It is comprised
of multiple subcohorts, of which the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study (1,750
participants), Cardiovascular Health Study (1,350 participants), and Framingham Heart
Study (1,000 participants) will be used for the follow-up meta-analysis of REM sleep [86].
The MGH cohort from the Mass General Brigham Biobank is a cohort of patients from
Mass Gen institutions. About 1,200 patients have PSG and genotype data, and of those
around 700 have PSG data suited for this analysis.
The skewed distribution of the REM sleep latency data and the need for it to be normalized
before running the linear regression makes it hard to compare it to the REM sleep amount
models as if aﬀects the eﬀect size value. The missing alcohol intake, smoking, and caﬀeine
consumption variables for the APOE cohort caused a decrease in sample size for the third
model for all phenotypes, meaning the association power was even less compared to the
other models.
These variables can be extracted from the paper questionnaires of the
original study, but they were not available at the time of the present analysis.
The proxy covariate variables could have an impact on the associations. Such as the non-
reported age above 79 years for STAGES, the redeﬁnition of hours of habitual sleep for
APOE, the variability in reporting of medication use, self-reported depression for APOE,
the respiratory distress index of MrOS used in place of AHI, and non-reported shift work
of MrOS participants. The automatic sleep stage scoring of the STAGES PSG data may
also have an impact, although the automatic scoring is based on manual scoring made by
technicians.
44
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:59==
7.5
Future perspectives
Regarding future work, the main aim is to repeat the meta-analysis with a larger cohort. If
some associations prove to be genome-wide signiﬁcant several steps can be taken to verify
and further analyze the results. Examples include a MAGMA pathway analysis, gene
function and eQTL tissue expression analysis, LD regression, and polygenic regression
scores to assess the polygenic eﬀect of the phenotypes, as well as overlapping of genes with
known disease associations e.g. Parkinson’s, or schizophrenia.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
45
==PAGE:60==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The present exploratory study’s ﬁndings indicate that there might be genetic associations
to PSG-derived REM sleep amount and REM sleep latency phenotypes. By running a
GWAS analysis this study presented suggestively signiﬁcant genetic associations to the
REM sleep phenotypes. Although the results were not genome-wide signiﬁcant, they indi-
cate a possibility of signiﬁcance in a larger sample. The most signiﬁcant SNP was observed
in the REM sleep amount models, but it didn’t have any relevant genetic expression.
While the results of the present study clearly illustrate that there might be individual
SNPs associated with the REM sleep phenotypes, it also raises a need to examine the
possibility that they are polygenic or controlled by a combined eﬀect of multiple genes
in the genome. Similar to the genetic determination of height or skin color. The main
limitation of sample size can easily be rectiﬁed by adding EUR cohorts that have been
genotyped and undergone a PSG study to the meta-analysis.
With the acquisition of
cohorts already underway. The missing variables from the APOE cohort, resulting in it
not contributing to the study analysis of the third covariate model, can also be amended
by digitizing all results of the sleep habit questionnaires from the original study.
Based on the results, discussion, and conclusion of the present analysis it is important to
further analyze the genetic control of REM sleep in a larger sample. Sleep as a whole is
an important factor in health and well-being, and REM sleep is an important factor in
the cognitive process, emotional control, cardiovascular disease, inﬂammation, and even
mortality. Understanding the control of REM sleep will help uncover links to behavior,
disease, and mortality.
46
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:61==
Bibliography
[1]
Susan L Worley. “The Extraordinary Importance of Sleep: The Detrimental Eﬀects of
Inadequate Sleep on Health and Public Safety Drive an Explosion of Sleep Research”.
eng. In: PT (Lawrenceville, N.J.) 43.12 (2018), pp. 758–763. issn: 1052-1372.
[2]
Aakash Patel, Vamsi Reddy, and John Araujo. Physiology, Sleep Stages. 2021. url:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK526132/.
[3]
Dale Purves et al. “Physiological Changes in Sleep States”. In: Neuroscience. 2nd
edition (2001). url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK10916/.
[4]
Genetic Alliance. CHAPTER 1, GENETICS 101: The New York-Mid-Atlantic Con-
sortium for Genetic and Newborn Screening Services. Understanding Genetics: A
New York, Mid-Atlantic Guide for Patients and Health Professionals. 2009. url:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK115568/.
[5]
Robert C Elston, Jaya M Satagopan, and Shuying Sun. “Genetic Terminology”. eng.
In: Statistical Human Genetics. Methods in Molecular Biology 850 (2011), pp. 1–9.
issn: 1064-3745.
[6]
C. Børsting and N. Morling. “Single-Nucleotide Polymorphisms”. In: Encyclopedia
of Forensic Sciences (Second Edition). Ed. by Jay A. Siegel, Pekka J. Saukko, and
Max M. Houck. Second Edition. Waltham: Academic Press, 2013, pp. 233–238. isbn:
978-0-12-382166-9. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-382165-2.00042-8. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123821652000428.
[7]
Martha U Gillette and Sabra M Abbott. “Basic Mechanisms of Circadian Rhythms
and their Relation to the Sleep/Wake Cycle”. eng. In: Neuroendocrine Correlates of
Sleep/Wakefulness. Boston, MA: Springer US, pp. 19–40. isbn: 9780387236414.
[8]
Ritchie E Brown et al. “Control of sleep and wakefulness”. eng. In: Physiological
reviews 92.3 (2012), pp. 1087–1187. issn: 0031-9333.
[9]
Francieli S Ruiz et al. “Immune alterations after selective rapid eye movement or total
sleep deprivation in healthy male volunteers”. eng. In: Innate immunity (London,
England) 18.1 (2012), pp. 44–54. issn: 1753-4259.
[10]
Shlomo Yehuda et al. “REM sleep deprivation in rats results in inﬂammation and
interleukin-17 elevation”. eng. In: Journal of interferon cytokine research 29.7 (2009),
pp. 393–398. issn: 1079-9907.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
47
==PAGE:62==
[11]
Richard Boyce et al. “Causal evidence for the role of REM sleep theta rhythm in
contextual memory consolidation”. eng. In: Science (American Association for the
Advancement of Science) 352.6287 (2016), pp. 812–816. issn: 0036-8075.
[12]
Deependra Kumar et al. “Sparse Activity of Hippocampal Adult-Born Neurons dur-
ing REM Sleep Is Necessary for Memory Consolidation”. eng. In: Neuron (Cam-
bridge, Mass.) 107.3 (2020), 552–565.e10. issn: 0896-6273.
[13]
Matthew P Pase et al. “Sleep architecture and the risk of incident dementia in the
community”. eng. In: Neurology 89.12 (2017), pp. 1244–1250. issn: 0028-3878.
[14]
Christian D Wiesner et al. “The eﬀect of selective REM-sleep deprivation on the
consolidation and aﬀective evaluation of emotional memories”. eng. In: Neurobiology
of learning and memory 122 (2015), pp. 131–141. issn: 1074-7427.
[15]
Marie Roxanne Sopp et al. “Remembering speciﬁc features of emotional events across
time: The role of REM sleep and prefrontal theta oscillations”. eng. In: Cognitive,
aﬀective, behavioral neuroscience 17.6 (2017), pp. 1186–1209. issn: 1530-7026.
[16]
Isabel C Hutchison and Shailendra Rathore. “The role of REM sleep theta activity
in emotional memory”. eng. In: Frontiers in psychology 6 (2015), pp. 1439–1439.
issn: 1664-1078.
[17]
Babak Mokhlesi et al. “Obstructive sleep apnea during REM sleep and hypertension.
results of the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort”. eng. In: American journal of respiratory and
critical care medicine 190.10 (2014), pp. 1158–1167. issn: 1073-449X.
[18]
Babak Mokhlesi et al. “Obstructive sleep apnea during REM sleep and incident
nondipping of nocturnal blood pressure: A longitudinal analysis of the Wisconsin
Sleep Cohort”. eng. In: Thorax 70.11 (2015), pp. 1062–1069. issn: 0040-6376.
[19]
Hassan A Chami et al. “Association between Glucose Metabolism and Sleep-disordered
Breathing during REM Sleep”. eng. In: American journal of respiratory and critical
care medicine 192.9 (2015), pp. 1118–1126. issn: 1073-449X.
[20]
Eileen B. Leary et al. “Association of Rapid Eye Movement Sleep With Mortal-
ity in Middle-aged and Older Adults”. In: JAMA Neurology 77.10 (Oct. 2020),
pp. 1241–1251. issn: 2168-6149. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.2108. eprint: https:
/ / jamanetwork . com / journals / jamaneurology / articlepdf / 2767713 / jamaneurology \
_leary\_2020\_oi\_200044\_1601489505.35643.pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamaneurol.2020.2108.
[21]
Eileen B. Leary, Katie L. Stone, and Emmanuel Mignot. “Living to DreamReply”.
In: JAMA Neurology 78.4 (Apr. 2021), pp. 495–496. issn: 2168-6149. doi: 10.1001/
jamaneurol.2021.0056. eprint: https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamaneurology/
articlepdf/2776792/jamaneurology\_leary\_2021\_lr\_210001\_1617209071.67352.
pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.0056.
[22]
Sudhansu Chokroverty, Meeta Bhatt, and Tammy Goldhammer. “1 - Polysomno-
graphic Recording Technique”. In: Atlas of Sleep Medicine. Ed. by Sudhansu Chokroverty,
Meeta Bhatt, and Robert J. Thomas. Philadelphia: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2005,
48
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:63==
pp. 1–28. isbn: 978-0-7506-7398-3. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-7506-7398-
3.50005-X. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978075067398350005X.
[23]
YJ Lee et al. “Inter-rater reliability of sleep stage scoring: a meta-analysis”. eng. In:
Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine (2021). issn: 1550-9389.
[24]
Erna S Arnardottir et al. “Variability in recording and scoring of respiratory events
during sleep in Europe: a need for uniform standards”. eng. In: Journal of sleep
research 25.2 (2016), pp. 144–157. issn: 0962-1105.
[25]
Stein Kristiansen et al. “Comparing manual and automatic scoring of sleep monitor-
ing data from portable polygraphy”. eng. In: Journal of sleep research 30.2 (2021),
e13036–n/a. issn: 0962-1105.
[26]
Rui Yan et al. “Automatic sleep scoring: A deep learning architecture for multi-
modality time series”. eng. In: Journal of neuroscience methods 348 (2021), pp. 108971–
108971. issn: 0165-0270.
[27]
Anies T Marees et al. “A tutorial on conducting genome-wide association studies:
Quality control and statistical analysis”. eng. In: International journal of methods
in psychiatric research 27.2 (2018), e1608–n/a. issn: 1049-8931.
[28]
Andrew Dervan and Jay Shendure. “Chapter 3 - The State of Whole-Genome Se-
quencing”. In: Genomic and Precision Medicine (Third Edition). Ed. by Geoﬀrey
S. Ginsburg and Huntington F. Willard. Third Edition. Boston: Academic Press,
2017, pp. 45–62. isbn: 978-0-12-800681-8. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
12- 800681- 8.00003- 7. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780128006818000037.
[29]
Jeﬀrey D Wall and Jonathan K Pritchard. “Haplotype blocks and linkage disequilib-
rium in the human genome”. eng. In: Nature reviews. Genetics 4.8 (2003), pp. 587–
597. issn: 1471-0056.
[30]
Jenna M VanLiere and Noah A Rosenberg. “Mathematical properties of the r2 mea-
sure of linkage disequilibrium”. eng. In: Theoretical population biology 74.1 (2008),
pp. 130–137. issn: 0040-5809.
[31]
H. Richard Johnston, Bronya J.B. Keats, and Stephanie L. Sherman. “12 - Popu-
lation Genetics”. In: Emery and Rimoin’s Principles and Practice of Medical Ge-
netics and Genomics (Seventh Edition). Ed. by Reed E. Pyeritz, Bruce R. Korf,
and Wayne W. Grody. Seventh Edition. Academic Press, 2019, pp. 359–373. isbn:
978-0-12-812537-3. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-812537-3.00012-3. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128125373000123.
[32]
Fred W. Turek and Ravi Allada. “Chapter 26 - Introduction: Genetics and Ge-
nomics of Sleep”. In: Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine (Sixth Edition). Ed.
by Meir Kryger, Thomas Roth, and William C. Dement. Sixth Edition. Elsevier,
2017, 270–271.e1. isbn: 978-0-323-24288-2. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
323- 24288- 2.00026- X. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B978032324288200026X.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
49
==PAGE:64==
[33]
Martha Hotz Vitaterna, Fred W. Turek, and Peng Jiang. “Chapter 27 - Genetics
and Genomics of Circadian Clocks”. In: Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine
(Sixth Edition). Ed. by Meir Kryger, Thomas Roth, and William C. Dement. Sixth
Edition. Elsevier, 2017, 272–280.e5. isbn: 978-0-323-24288-2. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-323-24288-2.00027-1. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780323242882000271.
[34]
E Mignot. “Genetic and familial aspects of narcolepsy”. eng. In: Neurology 50.2
(1998), S16–S22. issn: 0028-3878.
[35]
Hreinn Stefansson et al. “A Genetic Risk Factor for Periodic Limb Movements in
Sleep”. eng. In: The New England journal of medicine 357.7 (2007), pp. 639–647.
issn: 0028-4793.
[36]
John W Winkelman et al. “Genetic associations of periodic limb movements of sleep
in the elderly for the MrOS sleep study”. eng. In: Sleep medicine 16.11 (2015),
pp. 1360–1365. issn: 1389-9457.
[37]
Félix J. Jiménez-Jiménez et al. “Genetics of restless legs syndrome: An update”.
In: Sleep Medicine Reviews 39 (2018), pp. 108–121. issn: 1087-0792. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2017.08.002. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1087079217301545.
[38]
Philip R Jansen et al. “Genome-wide analysis of insomnia in 1,331,010 individu-
als identiﬁes new risk loci and functional pathways”. eng. In: Nature genetics 51.3
(2019), pp. 394–403. issn: 1061-4036.
[39]
Jacqueline M Lane et al. “Biological and clinical insights from genetics of insomnia
symptoms”. eng ; nor. In: Nature genetics 51.3 (2019), pp. 387–393. issn: 1061-4036.
[40]
S.B. Karch. “Autopsy: Molecular”. In: Encyclopedia of Forensic and Legal Medicine
(Second Edition). Ed. by Jason Payne-James and Roger W. Byard. Second Edition.
Oxford: Elsevier, 2016, pp. 290–296. isbn: 978-0-12-800055-7. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-800034-2.00041-0. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780128000342000410.
[41]
Jonathan Marchini and Gavin Band. SNPTEST: Input File Formats. 2008. url:
https://www.well.ox.ac.uk/~gav/snptest/#input_ﬁle_formats (visited on 07/10/2021).
[42]
Jonathan Marchini and Gavin Band. The BGEN format. 2009. url: https://www.
well.ox.ac.uk/~gav/bgen_format/ (visited on 07/10/2021).
[43]
Yun Li et al. “Genotype imputation”. eng. In: Annual review of genomics and human
genetics 10.1 (2009), pp. 387–406. issn: 1527-8204.
[44]
Brian L. Browning and Sharon R. Browning. “Genotype Imputation with Millions
of Reference Samples”. In: The American Journal of Human Genetics 98.1 (2016),
pp. 116–126. issn: 0002-9297. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.11.020. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929715004917.
[45]
Wei-Yang Bai et al. “Genotype imputation and reference panel: a systematic eval-
uation on haplotype size and diversity”. eng. In: Brieﬁngs in bioinformatics 21.5
(2019), pp. 1806–1817. issn: 1467-5463.
50
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:65==
[46]
Shefali S Verma et al. “Imputation and quality control steps for combining multiple
genome-wide datasets”. eng. In: Frontiers in genetics 5 (2014), pp. 370–370. issn:
1664-8021.
[47]
William S. Bush. “Genome-Wide Association Studies”. In: Encyclopedia of Bioin-
formatics and Computational Biology. Ed. by Shoba Ranganathan et al. Oxford:
Academic Press, 2019, pp. 235–241. isbn: 978-0-12-811432-2. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-0-12-809633-8.20232-X. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B978012809633820232X.
[48]
Randall J Pruim et al. “LocusZoom: regional visualization of genome-wide asso-
ciation scan results”. eng. In: Bioinformatics 26.18 (2010), pp. 2336–2337. issn:
1367-4803.
[49]
Eleftheria Zeggini and John PA Ioannidis. “Meta-analysis in genome-wide associa-
tion studies”. eng. In: Pharmacogenomics 10.2 (2009), pp. 191–201. issn: 1462-2416.
[50]
Heming Wang et al. “Genome-wide association analysis of self-reported daytime
sleepiness identiﬁes 42 loci that suggest biological subtypes”. eng ; nor. In: Nature
communications 10.1 (2019), pp. 3503–12. issn: 2041-1723.
[51]
Aiden Doherty et al. “GWAS identiﬁes 14 loci for device-measured physical activity
and sleep duration”. eng. In: Nature communications 9.1 (2018), pp. 5257–8. issn:
2041-1723.
[52]
Brian E Cade et al. “Common variants in DRD2 are associated with sleep duration:
the CARe consortium”. eng. In: Human molecular genetics 25.1 (2016), pp. 167–179.
issn: 0964-6906.
[53]
Sarah J Casey et al. “Slow Wave and REM Sleep Deprivation Eﬀects on Explicit and
Implicit Memory During Sleep”. eng. In: Neuropsychology 30.8 (2016), pp. 931–945.
issn: 0894-4105.
[54]
Eric Orwoll et al. “Design and baseline characteristics of the osteoporotic fractures
in men (MrOS) study A large observational study of the determinants of fracture in
older men”. In: Contemporary Clinical Trials 26.5 (2005), pp. 569–585. issn: 1551-
7144. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cct.2005.05.006. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1551714405001072.
[55]
Janet Babich Blank et al. “Overview of recruitment for the osteoporotic fractures
in men study (MrOS)”. In: Contemporary Clinical Trials 26.5 (2005), pp. 557–568.
issn: 1551-7144. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cct.2005.05.005. url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1551714405001060.
[56]
Terri Blackwell et al. “Association of Sleep Characteristics and Cognition in Older
Community-Dwelling Men: the MrOS Sleep Study”. In: Sleep 34.10 (Oct. 2011),
pp. 1347–1356. issn: 0161-8105. doi: 10.5665/SLEEP.1276. eprint: https://academic.
oup.com/sleep/article- pdf/34/10/1347/26618581/aasm.34.10.1347.pdf. url:
https://doi.org/10.5665/SLEEP.1276.
[57]
Eileen B Leary. “Sleep and death: The relationship between REM sleep and mortal-
ity.” PhD thesis. Stanford University, 2020.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
51
==PAGE:66==
[58]
PhD Young Terry. “Rationale, Design, and Findings from the Wisconsin Sleep Co-
hort Study: Toward Understanding the Total Societal Burden of Sleep-Disordered
Breathing”. eng. In: Sleep medicine clinics 4.1 (2009), pp. 37–46. issn: 1556-407X.
[59]
Terry Young et al. “Burden of sleep apnea: rationale, design, and major ﬁndings of
the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort study”. eng. In: Wisconsin medical journal (Madison,
Wis.) 108.5 (2009), pp. 246–249. issn: 1098-1861.
[60]
Umaer Rashid Hanif et al. “Estimation of Apnea-Hypopnea Index using Deep Learn-
ing on 3D Craniofacial Scans”. eng. In: IEEE journal of biomedical and health in-
formatics PP (2021), pp. 1–1. issn: 2168-2194.
[61]
Hyatt Moore 4th et al. “Design and validation of a periodic leg movement detector”.
eng. In: PloS one 9.12 (2014), e114565–e114565. issn: 1932-6203.
[62]
Jens B Stephansen et al. “Neural network analysis of sleep stages enables eﬃcient
diagnosis of narcolepsy”. eng. In: Nature communications 9.1 (2018), pp. 5229–15.
issn: 2041-1723.
[63]
Adam Wichniak et al. “Eﬀects of Antidepressants on Sleep”. eng. In: Current psy-
chiatry reports 19.9 (2017), pp. 1–7. issn: 1523-3812.
[64]
J F Pagel and Bennett L Parnes. “Medications for the Treatment of Sleep Disorders:
An Overview”. eng. In: Primary care companion to the Journal of clinical psychiatry
3.3 (2001), pp. 118–125. issn: 1523-5998.
[65]
Axel Steiger and Marcel Pawlowski. “Depression and Sleep”. eng. In: International
journal of molecular sciences 20.3 (2019), pp. 607–. issn: 1422-0067.
[66]
Michael D Stein and Peter D Friedmann. “Disturbed Sleep and Its Relationship to
Alcohol Use”. eng. In: Substance abuse 26.1 (2006), pp. 1–13. issn: 0889-7077.
[67]
Janine Weibel et al. “Regular Caﬀeine Intake Delays REM Sleep Promotion and
Attenuates Sleep Quality in Healthy Men”. eng. In: Journal of biological rhythms
36.4 (2021), pp. 384–394. issn: 0748-7304.
[68]
Andreas Jaehne et al. “Eﬀects of nicotine on sleep during consumption, withdrawal
and replacement therapy”. eng. In: Sleep medicine reviews 13.5 (2008), pp. 363–377.
issn: 1087-0792.
[69]
Alexander Neergaard Olesen et al. “Automatic sleep stage classiﬁcation with deep
residual networks in a mixed-cohort setting”. eng. In: Sleep (New York, N.Y.) 44.1
(2021). issn: 0161-8105.
[70]
Debra A Dunstan and Ned Scott. “Clariﬁcation of the cut-oﬀscore for Zung’s self-
rating depression scale”. eng. In: BMC psychiatry 19.1 (2019), pp. 177–177. issn:
1471-244X.
[71]
Kyoko Watanabe et al. “Functional mapping and annotation of genetic associations
with FUMA”. eng. In: Nature communications 8.1 (2017), pp. 1826–11. issn: 2041-
1723.
[72]
Chris C A Spencer et al. “Designing genome-wide association studies: sample size,
power, imputation, and the choice of genotyping chip”. eng. In: PLoS genetics 5.5
(2009), e1000477–e1000477. issn: 1553-7404.
52
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:67==
[73]
Suzan A. El Sayed, Michael W. Fahmy, and Janice Schwartz. Physiology, Pituitary
Gland. 2021. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK459247/.
[74]
Margaret E. Smith and Dion G. Morton. “5 - PANCREAS: EXOCRINE FUNC-
TIONS”. In: The Digestive System (Second Edition). Ed. by Margaret E. Smith and
Dion G. Morton. Second Edition. Churchill Livingstone, 2010, pp. 71–84. isbn: 978-
0-7020-3367-4. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-7020-3367-4.00005-0. url:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780702033674000050.
[75]
Ch. Weiss and W. Jelkmann. “Functions of the Blood”. In: Human Physiology. Ed.
by Robert F. Schmidt and Gerhrad Thews. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Hei-
delberg, 1989, pp. 402–438. isbn: 978-3-642-73831-9. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-73831-
9_18. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-73831-9_18.
[76]
Minal Caltskan et al. “The eﬀects of EBV transformation on gene expression levels
and methylation proﬁles”. eng. In: Human molecular genetics 20.8 (2011), pp. 1643–
1652. issn: 0964-6906.
[77]
Yoland Smith and Mamadou Sidibe. “Basal Ganglia”. In: Encyclopedia of the Neu-
rological Sciences. Ed. by Michael J. Aminoﬀand Robert B. Daroﬀ. New York:
Academic Press, 2003, pp. 345–355. isbn: 978-0-12-226870-0. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/B0-12-226870-9/00751-6. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B0122268709007516.
[78]
James Sonne, Vamsi Reddy, and Morris R. Beato. Physiology, Substantia Nigra.
2020. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK536995/.
[79]
Thomas C. Vary. “54 - Models of Endocrine Insuﬃciency”. In: Surgical Research.
Ed. by Wiley W. Souba and Douglas W. Wilmore. San Diego: Academic Press,
2001, pp. 747–756. isbn: 978-0-12-655330-7. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
012655330- 7/50056- 3. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780126553307500563.
[80]
Kuljeet Singh Anand and Vikas Dhikav. “Hippocampus in health and disease: An
overview”. eng. In: Annals of the Indian Academy of Neurology 15.4 (2012), pp. 239–
246. issn: 0972-2327.
[81]
Madalena Esteves, Armando Almeida, and Hugo Leite-Almeida. “Chapter 1 - In-
sights on nervous system biology and anatomy”. In: Handbook of Innovations in
Central Nervous System Regenerative Medicine. Ed. by Antonio J. Salgado. Else-
vier, 2020, pp. 1–28. isbn: 978-0-12-818084-6. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-
0-12-818084-6.00001-5. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780128180846000015.
[82]
Branka Hrvoj-Mihic and Katerina Semendeferi. “Chapter 5 - Neurodevelopmental
disorders of the prefrontal cortex in an evolutionary context”. In: Evolution of the
Human Brain: From Matter to Mind. Ed. by Michel A. Hofman. Vol. 250. Progress
in Brain Research. Elsevier, 2019, pp. 109–127. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
bs . pbr . 2019 . 05 . 003. url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
S0079612319301311.
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
53
==PAGE:68==
[83]
D.E. Haines, G.A. Mihailoﬀ, and R.P. Yezierski. “Chapter 9 - The Spinal Cord”.
In: Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications (Fifth Edition).
Ed. by Duane E. Haines and Gregory A. Mihailoﬀ. Fifth Edition. Elsevier, 2018,
138–151.e1. isbn: 978-0-323-39632-5. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 -
323- 39632- 5.00009- 8. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
B9780323396325000098.
[84]
David F. Cechetto and Jane C. Topolovec. “Cerebral Cortex”. In: Encyclopedia of
the Human Brain. Ed. by V.S. Ramachandran. New York: Academic Press, 2002,
pp. 663–679. isbn: 978-0-12-227210-3. doi: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B0 - 12 -
227210 - 2 / 00087 - X. url: https : / / www . sciencedirect . com / science / article / pii /
B012227210200087X.
[85]
Dr Heinzer R et al. “Prevalence of sleep-disordered breathing in the general popu-
lation: the HypnoLaus study”. eng. In: The lancet respiratory medicine 3.4 (2015),
pp. 310–318. issn: 2213-2600.
[86]
S. E QUAN et al. “The Sleep Heart Health study : Design, rationale, and methods”.
eng. In: Sleep (New York, N.Y.) 20.12 (1997), pp. 1077–1085. issn: 0161-8105.
54
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:69==
Appendix A
A.1
Keyword search
The literature search was conducted using PubMed (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/),
and Mendeley (https://www.mendeley.com/).
• "Genome-wide association study" + "Polysomnography"
• "Genome-wide association study" + "Sleep"
• "Genome-wide association study" + "REM sleep"
• "Genome-wide association study" + "quantitative"
• "REM sleep importance"
• "REM sleep aﬀects"
• "REM sleep deprivation eﬀect"
• "REM sleep" + "mortality"
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
55
==PAGE:70==
A.2
Code Examples
Python: translation and creation of phenotype and covariate ﬁles.
1
#Inputs: translation
file and
phenotype
file with
original
IDs
2
#Outputs: translated
covariate
and
phenotype
files
with
genotype
IDs
3
4
#!/ katrin_python /bin/python3
5
6
import
pandas as pd
7
import
numpy as np
8
9
translateFile = ’/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/ Genotypes_MrOS /
translation_extraction /mros_id_link.txt’
10
phenotypesFile = ’/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/ Phenotypes_MrOS / MrOSphenotypes_caff
.txt’
11
12
def
make_pheno(phenotypesFile , translateFile ):
13
14
df = pd.read_csv(phenotypesFile , delimiter=’\t’)
15
subID = df[[’nsrrid ’]]. to_numpy ()
16
print(subID [1])
17
remp = df[[’potmremp ’]]. to_numpy ()
18
remm = df[[’potmrem ’]]. to_numpy ()
19
reml = df[[’poremlat ’]]. to_numpy ()
20
21
outFile = open(’/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/ Genotypes_MrOS /
translation_extraction /MrOS_phenoA.txt’, ’w’)
22
outFile.write(’ID_1 ’ + ’\t’ + ’ID_2 ’ + ’\t’ + ’REM_P ’ + ’\t’ + ’REM_M ’
+ ’\t’ + ’REM_L ’ ’\n’)
23
24
with open(translateFile) as f:
25
for n, line in enumerate(f):
26
current_line = line.strip ().split(’,’)
27
output = []
28
if current_line [0] in subID:
29
output.append( current_line [1] + ’\t’+ current_line [1])
30
output.append(str(remp[np.where(subID == current_line
[0]) ][0]))
31
output.append(str(remm[np.where(subID == current_line
[0]) ][0]))
32
output.append(str(reml[np.where(subID == current_line
[0]) ][0]))
33
34
outFile.write(’\t’.join(output)+’\n’)
35
outFile.close ()
36
return
37
38
def
make_cov(phenotypeFile , translateFile ):
39
df = pd.read_csv(phenotypeFile , delimiter=’\t’)
40
subID = df[[’nsrrid ’]]. to_numpy ()
41
age = df[[’vsage1 ’]]. to_numpy ()
56
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:71==
42
gender = df[[’gender ’]]. to_numpy ()
43
bmi = df[[’hwbmi ’]]. to_numpy ()
44
habitual = df[[’slslphrs ’]]. to_numpy ()
45
rx_inc = df[[’Rxreduce ’]]. to_numpy ()
46
rx_red = df[[’Rxincrease ’]]. to_numpy ()
47
depression = df[[’m1adepr ’]]. to_numpy ()
48
plmi = df[[’poavgplm ’]]. to_numpy ()
49
caffeine = df[[’caffeine ’]]. to_numpy ()
50
smoking = df[[’tupipec ’]]. to_numpy ()
51
alcohol = df[[’tudramt ’]]. to_numpy ()
52
ahi = df[[’pordi3pa ’]]. to_numpy ()
53
54
print(subID [1])
55
#outFile = open(’/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/ Genotypes_MrOS /
translation_extraction / MrOS_model1_covA .txt ’, ’w ’)
56
#outFile = open(’/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/ Genotypes_MrOS /
translation_extraction / MrOS_model2_cov .txt ’, ’w ’)
57
outFile = open(’/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/ Genotypes_MrOS /
translation_extraction / MrOS_model3_cov .txt’, ’w’)
58
59
#outFile.write(’ID_1 ’ + ’\t’ + ’ID_2 ’ + ’\t’ + ’AGE’ + ’\t’ + ’GENDER ’
+ ’\t’ + ’BMI’ ’\n ’)
60
outFile.write(’ID_1 ’ + ’\t’ + ’ID_2 ’ + ’\t’ + ’AGE’ + ’\t’ + ’GENDER ’
+ ’\t’ + ’BMI’+ ’\t’ + ’HABIT ’ + ’\t’ + ’RxINCREASE ’ + ’\t’ + ’
RxDECREASE ’ + ’\t’ + ’DEPRESSION ’ + ’\t’
+ ’PLMI ’ + ’\t’ +’
CAFFEINE ’ + ’\t’ +’SMOKING ’ + ’\t’ + ’ALCOHOL_perday ’ + ’\t’ + ’AHI
’ ’\n’)
61
62
with open(translateFile ) as f:
63
for n, line in enumerate(f):
64
current_line = line.strip ().split(’,’)
65
output = []
66
if current_line [0] in subID:
67
output.append(current_line [1] + ’\t’+ current_line [1])
68
output.append(str(age[np.where(subID == current_line
[0]) ][0]))
69
output.append(str(gender[np.where(subID ==
current_line [0]) ][0]))
70
output.append(str(bmi[np.where(subID == current_line
[0]) ][0]))
71
output.append(str(habitual[np.where(subID ==
current_line [0]) ][0]))
72
output.append(str(rx_inc[np.where(subID ==
current_line [0]) ][0]))
73
output.append(str(rx_red[np.where(subID ==
current_line [0]) ][0]))
74
output.append(str(depression[np.where(subID ==
current_line [0]) ][0]))
75
output.append(str(plmi[np.where(subID == current_line
[0]) ][0]))
76
output.append(str(caffeine[np.where(subID ==
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
57
==PAGE:72==
current_line [0]) ][0]))
77
output.append(str(smoking[np.where(subID ==
current_line [0]) ][0]))
78
temp = alcohol[np.where(subID == current_line [0]) ][0]
79
temp_day = np.divide(float(temp) ,7)
80
temp_round = round(temp_day ,1)
81
output.append(str(temp_round))
82
output.append(str(ahi[np.where(subID == current_line
[0]) ][0]))
83
84
85
outFile.write(’\t’.join(output)+’\n’)
86
outFile.close ()
87
88
89
return
90
91
make_pheno(phenotypesFile , translateFile )
92
make_cov(phenotypesFile , translateFile )
R: Merging of super populations.
1
#Input: HapMap and 1000
Genomes.txt/.ped files
with
information on
subjects
and their
ethnicity
2
#Output: Subject .txt files
recoded as super
population
ethnicity.
3
4
#HapMap
5
data <- read.table(’/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_MrOS/PCdata/ethnicities
_hapmap.txt’,header=TRUE ,sep=’\t’, stringsAsFactors = FALSE)
6
7
data$population[which(data$population %in% c("CHB","JPT", "CHS", "CDX", "
KHV", "JPT", "CHD"))] <- "EAS"
8
data$population[which(data$population %in% c("CEU","TSI", "FIN", "GBR", "
IBJ","CEU", "TSI" ))] <- "EUR"
9
data$population[which(data$population %in% c("GIH","PJL", "BEB", "STU", "
ITU", "CHB"))] <- "SAS"
10
data$population[which(data$population %in% c("YRI","LWK", "GWD", "MSL", "
ESN", "ASW", "ACB", "MKK"))] <- "AFR"
11
data$population[which(data$population %in% c("MEX","YRI", "PEL", "GIH"))]
<- "AMR"
12
13
write.table(data ,file="/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_MrOS/PCdata/hapmap_
superpopulations .txt",sep=’\t’,quote=F,row.names=F)
14
15
16
#1000 genomes
17
data <- read.table(’/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_STAGES/PCdata/
integrated_call_samples_v2 .20130502. ALL.ped’,header=TRUE ,sep=’\t’,
stringsAsFactors = FALSE)
18
58
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:73==
19
data$Population[which(data$Population %in% c("CHB","JPT", "CHS", "CDX", "
KHV", "CHD"))] <- "EAS"
20
data$Population[which(data$Population %in% c("CEU","TSI", "FIN", "GBR", "
IBS"))] <- "EUR"
21
data$Population[which(data$Population %in% c("GIH","PJL", "BEB", "STU", "
ITU"))] <- "SAS"
22
data$Population[which(data$Population %in% c("YRI","LWK", "GWD", "MSL", "
ESN", "ASW", "ACB"))] <- "AFR"
23
data$Population[which(data$Population %in% c("MXL","PUR", "CLM", "PEL"))]
<- "AMR"
24
25
write.table(data ,file="/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_STAGES/PCdata/1000g_
superpopulations .txt",sep=’\t’,quote=F,row.names=F)
R: Extraction of European subjects using kmeans clustering.
1
# Input: Multidimentional
Scaling/Principal
component
analysis
files
from
the
relevant
cohort
merged
with a reference
genome (HapMap). The first
column of the file
indicates if a subject is from the cohort , or
reference
genome
2
# Output: A .txt file of European
subjects
3
4
library(plyr)
5
library(dplyr)
6
library(factoextra)
7
library(NbClust)
8
library(cluster)
9
library(fpc)
10
library(RColorBrewer)
11
library(scales)
12
library(ClusterR)
13
library(gridExtra)
14
library(flexclust)
15
library(ggplot2)
16
require(graphics)
17
18
## APOE
19
mergedDATAhapmap
<- read.table("/labs/mignot/PLMGWAS/genotypes_APOE/Affy_
subset/Affy_tablimited.txt", header = T, sep = "\t")
20
21
names( mergedDATAhapmap ) <- c("cc", "ID_1", "ID_2", "SOL", "PC1", "PC2", "
PC3", "PC4", "PC5", "PC6", "PC7", "PC8", "PC9", "PC10")
22
23
onlyHapmap
<- mergedDATAhapmap [which( mergedDATAhapmap [, "cc"] == 0), c("ID
_1", "ID_2", "PC1", "PC2", "PC3", "PC4", "PC5", "PC6", "PC7", "PC8", "
PC9")]
24
25
DATA <-mergedDATAhapmap [which( mergedDATAhapmap [, "cc"] == 1), c("ID_1", "
ID_2", "PC1", "PC2", "PC3", "PC4", "PC5", "PC6", "PC7", "PC8", "PC9")]
26
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
59
==PAGE:74==
27
28
famInfoHapmap
<- read.table("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_MrOS/PCdata/
hapmap_ superpopulations .txt", header = T, sep = "\t")
29
names(famInfoHapmap) <- c(’ID_1’, ’ID_2’, ’dad’, ’mom’, ’sex’, ’pheno ’, ’
population ’)
30
31
onlyHapmap_eth <- merge(x = onlyHapmap , y = famInfoHapmap , by = ’ID_1’,
all=FALSE)
32
33
PC1_Hapmap
<- onlyHapmap_eth$PC1
34
PC2_Hapmap
<- onlyHapmap_eth$PC2
35
PC3_Hapmap
<- onlyHapmap_eth$PC3
36
PC4_Hapmap
<- onlyHapmap_eth$PC4
37
ethnic_gr_Hapmap
<- factor(onlyHapmap_eth$population)
38
39
pcaHapmap
<- data.frame(PC1_Hapmap ,PC2_Hapmap ,PC3_Hapmap ,PC4_Hapmap ,ethnic
_gr_Hapmap)
40
41
PC1_DATA <- DATA$PC1
42
PC2_DATA <- DATA$PC2
43
PC3_DATA <- DATA$PC3
44
PC4_DATA <- DATA$PC4
45
46
pcaDATA
<- data.frame(DATA$ID_1, DATA$ID_2, PC1_DATA , PC2_DATA , PC3_DATA ,
PC4_DATA)
47
48
##plot
first 3 PCs
49
options(bitmapType=’cairo ’)
50
png("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/PCdata/APOE_1vs2.png", width = 8,
height = 8, units = ’in’, bg = "transparent", res = 300)
51
plot(PC1_DATA ,PC2_DATA ,col="white",xlab="PC1",ylab="PC2",main="500K_APOE
PC1 vs PC2")
52
points(PC1_DATA ,PC2_DATA ,col=rgb (0,0,0,1),pch=20, xlab="PC1",ylab="PC2",
main="APOE PC1 vs PC2")
53
dev.off()
54
png("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/PCdata/APOE_1vs3.png", width = 8,
height = 8, units = ’in’, bg = "transparent", res = 300)
55
plot(PC1_DATA ,PC3_DATA ,col="white",xlab="PC1",ylab="PC3",main="500K_APOE
PC1 vs PC3")
56
points(PC1_DATA ,PC3_DATA ,col=rgb (0,0,0,1),pch=20, xlab="PC1",ylab="PC3",
main="APOE PC1 vs PC3")
57
dev.off()
58
png("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/PCdata/APOE_2vs3.png", width = 8,
height = 8, units = ’in’, bg = "transparent", res = 300)
59
plot(PC2_DATA ,PC3_DATA ,col="white",xlab="PC2",ylab="PC3",main="500K_APOE
PC2 vs PC3")
60
points(PC2_DATA ,PC3_DATA ,col=rgb (0,0,0,1),pch=20, xlab="PC2",ylab="PC3",
main="APOE PC2 vs PC3")
61
dev.off()
62
63
all_PC1 <- append(PC1_Hapmap , PC1_DATA)
60
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:75==
64
all_PC2 <- append(PC2_Hapmap , PC2_DATA)
65
all_PC3 <- append(PC3_Hapmap , PC3_DATA)
66
67
##plot
against
HapMap
68
png("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/PCdata/APOE_against_1000g.png",
width = 8, height = 8, units = ’in’, bg = "transparent", res = 300)
69
plot(all_PC1 ,all_PC2 ,col="white",xlab="PC1",ylab="PC2",main="PC1 vs PC2")
70
points(PC1_Hapmap ,PC2_Hapmap ,xlab="PC1",ylab="PC2",main="PC1 vs PC2", col=
ethnic_gr_Hapmap)
71
points(PC1_DATA , PC2_DATA ,col=rgb (0.7 , 0.7, 0.7) ,pch=20, xlab="PC1",ylab="
PC2",main="APOE PC1 vs PC2")
72
legend("topleft",legend=levels(ethnic_gr_Hapmap),text.col=seq_along(levels
(ethnic_gr_Hapmap)))
73
dev.off()
74
75
##plot only
HapMap
76
png("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/PCdata/only_HapMap.png", width =
8, height = 8, units = ’in’, bg = "transparent", res = 300)
77
plot(all_PC1 ,all_PC2 ,col="white",xlab="PC1",ylab="PC2",main="HapMap
Genomes
PC1 vs PC2")
78
points(PC1_Hapmap ,PC2_Hapmap ,xlab="PC1",ylab="PC2",main="HapMap
Genomes
PC1 vs PC2", col=ethnic_gr_Hapmap)
79
legend("topleft",legend=levels(ethnic_gr_Hapmap),text.col=seq_along(levels
(ethnic_gr_Hapmap)))
80
dev.off()
81
82
##predict
STAGES
ancestry
using
trained
set "kmeans
training"
83
kmeans_training
<- kmeans(pcaHapmap[, 1:2] , centers = 5, nstart = 25)
84
pcaHapmap$cluster
<- kmeans_training$cluster
85
86
fitted_centers
<- unique(fitted(kmeans_training , method = "centers"))
87
tbl_predict_DATA <- predict_KMeans(pcaDATA[, 3:4] , fitted_centers)
88
89
DATA$cluster
<- tbl_predict_DATA
90
91
#write
table
with
assigned
clusters
92
extr_clust
<- DATA %>% mutate(Cluster = DATA$cluster)
93
write.table(extr_clust , "kmeans_clusters_k5.txt", sep = ’\t’)
94
95
### plot
clusters
96
97
#graph_pca
98
graph_pca_5 <- read.table("kmeans_clusters_k5.txt", sep = ’\t’)
99
head(graph_pca_5)
100
# PLOT
101
ethnic_gr_DATA <- factor(graph_pca_5$cluster)
102
103
png("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/PCdata/APOE_EUR_kmeans_against_
1000g.png", width = 8, height = 8, units = ’in’, bg = "transparent",
res = 300)
104
palette3 = rep(’grey ’, times = 653)
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
61
==PAGE:76==
105
palette3_named = setNames(object = palette3 , nm = ethnic_gr_DATA)
106
PC1 <- graph_pca_5$PC1
107
PC2 <- graph_pca_5$PC2
108
109
ggplot(graph_pca_5, aes(x = PC1 , y=PC2 , color=ethnic_gr_DATA)) + geom_
point ()
110
dev.off()
111
112
graph_pca_5$cluster[graph_pca_5$cluster == 1] <- "EUR"
113
DATA_EUR_id <- graph_pca_5[ which(graph_pca_5[, "cluster"]=="EUR"), c( "ID_
1", "ID_2")]
114
write.table(DATA_EUR_id ,file="/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/PCdata/
APOE_kmeans_EUR5centers.txt",quote=F,row.names=F)
Bash: Transform .gen ﬁles to .bgen ﬁles.
1
# Input: .gen files
2
# Output: .bgen
files
3
# The
scripts
are
submitted
the the
Stanford
SCG server
using
slurm. Bash
files are
created
for each
chromosome.
4
5
#!/bin/bash
6
touch
qctoolmerge.sh
7
chmod a+x qctoolmerge.sh
8
cat > qctoolmerge.sh <<- EOF
9
#!/bin/bash -l
10
#SBATCH
--job -name=QCTOOLbgen
11
#SBATCH
--mem -per -cpu =64000
12
#SBATCH
--account=mignot
13
#SBATCH
--time =120:00:00
14
#SBATCH
--array =1-22
15
module
load
qctool/v2 .0.1
16
qctool_v2 .0.1 \
17
-filetype
gen \
18
-g /labs/mignot/REMGWAS/ Genotypes_APOE / Affy_imputed4snptest /chr\${
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID } _Affy_APOE_impute2ed .gen -s /labs/mignot/REMGWAS/
Genotypes_APOE/ Affy_imputed4snptest /chr\${ SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID }
_Affy_APOE_impute2ed .sample \
19
-assume -chromosome "\ $SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID " \
20
-threads 16 \
21
-og /labs/mignot/REMGWAS/ Genotypes_APOE/ Affy_imputed4snptest /chr\${
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID } _Affy_APOE_impute2ed .bgen
22
-sort
23
EOF
24
sbatch
qctoolmerge.sh
R: Prep .sample ﬁles for SNPTEST.
62
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:77==
1
# Input: imputed .sample files , one per
chromosome
2
# Output: .sample
files for each
model
prepared
for
SNPTEST. One for each
chromosome. Can be converted
for each
phenotype , REM
percentage (REM_P)
, REM
minutes(REM_M), and REM
latency (REM_L).
3
4
library(plyr)
5
library(dplyr)
6
7
8
EUR_File <- read.table("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/PCdata/APOE_
kmeans_EUR5centers.txt", header=T,sep=’ ’)
9
phenotypeFile
<- read.table("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/
translation_extraction/APOE_pheno.txt", header=T,sep=’\t’)
10
pcaFile
<- read.table("/labs/mignot/PLMGWAS/genotypes_APOE/Affy_subset/
Affy_tablimited.txt", header=T, sep=’\t’)
11
names(pcaFile) <- c("cc", "ID_1", "ID_2", "SOL", "PC1", "PC2", "PC3", "PC4
", "PC5", "PC6", "PC7", "PC8", "PC9", "PC10")
12
model1File
<- read.table("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/translation_
extraction/APOE_model1_cov.txt", header=T,sep=’\t’)
13
14
# Recode
habitual
sleep
into
hours
15
shift_habFile
<- read.table("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/
translation_extraction/APOE_shift_hab_cov.txt", header=T,sep=’\t’)
16
shift_habFile$HABIT[which(shift_habFile$HABIT == 5)] <- 8
17
shift_habFile$HABIT[which(shift_habFile$HABIT == 4)] <- 7
18
shift_habFile$HABIT[which(shift_habFile$HABIT == 3)] <- 6
19
shift_habFile$HABIT[which(shift_habFile$HABIT == 2)] <- 5
20
shift_habFile$HABIT[which(shift_habFile$HABIT == 1)] <- 4
21
22
exclude_shift
<- shift_habFile[which(shift_habFile$SHIFT == 4 | shift_
habFile$SHIFT == 5), "ID_1"]
23
24
medicationFile
<- read.table("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/
translation_extraction/APOE_Rx_depression_cov.txt", header=T,sep=’\t’)
25
26
EUR_geno <- phenotypeFile[which( phenotypeFile $ID_1 %in% EUR_File$ID_1), "
ID_1"]
27
28
# ----- Model 1 -------
29
for (i in 1:22) {
30
sampleFile
<- read.table(paste("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/Affy
_ imputed4snptest /chr",i,"_Affy_APOE_impute2ed.sample", sep=""),
header=T,sep=’ ’)
31
32
sampleFile
<- sampleFile[c("ID_1", "ID_2", "missing", "sex")]
33
names(sampleFile) <- c("ID_1", "ID_2", "missing", "SEX")
34
35
mergedPCA
<- join(x = sampleFile , y = pcaFile[, c("ID_1", "PC1", "PC2",
"PC3", "PC4")], type = ’left ’,by = "ID_1")
36
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
63
==PAGE:78==
37
merged_sgb <- join(x = mergedPCA , y = model1File[, c("ID_1", "AGE", "BMI
")], type = ’left ’, by = "ID_1")
38
39
mergedPheno
<- join(x = merged_sgb , y = phenotypeFile [, c("ID_1", "REM_L
")], type = ’left ’, by = "ID_1")
40
mergedPheno[is.na(mergedPheno)] <- "NA"
41
#mergedPheno$REM_P[mergedPheno$REM_P == 112] <- "NA"
42
#mergedPheno$REM_M[mergedPheno$REM_M == 309.12]
<- "NA"
43
#mergedPheno$REM_M[mergedPheno$REM_L == 309.12]
<- "NA"
44
45
46
’%ni%’ <- Negate(’%in%’)
47
mergedPheno$REM_L[mergedPheno$ID_1 %ni% EUR_geno] <- "NA"
48
mergedPheno$REM_L[mergedPheno$ID_1 %in% exclude_shift] <- "NA"
49
50
mergedPheno [1, c("missing", "PC1", "PC2", "PC3", "PC4", "AGE", "BMI", "
REM_L")] <- c(’0’,’C’, ’C’, ’C’, ’C’, ’C’, ’C’, ’P’)
51
52
53
filename = paste("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/Affy_PCA_EUR/chr",
i,"_Affy_APOE_impute2ed_REML_model1_EUR.sample", sep="")
54
write.table(mergedPheno ,file=filename ,quote=F,row.names=F, col.names=T)
55
}
56
57
# -------------- MODEL 2 ----------------
58
for (i in 1:22) {
59
sampleFile
<- read.table(paste("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/Affy
_ imputed4snptest /chr",i,"_Affy_APOE_impute2ed.sample", sep=""),
header=T,sep=’ ’)
60
61
sampleFile
<- sampleFile[c("ID_1", "ID_2", "missing", "sex")]
62
names(sampleFile) <- c("ID_1", "ID_2", "missing", "SEX")
63
64
mergedPCA
<- join(x = sampleFile , y = pcaFile[, c("ID_1", "PC1", "PC2",
"PC3", "PC4")], type = ’left ’,by = "ID_1")
65
66
merged_sgb <- join(x = mergedPCA , y = model1File[, c("ID_1", "AGE", "BMI
")], type = ’left ’, by = "ID_1")
67
68
merged_hab <- join(x = merged_sgb , y = shift_habFile[, c("ID_1", "HABIT"
)], type = ’left ’, by = "ID_1")
69
70
merged_d_d <- join(x = merged_hab , y = medicationFile[, c("ID_2", "
RxWORSE", "DEPRESSION")], type = ’left ’, by = "ID_2")
71
72
mergedPheno
<- join(x = merged_d_d, y = phenotypeFile [, c("ID_1", "REM_L
")], type = ’left ’, by = "ID_1")
73
mergedPheno[is.na(mergedPheno)] <- "NA"
74
#mergedPheno$REM_P[mergedPheno$REM_P == 112] <- "NA"
75
#mergedPheno$REM_M[mergedPheno$REM_M == 309.12]
<- "NA"
76
64
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:79==
77
’%ni%’ <- Negate(’%in%’)
78
mergedPheno$REM_L[mergedPheno$ID_1 %ni% EUR_geno] <- "NA"
79
mergedPheno$REM_L[mergedPheno$ID_1 %in% exclude_shift] <- "NA"
80
81
mergedPheno [1, c("missing", "PC1", "PC2", "PC3", "PC4", "AGE", "BMI", "
HABIT", "RxWORSE","DEPRESSION" ,"REM_L")] <- c(’0’,’C’, ’C’, ’C’, ’C’
, ’C’, ’C’,’C’,’D’,’D’ ,’P’)
82
83
filename = paste("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/Affy_PCA_EUR/chr",
i,"_Affy_APOE_impute2ed_REML_model2_EUR.sample", sep="")
84
write.table(mergedPheno ,file=filename ,quote=F,row.names=F, col.names=T)
85
}
86
87
# -------------- MODEL 3 ----------------
88
for (i in 1:22) {
89
sampleFile
<- read.table(paste("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/Affy
_ imputed4snptest /chr",i,"_Affy_APOE_impute2ed.sample", sep=""),
header=T,sep=’ ’)
90
91
sampleFile
<- sampleFile[c("ID_1", "ID_2", "missing", "sex")]
92
names(sampleFile) <- c("ID_1", "ID_2", "missing", "SEX")
93
94
mergedPCA
<- join(x = sampleFile , y = pcaFile[, c("ID_1", "PC1", "PC2",
"PC3", "PC4")], type = ’left ’,by = "ID_1")
95
96
merged_sgb <- join(x = mergedPCA , y = model1File[, c("ID_1", "AGE", "BMI
", "AHI")], type = ’left ’, by = "ID_1")
97
98
merged_hab <- join(x = merged_sgb , y = shift_habFile[, c("ID_1", "HABIT"
)], type = ’left ’, by = "ID_1")
99
100
merged_d_d <- join(x = merged_hab , y = medicationFile [, c("ID_2", "
RxWORSE", "DEPRESSION")], type = ’left ’, by = "ID_2")
101
102
mergedPheno
<- join(x = merged_d_d, y = phenotypeFile [, c("ID_1", "REM_P
")], type = ’left ’, by = "ID_1")
103
mergedPheno[is.na(mergedPheno)] <- "NA"
104
mergedPheno$REM_P[mergedPheno$REM_P == 112] <- "NA"
105
#mergedPheno$REM_M[mergedPheno$REM_M == 309.12]
<- "NA"
106
107
’%ni%’ <- Negate(’%in%’)
108
mergedPheno$REM_P[mergedPheno$ID_1 %ni% EUR_geno] <- "NA"
109
mergedPheno$REM_P[mergedPheno$ID_1 %in% exclude_shift] <- "NA"
110
111
mergedPheno [1, c("missing", "PC1", "PC2", "PC3", "PC4", "AGE", "BMI", "
AHI", "HABIT", "RxWORSE","DEPRESSION" ,"REM_P")] <- c(’0’,’C’, ’C’, ’
C’, ’C’, ’C’, ’C’ ,’C’,’C’,’D’,’D’ ,’P’)
112
113
filename = paste("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_APOE/Affy_PCA_EUR/chr",
i,"_Affy_APOE_impute2ed_REMP_model3_EUR.sample", sep="")
114
write.table(mergedPheno ,file=filename ,quote=F,row.names=F, col.names=T)
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
65
==PAGE:80==
115
}
Bash: Run SNPTEST
1
# Input: .sample and .bgen files , one per
chromosome.
2
# Output: Association
files
from
SNPTEST
3
4
touch
snptestSlurm.sh
5
chmod 755
snptestSlurm.sh
6
cat > snptestSlurm.sh
<<- EOF
7
#!/bin/bash -l
8
#SBATCH
--job -name=snptest
9
#SBATCH
--mem -per -cpu =64000
10
#SBATCH
--time =120:00:00
11
#SBATCH
--account
mignot
12
#SBATCH
--array 1-22
13
/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/jobs /./ snptest_v2 .5.4 - beta3 \
14
-data /labs/mignot/REMGWAS/Genotypes_WSC / Affy6_imputed4snptest /chr\${
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID } _Affy6_WSC_impute2ed .bgen /labs/mignot/REMGWAS/
Genotypes_WSC/Affy6_PCA_EUR/chr\${ SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID }
_Affy6_WSC_impute2ed_PHENO_model3_REML_EUR .sample \
15
-o /labs/mignot/REMGWAS/associations/WSC_Affy6/REM_L/CHR\${
SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID } _WSC_Affy6_EUR_model3_REML \
16
-frequentist 1 \
17
-quantile_normalise_phenotypes \
18
-method
score \
19
-pheno
REM_L \
20
-chunk
10000 \
21
-hwe \
22
-cov_all
23
EOF
24
sbatch
snptestSlurm.sh
66
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:81==
R: Filter association ﬁles on imputation quality and minor allele frequency.
1
# Input: association
files , one per
chromosome.
2
#Output: association
files
filtered on MAF >0.01 and info >0.4. One file per
chromosome.
3
library(plyr)
4
library(dplyr)
5
for (i in 1:22) {
6
association
<- read.table(paste("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/associations/APOE/
REM_L/CHR",i,"_APOE_EUR_model2_REML", sep=""), header=T,sep=’ ’)
7
datafiltered
<- association[which(association[, "info"] >0.4 &
association[, "all_maf"] >0.01 ), c(1:26)]
8
write.table(datafiltered ,file=paste("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/associations/
APOE/REM_L/CHR",i,"_APOE_EUR_model2_REML_MAF_INFO", sep = ""),quote=F
,row.names=F, col.names=T)
9
}
Bash: Run meta-analysis using META.
1
#Input: filtered
association
files , one per
chromosome.
2
#Output: meta
analysed files , one per
chromosome.
3
4
#!/bin/bash
5
6
#SBATCH
--job -name=runMETA
7
#SBATCH
--mem -per -cpu =64000
8
#SBATCH
--account=mignot
9
#SBATCH
--time =120:00:00
10
#SBATCH
--array =1-22
11
12
module
load meta /1.7
13
14
meta --snptest
--method 1 --use_info_col
--threshold
0.4 --cohort /labs/
mignot/REMGWAS/associations/WSC_Affy6/REM_P/CHR${ SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID }
_WSC_Affy6_EUR_model3_REMP_MAF_INFO /labs/mignot/REMGWAS/ associations/
MrOS/REM_P/CHR${ SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID } _Ill_MrOS_EUR_model3_REMP_MAF_INFO
/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/associations /STAGES/REM_P/CHR${ SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID
} _STAGES_EUR_model3_REMP_MAF_INFO
--output /labs/mignot/REMGWAS/
meta_analysis/META/ META_model3_REMP /CHR${ SLURM_ARRAY_TASK_ID }
_META_model3_REMP .txt
R: Manhattan plot.
1
#Input: META
output
files
concatenated.
2
#Output: Manhattan plot , .jpg file.
3
4
library(tidyverse)
5
library(readr)
6
library(data.table)
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
67
==PAGE:82==
7
library(ggrepel)
8
library(viridis)
9
10
ggManh=function(metaout , fileName){
11
df.temp= metaout %>% group_by(chr) %>%
12
summarise(chr.len= max(pos)) %>%
13
mutate(tot=cumsum(as.numeric(chr.len))-chr.len) %>%
14
select(-chr.len) %>% left_join(metaout , ., by=c("chr"="chr")) %>%
arrange(chr , pos) %>% mutate(BPcum=pos+tot)
15
axisdf
<- df.temp %>% group_by(chr) %>% summarize(center =( max(BPcum) +
min(BPcum) ) / 2 )
16
setDT(df.temp)
17
nCHR <- length(unique(metaout$chr))
18
a=ggplot(df.temp[P_value > 1e-20] , aes(x=BPcum , y=-log10(P_value), color
= as.factor(chr))) +scale_color_manual(values = rep(c("#20 A39E", "
#08415C"), nCHR))+
19
geom_point(aes(color=as.factor(chr)), alpha =0.3, size =1.4)+geom_hline(
yintercept = c(-log10 (5e-8), -log10 (1e-5)))+
20
scale_x_continuous(label = axisdf$chr , breaks= axisdf$center )+ labs(x
= "Chromosome")+theme_bw(base_size = 22) +
21
theme(plot.title = element_text(hjust = 0.5) ,
22
legend.position="none",
23
panel.border = element_blank (),
24
panel.grid.major.x = element_blank (),
25
panel.grid.minor.x = element_blank ())
26
ggsave(a, file=paste0(fileName , ".png"), height = 5, width =15, device=’
png’, dpi =400)
27
}
28
29
30
options(bitmapType=’cairo ’)
31
metaout
<- read.table("/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/meta_analysis/META/META_model1
_REML/META_model1_REML_concat.txt", header=T, sep=’ ’)
32
fileName
<- "/labs/mignot/REMGWAS/meta_analysis/META/META_model1_REML/META
_model1_REML_manhattan_cohort"
33
ggManh(metaout , fileName)
68
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
==PAGE:83==
Genome-wide association study of rapid eye movement sleep
69
==PAGE:84==
I dedicate this thesis to my parents, who have supported be unconditionally in everything I have
done.
Mamma og pabbi, takk fyrir allt.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
