==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Polygeneration of methanol and
electricity based on biomass pyrolysis
Jan Ziety
Student number:
s192618
Supervisor:
Lasse Røngaard Clausen
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Mechanical Engineering
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Nils Koppels Allé
Building 404
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 25 19 60
www.mek.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The utilization of second-generation biomass to obtain liquid or gaseous biofuels is a
necessary step that has to be taken towards the limitation of fossil fuel consumption in
the transportation sector. Especially, in heavy transportation, long-distance shipping,
and aviation, where direct electrification does not seem applicable. Polygeneration of
fuels and electricity via termo-chemical process coupled with SOC enables storage of
electricity, and on the other hand, gives flexibility in terms of electricity production
in case of its shortage. This thesis presents a flexible system for the conversion of
straw pellets and electricity to bio-methanol, bio-char, bio-oil, and electricity, via two
modes. In Electricity Storage mode bio-methanol, bio-char, bio-oil are obtained via
pyrolysis gas conversion using SOC in the electrolysis mode. On the other hand, in
Electricity Production mode electricity, bio-char and bio-oil are produced from the
same biomass input. Electricity is generated by coupling pyrolysis and SOC in Fuel
Cell mode, or in the alternative scenario by a Gas Turbine instead of SOFC. Bio-
methanol and upgraded bio-oil can be used as transportation fuels, whereas bio-char
could be used as fertilizer or CO2 storage. The design system differentiates from
other power-to-X systems, especially those that use gasification, because it produces
bio-oil and bio-char in the same quantity, no matter in which mode it is operating.
Therefore the design system is characterized by high carbon binding capability. Via
thermodynamic modelling, a carbon eﬀiciency of 97% and energy eﬀiciency of 79%
for ES mode were established. By comparing SOFC and GT electricity generation
routes for Electricity Production mode, it was determined that GT stands out as more
energy eﬀicient (79.0% to 74.5%), whereas in terms of carbon eﬀiciency (61.0%), there
is no difference between those two modes configuration.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This Master thesis was prepared at the Department of Mechanical Engineering at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment of the requirements for acquiring
a Master degree in Sustainable Energy - Bio Energy.
Kongens Lyngby, June 25, 2021
Jan Ziety (s192618)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First of all, I would like to thank my supervisor Lasse Røngaard Clausen for our
robust cooperation, all the discussions, given advice, and for being patient with me,
during our meetings. For sure it helped me broaden my knowledge and look at some
aspect of the thesis from a slightly different perspective.
I would like to express my gratitude to my friend Konstantinos for the council and
help with ASPEN Plus software.
Finally, I would like to thank my family, especially my mum and my grandparents
for supporting my foreign escapade.
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
ASR
Area Specific Resistance
CGO
Cerium gadolinium oxide
CH3OH Methanol
CH4
Methane
CHP
Combined Heat and Power
CO
Carbon monoxide
CO2
Carbon dioxide
COS
Carbonyl sulfide
D : F
Distillate to feed
DC
Distillation Column
DH
District Heating
DME
Dimethyl ether
DNA
Dynamic Network Analysis
DTU
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
e´
Electron
EP
Electricity Production
EP ´ GT Electricity Production - Gas Turbine
ES
Electricity Storage
FPBO
Fast Pyrolysis Bio-oil
GHG
Greenhouse Gases
H2
Hydrogen
H2O
Water
H2S
Hydrogen Sulfide
HHV
High Heating Value
LHV
Low Heating Value
MeOH
Methanol
MTBE Methyl tert-butyl ether
N2
Nitrogen
O2
Oxygen
PH
Process Heat
POX
Partial Oxidation
RE
Renewable Energy
RK ´ S Redlich-Kwong-Soave
RR
Reflux Ratio
RSOC
Reversible Solid Oxide Cell
SA
Sensitivity Analysis
SOCs
Solid Oxide Cells
SOEC
Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cell
SOFC
Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
TC
Topping Column
WGS
Water-Gas Shift
Y SZ
Yttria-stabilized zirconia
ZnO
Zinc oxide
Symbols
∆H
Enthalpy change [kJ/mol]
∆p
Pressure difference [-]
9m
mass flow [kg/s]
η
Eﬀiciency [-]
ASOC
SOC Active Area [m2]
Cp
Specific heat [kJ/kg¨Ks
E
Electricity [kJ/s]
iSOC
Current density [A{cm2]
p
Pressure [bar]
PNet
Net Electricity Production [kJ/s]
Qloss
Heat loss [kJ/s]
T
Temperature [C]
x
Molar fraction, [-]
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Methanol synthesis via SOCs from biomass pyrolysis
4
2.1
Pyrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Partial Oxidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
RSOC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Methanol synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.5
Distillation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methods and system design
14
3.1
Pyrolysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Electricity Storage Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.3
Electricity Production Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Evaluation criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Results
24
4.1
Electricity Storage mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2
Electricity Production mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.3
Alternative Electricity Production mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.4
EP and EP-GT modes comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5
Discussion
36
6
Conclusion
39
Bibliography
40
An Appendix
46
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background
Day by day, the global warming phenomenon and fossil fuel depletion are becoming
more and more pressing issues. Anthropogenic emissions are estimated to have caused
approximately 1.0˝C of global warming, and the impacts are probable to reach 1.5˝C
in the upcoming decades [1]. Moreover, the ramifications of anthropogenic CO2 emis-
sions will persist for many millennia [2]. Therefore definitive measures are required
to reverse this state.
Among others, energy transition into renewable energy, via
technological development, is indispensable to make the goal realistic.
Increase of CO2 concentration in the atmospheric gas composition is the largest
contributor to total radiative forcing [3]. The transport sector, classified as a hard-to-
abate sector, accounts for around 20% of GHG emissions. Coupling Transport with
International Aviation and Navigation (shipping) sectors gives 25% of all GHG emit-
ted to the atmosphere (Figure 1.1) [4]. However, what is even more problematic is
that only in those 3 sectors (excluding CO2 emissions from biomass) absolute change
in GHG emissions between 1990-2014 was positive It causes a significant obstacle to
overcome when it comes to achieving Carbon Neutrality, because the biggest diﬀiculty
in transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources lies in the transport sector,
especially in the heavy vehicles, aviation and shipping. Whereas electrification can be
a solution for small vehicles, for heavy vehicles, aviation and shipping, the capacity of
batteries, size of batteries and metal resource constraints [5] are for now insuperable
obstacle to fully transform transportation sector, only using batteries.
Therefore, to reach a climate neutrality goal in 2050 with net-zero greenhouse gas
emissions, renewable energy sources, especially biofuels, that are required in hard-to-
abate sectors, have to be employed. The most promising sources of renewable energy,
that could be utilized in the transport sector, may come from the thermochemical
conversion of biomass systems integrated with electrolysers. Hydrogen and power-
to-x products like bio-methanol, bio-diesel, bio-ammonia and upgraded bio-oil could
substitute conventional petrochemicals used nowadays in aviation, shipping, heavy
transportation and chemical industries [6]. Bio-ethanol and bio-diesel, produced com-
mercially nowadays on a large scale [7], are applicable for heavy transportation and
shipping. Therefore, there is potential in developing commercial production of bio-
methanol. Bio-methanol can be used as a blend of diesel and gasoline. High thermal
eﬀiciency in diesel engines makes them more favourable over the gasoline engines in
heavy-duty applications, whereas a significant asset of the gasoline engine is the lower
==PAGE:10==
1.1 Background
2
emission of particulate matter, soot, smoke and nitrogen oxide compared to diesel en-
gines. A solution to this problem could be the addition of bio-methanol to the diesel,
which could reduce engine emissions, without supplementary engine modifications.
Bio-methanol could also be used as a binding bloc, to produce dimethyl ether, acetic
acid and formaldehyde in the chemical industry [8].
29%
20%
19%
12%
11%
3%
3%
3%
0%
Sectoral greenhouse gas emissions
Energy supply
Transport
Industry
Residential and commercial
Agriculture
Waste management
International Aviation
International Navigation
Other
Figure 1.1: Emissions share per main sector in by IPCC (2014) [9].
Currently in Denmark methanol usage is yet not introduced in the transportation
sector, however, according to the Danish Technological Institute report, admission of
3% methanol in new mix gasoline is possible to be implemented in the near future
[10].
In Denmark straw has the potential to become a biomass source, that could be utilised
to produce bio-oil, bio-methanol and bio-char via termo-chemical conversion. Nowa-
days, straw is mainly used at small-scale CHP plants, large-scale CHP plants and
in district heating boilers [11]. However, according to the Danish Commission on
Climate Change Policy, only 60% of straw total energy potential is currently used
[11]. An advantage of thermo-chemical conversion of straw via pyrolysis compared to
gasification is high co-production of bio-char, which can be used as a fertilizer, but
also poses as potential storage of carbon dioxide[12]. An additional asset of wheat
straw pyrolysis might be coupling produced syngas with partial oxidation and SOC
that would enable to switch between the scenarios with high and low electricity re-
quirement. In case of excess renewable energy production, part of it could be stored
in form of bio-methanol, where in case of electricity scarcity, Solid Oxide Cells in Fuel
==PAGE:11==
1.2 Research objectives
3
Cell mode are able to supply electricity from syngas via fuel oxidation. This issue
will be the concern of the present research, which details will be introduced in the
upcoming sections.
1.2
Research objectives
The general goal of the MSc Thesis project is to model and analyze the production of
methanol or electricity from a thermodynamic perspective, by coupling thermochem-
ical wheat straw conversion via pyrolysis with Solid Oxide Cell. In particular, the
objectives are:
• to propose a novel methanol/electricity production unit coupling SOCs and
updraft pyrolysis reactor - utilizing wheat straw pellets
• to optimize the eﬀiciency of biomass to methanol/electricity conversion
• to minimize the carbon loss in methanol/electricity conversion process
• optimize the model in terms of heat utilization
• to compare the created model with conventional solutions
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2
Methanol synthesis via SOCs from
biomass pyrolysis
2.1
Pyrolysis
Pyrolysis is a thermal degradation of organic material in the oxygen-deficient environ-
ment (to avoid relevant levels of combustion) [13, 14]. The products of the pyrolysis
process include bio-oil, bio-char, and pyrolysis gas, where liquid fraction poses as the
most desired substance, that is later used for fuel, or chemical production [15]. Pyrol-
ysis is usually carried out under ambient pressure (1 atm) and a temperature range
of 300-650˝C [15].
2.1.1
Pyrolysis raw material
Lignocellulosic biomass that can be a raw material for pyrolysis feedstock, is now in
the spotlight since it is the most abundant source of renewable carbon, therefore its
proper utilization is substantial in the case of GHG emission reduction [2]. Lignocel-
lulose consists mainly of hemicellulose, cellulose, lignin, and water. The proportion
of those 4 components varies according to the type of lignocellulosic raw material. So,
taking into account the heterogeneous nature of raw material utilized in the pyrolysis
process, it can be claimed that by changing biomass type, the pyrolysis process is
being changed, since the type and magnitude of degradation processes could substan-
tially differ. Therefore, the definition of pyrolysis refers to a whole range of different
thermal degradation processes, appearing with different magnitude and temperatures
that are forming diverse products. There are 3 main consecutive stages of the pyrolysis
process, occurring with the temperature increase: initial evaporation of free moisture,
rapid depolymerisation and volatilization, and slow degradation. In the last stage of
slow degradation, organic and inorganic compounds decompose, char is being formed,
and secondary reactions between pyrolysis products are occurring[13].
Cellulose decomposition can be described by 3 paths, differentiated by temperature
parameter. The first one, at a temperature below 280˝C, contains reactions of cellu-
lose depolymerisation via bond scission (e.g. dehydratation, free radical formation).
With the temperature increase, in the range of 280-500˝C, cellulose degradation is
occurring mainly via depolymerization. Finally, in the third path, above 500˝C, a
direct cellulose transformation directly to light gases, and volatile compounds, takes
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Pyrolysis
5
place [13].
Hemicellulose degradation occurs in the range of 200-260˝C, since its
amorphous structure makes it less resistant, compared to cellulose. For lignin, the
dehydratation in the pyrolysis process, takes place above 273˝C, up to 500˝C ([13]).
Moisture removal (dehydratation) in the lignocellulosic raw material occurs up to the
temperature of 200˝C. The hemicellulose decomposition happens in the temperature
range of 200-280˝C, whereas lignin in range of 280-500˝C. Product of hemicellulose
decomposition in pyrolysis adds up mainly to pyrolysis gas, cellulose decomposition
influences higher yield of syn-gas and bio-oil, whereas lignin decomposition adds up
mostly bio-oil and bio-char in the products[14].
The biomass that is attractive in terms of energy conversion can be divided into
energy crops, wood, agricultural residues, forestry residues, municipal, industrial and
food wastes [16]. For the pyrolysis process biomass from wood has been extensively
utilised due to its low cost, availability, and homogeneity. Use of another type of
biomass such as agricultural waste, e.g.
in form of wheat straw, could provide a
cheaper alternative, that nevertheless has some drawbacks when it comes to technical
aspects, homogeneity, or calorific value [16].
Wheat straw, that occurs in large quantities in Denmark [11], can be used as a raw
material in form of pellets. So, to be able to keep the pyrolysis process parameters
constant, the biomass used in the designed system is in the form of straw pellets,
so the biomass is more homogeneous and therefore modelling its conversion is more
predictable.
2.1.2
Pyrolysis parameters
To optimize the yield of the products, strict control of temperature profile has to
be applied, as this parameter, to some degree, can affect other parameters (pressure,
heating rate etc.)[14].
Figure 2.1: Variation of products from aspen polar wood with temperature, using
pyrolysis [17][18].
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Pyrolysis
6
As it can be seen on Figure 2.1, for pyrolysis there is a strong correlation between the
temperature and given products yield. However, the yield of given end products, of
the pyrolysis process, depends not only on temperature, but also on parameters such
as pressure, heating rate, or residence time (time the raw material spends inside the
heated pyrolysis reactor) [13]. Based on the heating rate parameter, pyrolysis can be
divided into slow, intermediate, fast and flash pyrolysis. The highest bio-oil yield can
be achieved by applying fast pyrolysis, with a high heating rate of 1000-10000˝C/s
(to prevent the occurrence of secondary termo-chemical reactions, that favour to
form bio-char) [13], with the final temperature of around 500˝C and residence time
below 2 s. Additionally, rapid cooling (quenching) needs to be applied to prevent
from the secondary reactions from taking place [14]. The bio-oil yield can amount
to 60-75wt.%, bio-char to 15-25wt.% and pyrolysis gas to 10-20wt.% [13]. Biomass
used in the pyrolysis process should contain not more than 10% moisture, to reduce
the water content in the produced bio-oil [17]. Moreover, small size of raw material
(2mm particle size, when using fluidized bed reactor) is necessary to provide rapid
processing in the reactor[17].
In slow pyrolysis, which is used to produce high bio-char content, the heating rate
should not exceed 10˝C. Higher temperature of around 500˝C, of slow pyrolysis pro-
cess, guarantee a release of the wider range of volatile fractions, which results in
higher carbon content in the bio-char [14].
Pyrolysis
Updraft
reactor
Drying
(to 10% water)
Grinding
(~2mm)
BIO-CHAR
BIO-OIL
PYROLYSIS
GAS
Cooling and
separation
WATER
VAPOUR
STRAW
REVERSED
PYROLYSIS 
GAS 
Figure 2.2: Slow pyrolysis process scheme.
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Pyrolysis
7
2.1.3
Pyrolysis reactor
When it comes to pyrolysis reactor, its design can differ based on the method of heat
transfer and the way feedstock is fed. For example, biomass can be pyrolyzed in a fixed
bed reactor with an up, down or through flow of inter gas, that is used to transport
emerging volatile products [13]. This type of reactor is applicable for slow pyrolysis
since they do not provide high heating rates. For fast or rapid pyrolysis fluidized-bed
reactors are being used since they are characterized by better heat properties.
As for the type of reactor, updraft fixed bed reactor is used in slow pyrolysis, due
to its simplicity in design, well-developed technology, simplicity in construction and
operation, reliable results[14, 17]. As mentioned before, small size of biomass feed is
required to reach a higher biomass heating rate [17]. Since char is an effective vapour
cracking catalyst is is vital to rapidly separate solid and vapour phase[17].
In the designed system updraft pyrolysis reactor is used to achieve high bio-char yield.
As depicted on Figure 2.2 pretreated straw, in form of wheat pellets, is fed from the
top to the reactor. Whereas, water vapour and part of pyrolysis gas are fed from the
bottom.
2.1.4
Pyrolysis products
2.1.4.1
Bio-char
Bio-char is solid amorphous carbonaceous material extracted from thermal degrada-
tion of hemicellulose and lignin [14]. The char typically account for around 25% of
the total energy stored in the used raw material, whereas the carbon content of the
char account for around 50 wt.% of the total carbon content stored in the used raw
material [13]. The heating value of the bio-char varies between 25-32 MJ/kg dry basis
[15]. Bio-char can be utilized as a solid fuel in boilers, a substrate for production of
activated carbon, a reactive feed for a further gasification process, or soil amendment
agent [13]. There is also a potential for carbon sequestration via underground bio-
char storage, which would result in negative carbon emissions when producing other
pyrolysis fuels like bio-oil, or pyrolysis gas [15].
2.1.4.2
Bio-oil
Bio-oil is a mixture of complex hydrocarbons with large amount of water (up to 25
wt.%) and oxygen (30-40 wt.%) [13, 15]. It can contain even 300 different organic
compounds, where the main are: hydroxyaldehydes, hydroxyketones, sugars and de-
hydrosugars, carboxylic acids and phenols [13, 15].
Bio-oil is extracted from the
thermal degradation of hemicellulose cellulose and lignin. HHV of bio-oil is around
16-17 MJ/kg, with 25 wt.% water content that is diﬀicult to reduce. Bio-oil has a
high density of around 1.2 kg/dm3 and viscosity of 50 cP (for 40˝C and 25 wt.%
water content)[17].
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Pyrolysis
8
High oxygen content is the main reason for differences in properties and behaviour
between bio-oil and conventional hydrocarbon fuels. The biggest obstacles for bio-oil
application are poor volatility, high viscosity, coking, corrosiveness and low heating
value [19].
Another problem that comes with the bio-oil is the matter of its self-
polymerization when additionally stored or processed [20].
However, as a fuel, it can substitute oil or diesel in various types of boilers, furnaces
or burners to produce heat and electricity, since those types of energy generators are
eligible to operate with a wide variety of fuels [19]. Diesel engines can also utilize bio-
oil, since they have high eﬀiciency, when it comes to electricity generation, compared
to boilers that are mainly used for heat production. The major obstacle in utilizing
bio-oil in diesel engine lies in specific properties of pyrolysis liquid, such as ignition,
corrosiveness and coking [19]. Another bio-oil utilization path can be the production
of various chemicals. Nevertheless, the most promising way of utilizing bio-oil lies
in its upgrading to transport fuels, as this would immensely help in the reduction of
carbon emissions from the transport sector caused by conventional fuels. The easiest
use of bio-oil as a transport fuel is to mix it with conventional diesel fuel, by adding
surfactants, that enables emulsification of bio-oil with diesel fuel [19], or to blend it
with 1-butanol and biodiesel to obtain marine fuel [21]. If used autonomously, as a
conventional transport fuel, bio-oil has to be fully oxygenated by using hydro-treating
or catalytic vapour cracking. Otherwise, it can also be esterified, or gasified to syngas
followed by synthesis to hydrocarbons and alcohols [22].
An example on a commercial scale can be the Empyro plant in the Netherlands, where
FPBO is produced and then utilised for biofuels production, after oxygenation and
fractionation to extract light and heavy oils, LPG, gasoline etc.[23]. In this study bio-
oil won’t be the main focus, therefore it is only accounted for as one of the products
of the pyrolysis process, but it is not converted to the products described above.
2.1.4.3
Pyrolysis gas
The non-condensable gases formed during pyrolysis, that are separated from bio-oil
using e.g. a condensator, are simply called pyrolysis gas. Pyrolysis gas comprises
mainly water in form of vapour, carbon monoxide, hydrogen and a lower degree
from carbon dioxide, methane, higher hydrocarbons and a solid-state fraction of ash.
The cracking of hydrocarbons is a mechanism accountable for hydrogen generation,
whereas oxygen that is present in the raw material is responsible for CO and CO2
formation. With high flash temperature pyrolysis, gas yield increases [14]. Due to the
hydrogen and carbon monoxide content, pyrolysis gas can be used in SOEC mode.
Conversely, because of high water and small hydrocarbons content, it can be also
utilized in SOFC mode to generate electricity, in high electricity demand periods. In
the designed system main focused is laid on pyrolysis gas conversion. In the first mode
(Electricity Storage), pyrolysis gas is upgraded via SOEC to syngas and later used
as a substrate for methanol production. In the second mode (Electricity Production)
pyrolysis gas is utilized as a fuel to generate electricity via SOFC.
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Partial Oxidation
9
2.2
Partial Oxidation
The partial oxidation process (POX) utilizes a non-stoichiometric fuel-oxidizer mix-
ture to obtain given reaction products. In the POX reactor, fuel is being partially
oxidized under elevated temperature and pressure conditions [24]. In the designed
process the POX reaction is regarded only in the non-catalytic variant. Generally, in
POX, the fuel-oxidant ratio has to be rigidly regulated, so that amount of oxygen is
smaller than the reactant in the fuel, which results in higher CO formation. Moreover,
it is proven that in POX, increasing temperature results in higher product yield [24].
Therefore the main parameters that are affecting the POX are temperature, pressure
and oxidant-reactant ratio. In the designed process methane and higher hydrocarbons
are the main reactants and pure oxygen, obtained from SOEC, is used as the oxidizer.
The general POX equation without a catalyst can be expressed as follows:
CxHy ` 2x ` y
2
O2 é xCO ` y
2H2O
(2.1)
Whereas direct route of methane oxidation is presented as:
CH4 ` 1
2O2 é CO ` 2H2
∆H˝
298K “ ´35.7kJ{mol
(2.2)
Additionally, some side reactions, such as water-gas shift reaction (WGS) (Equa-
tion 2.3) and Boudouard reaction (Equation 2.4) can be present along with the main
reactions [25]:
CO ` H2O é CO2 ` H2
∆H˝
298K “ ´41.2kJ{mol
(2.3)
2CO é CO2
∆H˝
298K “ ´172.8kJ{mol
(2.4)
In the designed process, oxidant in form of oxygen is supplied to such an extent,
so that the temperature of the POX reactions can reach 1300˝C, and the process
occurs isothermally (no external heat). This is a big advantage, in comparison with
steam reforming, where there is a large external heat requirement. Under a high
temperature of 1300˝C tars are thermally cracked. It is important since the presence
of tars in the gas brings serious diﬀiculties e.g. when coupling the pyrolysis process
with heat exchanges or SOCs since tars condense over cooler surfaces, which leads to
fouling, blockage of piping and eventually to malfunctions [26, 27].
2.3
RSOC
The reversibility of Solid Oxide Cells (SOC) enables them to operate in two different
modes: as Solid Oxide Electrolyzer (SOEC) or as Solid Oxide Fuel Cell (SOFC).
SOEC can store surplus electricity from RE by converting it into chemical energy, in
form of fuel. Whereas in SOFC mode, when electricity is scarce, it can be generated
==PAGE:18==
2.3 RSOC
10
using fuel like H2, CO, or CH4 that comes from biomass conversion [28].
Even
though the cells are called reversible, subtly lower performance is observed for SOEC
(differences in diffusion velocity) [29]. In the designed process, both modes of SOCs
are being examined.
SOCs are constructed in modular single repeating units within the stack, whereas
every single repeating unit contains several layers. The central layers are made of
porous fuel electrode (gray) and porous air electrode (green) that are separated by
a dense ion-conducting electrolyte membrane (blue) (Figure 2.3) [27]. Solid oxide
electrolyte is made from ceramics, usually, yttria stabilised zirconia (YSZ), which is
responsible for conducting oxygen ions [30]. YSZ due to its high mechanical strength
and outstanding thermodynamic stability is a preferred electrolyte for reversed SOC.
Perovskite structured metal oxides stand out with suﬀicient performance to be used
as oxygen electrodes. Nickel combined with YSZ or CGO (cerium gadolinium oxide)
being a remarkable electro-catalyst is used as fuel electrode, even though it is sensible
towards impurities poisoning and carbon precipitation [31].
O2
H2O/CO2
H2/CO
e-
O2-
O2
H2O/CO2
H2/CO
e-
O2-
SOEC
SOFC
Figure 2.3: SOEC and SOFC working principle scheme.
2.3.1
SOEC
The basic principle of electrolysis is the H2O splitting into O2 and H2 by supplying
electrical (and thermal) energy through two electrodes (cathode and anode) separated
by an electrolyte. This overall reaction is given as:
H2O Ù H2 ` 1
2O2
(2.5)
For the cathode:
H2O ` 2e´ Ù H2 ` O2´
(2.6)
==PAGE:19==
2.3 RSOC
11
And for the anode:
O2´ Ù 1
2O´
2 ` 2e´
(2.7)
Electrolysis of CO2 reaction is analogous as for Equation 2.5, except the product of
the process is CO instead of H2. Standard SOECs operates at a temperature of 700-
900˝C, which results in higher eﬀiciency reached, compared with alkaline and proton
exchange electrolysers [32]. Moreover, if the cell is operated at or over thermoneutral
voltage, the whole heat supplied for the electrolysis reaction can come from Joule
heat generated within the cell. However, nowadays many currently used electrolyser is
operated below that voltage, due to current density limitation concerning degradation
phenomenon. The operating current density is directly proportional to H2 production
rate [33]. The eﬀiciency of H2O electrolysis has been observed to be close to 100%
[29]. Moreover, the eﬀiciency of electrolyser drops with increasing current density,
declining temperature and marginally with rising pressure [32]. The important aspect
of SOEC is its degradation with time, resulting in higher over-potentials, or a drop
in eﬀiciency. Degradation is speeded up with higher operation current density, but
also higher temperature. Additionally, when CO2 is supplied to the SOEC’s cathode,
a certain amount of H2O has to be added, since without it coke formation would
appear [29]. It is not a concern in the designed process, since pyrolysis gas produced
via pyrolysis contains a substantial amount of H2O.
2.3.2
SOFC
FC operation principle is a reverse electrolysis process (Figure 2.3). In Fuel Cell ce-
ramic porous cathode surface enables O2 atoms to be reduced by electrons (Equa-
tion 2.9), utilizing RE electricity, to form O2´, which are thereafter transferred
though the ceramic oxide electrolyte to a fuel-rich anode zone. In the anode zone
O´2 reacts with H2 amd forms H2O by giving up 2 electrons (Equation 2.10) [30].
Overall SOFC reaction is given as:
H2 ` 1
2O2 Ù H2O
(2.8)
For the cathode:
1
2O2 ` 2e´ Ù O2´
(2.9)
And for the anode:
H2 ` O´2 Ù H2O ` 2e´
(2.10)
Due to the fact that SOFC operations are not restrained by the combustion process,
nor thermodynamic cycles, and the chemical energy is directly converted to electricity,
the SOFC eﬀiciency is higher compared to combustion engines, gas turbines etc.[27]
The problem with using a high content of hydrocarbons and CO as fuel in SOFC is the
possible formation of coke resulting in blockade and contamination of anode. However,
a higher H2 and H2O content decreases the risk of carbon formation, guaranteeing
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Methanol synthesis
12
a high H-to-C ratio (ratio between H2 and C atoms) [27]. Therefore this issue is
insubstantial in regards to the design process, because of the high H2O and H2 content
in the pyrolysis gas. Additionally, according to previous research [34], operating a
SOC at a higher temperature 800-850˝C mitigate the risk of internal reforming of
tars, and hence the risk of carbon deposition [34][27].
In the pyrolysis gas, that comprises from H2O, CO, H2, CH4 and CO2, CH4 and
part of the CO is used to generate electricity. The part of remaining CO can react
with H2O, in form of steam, to produce hydrogen via WGS reaction [35].
Additionally, sulphur poses as the impurity, that at a level of 10-100ppm is causing
SOFC failure [30].
For some types of electrodes, sulfur at the level above 2ppm
is intolerable [27]. However, this is not a concern for the design process, since the
pyrolysis gas is treated and sulphur is removed.
A substantial problem with SOFC is an insuﬀicient operation of the stack, within
the given temperature range, resulting from the exothermic operations. The airflow
needed for cooling down the stack requires a substantial amount of energy due to
the air preheating. Since the material from which SOC is ceramic based, the temper-
ature difference has to be held within certain boundaries. In the design process, a
certain temperature difference is assumed and the variant of using an injector is also
investigated.
2.4
Methanol synthesis
Methanol is a building block for a vast quantity of chemicals such as formaldehyde,
methyl tertbutryl ether (MTBE), acetic acid, ethylene, propylene and many others
[36]. Methanol can be used as a transport fuel e.g. as a blend with diesel or gaso-
line[8]. Industrially, methanol is produced from syngas, at 50-100 bar and 250-300˝C,
using copper and zinc-based catalyst [36].
Methanol synthesis reaction, being an
equilibrium-controlled reaction is given as:
2H2 ` CO é CH3OH
∆H˝
298K “ ´90.4kJ{mol
(2.11)
Another reaction that takes places in a methanol reactor is the WGS reaction (Equa-
tion 2.3). Both reactions are exothermic, therefore heat generated during methanol
synthesis can be utilized in other processes. After the methanol synthesis, impure
methanol is first directed to a gas-liquid flash tank, where uncondensed gas is being
separated from liquid fraction.
2.5
Distillation
In the distillation process, methanol liquid fraction is first directed to a topping
column (Figure 2.4). The distillation column allows to separate components of the
mixture, according to the relative volatility of those components [37]. The components
==PAGE:21==
2.5 Distillation
13
with the highest volatility are transformed from liquid to vapour phase, whereas less
volatile stay in the liquid phase. The vapour and liquid are in counter-current contact
in the distillation column since the vapour is flowing up, while the fluid is flowing
down [38]. The most volatile feed called ”overhead vapour” gets to the condenser,
where it splits to reflux that flows back in the column and to the distillation liquid.
The ratio between reflux flow rate and distillation liquid flow rate is named reflux
ratio. In the bottom, the least volatile compounds flow to the reboiler, where steam
vaporises part of the liquid that flows back, and the rest gets out of the column as
effluent[38].
During the design of the column and also in the design process, the
parameters like reflux ratio or distillate rate are manipulated in order to achieve the
desired composition of the distilled liquid.
cooling water
CONDENSER
REBOILER
steam
Bottom
liquid
Effluent
reflux
Distilled
liquid
Feed
Overhead
vapour
Rectifying
section
Stripping
section
distillation stage
Figure 2.4: Basic distillation column scheme [38].
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3
Methods and system design
The modelling work has been executed using the simulation tool Dynamic Network
Analysis (DNA) [39] and Aspen Plus from AspenTech® [40]. Pyrolysis and SOCs
processes were modelled in DNA, whereas the methanol synthesis and distillation
were modelled in Aspen Plus. All the main components of the designed system are
described in the next sections, together with all the modelling assumptions and input
data. Since the model is an early-stage design, some of the small heat losses and
pressure drops in elements of the designed system are omitted. However, in case they
are included in some element, it is clearly stated in this chapter. Process Heat (PH)
is accounted for in the designed systems as heat that provides a saturated stream at
200˝C, whereas District Heating (DH), as heat at temperatures high enough to heat
up the water from 40˝C to 70˝C [41].
3.1
Pyrolysis
Slow pyrolysis is the thermochemical process used in the model for straw pellets
conversion. Straw pellets have an assumed LHV of 14.4 MW/kg and 10% moisture
content. Therefore, the input of 1.38 kg of dry biomass used in the model contains
LHV of 20 MWth
A pyrolysis reactor is an updraft reactor, meaning the biomass, in form of pellets is
fed from the top of the reactor, whereas the gases are flowing from the bottom. The
inputs in the pyrolysis reactor are, therefore: straw pellets, H2O (as water steam)
and part of pyrolysis gas that is also a heat source - supplies heat that is required for
the pyrolysis process (Figure 3.1). The outputs are bio-char, pyrolysis gas and bio-oil.
The pyrolysis process is modelled with an assumption, that part of the pyrolysis gas
is constantly recycled, so it is supplying heat for the pyrolysis process. This pyrolysis
gas, before entering the pyrolysis reactor, flows through a blower (Figure 3.1) that
increases the pressure of the fluid by 0.01 bar and later in the reactor the pressure
drop of the pyrolysis gas amounts to 0.01 bar.
The rest of the pyrolysis gas and bio-oil is directed out of the pyrolysis process for
further treatment. Water that goes into the pyrolysis process, before it gets to the
reactor, is used for cooling off the bio-char coming out of the reactor. In the result,
heated water vaporizes, and in form of water vapour is fed into the reactor. Cooled
bio-char can be stored in a container and later used e.g. as fertilizer.
==PAGE:23==
3.2 Electricity Storage Mode
15
Later on, a mixture of pyrolysis gas and bio-oil flows through a ceramic filter, where
dust removal takes place. After that, the mixture enters the heat exchanger, where the
fluid is cooled down to the temperature of 110˝C, which enables the separation of the
liquid phase, in form of bio-oil, from the gaseous phase, represented by pyrolysis gas.
The bio-oil utilisation in engines, upgrading or chemical processing is not considered
in the model. Therefore it is assumed that the bio-oil is stored in the form obtained
after the separation. LHV of bio-oil is based on the experiment results conducted by
Ulrik B. Henriksen at DTU campus Risø [42].
After the bio-oil separation, pyrolysis gas additionally goes through an electro-filter,
where fine droplets of bio-oil, that remained in the gas are separated. Finally, the
last step of pyrolysis gas treatment is sulfur removal, since sulfur presence can cause
SOC poisoning. Metal oxide (in form of ZnO as adsorbing material) [43, 44] is used
to remove sulfur compounds such as H2S, COS and organically-bound sulfur [27]. It
is assumed, since the model is in early-stage design, that there are no pressure drops
on any step of pyrolysis gas treatment, nor heat losses.
Ceramic
filter
Pyrolysis
reactor
Sulfur
removal
Water
Straw pellets
Bio-char
Pyrolysis gas
13
Electro
filter
Bio-oil
4.3 MWth
Separator
Figure 3.1: Schematic of the pyrolysis system converting straw pellets to bio-char, bio-oil and
pyrolysis-gas.
3.2
Electricity Storage Mode
The electricity storage mode aims to produce methanol from pyrolysis gas utilizing
excess electricity. Therefore, certain measures are being taken to convert the pyrolysis
gas to methanol synthesis substrate, characterized by appropriate H2 : CO ratio.
Therefore, the first step of the process in the designed system is pyrolysis gas con-
version to syngas via POX reaction (Figure 3.2). Before entering the POX reactor,
pyrolysis gas is preheated to around 420˝C, and after that, the gas is mixed with
O2. O2, coming from SOEC, is dosed to POX reactor in an amount that enables
==PAGE:24==
3.2 Electricity Storage Mode
16
achieving a temperature of 1300˝C. Magnitude of the temperature of syngas in the
POX reactor has a double function: thermal cracking of tars [45] and supply of heat
for the pyrolysis process.
In the designed system, the Gibbs reactor is used to simulate POX reactions. Gibbs
reactor operates by minimizing the Gibbs free energy, under given thermodynamic
conditions.
Therefore, as distinct from a stoichiometric method, the independent
reactions don’t have to be totally define and the method is not so sensitive to the
values of initial guesses [46]. An advantage of coupling POX reaction with SOEC is
that there is no need for O2 storage since O2 is directly supplied from SOEC to POX
reactor.
POX
SOEC
Water
Gaseous
fraction
Water
Methanol
O2
DC
TC
CO2
Pyrolysis gas from pyrolysis
process
Methanol
reactor
Figure 3.2: Schematic view of Electricity Storage mode.
After POX rector, gas, now in form of the syngas, is mixed with a gaseous fraction
==PAGE:25==
3.2 Electricity Storage Mode
17
(coming from TC column of distillation process) and is cooled down to a temperature
of around 850˝C, by exchanging part of the heat required for the pyrolysis process.
Having SOEC operate at 850˝C ensures that CH4 will not build up in the methanol
reactor. The operation of SOC in electrolysis mode requires an external supply of
electricity, ideally coming from RE.
The highest electrical-to-hydrogen energy conversion eﬀiciencies are reported to be
achieved for the current density of -1.0 Am´2, therefore in a basic case of the designed
model this value is being used for SOEC operations [47]. As visible on Figure 3.2, no
air is supplied into the airside of SOEC. Apart from that, a conservative assumption
of no change in temperature between inlet and outlet fluid streams is taken. H2O
and CO2 fraction in syngas that exits fuel side of SOEC is set to be 10% mol [48].
Additionally, a parameter of heat loss to electricity (Qloss{ESOEC) is being assumed
Table 3.1. By using those set of parameters, other SOC parameters such as ASR,
Area and Qloss{ASOE are being determined using DNA, and later they will be used
in SOFC designed system.
As mentioned before, part of O2 leaving the airside of SOEC is mixed with pyrolysis
gas, before it enters the POX reactor. The rest of the oxygen is not utilized in the
model, only its heat is gonna be accounted for in heat possible to use as Process Heat
(PH) and District Heating (DH). This oxygen can be however stored and used for
various applications, but it is not in the scope of this work.
Later on, upgraded syngas (increased H2 and CO mol. frac. after SOEC mode) is
cooled down, before it can enter the first compressor. The pressure of the upgraded
syngas has to be increased before it enters the methanol reactor. Heat exchanged
during the cooling down of upgraded syngas is partly used for the pyrolysis process
and for heating pyrolysis gas that is about to enter the POX reactor.
From the
heat exchanger, which is located before the first compressor after SOC (Figure 3.2),
the designed process is being modelled in ASPEN Plus. Redlich-Kwong-Soave (RK-
Soave) property method is used for calculations in the model since it is recommended
for gas processing [49]. Free water is set in the model, as the third phase, apart
from vapour and liquid, so that it can be separated during compression operations.
Only for the methanol synthesis and distillation processes, the SR-POLAR property
method, based on an extended RK-Soave equation of state, is used.
SR-POLAR
property method can be applied for both non-polar and highly polar components,
but also it is recommended for high temperature and pressure applications [49].
After the first heat exchanger, modelled now in Aspen Plus, a sequence of 4 com-
pressors and 4 heat exchangers is set to achieve the right temperature (260˝C) and
pressure (85 [bar]) of the upgraded syngas entering methanol reactor. The first 3 com-
pressors are operating with a pressure rate of 2.99. After every compression stage,
the upgraded syngas is cooled down in a heat exchanger to the temperature of 30˝C.
In the fourth compressor, not pressure rate, but discharge pressure of 85 bars is set.
The polytropic and mechanical eﬀiciencies of compressors are given in Table 3.1.
Before the last heat exchanger (that is connected directly to the methanol reactor), a
stream of gaseous fraction, that was not converted in the first place in the methanol
synthesis reaction, is being mixed with upgraded syngas. This gaseous fraction comes
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Electricity Storage Mode
18
from the separation of gas and liquid phases, that takes place just after methanol
synthesis. 95% of the separated gaseous fraction is returned to the methanol reactor,
whereas 5% is discharged from the designed system. The temperature of mixed gas
that enters the methanol reactor is set to be 230˝C, to achieve optimal conditions for
methanol synthesis.
The operating conditions set for the methanol reactor are presented in Table 3.1.
The temperature of the reaction is set to be 260˝C, with a pressure drop of around 4
bars, between streams inlet and outlet. Reactions defined in the equilibrium reactor
(REquil) are: methanol synthesis reaction (Equation 2.11) and WGS reaction (Equa-
tion 2.3). Since the reactions taking place in the methanol reactor are exothermic,
heat generated during the process is partially used for: preheating of upgraded syngas
entering the methanol reactor, and for condensation in the DC column. The molar
fraction of H2 : CO in the stream entering methanol reactor is modelled to be as close
to a value of 2 (more precisely xH2 ´ xCO2
xCO ` xCO2
« 2q, taking into the account a change
in molar content of particular components. This change occurs, since 2 streams in
the model are being recycled (stream of gaseous fractions comprising mostly from H2
that is coming from separation after methanol synthesis, and stream of mainly CO2,
coming from the top TC column, that is reversed and feed into the SOEC as fuel).
After methanol synthesis, an impure methanol stream, containing non-condensable
gases and water, is cooled down, so a separation for gas and liquid phases can take
place.
As mentioned before, part of the gaseous fraction from this separation is
returned to the stream of upgraded syngas entering the methanol reactor. However,
beforehand this gaseous fraction is split, 5% of it is taken out of the system, whereas
the rest is compressed, so it has the same pressure as the fluid that it is mixed with,
before being subjected to methanol synthesis.
Liquid fraction, after the separation, goes into Topping Column (TC), where the rest
of the gaseous fractions, that were not rejected during primary separation, mainly
CO2, are dissociated from the liquid fraction. The number of stages (10) and pressure
at the condenser (8 [bar]) of TC are based on [34]. The feed stream is fed above stage
4. Reflux ratio (RR) and distillate to feed (D:F) ratios are operating specifications
of the TC column, that are determined by using ”DESIGN-SPEC” tool available
in APEN Plus to achieve the given molar fraction content of effluent and distilled
liquid. ”DESIGN-SPEC” enables to define a variable e.g. mole fraction of CO2 in
TC bottom stream, set its target and tolerance. Upon this, a simulation is run with
a chosen manipulated variable (e.g D:F ratio) that is altered to meet the given CO2
mole fraction in distilled liquid or effluent. Obtained D:F ratio and RR are presented
in Table 3.1. The bottom TC stream is modelled to have CO2 molar fraction ď 1ppm.
As described previously, the stream leaving the top of the TC column splits. 26% of
the stream is mixed with the upgraded syngas and fed into SOEC, whereas the rest
is discarded out of the system.
After TC column, liquid fraction enters Distillation Column (DC), where CH3OH is
separated from H2O. The number of stages and operating conditions at the condenser
are based on [34].
The feed stream is fed at stage 30.
RR and D:F ratios are
==PAGE:27==
3.3 Electricity Production Mode
19
established by using not only ”DESIGN-SPEC” tool, but also by Sensitivity Analysis
(SA) tool, to achieve reboiler heat duty lower, than heat generated via methanol
synthesis. It is done by manipulating RR and D:F ratio parameters values. It is
desired because as mentioned previously, heat for the DC reboiler could be provided by
heat generated during methanol synthesis. Obtained D:F ratio and RR are presented
in Table 3.1. The molar fraction of H2O in the top DC stream is modelled to be
ď 0.0001, whereas the molar fraction of CH3OH in the bottom DC stream to be ď
0.03. The final product of the process, coming out as the distillation liquid, is pure
CH3OH.
3.3
Electricity Production Mode
The electricity production mode aims to generate electricity from pyrolysis gas via
SOFC. A simplification in the SOFC model is made - all the higher hydrocarbons
are substituted with CH4, to get realistic results from the DNA simulation (it is
giving false results when the gas supplied into SOFC contains higher hydrocarbons).
Pyrolysis gas after treatment is directed into SOFC. Before the SOFC, a component
in form of a Gibbs reactor is added to the DNA model. It is done to make the best
possible simple approximation of internal reforming that takes place in SOFC. This
component is a part of the SOFC system, therefore it is not shown on the flowsheet.
It is assumed that ∆T of streams entering and exiting SOFC is ď 50, considering
the brittleness of ceramic material used in the construction of the SOC, and the
fact that the thermal stress can lead to its cracking [50]. Therefore, to achieve this
condition, from the air side of SOC substantial amount of air have to be supplied to
cool down SOFC operation. Airstream modelled in DNA is assumed to be ”Simple
Air”, meaning it constitutes only from N2 and O2 molar fractions.
Air blower is
placed in the model to achieve given pressure difference, to simulate flow Figure 3.3.
A pressure difference of 0.04 bar is assumed in the designed system. Variant with an
ejector was also considered and modelled, however since the eﬀiciency of the designed
system was lower, compared to the basic model, the configuration is not included
in this work. After an air blower, a stream of air goes through a heat exchanger to
increase its temperature to 800˝C, required in SOFC operations. A pressure drop of
0.03 bar is assumed to take place along the heat exchanger, whereas another pressure
drop of 0.01 bar is assumed in SOC on the airside, to imitate a large flow of air.
==PAGE:28==
3.3 Electricity Production Mode
20
SOFC
Burner
Used Air
Pyrolysis gas from pyrolysis
process
Air
Flue gas
Figure 3.3: Schematic view of Electricity Production mode.
The ASR, area of the SOC and Qloss{ASOC parameter in the SOFC designed process
are set the same as those parameters obtained for the SOEC model (Table 3.1).
Temperatures of inflow pyrolysis gas and air streams are set at 800˝C, whereas stream
of used fuel and used air exit at 850˝C. On this basis, the current density and voltage
of SOFC are established, and the current generation is calculated. The exiting stream
of used air is split. Part of used air is used to mainly heat incoming air, but also to
supply some heat to the pyrolysis process. The rest of the used air is directed into
a burner, where it is combusted together with used fuel from SOFC. An assumption
is made since in the model a higher stream of air is injected into the burner than it
would be used in reality. Therefore, the modelled process is imitating burning the
same amount of fuel with a smaller amount of used air (with a lambda of around 2)
and then mixing this flue gas with the rest of the used air. In the designed process
all air goes into the burner and this is done as simplification. Flue gas leaving the
burner is used for preheating gas in the pyrolysis process, whereas the rest of the heat
that is left cannot be used for PH and DH since the temperature of the stream is at
71˝C.
3.3.1
Gas Turbine
To properly compare the results of SOFC mode, an alternative in which gas turbine,
as a conventional solution is used instead of SOFC. In this designed system, the same
pyrolysis process is coupled with a gas turbine and a burner (Figure 3.4). The final
product of the system is also electricity, but in this case, it is generated via mechanical
==PAGE:29==
3.3 Electricity Production Mode
21
energy conversion, coming from the gas turbine (an eﬀiciency of 0.99 is assumed in
mechanical to electrical energy conversion [51]).
Burner
Pyrolysis gas from pyrolysis
process
Air
Flue gas
Gas
turbine
Figure 3.4: Schematic view of alternative Electricity Production mode - conventional solution
using Gas Turbine .
In this alternative electricity production using gas turbine mode (EP-GT), the same
pyrolysis gas is directed into the burner. At the same time air is compressed in a
compressor and together with pyrolysis gas, it is burned. Flue gas created in the
burner is directed into the gas turbine. The designed process is modelled, so that
decompressed flue gas leaving the gas turbine can supply the exact amount of heat
needed in the pyrolysis process. A constraint in the model is the temperature of
flue gas that enters the gas turbine. In regards to literature and practical use, this
temperature, and therefore the temperature in the burner, is set to be 1300˝C [52].
The ∆T in the heat exchanger in the basic scenario is set as in other modes Table 3.1.
However, a SA is conducted to investigate, if a bigger temperature difference would
increase the eﬀiciency of the model. The ratio between inlet and outlet pressure of
the burner is set to be 0.98 [53].
Isentropic eﬀiciency of the gas turbine is given
in Table 3.1. Flue gas is modelled to leave the gas turbine with a pressure of 1.01
bar because it is assumed that there is a pressure drop of 10 mbar along the heat
exchanger.
==PAGE:30==
3.3 Electricity Production Mode
22
Table 3.1: Process design parameters utilized in the model.
Biomass feed (Wheat straw pellets)
Moisture content: 10[%]
Composition (dry basis) [wt%] H2 6.2; O2 45.3; N2 0.3; C 43.0; Ashes 5.2;
CpstrawpelletsrkJ{kg¨K][54]
1.35
LHVdryrkJ{kgs
17095
Tbiomass,inr˝Cs
15
Pyrolysis reactor (updraft fixed bed)
Bio-char composition [wt%]: H2 2.4; O2 14.8; N2 0.1; C 64.3; Ash 18.5;
Pyrolysis gas in SOFC mode is modeled without the higher hydrocarbons.
Δppyrolysisrmbars
10
Tvolatiles,outr˝Cs
300
Tvolatiles,inr˝Cs
500
Tchar,outr˝Cs
500
mbiochar{mdrystrawpellets [-]
0.28
LHVcharrkJ{kgs
23200
CpcharrkJ{kgKs
1
QlossrMW s
0
LHVdry,pyrolysis.gasrkJ{kgs
15494
Compressors and blowers
ηis,blower
0.5
ηmech,blower
0.98
ηpol,comp
0.8
ηmech,comp
0.98
POX reactor
POX reactor operates at constant temperature of 1300˝C reforming all the tars and lower hydrocarbons
Qloss,P OXrMW s
0
SOC
ASRSOCrΩ¨cm2]
0.34[55]
ASOCrm2s
552
Qloss{ESOECr ´ s
0.01
Qloss{ASOCrkJ{m2]
0.1335
ΔpSOECrmbars
0
TSOEC.fuel.outr˝Cs
850[34]
iSOECrA/cm2]
-1[33]
H2O+CO2 fracSOECr ´ s
0.1[48]
ΔpSOF C,air.sidermbars
10
ΔpSOF C,fuel.sidermbars
0
TSOF C,air.inr˝Cs
800[34]
TSOF C,used.fuel,outr˝Cs
850[34]
Heat exchangers
ΔpHErmbars
0
ΔpHE,SOF C.air.sidermbars
10
ΔTmin,HE,gas´gasr˝Cs
50[34]
ΔTmin,HE,gas´liquidr˝Cs
10
QlossrMW s
0
Methanol synthesis
Equilibrium reactor. 95% of the unconverted gas is recilculated at the reactor inlet. xH2 ´ xCO2
xCO ` xCO2
=2 [8].
Treactor.inr˝Cs
230[34]
Treactor.outr˝Cs
260[34]
preactor.inrbars
85[34]
preactor.outrbars
81[34]
Distillation
Topping column (TC): 10 stages. Distillation column (DC): 35 stages[34].
Reflux ratioT Cpmoleq
1.2
Distillate to feed ratioT Cpmoleq
0.0659
Feed streamT Cr ´ s
4
pT C,condenserrbars
8 [34]
xCO2,bottom,T Crppms
1[34]
Reflux ratioDCpmoleq
0.92
Distillate to feed ratioDCpmoleq
0.972
Feed streamDCr ´ s
30
pDC.condenserrbars
1[34]
xH2O.top.DCr ´ s
0.001 [34]
xCH3OH,bottom,DCr ´ s
0.03[34]
Burner
Δpburnerrmbars
0
Tburner.outr˝Cs
976 [56]
Qloss,burnersrMW s
0
Gas Turbine
Tturbine,inr˝Cs
1300[52]
ηis,turbine
0.90[57]
pturbine,outrbars
1.01
==PAGE:31==
3.4 Evaluation criteria
23
3.4
Evaluation criteria
The plants are being compared based on energy and carbon eﬀiciency. Therefore, two
different eﬀiciencies were calculated [41]. First, called ”main” eﬀiciency (Equation 3.1)
accounts for all the main products of the plant, so bio-methanol and electricity, but
also bio-char and bio-oil. They are represented in the equation as multiplication of
theirs given LHV and mass flows. Net Electricity in the designed systems is denoted in
the Equation 3.1 as PNet. In ES mode eﬀiciency calculation PNet is an input, whereas
in EP and EP-GT modes it is used as an output, in other words as a product of the
designed systems. Therefore PNet used to calculate ES eﬀiciencies in Equation 3.1
and Equation 3.2 is given in denominator, whereas for EP and EP-GT modes it is
used in the numerator since more electricity is produced than it is used.
ηmain “
9mbio´char ¨ LHVbio´char ` 9mbio´oil ¨ LHVbio´oil ` 9mbio´MeOH ¨ LHVbio´MeOH
9mbiomass ¨ LHVbiomass ` PNet
(3.1)
The second eﬀiciency, called ”total” eﬀiciency (Equation 3.2) accounts additionally
for the heat taken out of the designed system in form of PH and DH. This heat is
represented in the equation by 9Qout term.
ηtotal “
9mbio´char ¨ LHVbio´char ` 9mbio´oil ¨ LHVbio´oil ` 9mbio´MeOH ¨ LHVbio´MeOH ` 9Qout
9mbiomass ¨ LHVbiomass ` PNet
(3.2)
Additionaly, Energy Product (Equation 3.3), Biomass to MeOH (Equation 3.4), Net
Electricity (Equation 3.6), Fuel (Equation 3.7) and Carbon (Equation 3.8) eﬀiciencies
are calculated using undermentioned equations:
For Energy Product eﬀiciency calculation, bio-char is not included as the product of
a designed system.
ηEnergy.P roducts “ 9mMeOH ¨ LHVMeOH ` 9mbio´oil ¨ LHVbio´oil
9mbiomass ¨ LHVbiomass ` PNet
(3.3)
ηBiomass.to.MeOH “
9mMeOH ¨ LHVMeOH
9mbiomass ¨ LHVbiomass
(3.4)
ηMeOH “
9mMeOH ¨ LHVMeOH
9mbiomass ¨ LHVbiomass ` PNet
(3.5)
ηNet.Electrical “
Pnet
9mbiomass ¨ LHVbiomass
(3.6)
ηF uel “ 9mMeOH ¨ LHVMeOH ` 9mbio´oil ¨ LHVbio´oil
9mbiomass ¨ LHVbiomass
(3.7)
ηCarbon “ mcarbon.bio´char ` mcarbon.bio´oil ` mcarbon.MeOH
mcarbon.biomass
(3.8)
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 4
Results
The result of the thermodynamic modelling for ES, EP and alternative EP using GT
(EP-GT) mode are presented in detailed flowsheets (Figures 4.1, 4.4 and 4.7), together
with (Tables 4.1 to 4.3) containing key results of thermodynamic properties. Energy
flows and eﬀiciencies of relevant modes are presented in Table 4.6. Graphically, energy
is presented in form of flows (Figures 4.2 and 4.5) to properly assess the energetic
performance of the designed systems. Moreover, carbon flows are shown similarly as
energy (Figures 4.3 and 4.6) to assess conversion of carbon, and its final placement.
All of the fuels chemical energy is calculated based on LHV. The results are divided
into three sections, one for each designed system (ES, EP, EP-GT), followed by a
comparison of the EP and EP-GT plants.
4.1
Electricity Storage mode
Results of the Electricity Storage mode simulation are presented on Figure 4.1 and
in Table 4.1. Compositions of the gases flowing in the designed system are given
displayed in Table 4.6. Whereas, Figure 4.2 illustrates the energy flows in the elec-
tricity storage mode. It is visible from the Figure 4.2 that as a result of the pyrolysis
process three different outputs have been obtained: bio-oil, bio-char and pyrolysis
gas. Bio-char and pyrolysis gas contain the highest amount of chemical energy of
the wheat straw input, corresponding to 40% and 38% respectively. Whereas, bio-oil
yields chemical energy of 22% of the wheat straw input. Both bio-char and bio-oil are
regarded as final products of the designed system and later on their chemical energy
are used to obtain the eﬀiciency of ES mode. Pyrolysis gas, on the other hand, is
being converted to syngas and heat via POX reaction. Syngas contains 29% of the
straw input. Heat on the Figure 4.2 reflects the heat exchanged between different
stages of the designed system. Therefore, it is not classified as a loss, but it is just
accounted for. In the next step of SOEC operations, additional input of 37%(of straw
input) in form of electricity is added, to obtain upgraded syngas via SOC electrolysis.
It can be seen from Figure 4.2 that the products of SOEC are: upgraded syngas and
PH containing respectively 65% and 1% of straw input. Heat exchanged with the O2
flow that is not going into POX, but is leaving the design system is supplied in for
of PH (Figure 4.1). Additionally, 5% of straw input energy, in form of electricity,
is added to power compressors, before the upgraded syngas is fed into the methanol
reactor. Finally, the chemical energy of straw ends up, after methanol synthesis and
distillation, as methanol (51%), DH (10%) and heat(9%). DH heat is coming from
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Electricity Storage mode
25
the heat obtained from condensers, that are located (Figure 4.1) before and after the
methanol reactor.
6,7
7,12
8
9
11
4
2
13
Ceramic
filter
Electro
filter
Pyrolysis
reactor
Sulfur
removal
14
Water
0.2 MWth
0.4MWth
~0 MWel
0.7 MWth
Straw pellets
(10% moisture)
20 MWth
Bio-char
8.1 MWth
Bio-oil
4.3 MWth
Pyrolysis gas
7.6 MWth
POX
SOEC
7.4 MWel
1.0 MWth
0.5 MWth 0.7 MWth
0.4 MWth
Water
0.2 MWth
0.2 MWel
0.2 MWth
0.3 MWel
0.3 MWth
0.2 MWel
0.3 MWth
1.1MWth
Gaseous
fraction
~0 MWel
Water
Methanol
8.1 MWth
O2
0.5 MWth
0.2 MWel
1.5MWth
DC
TC
0.3 MWth
1.1 MWth
0.1 MWth
1.0 MWth
17
18
23
24
25
26
20
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
42
37
38
40
41
43
44
48
49
50
21
22
16
Heat
Exchanger
№ 1
Heat
Exchanger
№ 1
Heat
Exchanger
№ 2
Heat
Exchanger
№ 3
Heat
Exchanger
№ 3
Heat
Exchanger
№ 4
Heat
Exchanger
№ 5
Heat
Exchanger
№ 4
Heat
Exchanger
№ 5
Heat
Exchanger
№ 6
Heat
Exchanger
№ 6
1
3
5
10
CO2
45
47
15
1.0 MWth
Heat
Exchanger
№ 2
19
36
39
46
Separator
Figure 4.1: Detailed flowsheet for the conversion of biomass to methanol via the Updraft Pyrol-
ysis reactor in Electricity Storage mode.
==PAGE:34==
4.1 Electricity Storage mode
26
Table 4.1: Thermodynamics properties for the plant operating in ES mode.
Nodes refer to
Figure 4.1.
Node
9m [kg/s]
T [°C]
p [bar]
Node
9m [kg/s]
T [°C]
p [bar]
1
1.38
15
1.00
26
0.59
30
1.00
2
0.35
500
1.00
27
0.07
30
1.00
3
0.35
50
1.00
28
0.59
173
2.99
4
0.05
15
1.00
29
0.59
30
2.99
5
0.05
450
1.00
30
0.59
173
8.94
6
5.57
300
1.00
31
0.59
30
8.94
7
0.14
300
1.00
32
0.59
192
26.73
8
4.59
300
1.00
33
0.59
30
26.73
9
4.59
303
1.01
34
0.59
182
85.00
10
4.59
383
1.01
35
1.02
122
85.00
11
4.59
500
1.01
36
1.02
230
85.00
12
0.93
300
1.00
37
1.02
260
81.00
13
0.14
110
1.00
38
1.02
40
81.00
14
0.93
110
1.00
39
0.45
40
81.00
15
0.93
423
1.00
40
0.02
40
81.00
16
1.11
462
1.00
41
0.43
40
81.00
17
1.11
1300
1.00
42
0.43
45
85.00
18
1.12
1292
1.00
43
0.57
40
81.00
19
1.12
850
1.00
44
0.05
52
8.00
20
0.46
850
1.00
45
0.04
52
8.00
21
0.29
850
1.00
46
0.01
52
8.00
22
0.17
850
1.00
47
0.01
45
1.00
23
0.66
850
1.00
48
0.52
129
8.00
24
0.66
473
1.00
49
0.01
100
1.00
25
0.66
165
1.00
50
0.51
64
1.00
As shown on Figure 4.1, the heat is integrated between the main streams via heat
exchangers. Pyrolysis process heat is supplied by upgraded syngas stream coming
from SOEC (Heat Exchanger №1) and syngas stream that leaves POX reactor (Heat
Exchanger №2). Pyrolysis gas entering the POX reactor is heated up with the re-
maining heat contained in the upgraded syngas stream (Heat Exchanger №3). The
heat produced during methanol synthesis is used for the condenser in the TC column
(Heat Exchanger №4) and to preheat the upgraded syngas entering the methanol re-
actor (Heat Exchanger №5). Finally, heat that comes from cooling the impure stream
of methanol before separation is partially used for the TC column boiler (Heat Ex-
changer №6), whereas the rest is utilised for DH purposes. Additionally, heat coming
from pyrolysis gas and bio-oil condensation, heat exchangers before methanol reactor,
is also used for PH and district heating, as shown on Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.3 shows the carbon flows in the Electricity Storage mode. 42% of the carbon
coming from straw goes with bio-char that can be used as fertilizer, or stored and
therefore it is not accounted as carbon loss. Bio-oil contains 19% of the carbon, that
can be further used and modified, however, this is not in the scope of the model.
Whereas, last product of pyrolysis which is pyrolysis gas bounds 39% of the straw
carbon. Pyrolysis gas is transformed into methanol with only two small losses of
primal carbon content. The first loss of 1% is coming from the reversed stream of
==PAGE:35==
4.1 Electricity Storage mode
27
gases that are going between separator and methanol reactor (Figure 4.1), containing
mainly H2. The other carbon loss comes from the fact, that to achieve a H2:CO ratio
of around 2, some of the CO2 gas reversed from the top stream of the TC column
has to be discarded from the designed system. Therefore, the final content of carbon,
coming from straw, that is bounded within bio-methanol, amounts to 36%. Based on
the carbon flows, the carbon eﬀiciency of 97.0% for the ES mode is calculated.
From the biomass input of 20MWth and from 8.4 MWel of electricity supplied to
SOC electrolysis, 10.4 MWth of bio-methanol is obtained. Additionally, byproducts
8.1 MWth of bio-char and 4.3 MWth are accounted for, as they are produced during
the pyrolysis process. Therefore, the main eﬀiciency comes up to 79.6%. Whereas
total eﬀiciency that includes also PH and DH equals 87.0%. When disregarding bio-
char as a product of the designed system, the calculated fuel eﬀiciency for ES mode
equals 51.1%.
Straw
pellets
100%
POX
Pyrolysis gas
38%
Bio-oil
22%
Bio-char
40%
Pyrolysis
Heat 9%
Syngas
29%
SOEC
Electricity
37%
Process Heat 1%
Upgraded Syngas
65%
Electricity 5%
Methanol synthesis
and distillation
Methanol
51%
Heat 9%
DH 10%
Figure 4.2: Energy flows for the Electricity Storage mode. Note: All flows are normalized to
the LHV of dry straw pellets. The numbers denote normalized percentage of the
respective energy flow.
The molar fraction of H2 in upgraded pyrolysis gas is increased throughout ES de-
signed system processes from 0.120 (pyrolysis gas) to 0.681 (methanol reactor inlet),
whereas CO (mol. frac.) changes from 0.202 to 0.231 between pyrolysis gas and up-
==PAGE:36==
4.2 Electricity Production mode
28
graded syngas entering methanol reactor. Final H2:CO ratio equals 2.03. Assumed
purities of methanol TC column stream, water and bio-methanol DC column streams
are fulfilled, with regard to model assumption Table 3.1. CO2 molar fraction in TC
column methanol streams equal 7 ppb. CH3OH molar fraction in bottom DC column
stream amounts to 0.003[-], whereas H2O in pure bio-methanol stream adds up to
0.002 [-]. SOEC operates with a high utilization factor (84%) since H2 is not needed
in further operations. The cell voltage of 1.34 V allows the SOEC to run isothermally.
Bio-char
Pyrolysis
42%
19%
POX
Mixer
Straw
pellets
100%
Pyrolysis gas
39%
Syngas
39%
Bio-oil
SOEC
Syngas
40%
Mixer
40%
Methanol
synthesis
40%
Separator
65%
TC
impure
methanol
39%
impure
methanol
36%
impure
methanol
DC
36%
Methanol
Gas
fraction
25%
CO2 1%
Gas
fraction
1%
CO2
2%
Upgraded
syngas
Upgraded
syngas
Figure 4.3: Carbon flows for the Electricity Storage mode. Note: All flows are normalized to
the carbon input of straw pellets. The numbers denote normalized percentage of the
respective carbon flow.
4.2
Electricity Production mode
Results of the Electricity Production mode simulation are presented on Figure 4.4 and
in Table 4.2. Compositions of the gases flowing in the designed system are given in
Table 4.4. Key results for ES mode are presented in Table 4.6. Figure 4.2 illustrates
the energy flows in the Electricity Production mode. The first part of the energy
flow of EP mode is the same as for the ES mode. Except for that pyrolysis gas in
the EP mode is not upgraded, and its chemical energy is supported by an additional
energy supply of 1% of straw input in form of electricity. This comes from the need
of compressing a large stream of air for SOC operations in Fuell Cell mode.
==PAGE:37==
4.2 Electricity Production mode
29
14
SOFC
19
15
18
Burner
20
23
21
22
17
24
25
Air
25.7 MWth
1.2 MWth
1.7 MWth
2.7 MWel
1.2 MWth
Used Air
Flue gas
8
9
10
4
2
Ceramic
filter
Pyrolysis
reactor
Sulfur
removal
13
Water
0.2 MWth
0.4MWth
~0 MWel
1.7 MWth
Straw pellets
(10% moisture)
20 MWth
Bio-char
8.1 MWth
Pyro-gas
7.6 MWth
0.2 MWel
16
25.7MWth
Heat
Exchanger
№ 1
Heat
Exchanger
№ 1
Heat
Exchanger
№ 2
Heat
Exchanger
№ 3
Heat
Exchanger
№ 2
Heat
Exchanger
№ 3
1
3
5
6,7
7,11
13
Electro
filter
Bio-oil
4.3 MWth
Separator
Figure 4.4: Detailed flowsheet for the conversion of biomass to electricity via the Updraft
Pyrolysis reactor in Electricity Production mode.
Table 4.2: Thermodynamics properties for the plant operating in EP mode. Nodes refer to
Figure 4.4.
Node
9m [kg/s]
T [°C]
p [bar]
Node
9m [kg/s]
T [°C]
p [bar]
1
1.38
15
1.00
14
0.93
800
1.00
2
0.35
500
1.00
15
1.28
850
1.00
3
0.35
50
1.00
16
30.57
15
1.00
4
0.05
15
1.00
17
30.57
21
1.04
5
0.05
450
1.00
18
30.57
800
1.01
6
5.57
300
1.00
19
30.23
850
1.00
7
0.14
300
1.00
20
24.92
850
1.00
8
4.64
300
1.00
21
26.20
941
1.00
9
4.64
303
1.01
22
26.20
71
1.00
10
4.64
500
1.01
23
5.31
850
1.00
11
0.93
300
1.00
24
5.31
648
1.00
12
0.14
110
1.00
25
5.31
353
1.00
13
0.93
110
1.00
==PAGE:38==
4.2 Electricity Production mode
30
SOC operating in the Fuel Cell mode enables to generate 14% of electricity, 14% of
used fuel, 4% of DH, 4% of PH, compared to straw energy input. Heat utilised for
DH and PH comes from a part of the used air that is not going into the burner after
it leaves SOFC (Figure 4.4). Additionally, 1% of the heat is lost in SOFC operations,
and 2% of the heat is accounted for as heat that is supplied to other processes in the
system. Finally, used fuel chemical energy coming from the SOFC is converted into
heat via a burner. This heat amounts to 14% of straw input and is used to heat a
large amount of air to 800˝C (Table 4.2) that is needed to cool down SOFC and keep
the temperature of the outlet gases below 850˝C.
In EP mode, the heat needed for the pyrolysis process is supplied via used air that
is not directed into the burner((Heat Exchanger №3, Figure 4.4). This used air also
enables to preheat the pyrolysis gas that enters SOFC (Heat Exchanger №2), and as
mentioned above, the rest of the heat from the used air stream is utilised for PH and
DH purposes. The task of the flue gas in the designed system is to supply the heat
needed for heating the air entering SOFC (Heat Exchanger №3). As it is cooled down
after this operation to around 71˝C it cannot be used for DH purposes (Table 4.2).
An option with an air ejector was also investigated, however, due to the low eﬀiciency
of the designed system it is not included in this research.
Straw
pellets
100%
SOFC
Pyrolysis gas
38%
Bio-oil
22%
Bio-char
40%
14% Used Fuel
Pyrolysis
4% Process heat
4% DH
14% Electricity
Burner
1% Electricity
1% Heat loss
2% Heat
14% Heat
Figure 4.5: Energy flows for the Electricity Production mode. Note: All flows are normalized
to the LHV of dry straw pellets. The numbers denote normalized percentage of the
respective energy flow.
Figure 4.6 shows the carbon flow in the Electricity Production mode. There are no
differences between EP and ES mode in the first part of the carbon flow. 66% of the
==PAGE:39==
4.2 Electricity Production mode
31
carbon is therefore bounded within bio-oil and bio-char. Carbon bounded in pyrolysis
gas (39%), via conversion, passes first to used fuel and later into the flue gas. After
the stream of flue gas exchanges heat with air flowing into the SOFC, it is being
discarded out of the designed system, and thereby carbon is discarded in form of
CO2. Therefore, the carbon eﬀiciency for the EP mode amounts to 61.0 %.
From the biomass input of 20MWth and from 0.2 MWel of electricity supplied to
the compressor that increases the pressure of the air entering SOFC (Figure 4.4),
2.7 MWel is generated, together with the same amount of bio-oil and bio-char as
in ES mode (Table 4.6). It means that the Net Electricity Production obtained in
EP mode amount to 2.5MWel. Therefore, the main eﬀiciency of EP mode come up
to 76.7%, whereas total eﬀiciency, which includes also PH and DP heat obtained
from the designed system, equals 86.6%. Additionally, for EP mode, Net Electricity
Eﬀiciency is calculated and it equals 12.5%.
When it comes to gas composition change, after SOFC, CH4 molar fraction drops
from 0.09 to 0.00, and CO content also decreases from 0.22 to 0.07. Molar fractions
of the other components in the gas are slightly increasing (Table 4.4). The utilization
factor amounts to 0.66. Current density is calculated based on the ASR, Area of SOC
and heat loss parameter from SOEC mode, and it equals 0.75A{cm2. Average Nerst
Voltage is lower compared to ES mode, whereas cell voltage at which SOFC operates
equal 0.75 V.
Bio-ash
Pyrolysis
42%
19%
SOFC
Burner
CO2
Flue gas
39%
Straw
pellets
100%
Pyrolysis gas
39%
Used fuel
39%
Bio-oil
Figure 4.6: Carbon flows for the Electricity Production mode. Note: All flows are normalized
to the carbon input of straw pellets. The numbers denote normalized percentage of
the respective carbon flow.
==PAGE:40==
4.3 Alternative Electricity Production mode
32
4.3
Alternative Electricity Production mode
Results of the Alternative Electricity Production mode are shown on Figure 4.7 and
in Table 4.3.
Compositions of the gas flows are given in Table 4.4.
As for the
other modes, key results are presented in Table 4.5. Alternative EP mode has the
same structure as EP mode, the only difference is the implementation of Gas Turbine
instead of SOC in FC mode. As shown on Figure 4.8, the chemical energy of pyrolysis
gas and electricity input, which corresponds to 52% of chemical energy in straw, is
converted into four parts: electricity, DH, PH, and heat loss. 31% of electricity, in
regards to straw input, is generated via a gas turbine. 15% of heat in form of DH
and PH is obtained from exchanging the heat with flue gas stream that comes from
heat exchanger after GT. The heat loss of 6% comes from the heat of flue gas that
cannot be recuperated.
8
9
10
4
2
Ceramic
filter
Pyrolysis
reactor
Sulfur
removal
13
Water
0.2 MWth
0.4MWth
~0 MWel
1.7 MWth
Straw pellets
(10% moisture)
20 MWth
Bio-char
8.1 MWth
Pyro-gas
7.6 MWth
Heat
Exchanger
№ 1
1
3
5
6,7
7,11
12
Electro
filter
Bio-oil
4.3 MWth
Separator
Burner
Air
Flue gas
Gas
turbine
Heat
Exchanger
№ 1
14
15
16
17
18
2.8 MWel
6.2Wel
Figure 4.7: Detailed flowsheet for the conversion of biomass to electricity via Updraft Pyrolysis
reactor in alternative EP mode using gas turbine.
==PAGE:41==
4.3 Alternative Electricity Production mode
33
Table 4.3: Thermodynamics properties for the alternative Electricity Production mode - conven-
tional solution using Gas Turbine. Nodes refer to Figure 3.1.
Node
9m [kg/s]
T [°C]
p [bar]
Node
9m [kg/s]
T [°C]
p [bar]
1
1.38
15
1.00
10
4.59
500
1.01
2
0.35
500
1.00
11
0.93
300
1.00
3
0.35
50
1.00
12
0.14
110
1.00
4
0.05
15
1.00
13
0.93
110
1.00
5
0.05
450
1.00
14
5.53
15
1.00
6
5.57
300
1.00
15
5.53
482
25.46
7
0.14
300
1.00
16
6.46
1300
24.95
8
4.59
300
1.00
17
6.46
573
1.01
9
4.59
303
1.01
18
6.46
353
1.00
As shown on Figure 4.7, heat for the pyrolysis process is supplied via heat exchange of
pyrolysis gas stream and flue gas stream coming out of gas turbine (Heat Exchanger
№1). Carbon flow for the EP-GT mode is the same as for EP mode since in this
scenario all the carbon bounded in pyrolysis gas is at the end discarded out of the
designed system in form of CO2 via flue gas.
Straw
pellets
100%
Pyrolysis gas
38%
Bio-oil
22%
Bio-char
40%
Pyrolysis
GT
Electricity
14%
Electricity
31%
DH 10%
PH 5%
Heat Loss 6%
Figure 4.8: Energy flows for the electricity production mode. Note: All flows are normalized to
the LHV of dry straw pellets. The numbers denote normalized percentage of the
respective energy flow.
In both cases, a bigger part of carbon is stored in bio-char and bio-oil. Therefore,
==PAGE:42==
4.3 Alternative Electricity Production mode
34
also carbon eﬀiciencies for EP and EP-GT modes are identical (Table 4.6).
Again, the same as in EP and ES mode, from input biomass input of 20MWth supplied
to the compressor, 8.1 MWth of bio-char, 4.3 MWth bio-oil and 7.6 MWth of pyrolysis
gas is obtained.
Next 7.6 MWth of pyrolysis gas and 2.8MWel electricity input,
supplied to the compressor, enables to generate 6.2MWel electricity. Therefore, the
net electricity production of the design system equals 3.4MWel Additionally, 3.4
MWth of heat are gained for PH and DH. Finally, the main eﬀiciency of EP-GT
mode amounts to 81.6% and total eﬀiciency up to 96.5%. Net Electricity Eﬀiciency
equal 17.0%.
Table 4.4: Gas compositions for the main process streams in the three operating modes (molar
fractions).
H2
O2
CO
CO2
H2O
CH4
C2H6
C3H8
C2H4
C3H6
CH3OH
N2
Electricity storage
Pyrolysis Reactor Outlet
0.120
„0
0.202
0.069
0.535
0.049
0.012
0.003
0.006
0.004
„0
„0
POX inlet
0.108
0.104
0.181
0.062
0.480
0.044
0.011
0.002
0.005
0.004
„0
„0
POX outlet
0.214
„0
0.178
0.136
0.473
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
SOC inlet
0.213
„0
0.177
0.139
0.470
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
SOC fuel outlet
0.613
„0
0.286
0.030
0.070
0.002
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
SOC air outlet
„0
1.000
0.000
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
Compressor outlet
0.658
„0
0.307
0.032
„0
0.002
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
Methanol reactor inlet
0.681
„0
0.231
0.070
„0
0.016
„0
„0
„0
„0
0.002
„0
Methanol reactor outlet
0.496
„0
0.091
0.100
0.008
0.025
„0
„0
„0
„0
0.280
„0
Separator gas outlet
0.710
„0
0.130
0.120
„0
0.034
„0
„0
„0
„0
0.006
„0
Separator liquid outlet
0.003
„0
0.001
0.055
0.027
0.002
„0
„0
„0
„0
0.912
„0
TC top outlet
0.042
„0
0.020
0.831
„0
0.026
„0
„0
„0
„0
0.081
„0
TC bottom outlet
„0
„0
„0
„0
0.029
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
0.971
„0
DC top outlet
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
1.000
„0
DC bottom outlet
„0
„0
„0
„0
1.000
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
Electricity production
Pyrolysis Reactor Outlet
0.104
„0
0.224
0.055
0.526
0.090
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
SOC air inlet
„0
0.210
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
0.790
SOC fuel outlet
0.134
„0
0.066
0.248
0.553
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
SOC air outlet
„0
0.202
„0
„0
0.000
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
0.798
Burner outlet
„0
0.185
„0
0.019
0.042
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
0.754
Electricity Production - GT
Pyrolysis Reactor Outlet
0.104
„0
0.224
0.055
0.526
0.090
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
Burner air inlet
„0
0.210
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
0.790
Gas Turbine inlet
„0
0.104
„0
„0.075
„0.166
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
„0
0.655
Table 4.5: Parameters results for the two SOC operation mode.
Electricity Storage
Electricity production
Current density [A{cm2]
-1
0.75
Average Nerst voltage [V]
0.99
0.92
Utilization Factor [-]
-0.84
0.66
Vcell [V]
1.34
0.73
==PAGE:43==
4.4 EP and EP-GT modes comparison
35
Table 4.6: Energy flows and eﬀiciencies for two main operating modes and alternative mode
(LHV 1, dry basis).
Electricity Storage
Electricity Production
Electricity Production
- Gas Turbine
Input [MW]
Dry biomass (Straw pellets)
20.0
20.0
20.0
Electric power
8.4
0.2
2.8
Output [MW]
Bio-char
8.1
8.1
8.1
Bio-oil
4.3
4.3
4.3
Methanol
10.2
-
-
Electric power
-
2.7
6.2
Process Heat
0.2
0.8
1.1
District Heating
1.9
1.2
2.3
Eﬀiciencies [%]
Main p3.1q
79.6
74.5
79.0
Total p3.2q
86.9
84.5
96.0
Energy Products p3.3q
51.0
34.0
38.5
Biomass to MeOH p3.4q
51.0
-
-
MeOH Eﬀiciencyp3.5q
35.9
-
-
Net Electricityp3.6q
-
12.5
17.0
Fuel Eﬀiciencyp3.7q
51.1
-
-
Carbon eﬀiciencyp3.8q
97.0
61.0
61.0
1. Apart from DH, PD and electric power
4.4
EP and EP-GT modes comparison
Both designed systems are based on the same biomass input and thermochemical
process, in this case, pyrolysis. Therefore, in both modes, there is no difference in
chemical composition, LHV or quantity of the produced bio-char and bio-oil. The
differences occur from choosing a different method of pyrolysis gas conversion. In
EP mode there is almost no need for electricity supply, whereas in EP-GT mode
compression of the air before the burner requires high electricity utilization. Therefore
even though, the production of electricity is much higher, on behalf of EP-GT mode,
the difference in Net Electricity between the two modes is only 0.9MWel. EP-GT
mode is more eﬀicient when taking into account both Main and Total Eﬀiciencies.
Especially, the difference in Total Eﬀiciency is visible (Table 4.6).
It comes from
the fact, that the designed system needs to supply heat for the pyrolysis system,
however, in SOFC mode, there is a temperature restriction, since SOFC are running
at 800-850˝C, whereas GT operates at 1300˝C, which results in higher eﬀiciency.
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 5
Discussion
The thermodynamic analysis of the designed systems shows, that high carbon eﬀi-
ciency is achieved when the plant is operating in SOC electrolysis mode. Additionally,
when considering only the energy products, in other words disregarding bio-char as
input in eﬀiciency calculations, ES mode demonstrates the highest eﬀiciency. Com-
pared to [34], the Biomass to MeOH eﬀiciency is much lower, however, the important
aspect that has to be laid out, is the approach that is being taken, during modelling
of the designed systems. The configuration of this model is designed to put special
emphasis on carbon binding, in other words, storing the carbon in the products of
the model. It means that the desired product of the designed system is not only the
pyrolysis gas, but it is also bio-char and bio-oil. The slow pyrolysis process favours
the production of bio-char and bio-oil, whereas gasification mainly produces syngas.
That is why slow pyrolysis is implemented as the main thermochemical process. Since
there is a number of papers regarding straw gasification and combining this process
with SOC [41, 34, 27]. there is no sense in comparing one to one those results with
the results of this thesis. Due to the taken approach, it is clear and explicit that the
gasification system is characterised by higher overall eﬀiciency. However, the model
built for this thesis has much higher carbon eﬀiciency, and the mass ratio of the
yielded products from the pyrolysis process lean in favour of bio-char and bio-oil.
The idea for the designed system was to optimize it in terms of energy and carbon
eﬀiciency for straw pellet input that has uniform properties. On the other hand, it
could be also investigated how small changes in straw pellets properties can affect the
operation of this particular model.
However, a comparison worth mentioning regards a similar case of biomass to methanol
conversion via two-stage gasifier and SOC [58]. However, in this case, the tempera-
ture of pyrolysis is higher (740˝C), and the bio-oil is not separated from the pyrolysis
gas after the pyrolysis reactor, but instead, it is directed together with pyrolysis gas
for further processing. The main eﬀiciency in SOEC mode in [58] (around 70%) is
lower than for this model, but as mentioned before it is different in terms of the
products that are yielded. When disregarding bio-char in eﬀiciency calculation, and
therefore comparing Fuel Eﬀiciency of this ES mode (51.1%) with an eﬀiciency of
ES mode (around 70%) [58], the finding is opposite. So, it is important to take into
account the fact of calculating the eﬀiciency of the designed system with or without
the bio-char.
Regarding the modelling and analysing of the designed system.
There are some
questions and that were not answered, and could be worked upon in further time.
==PAGE:45==
5 Discussion
37
One of the biggest question, that is not in the scope of this thesis, is the economical
aspect of this type of system. Since, in theory, the system is operating between ES
and EP modes. Therefore. it is vital to assess the conditions, meaning the price of
electricity, that allows the system to operate between the two modes. Additionally,
to assess full load hours of the plant operating in a given mode. Further, even if the
designed system with GT stands out as the more eﬀicient, compared to EP mode
with SOC, its implementation together with SOC for ES mode imposes higher costs.
Therefore, for a smaller system this kind of configuration would be less desirable, and
only from a certain scale implementation of GT would be financially feasible.
Another aspect is the use of O2 stream that is discarded out of the ES mode. For
a big scale plant, it would be reasonable to investigate possible ways of utilizing it,
since it can bring economical and possibly energetic advantages. The same goes for
the CO2 discarded off the ES mode. This stream contains 83% CO2 (mol. frac.),
therefore it could be utilized in some way, and if not, consideration regarding its
storage would be purposeful. Regarding LHV of the products and eﬀiciencies. The
assumptions made during the creation of the model could be pinpoint or corrected
if the small scale plant would be first tested, before starting the planning of bigger
scale operations. Adding to the model part of the system regarding bio-oil utilization,
or enhancement into usable transport fuel would give more realistic eﬀiciency results,
compared to other this type of projects that investigate poly-generation.
A SA relating GT was conducted, by changing the approach temperature of the last
heat exchanger (Figure 4.7). It was established that with the bigger ∆T even higher
total eﬀiciencies are achieved. However, it is not true for the main eﬀiciency, and
since the purpose of GT mode is to produce electricity and not heat this aspect does
not seem worthwhile.
Another aspect worth mentioning is the errors in calculations that can come from
constructing the design systems within two and not one software. The data between
the two software was being exchanged since one of the reversed streams had to be
iterated. Therefore, simulations of the model with corrected results were exchanged
more than one between two software. There is a potential to create a software pre-
destine to model power-to-X operations, that would be able to simulate with high
accuracy both thermo-chemical and chemical processes.
Since in the ES model, first of all, POX reactor is implemented, and then the tem-
perature in SOEC is kept at 800˝C, the probability of carbon formation is minimized.
There is a technological restriction regarding mainly SOC, its degradation due to
higher current density and value of stacks ASR, therefore possibility of using a smaller
stack could be considered in the future.
Moreover, when looking for further development of the model into a functioning plant,
estimation of energy return on investment would have to be calculated to give a more
precise answer regarding its sustainability.
When it comes to the heat used for DH and PH it has to be estimated if this could
be feasible in terms of economics, since it would entail locating the plant close to
an industrialized area, when the location would still be bounded to an area where
there are large straw supplies, since it is important in terms of biomass costs, even
==PAGE:46==
5 Discussion
38
when the biomass is transformed into pellets. Also, the scale of the plant would be
an important determinant.
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 6
Conclusion
A novel system coupling a pyrolysis reactor with SOC operating in electricity pro-
duction or electricity storage modes has been proposed and analyzed in terms of
thermodynamic modelling. At higher electricity prices, SOC can shift from storing
electricity in form of methanol to the production of electricity from straw pellets
via SOC in Fuel Cell mode. Generally, the analysis showed high carbon eﬀiciency
(97.0%) for ES mode, when accounting for all the products, whereas energy eﬀiciency
(79.6% to 70%) was higher compared to the models using gasification, when includ-
ing LHV of bio-char in eﬀiciency calculation, but much lower (51% to 70%) when
accounting only for bio-oil and methanol. This is the case since the designed system
enables the generation of bio-methanol from pyrolysis gas, together with bio-oil and
bio-char, whereas in gasification systems, mainly syngas is produced and converted
to bio-methanol. Therefore, the production of bio-char and bio-oil instead of a higher
amount of bio-methanol requires economic validity and thereby requires economic
analysis to assess if this route is beneficial. The reversed streams of H2 and CO2
were modelled to discard only the necessary amount out of the system while keeping
the H2 to CO ratio of the stream entering the methanol reactor at a value of 2. That
way, the highest possible bio-methanol yield in the configuration was achieved. For
EP mode, it was established that implementation of gas turbine instead of SOC in
Full Cell mode would give higher energy eﬀiciency (79.0% to 74.5%). However, the
scale of the plant has to be considered, since adding a gas turbine to the designed sys-
tem would increase the costs. Compared to other studies, the system proposed within
this study provide higher carbon eﬀiciency, flexibility and various outputs, however,
in terms of energy eﬀiciency it is not competitive against similar configuration gasifi-
cation systems. Therefore, the only profound economic analysis would answer, if this
solution could be implemented on the large scale.
==PAGE:48==
Bibliography
[1]
M.R. Allen, O.P. Dube, and W. Solecki. Framing and Context. In: Global Warm-
ing of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C
above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways,
in the context of strengthening the global response to the. Technical report. IPCC,
2018. url: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2019/05/
SR15_Chapter1_Low_Res.pdf.
[2]
M. Eby et al. “Lifetime of anthropogenic climate change: Millennial time scales
of potential CO2 and surface temperature perturbations.” In: Journal of Climate
22.10 (2009), pages 2501–2511. issn: 08948755. doi: 10.1175/2008JCLI2554.1.
url: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.738.
9197.
[3]
T.F. Stocker et al. PCC, 2013: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Technical report. IPCC, 2013.
url: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WG1AR5_all_
final.pdf.
[4]
The Core Writing Team IPCC. Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Con-
tribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2015, page 151. isbn:
9789291691432. url: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/
02/SYR_AR5_FINAL_full.pdf.
[5]
Björn A. Andersson and Ingrid Råde. “Metal resource constraints of electric-
vehicle batteries.” In: Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Envi-
ronment 6.5 (2001), pages 297–324. issn: 13619209. doi: 10 . 1016 / S1361 -
9209(00)00030-4.
[6]
Final FutureGas report. Technical report. 2020. url: www.futuregas.dk.
[7]
Wim Soetaert and Erick J. Vandamme. Biofuels. Edited by Wim Soetaert and
Erick J. Vandamme. Chichester, UK: John Wiley
Sons, Ltd, January 2009,
pages 1–242. isbn: 9780470754108. doi: 10.1002/9780470754108. url: http:
//doi.wiley.com/10.1002/9780470754108.
[8]
Oguzhan Canakci, Mustafa; Ilgen. Alternative Fuels for Transportation. isbn:
9781439819586 and 9781439819579. url: https : / / findit . dtu . dk / en /
catalog/2449115379.
==PAGE:49==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
41
[9]
Sectoral greenhouse gas emissions by IPCC sector — European Environment
Agency. url: https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/daviz/change-
of-co2-eq-emissions-2#tab-dashboard-01 (visited on May 20, 2021).
[10]
Kim Winther. IEA-AMF Annex 56 Methanol as motor fuel. Technical report.
Danish Technological Institute, 2019.
[11]
Biomass analysis. Technical report. 2020. url: https://ens.dk/sites/ens.
dk/files/Bioenergi/biomasseanalyse_final_ren_eng.pdf.
[12]
Bruno Glaser et al. “Biochar is carbon negative.” In: Nature Geoscience 2.1
(January 2009), page 2. issn: 17520894. doi: 10.1038/ngeo395. url: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/ngeo395.
[13]
Li Li et al. “An Introduction to Pyrolysis and Catalytic Pyrolysis: Versatile
Techniques for Biomass Conversion.” In: New and Future Developments in Catal-
ysis: Catalytic Biomass Conversion. Elsevier B.V., 2013, pages 173–208. isbn:
9780444538789. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53878-9.00009-6.
[14]
Chowdhury Zaira Zaman et al. “Pyrolysis: A Sustainable Way to Generate En-
ergy from Waste.” In: Pyrolysis. InTech, July 2017. doi: 10.5772/intechopen.
69036. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.69036.
[15]
Basu Prabir. Biomass Gasification, Pyrolysis and Torrefaction: Practical Design
and Theory - Prabir Basu - Google Books. url: https : / / books . google .
dk/books?id=BYM2DwAAQBAJ&pg=PA155&lpg=PA155&dq=Pyrolysis+is+a+
thermochemical+decomposition+or+cracking+of+biomass+or+similar+
feedstock+into+a+range+of+useful+products,+either+in+the+total+
absence+of+oxidizing+agents+or+with+a+limited+ (visited on March 9,
2021).
[16]
R. W. Nachenius et al. “Biomass Pyrolysis.” In: Advances in Chemical Engineer-
ing. Volume 42. Academic Press Inc., 2013, pages 75–139. doi: 10.1016/B978-
0-12-386505-2.00002-X.
[17]
Tony Bridgwater. Biomass Pyrolysis. Technical report. IEA, 2006. url: https:
/ / www . ieabioenergy . com / wp - content / uploads / 2013 / 10 / Task - 34 -
Booklet.pdf.
[18]
Donald S. Scott and Jan Piskorz. “The continuous flash pyrolysis of biomass.”
In: The Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering 62.3 (1984), pages 404–412.
issn: 1939019X. doi: 10.1002/cjce.5450620319.
[19]
Anthony Bridgewater. “Biomass fast pyrolysis.” In: Thermal Science 8.2 (2004),
pages 21–50. issn: 0354-9836. doi: 10.2298/tsci0402021b.
[20]
Ehsan Reyhanitash. “Upgrading Pyrolysis Oil to Produce Liquid Transporta-
tion Fuels.” In: Electronic Thesis and Dissertation Repository (August 2013).
url: https://ir.lib.uwo.ca/etd/1557.
[21]
By J Corresponding author Katie Chong, Co-author V Anthony Bridgwater,
and John Wiley. Fast pyrolysis oil fuel blend for marine vessels. Technical report.
==PAGE:50==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
42
[22]
Anthony V. Bridgwater. “Upgrading biomass fast pyrolysis liquids.” In: Envi-
ronmental Progress and Sustainable Energy 31.2 (July 2012), pages 261–268.
issn: 19447442. doi: 10.1002/ep.11635.
[23]
Koos Overwater. Advanced Biofuels from Fast Pyrolysis Bio-Oil. Technical re-
port. 2019.
[24]
R. L. Keiski et al. “Partial oxidation (POX) processes and technology for clean
fuel and chemical production.” In: Advances in Clean Hydrocarbon Fuel Process-
ing: Science and Technology. Elsevier Ltd., January 2011, pages 262–286. isbn:
9781845697273. doi: 10.1533/9780857093783.3.262.
[25]
Anis Hamza Fakeeha et al. “Highly selective syngas/H 2 production via partial
oxidation of CH 4 using (Ni, Co and Ni-Co)/ZrO 2 -Al 2 O 3 catalysts: Influence
of calcination temperature.” In: Processes 7.3 (March 2019). issn: 22279717. doi:
10.3390/pr7030141.
[26]
Lasse R. Clausen, Giacomo Butera, and Søren Højgaard Jensen. “Integration
of anaerobic digestion with thermal gasification and pressurized solid oxide elec-
trolysis cells for high eﬀiciency bio-SNG production.” In: Energy 188 (December
2019), page 116018. issn: 03605442. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2019.116018.
[27]
Giacomo Butera. “Methanol production integrating biomass thermochemical
conversion and solid oxide cells - DTU Findit.” In: (2020). url: https : / /
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2610962269.
[28]
M. Rokni. “Solid Oxide Cell Systems for Polygeneration Purposes - DTU Findit.”
In: (2018). url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/2438446687.
[29]
Alexander Buttler and Hartmut Spliethoff. “Current status of water electrolysis
for energy storage, grid balancing and sector coupling via power-to-gas and
power-to-liquids: A review.” In: Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 82
(February 2018), pages 2440–2454. issn: 18790690. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2017.
09.003.
[30]
Kevin Kendall. “High-Temperature Solid Oxide Fuel Cells for the 21st Century:
Fundamentals, Design and Applications: Second Edition.” In: (). url: https:
//www.researchgate.net/publication/303430844_High- Temperature_
Solid_Oxide_Fuel_Cells_for_the_21st_Century_Fundamentals_Design_
and_Applications_Second_Edition.
[31]
Mogens B. Mogensen. “Materials for reversible solid oxide cells.” In: Current
Opinion in Electrochemistry 21 (June 2020), pages 265–273. issn: 24519111.
doi: 10.1016/j.coelec.2020.03.014.
[32]
Sune Dalgaard Ebbesen et al. “High temperature electrolysis in alkaline cells,
solid proton conducting cells, and solid oxide cells.” In: Chemical Reviews 114.21
(November 2014), pages 10697–10734. issn: 15206890. doi: 10.1021/cr5000865.
[33]
Q. Cai et al. “The effects of operating conditions on the performance of a solid
oxide steam electrolyser: A model-based study.” In: Fuel Cells 10.6 (December
2010), pages 1114–1128. issn: 16156846. doi: 10.1002/fuce.200900211.
==PAGE:51==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
43
[34]
Giacomo Butera et al. “Flexible biomass conversion to methanol integrating
solid oxide cells and TwoStage gasifier.” In: Fuel 271 (July 2020), page 117654.
issn: 00162361. doi: 10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117654.
[35]
G. De Lorenzo and P. Fragiacomo. “Energy analysis of an SOFC system fed by
syngas.” In: Energy Conversion and Management 93 (March 2015), pages 175–
186. issn: 01968904. doi: 10.1016/j.enconman.2014.12.086.
[36]
Grazia Leonzio. “Methanol synthesis: Optimal solution for a better eﬀiciency
of the process.” In: Processes 6.3 (March 2018). issn: 22279717. doi: 10.3390/
pr6030020.
[37]
Thales Velho Barreto and Antônio Carlos Duarte Coelho. “Distillation.” In:
Sugarcane: Agricultural Production, Bioenergy and Ethanol. Elsevier Inc., May
2015, pages 341–363. isbn: 9780128022399. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-802239-
9.00016-5.
[38]
Ikhyun Kim. Process Modeling Using Aspen Plus (RadFrac Models) Chemical
Process and Product Design Basic Distillation. Technical report. 2014. url:
http://pssl.snu.ac.kr/korean/files/05_aspenplus_distillation_
sensiticity.pdf.
[39]
Leonardo Pierobon et al. “DNA - An integrated open-source optimization plat-
form for thermo-fluid systems - DTU Findit.” In: (2014). url: https://backend.
orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/110722962/paper.pdf.
[40]
Aspen Plus | Leading Process Simulation Software | AspenTech. url: https:
//www.aspentech.com/en/products/engineering/aspen-plus (visited on
June 4, 2021).
[41]
René Kofler and Lasse Røngaard Clausen. “Wheat straw based polygeneration
systems integrating the electricity, heating and transport sector.” In: Smart
Energy 2 (May 2021), page 100015. issn: 26669552. doi: 10.1016/j.segy.
2021.100015.
[42]
Andreas Eschenbacher. Catalytic deoxygenation of wheat straw fast pyrolysis
vapors for production of biofuels with improved properties. Technical report.
2020. url: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/
219909048/PhD_thesis_Final_Andreas_Eschenbacher_.pdf.
[43]
Ramiar Sadegh Vaziri and Matthaus U. Babler. Removal of hydrogen sulfide
with metal oxides in packed bed reactors-A review from a modeling perspective
with practical implications. Technical report 24. December 2019, page 5316. doi:
10.3390/app9245316. url: www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci.
[44]
Amvrosios G. Georgiadis, Nikolaos D. Charisiou, and Maria A. Goula. Re-
moval of hydrogen sulfide from various industrial gases: A review of the most
promising adsorbing materials. Technical report 5. May 2020. doi: 10.3390/
catal10050521.
==PAGE:52==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
44
[45]
Jesper Ahrenfeldt et al. “(PDF) Formation, Decomposition and Cracking of
Biomass Tars in Gasification.” In: (2005). url: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/265115976_Formation_Decomposition_and_Cracking_
of_Biomass_Tars_in_Gasification.
[46]
H. Zare Aliabadi. “Thermodynamic Modeling of the High Temperature Shift
Converter Reactor Using Minimization of Gibbs Free Energy.” In: (2011). url:
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.192.8047.
[47]
Annabelle Brisse, Josef Schefold, and Mohsine Zahid. “High temperature wa-
ter electrolysis in solid oxide cells.” In: International Journal of Hydrogen En-
ergy 33.20 (October 2008), pages 5375–5382. issn: 03603199. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijhydene.2008.07.120.
[48]
Giacomo Butera, Søren Højgaard Jensen, and Lasse Røngaard Clausen. “A
novel system for large-scale storage of electricity as synthetic natural gas us-
ing reversible pressurized solid oxide cells.” In: Energy 166 (January 2019),
pages 738–754. issn: 03605442. doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2018.10.079.
[49]
Aspen Physical Property System - Physical Property Methods and Models 11.1.
Technical report. 2001. url: http://web.ist.utl.pt/ist11061/de/ASPEN/
Physical_Property_Methods_and_Models.pdf.
[50]
Søren Koch. “Contact Resistance of Ceramic Interfaces Between Materials Used
for Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Applications.” In: (2002). url: https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/242320921_Contact_Resistance_of_Ceramic_Interfaces_
Between_Materi-_als_Used_for_Solid_Oxide_Fuel_Cell_Applications.
[51]
Hartmut Kruger et al. EFFICIENCY IN Eﬀiciency in Electricity Generation.
Technical report. 2003.
[52]
Meherwan P. Boyce. Gas Turbine Engineering Handbook. Elsevier Inc., 2012.
isbn: 9780123838421. doi: 10.1016/C2009-0-64242-2.
[53]
Prabir Basu, Cen Kefa, and Louis Jestin. “Pressure Drop in Gas and Air Ducts.”
In: Springer, New York, NY, 2000, pages 457–484. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4612-
1250-8_16. url: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-
4612-1250-8_16.
[54]
Capucine Dupont et al. “Heat capacity measurements of various biomass types
and pyrolysis residues.” In: Fuel 115 (2014), pages 644–651. issn: 00162361. doi:
10.1016/j.fuel.2013.07.086. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.
2013.07.086.
[55]
Niels Christiansen. “11 th European SOFC
SOE Forum 2014 Presentation.”
In: (2014). url: https://silo.tips/download/11-th-european-sofc-soe-
forum-2014-i-1.
==PAGE:53==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
45
[56]
Mustafa Ilbas et al. “Hydrogen as burner fuel: Modelling of hydrogen-hydrocarbon
composite fuel combustion and NOx formation in a small burner.” In: Interna-
tional Journal of Energy Research 29.11 (September 2005), pages 973–990. issn:
0363907X. doi: 10.1002/er.1104. url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/full/10.1002/er.1104.
[57]
A. M.Y. Razak. “Gas turbine performance modelling, analysis and optimisa-
tion.” In: Modern Gas Turbine Systems: High Eﬀiciency, Low Emission, Fuel
Flexible Power Generation. Elsevier Ltd., January 2013, pages 423–514. isbn:
9781845697280. doi: 10.1533/9780857096067.3.423.
[58]
Giacomo Butera et al. “Techno-economic analysis of methanol production units
coupling solid oxide cells and thermochemical biomass conversion via the TwoStage
gasifier.” In: Fuel Processing Technology 215 (May 2021). issn: 03783820. doi:
10.1016/j.fuproc.2020.106718.
==PAGE:54==
An Appendix
DNA code for Electricity Storage Mode
1
2 fluid steam-gas H2O-G 1
3
4 struc pyro PYRO_OIL 2 401 504 402 604 1 300 302 307 901 902 903 904 /
5
905 906 907 908
6 media 401 biomass 504 steam-gas 402 char-ash 604 bio-oil 1 gas
7
8 addco p 401 1 p 504 1 p 402 1 p 604 1 p 1 1
9 c addco m pyro 1 90
10 addco t pyro 401 15
11 addco t pyro 504 450
12 addco t pyro 402 500
13 addco t pyro 1 300
14 addco zc 901 20e3
15
16 addco za pyro 62 22.3 {wt% H2O formed MAF}
17
18 addco za pyro 24 0.58 {fraction of C to gas and oil phase}
19 addco za pyro 70 0.323 {C_oil/(C_oil+C_gas)}
20 addco za pyro 15 1 {total LHV efficiency}
21 addco za pyro 72 0.03 {heat loss / biomass}
22
23 c biomass (dry)
24 c addco za pyro 27 49.39 {wt% dry C}
25 addco za pyro 28 6.16 {wt% dry H}
26 addco za pyro 29 45.32 {wt% dry O}
27 addco za pyro 30 .3 {wt% dry N}
28 addco za pyro 31 5.19 {wt% dry ASH}
29 addco za pyro 32 10 {wt% H2O}
30
31 c biomass HHV and cp
32 addco ZA pyro 1 17500
33 addco ZA pyro 9 1.35
34
35 c char-ash Wt%
36 addco za pyro 33 64.27 {wt% C}
37 addco za pyro 34 2.39
{wt% H}
38 c addco za pyro 35 11.7
{wt% ash}
39
40 c C4+ liquids wt%
41 addco za pyro 36 71.3
{wt% C}
42 addco za pyro 38 18
{wt% O}
43 addco za pyro 71 2.4
{wt% N}
==PAGE:55==
An Appendix
47
44
45 c gas composition
46 c addco za pyro 39 12.04
{vol% H2 dry}
47 c addco za pyro 40 80
{vol% CO dry}
48 c addco za pyro 42 30
{vol% CO2 dry}
49 c addco za pyro 42 45.19
{vol% CO2 dry}
50 c addco za pyro 46 2.42
{vol% CH4 dry}
51 c addco za pyro 46 15.42
{vol% CH4 dry}
52 addco za pyro 47 2.67
{vol% C2H6 dry}
53 addco za pyro 48 0.58
{vol% C3H8 dry}
54 addco za pyro 49 1.23
{vol% C2H4 dry}
55 addco za pyro 50 0.86
{vol% C3H6 dry}
56 c addco za pyro 41 80
{vol% H2O}
57
58 c HHV's (cgar-ash, C1-3)
59 c addco ZA pyro 3 25400
{char-ash}
60
61 c cp's
62 addco ZA pyro 10 1
{char-ash}
63 addco ZA pyro 11 2
{C4+}
64
65 addco za pyro 25 100
{molar weight of C4+}
66
67 zcname 901 LHV_flow_bio
68 c ZC 901 = LHV_flow_bio
[kW]
69 c ZC 902 = m_bio_MAF
[kg/s]
70 c ZC 903 = m_H2O_bio
[kg/s]
71 c ZC 904 = m_H2_conv_pyro [kg/s]
72
73 struc heatsink-char HEATSNK0_1 402 403 311 0
74 addco t heatsink-char 403 50
75
76 struc char-cooler heatsrc0 501 503 311 0
77 media 501 STEAM-HF
78 addco t char-cooler 501 15
79
80 struc steam-to_H2O REAL_IDEALGAS3 503 504 304
81 addco q steam-to_H2O 304 0
82
83 struc split-gas splitter 1 4 2
84
85 struc recycle-blower compre_1 2 702 303 101 0.5 0.98
86
87 struc pyro-reactor-heat heatsnk0 3 1 300 0.01
88 addco t pyro-reactor-heat 1 300
89
90 struc heatex1 heatex_1 11 14 702 703 314 0 0
91 addco Q heatex1 314 0
92
93 struc heatex2 heatex_1 18 10 703 3 317 0 0
94 addco Q heatex2 317 0
95 addco T heatex2 3 500
96 addco T heatex2 10 850
97
98 struc condenser-oil HEATSNK0_1 604 605 310 0
==PAGE:56==
An Appendix
48
99
100 struc set_temp SET_TEMP_SOLID 605 606 900
101
102 struc condenser-gas heatsnk0 4 5 310 0
103 addco t condenser-gas 5 110
104
105 struc set_temp_gas SET_TEMP 5 66 900
106
107 struc heat_condensation HEAT_AND_FLOW 606 607 310 307
108 addco za heat_condensation 1 1e3
109
110 struc total-Heat-condenser HEAT_NODE 310 312
111
112 struc split-gas2 splitter 13 7 40
113
114 struc heatex3 heatex_2 14 15 66 6 318 50 0 0
115 addco Q heatex3 318 0
116
117 struc mixer mixer_01 6 7 8
118 media 8 mix
119
120 struc Gibbs_reactor GIBBS_REACTOR 5 8 9 313 5 1 4 6 7 11
121 media 9 product_gas
122
123 addco t Gibbs_reactor 9 1300
124 addco za Gibbs_reactor 8 0
125 addco Q Gibbs_reactor 313 0
126
127 struc mixer2 mixer_01 9 44 18
128 fluid CO2methanol H2 0.042 CO 0.020 CO2 0.831 CH4 0.026 CH3OH 0.081
129 media 44 CO2methanol 10 mix2
130 addco t mixer2 44 45
131 addco m mixer2 44 0.012
132
133 struc sofc sofceq0d_CBM_LRC2 /
134 {fuel and air inlets} 10 12 /
135 {fuel and air outlets} 11 13 /
136 {nodes for power and heat loss} 201 315 316 909 910 /
137 {pressure loss ratios} 0 0
138 media 12 purge 11 USEDFUEL 13 USEDAIR
139 fluid purge O2 1
140
141 addco m sofc 12 0
142 addco t sofc 12 800
143 addco t sofc 11 850
144 addco q sofc 315 0
145
146 addco za sofc 14 -1
147 addco za sofc 15 0.99
148 addco za sofc 16 0.1
149 addco za sofc 35 0
150 addco za sofc 37 0.01
151
152
153
==PAGE:57==
An Appendix
49
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163 C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
164 C ~~ Start of list of generated initial guesses.
165 C ~~ The values are the results of the latest simulation.
166 C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
167 START M
pyro
401
0.1375523724371589E+01 {~~}
168 START P
401
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
169 START H
pyro
401 -0.6979870188292087E+04 {~~}
170 START M
pyro
504
0.4717475226382719E-01 {~~}
171 START P
504
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
172 START H
pyro
504 -0.1258733046346574E+05 {~~}
173 START M
pyro
402 -0.3481151556709223E+00 {~~}
174 START P
402
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
175 START H
pyro
402 -0.2532770862844226E+04 {~~}
176 START M
pyro
604 -0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
177 START P
604
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
178 START H
pyro
604 -0.1804874671670658E+04 {~~}
179 START M
pyro
1 -0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
180 START P
1
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
181 START H
pyro
1 -0.8618386438984120E+04 {~~}
182 START Q
pyro
300
0.1745537922757965E+04 {~~}
183 START Q
pyro
302 -0.6000000000000000E+03 {~~}
184 START Q
pyro
307 -0.1399661210191048E+03 {~~}
185 START ZC
901
0.2000000000000000E+05 {~~}
186 START ZC
902
0.1173720638769033E+01 {~~}
187 START ZC
903
0.1375523724371589E+00 {~~}
188 START ZC
904 -0.1124372070868309E-01 {~~}
189 START ZC
905
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
190 START ZC
906
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
191 START ZC
907
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
192 START ZC
908
0.4717475226382719E-01 {~~}
193 START ZA
pyro
1
0.1750000000000000E+05 {~~}
194 START ZA
pyro
2
0.1747997389893978E+05 {~~}
195 START ZA
pyro
3
0.2372286240755282E+05 {~~}
196 START ZA
pyro
4
0.2333342517777413E+05 {~~}
197 START ZA
pyro
5
0.3277327975183743E+05 {~~}
198 START ZA
pyro
6
0.3277327975183743E+05 {~~}
199 START ZA
pyro
7
0.2320119939672469E+05 {~~}
200 START ZA
pyro
8
0.3096164670168120E+05 {~~}
201 START ZA
pyro
9
0.1350000000000000E+01 {~~}
202 START ZA
pyro
10
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
203 START ZA
pyro
11
0.2000000000000000E+01 {~~}
204 START ZA
pyro
12
0.8076689139742924E+04 {~~}
205 START ZA
pyro
13
0.4333581589198277E+04 {~~}
206 START ZA
pyro
14
0.8727689613789825E-01 {~~}
==PAGE:58==
An Appendix
50
207 START ZA
pyro
15
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
208 START ZA
pyro
16
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
209 START ZA
pyro
17
0.4038344569871462E+00 {~~}
210 START ZA
pyro
18
0.2166790794599139E+00 {~~}
211 START ZA
pyro
19
0.1829540778590855E+00 {~~}
212 START ZA
pyro
20 -0.6743611121274792E-01 {~~}
213 START ZA
pyro
21
0.1321696564146237E+00 {~~}
214 START ZA
pyro
22
0.2811980706394896E+00 {~~}
215 START ZA
pyro
23
0.4490502433064422E-01 {~~}
216 START ZA
pyro
24
0.5800000000000000E+00 {~~}
217 START ZA
pyro
25
0.1000000000000000E+03 {~~}
218 START ZA
pyro
26
0.1168884486630409E+02 {~~}
219 START ZA
pyro
27
0.4302999999999999E+02 {~~}
220 START ZA
pyro
28
0.6160000000000000E+01 {~~}
221 START ZA
pyro
29
0.4532000000000000E+02 {~~}
222 START ZA
pyro
30
0.3000000000000000E+00 {~~}
223 START ZA
pyro
31
0.5190000000000000E+01 {~~}
224 START ZA
pyro
32
0.1000000000000000E+02 {~~}
225 START ZA
pyro
33
0.6427000000000000E+02 {~~}
226 START ZA
pyro
34
0.2390000000000000E+01 {~~}
227 START ZA
pyro
35
0.1845674114405233E+02 {~~}
228 START ZA
pyro
36
0.7130000000000000E+02 {~~}
229 START ZA
pyro
37
0.8300000000000143E+01 {~~}
230 START ZA
pyro
38
0.1800000000000000E+02 {~~}
231 START ZA
pyro
39
0.2590187304350652E+02 {~~}
232 START ZA
pyro
40
0.4338096884438435E+02 {~~}
233 START ZA
pyro
41
0.5350880397541232E+02 {~~}
234 START ZA
pyro
42
0.1487631870498892E+02 {~~}
235 START ZA
pyro
43
0.2616426019818099E+00 {~~}
236 START ZA
pyro
44
0.1409727571168438E+00 {~~}
237 START ZA
pyro
45
0.4464668271464803E+00 {~~}
238 START ZA
pyro
46
0.1050083940712020E+02 {~~}
239 START ZA
pyro
47
0.2670000000000000E+01 {~~}
240 START ZA
pyro
48
0.5800000000000000E+00 {~~}
241 START ZA
pyro
49
0.1230000000000000E+01 {~~}
242 START ZA
pyro
50
0.8600000000000000E+00 {~~}
243 START ZA
pyro
51
0.4882699920229700E+02 {~~}
244 START ZA
pyro
52
0.2326993250392957E+02 {~~}
245 START ZA
pyro
53
0.7412888577127196E+01 {~~}
246 START ZA
pyro
54
0.1000115914741066E+02 {~~}
247 START ZA
pyro
55
0.1048902056923558E+02 {~~}
248 START ZA
pyro
56
0.7429129299157144E-01 {~~}
249 START ZA
pyro
57
0.1192499444892590E+02 {~~}
250 START ZA
pyro
58
0.6329554967141600E+01 {~~}
251 START ZA
pyro
59
0.1201075898816028E+02 {~~}
252 START ZA
pyro
60
0.2229172712309241E+02 {~~}
253 START ZA
pyro
61
0.2418500903274861E+02 {~~}
254 START ZA
pyro
62
0.2230000000000000E+02 {~~}
255 START ZA
pyro
63 -0.9579554399311923E+00 {~~}
256 START ZA
pyro
64
0.4622792907837010E+01 {~~}
257 START ZA
pyro
65
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
258 START ZA
pyro
66
0.5448876228471346E-01 {~~}
259 START ZA
pyro
67
0.2491957254850564E-03 {~~}
260 START ZA
pyro
68
0.2689121338912134E+02 {~~}
261 START ZA
pyro
69
0.4348043903684992E+01 {~~}
==PAGE:59==
An Appendix
51
262 START ZA
pyro
70
0.3230000000000000E+00 {~~}
263 START ZA
pyro
71
0.2400000000000000E+01 {~~}
264 START ZA
pyro
72
0.3000000000000000E-01 {~~}
265 START ZA
pyro
73
0.5936225126966938E+01 {~~}
266 START ZA
pyro
74
0.1030220753926735E+01 {~~}
267 START X_J
char-ash
H2
0.2390000000000000E-01 {~~
}
268 START X_J
char-ash
C
0.6426999999999999E+00 {~~
}
269 START X_J
char-ash
O2
0.1478135948570593E+00 {~~
}
270 START X_J
char-ash
N2
0.1018993702417553E-02 {~~
}
271 START X_J
char-ash
ASH
0.1845674114405233E+00 {~~
}
272 START X_J
char-ash
AR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
273 START X_J
char-ash
S
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
274 START X_J
bio-oil
H2
0.8300000000000143E-01 {~~
}
275 START X_J
bio-oil
C
0.7130000000000000E+00 {~~
}
276 START X_J
bio-oil
O2
0.1800000000000000E+00 {~~
}
277 START X_J
bio-oil
N2
0.2400000000000000E-01 {~~
}
278 START X_J
bio-oil
H2O-G
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
279 START Y_J
gas
H2
0.1204209057069645E+00 {~~
}
280 START Y_J
gas
H2O-G
0.5350880397541232E+00 {~~
}
281 START Y_J
gas
CO
0.2016833126280803E+00 {~~
}
282 START Y_J
gas
CO2
0.6916178490378803E-01 {~~
}
283 START Y_J
gas
CH4
0.4881965832991402E-01 {~~
}
284 START Y_J
gas
C2H6
0.1241314933856491E-01 {~~
}
285 START Y_J
gas
C3H8
0.2696489369426085E-02 {~~
}
286 START Y_J
gas
C2H4
0.5718417111024285E-02 {~~
}
287 START Y_J
gas
C3H6
0.3998242858114540E-02 {~~
}
288 START X_J
biomass
H2
0.5544000000000000E-01 {~~
}
289 START X_J
biomass
C
0.3872699999999999E+00 {~~
}
290 START X_J
biomass
O2
0.4078800000000000E+00 {~~
}
291 START X_J
biomass
N2
0.2700000000000001E-02 {~~
}
==PAGE:60==
An Appendix
52
292 START X_J
biomass
ASH
0.4671000000000000E-01 {~~
}
293 START X_J
biomass
H2O-L
0.1000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
294 START M
heatsink-char
402
0.3481151556709223E+00 {~~}
295 START H
heatsink-char
402 -0.2532770862844226E+04 {~~}
296 START M
heatsink-char
403 -0.3481151556709223E+00 {~~}
297 START P
403
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
298 START H
heatsink-char
403 -0.2982770862844226E+04 {~~}
299 START Q
heatsink-char
311 -0.1566518200519150E+03 {~~}
300 START M
char-cooler
501
0.4717475226382719E-01 {~~}
301 START P
501
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
302 START H
char-cooler
501 -0.1590800121496925E+05 {~~}
303 START M
char-cooler
503 -0.4717475226382719E-01 {~~}
304 START P
503
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
305 START H
char-cooler
503 -0.1258733046346574E+05 {~~}
306 START Q
char-cooler
311
0.1566518200519150E+03 {~~}
307 START M
steam-to_H2O
503
0.4717475226382719E-01 {~~}
308 START H
steam-to_H2O
503 -0.1258733046346574E+05 {~~}
309 START M
steam-to_H2O
504 -0.4717475226382719E-01 {~~}
310 START H
steam-to_H2O
504 -0.1258733046346574E+05 {~~}
311 START Q
steam-to_H2O
304
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
312 START M
split-gas
1
0.5527106374073034E+01 {~~}
313 START H
split-gas
1 -0.8618386438984120E+04 {~~}
314 START M
split-gas
4 -0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
315 START P
4
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
316 START H
split-gas
4 -0.8618386438984120E+04 {~~}
317 START M
split-gas
2 -0.4592489174127645E+01 {~~}
318 START P
2
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
319 START H
split-gas
2 -0.8618386438984120E+04 {~~}
320 START M
recycle-blower
2
0.4592489174127645E+01 {~~}
321 START H
recycle-blower
2 -0.8618386438984120E+04 {~~}
322 START M
recycle-blower
702 -0.4592489174127645E+01 {~~}
323 START P
702
0.1010000000000000E+01 {~~}
324 START H
recycle-blower
702 -0.8613681898108422E+04 {~~}
325 START Q
recycle-blower
303 -0.4409296539014110E+00 {~~}
326 START W
recycle-blower
101
0.2204648269478200E+02 {~~}
327 START M
pyro-reactor-heat
3
0.4592489174127645E+01 {~~}
328 START P
3
0.1010000000000000E+01 {~~}
329 START H
pyro-reactor-heat
3 -0.8238301074256060E+04 {~~}
330 START M
pyro-reactor-heat
1 -0.4592489174127645E+01 {~~}
331 START H
pyro-reactor-heat
1 -0.8618386438984120E+04 {~~}
332 START Q
pyro-reactor-heat
300 -0.1745537922757965E+04 {~~}
333 START M
heatex1
11
0.6605563675881373E+00 {~~}
334 START P
11
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
335 START H
heatex1
11 -0.2922525332664899E+04 {~~}
336 START M
heatex1
14 -0.6605563675881373E+00 {~~}
337 START P
14
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
338 START H
heatex1
14 -0.3951723551156047E+04 {~~}
339 START M
heatex1
702
0.4592489174127645E+01 {~~}
340 START H
heatex1
702 -0.8613681898108422E+04 {~~}
341 START M
heatex1
703 -0.4592489174127645E+01 {~~}
342 START P
703
0.1010000000000000E+01 {~~}
343 START H
heatex1
703 -0.8465648138864159E+04 {~~}
344 START Q
heatex1
314
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
==PAGE:61==
An Appendix
53
345 START ZA
heatex1
1
0.6798434367346949E+03 {~~}
346 START M
heatex2
18
0.1118288882760438E+01 {~~}
347 START P
18
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
348 START H
heatex2
18 -0.6973835384936592E+04 {~~}
349 START M
heatex2
10 -0.1118288882760438E+01 {~~}
350 START P
10
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
351 START H
heatex2
10 -0.7907484059333770E+04 {~~}
352 START M
heatex2
703
0.4592489174127645E+01 {~~}
353 START H
heatex2
703 -0.8465648138864159E+04 {~~}
354 START M
heatex2
3 -0.4592489174127645E+01 {~~}
355 START H
heatex2
3 -0.8238301074256060E+04 {~~}
356 START Q
heatex2
317
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
357 START ZA
heatex2
1
0.1044088932982385E+04 {~~}
358 START M
condenser-oil
604
0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
359 START H
condenser-oil
604 -0.1804874671670658E+04 {~~}
360 START M
condenser-oil
605 -0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
361 START P
605
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
362 START H
condenser-oil
605 -0.2184874671670656E+04 {~~}
363 START Q
condenser-oil
310 -0.5318712598725951E+02 {~~}
364 START M
set_temp
605
0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
365 START H
set_temp
605 -0.2184874671670656E+04 {~~}
366 START M
set_temp
606 -0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
367 START P
606
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
368 START H
set_temp
606 -0.2184874671670656E+04 {~~}
369 START ZC
900
0.1100000000000007E+03 {~~}
370 START M
condenser-gas
4
0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
371 START H
condenser-gas
4 -0.8618386438984120E+04 {~~}
372 START M
condenser-gas
5 -0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
373 START P
5
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
374 START H
condenser-gas
5 -0.8952222422387160E+04 {~~}
375 START Q
condenser-gas
310 -0.3120088520491663E+03 {~~}
376 START M
set_temp_gas
5
0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
377 START H
set_temp_gas
5 -0.8952222422387160E+04 {~~}
378 START M
set_temp_gas
66 -0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
379 START P
66
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
380 START H
set_temp_gas
66 -0.8952222422387160E+04 {~~}
381 START M
heat_condensation
606
0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
382 START H
heat_condensation
606 -0.2184874671670656E+04 {~~}
383 START M
heat_condensation
607 -0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
384 START P
607
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
385 START H
heat_condensation
607 -0.2184874671670656E+04 {~~}
386 START Q
heat_condensation
310 -0.1399661210191048E+03 {~~}
387 START Q
heat_condensation
307
0.1399661210191048E+03 {~~}
388 START ZA
heat_condensation
1
0.1000000000000000E+04 {~~}
389 START Q
total-Heat-condenser
310
0.5051620990555306E+03 {~~}
390 START Q
total-Heat-condenser
312 -0.5051620990555306E+03 {~~}
391 START M
split-gas2
13
0.4577325151723011E+00 {~~}
392 START P
13
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
393 START H
split-gas2
13
0.8444475537634738E+03 {~~}
394 START M
split-gas2
7 -0.1716716828150492E+00 {~~}
395 START P
7
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
396 START H
split-gas2
7
0.8444475537634738E+03 {~~}
397 START M
split-gas2
40 -0.2860608323572518E+00 {~~}
398 START P
40
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
399 START H
split-gas2
40
0.8444475537634738E+03 {~~}
==PAGE:62==
An Appendix
54
400 START M
heatex3
14
0.6605563675881373E+00 {~~}
401 START H
heatex3
14 -0.3951723551156046E+04 {~~}
402 START M
heatex3
15 -0.6605563675881373E+00 {~~}
403 START P
15
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
404 START H
heatex3
15 -0.4748922592684385E+04 {~~}
405 START M
heatex3
66
0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
406 START H
heatex3
66 -0.8952222422387160E+04 {~~}
407 START M
heatex3
6 -0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
408 START P
6
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
409 START H
heatex3
6 -0.8388788640997867E+04 {~~}
410 START Q
heatex3
318
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
411 START ZA
heatex3
1
0.5265949031167029E+03 {~~}
412 START M
mixer
6
0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
413 START H
mixer
6 -0.8388788640997867E+04 {~~}
414 START M
mixer
7
0.1716716828150492E+00 {~~}
415 START H
mixer
7
0.8444475537634738E+03 {~~}
416 START M
mixer
8 -0.1106288882760438E+01 {~~}
417 START P
8
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
418 START H
mixer
8 -0.6955993626888750E+04 {~~}
419 START Y_J
mix
H2
0.1079198688764870E+00 {~~
}
420 START Y_J
mix
O2
0.1038111842548164E+00 {~~
}
421 START Y_J
mix
N2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
422 START Y_J
mix
CO
0.1807463290997250E+00 {~~
}
423 START Y_J
mix
NO
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
424 START Y_J
mix
CO2
0.6198201810774891E-01 {~~
}
425 START Y_J
mix
H2O-G
0.4795399166666595E+00 {~~
}
426 START Y_J
mix
NH3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
427 START Y_J
mix
H2S
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
428 START Y_J
mix
SO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
429 START Y_J
mix
CH4
0.4375163178377015E-01 {~~
}
430 START Y_J
mix
C2H6
0.1112452560539660E-01 {~~
}
431 START Y_J
mix
C3H8
0.2416563614655440E-02 {~~
}
432 START Y_J
mix
C4H10-N
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
433 START Y_J
mix
C4H10-I
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
434 START Y_J
mix
C5H12
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
435 START Y_J
mix
C6H14
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
436 START Y_J
mix
C7H16
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
==PAGE:63==
An Appendix
55
437 START Y_J
mix
C8H18
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
438 START Y_J
mix
C2H4
0.5124781458665849E-02 {~~
}
439 START Y_J
mix
C3H6
0.3583180532075309E-02 {~~
}
440 START Y_J
mix
C5H10
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
441 START Y_J
mix
C6H12-1
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
442 START Y_J
mix
C7H14
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
443 START Y_J
mix
C2H2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
444 START Y_J
mix
C6H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
445 START Y_J
mix
C6H12-C
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
446 START Y_J
mix
C
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
447 START Y_J
mix
S
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
448 START Y_J
mix
NO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
449 START Y_J
mix
HCN
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
450 START Y_J
mix
COS
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
451 START Y_J
mix
N2O
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
452 START Y_J
mix
NO3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
453 START Y_J
mix
SO3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
454 START Y_J
mix
AR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
455 START Y_J
mix
ASH
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
456 START Y_J
mix
TAR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
457 START Y_J
mix
CH3OH
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
458 START Y_J
mix
C2H5OH
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
459 START Y_J
mix
C2H5OH-L
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
460 START Y_J
mix
CH3OCH3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
461 START Y_J
mix
CH3OCH3-L
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
462 START M
Gibbs_reactor
8
0.1106288882760438E+01 {~~}
463 START H
Gibbs_reactor
8 -0.6955993626888750E+04 {~~}
464 START M
Gibbs_reactor
9 -0.1106288882760438E+01 {~~}
465 START P
9
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
466 START H
Gibbs_reactor
9 -0.6955993626888750E+04 {~~}
==PAGE:64==
An Appendix
56
467 START Q
Gibbs_reactor
313
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
468 START ZA
Gibbs_reactor
1
0.1326409013582656E+06 {~~}
469 START ZA
Gibbs_reactor
2
0.1526248674348709E+06 {~~}
470 START ZA
Gibbs_reactor
3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
471 START ZA
Gibbs_reactor
4
0.3325429494063725E+06 {~~}
472 START ZA
Gibbs_reactor
5
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
473 START ZA
Gibbs_reactor
6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
474 START ZA
Gibbs_reactor
7 -0.5365483938193338E+06 {~~}
475 START ZA
Gibbs_reactor
8
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
476 START ZA
Gibbs_reactor
9
0.1300000000000000E+04 {~~}
477 START ZA
Gibbs_reactor
10
0.8376641873471084E+03 {~~}
478 START Y_J
product_gas
H2
0.2138789949344949E+00 {~~
}
479 START Y_J
product_gas
O2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
480 START Y_J
product_gas
N2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
481 START Y_J
product_gas
CO
0.1774712499734697E+00 {~~
}
482 START Y_J
product_gas
NO
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
483 START Y_J
product_gas
CO2
0.1357110417305665E+00 {~~
}
484 START Y_J
product_gas
H2O-G
0.4729387066632205E+00 {~~
}
485 START Y_J
product_gas
NH3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
486 START Y_J
product_gas
H2S
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
487 START Y_J
product_gas
SO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
488 START Y_J
product_gas
CH4
0.6698248475470123E-08 {~~
}
489 START Y_J
product_gas
C2H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
490 START Y_J
product_gas
C3H8
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
491 START Y_J
product_gas
C4H10-N
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
492 START Y_J
product_gas
C4H10-I
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
493 START Y_J
product_gas
C5H12
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
494 START Y_J
product_gas
C6H14
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
495 START Y_J
product_gas
C7H16
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
496 START Y_J
product_gas
C8H18
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
497 START Y_J
product_gas
C2H4
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
498 START Y_J
product_gas
C3H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
499 START Y_J
product_gas
C5H10
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
==PAGE:65==
An Appendix
57
500 START Y_J
product_gas
C6H12-1
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
501 START Y_J
product_gas
C7H14
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
502 START Y_J
product_gas
C2H2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
503 START Y_J
product_gas
C6H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
504 START Y_J
product_gas
C6H12-C
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
505 START Y_J
product_gas
C
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
506 START Y_J
product_gas
S
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
507 START Y_J
product_gas
NO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
508 START Y_J
product_gas
HCN
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
509 START Y_J
product_gas
COS
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
510 START Y_J
product_gas
N2O
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
511 START Y_J
product_gas
NO3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
512 START Y_J
product_gas
SO3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
513 START Y_J
product_gas
AR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
514 START Y_J
product_gas
H2O-L
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
515 START Y_J
product_gas
ASH
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
516 START Y_J
product_gas
TAR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
517 START Y_J
product_gas
CH3OH
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
518 START Y_J
product_gas
CH3OH-L
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
519 START Y_J
product_gas
C2H5OH
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
520 START Y_J
product_gas
C2H5OH-L
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
521 START Y_J
product_gas
CH3OCH3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
522 START Y_J
product_gas
CH3OCH3-L
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
523 START M
mixer2
9
0.1106288882760438E+01 {~~}
524 START H
mixer2
9 -0.6955993626888750E+04 {~~}
525 START M
mixer2
44
0.1200000000000000E-01 {~~}
526 START P
44
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
527 START H
mixer2
44 -0.8618680266372223E+04 {~~}
528 START M
mixer2
18 -0.1118288882760438E+01 {~~}
529 START H
mixer2
18 -0.6973835384936592E+04 {~~}
530 START Y_J
mix2
H2
0.2129619069369655E+00 {~~
}
==PAGE:66==
An Appendix
58
531 START Y_J
mix2
O2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
532 START Y_J
mix2
N2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
533 START Y_J
mix2
CO
0.1766310368144292E+00 {~~
}
534 START Y_J
mix2
NO
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
535 START Y_J
mix2
CO2
0.1394208676967154E+00 {~~
}
536 START Y_J
mix2
H2O-G
0.4704152661950401E+00 {~~
}
537 START Y_J
mix2
NH3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
538 START Y_J
mix2
H2S
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
539 START Y_J
mix2
SO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
540 START Y_J
mix2
CH4
0.1387338405730286E-03 {~~
}
541 START Y_J
mix2
C2H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
542 START Y_J
mix2
C3H8
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
543 START Y_J
mix2
C4H10-N
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
544 START Y_J
mix2
C4H10-I
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
545 START Y_J
mix2
C5H12
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
546 START Y_J
mix2
C6H14
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
547 START Y_J
mix2
C7H16
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
548 START Y_J
mix2
C8H18
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
549 START Y_J
mix2
C2H4
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
550 START Y_J
mix2
C3H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
551 START Y_J
mix2
C5H10
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
552 START Y_J
mix2
C6H12-1
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
553 START Y_J
mix2
C7H14
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
554 START Y_J
mix2
C2H2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
555 START Y_J
mix2
C6H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
556 START Y_J
mix2
C6H12-C
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
557 START Y_J
mix2
C
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
558 START Y_J
mix2
S
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
==PAGE:67==
An Appendix
59
}
559 START Y_J
mix2
NO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
560 START Y_J
mix2
HCN
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
561 START Y_J
mix2
COS
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
562 START Y_J
mix2
N2O
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
563 START Y_J
mix2
NO3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
564 START Y_J
mix2
SO3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
565 START Y_J
mix2
AR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
566 START Y_J
mix2
ASH
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
567 START Y_J
mix2
TAR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
568 START Y_J
mix2
CH3OH
0.4321885162767259E-03 {~~
}
569 START Y_J
mix2
C2H5OH
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
570 START Y_J
mix2
C2H5OH-L
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
571 START Y_J
mix2
CH3OCH3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
572 START Y_J
mix2
CH3OCH3-L
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
573 START M
sofc
10
0.1118288882760438E+01 {~~}
574 START H
sofc
10 -0.7907484059333771E+04 {~~}
575 START M
sofc
12
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
576 START P
12
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
577 START H
sofc
12
0.7892060215075919E+03 {~~}
578 START M
sofc
11 -0.6605563675881373E+00 {~~}
579 START H
sofc
11 -0.2922525332664899E+04 {~~}
580 START M
sofc
13 -0.4577325151723011E+00 {~~}
581 START H
sofc
13
0.8444475537634738E+03 {~~}
582 START E
sofc
201
0.7447086928827825E+04 {~~}
583 START Q
sofc
315
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
584 START Q
sofc
316 -0.1481970298836733E+03 {~~}
585 START ZC
909 -0.7447086928827825E+04 {~~}
586 START ZC
910
0.1335446419570991E+01 {~~}
587 START ZA
sofc
1
0.8539891842041042E+05 {~~}
588 START ZA
sofc
2
0.3264792870326959E+05 {~~}
589 START ZA
sofc
3
0.2250272476707375E+06 {~~}
590 START ZA
sofc
4
0.3315551240054293E+06 {~~}
591 START ZA
sofc
5 -0.2653598637685105E+06 {~~}
592 START ZA
sofc
6
0.7649076843343398E+00 {~~}
593 START ZA
sofc
7
0.1347197833230568E+01 {~~}
594 START ZA
sofc
8 -0.5527149330989569E+00 {~~}
595 START ZA
sofc
9
0.1030481974956634E+01 {~~}
596 START ZA
sofc
10
0.1487758362003651E+01 {~~}
597 START ZA
sofc
11
0.9912771432897889E+00 {~~}
598 START ZA
sofc
12
0.1335446419570991E+01 {~~}
==PAGE:68==
An Appendix
60
599 START ZA
sofc
13
0.5520712738072998E+03 {~~}
600 START ZA
sofc
14 -0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
601 START ZA
sofc
15
0.9900000000000000E+00 {~~}
602 START ZA
sofc
16
0.1000000000000000E+00 {~~}
603 START ZA
sofc
17
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
604 START ZA
sofc
18
0.1040890883794579E+01 {~~}
605 START ZA
sofc
19 -0.1307633342423420E+01 {~~}
606 START ZA
sofc
20
0.3441692762812021E+00 {~~}
607 START ZA
sofc
21
0.4323876611278524E+01 {~~}
608 START ZA
sofc
22
0.6518518085482404E+00 {~~}
609 START ZA
sofc
23
0.1507563390795962E+00 {~~}
610 START ZA
sofc
24
0.1973918523721633E+00 {~~}
611 START ZA
sofc
25
0.5242245455127975E+00 {~~}
612 START ZA
sofc
26
0.1212394785145800E+00 {~~}
613 START ZA
sofc
27
0.3545359759726224E+00 {~~}
614 START ZA
sofc
28
0.9607154943604546E+00 {~~}
615 START ZA
sofc
29
0.9242134326975757E+00 {~~}
616 START ZA
sofc
30
0.9242134326975757E+00 {~~}
617 START ZA
sofc
31
0.9242134326975761E+00 {~~}
618 START ZA
sofc
32
0.9242134326975761E+00 {~~}
619 START ZA
sofc
33
0.1067454368422413E+01 {~~}
620 START ZA
sofc
34
0.1067454368422413E+01 {~~}
621 START ZA
sofc
35
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
622 START ZA
sofc
36
0.2679920511485782E+00 {~~}
623 START ZA
sofc
37
0.1000000000000000E-01 {~~}
624 START ZA
sofc
38
0.1335446419570991E+00 {~~}
625 START Y_J
USEDFUEL
H2
0.6124924004812160E+00 {~~
}
626 START Y_J
USEDFUEL
CO
0.2856956772134426E+00 {~~
}
627 START Y_J
USEDFUEL
CO2
0.2990018886871776E-01 {~~
}
628 START Y_J
USEDFUEL
H2O-G
0.7009981113128225E-01 {~~
}
629 START Y_J
USEDFUEL
CH4
0.1811922305341436E-02 {~~
}
630 START Y_J
USEDFUEL
N2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
631 START Y_J
USEDAIR
O2
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~
}
632 START Y_J
USEDAIR
N2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
633 START Y_J
USEDAIR
CO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
634 START Y_J
USEDAIR
H2O-G
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
635 START Y_J
USEDAIR
AR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
636 C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
637 C ~~ End of generated initial guesses.
638 C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.
==PAGE:69==
An Appendix
61
DNA code for Electricity Production Mode
1
2 fluid steam-gas H2O-G 1
3
4 struc pyro PYRO_OIL 2 401 504 402 604 1 300 302 307 901 902 903 904 /
5
905 906 907 908
6 media 401 biomass 504 steam-gas 402 char-ash 604 bio-oil 1 gas
7
8 addco p 401 1 p 504 1 p 402 1 p 604 1 p 1 1
9 c addco m pyro 1 90
10 addco t pyro 401 15
11 addco t pyro 504 450
12 addco t pyro 402 500
13 addco t pyro 1 300
14 addco zc 901 20e3
15
16 addco za pyro 62 22.3 {wt% H2O formed MAF}
17
18 addco za pyro 24 0.58 {fraction of C to gas and oil phase}
19 addco za pyro 70 0.323 {C_oil/(C_oil+C_gas)}
20 addco za pyro 15 1 {total LHV efficiency}
21 addco za pyro 72 0.03 {heat loss / biomass}
22
23 c biomass (dry)
24 c addco za pyro 27 49.39 {wt% dry C}
25 addco za pyro 28 6.16 {wt% dry H}
26 addco za pyro 29 45.32 {wt% dry O}
27 addco za pyro 30 .3 {wt% dry N}
28 addco za pyro 31 5.19 {wt% dry ASH}
29 addco za pyro 32 10 {wt% H2O}
30
31 c biomass HHV and cp
32 addco ZA pyro 1 17500
33 addco ZA pyro 9 1.35
34
35 c char-ash Wt%
36 addco za pyro 33 64.27 {wt% C}
37 addco za pyro 34 2.39
{wt% H}
38 c addco za pyro 35 11.7
{wt% ash}
39
40 c C4+ liquids wt%
41 addco za pyro 36 71.3
{wt% C}
42 addco za pyro 38 18
{wt% O}
43 addco za pyro 71 2.4
{wt% N}
44
45 c gas composition
46 c addco za pyro 39 12.04
{vol% H2 dry}
47 c addco za pyro 40 80
{vol% CO dry}
48 c addco za pyro 42 30
{vol% CO2 dry}
49 c addco za pyro 42 45.19
{vol% CO2 dry}
50 c addco za pyro 46 2.42
{vol% CH4 dry}
51 c addco za pyro 46 15.42
{vol% CH4 dry}
52 addco za pyro 47 0
{vol% C2H6 dry}
53 addco za pyro 48 0
{vol% C3H8 dry}
==PAGE:70==
An Appendix
62
54 addco za pyro 49 0
{vol% C2H4 dry}
55 addco za pyro 50 0
{vol% C3H6 dry}
56 c addco za pyro 41 80
{vol% H2O}
57
58 c HHV's (cgar-ash, C1-3)
59 c addco ZA pyro 3 25400
{char-ash}
60
61 c cp's
62 addco ZA pyro 10 1
{char-ash}
63 addco ZA pyro 11 2
{C4+}
64
65 addco za pyro 25 100
{molar weight of C4+}
66
67 zcname 901 LHV_flow_bio
68 c ZC 901 = LHV_flow_bio
[kW]
69 c ZC 902 = m_bio_MAF
[kg/s]
70 c ZC 903 = m_H2O_bio
[kg/s]
71 c ZC 904 = m_H2_conv_pyro [kg/s]
72
73 struc heatsink-char HEATSNK0_1 402 403 311 0
74 addco t heatsink-char 403 50
75
76 struc char-cooler heatsrc0 501 503 311 0
77 media 501 STEAM-HF
78 addco t char-cooler 501 15
79
80 struc steam-to_H2O REAL_IDEALGAS3 503 504 304
81 addco q steam-to_H2O 304 0
82
83 struc split-gas splitter 1 4 2
84
85 struc recycle-blower compre_1 2 702 303 101 0.5 0.98
86
87 struc pyro-reactor-heat heatsnk0 3 1 300 0.01
88 addco t pyro-reactor-heat 1 300
89
90 struc condenser-oil HEATSNK0_1 604 605 310 0
91
92 struc set_temp SET_TEMP_SOLID 605 606 900
93
94 struc condenser-gas heatsnk0 4 5 310 0
95 addco t condenser-gas 5 110
96
97 struc set_temp_gas SET_TEMP 5 66 900
98
99 struc heat_condensation HEAT_AND_FLOW 606 607 310 307
100 addco za heat_condensation 1 1e3
101
102 struc total-Heat-condenser HEAT_NODE 310 312
103
104 struc int_reformer GIBBS_REACTOR 5 67 6 315 5 1 4 6 7 11
105 media 6 ref_gas
106 addco t int_reformer 6 800
107 c addco q int_reformer 315 0
108 addco za int_reformer 8 0
==PAGE:71==
An Appendix
63
109
110 struc sofc sofceq0d_CBM_LRC2 /
111 {fuel and air inlets} 6 12 /
112 {fuel and air outlets} 11 13 /
113 {nodes for power and heat loss} 201 315 316 909 910 /
114 {pressure loss ratios} 0 0.01
115 media 12 SIMPLE_AIR 11 USEDFUEL 13 USEDAIR
116
117 addco t sofc 12 800
118 addco t sofc 11 850
119 c addco q sofc 315 0
120
121 addco za sofc 13 552
122 C addco za sofc 14 -1
123 addco za sofc 15 0.99
124 c addco za sofc 16 0.8
125 addco za sofc 20 0.34
126
127 addco za sofc 35 0
128 addco za sofc 38 0.1335
129
130 struc split-gas2 splitter 13 14 15
131
132 STRUC burner GASBUR_3 14 11 16 317 1
133 media 16 flue_gas
134 addco Q burner 317 0
135
136 struc recycle-blower_2 compre_1 9 10 333 111 0.5 0.98
137 addco p 9 1.0
138 addco T recycle-blower_2 9 15
139 C ~start T recycle-blower_2 9 14.5
140 C ~start Q recycle-blower_2 333 -5
141 C ~start W recycle-blower_2 111 50
142
143 STRUC heatex1 heatex_2 16 17 10 12 318 50 0 0.03
144 addco Q heatex1 318 0
145
146 STRUC heatex2 heatex_1 15 18 66 67 319 0 0.0
147 addco Q heatex2 319 0
148 addco T heatex2 67 800
149
150 STRUC heatex3 heatex_2 18 19 702 3 320 50 0 0.0
151 addco Q heatex3 320 0
152 addco T heatex3 3 500
153
154
155 C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
156 C ~~ Start of list of generated initial guesses.
157 C ~~ The values are the results of the latest simulation.
158 C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
159 START M
pyro
401
0.1375523724371589E+01 {~~}
160 START P
401
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
161 START H
pyro
401 -0.6979870188292087E+04 {~~}
==PAGE:72==
An Appendix
64
162 START M
pyro
504
0.4717475226382720E-01 {~~}
163 START P
504
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
164 START H
pyro
504 -0.1258733046346574E+05 {~~}
165 START M
pyro
402 -0.3481151556709223E+00 {~~}
166 START P
402
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
167 START H
pyro
402 -0.2532770862844225E+04 {~~}
168 START M
pyro
604 -0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
169 START P
604
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
170 START H
pyro
604 -0.1804874671670733E+04 {~~}
171 START M
pyro
1 -0.9346171999453888E+00 {~~}
172 START P
1
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
173 START H
pyro
1 -0.8621009599018349E+04 {~~}
174 START Q
pyro
300
0.1743086272271755E+04 {~~}
175 START Q
pyro
302 -0.6000000000000000E+03 {~~}
176 START Q
pyro
307 -0.1399661210191048E+03 {~~}
177 START ZC
901
0.2000000000000000E+05 {~~}
178 START ZC
902
0.1173720638769033E+01 {~~}
179 START ZC
903
0.1375523724371589E+00 {~~}
180 START ZC
904 -0.9865750133213154E-02 {~~}
181 START ZC
905
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
182 START ZC
906
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
183 START ZC
907
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
184 START ZC
908
0.4717475226382720E-01 {~~}
185 START ZA
pyro
1
0.1750000000000000E+05 {~~}
186 START ZA
pyro
2
0.1747997389893978E+05 {~~}
187 START ZA
pyro
3
0.2372286240755282E+05 {~~}
188 START ZA
pyro
4
0.2333342517777413E+05 {~~}
189 START ZA
pyro
5
0.3277327975183708E+05 {~~}
190 START ZA
pyro
6
0.3277327975183708E+05 {~~}
191 START ZA
pyro
7
0.2320119939672469E+05 {~~}
192 START ZA
pyro
8
0.3096164670168081E+05 {~~}
193 START ZA
pyro
9
0.1350000000000000E+01 {~~}
194 START ZA
pyro
10
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
195 START ZA
pyro
11
0.2000000000000000E+01 {~~}
196 START ZA
pyro
12
0.8076689139742924E+04 {~~}
197 START ZA
pyro
13
0.4333581589198222E+04 {~~}
198 START ZA
pyro
14
0.8715431361358772E-01 {~~}
199 START ZA
pyro
15
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
200 START ZA
pyro
16
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
201 START ZA
pyro
17
0.4038344569871462E+00 {~~}
202 START ZA
pyro
18
0.2166790794599111E+00 {~~}
203 START ZA
pyro
19
0.1737104988212775E+00 {~~}
204 START ZA
pyro
20 -0.5917150029053579E-01 {~~}
205 START ZA
pyro
21
0.1495225667047520E+00 {~~}
206 START ZA
pyro
22
0.2811980706394896E+00 {~~}
207 START ZA
pyro
23
0.4490502433064422E-01 {~~}
208 START ZA
pyro
24
0.5800000000000000E+00 {~~}
209 START ZA
pyro
25
0.9999999999999999E+02 {~~}
210 START ZA
pyro
26
0.1009211188724436E+02 {~~}
211 START ZA
pyro
27
0.4302999999999999E+02 {~~}
212 START ZA
pyro
28
0.6160000000000000E+01 {~~}
213 START ZA
pyro
29
0.4532000000000000E+02 {~~}
214 START ZA
pyro
30
0.3000000000000000E+00 {~~}
215 START ZA
pyro
31
0.5190000000000000E+01 {~~}
216 START ZA
pyro
32
0.1000000000000000E+02 {~~}
==PAGE:73==
An Appendix
65
217 START ZA
pyro
33
0.6427000000000000E+02 {~~}
218 START ZA
pyro
34
0.2390000000000000E+01 {~~}
219 START ZA
pyro
35
0.1845674114405233E+02 {~~}
220 START ZA
pyro
36
0.7130000000000000E+02 {~~}
221 START ZA
pyro
37
0.8299999999999853E+01 {~~}
222 START ZA
pyro
38
0.1800000000000000E+02 {~~}
223 START ZA
pyro
39
0.2193653275884576E+02 {~~}
224 START ZA
pyro
40
0.4736864715477203E+02 {~~}
225 START ZA
pyro
41
0.5262662980401274E+02 {~~}
226 START ZA
pyro
42
0.1160990918307302E+02 {~~}
227 START ZA
pyro
43
0.2959943641292657E+00 {~~}
228 START ZA
pyro
44
0.1139860726215736E+00 {~~}
229 START ZA
pyro
45
0.4464668271464804E+00 {~~}
230 START ZA
pyro
46
0.1908491090330920E+02 {~~}
231 START ZA
pyro
47
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
232 START ZA
pyro
48
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
233 START ZA
pyro
49
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
234 START ZA
pyro
50
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
235 START ZA
pyro
51
0.9999999999999999E+02 {~~}
236 START ZA
pyro
52
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
237 START ZA
pyro
53
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
238 START ZA
pyro
54
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
239 START ZA
pyro
55
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
240 START ZA
pyro
56
0.6830418591485621E-01 {~~}
241 START ZA
pyro
57
0.1192499444892590E+02 {~~}
242 START ZA
pyro
58
0.5819458537126162E+01 {~~}
243 START ZA
pyro
59
0.9711516425332618E+01 {~~}
244 START ZA
pyro
60
0.2521846803679764E+02 {~~}
245 START ZA
pyro
61
0.2418500903274861E+02 {~~}
246 START ZA
pyro
62
0.2230000000000000E+02 {~~}
247 START ZA
pyro
63 -0.8405535190690769E+00 {~~}
248 START ZA
pyro
64
0.4740194828699162E+01 {~~}
249 START ZA
pyro
65
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
250 START ZA
pyro
66
0.5448876228471349E-01 {~~}
251 START ZA
pyro
67
0.2491957254850550E-03 {~~}
252 START ZA
pyro
68
0.2689121338912134E+02 {~~}
253 START ZA
pyro
69
0.4348043903684992E+01 {~~}
254 START ZA
pyro
70
0.3230000000000000E+00 {~~}
255 START ZA
pyro
71
0.2400000000000000E+01 {~~}
256 START ZA
pyro
72
0.3000000000000000E-01 {~~}
257 START ZA
pyro
73
0.5936225126966956E+01 {~~}
258 START ZA
pyro
74
0.1029722518747219E+01 {~~}
259 START X_J
char-ash
H2
0.2390000000000000E-01 {~~
}
260 START X_J
char-ash
C
0.6426999999999999E+00 {~~
}
261 START X_J
char-ash
O2
0.1478135948570592E+00 {~~
}
262 START X_J
char-ash
N2
0.1018993702417550E-02 {~~
}
263 START X_J
char-ash
ASH
0.1845674114405233E+00 {~~
}
264 START X_J
char-ash
AR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
265 START X_J
char-ash
S
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
==PAGE:74==
An Appendix
66
}
266 START X_J
bio-oil
H2
0.8299999999999857E-01 {~~
}
267 START X_J
bio-oil
C
0.7130000000000000E+00 {~~
}
268 START X_J
bio-oil
O2
0.1800000000000000E+00 {~~
}
269 START X_J
bio-oil
N2
0.2400000000000000E-01 {~~
}
270 START X_J
bio-oil
H2O-G
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
271 START Y_J
gas
H2
0.1039207487201202E+00 {~~
}
272 START Y_J
gas
H2O-G
0.5262662980401275E+00 {~~
}
273 START Y_J
gas
CO
0.2244012457346114E+00 {~~
}
274 START Y_J
gas
CO2
0.5500005256715101E-01 {~~
}
275 START Y_J
gas
CH4
0.9041165493799000E-01 {~~
}
276 START Y_J
gas
C2H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
277 START Y_J
gas
C3H8
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
278 START Y_J
gas
C2H4
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
279 START Y_J
gas
C3H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
280 START X_J
biomass
H2
0.5544000000000000E-01 {~~
}
281 START X_J
biomass
C
0.3872699999999999E+00 {~~
}
282 START X_J
biomass
O2
0.4078800000000000E+00 {~~
}
283 START X_J
biomass
N2
0.2700000000000001E-02 {~~
}
284 START X_J
biomass
ASH
0.4671000000000000E-01 {~~
}
285 START X_J
biomass
H2O-L
0.9999999999999999E-01 {~~
}
286 START M
heatsink-char
402
0.3481151556709223E+00 {~~}
287 START H
heatsink-char
402 -0.2532770862844225E+04 {~~}
288 START M
heatsink-char
403 -0.3481151556709223E+00 {~~}
289 START P
403
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
290 START H
heatsink-char
403 -0.2982770862844225E+04 {~~}
291 START Q
heatsink-char
311 -0.1566518200519150E+03 {~~}
292 START M
char-cooler
501
0.4717475226382720E-01 {~~}
293 START P
501
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
294 START H
char-cooler
501 -0.1590800121496925E+05 {~~}
295 START M
char-cooler
503 -0.4717475226382720E-01 {~~}
296 START P
503
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
297 START H
char-cooler
503 -0.1258733046346574E+05 {~~}
298 START Q
char-cooler
311
0.1566518200519150E+03 {~~}
299 START M
steam-to_H2O
503
0.4717475226382720E-01 {~~}
==PAGE:75==
An Appendix
67
300 START H
steam-to_H2O
503 -0.1258733046346574E+05 {~~}
301 START M
steam-to_H2O
504 -0.4717475226382720E-01 {~~}
302 START H
steam-to_H2O
504 -0.1258733046346574E+05 {~~}
303 START Q
steam-to_H2O
304
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
304 START M
split-gas
1
0.5569786793819914E+01 {~~}
305 START H
split-gas
1 -0.8621009599018347E+04 {~~}
306 START M
split-gas
4 -0.9346171999453888E+00 {~~}
307 START P
4
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
308 START H
split-gas
4 -0.8621009599018349E+04 {~~}
309 START M
split-gas
2 -0.4635169593874525E+01 {~~}
310 START P
2
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
311 START H
split-gas
2 -0.8621009599018349E+04 {~~}
312 START M
recycle-blower
2
0.4635169593874525E+01 {~~}
313 START H
recycle-blower
2 -0.8621009599018349E+04 {~~}
314 START M
recycle-blower
702 -0.4635169593874525E+01 {~~}
315 START P
702
0.1010000000000000E+01 {~~}
316 START H
recycle-blower
702 -0.8616226054878931E+04 {~~}
317 START Q
recycle-blower
303 -0.4525007825686599E+00 {~~}
318 START W
recycle-blower
101
0.2262503912855835E+02 {~~}
319 START M
pyro-reactor-heat
3
0.4635169593874525E+01 {~~}
320 START P
3
0.1010000000000000E+01 {~~}
321 START H
pyro-reactor-heat
3 -0.8244952965713004E+04 {~~}
322 START M
pyro-reactor-heat
1 -0.4635169593874525E+01 {~~}
323 START H
pyro-reactor-heat
1 -0.8621009599018349E+04 {~~}
324 START Q
pyro-reactor-heat
300 -0.1743086272271755E+04 {~~}
325 START M
condenser-oil
604
0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
326 START H
condenser-oil
604 -0.1804874671670733E+04 {~~}
327 START M
condenser-oil
605 -0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
328 START P
605
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
329 START H
condenser-oil
605 -0.2184874671670732E+04 {~~}
330 START Q
condenser-oil
310 -0.5318712598725963E+02 {~~}
331 START M
set_temp
605
0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
332 START H
set_temp
605 -0.2184874671670732E+04 {~~}
333 START M
set_temp
606 -0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
334 START P
606
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
335 START H
set_temp
606 -0.2184874671670732E+04 {~~}
336 START ZC
900
0.1100000000000003E+03 {~~}
337 START M
condenser-gas
4
0.9346171999453888E+00 {~~}
338 START H
condenser-gas
4 -0.8621009599018349E+04 {~~}
339 START M
condenser-gas
5 -0.9346171999453888E+00 {~~}
340 START P
5
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
341 START H
condenser-gas
5 -0.8952463030459068E+04 {~~}
342 START Q
condenser-gas
310 -0.3097820780054153E+03 {~~}
343 START M
set_temp_gas
5
0.9346171999453888E+00 {~~}
344 START H
set_temp_gas
5 -0.8952463030459068E+04 {~~}
345 START M
set_temp_gas
66 -0.9346171999453888E+00 {~~}
346 START P
66
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
347 START H
set_temp_gas
66 -0.8952463030459068E+04 {~~}
348 START M
heat_condensation
606
0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
349 START H
heat_condensation
606 -0.2184874671670732E+04 {~~}
350 START M
heat_condensation
607 -0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
351 START P
607
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
352 START H
heat_condensation
607 -0.2184874671670732E+04 {~~}
353 START Q
heat_condensation
310 -0.1399661210191048E+03 {~~}
354 START Q
heat_condensation
307
0.1399661210191048E+03 {~~}
==PAGE:76==
An Appendix
68
355 START ZA
heat_condensation
1
0.9999999999999999E+03 {~~}
356 START Q
total-Heat-condenser
310
0.5029353250117799E+03 {~~}
357 START Q
total-Heat-condenser
312 -0.5029353250117799E+03 {~~}
358 START M
int_reformer
67
0.9346171999453888E+00 {~~}
359 START P
67
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
360 START H
int_reformer
67 -0.7628569910996313E+04 {~~}
361 START M
int_reformer
6 -0.9346171999453888E+00 {~~}
362 START P
6
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
363 START H
int_reformer
6 -0.6778190879312147E+04 {~~}
364 START Q
int_reformer
315
0.7947788694849252E+03 {~~}
365 START ZA
int_reformer
1
0.8291608246768636E+05 {~~}
366 START ZA
int_reformer
2
0.4481631039689473E+05 {~~}
367 START ZA
int_reformer
3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
368 START ZA
int_reformer
4
0.3111733823627802E+06 {~~}
369 START ZA
int_reformer
5
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
370 START ZA
int_reformer
6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
371 START ZA
int_reformer
7 -0.3549164808501994E+06 {~~}
372 START ZA
int_reformer
8
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
373 START ZA
int_reformer
9
0.7999999999999999E+03 {~~}
374 START ZA
int_reformer
10 -0.2410850915519590E-13 {~~}
375 START Y_J
ref_gas
H2
0.4049814232904906E+00 {~~
}
376 START Y_J
ref_gas
O2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
377 START Y_J
ref_gas
N2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
378 START Y_J
ref_gas
CO
0.1786151345099079E+00 {~~
}
379 START Y_J
ref_gas
NO
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
380 START Y_J
ref_gas
CO2
0.1344728170012865E+00 {~~
}
381 START Y_J
ref_gas
H2O-G
0.2816781258563975E+00 {~~
}
382 START Y_J
ref_gas
NH3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
383 START Y_J
ref_gas
H2S
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
384 START Y_J
ref_gas
SO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
385 START Y_J
ref_gas
CH4
0.2524993419175756E-03 {~~
}
386 START Y_J
ref_gas
C2H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
387 START Y_J
ref_gas
C3H8
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
388 START Y_J
ref_gas
C4H10-N
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
389 START Y_J
ref_gas
C4H10-I
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
390 START Y_J
ref_gas
C5H12
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
391 START Y_J
ref_gas
C6H14
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
392 START Y_J
ref_gas
C7H16
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
==PAGE:77==
An Appendix
69
}
393 START Y_J
ref_gas
C8H18
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
394 START Y_J
ref_gas
C2H4
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
395 START Y_J
ref_gas
C3H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
396 START Y_J
ref_gas
C5H10
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
397 START Y_J
ref_gas
C6H12-1
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
398 START Y_J
ref_gas
C7H14
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
399 START Y_J
ref_gas
C2H2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
400 START Y_J
ref_gas
C6H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
401 START Y_J
ref_gas
C6H12-C
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
402 START Y_J
ref_gas
C
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
403 START Y_J
ref_gas
S
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
404 START Y_J
ref_gas
NO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
405 START Y_J
ref_gas
HCN
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
406 START Y_J
ref_gas
COS
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
407 START Y_J
ref_gas
N2O
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
408 START Y_J
ref_gas
NO3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
409 START Y_J
ref_gas
SO3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
410 START Y_J
ref_gas
AR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
411 START Y_J
ref_gas
H2O-L
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
412 START Y_J
ref_gas
ASH
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
413 START Y_J
ref_gas
TAR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
414 START Y_J
ref_gas
CH3OH
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
415 START Y_J
ref_gas
CH3OH-L
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
416 START Y_J
ref_gas
C2H5OH
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
417 START Y_J
ref_gas
C2H5OH-L
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
418 START Y_J
ref_gas
CH3OCH3
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
419 START Y_J
ref_gas
CH3OCH3-L
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
==PAGE:78==
An Appendix
70
420 START M
sofc
6
0.9346171999453888E+00 {~~}
421 START H
sofc
6 -0.6778190879312147E+04 {~~}
422 START M
sofc
12
0.3057043152871332E+02 {~~}
423 START P
12
0.1010000000000000E+01 {~~}
424 START H
sofc
12
0.8372115805917294E+03 {~~}
425 START M
sofc
11 -0.1276628267407722E+01 {~~}
426 START P
11
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
427 START H
sofc
11 -0.8978919213702819E+04 {~~}
428 START M
sofc
13 -0.3022842046125099E+02 {~~}
429 START P
13
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
430 START H
sofc
13
0.8961060503877708E+03 {~~}
431 START E
sofc
201 -0.2737653197116004E+04 {~~}
432 START Q
sofc
315 -0.7947788694849252E+03 {~~}
433 START Q
sofc
316 -0.1013450625971316E+03 {~~}
434 START ZC
909
0.2737653197116004E+04 {~~}
435 START ZC
910
0.6703779029388788E+00 {~~}
436 START ZA
sofc
1
0.9248810980928432E+05 {~~}
437 START ZA
sofc
2
0.7983104913435795E+05 {~~}
438 START ZA
sofc
3
0.2250272476707376E+06 {~~}
439 START ZA
sofc
4
0.2980960322075987E+06 {~~}
440 START ZA
sofc
5 -0.4839161883752840E+06 {~~}
441 START ZA
sofc
6
0.7028864010744502E+00 {~~}
442 START ZA
sofc
7
0.7251611035551817E+00 {~~}
443 START ZA
sofc
8
0.6579109223197069E+00 {~~}
444 START ZA
sofc
9
0.5097058782770785E+00 {~~}
445 START ZA
sofc
10
0.8989523219536145E+00 {~~}
446 START ZA
sofc
11
0.9244537519349527E+00 {~~}
447 START ZA
sofc
12
0.6703779029388788E+00 {~~}
448 START ZA
sofc
13
0.5519999999999999E+03 {~~}
449 START ZA
sofc
14
0.7472819088119824E+00 {~~}
450 START ZA
sofc
15
0.9900000000000000E+00 {~~}
451 START ZA
sofc
16
0.8001148702012987E+00 {~~}
452 START ZA
sofc
17
0.2019503159414938E+00 {~~}
453 START ZA
sofc
18
0.5046088194943077E+00 {~~}
454 START ZA
sofc
19
0.3312916030550107E+00 {~~}
455 START ZA
sofc
20
0.3400000000000000E+00 {~~}
456 START ZA
sofc
21
0.4386057056851898E+01 {~~}
457 START ZA
sofc
22
0.4905642033023739E+00 {~~}
458 START ZA
sofc
23
0.1118462885784887E+00 {~~}
459 START ZA
sofc
24
0.3975895081191374E+00 {~~}
460 START ZA
sofc
25
0.5686310132456226E+00 {~~}
461 START ZA
sofc
26
0.1296451473099985E+00 {~~}
462 START ZA
sofc
27
0.3017238394443789E+00 {~~}
463 START ZA
sofc
28
0.1981733099715038E+01 {~~}
464 START ZA
sofc
29
0.9426128627919200E+00 {~~}
465 START ZA
sofc
30
0.9414264265710531E+00 {~~}
466 START ZA
sofc
31
0.9579656069986612E+00 {~~}
467 START ZA
sofc
32
0.9568319881319912E+00 {~~}
468 START ZA
sofc
33
0.8553584834509227E+00 {~~}
469 START ZA
sofc
34
0.8565449196717890E+00 {~~}
470 START ZA
sofc
35
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
471 START ZA
sofc
36 -0.1861670167329105E+00 {~~}
472 START ZA
sofc
37
0.2664876620488487E-01 {~~}
473 START ZA
sofc
38
0.1335000000000000E+00 {~~}
474 START Y_J
USEDFUEL
H2
0.1341772901854792E+00 {~~
==PAGE:79==
An Appendix
71
}
475 START Y_J
USEDFUEL
CO
0.6570728388963190E-01 {~~
}
476 START Y_J
USEDFUEL
CO2
0.2474748026790928E+00 {~~
}
477 START Y_J
USEDFUEL
H2O-G
0.5526400675222057E+00 {~~
}
478 START Y_J
USEDFUEL
CH4
0.5557235902891570E-06 {~~
}
479 START Y_J
USEDFUEL
N2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
480 START Y_J
USEDAIR
O2
0.2019503159414938E+00 {~~
}
481 START Y_J
USEDAIR
N2
0.7980496840585061E+00 {~~
}
482 START Y_J
USEDAIR
CO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
483 START Y_J
USEDAIR
H2O-G
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
484 START Y_J
USEDAIR
AR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
485 START M
split-gas2
13
0.3022842046125099E+02 {~~}
486 START H
split-gas2
13
0.8961060503877708E+03 {~~}
487 START M
split-gas2
14 -0.2492268518561126E+02 {~~}
488 START P
14
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
489 START H
split-gas2
14
0.8961060503877709E+03 {~~}
490 START M
split-gas2
15 -0.5305735275639742E+01 {~~}
491 START P
15
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
492 START H
split-gas2
15
0.8961060503877709E+03 {~~}
493 START M
burner
14
0.2492268518561126E+02 {~~}
494 START H
burner
14
0.8961060503877709E+03 {~~}
495 START M
burner
11
0.1276628267407722E+01 {~~}
496 START H
burner
11 -0.8978919213702820E+04 {~~}
497 START M
burner
16 -0.2619931345301898E+02 {~~}
498 START P
16
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
499 START H
burner
16
0.4149202965660132E+03 {~~}
500 START Q
burner
317
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
501 START ZA
burner
1
0.3142679254453260E+02 {~~}
502 START Y_J
flue_gas
O2
0.1848280809765819E+00 {~~
}
503 START Y_J
flue_gas
N2
0.7543922752305796E+00 {~~
}
504 START Y_J
flue_gas
NO
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
505 START Y_J
flue_gas
CO2
0.1903510828410935E-01 {~~
}
506 START Y_J
flue_gas
H2O-G
0.4174453550872889E-01 {~~
}
507 START Y_J
flue_gas
SO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
508 START Y_J
flue_gas
NO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
509 START Y_J
flue_gas
AR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
510 START M
recycle-blower_2
9
0.3057043152871332E+02 {~~}
==PAGE:80==
An Appendix
72
511 START P
9
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
512 START H
recycle-blower_2
9 -0.1010527553297788E+02 {~~}
513 START M
recycle-blower_2
10 -0.3057043152871332E+02 {~~}
514 START P
10
0.1040000000000000E+01 {~~}
515 START H
recycle-blower_2
10 -0.3555012350410367E+01 {~~}
516 START Q
recycle-blower_2
333 -0.4086619839137330E+01 {~~}
517 START W
recycle-blower_2
111
0.2043309919568693E+03 {~~}
518 START M
heatex1
16
0.2619931345301898E+02 {~~}
519 START H
heatex1
16
0.4149202965660132E+03 {~~}
520 START M
heatex1
17 -0.2619931345301898E+02 {~~}
521 START P
17
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
522 START H
heatex1
17 -0.5661205848012630E+03 {~~}
523 START M
heatex1
10
0.3057043152871332E+02 {~~}
524 START H
heatex1
10 -0.3555012350410367E+01 {~~}
525 START M
heatex1
12 -0.3057043152871332E+02 {~~}
526 START H
heatex1
12
0.8372115805917294E+03 {~~}
527 START Q
heatex1
318
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
528 START ZA
heatex1
1
0.2570259756116728E+05 {~~}
529 START M
heatex2
15
0.5305735275639742E+01 {~~}
530 START H
heatex2
15
0.8961060503877709E+03 {~~}
531 START M
heatex2
18 -0.5305735275639742E+01 {~~}
532 START P
18
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
533 START H
heatex2
18
0.6628993003223798E+03 {~~}
534 START M
heatex2
66
0.9346171999453888E+00 {~~}
535 START H
heatex2
66 -0.8952463030459068E+04 {~~}
536 START M
heatex2
67 -0.9346171999453888E+00 {~~}
537 START H
heatex2
67 -0.7628569910996313E+04 {~~}
538 START Q
heatex2
319
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
539 START ZA
heatex2
1
0.1237333280339246E+04 {~~}
540 START M
heatex3
18
0.5305735275639742E+01 {~~}
541 START H
heatex3
18
0.6628993003223798E+03 {~~}
542 START M
heatex3
19 -0.5305735275639742E+01 {~~}
543 START P
19
0.9999999999999999E+00 {~~}
544 START H
heatex3
19
0.3385495835494741E+03 {~~}
545 START M
heatex3
702
0.4635169593874525E+01 {~~}
546 START H
heatex3
702 -0.8616226054878931E+04 {~~}
547 START M
heatex3
3 -0.4635169593874525E+01 {~~}
548 START H
heatex3
3 -0.8244952965713004E+04 {~~}
549 START Q
heatex3
320
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
550 START ZA
heatex3
1
0.1720913733925768E+04 {~~}
.
DNA code for Electricity Production Mode - Gas Turbine
1
2 fluid steam-gas H2O-G 1
3
4 struc pyro PYRO_OIL 2 401 504 402 604 1 300 302 307 901 902 903 904 /
5
905 906 907 908
6 media 401 biomass 504 steam-gas 402 char-ash 604 bio-oil 1 gas
7
8 addco p 401 1 p 504 1 p 402 1 p 604 1 p 1 1
9 c addco m pyro 1 90
10 addco t pyro 401 15
==PAGE:81==
An Appendix
73
11 addco t pyro 504 450
12 addco t pyro 402 500
13 addco t pyro 1 300
14 addco zc 901 20e3
15
16 addco za pyro 62 22.3 {wt% H2O formed MAF}
17
18 addco za pyro 24 0.58 {fraction of C to gas and oil phase}
19 addco za pyro 70 0.323 {C_oil/(C_oil+C_gas)}
20 addco za pyro 15 1 {total LHV efficiency}
21 addco za pyro 72 0.03 {heat loss / biomass}
22
23 c biomass (dry)
24 c addco za pyro 27 49.39 {wt% dry C}
25 addco za pyro 28 6.16 {wt% dry H}
26 addco za pyro 29 45.32 {wt% dry O}
27 addco za pyro 30 .3 {wt% dry N}
28 addco za pyro 31 5.19 {wt% dry ASH}
29 addco za pyro 32 10 {wt% H2O}
30
31 c biomass HHV and cp
32 addco ZA pyro 1 17500
33 addco ZA pyro 9 1.35
34
35 c char-ash Wt%
36 addco za pyro 33 64.27 {wt% C}
37 addco za pyro 34 2.39
{wt% H}
38 c addco za pyro 35 11.7
{wt% ash}
39
40 c C4+ liquids wt%
41 addco za pyro 36 71.3
{wt% C}
42 addco za pyro 38 18
{wt% O}
43 addco za pyro 71 2.4
{wt% N}
44
45 c gas composition
46 c addco za pyro 39 12.04
{vol% H2 dry}
47 c addco za pyro 40 80
{vol% CO dry}
48 c addco za pyro 42 30
{vol% CO2 dry}
49 c addco za pyro 42 45.19
{vol% CO2 dry}
50 c addco za pyro 46 2.42
{vol% CH4 dry}
51 c addco za pyro 46 15.42
{vol% CH4 dry}
52 addco za pyro 47 0
{vol% C2H6 dry}
53 addco za pyro 48 0
{vol% C3H8 dry}
54 addco za pyro 49 0
{vol% C2H4 dry}
55 addco za pyro 50 0
{vol% C3H6 dry}
56 c addco za pyro 41 80
{vol% H2O}
57
58 c HHV's (cgar-ash, C1-3)
59 c addco ZA pyro 3 25400
{char-ash}
60
61 c cp's
62 addco ZA pyro 10 1
{char-ash}
63 addco ZA pyro 11 2
{C4+}
64
65 addco za pyro 25 100
{molar weight of C4+}
==PAGE:82==
An Appendix
74
66
67 zcname 901 LHV_flow_bio
68 c ZC 901 = LHV_flow_bio
[kW]
69 c ZC 902 = m_bio_MAF
[kg/s]
70 c ZC 903 = m_H2O_bio
[kg/s]
71 c ZC 904 = m_H2_conv_pyro [kg/s]
72
73 struc heatsink-char HEATSNK0_1 402 403 311 0
74 addco t heatsink-char 403 50
75
76 struc char-cooler heatsrc0 501 503 311 0
77 media 501 STEAM-HF
78 addco t char-cooler 501 15
79
80 struc steam-to_H2O REAL_IDEALGAS3 503 504 304
81 addco q steam-to_H2O 304 0
82
83 struc split-gas splitter 1 4 2
84
85 struc recycle-blower compre_1 2 702 303 101 0.5 0.98
86
87 struc pyro-reactor-heat heatsnk0 3 1 300 0.01
88 addco t pyro-reactor-heat 1 300
89
90 struc condenser-oil HEATSNK0_1 604 605 310 0
91
92 struc set_temp SET_TEMP_SOLID 605 606 900
93
94 struc condenser-gas heatsnk0 4 5 310 0
95 addco t condenser-gas 5 110
96
97 struc set_temp_gas SET_TEMP 5 66 900
98
99 struc heat_condensation HEAT_AND_FLOW 606 607 310 307
100 addco za heat_condensation 1 1e3
101
102 struc total-Heat-condenser HEAT_NODE 310 312
103
104 STRUC Compressor COMPRE_1 6 7 313 113 .9 .98
105 MEDIA 6 SIMPLE_AIR
106 C ~start m Compressor 6 20
107 ADDCO P 6 1 T Compressor 6 15
108
109 C ~START T Compressor 7 20 Q Compressor 313 1
110
111 STRUC Burner GASBUR_2 7 66 8 314 1300 .98
112 MEDIA 8 FlueGas
113 ADDCO Q Burner 314 -10
114 C ~START Y_J FlueGas O2 .1 Y_J FlueGas N2 .9
115
116
117 STRUC Turbine TURBIN_1 8 9 114 .9
118 addco p 9 1.01
119 C ~START T Turbine 9 200
120
==PAGE:83==
An Appendix
75
121 STRUC heatex3 heatex_2 9 10 702 3 320 50 0.01 0
122 addco Q heatex3 320 0
123 addco T heatex3 3 500
124
125
126
127
128
129
130 C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
131 C ~~ Start of list of generated initial guesses.
132 C ~~ The values are the results of the latest simulation.
133 C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
134 START M
pyro
401
0.1375523724371589E+01 {~~}
135 START P
401
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
136 START H
pyro
401 -0.6979870188292087E+04 {~~}
137 START M
pyro
504
0.4717475226382720E-01 {~~}
138 START P
504
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
139 START H
pyro
504 -0.1258733046346574E+05 {~~}
140 START M
pyro
402 -0.3481151556709223E+00 {~~}
141 START P
402
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
142 START H
pyro
402 -0.2532770862844226E+04 {~~}
143 START M
pyro
604 -0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
144 START P
604
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
145 START H
pyro
604 -0.1804874671670734E+04 {~~}
146 START M
pyro
1 -0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
147 START P
1
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
148 START H
pyro
1 -0.8621009599018347E+04 {~~}
149 START Q
pyro
300
0.1743086272271757E+04 {~~}
150 START Q
pyro
302 -0.6000000000000000E+03 {~~}
151 START Q
pyro
307 -0.1399661210191048E+03 {~~}
152 START ZC
901
0.2000000000000000E+05 {~~}
153 START ZC
902
0.1173720638769033E+01 {~~}
154 START ZC
903
0.1375523724371589E+00 {~~}
155 START ZC
904 -0.9865750133213216E-02 {~~}
156 START ZC
905
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
157 START ZC
906
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
158 START ZC
907
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
159 START ZC
908
0.4717475226382720E-01 {~~}
160 START ZA
pyro
1
0.1750000000000000E+05 {~~}
161 START ZA
pyro
2
0.1747997389893978E+05 {~~}
162 START ZA
pyro
3
0.2372286240755282E+05 {~~}
163 START ZA
pyro
4
0.2333342517777413E+05 {~~}
164 START ZA
pyro
5
0.3277327975183708E+05 {~~}
165 START ZA
pyro
6
0.3277327975183708E+05 {~~}
166 START ZA
pyro
7
0.2320119939672469E+05 {~~}
167 START ZA
pyro
8
0.3096164670168081E+05 {~~}
168 START ZA
pyro
9
0.1350000000000000E+01 {~~}
169 START ZA
pyro
10
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
170 START ZA
pyro
11
0.2000000000000000E+01 {~~}
171 START ZA
pyro
12
0.8076689139742924E+04 {~~}
172 START ZA
pyro
13
0.4333581589198222E+04 {~~}
173 START ZA
pyro
14
0.8715431361358786E-01 {~~}
==PAGE:84==
An Appendix
76
174 START ZA
pyro
15
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
175 START ZA
pyro
16
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
176 START ZA
pyro
17
0.4038344569871462E+00 {~~}
177 START ZA
pyro
18
0.2166790794599111E+00 {~~}
178 START ZA
pyro
19
0.1737104988212770E+00 {~~}
179 START ZA
pyro
20 -0.5917150029053619E-01 {~~}
180 START ZA
pyro
21
0.1495225667047523E+00 {~~}
181 START ZA
pyro
22
0.2811980706394896E+00 {~~}
182 START ZA
pyro
23
0.4490502433064422E-01 {~~}
183 START ZA
pyro
24
0.5800000000000000E+00 {~~}
184 START ZA
pyro
25
0.1000000000000000E+03 {~~}
185 START ZA
pyro
26
0.1009211188724442E+02 {~~}
186 START ZA
pyro
27
0.4302999999999999E+02 {~~}
187 START ZA
pyro
28
0.6160000000000000E+01 {~~}
188 START ZA
pyro
29
0.4532000000000000E+02 {~~}
189 START ZA
pyro
30
0.3000000000000000E+00 {~~}
190 START ZA
pyro
31
0.5190000000000000E+01 {~~}
191 START ZA
pyro
32
0.1000000000000000E+02 {~~}
192 START ZA
pyro
33
0.6427000000000000E+02 {~~}
193 START ZA
pyro
34
0.2390000000000000E+01 {~~}
194 START ZA
pyro
35
0.1845674114405233E+02 {~~}
195 START ZA
pyro
36
0.7130000000000000E+02 {~~}
196 START ZA
pyro
37
0.8299999999999855E+01 {~~}
197 START ZA
pyro
38
0.1800000000000000E+02 {~~}
198 START ZA
pyro
39
0.2193653275884586E+02 {~~}
199 START ZA
pyro
40
0.4736864715477204E+02 {~~}
200 START ZA
pyro
41
0.5262662980401272E+02 {~~}
201 START ZA
pyro
42
0.1160990918307298E+02 {~~}
202 START ZA
pyro
43
0.2959943641292661E+00 {~~}
203 START ZA
pyro
44
0.1139860726215734E+00 {~~}
204 START ZA
pyro
45
0.4464668271464804E+00 {~~}
205 START ZA
pyro
46
0.1908491090330911E+02 {~~}
206 START ZA
pyro
47
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
207 START ZA
pyro
48
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
208 START ZA
pyro
49
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
209 START ZA
pyro
50
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
210 START ZA
pyro
51
0.1000000000000000E+03 {~~}
211 START ZA
pyro
52
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
212 START ZA
pyro
53
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
213 START ZA
pyro
54
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
214 START ZA
pyro
55
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
215 START ZA
pyro
56
0.6830418591485597E-01 {~~}
216 START ZA
pyro
57
0.1192499444892590E+02 {~~}
217 START ZA
pyro
58
0.5819458537126143E+01 {~~}
218 START ZA
pyro
59
0.9711516425332604E+01 {~~}
219 START ZA
pyro
60
0.2521846803679767E+02 {~~}
220 START ZA
pyro
61
0.2418500903274861E+02 {~~}
221 START ZA
pyro
62
0.2230000000000000E+02 {~~}
222 START ZA
pyro
63 -0.8405535190690823E+00 {~~}
223 START ZA
pyro
64
0.4740194828699155E+01 {~~}
224 START ZA
pyro
65
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
225 START ZA
pyro
66
0.5448876228471346E-01 {~~}
226 START ZA
pyro
67
0.2491957254850565E-03 {~~}
227 START ZA
pyro
68
0.2689121338912134E+02 {~~}
228 START ZA
pyro
69
0.4348043903684992E+01 {~~}
==PAGE:85==
An Appendix
77
229 START ZA
pyro
70
0.3230000000000000E+00 {~~}
230 START ZA
pyro
71
0.2400000000000000E+01 {~~}
231 START ZA
pyro
72
0.3000000000000000E-01 {~~}
232 START ZA
pyro
73
0.5936225126966955E+01 {~~}
233 START ZA
pyro
74
0.1029722518747219E+01 {~~}
234 START X_J
char-ash
H2
0.2390000000000000E-01 {~~
}
235 START X_J
char-ash
C
0.6426999999999999E+00 {~~
}
236 START X_J
char-ash
O2
0.1478135948570593E+00 {~~
}
237 START X_J
char-ash
N2
0.1018993702417553E-02 {~~
}
238 START X_J
char-ash
ASH
0.1845674114405233E+00 {~~
}
239 START X_J
char-ash
AR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
240 START X_J
char-ash
S
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
241 START X_J
bio-oil
H2
0.8299999999999856E-01 {~~
}
242 START X_J
bio-oil
C
0.7130000000000000E+00 {~~
}
243 START X_J
bio-oil
O2
0.1800000000000000E+00 {~~
}
244 START X_J
bio-oil
N2
0.2400000000000000E-01 {~~
}
245 START X_J
bio-oil
H2O-G
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
246 START Y_J
gas
H2
0.1039207487201207E+00 {~~
}
247 START Y_J
gas
H2O-G
0.5262662980401271E+00 {~~
}
248 START Y_J
gas
CO
0.2244012457346116E+00 {~~
}
249 START Y_J
gas
CO2
0.5500005256715088E-01 {~~
}
250 START Y_J
gas
CH4
0.9041165493798965E-01 {~~
}
251 START Y_J
gas
C2H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
252 START Y_J
gas
C3H8
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
253 START Y_J
gas
C2H4
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
254 START Y_J
gas
C3H6
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
255 START X_J
biomass
H2
0.5544000000000000E-01 {~~
}
256 START X_J
biomass
C
0.3872699999999999E+00 {~~
}
257 START X_J
biomass
O2
0.4078800000000000E+00 {~~
}
258 START X_J
biomass
N2
0.2700000000000001E-02 {~~
}
==PAGE:86==
An Appendix
78
259 START X_J
biomass
ASH
0.4671000000000000E-01 {~~
}
260 START X_J
biomass
H2O-L
0.1000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
261 START M
heatsink-char
402
0.3481151556709223E+00 {~~}
262 START H
heatsink-char
402 -0.2532770862844226E+04 {~~}
263 START M
heatsink-char
403 -0.3481151556709223E+00 {~~}
264 START P
403
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
265 START H
heatsink-char
403 -0.2982770862844226E+04 {~~}
266 START Q
heatsink-char
311 -0.1566518200519150E+03 {~~}
267 START M
char-cooler
501
0.4717475226382720E-01 {~~}
268 START P
501
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
269 START H
char-cooler
501 -0.1590800121496925E+05 {~~}
270 START M
char-cooler
503 -0.4717475226382720E-01 {~~}
271 START P
503
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
272 START H
char-cooler
503 -0.1258733046346574E+05 {~~}
273 START Q
char-cooler
311
0.1566518200519150E+03 {~~}
274 START M
steam-to_H2O
503
0.4717475226382720E-01 {~~}
275 START H
steam-to_H2O
503 -0.1258733046346574E+05 {~~}
276 START M
steam-to_H2O
504 -0.4717475226382720E-01 {~~}
277 START H
steam-to_H2O
504 -0.1258733046346574E+05 {~~}
278 START Q
steam-to_H2O
304
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
279 START M
split-gas
1
0.5569786793819929E+01 {~~}
280 START H
split-gas
1 -0.8621009599018345E+04 {~~}
281 START M
split-gas
4 -0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
282 START P
4
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
283 START H
split-gas
4 -0.8621009599018347E+04 {~~}
284 START M
split-gas
2 -0.4635169593874541E+01 {~~}
285 START P
2
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
286 START H
split-gas
2 -0.8621009599018347E+04 {~~}
287 START M
recycle-blower
2
0.4635169593874541E+01 {~~}
288 START H
recycle-blower
2 -0.8621009599018347E+04 {~~}
289 START M
recycle-blower
702 -0.4635169593874541E+01 {~~}
290 START P
702
0.1010000000000000E+01 {~~}
291 START H
recycle-blower
702 -0.8616226054878933E+04 {~~}
292 START Q
recycle-blower
303 -0.4525007825711334E+00 {~~}
293 START W
recycle-blower
101
0.2262503912854181E+02 {~~}
294 START M
pyro-reactor-heat
3
0.4635169593874541E+01 {~~}
295 START P
3
0.1010000000000000E+01 {~~}
296 START H
pyro-reactor-heat
3 -0.8244952965713002E+04 {~~}
297 START M
pyro-reactor-heat
1 -0.4635169593874541E+01 {~~}
298 START H
pyro-reactor-heat
1 -0.8621009599018347E+04 {~~}
299 START Q
pyro-reactor-heat
300 -0.1743086272271757E+04 {~~}
300 START M
condenser-oil
604
0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
301 START H
condenser-oil
604 -0.1804874671670734E+04 {~~}
302 START M
condenser-oil
605 -0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
303 START P
605
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
304 START H
condenser-oil
605 -0.2184874671670734E+04 {~~}
305 START Q
condenser-oil
310 -0.5318712598725970E+02 {~~}
306 START M
set_temp
605
0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
307 START H
set_temp
605 -0.2184874671670734E+04 {~~}
308 START M
set_temp
606 -0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
309 START P
606
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
310 START H
set_temp
606 -0.2184874671670734E+04 {~~}
311 START ZC
900
0.1100000000000005E+03 {~~}
==PAGE:87==
An Appendix
79
312 START M
condenser-gas
4
0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
313 START H
condenser-gas
4 -0.8621009599018347E+04 {~~}
314 START M
condenser-gas
5 -0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
315 START P
5
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
316 START H
condenser-gas
5 -0.8952463030459066E+04 {~~}
317 START Q
condenser-gas
310 -0.3097820780054169E+03 {~~}
318 START M
set_temp_gas
5
0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
319 START H
set_temp_gas
5 -0.8952463030459066E+04 {~~}
320 START M
set_temp_gas
66 -0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
321 START P
66
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
322 START H
set_temp_gas
66 -0.8952463030459066E+04 {~~}
323 START M
heat_condensation
606
0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
324 START H
heat_condensation
606 -0.2184874671670734E+04 {~~}
325 START M
heat_condensation
607 -0.1399661210191048E+00 {~~}
326 START P
607
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
327 START H
heat_condensation
607 -0.2184874671670734E+04 {~~}
328 START Q
heat_condensation
310 -0.1399661210191048E+03 {~~}
329 START Q
heat_condensation
307
0.1399661210191048E+03 {~~}
330 START ZA
heat_condensation
1
0.1000000000000000E+04 {~~}
331 START Q
total-Heat-condenser
310
0.5029353250117814E+03 {~~}
332 START Q
total-Heat-condenser
312 -0.5029353250117814E+03 {~~}
333 START M
Compressor
6
0.5522438540158696E+01 {~~}
334 START P
6
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
335 START H
Compressor
6 -0.1010527553297788E+02 {~~}
336 START M
Compressor
7 -0.5522438540158696E+01 {~~}
337 START P
7
0.2548521060620397E+02 {~~}
338 START H
Compressor
7
0.4775292641207388E+03 {~~}
339 START Q
Compressor
313 -0.5495779133257563E+02 {~~}
340 START W
Compressor
113
0.2747889566628805E+04 {~~}
341 START M
Burner
7
0.5522438540158696E+01 {~~}
342 START H
Burner
7
0.4775292641207388E+03 {~~}
343 START M
Burner
66
0.9346171999453889E+00 {~~}
344 START H
Burner
66 -0.8952463030459066E+04 {~~}
345 START M
Burner
8 -0.6457055740104085E+01 {~~}
346 START P
8
0.2497550639407990E+02 {~~}
347 START H
Burner
8 -0.8889500337216772E+03 {~~}
348 START Q
Burner
314 -0.1000000000000000E+02 {~~}
349 START ZA
Burner
1
0.2474382343863026E+01 {~~}
350 START Y_J
FlueGas
O2
0.1037887750516515E+00 {~~
}
351 START Y_J
FlueGas
N2
0.6552618286400229E+00 {~~
}
352 START Y_J
FlueGas
CO2
0.7546108472356976E-01 {~~
}
353 START Y_J
FlueGas
H2O-G
0.1654883115847559E+00 {~~
}
354 START Y_J
FlueGas
SO2
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
355 START Y_J
FlueGas
AR
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~
}
356 START M
Turbine
8
0.6457055740104085E+01 {~~}
357 START H
Turbine
8 -0.8889500337216773E+03 {~~}
358 START M
Turbine
9 -0.6457055740104085E+01 {~~}
359 START P
9
0.1010000000000000E+01 {~~}
360 START H
Turbine
9 -0.1855401732356828E+04 {~~}
==PAGE:88==
An Appendix
80
361 START W
Turbine
114 -0.6240432488205442E+04 {~~}
362 START M
heatex3
9
0.6457055740104085E+01 {~~}
363 START H
heatex3
9 -0.1855401732356828E+04 {~~}
364 START M
heatex3
10 -0.6457055740104085E+01 {~~}
365 START P
10
0.1000000000000000E+01 {~~}
366 START H
heatex3
10 -0.2121918516970808E+04 {~~}
367 START M
heatex3
702
0.4635169593874541E+01 {~~}
368 START H
heatex3
702 -0.8616226054878933E+04 {~~}
369 START M
heatex3
3 -0.4635169593874541E+01 {~~}
370 START H
heatex3
3 -0.8244952965713002E+04 {~~}
371 START Q
heatex3
320
0.0000000000000000E+00 {~~}
372 START ZA
heatex3
1
0.1720913733925786E+04 {~~}
373 C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
374 C ~~ End of generated initial guesses.
375 C ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
.
==PAGE:89==
==PAGE:90==
