==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HIGH-THROUGHPUT METABOLIC MODELLING 
STRATEGIES TO HANDLE BIG DATA FROM 
BIOREACTOR CULTURES 
Master of Science in Engineering (MSc) Thesis 
32,5 ECTS 
July 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
Josep Serra Olivé 
s192468 
 
Supervised by: 
Igor Marín de Mas, Senior Researcher, Quantitative Modelling of Cell Metabolism, DTU 
Biosustain 
Lise Marie Grav, Assistant Professor, CFB-S-CHO Cell Line Engineering and Design, DTU 
Biosustain 
==PAGE:2==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
2 | 66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to handle big data from bioreactor 
cultures 
Master Thesis 
July 2021 
By 
Josep Serra Olivé 
Copyright: Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the 
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc. 
Published by: DTU, Department of Bioengineering, Søltofts Plads, Building 224, 2800 
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark. 
www.bioengineering.dtu.dk 
ISSN: [0000-0000] (electronic version)  
ISBN: [000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)  
ISSN: [0000-0000] (printed version)  
ISBN: [000-00-0000-000-0] (printed versión) 
==PAGE:3==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
3 | 66 
 
Approval  
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Quantitative Modelling and Cell 
Metabolism Group (QMCM) of the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for 
Biosustainability, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for 
the degree Master of Science in Chemical ad Biochemical Engineering (Study line in 
Fermentation Based Manufacturing). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Josep Serra Olivé – s192468 
 
 
…………………………………. 
(Signature) 
 
10-07-2020 
………………………………… 
(Date) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
4 | 66 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This master thesis has become a reality thanks to the invaluable support and advice of many 
individuals that have provided this project with a reason to exist. 
First and foremost, I would like to thank Igor Marin de Mas for his invaluable support and help 
during this project, and for steering me to the right direction in the uncountable meetings 
where I thought I had found a dead end.  
I would also like to thank Lise Marie Grav for supervising this master thesis, and Iván Martínez 
Monge and Pere Comas Sánchez for their contributions to the project. 
Finally, I must express my very profound gratitude to my family for providing me with unfailing 
support and continuous encouragement throughout my years of study and through the 
process of researching and writing this thesis. And my friends Albert, Eduard and Oriol and my 
uncle Joan, for always being there when I need them, this accomplishment would not have 
been possible without them. Thank you. 
Josep Serra Olivé, MSc in Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, DTU 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
5 | 66 
 
Abstract 
 
Chinese Hamster Ovary (CHO) cells have become the most widely used system for the 
production of a large variety of high value bio-products such as monoclonal antibodies, viral 
vaccines and gene therapy vectors. CHO cell produced biopharmaceuticals are among the top 
ten selling products worldwide. This fact has driven the industry to enhance the productivity of 
bioprocesses through intensification of culture process. 
 
In the recent years the mammalian cells industry has showed great interest for parallel 
bioreactors systems such as ambr15 (with volumes of 15 mL). This platform enables to run up 
to 48 controlled bioreactors in parallel each, with the possibility to test multiple conditions in 
parallel in very small-scale volumes. In addition, these reactors enable the massive acquisition 
of a vast quantity of omics data such as genomics, proteomics, transcriptomics, endo and exo 
label-free and labeled metabolomics. 
 
In particular, the exometabolomic data is one of the most frequent measurements in industrial 
processes and it is tremendously valuable in the development, optimization and scaling up of 
bioprocesses using mammalian cell lines. However, extracting relevant knowledge from the of 
heterogeneous data generated by these experiments is not trivial.  
 
This project aims to develop a pipeline to automate the integration of exometabolomic data 
extracted from experiments with CHO cells in ambr15 (15-mL bioreactor) into complete 
genome-scale metabolic network reconstruction analysis. The developed pipeline will allow 
the high-throughput model-driven analysis of the massive amount of omic data provided by 
ambr15-based experiments in order to extract biological knowledge about CHO cell 
metabolism relevant for the design of more efficient bio-process strategies and control 
methods. 
 
The work done in this thesis revised the different modules of the pipeline that had been 
created based on the integration of a reduced model of CHO and implemented several 
modifications to integrate a complete CHO metabolic model and to optimize some of the 
already created modules. In addition, a new module for the tuning of the model biomass 
equation based on the exometabolomic data was implemented to generate more accurate 
predictions of the cell composition than the reference values currently used in the CHO 
metabolic models. 
 
Despite needing further refinement, this pipeline arises as a very promising tool not only for 
the integration of exometabolomic data into genome scale models of CHO, but also as a basis 
for the automation of the data extraction process to be used for modelling purposes in the 
bioprocess industry.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:6==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
6 | 66 
 
List of abbreviations 
 
BOF: Biomass Objective Function 
CBM: Constraint Based Modelling 
CHO: Chinese Hamster Ovary 
COBRA: Constraint Based Reconstruction Analysis 
FBA: Flux Balance Analysis 
Fmincon: find minimum constrained nonlinear multivariable function 
GEM: Genome Scale Metabolic Model 
GMEA: Gross Measurement Error Analysis 
OTR: Oxygen Transfer Rate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
7 | 66 
 
 
 
Table of contents 
 
Acknowledgements ....................................................................................................................... 4 
Abstract ......................................................................................................................................... 5 
List of abbreviations ...................................................................................................................... 6 
1. 
Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 9 
1.1. 
Project background ....................................................................................................... 9 
1.2. 
High throughput, automated bioreactor system .......................................................... 9 
1.3. 
High throughput data handling ................................................................................... 10 
1.4. 
CHO Metabolism Genome Scale Reconstruction ........................................................ 10 
1.5. 
Constraint Based Modelling (CBM) ............................................................................. 11 
1.6. 
CHO biomass function ................................................................................................. 13 
2. 
Project aim .................................................................................................................. 13 
3. 
Materials and Methods ....................................................................................................... 14 
3.1. Pipeline Description ............................................................................................................ 14 
3.2. 
Experimental design .................................................................................................... 16 
3.3. 
Experimental data acquisition and integration in the pipeline ................................... 17 
3.3.1. 
Glutamine rate recalculation accounting for degradation in the biomass tunning 
module 17 
3.4. 
Automatization of the outlier removal process in the exometabolomics data .......... 19 
3.5. 
Identify steady state regions by applying the k-means algorithm on exometabolomic 
data 
21 
3.6. 
Testing consistency between the experimental data and the GEM with Gross 
Measurement Error Analysis (GMEA) ..................................................................................... 24 
3.7. 
Reformulating the biomass equation based on exometabolomic measurements. .... 25 
3.7.1. 
Calculation of the cell composition based on the exchange reactions ............... 27 
3.7.2. 
Constraining the biomass composition to account for experimental error ........ 28 
3.7.3. 
Global balance calculation as a test of the fmincon procedure .......................... 28 
==PAGE:8==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
8 | 66 
 
3.7.4. 
Stablishing non-arbitrary boundaries for the non-calculated metabolites ........ 30 
3.7.5. 
Evaluating the consistency of the reformulated biomass composition .............. 33 
3.7.5.1. 
Leak test .......................................................................................................... 33 
3.7.5.2. 
Evaluating the calculated biomass equation in the CHO DG44 model ........... 33 
3.8. 
Integration of the data into the CHO model ............................................................... 34 
4. 
Results ................................................................................................................................. 34 
4.1. 
Analysis of the outlier removal method and the addition of outlier removal cycles . 34 
4.2. 
Steady state clustering of the concentration evolution of the metabolites and 
reconstruction of the exometabolomic data .......................................................................... 37 
4.3. 
GMEA of the steady states predicted by the k-means algorithm ............................... 41 
4.4. 
Glutamine rate recalculation for the biomass reformulation ..................................... 43 
4.5. 
Reformulating the biomass equation with the exometabolomic data ....................... 45 
4.6. 
Consistency testing of the CHO model with the new biomass equation incorporated
 
48 
4.7. 
Constraining the non-measured metabolite boundaries individually to enforce the 
global balance to be closer to zero ......................................................................................... 48 
5. 
Discussion and future work ................................................................................................. 49 
6. 
Conclusions ......................................................................................................................... 52 
7. 
References ........................................................................................................................... 54 
8. 
Appendices .......................................................................................................................... 57 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
9 | 66 
 
1. Introduction 
 
1.1. Project background 
While simple proteins such as insulin can be produced effectively in microbial hosts the most 
common hosts for therapeutic proteins are animal cells as Chinese Hamster Ovary cells (CHO), 
murine myeloma (NS0), Human Embryonic Kidney (HEK) and Baby Hamster Kidney cells (BHK) 
(Templeton & Young, 2018) CHO cells are the primary factories for biopharmaceuticals due to 
their capacity to correctly fold and post-transitionally modify recombinant proteins compatible 
with humans. Currently, from all the recombinant proteins in the market, 60-70% are 
produced in this host. 
 
Starting with the commercial launch of recombinant insulin in the 1980s, the biopharma 
industry experienced a fast exponential growth, and focused on bringing new products to the 
market rather than establishing a cost-effective manufacturing process (Dimitrov, 2012). 
However, with the emergence of biosimilars, the industry requires to develop more optimal 
processes in order to improve the efficiency of the process.  
 
One of the downsides of CHO cells, and mammalian cells in general, is the high costs of 
operation. However, with the development of synthetic biology and modelling tools, the 
industry is making a turn towards the development of mathematical models that can mimic 
the behavior of the real cells. These models would allow to reduce the number of experiments 
as it would be possible to test hypothesis in silico, reproducing only those hypotheses with 
chances of success. This would not only reduce the costs of research, but would also imply a 
considerable time reduction, as mammalian cells fermentation times are remarkably high. To 
develop precise models of a host organisms it is necessary to have big amounts of data that 
will guarantee that the input of these models is as close to reality as possible.  
 
1.2. 
High throughput, automated bioreactor system 
 
In this context, parallel bioreactors systems such as ambr15 (with volumes of 15 mL) have 
considerably attracted the interest of the industry in the last years. The possibility to run 
several experiments in parallel to test multiple conditions at the same time in very small-scale 
volumes have made them very suitable for mammalian cell culture optimization. These 
systems have shown to be highly scalable to industrial volumes; not only facilitating the 
scaling-up of a new process, but also the scale-down of existing processes to improve them.  
 
In addition, optimized in-house developed ambr15's protocols enable the analysis of the 
different moieties within the cell through the increasingly efficient and widely used high-
throughput platforms. These platforms enable the massive acquisition of Critical ‘omics data 
sets, including proteomics, transcriptomics, metabolomics fluxomics and glycomics which will 
allow the elucidation of the molecular basis of CHO cell physiology (Hefzi et al., 2016). The 
incorporation of this data sets into mathematical models that describe the CHO cell 
phenotypes will provide crucial information for further development and optimization of CHO-
based biopharmaceuticals (Hefzi et al., 2016). The incorporation of this data sets into 
==PAGE:10==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
10 | 66 
 
mathematical models that describe the CHO cell phenotypes will provide crucial information 
for further development and optimization of CHO-based biopharmaceuticals. 
 
1.3. 
High throughput data handling 
 
The data provided by high-throughput bioreactors is tremendously valuable in the 
development, optimization and scaling up of bioprocesses using mammalian cell lines. 
However, the extraction of useful and understandable data from the big amount of 
information generated by these experiments is not trivial (Kitano, 2002a).  
 
Patterns extracted from huge quantities of biological and physiological knowledge and data 
are used to generate models of gene regulation, biochemical networks, etc. and then they are 
combined to generate Genomic Scale Metabolic Network Models (GEMs) (Ideker et al., 2001). 
These models are validated with experimental data with in silico experiments, and if they show 
consistency, then they can be used to generate new hypothesis and predictions to be tested by 
in vitro and in vivo studies (Kitano, 2002b). Finally, the new information obtained with these 
experiments is used to optimize the GEMs.  
 
In this sense, Genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) have emerged as a valuable tool to 
unveil cellular mechanisms of complex biological systems (Ideker et al., 2001). GEMs gather all 
the known bioreactions encode by a given organism’s genome including metabolites 
(substrates and products of the biochemical reactions), enzymes catalyzing the reactions and 
the genes encoding those enzymes. This makes them a convenient platform for multiple and 
heterogeneous omics data integration. However, the optimization of algorithms for omics-
wide analysis is crucial to fully exploit the potential of omics information. This raises a 
challenge in terms of data integration, analysis and interpretation. 
 
1.4. 
CHO Metabolism Genome Scale Reconstruction 
 
The large genome of CHO cells, increased complexity, multicellular compartments and diverse 
post-transcriptional and post-translational processing has obstructed the understanding of this 
cells systems in comparison to other cell factories (e.g Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae)(Kildegaard et al., 2013). This implied that the first CHO genome models were 
restricted to core metabolism or used other organisms as a template. However, the application 
of ‘omics-based approaches, enabled a fundamental understanding and appreciation of this 
production host, and allowed for the first reconstruction of a consensus genome scale 
reconstruction of CHO cell metabolism and cell-line-specific models (Hefzi et al., 2016) 
 
These new models bring a framework to stop understanding the behavior of the cell as a 
combination of simple elements that interact to produce complex behavior. Instead, the new 
frame to understand a cell factory is a large number of functionally diverse, and frequently 
multifunctional, sets of elements interacting selectively and nonlinearly to produce coherent 
rather than complex behaviors (Oberhardt et al., 2009).  
 
==PAGE:11==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
11 | 66 
 
The new CHO cell models allowed to elucidate metabolic bottlenecks, and have been 
demonstrated to accurately predict growth phenotypes, and simulate auxotrophies. 
Experimentation with these models also demonstrated that targeted metabolic engineering 
was necessary in combination with bioprocess engineering to effectively redirect metabolic 
fluxes to the desired paths for recombinant protein production (Hefzi et al., 2016). 
 
1.5. 
Constraint Based Modelling (CBM) 
 
Even with the exponential development of the genomic scale models for cell factories, the 
properties and interactions of all the elements in the system are not fully characterized. The 
implications of this are that biological models are not fully deterministic. Instead, they contain 
many unknowns (undiscovered pathways, gens with unknown functions, etc.)  that can lead 
into significant errors in the predictions of the outcomes.  
 
Without considering the simplest model organisms, the behavior of entire networks has not 
been fully characterized yet. In general, the enzymatic parameters are only available for 
subsections of the metabolic network where complete characterization is available (e.g central 
metabolism). In this situation, it is possible to generate simple models in which, by using 
metabolite concentrations, reaction rates and pathways one can accurately determine the 
performance of the system.  
 
However, mathematical model building in biology is still far from being able to predict the 
behavior of an entire cell. At present, it is possible to obtain the network structure of 
multigenic processes, but acquiring information about physicochemical properties of gene 
products, such as binding constants and turnover rates is still a challenge (Bernhard, 2000). 
 
Instead, al alternative approach to computationally describe the behavior of the cell factories 
can be formulated. Cells are subject to certain constraints, both genetical and environmental, 
that limit their possible behaviors. Imposing multiple constrains to the GEMs makes it possible 
to delimitate which outcomes are biologically realistic and create what is known as Constraint 
Based Models (CBM)(de Mas et al., 2014). However, even the predictions can be very accurate 
it is still not possible to predict a precise outcome. Instead, what is generated from these 
predictions is a space of solutions, rather than a single solution (Figure 1.1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.1. Overview of the evolution of the solution space when the different stoichiometric and thermodynamical 
constrains are imposed. Image extracted from (Heirendt et al., 2011) 
==PAGE:12==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
12 | 66 
 
CBMs do not require the complete kinetic information of the cell in order to generate 
predictions. These models use reaction stoichiometry and functional annotation of the 
genome to link genes through the protein expression to the metabolite distribution and flux 
through the network (Bordbar et al., 2014). 
 
CBM, among other constrains, assume that the flow of metabolites is in steady state. In other 
words, that the conversion of metabolites from A to B, occurs at a faster pace than the cell 
growth or any external changes. This implies, that there will not be an accumulation of 
metabolites at any point of the system. 
 
To facilitate the analysis the scientific community has generated the Constraint-Based 
Reconstruction and Analysis (COBRA) Toolbox), which is the leading software package for 
genome-scale analysis of metabolism (Ebrahim et al., 2013). This software provides a variety of 
methods for constraint-based modeling of genome-scale stoichiometric models. 
 
However, one of its major downsides is that the COBRA Toolbox does not contain a framework 
for the integration of the high throughput multi-omics data that can be extracted, for example, 
from an ambr15 reactor. In other words, it is still necessary to manually curate the data 
extracted from the laboratory to remove outliers or errors that can lead to unfeasible inputs 
that do not generate any solution within the solution space. Therefore, the generation of a 
pipeline to integrate the big amount of data extracted from high throughput reactors into CHO 
metabolic networks would be a big step forward in the generation of a platform to enable 
rigorous and systematic in silico experiments with this cell factories. 
 
One of the most used CBMs is the flux balance analysis (FBA). The formulation of this method 
assumes that the cell tries to achieve a metabolic objective, which is the maximum growth 
rate. Studies have shown that by optimizing the assumed cellular objective it is possible to 
predict metabolic fluxes in microorganisms (Edwards et al., 2001). 
 
Flux Balance Analysis is a mathematical approach to analyze the flow of metabolites through a 
metabolic network. This network reconstructions contain all the information about known 
metabolic reactions of the cell and the genes encoding the enzymes that participate in them 
interest (Pan et al., 2017). FBA calculates the flow of each metabolite through this network 
allowing the possibility to predict the growth rate of the organism or the production rate of a 
metabolite of interest. (Supplementary Information 1.1) 
 
The exometabolomic data extracted from the ambr15 bioreactors can be used to define the 
boundaries of the exchange reactions of the cell, constraining the space of solutions and 
enforcing the model to distribute these metabolites through the network to satisfy the 
objective function, which is maximized growth rate. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
13 | 66 
 
1.6. 
CHO biomass function 
 
The two key ingredients that define the accuracy of a GEM are a comprehensive 
reconstruction of the cellular metabolism based on experimental data and genomic 
reconstructions, and a cell-line condition-specific biomass composition (Chen et al., 2019).  
 
Despite the genome-scale metabolic models of CHO for multiple cell lines are already 
available, an experimentally validated biomass function that summarizes the composition of 
the cells is often overlooked. Instead, the biomass composition used in all the CHO genomic-
scale metabolic models currently available is based on literature values, partially derived from 
different organisms such as hybridoma cells (Széliová et al., 2020). 
 
Even there is important evidence pointing towards the importance of obtaining accurate data 
for the biomass composition (Lachance et al., 2019), generating this data in a “wet” laboratory 
for each experiment is too time consuming with the current technological development. The 
reasons are that different analytical methods have to be used to measure each of the different 
components in the cell (DNA, aminoacids, lipids, etc.), and that some of the equipment used 
for these measurements is very expensive and it is not commonly available in all laboratories.  
 
 
2. Project aim  
The aim of this master thesis is to develop and integrate different computational methods for 
the integration of high-throughput exometabolomic data from experiments with CHO cells in 
bioreactor into genome-scale metabolic network reconstruction analyses in order to enable 
the automatic performance of high-throughput fluxomic analyses which nowadays represents 
one of the main bottlenecks in the overall process of analyzing and characterizing the cell 
metabolism of CHO. To this aim different modules have been improved and other have been 
completely developed and finally incorporated in the above-mentioned pipeline. In order to 
achieve this the following objectives were defined: 
 
• To develop and apply a novel computational method to reformulate the biomass 
composition based on the exometabolomic data-protection. 
•  To improve and apply a machine learning method identify steady state regions from 
time-course experiment using exometabolomic data-protection. 
• To apply a novel computational approach to identify outlier measurements. 
• To implement a computational method to evaluate the gross error of the 
exometabolomic data measurements. 
• To integrate the above-mentioned approaches into a automatic pipeline to automatize 
the analysis and integration of exometabolomic data into GEMs 
• To develop a user guide for future users implementing or developing the tool. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:14==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
14 | 66 
 
Figure 3.1. General overview of the pipeline for the Integration of exometabolomic data into a more complex 
genome scale metabolic model. The color legend indicates if the block has been tested (only minor changes to clean 
the code), modified to account for factors that were not considered with a simpler model, or developed from scratch 
and integrated into the pipeline. 
 
3. Materials and Methods 
 
3.1. 
Pipeline Description 
 
The pipeline developed in our group is a middle step between the integration of the 
experimental data into the model and the FBA. The initial pipeline developed was designed 
around simplified model of CHO and contained 431 metabolites and 297 reactions. However, 
designing this tool around a simplified model caused to overlook many factors during the 
development of the different subsections of the script that derived in many errors, resulting in 
a tool that was not prepared to deal with the arising complexity of the new models that have 
been developed in the recent years.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For that reason, the pipeline should be modified to contemplate a more general use, as the 
aim of this tool is to be able to integrate high throughput metabolic data to any complete 
model of CHO. The model used for this purpose was a cell line specific model for CHO DG44, 
==PAGE:15==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
15 | 66 
 
that contains 2751 metabolites and 3942 reactions (Supplementary Information 1.2). This 
model contains the most up-to-date information of the developed CHO GeMs (Calmels et al., 
2019). 
 
The developed pipeline will allow the high-throughput model-driven analysis of the massive 
amount of ‘omic data provided by ambr15-based experiments in order to extract biological 
knowledge about CHO cell metabolism relevant for the design of more efficient bio-process 
strategies and control methods.  
 
A description of the general structure of the pipeline, is shown in Figure 3.1. A legend is 
included showing which parts were tested to evaluate consistency when a more complex 
model was used, modified to resolve errors and long simulation times, or newly developed and 
integrated into the pipeline. 
 
The pipeline takes the data measurements from an Excel file and pretreats and sorts them to 
account for experimental replicates, variables, different measurements, etc. Once the data is 
sorted the different measurements are associated with a metabolite within the model. After 
this process the data enters the outlier removal module, were the measurements that deviate 
a lot from their expected values are removed from the data set. Generally, this data is then 
clustered into different steady states that will help to elucidate the behavior of the cell in 
different stages of the culture during the flux balance analysis. Finally, the consistency 
between the data from the steady state clustering and the model is tested in the GMEA 
module to ensure that the measured fluxes can be explained by the model under the steady 
state assumption.  
 
In parallel to this process, the biomass tunning module uses the exometabolomic data to tune 
the reference biomass equation and introduce it back to the model, to generate an optimized 
version of the biomass composition of the cell.  
 
If the cleaned and clustered data is successfully validated, it is introduced in the modified 
model in the form of exchange reaction boundaries that will restrict the space of solutions 
when conducting posterior analysis by FBA.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:16==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
16 | 66 
 
3.2. 
Experimental design 
 
For the integration of high throughput data generated in Ambr15 bioreactors into GEM models 
to perform a flux balance analysis, it is not only necessary to treat the data to fit the models, 
but also to develop a tool that is able to work with different data inputs, and for different 
models. Most important, the method has to be scalable and automated as this has become the 
main bottleneck of all the process. 
 
First, the input for the pipeline should be a spreadsheet type document containing the 
measured concentrations of the different metabolites analyzed during the experiment, as well 
as other relevant data as cell growth, oxygen transfer rate (OTR) or the pH of the media. Then, 
this data should be pretreated to account for the possible addition of substrates or the 
degradation of others, as for example, glutamine.  
 
The developed pipeline uses this spreadsheet containing the pre-treated data, and is divided 
on five main sections, four of them being data treatment procedures: 
 
1- Integration of the data contained in the spreadsheet to the metabolites in the model, 
automatically and indistinctively of the model used. 
 
2- An automatic removal of the possible outliers found in each data group. These outliers are 
provoked by biological or instrumental noise and can lead to a bad integration of the data 
into the model. This module is named outlier removal. 
 
3- Identification of the different steady states that happen across the course of the 
experiment. As mentioned before, the FBA analysis is based on the hypothesis that for the 
studied time frame the system is in steady state, and the flux across the network happens 
faster than any change on the cell or the environment. This module is called steady state 
clustering. 
 
4- It cannot be assumed that the model is an appropriate representation of the organism. 
Testing the consistency between the model and experimental data is necessary to validate 
that the obtained data is biologically relevant. After this procedure, an adjusted set of 
measurements is generated accounting for the error associated to measurements. This 
module is named GMEA (Gross measurement Error Analysis) 
 
5- Recalculation of the biomass composition of the cell based on the exchange rates measured 
during the experiment for the cell strain used. Genetically modifying a cell can alter its 
internal fluxes, altering the biomass composition. Accurately predicting this new 
composition will lead to more accurate descriptions of the cell growth in the FBA analysis, 
as the amount of each metabolite destined to cell growth will be better described. This 
module is named biomass tunning. 
 
After the data is treated and validated with the model it is integrated into the model. The 
objective of the integration of the tool with a more complex model of CHO, was not for a 
==PAGE:17==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
17 | 66 
 
particular interest in that model. Instead, the aim was to use this model to take a more 
generalist approach during the modification of the scripts, simplifying the task of designing the 
code to work for any given input. 
 
In addition, the script must be modular, which means that the user has to be able to perform 
only some of the analysis described in Figure 3.1, without the need of using all the modules of 
the tool. This will also allow for an easier integration of possible future modules that are 
integrated into the tool to satisfy possible analysis needs.  
 
In addition, the output (graphs and tables) generated with the tool should be understandable 
and presented in an ordered way to allow an easy comprehension by the user of what is being 
generated at every moment. In relation to this, the tool must be as simple as possible, and 
should be descriptive enough to facilitate troubleshooting and comprehension of the script by 
future users that might encounter errors or bad functioning of a module.  
 
3.3. 
Experimental data acquisition and integration in the pipeline 
 
The exometabolomic data used to develop the presented methods was generated in a time 
course experiment were wild type (CHOS) and mutant non-lactate producer cells (CHOZela) 
were grown in a DASGIB bioreactor. Here, 38 different metabolites were measured from 
media at 22 timepoints along 160 hours. 
 
The data used as input of the presented pipeline was previously treated in order to account for 
the nutrient addition and natural degradation of certain metabolites such as the glutamine 
that would introduce errors in the consumption/secretion rate calculation. Finally, the 
exometabolomic input data consisting on the metabolites concentrations at each measured 
time point and is used to calculate the metabolites consumption/ secretion rates.  
 
The exometabolomic data was integrated in one of the latest reconstructions of CHO cell 
metabolism (CHO-DG44, (Calmels et al., 2019). The model was manually curated modifying 
601 reactions to mimic the metabolic profile of cell lines used for industrial protein production. 
The model is stored in SBML (System Biology markup language) format (Schellenberger et al., 
2011). 
 
In order to automatize the exometabolomic data integration into the GEM, metabolite names 
were matched with the corresponding extracellular metabolite IDs in the model. 
 
3.3.1. Glutamine rate recalculation accounting for degradation in the biomass tunning 
module 
 
Even this calculations were automated in the pipeline, the input data for the biomass 
composition determination did not account for glutamine degradation during the 
fermentation and the different additions needed to avoid that this metabolite became limiting 
for the cell. For that reason, the calculations were done in a separate Excel file (Gdeg, 
Supplementary Material). 
==PAGE:18==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
18 | 66 
 
 
First the glutamine concentration right after each addition (Glu0) was calculated from the 
measured glutamine (Glumeas): 
 
 
𝐺𝑙𝑢0 = 𝐺𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠+ 𝐺𝑙𝑢𝑎𝑑𝑑∙𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑔𝑙𝑢
𝑉𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟
   
(1) 
 
Where Gluadd is the volume of the glutamine addition, Concglu is the concentration of the added 
glutamine and Vbioreactor is the working volume of the bioreactor. Then the amount of glutamine 
degraded (Gludeg) from measure to measure was calculated: 
 
 
𝐺𝑙𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑔= 𝐺𝑙𝑢0 −𝐺𝑙𝑢0 ∙𝑒𝑘𝑑𝑒𝑔∙(∆𝑡)  
(2) 
 
The demonstration of Equation 2 is shown in the Supplementary Information 1.3.4. The 
degradation constant of glutamine was -0,0028 h-1. Then, it was possible to recalculate the 
evolution of concentration accounting for degradation by subtracting the degraded glutamine 
to each measurement: 
 
 
𝐺𝑙𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙= 𝐺𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠−𝐺𝑙𝑢𝑑𝑒𝑔  
(3) 
 
Finally, the real glutamine concentration using the concentration values accounting for 
glutamine degradation, the different additions of glutamine and the volume differences in the 
bioreactor after each measure (Cbatch) was calculated as: 
 
 
𝐶𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ= 𝐺𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑠∙𝐷𝐹𝐴𝐶 − 𝐺𝑙𝑢𝑎𝑑𝑑∙𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑔𝑙𝑢
𝑉𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟
 ∙𝐷𝐹𝐴𝐶   
(4) 
 
Where DFAC is the accumulation factor of DF at every measure, and DF is obtained by Vbioreactor 
(t1) / Vbioreactor (t0). 
 
The treated data obtained by Equation 4 was used to plot the evolution of the concentration 
of glutamine and recalculate the rate at each time point:  
 
 
𝑞𝑔𝑙𝑢 (𝑚𝑀∙𝐿−1 ∙ℎ−1) =
𝐶𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑡1 −𝐶𝑏𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑡0
𝑡1 −𝑡0
  
(5) 
 
To convert the rate to the same units used for the biomass tunning the viable cell density 
(VCD) and the CHO DW from literature (0.36 mg/106 cells) were used: 
 
  
 
𝑞𝑔𝑙𝑢 (𝑚𝑀∙ℎ−1) ∙1000
𝑉𝐶𝐷(106𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠∙ 𝐿−1) ∙𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐷𝑊(𝑚𝑔∙106 𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠−1)
= 𝑞𝑔𝑙𝑢(𝑛𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒∙𝑚𝑔−1 ∙ℎ−1) 
 
(6) 
 
==PAGE:19==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
19 | 66 
 
Finally, an average rate of consumption of glutamine was calculated with the measured values 
that belonged to the exponential growth phase of the cell culture in the fermenter.  
 
3.4. 
Automatization of the outlier removal process in the exometabolomics 
data 
 
Experimental measurements are subject to some error. The two main sources of uncertainty 
are instrumentation error and biological variation. This error can be handled at later stages 
when the extracted data is studied. In general, when a big amount of data is generated and 
must be integrated in a model, these errors must be taken into account in order to avoid 
unfeasible solutions in the study of the metabolic fluxes (I.e. by applying Flux Balance Analysis) 
 
However, there might also be points that fall clearly out the limits of tolerable error (outliers), 
which can lead to a bigger impact of the error in the measurements. As a result, they can 
totally alter the calculated fluxes and mask the real behavior of each metabolite predicted by 
the model, leading to wrong outputs or infeasible solutions.  
 
The biological variation and uncertainty in the measurements by instrumentation error can be 
solved with experimental replicates. However, the costs of CHO cultures are very high, which 
becomes a limiting factor specially when the data is extracted from bioreactors (bigger 
volumes). For this reason, it is important to develop an automated method to detect and 
remove outliers without the need to perform multiple replicates. 
 
In general, the removal of outliers can be done manually. However, using a subjective criterion 
to remove data points can lead to biased modifications of the data. In addition, when high 
throughput data is generated, a lot of metabolites are measured at the same time and curating 
each concentration evolution one by one can be very time consuming. For this reason, the 
outlier removal block arises as a need to develop a method to the systematically remove 
outlier in an automatic manner, reducing the time needed for data curation. 
 
It can be assumed that the evolution of a cell culture in a bioreactor is defined by a set of 
steady states that shift gradually between one another if no drastic environmental changes 
affect the cell growth. These steady states are defined by the growth of the cell and the 
availability of substrates during the experiment. 
 
Thus, it should be possible to calculate the behavior of any given metabolite based on its 
consumption/excretion rate at each point and the concentration in the previous 
measurement. In other words, it would be possible to generate a prediction of ideal value of 
each data point according to the previous measurements. And then comparing both results to 
determine if the measured point is an outlier or if it fits within the expected value accounting 
for error. 
 
However, the instrumentation noise has a big impact on the local gradient, which could lead to 
wrong outcomes if only the last two points were used for the calculation of the predicted next 
==PAGE:20==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
20 | 66 
 
point. For this reason, to increase the accuracy of the calculations, using a mean gradient 
(average of all the previous data points) would help to remove the effect of the 
instrumentation noise. Despite this, when doing a gradient average, the changes in the 
behavior in the concentrations of each metabolite would be poorly calculated as the swift in 
the gradient in the most recent data points would be altered by the rates calculated at the 
beginning of the curves. 
 
Taking all this into account, an exponentially weighted moving average system was used. In 
this approach the overall concentration of the metabolite is considered but the most recent 
data points have a bigger impact on the next point calculation that the data points that are 
further in time. This variation will improve the calculations of the biological swifts that happen 
during the experiment without being affected by the instrumentation error.  
 
 
𝑀𝑛= α ∙mn + (1 −α) ∙Mn−1  
(7) 
 
Where M is the weighted average, alpha is the weight decided by the user, n is the time index 
and m is the rate of the metabolite at that time point. M corresponds to an estimation of a 
mean rate that allows the calculation of the ideal location of the next point in the data set, 
giving more weight to the most recent points placed and avoiding the instrumentation noise at 
the same time. 
 
Then, based on the assumption that the calculation of any subsequent point in the data set can 
be considered semideterministic if the direction of the curve (q) is known: 
 
 
𝑞= (yn+1 −yn)
(𝑡𝑛+1 −𝑡n) 
  
(8) 
The Equation 9 was used to calculate each predicted point in the data set using the 
exponentially weighted moving factor is: 
 
 
𝑦𝑛+1 = yn + Mn ∙(tn+1 −tn) ± ε  
(9) 
 
 
The margin of error can be stipulated by the user as 3x the limit of detection of the metabolite 
by Mass Spectrometry, or 10% of the local value if the data is not available. 
 
The code was designed to mark potential outliers that were out of the range of prediction. The 
total χ2 distance between predicted and observed points was used as a measurement to 
evaluate the curve. Each possible outlier is taken out of the data set and the curve is 
reevaluated and the chi-square distance is calculated again. If the removal of the possible 
outlier results in a minimization of the χ2 error, the point is removed from the data. This 
procedure is performed for every metabolite until no points fall outside the predicted range 
for the given boundaries.  
 
==PAGE:21==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
21 | 66 
 
To avoid the possibility of excessive point deletions, it was stipulated that a maximum of 25% 
of any metabolite data set could be removed. However, this setting can be modified by the 
user to constrain the output of the outlier removal. 
 
To add an extra layer on the outlier evaluation an additional method of Short Time Fourier 
Transformation (STFT) was used to evaluate the frequency distribution of each metabolite 
during the experiment. The reason for this was that, even the exponentially moving average 
method worked perfectly, the calculated gradient to predict each point was still based on the 
real data points and gradients. This could provoke that for data sets with many data points, the 
total error added due to experimental noise could be very high at later point predictions. 
 
The second method processes the behavior of the metabolite concentrations as a low 
frequency signal representing the biological activity of the cell. Over this frequency there is the 
low amplitude high frequency signal caused by the instrumental noise and the biological noise. 
And finally, the outlier points correspond to a high frequency high amplitude signal. 
 
By performing STFT to this signal it was possible to map the frequency distribution in each 
metabolite along the time of the experiment.  Taking the integral of amplitude with respect to 
the frequency, it was possible to identify local maximum points, which corresponded to the 
location of outlier points. 
 
The evaluation of the outlier process for the CHO DG44 model was done by running the outlier 
removal process for the selected metabolites annotated in the metabolic model, and then the 
cleaned data was treated again with the outlier removal script, expecting no extra data points 
to be removed. 
 
3.5. Identify steady state regions by applying the k-means algorithm on 
exometabolomic data 
 
The flux balance analysis studies the flux distribution of the cell based on the pseudo-steady 
state hypothesis. Here, the internal fluxes are assumed to be faster than any changes on the 
cell or the environment. For this reason, they are constant and there is no accumulation of 
substrates or products along all the steady state.  
 
Defining several steady states in one experiment allows to analyze the different phases of the 
experiment, and for example, to identify metabolic switches that totally change the behavior 
of the cells. 
 
Steady state clustering can be done manually, but similarly to the outlier removal procedure, it 
is a time-consuming task that can lead to biased modifications of the data. Thus, the 
methodology had to be a totally automated process based on a defined criteria to cluster the 
data into different steady states. 
 
==PAGE:22==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
22 | 66 
 
The consumption or generation rate of a metabolite can be calculated from the change of 
concentration of the metabolite and biomass over time by the rate equations(Hong, 1989): 
 
 
𝑑𝐶
𝑑𝑡= 𝑞c ∙X 
(10) 
 
 
𝑑𝑥
𝑑𝑡= μ ∙X 
(11) 
 
Combining Equations 10 and 11: 
 
 
𝑑𝐶
𝑑𝑡= 𝑞𝑐∙𝑑𝑋
𝑑𝑡∙1
𝜇 
(12) 
 
 
𝑞𝑐= ∆𝐶
∆𝑋∙μ 
(13) 
 
Where C is the concentration of the metabolite, X is the total biomass and µ corresponds to 
the growth rate of the cells. 
 
The aim of clustering strategy was to find a set of steady states with rates (qc) that precisely 
described the evolution of the metabolites concentration through the experiment. The 
optimization problem becomes to define a set of steady state that can explain the evolution of 
all the metabolites analyzed. In other words, the transition from one steady state to another 
will be at the same time point for every metabolite, and this transition must be the optimal 
solution for the overall set of metabolites and not only one of them. 
 
This optimization problem was solved by implementing the k means algorithm (Supplementary 
Information 1.3.1) which clustered all the data analyzed according to the rates measured for 
every metabolite along the course of the experiment.  
 
The rate (q) at every time point for each metabolite was calculated with Equation 13, creating 
a matrix of rates with a size metabolites x time points. Then the clustering algorithm found a 
set of clusters that defined the minimum sum between distances of each metabolite rate and 
their corresponding centroid (Inertia). 
 
Then a constant rate for each metabolite at every steady state was defined and then by 
applying Equation 12 the concentration profile of each metabolite in the exometabolomic data 
was reconstructed and compare it with the original profile.  
 
Due to the inherent design of the k-means clustering, the theoretical maximum number of 
clusters is equal to the number of points in the data set. However, there is a point were adding 
one more cluster does not significantly reduce the inertia value. Thus, the objective becomes 
to find the maximum number of clusters such as adding one more does not significantly reduce 
the distance between each data point to its corresponding centroid (Figure 1.2, Supplementary 
Information 1.3.1). 
==PAGE:23==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
23 | 66 
 
 
The initial testing strategy to define the number of clusters in a multidimensional k-means 
clustering algorithm was to evaluate the convergence between the original metabolic profile 
and the predicted one by error convergence. In this procedure the predicted metabolic profiles 
of all the metabolites were obtained by the k-means algorithm, with one cluster (k=1). Then, 
the reconstructed curves were compared to the original metabolic curve, and if the mean 
distance between the predicted and calculated curves were within the standard deviation 
calculated from the experimental data, the predicted curves were considered to be well 
characterized. If the result was unsatisfactory, the process was restarted with k+1, until the 
error did not decrease significantly.  
 
Despite the method was already developed at the start of the project, it was designed to work 
only for a specific set of metabolites matching with a specific GEM. Thus, the main aim of this 
thesis in this section was to generalize the use of this algorithm to any data set as well as 
improve the algorithm performance which dramatically reduced the calculation time and 
finally to integrate this method in the overall pipeline described in Figure 3.1. 
 
More specifically, in the updated version of the algorithm, the number of clusters increased 
until the convergence between each metabolite with its corresponding calculation by the k-
means algorithm was achieved. In other words, when the predicted value felt inside the 
prediction range accounting for the standard deviation of the original data point. 
 
Then, if the predicted value was inside the predictive range, the output of the calculation was 
1, otherwise it was 0. Therefore, the maximum achievable number would be equal to the 
number of metabolites analyzed. In this case it would be 38 as it was the number of 
metabolites analyzed in the exometabolomic data that were present in the model.  
 
As widened in the Supplementary Information (1.3.1), the k-means algorithm is subject to 
some degree of variability as the initial clusters are randomly selected from the input data. 
This could cause some variation in the achieved number of clusters. For this reason, the k-
means algorithm in the pipeline was designed to run multiple times (30 iterations) to confirm 
that the same number of clusters was achieved consistently. 
 
Finally, the method was also adapted to run the k-means algorithm at the same time for the 
data of multiple replicates of the same experiment, enforcing the same number of clusters in 
all of them. This could alter the number of clusters for a particular replicate, obtaining the 
“average” number of clusters that better describe all the replicates. However, at the same 
time it allowed for a simplification of the method, as there was no need for a posterior manual 
analysis to decide which number of clusters defines the global data set more accurately 
(replicates for the same experiment cannot have different number of steady states). 
 
The output of the steady state clustering is a set of data divided in several steady states, which 
could be already analyzed by an FBA analysis to determine the flux distribution of every 
metabolite in the model at the different steady state ranges.  
 
==PAGE:24==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
24 | 66 
 
3.6. 
Testing consistency between the experimental data and the GEM with 
Gross Measurement Error Analysis (GMEA) 
 
After the steady state determination of the measured data, the consistency between the 
model and the input should be tested to avoid unfeasible solutions within the solution space of 
the FBA. The Gross Measurement Error Analysis (GMEA) process allows not only to perform 
this test, but also to readjust the set of measurements based on the error distribution to fit the 
data into the model (Quek et al., 2010). 
 
In large and complex metabolic model, such as GEMs, the total sum of small errors in every 
measurement for all the metabolites can easily lead to unfeasible solutions of the flux 
distribution analysis. In addition, performing a GMEA will be useful to evaluate if the model is 
an accurate representation of what is measured in the experiment, or if it should be further 
developed to integrate the inconsistencies found during the analysis.  
 
Typically, only a subset of all the extracellular metabolites annotated in a GEM is 
experimentally measured. Then, there will be some measured fluxes (vm) and other fluxes that 
should be calculated because the value cannot be imposed by the data. Starting from the 
steady state hypothesis (S·v = 0), it is possible to distribute the fluxes between those that can 
be measured and the ones that must be calculated: 
 
 
𝑆𝑚∙ 𝑣𝑚+ 𝑆𝑐∙ 𝑣𝑐 = 0 
(14) 
 
The main modification on the GMEA method was to redesign the function to find the exchange 
reactions in the model, which are used to define Sm and vm. The previous method performed 
the search of the exchange reactions based on their names. As mentioned before, the reaction 
and metabolite names definitions are arbitrarily decided by the model designer, and they are 
not standard. Therefore, some exchange reactions could not be included in Sm and vm, or in 
worse cases, the GMEA function would not work. 
 
The new adaptation instead, was based on the metabolites and reactions position in the 
stoichiometric matrix, which allowed the script to work for any given model andsituation, and 
it also simplified the procedure noticeably. 
 
Then, it is possible to rearrange Equation 15 to isolate vc and substitute it back to Equation 15 
(Supplementary Information 1.3.2), making it possible to write the steady state equation as a 
function of vm:  
 
 
𝑅∙vm = 0 
(15) 
 
 
𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒  𝑅= (𝑆𝑚− 𝑆𝑐∙(𝑆𝑐)# ∙𝑆𝑚) 
(16) 
 
R is the Redundancy Matrix, and it has as many rows as measured metabolites. From all the 
fluxes, only a small number of all the flux relationships will be linearly independent. This 
==PAGE:25==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
25 | 66 
 
linearly independent fluxes can be extracted in the so-called reduced redundancy matrix (Rred), 
which is a reduced version of R, with as many rows as the rank of R.  
 
If no error was present in the measurements, the steady state hypothesis should hold, even 
when Rred was used. However, there are always some errors associated to the experimental 
measurements that deviate the steady state hypothesis from the ideal value:  
 
 
𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑑∙vm =  𝜀 
(17) 
 
With the error and the deviation of the error it is possible to calculate the chi square test score 
(Equation 18). The Chi-square is a statistical hypothesis test used to determine whether a 
variable is likely to come from a specified distribution or not. And it is used to evaluate if a 
sample is representative of the full population. 
 
 
ℎ𝜀 = 𝜀𝑇∙𝐷𝜀 
−1 ∙𝜀 
(18) 
 
The hε value was compared to the chi-squared value in the rank of R. In the case of the CHO 
DG44 model, the rank (R) was equal to 14, so the critical value of the Chis-square distribution 
with 14 degrees of freedom with a 95% of consistency was 23,685 (Table 8.1, Appendices). If 
the hε exceeds this value, the consistency between the data and the model is rejected 
(Equation 19), as the defined variance of the measured fluxes is not enough to explain the 
differences between the data and the model. 
 
 
ℎ𝜀 ≤𝜒95%(𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑘(𝑅)) →ℎ𝑦𝑝𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑠 𝑎𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑝𝑡𝑒𝑑 
(19) 
 
The reasons for inconsistency between the data and the model can be (Quek et al., 2010):  
 
1) The assumed accuracy of the data is less than expected and the real error is bigger 
than the assumed. In this script it is also assumed that the error has a gaussian 
distribution around the real value, but other error distributions would be more 
accurate descriptions of the error distribution. 
2) There is a significant bias in one or more of the measurements. 
3) The model is wrong or incomplete (some substrates or products are ignored). 
 
The GMEA function allows to test the accuracy of the data without the need to perform an FBA 
and have an extra verification of the accuracy of the data extracted from the laboratory. It is 
also a system to further analyze the possible inconsistencies between the data and the model 
and understand how they can be solved. 
 
3.7.  Reformulating 
the 
biomass 
equation 
based 
on 
exometabolomic 
measurements.  
 
An alternative to the experimental method for the biomass determination would be the 
generation of a computational tool that could recalculate the biomass composition of the cell 
==PAGE:26==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
26 | 66 
 
based on the exometabolomic information that is easily obtained in high throughput 
bioreactors. This tool should readjust the concentrations of the non-measured metabolites 
based on the exchange rates of the measured metabolites. The generation of this tool would 
increase the predictivity of the models as more accurate biomass equations for each CHO cell 
line would be used. But also, it would significantly reduce the time spent to generate these 
equations compared to the experimental path. 
 
To compute growth phenotypes accurately in a model, the biomass objective function should 
be determined using data drawn from experimental measurements and literature.  
 
A biomass objective function (BOF) includes the cell major macromolecules (DNA, RNA, 
protein, lipids, and carbohydrates), and the fractions of each of these elements that are used 
for cell growth.  In general terms, the biomass equation comes down to: 
 
 
𝑥∙𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑙𝑒𝑠+ 𝑦∙𝐻2𝑂+ 𝑧∙𝐴𝑇𝑃→𝑘∙𝐻+ + 𝑗∙𝐴𝐷𝑃+ 𝑖∙𝑝𝑖  
(20) 
 
Where the coefficients are the fraction of each component contributing to the reaction in 
nmole/gDW, and the flux through this reaction corresponds to the growth rate of the cell. 
 
The biomass equation in the current CHO models, due to the lack of relevant data, is based on 
literature values partially derived from different organisms. The reason for this is the required 
experimental time and effort for the accurate determination of the BOF. 
 
However, 
the extensive 
exometabolomic 
data 
extracted 
from 
the 
experimental 
measurements, could be used to calculate the exchange rates of those metabolites that can be 
measured in the media and that are present in the biomass composition. By knowing the 
consumption or excretion rate of each metabolite it would be possible to infer the cell’s 
metabolic requirement to improve the cell composition accuracy. 
 
Then, using the exometabolomic data the internal metabolites of the biomass equation could 
be divided between the calculated metabolites and the non-calculated metabolites. This 
information permits a better determination of those components in the biomass composition 
that can be calculated. Then, the non-calculated metabolites can be readjusted to fit the new 
composition based on the literature values. This approach should give a better approximation 
of the real biomass composition for the CHO strain used in the experiment, compared to the 
generic biomass equation used in the current models, which is also not characterized for 
different strains.  
 
The presented algorithm for biomass reformulation was divided in two modules. In the first 
module the exometabolomic data was used to infer the composition of those metabolites in 
the biomass equation and in the second module the other biomass components’ contribution 
was calculated by trying to impose a 0 Carbon, Nitrogen and Redox balance criteria. 
 
From all measured metabolites present in the biomass, only the consumption rates were 
considered in the first module. The reason for this was that excretion rates are no good 
==PAGE:27==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
27 | 66 
 
measurements of the biomass composition as they may be produced internally, making them 
very difficult to measure as the initial concentrations are unknown. In addition, the highest 
measured rates from the replicates are used for the biomass calculation. If a metabolite is 
consumed at different rates in two situations, it means that for the highest rate situation the 
cell will grow less per metabolite consumed. Then, by taking the highest consumption rates for 
each metabolite in different replicates it was ensured to consider the worst-case scenario for 
the consumption of each metabolite. 
 
The objective was to give more accurate descriptions of every cell strain used in the 
experiments without the need of defining the biomass composition experimentally, which is 
totally unfeasible. The proposed approximation, even not totally accurate, should result in 
better descriptions of the cell growth in the model and the internal fluxes of the cell.  
 
3.7.1. Calculation of the cell composition based on the exchange reactions 
 
First the measured metabolites exchange rates were expressed as a fraction of the cell mass: 
 
 
𝑞𝑐 𝑒𝑥(𝑛𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒
𝐿 ∙ℎ) ∙ 
1
𝑉𝐶𝐷 (106𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠
𝐿 
) ∙ 𝒄𝒆𝒍𝒍 𝑫𝑾(𝑚𝑔 𝐷𝑊
106𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑠)
= 𝑞𝑐 𝑒𝑥(
𝑛𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒
𝑚𝑔 𝐷𝑊 ∙ℎ)  
(21) 
 
Where VCD is the viable cell density and cell DW is the dry weight of CHO. Even trivial, the step 
shown in Equation 21 is crucial for the determination of the biomass equation, as small 
variations in the dry weight of the cell used, will have a big impact on the rates. The value used 
for these calculations was 0.36 mg DW (106 cells)-1. 
 
The exchange rates (nmole mg-1 h-1) were converted to nmole mg-1 h-1 by the molecular weight 
(MW): 
 
𝑞𝑐 𝑒𝑥(
𝑛𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒 
𝑚𝑔 𝐷𝑊 ∙ℎ) ∙𝑀𝑊( 𝑛𝑔 
𝑛𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒) = 𝑞𝑐 𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠(
𝑛𝑔
𝑚𝑔 𝐷𝑊 ∙ ℎ) 
  
  
(22) 
Then the contribution of each one of the metabolites in the exchange reactions was 
determined dividing by the cell mass:  
 
% 𝑜𝑓 𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  = 𝑞𝑐 𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠
𝑞𝑐 𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠
  
 
  
(23) 
Where qc biomass is the biomass growth rate in the units of qc mass.  
 
Because some of the components in the biomass composition are not recalculated based on 
the exchange reaction, the total percentage of biomass composition could be different than 
100%, so the results were normalized dividing by the sum of the contribution of each 
metabolite to the biomass composition and multiplying by 100. 
 
==PAGE:28==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
28 | 66 
 
3.7.2. Constraining the biomass composition to account for experimental error 
 
Theoretically, the calculation of the biomass composition based on the consumption rates of 
the cell should be an improvement to the standard biomass equation. However, the 
experimental data is subject to biological and instrumental noise that could cause deviations 
from the ideal values, leading to wrong biomass composition predictions. 
 
To overcome this issue, the new approach first calculates the new biomass composition based 
on the exchange reactions, and then, applies a nonlinear optimization tool (MATLAB function 
fmincon), to determine the non-calculated metabolites values that minimize the difference 
between the calculated biomass composition and the reference values (Supplementary 
information 1.3.3). This can be described as: 
 
 
𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝐹(𝑥)) = ∑(|𝑅𝑒𝑓𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝.  − 𝐶𝑎𝑙𝑐𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝|)  
(24) 
 
The fmincon solver iterates to find the minimum value of this multivariable function (F(x)), 
where the variables are the composition of the non-measured metabolites. However, if any 
extra constrains are added the value of the variables could be negative, which in biological 
terms is unfeasible. For this reason, the variable of the function must have upper and lower 
limits that can be stablished by the user based on previous knowledge. In this case they were 
set at ± 0.4 from the reference value. 
 
3.7.3. Global balance calculation as a test of the fmincon procedure 
 
If all the metabolites consumed and excreted by the cell were measured, and these 
measurements were accurate, the general balance equation should hold: 
 
 
𝐹𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑖𝑛+ 𝐺𝑒𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 − 𝐹𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑜𝑢𝑡 − 𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛= 0 
(25) 
 
Which in a biological system, where no generation of matter exists: 
 
 
𝐹𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑖𝑛= 𝐹𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑜𝑢𝑡+ 𝐶𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑀𝑎𝑠𝑠 
(26) 
 
Where Flowin is the total metabolites absorbed by the cell in moles, Flowout is the total 
metabolites excreted by the cell, and Cell Mass is based on the newly defined composition. 
 
Due to inaccuracies in the measurements, it would be expected that the Equation 25 was not 
balanced. However, a better definition of the cell composition should impact the accumulation 
factor, bringing the general balance closer to zero. The balance of Equation 26 with the newly 
predicted biomass equation was performed using the exometabolomic measurements of 
containing the information of 32 metabolites. In contrast, the balance performed with the 
reference composition was based in a study with 25 metabolites. 
 
==PAGE:29==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
29 | 66 
 
In fact, the balance is not the total moles of elements, but the carbon, nitrogen and redox 
balance in the system. Thus, the global balance equation is the sum of balancing these three 
elements:  
 
 
𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑏𝑜𝑛𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒+ 𝑁𝑖𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒+ 𝑅𝑒𝑑𝑜𝑥𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒= 0 
 
(27) 
 
The first step was to recalculate the elemental composition of the new biomass equation. As 
an example, the carbon composition is shown, but the same procedure was performed for all 
the elements in the metabolites (C, H, O, N, P, S): 
 
 
𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑖(𝑛𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒 𝑚𝑔𝐷𝑊−1) = 𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑖(𝑛𝑔 𝑚𝑔𝐷𝑊−1)
𝑀𝑊𝑖(𝑛𝑔 𝑛𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒−1)
 
(28) 
 
 
𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑏𝑜𝑛𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑠= ∑(𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑖∙𝐶𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑖)
𝑖=35
 
(29) 
 
Where Total molei represents the amount of each metabolite in the biomass in moles, Cmol is 
the moles of carbon per mole of metabolite, and i is the number of metabolites in the biomass 
composition. The same calculation for the different elements in the biomass metabolites 
resulted in the new biomass elemental composition. 
 
Whit the calculation of the new biomass elemental fractions and the molecular weight of all 
the metabolites included in the exometabolomic data, a similar calculation to Equation 28 was 
done to calculate the moles of carbon and nitrogen of each metabolite. 
 
 
𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑏𝑜𝑛𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒= ∑𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑖∙𝐶𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑖
𝑖=32
 
(30) 
 
Where Ratei is the rate of each metabolite, Cmol is the moles of carbon per mole of metabolite 
in the media and i is the total elements analyzed by the exometabolomics. The same 
procedure was performed for the nitrogen balance.  
 
For the calculation of the reduction balance of the fluxes, the first step was to calculate the 
degree of reduction (DoR) of each metabolite measured: 
 
 
𝐷𝑜𝑅= 𝑥∙𝐸𝑠𝑡𝐶+ 𝑦∙𝐸𝑠𝑡𝐻+ 𝑧∙𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑂+ ℎ∙𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑁+ 𝑖∙𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑆   
(31) 
 
Where the lowercase variables, which are the moles of each element (CHONS) in the 
metabolites, are multiplied by the oxidation state of each element. Finally, the DoR of each 
metabolite was multiplied by its corresponding rate using Equation 30 to calculate an 
approximation of the Redox balance in the fermentation. 
 
The sum of the carbon, nitrogen and redox balances resulted in the global balances. The 
comparison of the global balance using the new biomass equation against the calculations 
==PAGE:30==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
30 | 66 
 
from literature using the reference biomass composition, would be an indicator of how good 
the developed method was at predicting the real biomass composition of the cell.  
 
3.7.4. Stablishing non-arbitrary boundaries for the non-calculated metabolites 
 
One of the limitations of the initial fmincon based strategy was the arbitrary establishment of 
the variable boundaries. For example, the real lower boundary of any value should be closer to 
zero, while right now it was -0.4 from the literature value. In addition, in a real system each 
metabolite will have its own upper and lower boundaries based on the internal balances in the 
cell.  
 
Moreover, as the equation that was trying to be minimized was the difference between the 
reference and predicted values (Equation 24), the design of the script did not permit to fix the 
global balance to 0. To solve this issue, the approach was to find the upper and lower 
boundaries of the non-calculated metabolites one by one and at the same time enforce the 
balance to be equal to zero. 
 
To do that, Equation 24 was rewritten as a function of the different non-calculated variables, 
resulting in a polynomial equation of 17 variables. And then, isolating them one by one and 
running an fmincon, where f(x) was one metabolite and the other 16 where the variables, it 
would be possible to stablish the lower boundaries of all of them: 
 
 
𝐹(𝑥) = 0 − 𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑏𝑜𝑛𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 − 𝑁𝑖𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 − 𝑅𝑒𝑑𝑜𝑥𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 
(32) 
 
On the contrary, to calculate the upper boundaries a reverse fmincon was performed in order 
to stablish the upper boundaries for each metabolite. 
 
However, as Equation 29 is polynomial, if no constrains were added, the result of minimizing 
F(x) would tend to minus infinite. As opposed to the fmincon for the biomass determination, it 
is not possible to constrain the variables of the equation with upper and lower boundaries as 
their determination is the objective of this process.  
 
An additional constrain that can be used for the fmincon function is (Supplementary 
information 1.3.3): 
 
 
 
𝐴 ∙𝑥 ≤𝑏 
(33) 
 
This linear inequality is an alternative to constrain the values of x without the need to add 
upper and lower boundaries. In this case, the biomass elemental composition was calculated 
again without the non-calculated metabolites. Here, b was the fraction of the MW of the cell 
represented by the non-calculated metabolites using the reference values. And A is a vector 
containing the contribution of each non calculated metabolite to the MW of the biomass. As 
an example, the calculation of the first element of the vector is shown: 
 
==PAGE:31==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
31 | 66 
 
 
 
𝐶𝐴(1,1) = 𝐶𝑚𝑒𝑡𝑎𝑏.  (𝑛𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑐 𝑛𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒−1)
𝑀𝑊𝑚𝑒𝑡(𝑛𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑐 𝑛𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒−1) 
 
(34) 
 
Cmetab corresponds to the moles of carbon in the metabolite and MWmet is the molecular weight 
of the metabolite.  
 
 
 
𝑀𝐶𝐴(1,1)(𝑛𝑔𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑏𝑜𝑛 𝑛𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑐−1) = 𝐶𝐴(1,1) ∙𝑀𝑊𝑐𝑎𝑟𝑏𝑜𝑛 
(35) 
 
Multiplying CA(1,1) the nanograms of carbon per nanogram of molecule can be calculated. 
Finally, the sum of the mass of each element in the first element gives the first element of the 
vector A: 
 
 
 
𝐴(1,1) = 𝑀𝐶𝐴(1,1) + 𝑀𝐻𝐴(1,1) + 𝑀𝑂𝐴(1,1) + 𝑀𝑁𝐴(1,1) + 𝑀𝑆𝐴(1,1) 
(36) 
 
Multiplying A(1,1) by the mass percentage of the first non-calculated metabolite in the 
biomass composition will give the mass contribution of this element to the molecular weight of 
the biomass.  
 
The reason for using the inequality constraint instead of the linear equality, is that the 
constraint is built around the 17 non-calculated metabolites, but during the calculation of the 
upper and lower boundaries, one of these values must be deleted as there are only 16 
variables (one metabolite is isolated). Then, A·x will always be smaller than b during the 
function minimization.  
 
In addition, it would be possible that the balance could not be zero, due to the before 
mentioned reasons. Errors in the data measurements, or the presence of metabolites in the 
media that can not be measured could make Equation 29 impossible to balance. To prevent 
this from happening a new equation was designed for the situations with the balance being 
zero were unfeasible:  
 
 
𝐹(𝑥) = ±𝑍−𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑏𝑜𝑛𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒−𝑁𝑖𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒−𝑅𝑒𝑑𝑜𝑥𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 
(37) 
 
Where Z is an arbitrary value that increases at each iteration of the system until the system 
becomes feasible to solve. A ± sign was needed because the deviation from the balance equal 
to zero could be either negative or positive. For this situation, the system would be still 
constrained by Equation 30. 
An overview of the boundary’s determination process is shown in Figure 3.2: 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
32 | 66 
 
 
Figure 3.2. Overview of the process to constrain the upper and lower boundaries of the non-calculated metabolites 
during the biomass tunning process. Section a) gives a schematic view of the constrained and unconstrained 
boundaries. In the first figure the boundaries for each metabolite are the same while in the second each metabolite 
has its own limits. The yellow section corresponds to the calculated metabolites, while the grey section corresponds 
to the variables. Section b) shows the two variations to calculate the upper (ub) and lower (lb) boundaries depending 
on the results of balancing the balance equation. The obtained results are used to calculate the new biomass 
composition still based on the reference values.   
 
 
 
 
a) 
b) 
==PAGE:33==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
33 | 66 
 
3.7.5. Evaluating the consistency of the reformulated biomass composition 
 
Once the biomass composition is reformulated its consistency with the observed phenotype 
must be tested. To this aim the calculated biomass composition was added to one of the latest 
reconstructions of CHO cell metabolism (CHO DG44). By this mean two analyses were 
performed: a leak test to identify possible free metabolite generation which would break the 
mass conservation under the steady state assumption and ii. a robustness analysis to test the 
consistency between cell growth requirements represented by the biomass formula and the 
measured consumption/secretion rates.   
 
3.7.5.1. Leak test 
 
One of the basic properties of a metabolic model is that there should be no free generation of 
any exchanged metabolite. If a species is consumed or produced from nothing it would violate 
the mass conservation principle. 
 
If the system is not well defined, it could happen that, to hold the steady state assumption 
(S·v=0) there could be generation or consumption of a species that were not coming from the 
exchange reactions to keep the steady state assumption true. 
 
Thus, the leaks in a network can be identified with the cardinality optimization problem: 
 
𝑚𝑖𝑛‖𝑦‖0 
 
𝑆∙v ± y = 0 
(38) 
𝑙≤𝑣≤𝑢 
0 ≤𝑦 
 
Where yi ≠ 0 indicates that the species is a leak and can be produced or consumed from 
nothing. The COBRA Toolbox contains a structure to automatically perform the leak test on a 
given model, blocking all the exchange reactions to detect if there is generation or 
consumption of metabolites from nothing. 
 
3.7.5.2. Evaluating the calculated biomass equation in the CHO DG44 model 
Once the CHO DG44 model with the new biomass equation had been tested to be leak proof 
another robustness test is required to determine if the reformulated biomass equation is 
consistent with the observed cell phenotype. 
This approach is based on the idea that the cell consumption rates are in accordance with cell 
growth requirements. Thus, if the biomass equation is well defined in a metabolic model, 
changing the boundaries of the intracellular reactions while keeping the exchange reaction 
boundaries, should not have an impact on the growth. Otherwise, the biomass growth rate 
would change since some intracellular reactions are limiting the growth rate in a way that 
increasing the boundaries will directly increase to growth rate. This approach can be applied 
assuming that none of the intracellular reactions associated to the biomass generation is 
==PAGE:34==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
34 | 66 
 
carrying the maximum flux defined by the upper boundary when it is within a reasonable 
range of values 
To perform this analysis, several FBA were performed for the standard DG44 model and the 
model with the new biomass equation, increasing the upper and lower boundaries of the 
exchange reactions to different ranges. If the model was well defined, the internal fluxes 
should remain constant and thus the cell growth should be kept unchanged. 
3.8. 
Integration of the data into the CHO model 
The final step of the designed pipeline is the integration of the validated fluxes from the GMEA 
into the GEM model with the updated biomass equation, which will give a more accurate 
behavior of the cell internal metabolite distribution. 
The exometabolomic data must be introduced in the model as upper and lower boundaries for 
the relevant exchange reactions that describe the transfer of the measured metabolites from 
the media into the cytoplasm. These boundaries are derived from the uncertainty limits 
calculated within the pipeline and define the space of solutions in which the FBA analysis can 
operate to find the optimal solution for a given objective function. 
Using the metabolite indexing stablished in the nomenclature standardization procedure it is 
possible to screen the stoichiometric matrix to extract all the exchange reactions. Then, using 
the COBRA toolbox functions the relevant boundaries for each metabolite are modified 
according to the exometabolomic. As there exist several steady stats across the course of the 
experiment, they must be analyzed separately. Therefore, several copies of the model are 
generated, each one containing the relevant upper and lower boundaries of the steady state 
being analyzed. 
 
 
4. Results 
 
The objective of the analysis was to test the consistency of the pipeline when complete models 
of CHO were used. 
 
The outlier removal, steady state clustering method and GMEA were tested for the new model 
and compared to the previous results using simpler models, and the objective was that each 
process worked properly for the newly given GEM. Instead, the biomass tunning, which was a 
new developed method, was compared to the results in the bibliography to determine the 
validity of the method before finally integrating it in the pipeline. 
 
4.1. Analysis of the outlier removal method and the addition of outlier removal 
cycles 
 
To test if the nomenclature standardization procedure worked properly and all the metabolites 
that appeared in the data and the model were related, the evolution of concentrations of each 
metabolite through time were plotted. 
==PAGE:35==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
35 | 66 
 
Concentration (mM) 
Time (h) 
 
Figure 4.1 illustrates the evolution of some relevant metabolite concentrations measured 
during the data acquisition process. Consistency was shown between the concentration 
evolution and the metabolite represented, which meant that the metabolites were 
successfully related with the corresponding data set. In addition, all the measured metabolites 
present in the model were showed in the plots, which meant that no data went missing during 
the outlier treatment even the new model contained significantly more metabolites than the 
previous model. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.1. Metabolite concentrations for those metabolites from the input data that appear in the GEM of CHO. 
This data corresponds to the first of the two replicates of the wild type of experiment. The concentrations for the 
new model integration are shown in blue, and the concentrations for the old model integration are shown in red.  
 
After the process of correlating each metabolite from the data set to the metabolites in the 
model had been validates, the outlier removal process was tested by running a first test with 
the original exometabolomic data extracted from the DASGIB bioreactor experiment. Then the 
output data with the removed outliers from the first test was used again as the input for a 
second outlier removal procedure. If the outlier removal process worked as expected, no data 
points should be removed during the second run, as the data should be already clean from 
outliers. The results for the first outlier removal run are shown in Figure 4.2. 
==PAGE:36==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
36 | 66 
 
Concentration (mM) 
Time (h) 
Concentration (mM) 
Time (h) 
 
 
Figure 4.2. Outlier removal process for the selected initial measured metabolite concentrations for the first replicate 
of the experiment. The blue points correspond to the initial data points, while the green dots correspond to data 
points that have been removed by the outlier removal process. The red flags are high frequency areas that 
correspond to the STFT analysis. Complete results are shown in Figure 8.3 in the Appendices. 
In general, the first outlier removal worked as expected by removing most of the clear outliers 
that could be visually seen in the data. However, in some metabolites as acetate, not all the 
outliers were removed, which could still cause problems in later analysis as GMEA or the FBA 
analysis of the data into the model. Nevertheless, it would be expected that by removing most 
of the outliers the data could be clean enough to avoid high errors deviations in later modules. 
 
In other plots as glucose and biomass it could be observed how points that were clearly not 
outliers were removed. This was not a concern as after the data point is removed, the outlier 
removal process gives a new estimation of the location of the data point based on the trend of 
the metabolite concentration. Then, the new data point will be very close to its previous 
location. Figure 4.3 shows how the removed measurements that were not outliers, were 
added again on the cleaned data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.3. Outlier removal process for the selected initial measured metabolite concentrations for the first replicate 
of the experiment using the cleaned data form the previous outlier removal process. The blue points correspond to 
the initial data points, while the green dots correspond to data points that have been removed by the outlier 
removal process. The red flags are high frequency areas that correspond to the STFT analysis. Complete results are 
shown in Figure 8.4 in the Appendices. 
==PAGE:37==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
37 | 66 
 
The only big concern is glutamine as it is one of the most problematic metabolites to measure 
due to its degradation in the media. In Figure 4.2 it can be appreciated how after each one of 
the three additions the concentration of the metabolite increases. However, the point 
considered an outlier corresponds to the real trend of the glutamine consumption in the 
media. This will cause that the resulting glutamine rate differs from its real value. A simple 
solution for that problem would be to include in the glutamine degradation calculations a step 
to remove the 3 points corresponding to the glutamine additions so they are not included in 
the outlier removal process. 
 
After the data had been treated with the first outlier removal, the resulting cleaned set of 
measurements was run again to test the performance of the outlier process. It would be 
expected that no data points were removed from the set. However, as shown in Figure 4.3 
some data points were removed but most of them did not correspond to outliers in the initial 
test. These results are clearer in Figure 8.4 in the Appendices, where all the metabolite 
concentrations are shown. 
 
The reason, why the second outlier removal still deleted some points was that the deletion 
process of a data point is based on some error margins based on the exponentially weighted 
moving factor. This causes that for more accurate data points the error margins become 
smaller, and points that were not removed initially are then considered outliers. In other 
words, performing a second outlier removal with clean data increases the accuracy of the 
method.  
 
This is not necessarily wrong as the plotting of the cleaned data (blue) in the second outlier 
removal process (Figure 4.3) showed that the recalculated data points that substituted the old 
outliers were very close to the value that would be expected in a visual observation of the 
data. In addition, this second cleaning would remove outliers that had not been deleted during 
the first cleaning process. This demonstrates that adding the possibility to perform several 
cycles of the outlier removal process into the pipeline could be beneficial for the data 
treatment process pervious to the integration to the GMEA process, helping to increase the 
consistency between the measured data and the model. 
 
However, to demonstrate that adding cycles to the outlier process could be beneficial for the 
data treatment, a comparative study for the different situations should be carried out to 
prevent the addition of unnecessary steps and complexity if it does not significantly increase 
the performance of the method. 
 
4.2. 
Steady state clustering of the concentration evolution of the metabolites 
and reconstruction of the exometabolomic data 
 
The k-means clustering approach is a machine learning method used to divide the metabolic 
fluxes in a set of steady states, as it is a basic requirement to perform a Flux Balance Analysis 
of the data in the model. The number of steady states will be defined by the number of 
centroids (k) that are necessary to recalculate the metabolic fluxes of all the metabolites 
within the given error margins. 
==PAGE:38==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
38 | 66 
 
The hypothesis of this method is that it is possible to divide each metabolite flux in a set of 
steady states with a constant rate. In order to test this hypothesis, the method must be able to 
reconstruct the concentration curves within a given error margin based on the predicted rates. 
 
Figure 4.4 shows the steady state segmentation of the metabolite concentration curves into 
different steady states.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An important remark on the k-means analysis is that the steady state distribution is a function 
of all the consumption/secretion rates. This means that each steady state described in Figure 8 
is calculated based in the data for all metabolites in that time interval at once. 
 
Each cluster must be understood as a vector of 38 rates, one for each metabolite, that are 
constant along the duration of the steady state. The steady state reconstruction of some 
metabolites is shown in Figure 4.5, where it can be observed that most of the steady states are 
found at the initial time intervals to account for the fast variations of the metabolites at the 
initial stages of the experiment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.4. Cluster assignment of the exometabolomic data over time by the k-means clustering method for an error 
threshold (E_th) of 20%. 
==PAGE:39==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
39 | 66 
 
Flux (mM/gDWh) 
Time (h) 
Time (h) 
Concentration (mM) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
By reversing the yield equation (Equation 13) it was possible to reconstruct the concentration 
of the metabolite for each time point based on the constant rate calculated for each steady 
state for every given metabolite. The results of this process are shown in Figure 4.6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The metabolite concentration curves reconstructed from the calculated steady state rates 
showed good agreement with the measured data, demonstrating the effectivity of the 
method. Thus, the predicted fluxes could be considered reliable approximations of the true 
fluxes and could be used for the integration of the data into the CHO model.   
 
Figure 4.5. Measured flux curves (red) and steady state predictions (blue) from the k-means clustering method for 
the selected metabolites. The complete analysis can be found in Figure 8.5 in the Appendices. 
Figure 4.6. Measured metabolite concentrations (red) and reconstructed metabolite concentrations(blue) for the 
selected metabolites. The complete analysis can be found in Figure 8.6 in the Appendices. 
==PAGE:40==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
40 | 66 
 
The modifications added to the k means algorithm changed the calculation of the error 
threshold to reduce the calculation time and resolve inconsistency issues. The new method 
gave a value of 1 to each metabolite when the calculated concentration was inside the 
stablished error threshold limits, and 0 if it was not. Then the iteration would stop when the 
sum of error reached 76 which meant that all the predicted metabolite concentrations were 
within threshold limits. 
 
 The error convergence in relation to the number of clusters for an error threshold of 20% and 
95% is shown in Figure 11 for comparison. In the figure it can be appreciated that around k=7 
the increase in the number of clusters does not significantly increase the accuracy of the 
calculated concentrations. However, for an error threshold of 95% the predicted number of 
steady states is 18, compared to 8 using a 20% of similarity between predicted and measured 
concentrations. 
 
A FBA analysis should be performed for each steady state found in the data. Thus, a reduced 
number of clusters would significantly simplify the posterior GMEA process and flux balance 
analysis. For this reason, comparative studies would be required to determine which error 
threshold would be enough to obtain flux predictions that were descriptive enough of the real 
calculated rates.  
 
Finally, to show the effect of stiffening the error threshold between the measured 
concentrations and the predictions, the measured and predicted concentration of glutamine 
over time was plotted for 20, 50 and 95% of error threshold.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Sum of the error convergence in relation to increasing the number of clusters for the 30 iterations 
performed by the k-means algorithm.  
==PAGE:41==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
41 | 66 
 
Concentration (mM) 
Time (h) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Figure 4.8 it can be concluded that increasing the error threshold from 0,2 to 0,5 
significantly increased the accuracy of the prediction specially at later stages of the 
experiment. For the 50% error threshold 13 steady states were found. However, no big 
differences could be observed when the error threshold was increased to 95%, where the 
number of clusters was 18.   
 
From this observation, it could be concluded that the user should aim for the minimization of 
the steady states in order to simplify posterior analysis but obtaining results that are predictive 
enough of the real behavior of the cell. Thus, the ideal error threshold should be a balance 
between accuracy and the minimization of the number of clusters.  
 
 
4.3. 
GMEA of the steady states predicted by the k-means algorithm 
 
The outcome of the gross measurement error analysis is a table with the result of the chi-
square test statistic for each one of the analyzed steady states.  
 
As previously mentioned, the CHO DG44 model was composed of 2751 metabolites that are 
combined to participate in 3942 reactions, which meant that the stoichiometric matrix (S) was 
2751x3942. The size of the associated redundancy matrix (R) was 752x23 with rank 14. Then, 
the reduced redundancy matrix (Rred) was a subset of R with as many rows as the rank of R 
containing only linearly independent fluxes. The dimension of the reduced redundancy matrix 
was 14x23.  
 
With the reduced redundancy matrix and the residual error calculated assuming a Gausian 
distribution around the real value it was possible to calculate the test hypothesis score (hε). 
This procedure was performed 8 times to study each one of the steady states determined by 
the k means algorithm and the results are shown in Table 1. Ensuring that the matrix is well 
conditioned will guarantee that the estimated fluxes are consistent with the model.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.8. Measured (red) and calculated (blue) concentration of glutamine over time for an error threshold 
of 20, 50 and 95% respectively. 
==PAGE:42==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
42 | 66 
 
Table 4.1.CHI squared test statistics results for the two replicates of the experiment for the eight steady state 
clusters identified by the k-means algorithm. For the matrix to be well conditioned Test score < CHI2 95% threshold. 
CHO DG44 
CHI2 95% threshold: 
23,685 
Replicate 
Cluster 
Test score 
1 
1 
0,070 
2 
46,284 
3 
647,04 
4 
13636,639 
5 
2075,597 
6 
366,903 
7 
72,496 
8 
4,865 
2 
1 
1076,002 
 
2 
9185.633 
 
3 
10889.472 
 
4 
1144.227 
 
5 
299.449 
 
6 
47.893 
 
7 
2.980 
 
8 
0.111 
 
From Table 4.1 it can be observed that for most of the steady states found in the first and 
second replicates the reduced redundancy matrix is not well conditioned as the test score was 
higher than the chi square threshold. This means that the calculated fluxes cannot satisfy the 
steady state hypothesis within the given margins of error. 
 
To ensure that these results were not affected by the high error threshold set in the k-means 
algorithm, the GMEA test was repeated with a stricter error margin for the k means algorithm, 
where 18 steady states were obtained. The results of the second GMEA process for the first 
replicate are shown Table 4.2. These results showed that the bad condition of the redundancy 
matrix was not related to the number of steady states defined.  
 
In conclusion, the GMEA process for the CHO model predicted that the measured fluxes were 
not consistent with the model for the assumed error threshold of the measures. This caused 
that the exometabolomic data could not be integrated into the model as it would have 
resulted into infeasible solution spaces or solutions that were not representative of the real 
behavior of the cell. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
43 | 66 
 
Table 4.2. CHI squared test statistics results for the first replicate of the experiment for 18 steady state clusters 
identified by the k-means algorithm. For the matrix to be well conditioned Test score < CHI2 95% threshold. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.4. 
Glutamine rate recalculation for the biomass reformulation 
 
Before using the exometabolomic data to reformulate the reference biomass composition the 
glutamine consumption rate had to be recalculated to account for glutamine degradation and 
the different additions of this metabolite that were done across the course of the experiment. 
 
Figure 4.9 shows the evolution of the glutamine concentration during the experiment without 
considering degradation and additions. This graph clearly showed the bad measurements of 
the metabolite during the constant changes in its concentration at each measurement time. 
 
After recalculating the real glutamine concentration that was consumed by the cell the results 
were plotted again (Figure 4.10), showing a great improvement in relation to the experimental 
measurements. The reason for obtaining negative concentrations of glutamine (Figures 4.10, 
4.11) was because what was being measured was the theoretical glutamine that would be in 
the batch according to the glutamine measured rate, as this allowed to calculate the real 
consumption rate of this metabolite. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHO DG44 
CHI2 95% threshold: 
23,685 
Replicate 
Cluster 
Test value 
1 
1 
1,679 
2 
7,754 
3 
33,310 
4 
97,134 
5 
202,448 
6 
647,04 
7 
13636,639 
8 
2075,597 
9 
366,903 
10 
148,043 
11 
79,899 
12 
31,294 
13 
10,001 
14 
3,545 
15 
1,313 
16 
0,572 
17 
0,216 
18 
0.039 
==PAGE:44==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
44 | 66 
 
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
140.00
Glutamine (mM)
Time (h)
-12.00
-10.00
-8.00
-6.00
-4.00
-2.00
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
0.00
50.00
100.00
150.00
Glutamine batch(mM)
Time (h)
-12.00
-10.00
-8.00
-6.00
-4.00
-2.00
0.00
2.00
4.00
6.00
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00 100.00 120.00 140.00
Glutamine batch (mM)
time (h)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finally, as the points of addition were known, it was possible to manually remove them from 
the graph (Figure 4.11). From this data it was possible to extract the glutamine consumption 
rate of the cell, that was reduced from -122 nmole mgDW-1 h-1 to -87 nmole mgDW-1 h-1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.9. Experimental glutamine concentration vs time for the experimental data used in the biomass tunning 
method. Data extracted from original_rates_biomass_tunning (Supplementary Material).  
Figure 4.10. theoretical glutamine concentration in the batch accounting for degradation across the 
duration of the experiment. Data extracted from Gdeg. (Supplementary Material) 
Figure 4.11. Theoretical glutamine evolution over time accounting for degradation and deleting the outliers caused 
by glutamine addition. Data extracted from Gdeg (Supplementary Material) 
==PAGE:45==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
45 | 66 
 
 
4.5. 
Reformulating the biomass equation with the exometabolomic data 
 
The first step to tune the biomass equation from reference based on the exometabolomic 
data, was to recalculate the mass percentages of those metabolites that were present in the 
biomass equation and whose exchange rates had been measured. The results of this 
calculations are shown in Table 4.3. Using this new percentages, the rest of the metabolites in 
the biomass were readjusted to fit the calculated mass percentages and so the total biomass 
composition percentages were equal to 100%. The result of the recalculation of the biomass 
composition for all the metabolites as well as the mass percentages can be found in the 
Appendices (Table 8.2). 
 
As shown in Table 4.3, some of the measured metabolites as glutamine or asparagine highly 
differed from the reference percentage assumptions, highlighting the potential of defining the 
biomass equation of the CHO cells instead of using a reference composition, and how this 
approach has the potential to improve the consistency of the models without the need of 
extra experimental work. 
 
Table 4.3. Mass percentages of the reference measured metabolites whose exchange rates were calculated in the 
exometabolomic data and the newly percentages calculated based on those rates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To account for the possible experimental error of the measurements and at the same time 
adjust the non-calculated metabolites, the fmincon MATLAB function was used. The objective 
was to minimize the differences between the Update % and the Reference % (Equation 24). As 
the non-calculated percentages cannot adopt any value, arbitrary upper and lower limits were 
stablished, giving a range within they could vary. The results of the fmincon procedure for the 
non-calculated metabolites are shown in Table 4.4 (Optimized %). 
 
Compound 
Reference % 
Updated % 
'L-Lysine[b]' 
5,002 
5,213 
'L-Arginine[b]' 
3,596 
5,095 
'L-Glutamine[b]' 
4,633 
28,721 
'L-Serine[b]' 
4,790 
9,940 
'L-Methionine[b]' 
1,947 
1,937 
'L-Tryptophan[b]' 
0,471 
1,403 
'L-Phenylalanine[b]' 
3,424 
2,950 
'L-Tyrosine[b]' 
2,301 
2,645 
'L-Cysteine[b]' 
0,204 
2,260 
'L-Leucine[b]' 
7,020 
5,990 
'L-Histidine[b]' 
1,782 
1,870 
'L-Proline[b]' 
4,593 
3,206 
'L-Asparagine[b]' 
4,185 
19,659 
'L-Valine[b]' 
5,481 
3,857 
'L-Threonine[b]' 
4,287 
3,384 
'L-Isoleucine[b]' 
4,758 
3,953 
==PAGE:46==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
46 | 66 
 
Table 4.4. Upper and lower boundaries for the non-measured metabolites of the biomass equation for the fmincon 
process. The results of the fmincon are shown in the column Optimized %. 
Compound 
Updated % 
Lower limit 
Upper limit 
Optimized % 
'1-Phosphatidyl-D-myo-inositol[b]' 
0,557 
0,334 
0,779 
0,740 
'CTP[b]' 
2,016 
1,210 
2,823 
2,680 
'Cardiolipin[b]' 
0,167 
0,100 
0,234 
0,222 
'Cholesterol[b]' 
3,117 
1,870 
4,363 
4,142 
'GTP[b]' 
2,273 
1,364 
3,182 
3,021 
'Phosphatidylcholine[b]' 
3,840 
2,304 
5,376 
5,103 
'Phosphatidylethanolamine[b]' 
1,447 
0,868 
2,026 
1,923 
'Phosphatidylglycerol[b]' 
0,056 
0,033 
0,078 
0,074 
'Phosphatidylserine[b]' 
0,167 
0,100 
0,234 
0,222 
'Sphingomyelin[b]' 
1,870 
1,122 
2,618 
2,485 
'UTP[b]' 
1,210 
0,726 
1,694 
1,608 
'dATP[b]' 
0,486 
0,291 
0,680 
0,646 
'dCTP[b]' 
0,324 
0,194 
0,453 
0,430 
'dGTP[b]' 
0,324 
0,194 
0,453 
0,430 
'dTTP[b]' 
0,486 
0,291 
0,680 
0,646 
 
The final biomass equation composition and the reference composition are shown in the 
Appendices (Table 8.2). 
 
After the new values for the non-measured metabolites had been obtained the global balances 
(Equation 27) were calculated for the reference biomass and the predicted biomass in order to 
compare which one was better. In theory a better conditioned biomass equation should be 
closer to zero as it would better explain the balances inside the cell.  
 
The biomass molecular weight was readjusted for the new biomass composition and then the 
carbon and nitrogen balances of all the measured metabolites in the data were calculated by 
multiplying the moles of each element with the measured rate. Finally, the redox balance for 
every measured metabolite in the media was obtained by multiplying the degrees of oxidation 
of each metabolite with the rate. The contribution of each metabolite in the carbon, nitrogen 
and redox balance was summed to calculate the total balance, and the results of are shown in 
Table 4.5.   
 
Table 4.5. Results for the carbon, nitrogen and redox balances for the updated biomass equation and the reference 
data. The data for the calculation of the balances for the new biomass equation can be found in the Appendices 
(Table 8.3). The data used for the calculation of the balances for the reference biomass was extracted from 
ref_glob_balance (Supplementary Material).  
Carbon Balance 
Nitrogen Balance 
Redox Balance 
Total 
NEW BIOMASS 
(nmole mgDW-1 h-1) 
-697,0812 
-233,9496 
-3.784,6348 
-4,715.6657 
REFERENCE BIOMASS 
(nmole mgDW-1 h-1) 
-1226.3343 
 
-139.8338 
 
-4822.1457 
 
-6188.3138 
 
 
The global balance for the new biomass equation was clearly better than the reference value. 
In addition, the reference data did not include as many metabolites in the calculation of the 
==PAGE:47==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
47 | 66 
 
rate as the data used for our experiments. In fact, oxygen, which is one of the main 
contributors to the negative sign on the redox balance was not measured in the reference 
data. This implies that the if the same metabolites had been measured in both studies the 
differences in the global balance calculations between our data and the reference would have 
probably been wider. However, the implementation of a module that determined the non-
arbitrary boundaries of the non-measured metabolites by enforcing the balance to be zero, 
would substantially improve these results.  
 
With these results, the predicted biomass equation was demonstrated to be more descriptive 
of the reality of the cell compared to the composition of reference and shows that this method 
could be a good alternative to generate good approximations from the biomass composition of 
CHO without the need of characterizing it for every experiment, which would be both time and 
cost expensive. 
 
Before adding the biomass composition to the model, it had to be converted from % of dry 
weight to mmole/ gDW as these are the standard units used on the GEMs. The final biomass 
composition that was added in the CHO DG44 model is shown in Table 4.6. 
 
Table 4.6. Biomass equation integrated in the CHO DG44 model obtained from the biomass tuning method. Data 
extracted from biomass_equation (Supplementary Material) 
Biomass composition (mmole gDW-1) 
0,6101 
ala_L[c] 
0,0906 
tyr_L[c] 
0,1816 
arg_L[c] 
0,2006 
val_L[c] 
0,2361 
asp_L[c] 
0,0147 
datp[c] 
0,8965 
asn_L[c] 
0,0105 
dctp[c] 
0,1337 
cys_L[c] 
0,0093 
dgtp[c] 
1,4788 
gln_L[c] 
0,0151 
dttp[c] 
0,2369 
glu_L[c] 
0,0624 
ctp[c] 
0,7163 
gly[c] 
0,0626 
gtp[c] 
0,0658 
his_L[c] 
0,0372 
utp[c] 
0,1607 
ileu_L[c] 
0,0806 
chsterol[c] 
0,2513 
leu_L[c] 
0,1234 
pchol_cho[c] 
0,2083 
lys_L[c] 
0,0538 
pe_cho[c] 
0,0752 
met_L[c] 
0,0143 
pail_cho[c] 
0,1091 
phe_L[c] 
0,0053 
ps_cho[c] 
0,1320 
pro_L[c] 
0,0019 
pglyc_cho[c] 
0,5320 
ser_L[c] 
0,0033 
clpn_cho[c] 
0,1498 
thr_L[c] 
0,0380 
sphmyln_cho[c] 
0,0340 
trp_L[c] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:48==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
48 | 66 
 
4.6. Consistency testing of the CHO model with the new biomass equation 
incorporated 
 
The first consistency test for the model was a Leak test in order to ensure that not metabolites 
were generated or consumed from nothing when the new biomass equation was incorporated. 
The leak tests consist of a MATLAB file where the model is loaded, and the script eliminates 
the exchange reactions and analyzes the internal fluxes of the model. The results for the leak 
test for the modified CHO DG44 model indicated that the model was leak free, which meant 
that it was prepared to run an FBA with it.  
 
The second test was aimed to evaluate the consistency of the new biomass equation and the 
model. When the biomass is well defined, there should not be accumulation of any metabolite 
in the model, and it should be independent of the rest of the internal fluxes. This means that 
modifying the rest of the fluxes while keeping the exchange reactions constant should not alter 
the cell growth predicted by an FBA. The results of the tests are shown in Table 7.  
 
Table 4.7. results of the Flux Balance analysis of the model with the original biomass equation and the new biomass 
for different boundary conditions for the internal reactions while the exchange reactions are kept constant. 
Upper/lower 
boundaries 
Growth Rate (mmole gDW-1) 
Original biomass 
New biomass 
lb: -100 
ub: 100 
0.0079 
0.0107 
lb: -1000 
ub: 1000 
0.0079 
0.0107 
lb: -10000 
ub: 10000 
0.0079 
0.0107 
lb: -100000 
ub: 100000 
0.0079 
0.0107 
lb: -1000000 
ub: 1000000 
0.0079 
0.0107 
 
Table 4.7 shows the consistency of the new biomass equation even the boundaries for the 
internal reactions are modified. In addition, the biomass growth of the cell for the new 
biomass equation was different than when the original equation was used, showing that the 
application of the biomass tunning method to optimize the biomass equation of the models 
has great potential to become a useful tool for the study of genome scale metabolic models. 
Generating optimized models would help to obtain more accurate predictions of the real 
behavior of the cell. 
 
4.7. Constraining the non-measured metabolite boundaries individually to 
enforce the global balance to be closer to zero   
 
Even the developed tool for biomass tunning improved the reference biomass composition 
accuracy, it had a couple limitations.  
 
==PAGE:49==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
49 | 66 
 
On one side, by arbitrary defining the upper and lower boundaries of the non-measured 
metabolites it was assumed that their range of variation was the same. However, due to the 
interconnectivity of all the metabolites in a cell, the reality is that each metabolite will have its 
individual upper and lower boundaries, that will be conditioned by the reactions it participates 
in.  
 
On the other side, trying to constrain the non-measured metabolites by reducing the 
difference between the calculated and reference data with arbitrary boundaries, enforces that 
what the system is really trying to do is to reduce the concentrations of the metabolites that 
diverge more from their reference value. However, that a measured value differed a lot with 
the value from literature is not an indicator of that measurement being wrong. In addition, the 
current method is only based on this constrain, but is not trying tom improve the global 
balance by enforcing it to be zero. 
 
To solve these two problems at once an inverse approach was tried. By enforcing the global 
balance equal to zero and writing the balance equation as a function of the non-measured 
variables, it was expected that they could be isolated one by one and to calculate their 
individual upper and lower bounds by performing an fmincon for each. By doing this we would 
be enforcing the balance equation to be zero or close, and at the same time it would be 
possible to calculate the boundaries for each metabolite individually. 
 
Due to time limitations in the project this module is under development, but it would be a 
great improvement to add more accuracy on the biomass equation definition. 
 
 
5. Discussion and future work 
 
Nomenclature standardization 
 
Even the outlier removal and steady state clustering steps do not use the CHO model, the 
nomenclature standardization script generates variables that are used in all the pipeline. For 
this reason, it is important to have a standard procedure that works for any given model and 
does not generate incomplete variables that will lead to errors in posterior phases of the 
pipeline. When comparing different models, it has been seen that they do not contain a 
standard nomenclature for the metabolites. However, what they generally have in common is 
the metabolite IDs. For this reason, a very simple but effective upgrade of the pipeline would 
be to design a structure with excel that extracted the data and placed it based on metabolite 
IDs directly instead of the common names of the metabolites. This would lead in less errors 
during the input integration into the pipeline.  
 
Outlier Removal 
 
During the evaluation of the outlier removal for a bigger model it was demonstrated that 
running to module more than one time could improve the effectivity of the method. The 
reason for this is that the deletion of outliers is based on an exponential moving average 
factor, which means that the reduction of variation between the criteria to delete a data point 
is based on the mean of the curve in the previous points. The presence of big outliers in the 
==PAGE:50==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
50 | 66 
 
first cycle of the process can mask smaller deviations. However, with a second cycle the 
method gets stricter for these outliers and removes them, generating cleaner data and 
replicates better the human behavior.  In conclusion, the pipeline could benefit from the 
implementation of outlier removal cycles, but new data inputs would be necessary to test the 
consistency of the method and stablish a reasonable number of cycles. 
 
Even the method worked for most of the metabolites, it was detected that it was incapable to 
delete the outliers caused by glutamine addition. In fact, the system detected the good data 
points as outliers and removed them. In the future, it would be necessary to implement the 
removal of the glutamine addition points prior to the outlier removal treatment. The pipeline 
already includes the calculation of the glutamine rate accounting for degradation and the 
addition of this extra step should be straight forward. 
 
K-means algorithm 
 
During the steady state clustering method, it was detected that the increase on the error 
threshold that was tolerated significantly impacted the number of steady states. In this study, 
between 8 and 18 steady states were calculated depending on the error margins.  While 
increasing the number of steady states increases the accuracy of the reconstruction of the 
metabolite concentrations, it also increases the complexity of the method, as more inputs 
must be analyzed in the posterior GMEA and flux balance analysis of the method. For example, 
if 13 steady states are calculated, the gross measurement error analysis will calculate the 
consistency between the data and the input for 13 different situations, and the FBA will be 
divided in 13 flux analysis. When we replicate a production host with a mathematical model, 
we want to generate predictions as accurate as possible to the reality, but at the same time 
make them as simple as possible. If it is possible to accurately describe the flux distribution of 
the cell during an experiment with eight steady states, it will be better than dividing it into 
thirteen.  
 
For this reason, a further development for the pipeline would be to test the advantages and 
disadvantages of increasing the error tolerance in the determination of the number of steady 
states to study how this affect the predictions in the Flux Balance Analysis. This would allow to 
stablish more accurate upper and lower limits for the error threshold variable. However, 
before doing this implementation the inconsistencies between the model and the data during 
the GMEA process must be addressed. 
 
Gross Measurement Error Analysis  
 
As shown in Tables 4.1 and 4.2, most of the fluxes determined in the steady state clustering 
were considered inconsistent when fitted into the model by the GMEA process even it was 
showed that the calculated steady states rates were able to accurately predict the metabolites 
evolution. However, when using the previous model, 7 steady states were defined and the 
GMEA method found that the reduced redundancy matrices for all of them where well-
conditioned. As the input data for both models was the same, this leads to the conclusion that 
==PAGE:51==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
51 | 66 
 
the inconsistencies could be caused by the increased model complexity (redundancy matrix 
with more degrees of freedom). 
 
From a biological point of view, the reason that could explain these inconsistencies between 
the data and the mode is that the number of measured metabolites is not enough to explain 
all the reactions happening inside the cell, as some of the exchange reactions contained in the 
model were not measured. This will eventually be solved with the advances in measurement 
technology as every day new tools and strategies arise to take measures that could not be 
done in the past. 
 
In mathematical terms, this problem is translated into a reduced redundancy matrix with high 
degrees of freedom as there is a big number of linearly independent reactions in the 
stoichiometric matrix. This added to the assumed error margins between the measured value 
and the real value of the data lead to very high hypothesis tests scores. In addition to this, it 
was also detected that during the assignment of the model metabolites to the data during the 
nomenclature standardization process, the selection of different enantiomers (i.e L-proline or 
D-proline) could cause that the process of calculating the reduced redundancy matrix resulted 
unfeasible. This shows the importance of the measured fluxes in the GMEA process and that it 
could be one of the reasons for the inconsistencies. 
 
For this reason, future resources should be focused on the development and implementation 
of the GMEA process, as right now is the limiting step that stops the application of the pipeline 
and the integration of measured exometabolomic data into complete genome scale metabolic 
models.  
 
This is a crucial step as it will prove that the measured exometabolomic data is consistent with 
the model and that the measurements can be used to constrain the space of solutions during 
constrained based modelling analysis as for example an FBA and study the behavior of the cell 
as well as metabolic bottlenecks, etc. 
 
Biomass tunning 
 
As this was the most recently developed module of the pipeline it still has room for 
improvement. The next step in the development of the biomass tuning module is the 
recalculation of the individual upper and lower boundaries for each non-measured metabolite. 
The implementation of this method should accurately predict the possible variation of each 
metabolite avoiding using arbitrary constraints and at the same time it would enforce the 
global balance to be closer to zero. To achieve this, it is crucial to stablish a system to constrain 
the variables without the need to stablish upper and lower boundaries. 
 
The current limitation of the process is that when writing the balance equation as a function of 
the non-measured variables (Equation39) to isolate them one by one the resulting equation is 
polynomial. This causes that performing an fmincon for each metabolite brings the boundaries 
to minus infinite and infinite, respectively.  To solve this, an inequality constrain was added to 
indirectly limit the boundaries, but the results were not satisfactory. For this reason, it is 
==PAGE:52==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
52 | 66 
 
necessary to stablish a way to constrain these balances to obtain the real upper and lower 
boundaries for each metabolite.  
 
 
𝐹(𝑥) = 0 − 𝐶𝑎𝑟𝑏𝑜𝑛𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 − 𝑁𝑖𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 − 𝑅𝑒𝑑𝑜𝑥𝑏𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 
(39) 
 
 
After having demonstrated that the tunned biomass was a better approximation to the real 
composition of CHO cells than the reference value, the module should be integrated with the 
rest of the pipeline in order to automate the process and make it fully modular. However, it 
would be good procedure to fully develop the complete module with the individual 
determination of the boundaries to simplification the integration process before adding the 
module to the pipeline.  
 
Similarly, to the GMEA process, this module will also benefit from the technology evolution, as 
the possibility of measuring more metabolites in the media that are part from the cell 
composition will lead to more accurate predictions. In addition, the biomass tunning process is 
only based on the intake reactions, as the calculation of the metabolite concentration that 
enters the cell can be easily calculated. However, a possible upgrade of the method could be 
to add the measurements of the excreted metabolites, to take into consideration those 
metabolites that are present in the biomass that are secreted out of the cell. However, these 
calculations are more complex as more internal information about the real cell composition is 
needed as well as the fluxes and pathways that lead to the excretion of that metabolite to 
make it possible to calculate which amount generated stays inside the cell. 
 
 
6. Conclusions 
 
The major aim of this master thesis was to improve the already developed pipeline for the 
treatment of high throughput exometabolomic data and its integration into a complex genome 
scale metabolic model. Following this improvement, a new module that recalculated the 
biomass equation of the model based on the exometabolomic data was developed with the 
aim to integrate it in the pipeline. This section will list the progress made in this project: 
 
1. The modified nomenclature standardization and input integration script was capable 
to successfully link the measured metabolites to their associate metabolites in the new 
model integrated in the pipeline. The modifications in this script generated errors in 
other parts of the pipeline that had to be resolved. The new format used should be 
functional for any new integrated model. However, to ensure this it would be 
advisable to directly store the measurements from the data sheets with the metabolite 
IDs as they generally follow a standard nomenclature.  
 
2. Experimental outliers in the measurements were identified and successfully deleted 
from the data with a method combining an exponentially weighted moving average 
and STFT, thanks to the semi-deterministic nature of the data points. It was also 
==PAGE:53==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
53 | 66 
 
demonstrated that the pipeline could benefit from a second cleaning procedure, as the 
treatment of the cleaned data in a second outlier removal process was able to correct 
smaller outliers that were undetected in the previous treatment. However, this should 
be tested to prove if the extra accuracy of the data could be beneficial for the process, 
or if it would only add unnecessary complexity to the method. 
 
3. The steady state clustering module was optimized to significantly reduce the 
calculation time. The results demonstrated that the extracellular metabolic fluxes 
could be divided in a set of steady states with constant fluxes for each metabolite.  This 
allowed the use of these steady state rates to perform FBAs at multiple stages of the 
cell culture in order to investigate the cell behavior in each of them. By accurately 
reconstructing the concentration curves of the metabolites using the steady state 
rates, it was demonstrated that the k-means clustering method worked successfully. 
However, more studies are needed to assess the impact of the tolerated error 
threshold in the calculated number of steady states. Stricter error tolerances 
generated more accurate reconstructions, but at the same time they increased the 
number of steady states, which raised the complexity of posterior analysis of the data. 
 
4. Even the method worked for simpler models, the increased complexity of the CHO 
DG44 leaded to inconsistencies between the model and the data in the gross 
measurement error analysis. As the input data remained unchanged all the 
explanations for these inconsistencies pointed at the model as the reason for the high 
“h test scores”. This represents the main bottleneck for the integration of the 
exometabolomic data into a complete GEM of CHO cells, and it should be a priority to 
address.  
 
5. The new developed biomass tunning module was able to successfully recalculate a 
biomass equation from literature using the exometabolomic data. The new biomass 
function was demonstrated to be a better description of the biomass composition by 
calculating the global balance of the cell and comparing it to the reference value. The 
module used the intake rates of the metabolites that where present in the biomass to 
recalculate the biomass function and then the minimum of a constrained nonlinear 
multivariable function was used to iterate the values of the non-measured 
metabolites. To improve the method the module should include the individual 
calculation for the upper and lower boundaries for every non-measure metabolite 
before running the function minimization and at the same time enforce to bring the 
global balance close to zero. Due to time limitations of the project this part is under 
development.  
 
6. All the knowledge from developing and using the pipeline was transferred into a user 
guide attached as supplementary material, that together with the pipeline will help 
future users that want to use the tool or develop it further. 
 
With this master thesis it has been demonstrated that the pipeline developed in the 
Quantitative Modelling and Cell metabolism group from DTU Biosustain has the potential to 
==PAGE:54==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
54 | 66 
 
become a very useful tool for the automatic integration of exometabolomic data into complete 
genome scale metabolic models once the consistency between the data and the model can be 
tested. This data will act as exchange reaction constrains that will restrict the space of 
solutions of the FBA analysis of the models, giving more accurate predictions of the cell model 
at different times of a cell culture. In addition, the newly developed biomass tunning module 
has successfully modified a biomass equation based on the exometabolomic data to generate 
a more accurate cell composition equation and after introducing it into the model the validity 
tests have been positive. For this reason, the integration of this module in the future will also 
contribute to the generation of more accurate in silico experiments with CHO cells. 
 
7. References 
 
 
Arthur, D., & Vassilvitskii, S. (n.d.). k-means++: The Advantages of Careful Seeding. 
Bernhard, P. (2000). The challenges of in silico biology. Nature Biotechnology, 18, 1147–1150. 
http://biotech.nature.com 
Bordbar, A., Monk, J. M., King, Z. A., & Palsson, B. O. (2014). Constraint-based models predict 
metabolic and associated cellular functions. In Nature Reviews Genetics (Vol. 15, Issue 2, 
pp. 107–120). https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg3643 
Calmels, C., McCann, A., Malphettes, L., & Andersen, M. R. (2019). Application of a curated 
genome-scale metabolic model of CHO DG44 to an industrial fed-batch process. 
Metabolic Engineering, 51, 9–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2018.09.009 
Chen, Y., McConnell, B. O., Gayatri Dhara, V., Mukesh Naik, H., Li, C. T., Antoniewicz, M. R., & 
Betenbaugh, M. J. (2019). An unconventional uptake rate objective function approach 
enhances applicability of genome-scale models for mammalian cells. Npj Systems Biology 
and Applications, 5(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41540-019-0103-6 
de Mas, I. M., Aguilar, E., Jayaraman, A., Polat, I. H., Martín-Bernabé, A., Bharat, R., Foguet, C., 
Milà, E., Papp, B., Centelles, J. J., & Cascante, M. (2014). Cancer cell metabolism as new 
targets for novel designed therapies. In Future Medicinal Chemistry (Vol. 6, Issue 16, pp. 
1791–1810). Future Science. https://doi.org/10.4155/fmc.14.119 
Dimitrov, D. S. (2012). Therapeutic proteins. Methods in Molecular Biology, 899, 1–26. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-61779-921-1_1 
Ebrahim, A., Lerman, J. A., Palsson, B. O., & Hyduke, D. R. (2013). COBRApy: COnstraints-Based 
Reconstruction and Analysis for Python. BMC Systems Biology, 1–6. 
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1752-0509/7/74 
Edwards, J. S., Ibarra, R. U., & Palsson, B. O. (2001). In silico predictions of Escherichia coli. 
Nature Biotechnology, 19, 125–130. 
Hefzi, H., Ang, K. S., Hanscho, M., Bordbar, A., Ruckerbauer, D., Lakshmanan, M., Orellana, C. 
A., Baycin-Hizal, D., Huang, Y., Ley, D., Martinez, V. S., Kyriakopoulos, S., Jiménez, N. E., 
Zielinski, D. C., Quek, L. E., Wulff, T., Arnsdorf, J., Li, S., Lee, J. S., … Lewis, N. E. (2016). A 
==PAGE:55==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
55 | 66 
 
Consensus Genome-scale Reconstruction of Chinese Hamster Ovary Cell Metabolism. Cell 
Systems, 3(5), 434-443.e8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2016.10.020 
Heirendt, L., Arreckx, S., & Pfau, T. (2011). Creation and analysis of biochemical 
constraintbased models using the COBRA Toolbox v.3.0. Nature Protocols, 2(3), 727–738. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2007.99 
Hong, J. (1989). Communications to the Editor Yield Coefficients for Cell Mass and Product 
Formation. In Biotechnology and Bioengineering (Vol. 33). 
Ideker, T., Galitski, T., & Hood, L. (2001). A New Approach to Decoding Life: Systems Biology. 
www.annualreviews.org 
J M van der Heijden, R. T., Romein, B., Heijnen, J. J., Hellinga, C., & Ch M Luyben, K. A. (1994). 
Linear Constraint Relations in Biochemical Reaction Systems: II. Diagnosis and Estimation 
of Gross Errors. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 43, 11–20. 
Kildegaard, H. F., Baycin-Hizal, D., Lewis, N. E., & Betenbaugh, M. J. (2013). The emerging CHO 
systems biology era: Harnessing the ’omics revolution for biotechnology. In Current 
Opinion in Biotechnology (Vol. 24, Issue 6, pp. 1102–1107). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2013.02.007 
Kitano, H. (2002a). Systems Biology: A Brief Overview. Science, 295(5560), 1662–1664. 
http://www.stke.org/ 
Kitano, H. (2002b). Computational systems biology. In Nature (Vol. 420, Issue 6912, pp. 206–
210). https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01254 
Lachance, J. C., Lloyd, C. J., Monk, J. M., Yang, L., Sastry, A. v., Seif, Y., Palsson, B. O., Rodrigue, 
S., Feist, A. M., King, Z. A., & Jacques, P. É. (2019). Generating biomass objective functions 
for genome-scale metabolic models from experimental data. PLoS Computational 
Biology, 15(4). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006971 
Lewis, N. E., Nagarajan, H., & Palsson, B. O. (2012). Constraining the metabolic genotype-
phenotype relationship using a phylogeny of in silico methods. In Nature Reviews 
Microbiology (Vol. 10, Issue 4, pp. 291–305). Nature Publishing Group. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrmicro2737 
M van der Heijden, R. J., Heijnen, J. J., Hellinga, C., Romein, B., & Ch M Luyben, K. A. (1994). 
Linear Constraint Relations in Biochemical Reaction Systems: I. Classification of the 
Calculability and the Balanceability of Conversion Rates. Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering, 43, 3–10. 
Martinez, I., Comas, P., de Mas, M., Batolomé, I., Joan, J., & Keld, L. (2020). Lactate reduction in 
CHO cell cultures through metabolic analysis. 
Nielsen, L. K. (2004). CHEE4014 METABOLIC ENGINEERING. 
Oberhardt, M. A., Palsson, B., & Papin, J. A. (2009). Applications of genome-scale metabolic 
reconstructions. In Molecular Systems Biology (Vol. 5). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/msb.2009.77 
Orth, J. D., Thiele, I., & Palsson, B. O. (2010). What is flux balance analysis? In Nature 
Biotechnology (Vol. 28, Issue 3, pp. 245–248). https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1614 
==PAGE:56==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
56 | 66 
 
Pan, X., Dalm, C., Wijffels, R. H., & Martens, D. E. (2017). Metabolic characterization of a CHO 
cell size increase phase in fed-batch cultures. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 
101(22), 8101–8113. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-017-8531-y 
Quek, L. E., Dietmair, S., Krömer, J. O., & Nielsen, L. K. (2010). Metabolic flux analysis in 
mammalian cell culture. Metabolic Engineering, 12(2), 161–171. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2009.09.002 
Schellenberger, J., Que, R., Fleming, R. M. T., Thiele, I., Orth, J. D., Feist, A. M., Zielinski, D. C., 
Bordbar, A., Lewis, N. E., Rahmanian, S., Kang, J., Hyduke, D. R., & Palsson, B. (2011). 
Quantitative prediction of cellular metabolism with constraint-based models: The COBRA 
Toolbox v2.0. Nature Protocols, 6(9), 1290–1307. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2011.308 
Széliová, D., Ruckerbauer, D. E., Galleguillos, S. N., Petersen, L. B., Natter, K., Hanscho, M., 
Troyer, C., Causon, T., Schoeny, H., Christensen, H. B., Lee, D. Y., Lewis, N. E., 
Koellensperger, G., Hann, S., Nielsen, L. K., Borth, N., & Zanghellini, J. (2020). What CHO is 
made of: Variations in the biomass composition of Chinese hamster ovary cell lines. 
Metabolic Engineering, 61, 288–300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2020.06.002 
Templeton, N., & Young, J. D. (2018). Biochemical and metabolic engineering approaches to 
enhance production of therapeutic proteins in animal cell cultures. In Biochemical 
Engineering Journal (Vol. 136, pp. 40–50). Elsevier B.V. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2018.04.008 
  
==PAGE:57==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
57 | 66 
 
8. Appendices 
 
 
Concentration (mM) 
Time (h) 
Figure 8.1. Evolution of the concentration of metabolites over time for the metabolites that were both measured and present in the CHO DG44 model.  
==PAGE:58==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
58 | 66 
 
 
 
Concentration (mM) 
Time (h) 
Figure 8.2. Evolution of the concentration of metabolites over time for the metabolites that were both measured and present in the simple CHO model.  
==PAGE:59==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
59 | 66 
 
 
 
Concentration (mM) 
Time (h) 
Figure 8.3. Outlier removal process for the original data extracted from the main pipeline. The results of both experimental replicates are shown in the figures. The blue dots correspond 
to the measured data points and the green dots show positions where original data points have been removed. The red flags are high frequency areas found with the STFT analysis. 
==PAGE:60==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
60 | 66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.4. Second outlier removal process for the clean data extracted from the main pipeline. The results of the second replicate are shown in the figures as they were the ones used 
for the analysis of the second clean procedure. The blue dots correspond to the measured data points and the green dots show positions where original data points have been removed. 
The red flags are high frequency areas found with the STFT analysis. 
 
Concentration (mM) 
Time (h) 
==PAGE:61==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
61 | 66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.5. Measured flux curves (red) and steady state predictions (blue) from the k-means clustering method for the selected metabolites for the first replicate of the experiment.  
Flux (mM/gDWh) 
Time (h) 
==PAGE:62==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
62 | 66 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Flux (mM/gDWh) 
Time (h) 
Figure 8.6. Measured metabolite concentrations (red) and reconstructed metabolite concentrations(blue) for the selected metabolites for the first replicate of the experimental data.  
==PAGE:63==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
63 | 66 
 
 
 
Table 8.1. Critical values of the Chi-square distribution with d degrees of freedom. Extracted from Introduction to Population 
Genetics (table D1) by Sinauer 2013. 
==PAGE:64==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
64 | 66 
 
 
 
Table 8.2. Comparison of the reference biomass composition (Reference %) with the recalculated biomass 
composition (Updated %) after the fmincon process to recalculate the non-measured metabolites. Reference values 
extracted from ref_biomass_comp (Supplementary Material)   
Compound 
Reference % 
Updated % 
MW 
'1-Phosphatidyl-D-myo-inositol[b]' 
0,557 
0,557 
389,97 
'CTP[b]' 
2,016 
2,016 
322,97 
'Cardiolipin[b]' 
0,167 
0,167 
507,94 
'Cholesterol[b]' 
3,117 
3,117 
386 
'GTP[b]' 
2,273 
2,273 
362,97 
'Glycine[b]' 
7,145 
5,377 
75 
'L-Alanine[b]' 
7,224 
5,436 
89 
'L-Arginine[b]' 
3,596 
3,163 
174 
'L-Asparagine[b]' 
4,185 
11,844 
132 
'L-Aspartate[b]' 
4,185 
3,149 
133 
'L-Cysteine[b]' 
0,204 
1,620 
121 
'L-Glutamate[b]' 
4,633 
3,486 
147 
'L-Glutamine[b]' 
4,633 
21,612 
146 
'L-Histidine[b]' 
1,782 
1,021 
155 
'L-Isoleucine[b]' 
4,758 
2,108 
131 
'L-Leucine[b]' 
7,020 
3,296 
131 
'L-Lysine[b]' 
5,002 
3,046 
146 
'L-Methionine[b]' 
1,947 
1,122 
149 
'L-Phenylalanine[b]' 
3,424 
1,802 
165 
'L-Proline[b]' 
4,593 
1,519 
115 
'L-Serine[b]' 
4,790 
5,591 
105 
'L-Threonine[b]' 
4,287 
1,785 
119 
'L-Tryptophan[b]' 
0,471 
0,695 
204 
'L-Tyrosine[b]' 
2,301 
1,641 
181 
'L-Valine[b]' 
5,481 
2,350 
117 
'Phosphatidylcholine[b]' 
3,840 
3,840 
310,97 
'Phosphatidylethanolamine[b]' 
1,447 
1,447 
268,97 
'Phosphatidylglycerol[b]' 
0,056 
0,056 
299,97 
'Phosphatidylserine[b]' 
0,167 
0,167 
312,97 
'Sphingomyelin[b]' 
1,870 
1,870 
491,97 
'UTP[b]' 
1,210 
1,210 
324,97 
'dATP[b]' 
0,486 
0,486 
330,97 
'dCTP[b]' 
0,324 
0,324 
306,97 
'dGTP[b]' 
0,324 
0,324 
346,97 
'dTTP[b]' 
0,486 
0,486 
321,97 
 
 
 
==PAGE:65==
High throughput metabolic modelling strategies to   handle big data                                                                      July 2021 
from bioreactor cultures 
65 | 66 
 
Table 8.3.  Information used for the calculation of the global balance for the newly defined biomass equation using 
the exometabolomic data. 
Compound 
Carbon (mole) 
Nitrogen (mole) 
DoR 
Rate 
(nmole/mgDWh) 
'Oxygen' 
0 
0 
-4 
176,293 
'''Pyruvate''' 
3 
0 
10 
-1,891 
'''Glutamic acid''' 
5 
1 
20 
13,883 
'''Acetate''' 
2 
0 
8 
5,694 
'''Glycine''' 
2 
1 
8 
10,485 
'''Alanine''' 
3 
1 
14 
46,403 
'''Succinate''' 
4 
0 
14 
0 
'''Lysine''' 
6 
2 
32 
-10,360 
'''Aspartic acid''' 
4 
1 
14 
9,777 
'''Formate''' 
1 
0 
2 
28,210 
'''Arginine''' 
6 
4 
30 
-9,94873 
'''Glutamine''' 
5 
2 
22 
-73,371 
'''Serine''' 
3 
1 
12 
-28,717 
'''Methionine''' 
5 
1 
32 
-4,442 
'''Tryptophan''' 
11 
2 
50 
-1,958 
'''Phenylalanine''' 
9 
1 
42 
-6,097 
'''Tyrosine''' 
9 
1 
40 
-5,074 
'''Cysteine''' 
3 
1 
20 
-7,369 
'''Glycerol''' 
3 
0 
14 
63,495 
'''Fumarate''' 
4 
0 
12 
-2,670 
'''Leucine''' 
6 
1 
32 
-14,106 
'''Histidine''' 
6 
3 
26 
-3,763 
'''Proline''' 
5 
1 
24 
-7,436 
'''Asparagine''' 
4 
2 
16 
-49,869 
'''Citrate''' 
6 
0 
18 
0 
'''Valine''' 
5 
1 
26 
-11,593 
'''Lactate''' 
3 
0 
12 
488,311 
'''Threonine''' 
4 
1 
18 
-8,859 
'''Glucose''' 
6 
0 
24 
-235,152 
'''Isoleucine''' 
6 
1 
32 
-9,188 
'''NH4+''' 
0 
1 
3 
110,543 
'''mu(h-1)''' 
3,538 
1,082 
16,006 
0,043 
