==PAGE:1==
M.Sc. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Opinion Dynamics on Networks
Lasse Mohr Mikkelsen
Kongens Lyngby 2021
==PAGE:2==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Matematiktorvet
Building 303B
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
The thesis topic is discrete-time continuous-state evolution equations for opinion dynamics on social
networks. Each node in the network is assigned a state, representing an opinion, and the state values
change according to prescribed rules for interaction between the nodes.
In particular, we work with a synchronous-update version of the weighted-median model for opinion
dynamics proposed by Mei et al. [Mei+21]. A group of agents is connected in accordance with an in-
fluence network and each agent is assigned a one-dimensional continuous state. Starting with an initial
state, for each discrete time step, all individuals update their states to be the weighted median of their
neighbors states. Because the weighted median is insensitive to outliers, our weighted median model
restricts the influence of extreme opinions in the network. It can therefore be viewed as a bounded-
confidence model for opinion dynamics.
We will numerically simulate our weighted-median model to study the time to reach fixed points and
the state at fixed points for several different types of influence networks and initial opinion distributions.
We will also seek analytical approaches to approximate trajectories of the system or provide other useful
insights into the nature of the models dynamics.
==PAGE:4==
Resumé
Emnet for dette speciale er matematiske modeller med diskret tid og kontinuert tilstande for hold-
ingsudvikling på netværk. Hver knude i netværket har en tilstand, der representerer en holdning, og
tilstandene udvikler sig i henhold til foreskrevne regler for hvordan knuderne interagerer.
Vi vil mere specifikt arbejde med en synkronopdateringsudgave af den vægtede median model for
udviklingen af holdninger som er blevet foreslået af Mei et al. [Mei+21]. En gruppe af agenter er
forbundet i henhold til et inflydelsesnetværk og hver agent har en kontinuert tilstand. Begyndende med
en initial tilstand opdaterer hver agent sin tilstand i hvert diskrete tidsskridt til at være den vægtede
median af sine naboers holdninger. Fordi ekstremværdier har begrænset inflydelse på den vægtede me-
dian, begrænser vores model hvor meget inflydelse ekstreme holdninger har i netværket. Vores model
kan derfor ses som en begrænset-tillidsmodel for holdningsudvikling.
Vi vil numerisk simulerer den vægtede median model med henblik på at studere hvornår stabile
tilstande indtræffer, og beskaffenheden af de stabile tilstande, på forskellige netværk og med forskellige
begyndelsesfordelinger af holdninger. Vi vil også forsøge at finde analytiske tilgange til at approksimerer
banekurver for systemet eller øge vores indsigt i systemets opførsel på anden vis.
==PAGE:5==
Preface
This master thesis was prepared at the department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring an engineering
degree in mathematical modeling and computing.
Kongens Lyngby, July 25, 2021
Lasse Mohr Mikkelsen
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisor Associate Professor Poul G. Hjorth for his invaluable help during
this project and my master studies as a whole; you have molded me as a researcher and I am truly
grateful for all your guidance and words of advice. I am also indebted to my co-supervisor Professor
Mason A. Porter.
Your incredible knowledge, sense for details, and patience stand as a beacon of
inspiration for me. Furthermore, I would like to thank Doctor Kiran Garimella for supplying me with
the Twitter-follower network data sets and Associate professor Christian Henriksen for his input during
my stability analysis for the weighted median model. Lastly, I would like to thank Ingrid Lykke Borre
for her patience, love, and support during this thesis.
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Summary
i
Resumé
ii
Preface
iii
Acknowledgements
iv
Contents
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Social networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Opinions on networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Cognitive-dissonance theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.5
Dynamical systems on networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.6
Structure of this report
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.7
Research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Network theory
12
2.1
Network definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2
Examples of networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Network characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Random-network models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Dynamical-systems theory
16
3.1
Discrete-time dynamical systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Weighted median model of opinion dynamics
17
4.1
Definition of our weighted median model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Fixed points of the weighted median model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Simulations of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5
Weighted median model with self-appraisal
24
5.1
Weighted median model with self-appraisal definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.2
Fix points of the weighted median model with self-appraisal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Simulated trajectories
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.4
Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.5
Limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal . . . . .
39
6
Mean-field approximation of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
49
6.1
Mean-field approximations for dynamical systems on networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
6.2
Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal . . . . . . .
51
6.3
Numerical test of our mean-field approximation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
==PAGE:8==
Contents
vi
7
Discussion and conclusions
69
7.1
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Bibliography
75
A
Appendix
84
A.1 Behavior of the weighted median model on a complete network . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
A.2 Convergence time and the number of opinion groups at fix-points . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
A.3 Opinion distribution at fixed points for the weighted median model . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
A.4 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal on a two-
regular network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
In this chapter, we initially make an informal introduction to network theory. We then introduce a
selection of theories and results from psychology and sociology that deal with the formation of opinions
of individuals and groups. We introduce social networks and some of the classical results about opinions
on networks. We then discuss dynamical systems on networks. Finally, we discuss a selection of the
most prominent models of opinion dynamics on networks. The theories and empirical findings presented
here form the inspiration for the mathematical modeling in later chapters.
1.1
Networks
To meaningfully introduce social networks and dynamical systems on networks, we need to introduce
some terminology from network theory. A formal introduction to networks can be found in Chapter 2.
A network consists of nodes and edges that connect the nodes. Nodes often represent some entities of
interest and edges represent a relation between two entities. Edges can either be directed or undirected
depending on the relation they represent. Two nodes are said to be neighbors when they are connected
by an edge. A path between two nodes in a network is a sequence of distinct edges and nodes that lead
from one node to the other. Some network structures have names, such as the complete network where
all nodes are connected to one another.
A mathematical subject similar to that of network theory is graph theory. The distinction between
networks and graphs is not always made clear. Yet, there can be a subtle distinction between the
two terminologies; networks often refer to real systems where nodes represent some entity and edges
represent a relation between two entities, whereas graphs refer strictly to the mathematical object
[BP16]. In this report, we do not make this distinction. The terminology will predominantly be from
network theory.
1.2
Social networks
A social network is an abstract representation of a set of individuals and the relations between them.
We take nodes to be people and the edges to represent relations between individuals. The type of
relation an edge represents can vary from network to network. The modern study of social networks
goes back to the 1930s with Jacob Moreno’s developments of sociometry [Rus05]. Historically, social
networks have been a major field of research in sociology and anthropology [Laz11]. More recently, the
topic has gained popularity in fields of research as diverse as physics, data science, political science, and
medicine [Rus05; CF11]. The development of social media has only increased the general interest in the
field, and it will surely continue to be an active field of research for many years to come.
Since real-world data on social networks are not always readily available, there has been a lot of
research into how one can synthetically construct networks that resemble social networks. Even in
cases in which real data is abundant, many algorithms and techniques need to be tested on networks
of various sizes. It is still an open problem how to construct networks with realistic properties [Bon+20].
==PAGE:10==
1.3 Opinions on networks
2
The degree distribution of networks is a classical feature to study. For social networks, the degree
distribution is often heavy-tailed [BA99; New18].
The social network consisting of all humans on the planet is often cited as having a 6-degree-of-
separation attribute. That is, a shortest path between any two individuals on the planet will on average
be no longer than 6 steps. The idea was studied by experimental psychologists Travis and Milgram in
the 1960s with their famous “small-world” experiments, [TM69]. Milgram’s findings were based on a
very small and biased sample, but the experiments have been repeated multiple times, more recently
by Dodds et. al. [DMW03] and by Facebook research [Edu+16]. It has mathematically been found
that large networks have surprisingly short paths between nodes [New18]. A shortest path between any
two nodes often scales no faster than the logarithm of the number of nodes. This effect is known as the
small-world property.
1.3
Opinions on networks
That people affect and are affected by neighbors in their social network has been known for decades; for
example, see the 1948 book The people’s choice by Paul Lazarsfeld, Bernard Berelson [LBG21]. To fully
understand these effects, one needs to consider how neighbors are affected and affect their neighbors in
turn. Repeating such an argument leads to an ever-increasing cobweb of relations among individuals;
that is, a social network. So the study of social phenomena, like opinions, is tied to the study of networks.
The reasons for studying opinions are very diverse. The opinion of the majority is the theoretical
foundation of modern democracies. Additionally, understanding how group dynamics shape radical
opinions is being studied in the research of terror cells [Lyo+15; MM08].
Opinions can also be studied without including the social network in which individuals opinions
evolve.
This was the case for many years in political science where the dominant methodological
paradigm was centered on public opinion research, with the assumption that observations in a sam-
ple are distributed independently of one another [Laz11]. In general, multivariate analysis of dyadic
data suffers from complicated interdependence and therefore violates the assumption of independence
[Laz+10]. Moreover, that is even before one realizes that social relations are not static. Social networks
are temporal. As individuals enter and exit social spheres, so will nodes appear and disappear. As rela-
tionships are created and broken, the edges of the network enter and leave. Another layer of complexity
stems from the fact that not all relations are created equal. Followers on social media do not have the
same relation to you, or you to them, as one would have with their spouse. Relations have even been
found to be asymmetric; friendship can be a one-way relation [CF11]. To include network structure in
any science may seem like trying to untie, rather than cut, the Gordian knot.
The reason to study networks and to include networks in the study of different phenomena rests
on the assertion that they are somehow consequential. Anecdotally, one would expect that people in
a highly connected social network have higher chances of reaching a consensus, or that individuals in
the periphery of such a network would have a lower social status. Empirically, it has been observed
that structural characteristics of social networks can affect attitudes regarding social and political issues
[BBM90]. It has also been observed that individuals part of the political minorities have significantly
fewer connections than individuals of the majority [Laz+10]. The causalities behind these findings are
not fully understood. If there truly are causalities behind the findings, then mathematical models might
be useful for analyzing and categorizing them.
1.3.1
Clustering in networks
Clustering in social networks is a well-known and thoroughly researched phenomenon. But the causes
of clustering are still not fully understood by social scientists.
Indeed, on April 10, 2010, a dozen
==PAGE:11==
1.3 Opinions on networks
3
leading researchers in the social sciences shared their thoughts on the hardest problems in social science
[Chr+10], where James H. Fowler proposed the following: “What causes clustering in social networks;
for example, how much is it the effect of shared environment (individuals in the cluster are connected by
some shared context that isn’t obvious); homophily (the tendency of similar people to like and associate
with each other); or — most interesting — influence? If it’s influence, how does it work?”.
Fowler’s quote enumerates three possible causes for clustering of individuals with similar traits
within a social: homophily, social influence, and shared environment. The balance between these three
forces has been studied extensively, but the causality and covariance of the dynamics are diﬀicult to
distinguish [Mar88; CF11; Laz01; Laz+10; ST10; CF08].
Homophily, social influence, and shared environment affect clustering in different ways. By def-
inition, homophily affects only the formation and time evolution of social networks [MSC01].
The
probability of creating an edge between two individuals and the probability of eventually removing it
from the network has been reported to depend on the similarity of said individuals [MSC01]. Contrary
to homophily, social influence only affects already connected nodes. Shared environment is less clearly
defined than homophily and social influence. Some researchers use the term to cover all unobserved
confounding factors which might explain an observed clustering [CF11]. This implies that an external
factor seizes to be, once it is observed.
Clustering has been observed with respect to attributes as diverse as ethnicity, happiness, lifestyle
diseases, opinions, and more [Laz+10; CF11; CF07]. Across multiple characteristics, it has been pro-
posed that social networks exhibit a “three-degree of influence” property. That is, attributes such as
obesity or depressions of individuals who are connected with a path of length 3 or shorter between
them are significantly correlated due to social influence. But the causality and statistical methods used
to infer it have been scrutinized [ST10; SG12; CF08]. If the property hold true, then even though
somebody might not know their spouse’s cousin’s neighbor, they may be influenced by them.
Clustering is a key concept in the study of echo chambers; social circles in which beliefs are rein-
forced by repetition and isolated from opposing arguments [Gar+18; Bau+19]. By their very nature,
echo chambers have a high degree of homogeneity with respect to one or more traits. This has been
observed to create stronger “fault lines” in society where opinions inside and outside groups differ more
clearly [BBM90].
Empirical studies of opinions on networks have historically been restricted to smaller groups [New18].
More modern studies cover larger social-media networks [Gar+18]. But the questions are relatively
similar; what is the distribution of opinions and how does it evolve? A lot of work has been made to
describe when a group can reach consensus and the relation between the group opinion and the original
opinion of the group members [Deg74; Har52; Jia+15; Red; FB17; MW05; Fri99].
1.3.2
Flow of information
In 1948, Paul Lazarsfeld, Bernard Berelson, and Hazel Gaudet formulated the two-step flow model of
voter opinions in the book; The People’s Choice after research into voters’ decision-making processes
during the 1940 U.S. presidential election [LBG21]. In the model, media content flows from mass media
to opinion leaders who collect, interpret, and disseminate it to less-active media consumers. The theory
reversed the dominant paradigm in mass communication at the time, which was to assume that mass
media influenced audiences directly.
The two-step model was formulated at a time when newspapers were the major source of mass media.
One may hypothesize that the innovations in data-driven automated mass media and the rise of social
media could lead to a one-step flow of information. But even though one-step flows have been observed,
==PAGE:12==
1.4 Cognitive-dissonance theory
4
they do not seem to be dominant compared to complex and iterative flows of information of social
media [Hil+17; BM06]. It has been observed that mass media messages affect individuals not targeted
with the original messages, implying that social influence is still prevalent [Bon+12]. So to model the
flow of information, one needs to accommodate a spectrum of flows: one-step, two-step, three-step, and
even more complex dynamics.
1.4
Cognitive-dissonance theory
Cognitions are a wide class of mental processes, covering aspects of intellectual functions and processes
such as thoughts, behaviors, attitudes, and beliefs [Fes57]. An aspect of cognition that has been studied
intensively is when two or more cognitions conflict with one another, resulting in what is known as cog-
nitive dissonance [Fes57; FC59; SC01; MW05; Fre86; Coo19]. The theory of cognitive dissonance was
proposed by Leon Festinger as an explanation for a number of findings that contradicted the theories of
motivation and social psychology of the day [Fes57]. The theory of cognitive dissonance has been used
to explain findings in the psychology of social influence and political science [FC59; BJ01; MW05].
According to cognitive-dissonance theory, individuals experience psychological stress, known as dis-
sonance, when two or more of their cognitions conflict. An individual continues to feel this stress until
the cognitions in question are aligned, in which case they become consonant. Cognitive-dissonance
theory proposes that people seek to minimize the discrepancy between what they expect and reality
[FC59]. Therefore individuals continually seek to reduce cognitive-dissonance.
Social-influence theories distinguish between normative reasons for dissonance (when opinions con-
flict) and informational reasons when (several perceived factual statements contradict one another).
When individuals are exposed to dissonance due to informational reasons they react by changing the
cognitions that conflict or by introducing new cognitions that justify or decrease the dissonance. When
the dissonance occurs due to informational reasons, individuals can also choose to ignore the new piece
of information that causes the dissonance. If the dissonance has normative reasons individuals can
adopt the opinion of others or try to convince others to adopt their opinion to lower dissonance [MW05].
It is well-known that interpersonal relations can be a source of and resolution to dissonance [SC01].
How group members react to dissonance depends on several social factors. Social status, perceived level
of expertise on the subject matter, and the number of group members on each side of the argument each
play a role in determining how individual group members react to minimize the dissonance [MW05].
Disagreement from a minority of others does not produce much dissonance because of the supportive
consonant cognitions provided by the majority. To avoid dissonance, individuals are likely to form
relationships with similar others [MW05]. Therefore, cognitive-dissonance might be one of the driving
forces behind opinion homophily [MSC01].
One of the notable theories that have built upon cognitive dissonance is selective exposure theory
[Fre86]. In it, the concepts of selective exposure, selective perception, and selective retention drive in-
dividuals to favor information that aligns with their pre-existing views while avoiding contradictory
information. This research has gained interest in recent years due to its relation to echo chambers
[Fre86].
1.5
Dynamical systems on networks
In this section, we give a brief introduction to dynamical systems, with a special focus on systems that
are defined on networks. This introduction is in no way exhaustive. Good general introductions are
==PAGE:13==
1.5 Dynamical systems on networks
5
given in [PG16] or in chapters 16 and 17 of [New18].
In general, a dynamical system is a system in which a function describes how a state changes with
time. The field can be traced back to the equations of motion formulated by Isaac Newton and devel-
oped upon by Pierre-Simone Laplace, Leonard Euler, and Joseph Lagrange. The French mathematician
Henri Poincaré is often regarded as the founder of modern dynamical-systems theory. He published the
monographs “New Methods of Celestial Mechanics” (1892–1899) and “Lectures on Celestial Mechanics”
(1905–1910). In them, he applied what would later be called dynamical-systems theory to the problem
of the motion of three celestial bodies. Other notable mathematicians and physicists who have con-
tributed to the field of dynamical systems are Aleksandr Lyapunov, who founded the field of stability
analysis for dynamical systems; and George David Birkhoff, for his work in discrete systems and the
discovery of the ergodic theorem.
In loose terms, dynamical systems are abstract representations of how things develop over time.
Since such abstractions can be made in different ways, dynamical systems can be categorized in dif-
ferent manners. A clear distinction in the family tree of dynamical systems is how they model time.
Some systems model time as discrete and some as a continuum. In the classical literature, time is often
continuous and all mappings are differentiable, which allows one to use powerful tools from analysis
and differential geometry to analyze the systems. Another distinction in the family tree is the division
between a deterministic or a stochastic system.
Dynamical systems are made up of a state space and an update function. At any given time, a
dynamical system has a state given by a tuple. We will assume this tuple is of real numbers or integers.
The update function will usually infer some interdependence among states. One way to think of this
interdependence is as a network; each coordinate in the tuple is a node and node i has a directed edge to
node j if the ith coordinate in state space affects the evolution of coordinate j. This perspective raises
the question of how different network attributes affect the behavior of the dynamics. This question is
non-trivial and we only know the answer for a selection of attributes and dynamical systems. For exam-
ple, the degree distribution of the underlying network can strongly influence the dynamics of a process
on a network and determine critical values of parameters in the epidemic threshold for disease-spread
models [Coo19; PCH10].
The way that we introduced dynamical systems on networks lends itself to a static and unweighted
network structure because the interdependence among states in classical dynamical systems is seldom
time-dependent. However, there are many situations in which a network itself can be dynamic, with
edges (or edge weights) and/or nodes changing in time, perhaps in response to a dynamical system
running on the network. From a modeling perspective, one usually chooses one of three options;
1. A dynamical system on static networks. This is often reasonable if the dynamical system on the
network runs on a faster time scale than the dynamics of the network itself.
2. A static system on a dynamical network. This could be a good approximation if the dynamics of
a network are much faster than the dynamical system that one is examining on that network.
3. A dynamical system on a dynamical network. This is often the closest representation of the real
system, but it is also the most complex. This type of model is often used when the dynamics on
and of the network operate on a similar time scale.
In this report, we restrict our focus to systems defined on static networks.
Common for many dynamical systems is that analytical solutions are not easily found. Therefore,
there is a widespread use of simulations and approximate solution schemes. For dynamical systems
on networks, direct simulations (Monte-Carlo simulations for stochastic systems) are often the only
known way of gaining insight into its dynamical behavior. General approximation methods are known
==PAGE:14==
1.5 Dynamical systems on networks
6
for certain families of systems [Gle11; Gle13; Fen+20; DV17], but these are in general only accurate
under certain conditions. To find accurate approximation methods for dynamical systems on networks
is therefore still an open field of research.
To categorize dynamical systems further than the rough categorization above is diﬀicult. But for
pedagogical reasons, we discuss a selection of individual dynamical systems on networks or notable
families thereof and highlight some similarities and differences in these families and the approximation
schemes used for them. One can, of course, categorize them differently [Gle13; PG16]. Unless otherwise
stated, each of the following models are defined on undirected and unweighted networks.
1.5.1
Compartment models
Compartment models cover a wide range of dynamical systems where the state of each node is restricted
to a finite set. The number of possible states, their labels, and the transition among them differs from
model to model.
1.5.1.1
Compartment models in epidemiology
Compartmental models have long been used in epidemiology where the number of compartments and
transition among them varies depending on the epidemic being modeled. Classical cases include the
SIR model (susceptible - infectious - recovered), the SIS model, and the SI model. Note that the SIS
and SI models are in fact binary state models, but we present them in the context of more general
discrete state compartment models. More complicated models include the SEIR model and models that
distinguish between characteristics like age, behavior, and sex of the population [Het00].
Epidemiological compartment models are typically continuous time models where the transitions
among compartments follow a Poisson process [Pas+15]. Hence, the probability that a node goes from
susceptible to infected in an infinitesimal time step scales linearly with the number of infected neigh-
bors. This scaling determines the infection rate. The probability to go from infected to susceptible
(or recovered) in an infinitesimal time step is usually fixed. This scaling is known as the recovery rate
[PG16]. Hence, the entire dynamical system has exponential waiting times (the minimum of a selection
of exponential waiting times is still exponential). Epidemiological compartment models are therefore
continuous-time Markov chains.
The nature of the underlying network clearly has an impact on the dynamics of such a stochastic
process. For example, think of the difference between a disease outbreak on a complete network con-
trary to an outbreak on a network with no edges. One assumption that is often made on the underlying
network is that individuals in a population interact with each other completely at random such that
all individuals with state in a compartment are indistinguishable. In epidemiology, this assumption is
known as homogeneous mixing [Pas+15]. Using the homogeneous mixing assumption and assuming an
infinite population, the average proportions of the population in each compartment follow deterministic
differential equations [Het00]. Under these approximations, full information about the state of the epi-
demics is encoded in the total fraction of individuals with state in each compartment. Such equations
are often used to model the dynamics on finite networks, in which case they are known as mean-field
approximations (which we will elaborate on shortly).
Epidemiological style compartment models have been used to model social influence, but this use is
not widespread [MNP04; Mel+11; LA].
It is infeasible to analyze the full Markov chain governing an epidemiological compartment model
on anything but the most basic network structures. This is partly due to the rapidly increasing di-
mensionality of the system as the number of nodes increase. Assume that each node can be in one of
==PAGE:15==
1.5 Dynamical systems on networks
7
m states and that there are N nodes in the network. Then the state space has dimension mN. The
initial and long-term behavior can often be described analytically [MK14; New18]. But to understand
the general behavior one must resort to approximate schemes [Gle11; Pas+15; New18; PG16]. We
choose to focus on approximations that yield deterministic systems in the form of ODEs 1. Consider an
ensemble of stochastic simulations of the compartment-type epidemiological model on a given network.
The dynamics evolves differently in each realization, but one can compute (time-dependent) statistics
over all simulations in the ensemble. Using probabilistic arguments and knowledge of the system dy-
namics, one may be able to write up equations governing these statistics. Often times, the statistics of
choice are one or more moments of the distribution of states across the realizations. Moment equations
are often large or even infinite-dimensional [Kue15]. But assuming that higher-order moments can be
written as functions of lower-order moments, the system can be reduced to a finite dimension [Kue15].
Such assumptions are known as Moment closures.
Mean-field approximations, pair-approximations,
and higher-order motifs are all examples of approximation methods that can be derived using moment-
closures [PG16; MK14]. A more detailed discussion of such approximation methods for compartment
type models on networks is given in Section 6.1.
Different approximation schemes for epidemic processes can predict the dynamics with varying de-
grees of accuracy. The cost of increased accuracy is typically an increase in the dimensionality of the
resulting system of equations. Methods for reducing this dimensionality have been proposed for certain
mean-field approximations, pair-approximations, and approximate master equations for binary state
systems [Kyr+17; GB19]. These methods lump groups of equations together using heuristics to mini-
mize the resulting deviation from the solution of the original set of equations and are known as lumping
heuristics [Kyr+17; GB19].
Methods for directly reducing the dimensionality of the Markov chain underlying the spreading
process have also been proposed [Gro+18]. These methods rely on different counting abstractions to
partition the possible states of the global system. But to find the transition probabilities between the
partitioned states requires knowledge of the transition probabilities for the full system [Gro+18]. There-
fore the method only viable for relatively small networks.
1.5.1.2
Voter models
Another notable family of compartment models is the voter models. The original voter model was first
proposed by Clifford and Sudbury [CS73]. The dynamical system that they introduced was given its
current name by Holley and Liggett a couple of years later [HL75]. In the original model, individuals
held one of two opinions. In each discrete time step, a randomly chosen node then adopts the opinion
of a random neighbor. Each node has the same probability to be chosen in each time step, and the
neighbor of the chosen node is equally likely to be chosen thereafter [Red].
The voter model is quite tractable and analytic solutions are known for several networks [Red]. This
tractability stems from the fact, that the probability that a given note will change its state in each time
step is linearly dependent on the number of neighbors with an opposing opinion. The model predicts
eventual consensus for any initial conditions on a connected network [Red]. This means that the model
can be viewed as a first-passage process and can be analyzed using the backwards Kolmogorov equation
[Red].
But it has been reported that complete consensus is diﬀicult to obtain in real social networks [Har52].
Therefore, many generalizations of the voter model have been proposed to include realistic aspects of
opinion formation that can forestall consensus. Such extensions include stubborn individuals, non-linear
1Other approximation methods for compartment-type dynamics include approximations that lead to branching pro-
cesses, but these do not generalize well to continuous state models and are therefore omitted [PCH10; MK14].
==PAGE:16==
1.5 Dynamical systems on networks
8
transition probabilities, majority rules of updating, and multiple-choice voting [Red; JS19].
Many of the approximation schemes used for epidemic processes can also be used for approximating
the voter model. Mean-field approximations [Gle11], pair-approximations [Gle11], approximate master
equations [Gle13], and lumping heuristics for decreasing the dimensionality of the moment equations
[Kyr+17; GB19] are all known for the voter model.
1.5.2
Threshold models
Threshold models were first proposed for modeling social influence in the 1970s by Granovetter [Gra78].
Watts later worked with a related threshold mechanism to analyze cascade-type phenomena [Wat02].
The common feature is that nodes change state once the number (or fraction) of their neighbors that
are in a different state than themselves reach some threshold. Threshold models are often binary-state
models, and the states of nodes are usually labeled 0 and 1. More general compartment models with
more than two states and non-monotone dynamics have also been considered [Mel+11].
In the threshold model introduced by Watts, each node i has a static threshold Ri. Some fraction
of nodes starts in the state 1, while all others start in state 0. For each discrete time step, a single node
i changes state from 0 to 1 if the fraction of its neighbors who are in state 1 surpasses the threshold Ri.
Nodes never change back from 1 to 0, and hence the dynamics are monotonic.
The simplicity of threshold models and their similarity to percolation theory make them analytically
tractable [PG16; Wat02]. For the binary voter model many of the approximation schemes used for
compartment models can also be used for predicting the dynamics of the voter model.
Mean-field
approximations [Gle11], pair-approximations [Gle11], approximate master equations [Gle13], and the
lumping heuristics for decreasing the dimensionality of the resulting systems [Kyr+17; GB19] are all
available for the binary-state threshold model.
1.5.3
Continuous-state models of social influence
Until now, we have only introduced models for opinion dynamics with binary or more general discrete
states. However, a discrete representation of opinions fixates the number of opinions that can coexist
in the system. As an alternative, models for opinion dynamics have been developed where opinions
are represented by real numbers. This section introduces a selection of the most widely studied models
for continuous-state opinion dynamics.
We restrict the introduction to models where opinions are
represented by a single real number.
1.5.3.1
DeGroot’s model
DeGroot’s model was proposed in the 1970s as a model for how a group of individuals might reach
a consensus [Deg74]. The original model is a discrete-time model on a weighted network where each
time step, individuals update their opinion according to a weighted mean of their neighbor’s opinion.
Degroot himself formulated the criteria for the convergence to consensus using Markov-chain theory
[Deg74]. These constraints are equivalent to very mild connectivity constraints for the underlying net-
work [HK02].
A notable extension is the Friedkin–Johnson model which introduced self-appraisal [FJ99]. Indi-
viduals each have a weight assigned to their initial opinion. Each time step, all opinions are updated
according to a weighted mean of their own initial opinion and their neighbor’s current opinion. Since
the update is synchronous and linear the long-term behavior can be analyzed using matrix algebra
[FJ99; HK02]. The DeGroot-Friedkin model can exhibit non-consensus limit distribution even on well-
connected networks [FJ99].
==PAGE:17==
1.5 Dynamical systems on networks
9
1.5.3.2
Deffuant model
The Deffuant model is a member of the family of continuous-state opinion models known as the bounded
confidence models; models of opinion dynamics that capture the effects of selective exposure where in-
dividuals tend to favor information that supports their views while neglecting conflicting arguments
[Fre86]. The Deffuant model is one of the most studied bounded confidence models and was proposed
by Deffuant et al [Def+00].
The Deffuant model has two parameters; a confidence bound, c, and a multiplier, m. Each time step
two neighboring individuals are picked uniformly at random. If their current opinions differ by no more
than c, then their opinions move an m step towards each other (m = 0 mean no change, m = 0.5 gives
perfect compromise, and m = 1 implies that the node swap opinions). The Deffuant model thereby
models selective exposure by truncating the influence between individuals if the distance between their
opinion is above a certain threshold.
The steady-state distribution of the Deffuant model can be consensus or disagreement depending
on the initial conditions and the underlying network [LU07; Gan+10]. The convergence time for the
Deffuant model and the number of opinions in the steady-state have been investigated numerically for
a wide selection of parameters on synthetic and real social networks [MGP18]. Regression analysis was
used to indicate how the convergence time depends on the network size, the confidence bound, and
the multiplier. It was found that this dependency was qualitatively different for different families of
networks [MGP18].
A mean-field rate equation for the probability density of states for the Deffuant model with un-
bounded continuous states have been proposed [BKR03]. This equation assumes an infinite complete
network structure. More general degree-based and community-based mean-field approximations of state
densities have been proposed for the Deffuant model on infinite configuration type networks [Fen+20].
1.5.3.3
Hegselmann–Krause model
Another famous bounded confidence model is the Hegelsmann–Krause model proposed by Hegselmann
et al. [HK02]. The model only have the confidence bound parameters, c [HK02]. In each time step, all
nodes update their opinion in accordance with the mean of their neighbors’ opinion which are less than
c away from their own. There is also an asynchronous-update version of the model where only a single
node updates its opinion in each time step. The synchronous-update Hegselmann–Krauss model can
be seen as a DeGroot model where the social influence between individuals who disagree is truncated.
This truncation makes it diﬀicult to analytically describe the dynamics because the update rule becomes
nonlinear. The model has also been extended to include non-symmetric and heterogeneous confidence
bounds, higher-dimensional opinions [HK02].
The limit distribution of the Hegelsmann–Krause model can, as with the Deffuant model, be either
consensus or disagreement depending on initial conditions, underlying network, and parameter values
[HK02; SFH21]. For a selection of initial conditions, it can be proven that the Hegelsmann-Krause
model will converge to consensus [HK02]. Upper and lower bounds for the time to convergence are also
known [Bha+12].
A mean-field rate equation for the probability density of states similar to that proposed for the
Deffuant model has been proposed for the Hegselmann–Krause model [For+05].
1.5.3.4
Weighted median model
The weighted median model was introduced and analyzed by Mei et al. in 2021, [Mei+21]. The weighted
median model is defined on a weighted network. In each discrete time step a random node updates in
==PAGE:18==
1.5 Dynamical systems on networks
10
accordance with the weighted median of its neighbor’s state (where the weights stem from the network)
[Mei+21].
The weighted-median model was proposed as an alternative to DeGroot’s model which the authors
believed rested upon unrealistic ideas of opinion formation. In DeGroot’s model, a consensus can be
pushed to arbitrary extremeness by influencing a single individual’s initial opinion. This is due to the
linearity of influence in DeGroot’s model. This is not possible when using a median-based update rule
[Mei+21]. Therefore, we view the weighted median model as a bounded confidence model.
An alternative way to arrive at the weighted median model is based on cognitive dissonance. Assume
each node experiences dissonance based on the sum of the absolute difference between its neighbor’s
current opinion and its own current opinion (weighted in accordance with the underlying network). The
way for an individual to minimize the cognitive dissonance it experiences is to update its opinion to the
weighted median of its neighbor’s opinion [SS09].
Due to the median update rule, no new opinions are introduced in the update [Mei+21]. The system
can therefore be viewed as a discrete-time and discrete-state Markov process. This implies that the
weighted median model converges in finite time with probability 1 under mild conditions on the initial
state of the system [Mei+21]. It is in a certain sense wrong to label the weighted median model as
a continuous state dynamical system. If the initial state of each node is picked from a discrete set,
then the model is discrete. However, because the state is not restricted to a discrete set before initial
conditions are assumed we regard it as a continuous state model.
1.5.4
Synchronous or asynchronous update
The distinction between synchronous and asynchronous updating models is often not made explicit in
the literature. We define asynchronous update models to be those in which only a single node is up-
dated at a time. If there is a positive probability that two or more nodes update at the same time, the
process is said to be synchronous. Continuous-time processes such as the epidemiological compartment
models can be reduced to a discrete-time Markov chain where each discrete time step corresponds to
a state-dependent exponentially distributed waiting time [FMG16]. The probability that two or more
states update simultaneously is 0 for any continuous-time process. Therefore, synchronous-update sys-
tems have no equivalent continuous-time processes and are therefore inherently discrete-time systems.
The synchronous-update and asynchronous-update versions of a model may seem similar at first sight,
but their behavior can be very different and results for one cannot always be carried over to the other
[EB15; EB15].
This connection between continuous-time processes and asynchronous update systems can be used
to perform eﬀicient simulations of continuous-time processes. This was done in the 1970s by Gillspie
to model chemical reactions [Gil77], and the simulation algorithm is therefore often referred to as the
Gillspie algorithm or event-based simulation [FMG16].
Synchronous-update systems have been used as approximations for continuous-time processes [FMG16;
Car+08]. However, such approximations may be inaccurate. Numerical simulations of epidemiological
models have shown that the continuous-time empirical epidemic threshold differs significantly from the
discrete-time counterpart when the time step or the transition rates are large [FMG16]. Finite-difference
SI and SIR epidemic models with feedback to the susceptible class (i.e., through recovery or births)
can produce complex behavior such as period-doubling and chaotic effects for suﬀiciently large values
of the time step and/or contact rate [All94]. Such behavior is not possible in their continuous-time
differential equation counterpart.
==PAGE:19==
1.6 Structure of this report
11
The change from synchronous to asynchronous updates can also make analysis more diﬀicult. The
synchronous-update DeGroot’s and Friedkin–Johnson models can be written as state-independent linear
transformations of the initial state [Deg74; Fri99]. Therefore, analysis of these systems reduces to linear
algebra which makes them analytically tractable. Updates in asynchronous-update DeGroot or asyn-
chronous update Friedkin–Johnson model are stochastic and state-dependent linear transformations,
which makes analysis cumbersome.
1.6
Structure of this report
In Chapter 2, we make a formal introduction to network theory and introduce a series of random-
network models.
In Chapter 3, we define discrete-time dynamical systems and introduce stability
analysis for these systems. In Chapter 4, we define our synchronous-update weighted median model,
characterize its fixed points, and analyze their stability.
In Chapter 5, we generalize our weighted
median model to include “self-appraisal”, a measure of how much individuals are willing to change their
opinion in each time step. Then, we characterize the fixed points of this generalization and investigate
their stability. We analyze the convergence times of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
and investigate the distribution of opinions at fixed points.
In Chapter 6, we derive a mean-field
approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal and investigate the accuracy of our
approximation numerically.
Finally, in Chapter 7, we discuss our results and point to unanswered
research questions for our weighted median models.
1.7
Research questions
We seek to answer the following three fundamental questions for our asynchronous-update weighted
median model (defined in Section 4.1) and our asynchronous-update weighted median model with self-
appraisal (defined in Section 5.1):
1. Do our models have fixed points and how are they characterized?
2. How would a mean-field description of our models behave?
3. How are the dynamics of our models different and how are they similar to the asynchronous-update
model of Mei et al. [Mei+21]?
We believe that seeking to answer these three questions will guide our research and yield valuable
new insights in the field of opinion dynamics and complex systems.
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2
Network theory
In this chapter, we introduce the notation and several concepts for networks that we use in the rest of
the report. We also define a variety of random-graph models.
2.1
Network definitions
We define a network to be a pair G = (V, E), where V is a set whose elements are called nodes and E is
a multi-set whose elements are called edges and consists of pairs of nodes. Because E is a multi-set with
no restriction on the node pairs, G can have multiple edges that connect the same nodes. Such edges
are known as parallel edges. Edges connecting a node to itself are known as self-edges. If the elements
of E are ordered pairs, then we say that the network is directed and that the element of E are directed
edges; otherwise, the network and its edges are undirected. If i, j ∈V and e = {i, j} ∈E is undirected,
then we say that node i and j are neighbors in G and that e is incident with i and j. If e is directed
from i to j, then we say that e is an outgoing edge of i and an ingoing edge of j, we say that i is the
start node of e and that j is the end node of e, and finally, we say that i is an in-neighbor of j and that
j is an out-neighbor of i. In directed networks, an edge is incident with a node only if it is an outgoing
edge of that node. In an undirected, network we define n(i) to be the set of nodes that are neighbors
of node i ∈V . In a directed network we define n(i) to be the set of nodes that are out-neighbors of
node i ∈V . A network is said to be finite if |V | < ∞. A node i ∈V is said to be isolated if n(i) is the
empty set.
Given an undirected network G, a path in G is a sequence of distinct nodes such that every consec-
utive pair of nodes are connected by an edge. For a directed network, a directed path is path where
all the nodes can be traversed in the direction of the edges connecting the nodes. For an undirected
network, we say that a path connects. If a path or directed path connects a node i and another node
j, then we say the path or the directed path connects i and j. We define the length of the path or a
directed path to be the number of edges in the path.
For an undirected network G, we define a components of G to be a set of nodes where all node pairs
can be connected by one or more paths and no other nodes of the network can be added to this set
while preserving this property. An undirected network can have multiple components. We say that an
undirected network G is connected if it only has a single component. For a directed network, we define
a strongly connected component to be a set of nodes where all node pairs can be connected by one or
more directed paths and no other nodes can be added to this set while preserving this property. For a
directed network, we define a weakly connected component to be a set of nodes such that if we replace
all directed edges in the network with undirected edges, all node pairs in the set can be connected by
one or more paths and no more nodes can be added while preserving this property. We say that a
directed network is strongly connected if is only has one strongly connected component, and we call it
weakly connected if it only has one weakly connected component.
A weighted network is a network where a number is assigned to each edge in E. We define an evenly
weighted network to be a weighted network where all weights are non-negative and where the weights
of all edges that are incident to any given node sum to 1. Note that not all undirected networks can
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Examples of networks
13
be assigned weights to become evenly weighted networks. An example where this is impossible is a
star network. However, if each edge in an undirected network is replaced by two directed edges with
opposite directions, then the resulting directed network can be assigned weights to become an evenly
weighted network.
An evenly weighted network G can be represented by an influence matrix W ∈[0, 1]|V |; where the
element Wij is the weight assigned to the edge {i, j} ∈E. We know that W is a symmetric matrix for
undirected networks. Because G is evenly weighted, the rows of W sum to 1.
2.2
Examples of networks
The are many “classic” networks that have been studied extensively in many different fields. One such
“classic network” is the complete network, where all node pairs in the network are connected. Note that
a complete network is not specific network, but rather a family of networks with different sizes but with
common structure. This is in general true for many such “classic networks”. These families of often
have a regular structure, making them useful for doing analytical calculations.
A network where each node is connected to k other nodes is called a k-regular network. A cycle
network is a network that consist of a single cycle. A network that can be partitioned into two groups
of nodes where there are no edges between nodes in the same group is said to be bipartite. If each
node in either group of a bipartite network is connected to all other nodes in the opposite group, then
the network is a complete bipartite network. A 2-dimensional grid network is a network that can be
embedded in the plane such that the nodes and edges constitute a two-dimensional regular lattice. A
cyclenetwork is a network consisting of path that connects a node with itself. A prism network consists
of a path {ui}n
i=1 connecting node u1 to itself, a path {vi}n
i=1 connecting node v1 to itself, and the edges
(ui, vi) for all i.
2.3
Network characteristics
The structure of real networks is often extremely complex. To understand the structure of a network
or how a single node is positioned in that structure is immensely diﬀicult without using some kind of
summary statistics. Even the question “What is the structure of this network?” is almost meaningless
without a selection of measures to make the question more specific. Summary statistics for networks are
therefore important tools when trying to understand what kind of properties a network has or in what
sense one network is structurally different from another. In this report, we will be working with a series
of random-network models. The networks statistics introduced in this section are used to describe the
differences between these models and to compare them to real-world social networks. Because we only
introduce random-network models that generate undirected networks, we restrict the following defini-
tions of network summary statistics to undirected networks. We stress, that the summary statistics
presented here are not evaluated for any networks in the project. They can be extended to directed
networks with varying levels of complexity [New18].
One way to characterize networks is to look at the degrees of nodes in the network. Given a network,
we define the degree distribution qk as the probability that a node chosen uniformly at random from the
set of all nodes has degree k. We define the degree sequence as the multi-set of all node degrees. Note
that the degree sequence tells us the number of nodes and edges in the network as well as the degree of
each node.
Another way to characterize networks, it to investigate how large a proportion of node pairs that
are connected by edges. If we count parallel edges as a single edge and don’t count self-edges, a network
with n node can have N(N−1)
2
edges. If a network has close to the maximum number of edges, we say
==PAGE:22==
2.4 Random-network models
14
that it is dense. If a network have very few edges compared to the maximum number of possible edges,
we say that the network is sparse.
When presented with two nodes in a network, one might be interested in how “far apart” they are.
Alternatively, given a network, one might wonder which nodes are the furthest apart. To quantify
this, we define the distance between two nodes i and j in a network as the length of a shortest path
connecting i and j. We define the diameter to be the longest shortest path. That is, among all shortest
paths in a network, the diameter is the length of the longest.
It is also useful to define a measure of how clustered a network is. We define the global clustering
coeﬀicient C to be the fraction of pairs of nodes with a common neighbor who are themselves connected.
That is,
C = 3 × (Number of closed triangles in the network)
(Number of connected triples in the network) ,
(2.1)
where a “connected triple” is a set of three nodes i, j, l with edges (i, j) and (j, l) [New18]. The factor
3 in the enumerator accounts for the fact that each triangle gets counted three times when counting
the connected triples. We define the local clustering coeﬀicient of a node i ∈V to be
Ci = (Number of pairs of neighbors of i that are connected)
(Number of pairs of neighbors of i)
.
(2.2)
The local and global clustering coeﬀicients defined in Equation 2.1 should not be confused with the
notion of clustering introduced in Section 1.3.1 which refers to the tendency of connected individuals
to have similar traits or attributes.
The local and global clustering coeﬀicients are purely network
measures and are therefore independent of any attributes associated to the nodes.
We define the degree-degree correlation to be the Pearson correlation between the degrees of nodes
at each end of a uniformly randomly chosen edge of a network. If the degree degree correlation is
close to 1, then nodes of high (respectively, low) degree are connected mostly to other nodes of high
(respectively, low) degree and we say that the network is homophilous by degree. If it is close to 0, we
say the network is heterophilous by degree.
2.4
Random-network models
An important tool for analyzing dynamics on networks is random-network models. These allow one
to keep certain characteristics of a network fixed and statistically investigate how the structure of the
network is affected by the characteristic. Random-network models are defined as ensembles of networks
where each network in the ensemble has an assigned probability [New18]. In this interpretation, con-
structing a network using a random-network model is to draw one instantiation of a network from the
ensemble of possible networks.
A simple example of a random-network model is the Erdős–Rényi random-network model. The
model has two parameters; a number N of nodes and a probability p. The model is defined as an
ensemble of networks with N nodes in which each distinct pair of nodes is connected by an edge with
probability p. The networks in the ensemble have between 0 and
N(N−1)
2
edges, and each network
with m edges in the ensemble has probability pm(1 −p)(n
2)−m [New18]. This formulation was origi-
nally introduced by Edgar Nelson Gilbert [Gil59], whereas Pál Erdős and Alfréd Rényi used a slightly
different formulation of their random-network model. Networks generated by the Erdős-Rényi model
can be dense or sparse based on the choice of p and can therefore mimic the sparsity of real-world
social networks [New18]. However, networks generated from the Erdős–Rényi model have a binomial
degree distribution [New18] whereas real-world social networks have degree distributions with heavier
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Random-network models
15
tails than the binomial distribution. We call networks generated by the Erdős–Rényi model simply
“Erdős–Rényi network”.
Two common types of random-network models that can generate networks with heavy-tailed de-
gree distributions are the Barabási–Albert preferential-attachment model and configuration models. The
Barabási–Albert preferential attachment model, which we henceforth call the Barabási–Albert model,
was introduced to show how one might generate undirected networks with heavy-tailed degree-distributions
[BA99]. The model has two parameters: a number N of nodes and the number of edges c that each
node brings to the network. The process starts with m0 initial nodes (with c ≤m0 < N). How these
m0 nodes are connected is not states explicitly in the original model [BA99]. We define that they are
all pairwise connected. Then add a single node and connect it to c of the existing nodes, where the
probability of connecting to a given node i is
ki
P
j kj . We continue repeating this process until the
network has N nodes. The resulting network has heavy-tailed degree distributions [BA99]. We call
networks generated by the Barabás–Albert model simply “Barabási–Albert networks”.
Configuration models are a family of random graph models that produce undirected networks with a
prescribed degree-distribution such that each network with the given degree-distribution has the same
probability and all other networks have probability 0 [Fos+16]. Because we allow self-edges and parallel
edges, we work with the configuration model presented in [New18] (which is referred to as a configura-
tion model on the space of vertex-labeled loopy multi-graphs in [Fos+16] ). We will refer to this model
as the configuration model. Note that for a degree sequence to be feasible, the sum of degrees must be an
even number because the sum equals two times the number of edges in the network. The configuration
model starts with a degree sequence {ki}i such that the sum of ki for all i is an even number. We then
equip each node i with a set of ki “half-edges” (also known as “stubs”). Pick two “half-edges” uniformly
at random and replace them by an edge. Then pick another two “half-edges” uniformly at random and
replace them by an edge. Repeating this process, we eventually replace all “half-edges” because the
sum of ki is even. The above processes can be seen as a matching of “half-edges” where each possible
matching has the same probability [New18]. The resulting network has the prescribed degree sequence.
One can extend the configuration model to be an ensemble of networks with a given degree distri-
bution qi rather than a degree sequence. The degree-distribution extension of the configuration model
is an ensemble of networks where each degree sequence {ki}i appears with probability Πiqki and the
probability of a particular matching of stubs appears with the probability of the specific degree sequence
times the probability of that matching in the original configuration model. We will refer to both the
original configuration model and the degree-distribution extension as the configuration model. We call
networks generated by the configuration model configuration networks.
A random-graph model that can generate networks with high clustering coeﬀicients is theWatts–
Strogatz small-world network model. The Watts–Strogatz small-world network model, henceforth referred
to as the Watts–Strogatz model, was introduced to show how one might generate networks with high
clustering coeﬀicient but small average shortest path lengths [WS98]. The model has three parameters:
the number N of nodes, the number n of neighbors for each node in the initial network structure, and
a rewiring probability p. The process starts with a ring lattice where each node is connected to n by
undirected edges. For each node and each edge incident with that node, with probability p, we reconnect
the edge to connect to a node chosen uniformly at random over the entire ring such that parallel edges
and self-edges are not created. For p in some interval, the resulting network will have relatively short
diameter while retaining a high clustering coeﬀicient. We call networks that we generate using the
Watts–Strogatz simply “Watts–Strogatz” networks.
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3
Dynamical-systems theory
In this chapter, we introduce concepts from the field of dynamical-systems theory that we use in the
rest of the report. Our focus will be on discrete-time dynamical systems and their stability.
3.1
Discrete-time dynamical systems
We define an n-dimensional discrete-time dynamical system as a system of first-order autonomous finite
difference equations governing the evolution of a time-dependent n-dimensional tuple of real numbers
x(t) = (x1(t), x2(t), . . . , xn(t)) over time t ∈N of the form
xi(t + 1) = ϕi(x(t)), for i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n} , t ∈N ,
(3.1)
where ϕi : R →R for i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n}. We call x(t) the state of the system at time t and the set of
possible states is called the state space. In some literature, the definition of discrete-time dynamical
systems allow for higher-order and non-autonomous systems of finite-difference equations. However,
such systems can always be reduced to be first-order autonomous systems [Gal07]. A discrete-time dy-
namical system is linear if the mappings ϕi are all linear. Otherwise, the system is said to be non-linear.
A trajectory is a sequence {x(t)}∞
t=0 of tuples such that xi(t + 1) = ϕi(x(t)) for i ∈{1, . . . , n}
and t ∈N. For a trajectory, the initial state is the state variable value at time t = 0. Because of
the deterministic nature of discrete-time dynamical systems, once an initial state is given, the entire
trajectory of the state variable is uniquely determined. For a trajectory {x(t)}∞
t=0, if there exist an
m ∈N such that
xi(t + m) = x(t) , for i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n} , t ∈N ,
(3.2)
then we say that the trajectory is a period-m orbit. If instead, there exist m, l ∈N such that
xi(t + m) = x(t), for i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n} , t ≥l ,
(3.3)
then we say that the trajectory “is caught” in a period-m orbit at time l.
We define a fixed point of a discrete-time dynamical system to be a point x in state space such that
ϕi(x) = x , for i ∈{1, 2, . . . , n} .
(3.4)
A set U is invariant if trajectories of the system with initial state within U remain in U for all times
t ∈N [Gal07]. A fixed point is stable if there exists an open invariant neighborhood around the fixed
point. A fixed point that is not stable is unstable. A fixed point is asymptotically stable if there exists a
neighborhood U of the point such that all trajectories with initial state within U converge towards the
fixed point as t goes to infinity. The study of fixed points and their stability is called stability analysis
and is a cornerstone of classical dynamical systems theory [Per07; Gal07].
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 4
Weighted median model of
opinion dynamics
A weighted median bounded-confidence model with asynchronous update was defined in [Mei+21] and
discussed in Section 1.5.3.4 as an alternative to the weighted mean based models for opinion dynamics,
such as DeGroot’s model that we discussed in Section 1.5.3.1. We work with a synchronous-update
version of the weighted median model more akin to the original DeGroot model than the model defined
in [Mei+20]. We present the formal definition of the model as well as analytical and numerical results.
4.1
Definition of our weighted median model
Let G = (V, E) be an evenly weighted network with influence matrix W. For each node i ∈V , we define
an associated time-dependent state xi(t) ∈[0, 1] for t ∈N0. We define the global state x(t) ∈[0, 1]|V |
to be the tuple of each xi(t) for i ∈V . Given an initial state x(0), we define the synchronous updated
weighted median model (which we henceforth call the “weighted median model”) to be
xi(t + 1) = Medi(x(t) ; W) ,
for i ∈V ,
(4.1)
where Medi(x(t) ; W) is the weighted median, which we define to be the unique element from the set


xk ∈x(t)
 Wi k > 0 ,
X
{j :xj<xk}
Wi j ≤1
2 ,
X
{j :xj<xk}
Wi j ≥1
2



(4.2)
that either minimizes the distance to xi(t) or is the smallest if two elements are the same distance from
xi(t). The weighted median model is not well defined in a network with isolated nodes. Therefore, all
networks discussed in this section are assumed to have no isolated nodes.
The weighted median model 4.1 is a nonlinear discrete-time dynamical system as discussed in Chap-
ter 3. In Figure 4.1, we show an example trajectory of the weighted median model on a complete evenly
weighted network with 3 nodes. The system reaches a fix-point at time t = 3.
The regularity (or “smoothness”) of the mappings Medi in the weighted median model depends
on the underlying network. On the complete evenly weighted network with 3 nodes, the mapping is
discontinuous.
This can be seen in Figure 4.2, where two similar initial states are mapped by the
dynamics of the weighted median model. In panel (A), the system is initialized with state x1 = 0,
x2 = 1, and x3 = 0.5. In panel (B), we perturb the initial state x3 = 0.5 + ϵ for some suﬀiciently small
ε > 0 without altering the initial states x1 and x2. Using the maximum norm, the distance between
these two initial states equals ε. At time t = 1, the max-norm distance between the states in panel
(A) and (B) equals 1. In the limit ε →0, the distance between the initial states goes to 0, while the
distance between the states at time t = 1 remains 1. Therefore, the mapping in the dynamics of the
weighted median model on the given network is discontinuous.
==PAGE:26==
4.2 Fixed points of the weighted median model
18
Figure 4.1: Example trajectory of the weighted median model on an evenly weighted complete network
with 3 nodes.
Figure 4.2: Example of discontinuity in the dynamics of the weighted median mapping. In panel (A),
the initial state is x1 = 0, x2 = 1, and x3 = 0.5. In panel (B), we perturb the initial state
x3 = 0.5 + ϵ for some suﬀiciently small ε > 0 without altering the initialization of state
x1 and x2. At time t = 1, we see that the initial states are mapped to different states no
matter how small ε is.
In Figure 4.3, we show a network structure where the mapping in the weighted median dynamics
is differentiable. To see this, note that each node has an outgoing edge with weight above 0.5. For
example W1,2 = 0.7. Therefore, for i = 1, the set in Equation 4.2 only contains the state x2 for all
times t ∈N. Therefore, Med1(x(t), W) = x2 for t ∈N, which is a differentiable mapping. A similar
argument can be made for Medi(x(t), W) with i ∈{2, 3, 4, 5}. The mapping is therefore differentiable.
4.2
Fixed points of the weighted median model
From Equation 4.1, we see that a point x∗∈[0, 1]|V | is a fixed point for the weighted median model if
and only if
x∗
i = Medi(x∗, W)
for all i ∈V .
(4.3)
Proposition 1. All fixed points of the weighted median model for a finite network are stable.
==PAGE:27==
4.2 Fixed points of the weighted median model
19
W =


0
0.7
0
0
0
0
0
0.7
0.2
0.1
0
0.1
0.1
0.8
0
0
0
0.4
0
0.6
0.9
0
0
0.1
0


Figure 4.3: Illustration of influence structure where the mapping in the weighted median model is
a differentiable mapping. The differentiability of the dynamics is a consequence of each
node having an outgoing edge with weight larger than a half.
Proof. To prove this proposition, we show that the mapping in Equation 4.1 is Lipschitz continuous
with constant 1 at each fixed point [DiB16]. This implies that any open ball centered on the fixed point
is invariant. We use this to prove the stability of the fixed points.
Assume that x∗∈R|V | is a fixed point for the weighted median model in Equation 4.1. We then
know that the relation in Equation 4.3 is true for x∗.
We first prove that the weighted median is
Lipschitz continuous at x∗when all node states are equal. Afterward, we deal with the more general
case.
Assume that x∗
i = a for all i ∈V for a ∈[0, 1]. Let ε ∈R|V | be such that a + εi ∈[0, 1] for all i ∈V
and let ε′ = maxi∈V |εi|. We see that
x∗
i + εi ∈[a −ε′, a + ε′],
for all i ∈V.
(4.4)
For each i ∈V , there exist an j ∈V such that Medi(x∗, W) = x∗
j. Therefore, from Equation 4.4 we
see that Medi(x∗+ ε, W) ∈[a −ε′, a + ε′] for all i ∈V . This implies that
max
i∈V |Medi(x∗, W) −Medi(x∗+ ε, W)| = max
i∈V |x∗
i −Medi(x∗+ ε, W)| ≤max
i∈V |εi| .
(4.5)
Therefore, the mapping in Equation 4.1 is Lipschitz continuous at fixed points where all nodes have the
same state value.
We now consider the case where at least two nodes have distinct state values. Let ε ∈Rn be such
that
max
i∈V |εi| < 1
4
min
{i,j : x∗
i ̸=x∗
j }
x∗
i −x∗
j

(4.6)
which is well-defined since the network is finite.
Let i ∈V be fixed. Let
 x∗
ji
|n(i)|
j=1
be the tuple of states of nodes in n(i) and let (εji)|n(i)|
j=1
be the
respective elements of ε. Due to the choice of ε, there is an an index of nodes in n(i) such that x∗
ji and
==PAGE:28==
4.2 Fixed points of the weighted median model
20
x∗
ji + εji are both nondecreasing as j increases. That is, we can index the neighbors of i such that
x∗
1i ≤x∗
2i ≤· · · ≤x∗
n(i)i ,
x∗
1i + ε1i ≤x∗
2i + ε2i ≤· · · ≤x∗
n(i)i + εn(i)i .
(4.7)
Define the set
A =

j ∈n(i) : x∗
j = x∗
i
	
,
(4.8)
which is nonempty because Equation 4.3 implies the existence of at least one node ki ∈n(i) such that
x∗
i = x∗
ki. Let ki ∈A, so x∗
i = x∗
ki. From here, we split the argumentation into two cases.
In the first case, we assume that
X
{j : x∗
ji<x∗
ki}
Wij < 1
2 ,
X
{j : x∗
ji>x∗
ki}
Wij < 1
2 .
(4.9)
Because the perturbation ϵ preserves the ordering in Equation 4.7, we know that the sum of weights of
edges from i to nodes whose state is smaller than x∗
i + minj∈A εj will be less than 1
2. The sum of edges
from i to nodes whose state is above above x∗
i + maxj∈A εj will also be less than 1
2. This restricts the
median to the interval
Medi(x∗+ ε, W) ∈

x∗
i + min
j∈A εj, x∗
i + max
j∈A εj

(4.10)
Therefore, for all i ∈V , we know that
|Medi(x∗, W) −Medi(x∗+ ε, W)| = |x∗
i −Medi(x∗+ ε, W)|
≤max
j∈A |εj|
(4.11)
≤max
j∈V |εj| ,
which implies that maxi∈V |Medi(x∗, W) −Medi(x∗+ ε, W)| ≤maxj∈V |εj|. Therefore, the weighted
median is Lispchitz continuous with constant 1 in the open ball centered on x∗defined in Equation 4.6
under the assumption in Equation 4.9. This proves the first case.
In the second case, we assume
either
X
{j : x∗
ji<x∗
ki}
Wij = 1
2 , or
X
{j : x∗
ji>x∗
ki}
Wij = 1
2 .
(4.12)
There are two distinct elements in the set in Equation 4.2; denote them xki and xvi for ki, vi ∈n(i).
Because x∗is a fixed point, we know that either xi = xki or xi = xvi. Without loss of generality, assume
the former. Because x∗
ki = x∗
i , we know that x∗
vi ̸= x∗
i . Noting that |x∗
i −x∗
vi| > 4 maxi∈V , |εi| we see
x∗
i + εi −x∗
ki −εki
 ≤2 max
j∈V |εj|
< 1
2
x∗
i −x∗
vi

≤
|x∗
i −x∗
vi| −1
2
min
l,j : x∗
l ̸=x∗
j
x∗
l −x∗
j


(4.13)
=
|x∗
i −x∗
vi| −2 max
j∈V |εj|

≤
x∗
i + εi −x∗
vi −εvi
 ,
==PAGE:29==
4.2 Fixed points of the weighted median model
21
which shows that x∗
i +εi is closer to x∗
ki +εki than to x∗
vi +εvi. Because the ordering of states is preserved
by the perturbation, we again conclude that the statement in Equation 4.10 and Equation 4.11 are true.
Therefore, the weighted median is Lispchitz continuous with constant 1 in the open ball centered on x∗
defined in Equation 4.6 under the assumption in Equation 4.12.
Therefore, for any evenly weighted network G and any fixed point x∗, the weighted median dynamics
are Lipschitz continuous with constant 1 on any open ball centered on the fixed point with radius r > 0
if x∗
i = x∗
j for all i, j ∈V and with radius r < 1
4 min{i,j : x∗
i ̸=x∗
j }
x∗
i −x∗
j
 otherwise. Therefore, these
open balls are invariant. This proves that all fixed points of the weighted median model are stable.
Proposition 2. None of the fixed points of the weighted median model on finite networks are asymp-
totically stable.
Proof. Assume that x∗∈[0, 1]|V | is a fixed point of the weighted median model. We will prove that x∗
is not an isolated fixed point and thus that it is not asymptotically stable. We know that x∗satisfies
the condition in Equation 4.3. Let δ > 0 be given. We will construct a perturbation ε ∈R|V | such that
maxi∈V |εi| < δ and x∗+ ϵ also satisfies Equation 4.3.
First, assume that all nodes are in the same state; in other words, x∗
i = a for all i ∈V for some
a ∈[0, 1]. Then let εi = 1
2δ for all i ∈V . Because all states are perturbed in the same way, we see that
x∗+ ε also satisfies Equation 4.3 and is therefore a fixed point.
Now assume that there are at least two distinct node states. Let i ∈V be fixed. Define the set A
as in Equation 4.8. Choose ε such that εj = c for j ∈A and j = i, where
0 < c < min
(
δ,
min
{i,j : x∗
i ̸=x∗
j }
x∗
i −x∗
j

)
(4.14)
and εj = 0 for i /∈A∪{i}. We know that c is well-defined, because the underlying network is finite. We
claim that x∗+ ϵ is a fixed point. This is true because the perturbation ε cannot change the ordering
of states. That is, for j, k ∈V , the inequality x∗
k < x∗
j implies x∗
k + εk < x∗
j + εj and if x∗
k = x∗
j then
x∗
k +εk = x∗
j +εj. The elements in the summation in Equation 4.2 remain unchanged. Therefore, x∗+ϵ
also satisfies Equation 4.3 and is a fixed point. We can therefore conclude that x∗is not isolated.
Because x∗is not isolated, we know that for any open ball centered on x∗with radius δ > 0, there
is a fixed point y∗in the ball such that x∗̸= y∗. Any trajectory that starts in y∗remains there, and
thus does not approach x∗as t →∞. This proves that x∗is not asymptotically stable.
Corollary 1. Fixed points of the asynchronous-update weighted median model, as defined in [Mei+20],
are stable but not asymptotically stable.
Proof. The update rule of the asynchronous-update weighted median model is different from the one
in Equation 4.1 in that only a single uniformly random selected node updates in each time step. Let
x∗∈[0, 1]|V | be a fixed point of the asynchronous update weighted median model. We first prove that
x∗is not isolated and hence not asymptotically stable. We then prove that x∗is stable.
For x∗to be a fixed point of the asynchronous-update weighted median model, it must satisfy the
condition in Equation 4.3. Consequently, the asynchronous-update weighted median model and the
synchronous update weighted median model have the same fixed points. From the argument in the
proof of Proposition 2, we know that x∗is not an isolated fixed point. Therefore x∗is not asymptoti-
cally stable.
We now prove that x∗is stable. If the state of all nodes are equal then let ε ∈R|V | such that
x∗
i + ϵi ∈[0, 1] for all i ∈V . Otherwise choose ε ∈R|V | to satisfy the condition in Equation 4.6. Let
==PAGE:30==
4.3 Simulations of the model
22
the system be in state x∗+ ε at some time t ∈N. Let i ∈V be the node that is updated by the
asynchronous update weighted median model at time t. Because the other states j ∈V , where j ̸= i,
remain constant in this time step, we only need to ensure that Medi(x∗+ ε, W) is not too far from
Medi(x∗, W). From the proof of Proposition 1, we know
|Medi(x∗, W) −Medi(x∗+ ε, W)| ≤max
i∈V |Medi(x∗, W) −Medi(x∗+ ε, W)| ≤max
i∈V |εi| .
(4.15)
This proves that the mapping in the dynamics of the asynchronous-update weighted median model on an
evenly weighted network is Lipschitz continuous with constant 1 on any open ball that is centered on any
fixed point x∗with radius r > 0 if x∗
i = x∗
j for all i, j ∈V and with radius r < 1
4 min{i,j : x∗
i ̸=x∗
j }
x∗
i −x∗
j

otherwise. Therefore, these open balls are invariant and all the fixed points are stable.
4.3
Simulations of the model
In Figure 4.4, we show the result of simulating the weighted median model 4.1 on a variety of networks.
The networks have either 30 or 29 nodes. Even with the small network size, the complexity of the
dynamics is still evident. We observe two general types of long-term behavior: cycles and fixed points.
On the complete network with an even number of nodes and on the cycle network, the trajectory of
the weighted median model gets caught in a period-two orbit. On the complete network with an odd
number of nodes and on the Erdős-Rényi network with p = 0.5 the trajectory of the weighted median
model seems to settle at a fix-point.
The weighted median model has different long-term behavior on the complete network with 30 nodes
than on the complete network with 29 nodes. This behavior is not an artifact of an “unfortunate” ini-
tialization. In fact, given an evenly weighted complete network with an even number of nodes and given
that the initialization of the individual initial states are randomly sampled from a continuous distribu-
tion, the resulting trajectory will be caught in a period-two orbit with probability 1. See section A.1 for
the proof. If the network has an odd number of nodes, the resulting trajectory reaches a fixed point at
time t = 2. Therefore, we conclude that the dynamics of the weighted median model are very sensitive
to small changes in the network structure.
To our knowledge, there is no empirical evidence to support the claim, that period-two orbits occur
in opinion dynamics. The period-two orbits that we observed on the cycle network and the complete
network with an even number of nodes seem unrealistic for the behavior of opinions. Therefore, we find
that the weighted median model is unfit for modeling the dynamics of opinions.
4.3.1
Notes on the simulations
We perform all simulations in this project with the Python library NetworkX [HSS08]. We choose
this software environment because NetworkX has many built-in methods for generating and analyzing
networks. NetworkX represents networks as hash tables, which makes finding, adding, and removing
nodes or edges fast while keeping the required memory to a minimum. (Representing networks with
hash-tables enables the operations listed to be performed in O(1) on average [New18]). NetworkX
also enables nodes and edges to have attributes, which makes it easy to keep track of the state of nodes
and weight of edges. One problem with this choice of software is performance; due to being in Python,
NetworkX is relatively slow compared to software packages that are implemented in C or C++. Unless
otherwise stated, visualizations are made with the R library ggplot2 [Wic16; Tea17].
==PAGE:31==
4.3 Simulations of the model
23
Complete even
Complete odd
Cycle
ER
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
5
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
t
State
Figure 4.4: Trajectories of the weighted median model on a selection of networks. Complete even is
a complete network, Cycle is a cycle network, and ER is an Erdős-Rényi network with
p = 0.5, each with 30 nodes. Complete odd is a complete network on 29 nodes.
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 5
Weighted median model
with self-appraisal
To avoid the unrealistic network sensitivity of the weighted median model that we discussed in Section
4.3, we generalize the weighted median model in a way that is reminiscent of the DeGroot–Friedkin
self-appraisal model. Each time step, each individuals opinion move to a linear combination of their
current opinion and the weighted median opinion of their neighbors. We refer to this revised model
as the weighted median model with self-appraisal to highlight the similarity with the DeGroot–Friedkin
model.
5.1
Weighted median model with self-appraisal definition
Let G = (V, E) be a evenly weighted network with influence matrix W. For each node i ∈V , we define
an associated time-dependent state xi(t) ∈R for t ∈N0. We define the global state x(t) ∈[0, 1]|V | to
be a tuple of each xi(t) for i ∈V . Given an initial state x(0), we define the weighted median model
with self appraisal to be
xi(t + 1) = (1 −s)xi(t) + s Medi(x(t) ; W) ,
for i ∈V ,
(5.1)
where s ∈] 0, 1[ is the level of self-appraisal, Medi(x(t) ; W) denotes the weighted median of the n-tuple
x(t) = (x1(t), . . . , xn(t)) with weights (Wi1, Wi2, . . . , Win) .
5.2
Fix points of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
In this section, we characterize the fixed points of the weighted median model with self-appraisal and
determine their stability.
From Equation 5.1, we see that x∗∈[0, 1]|V | is a fixed point of the weighted median model with
self-appraisal if and only if x∗satisfies Equation 4.3. Therefore, the weighted median model and the
weighted median model with self-appraisal have the same fixed points. The following two propositions
show that the fixed points of the weighted median model with self-appraisal also have the same stability
as those of the weighted median model.
Proposition 3. All fixed points of the weighted median model with self-appraisal for finite networks
are stable.
Proof. Assume that x∗∈[0, 1]|V | is a fixed point for the weighted median model with self-appraisal and
let ε ∈R|V | satisfy the bound in Equation 4.6. We know from the proof of Proposition 1 in Chapter 4
that
max
i∈V |x∗
i −Medi(x∗+ ε, W)| ≤max
j∈V |εj|
for all i ∈V .
==PAGE:33==
5.3 Simulated trajectories
25
The maximum absolute difference between the weighted median mapping with self-appraisal of the
fixed point and its perturbation can be bound above by
max
i∈V |(1 −s)x∗
i + s Medi(x∗; W) −((1 −s)(x∗
i + εi) + s Medi(x∗+ ε ; W))|
= max
i∈V |x∗
i −(1 −s)(x∗
i + εi) −s Medi(x∗+ ε ; W)|
= max
i∈V |(1 −s)εi + s(x∗
i −Medi(x∗+ ε ; W)|
(5.2)
≤(1 −s) max
i∈V |εi| + s max
i∈V |(x∗
i −Medi(x∗+ ε ; W)|
≤(1 −s) max
i∈V |εi| + s max
i∈V |εi|
= max
i∈V |εi| .
Therefore, for any evenly weighted network G and any fixed point x∗, the weighted median with self-
appraisal is Lipschitz continuous with constant 1 on any open ball that is centered on any fixed point
x∗with radius r > 0 if x∗
i = x∗
j for all i, j ∈V and with radius r < 1
4 mini,j : x∗
i ̸=x∗
j
x∗
i −x∗
j
 otherwise.
This proves that all fixed points of the weighted median model with self-appraisal are stable.
Proposition 4. None of the fixed points of the weighted median model are asymptotically stable.
Proof. Because the weighted median model and the weighted median model with self-appraisal have
the same fixed points, we know that none of the fixed points of the weighted median model with self-
appraisal are isolated. By the argument in the proof of Proposition 2 in Chapter 4, this implies that
none of the fixed points are asymptotically stable.
5.3
Simulated trajectories
We saw in Section 4.3 that a lot of the state space for the weighted median model contracted into period-
two orbits. We found that this is potentially an unrealistic feature when modeling opinion dynamics.
In Figure 5.1, we show the result of simulating the weighted median model with self-appraisal for the
same networks that we tested the weighted median model on in Figure 4.4 for self-appraisal s = 0.5.
We observe that all the trajectories seem to move to fixed points. For all simulations in this project,
the only long-term behavior that we have observed for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
is fixed points.
5.4
Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
To investigate the number of opinions at fixed points of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
and to determine how quickly the system converges to these fixed points is not simple.
Therefore,
we study how the convergence time and the number of opinions at fixed points depend for network
structure and level of self-appraisal. The results from these simulations are be analyzed statistically
using regression analysis.
5.4.1
Simulation specifications
In principle, fixed points are reached only at infinitely long times, as the opinion space is continuous
and opinions can approach each other arbitrarily closely without reaching the same value in finite time.
However, from Figure 5.1, we find that the existence of fixed points can be evident at finite times.
Therefore, we introduce a convergence criterion for our numerical simulations and a threshold of how
==PAGE:34==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
26
Complete even
Complete odd
Cycle
ER
1
3
5
7
9
11
1
3
5
7
9
11
1
3
5
7
9
11
1
3
5
7
9
11
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
t
State
Figure 5.1: Trajectories of the weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.5 for a selection of
networks. Complete even is a complete network, Cycle is a cycle network, and ER is an
Erdős-Rényi network with p = 0.5; each of these networks has 30 nodes. Complete odd is
a complete network with 29 nodes.
close opinions can be while being counted as separate. We consider the system to be at a fixed point
at time t if
max
i∈N(G) |xi(t) −xi(t + 1)| < ε ,
(5.3)
for a fixed ε.
For synthetic networks, we use ε = 4.44 · 10−16 (i.e., twice the machine precision). When the sys-
tem has converged, we round all opinions to the 14th decimal point and count the number of distinct
opinions. For real social networks, we use ε = 10−6 to keep the computational costs of the simulations
manageable. When the system has converged, we round all opinions to the 4th decimal point and
count the number of opinions. The large difference between the values of ε on synthetic networks and
real-world social networks is not ideal. However, to make multiple simulations on large social networks
computationally feasible, we have to make ε relatively large. Therefore, the convergence times in this
report cannot be compared directly between synthetic networks and social networks. Because the focus
of our investigation is to examine how convergence times depend on the level of self-appraisal and size
of the network, we find that direct comparisons of convergence times are of little importance for our
goals.
For our simulations, we use synthetic networks with at most of N = 1000 nodes. This maximum
number of nodes keeps the computational costs of simulations feasible. During one simulation, we first
generate a group of N independent and identically distributed initial opinions from a uniform distribu-
tion on the interval [0, 1].
Because the initial opinion profile and the synthetic networks that we generate by random graph
models are stochastic, we run ten groups of independent simulations for each type of network and for
each combination of the values of N and s that we consider. Therefore, in the simulations with random-
network models, each of the ten simulations has its own instantiation of the models.
==PAGE:35==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
27
Based on test runs, we choose a bailout time of 105 iterations for each simulation. If the convergence
criterion in Equation 5.3 is satisfied before the bailout time, we record the convergence time and the
number of opinions. Otherwise, we record the bailout time and the number of opinions. We visualize
and analyze the results of these simulations in Section 5.4.3
5.4.2
Networks used in our simulations
We simulate the weighted median model with self-appraisal for a variety of networks. The choice of
synthetic networks is inspired by [MGP18] and covers a wide range of different structures.
The deterministic network models we study are complete networks, cycles, prism networks, two-
dimensional grids, and complete bipartite networks.
These synthetic networks were introduced in
Chapter 2. The stochastic network models we study are the Erdős–Rényi model, cycle networks with
additional edges that we add uniformly at random, and prism networks with additional edges that we
add uniformly at random. The Erdős–Rényi network was introduced in Chapter 2. These networks
allow us to investigate how small changes in network structure affect the convergence times and the
number of opinions at fixed points. Cycles and prisms with randomly added edges are naturally similar
to their deterministic counterparts, and dense Erdős–Rényi networks are similar to complete networks.
We also examine three Facebook friendship networks that were recorded in the autumn of 2005
[TMP12] and two Twitter follower networks [GW17].
In the three Facebook friendship networks, nodes represent users and edges indicate that two users
are friends on Facebook. We use the network from Bowdoin College, California Institute of Technology
(Caltech), and Georgetown University. Because Facebook friendships are symmetrical relationships,
each network is undirected. We consider the largest connected component (LCC) of each network. The
LCC of the Caltech network has 762 nodes, the LCC of the Bowdoin network has 2250 nodes, and the
LCC of the Georgetown network has 9388 nodes. For further information on the networks, see [TMP12].
In the two Twitter follower networks, nodes represent users and edges indicate a follower relation
between two users. The networks consist of users who actively partook in a political discussion about
a certain issue during a period of time on Twitter. Due to the asymmetric nature of Twitter follower
relations, these networks are directed. The abortion network consists of users who tweeted with the
hashtag #abortion from the June 27th to July 3rd 2016 after the United States supreme court made
a ruling against abortion restrictions in Texas [Lip16]. The Obamacare network consists of users who
tweeted with the hastag #obamacare from June 22nd to June 29th in 2015 after the United States
supreme court ruled in favor of preserving healthcare subsidies [15]. On these networks, user opinions
were inferred [Gar+18] using the political leaning of politicians that the user followed. The sets of users
with inferred opinions constitute sub-networks of the abortion and Obamacare networks. We work with
the LCC of each of these sub-networks. The LCC of the Obamacare network has 8006 nodes, and the
LCC of the abortion network has 6114 nodes.
5.4.3
Results for the convergence time and number of opinion groups at fixed
points
We present the results of our simulation study of the convergence time and the number of opinions
at fixed points of the weighted median model with self-appraisal in Equation 4.1. We visualize how
the convergence time (T) and the number of opinions at fixed points (M) depend on the level of self-
appraisal (s) and the size of the network (N). We use regression analysis inspired by the procedure
of Meng et al. in [MGP18] to investigate the dependencies further. Contrary to the convergence time
analysis that was performed by Meng et al., we do not average our convergence-time observations before
performing regression. The results of the simulations that did not converge before the bailout time are
==PAGE:36==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
28
not included in the visualization and the regression.
For each network structure, we perform a linear regression analysis to model convergence time as
a function of the number of participating agents and self-appraisal level. Because we use the same
methodology for each network, we only give full details of our data exploration and regression analysis
for the complete network. We use the method of ordinary least-squares for our linear regression. We
use least-square regression because it is a consistent and unbiased estimator if the errors have the same
finite variance and are uncorrelated with the explanatory variables [DS14]. If the residuals are normally
distributed, ordinary least-squares regression is also the maximum-likelihood estimator [Paw13]. Based
on visual inspection of the data we start with the model
T = α0 +α1s+α2s2 +α3s3 +α4N +α5N 2 +α6N 3 +α7sN +α8s2N +α9sN 2 +α10 ln(N)+α11 ln(s)+ε
(5.4)
for synthetic networks and
ln(T) = α0 + α1s + α2s2 + α3s3 + α4s4 + α5 ln(s) + ε
(5.5)
for social networks. We have chosen these starting models based on data exploration across the different
networks used in this simulations study.
We remove terms from the regression to maximize the Akaike information criterion (AIC)
AIC = 2 (k −ln(L)) ,
(5.6)
where k is the number of coeﬀicients in the model and L is its likelihood [Paw13]. Finally, we remove
all terms that are not significant at a 95% significance level. To evaluate the regression, we use the
AIC and the R2 value, a measure of goodnes of fit for regression models [DS14]. The value of R2 lies
in the interval [0, 1], where R2 = 1 implies that the response variable can be predicted without error
from the explanatory variables and R2 = 0 implies that the response variable cannot be predicted from
the explanatory variables. Let ¯Ti be the predicted value of the observed convergence time Ti with
i = 1, 2, . . . , n for some regression model. Let µT = 1
n
P
i Ti. The R2 value of the regression model is
R2 =
P
i
  ¯T −µT

P
i (Ti −µT ) .
(5.7)
When we present each regression model, we also present its parameter estimates and the corresponding
AIC and R2 values.
When the AIC-based model selection results in a simple regression expression, we examine it ana-
lytically to investigate the minimum and maximum convergence times.
All visualizations and statistical analysis are made with the software environment R [Tea17] and
the R package ggplot2 [Wic16].
5.4.4
Complete networks
We first investigate the convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points for the weighted median
model with self-appraisal for complete networks. In Figure 5.2, we see that the convergence times (T)
are well-described by the level of self-appraisal s. We also note the number of opinions at the fixed
point (M) is either one or two. It appears visually that M is independent of N and s. Therefore, it is
possible that M is determined by the nature of the specific initialization.
For the untransformed convergence times, our AIC-based model-selection method yields the following
model
T = α0 + α1s + α2s2 + αs3 + ε .
(5.8)
==PAGE:37==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
29
100
200
300
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
s
T
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
s
M
N
10
50
100
200
400
600
800
1000
Figure 5.2: Convergence time T and the number M of opinions at fixed points for different level of
self-appraisal s for complete networks. Color shows the size N of the networks.
In Figure 5.3, we show a Q–Q plot and a histogram of the residuals of this regression. From the Q–Q
plot, we see that the residuals are not normally distributed. To improve upon the fit, we log-transform
the convergence times. For ln(T), the model-selection procedure suggests the model
ln(T) = α0 + α1s + α2s2 + α3s3 + α4N + α5N 2 + α6sN + α7sN 2 + α8 ln(N) + α9 ln(s) + ε .
(5.9)
−25
0
25
−2
0
2
Theoretical quantiles
Sample quantiles
0
50
100
150
−20
−10
0
10
Residuals
Count
Figure 5.3: Q–Q plot and histogram of residuals for the regression model of the convergence time of
the weighted median model with self-appraisal for complete networks in Equation 5.8.
In Figure 5.4, we see a Q–Q plot and histogram of the residuals for the model in Equation 5.9. We
see that the residuals seem more Gaussian than those for the model in Equation 5.8 that we visualized
in Figure 5.3. However, Figure 5.4 shows that the regression on ln(T) has notable outliers. To investi-
gate how much these outliers affect the regression, we plot Cook’s distance [DS14] in Figure 5.5. There
are multiple ways to decide what observations enact “too much” influence on the regression [DS14].
==PAGE:38==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
30
−0.10
−0.05
0.00
0.05
−2
0
2
Theoretical quantiles
Sample quantiles
0
40
80
120
−0.10
−0.05
0.00
0.05
Residuals
Count
Figure 5.4: Q–Q plot and histogram of residuals for the regression model of the log-transformed
convergence time of the weighted median model with self-appraisal for complete networks
in Equation 5.9.
Following Meng et al. [MGP18], we choose to use the threshold 8/(n −2p), where n is the number of
observations and p is the number of parameters in the regression. We find that six observations have a
Cook’s distance above this threshold and thus enact too much influence.
After removing the observations with too much influence, the AIC-based model-selection procedure
results in the regression model in Equation 5.9 with R2 ≈0.999 and AIC ≈−4500.951. From the large
R2 value, we see that the response variable ln(T) can be described almost entirely by the explanatory
variables (N and s).
on
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.50
0.75
s
Cook's distance
Figure 5.5: Cook’s distance for the regression in Equation 5.9 on ln(T). The red line indicates the
threshold 8/(n −2p), where n is the number of observations and p is the number of
parameters in the regression. We find that 6 observations have a Cook’s distance above
this threshold.
==PAGE:39==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
31
In Table 5.1, we give tabulated parameter estimates and estimate statistics for the regression model
in Equation 5.9. The software environment R [Tea17] was used to calculate the estimates and estimate
statistics. The column “t value” is the t-statistic for the hypothesis test with the null hypothesis that
the corresponding regression coeﬀicient is 0. The column “Pr(> |t|)” is the probability of a test statistic
to be at least as extreme as the observed t value when the null hypothesis is true.
We tested if merging the intercept and s term or the N 2 and sN 2 term to a N 2(1 + s) term would
decrease the AIC. Neither of these term merges decreases the AIC.
Estimate
Std. error
t value
Pr(>|t|)
α0
4.568 × 100
4.186 × 10−2
1.091 × 102
0.000 × 100
α1
−4.069 × 100
1.254 × 10−1
−3.245 × 101
4.819 × 10−141
α2
5.437 × 100
1.599 × 10−1
3.399 × 101
1.228 × 10−149
α3
−3.684 × 100
7.923 × 10−2
−4.649 × 101
6.371 × 10−215
α4
−5.242 × 10−5
1.240 × 10−5
−4.226 × 100
2.698 × 10−5
α5
3.399 × 10−8
1.056 × 10−8
3.220 × 100
1.343 × 10−3
α6
4.211 × 10−5
1.666 × 10−5
2.528 × 100
1.169 × 10−2
α7
−3.403 × 10−8
1.647 × 10−8
−2.066 × 100
3.921 × 10−2
α8
4.945 × 10−3
8.280 × 10−4
5.973 × 100
3.734 × 10−9
α9
−6.505 × 10−1
1.354 × 10−2
−4.803 × 101
2.227 × 10−222
Table 5.1: Estimates of regression coeﬀicients for convergence time model in equation Equation 5.9
on complete network.
We have investigated multiple transformations, including general Box–Cox transformations, square-
root transformations, and log–log transformations.
Compared to the log transformation, no other
transformation improved upon the distribution of the residuals or the R2 value. Therefore, we decide
to work with the log transformation.
We see from the model in Equation 5.9 and the parameter estimates in Table 5.1, that T initially
increases with the network size until
N = α4 + α6 ±
p
(α6 + α4)2 −8α8(α7s + α5)
4(α7 + α5)
.
(5.10)
This stationary point of the convergence time regression assumes, however, that α7 + α5 ̸= 0. From
the estimated values in Table 5.1 we see that α7 + α5 ≈10−10. It should therefore be further tested
whether this stationary point exists.
5.4.5
Erdős–Rényi networks
We now explore how convergence time and the number of opinion groups at fixed points of the weighted
median model with self-appraisal depend on the self-appraisal s and network size N for Erdős–Rényi net-
works. We consider networks generated by the Erdős–Rényi random-network with p = 0.1, 0.2, . . . , 0.9.
For each value of p, N, and s we perform ten independent simulations each with their own instanti-
ation of the network model. The complete network is equivalent to the network that one obtains by
generating a network from the Erdős–Rényi model with p = 1. In Figure 5.6, we show a subset of the
values of T from the simulations where p = 0.1, p = 0.5, and p = 0.9. This subset is representative of
the observed trend; as p increases, the variance of T decreases and the values of T approach those for
the complete network. Because of the large number of outliers for smaller values of p, we only perform
regression for p ≥0.7.
In Figure 5.7, we show the number of opinion at the fixed point for p = 0.1, p = 0.5, and p = 0.9.
This subset is representative, as smaller values of p tend to lead to a larger number of opinion groups
==PAGE:40==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
32
p = 0.1
p = 0.5
p = 0.9
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00 0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00 0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
200
400
600
800
s
T
N
10
50
100
200
400
600
800
1000
Figure 5.6: Convergence time T for different levels of self-appraisal s for Erdős–Rényi networks with
edge probability p = 0.1, p = 0.5, and p = 0.9. Color shows the size N of the networks.
We have removed five outliers to improve the readability of the figure.
at the fixed point. Because it is likely that Erdös-Renyi networks are disconnected for small values
of p [BP16], the increasing number of opinions at fixed points for decreasing p may simply reflect the
increasing number of connected components of the networks generated by the model. We have not
investigated this hypothesis further.
p = 0.1
p = 0.5
p = 0.9
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00 0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00 0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
4
8
12
s
T
N
10
50
100
200
400
600
800
1000
Figure 5.7: Number M of distinct opinions at fixed points for different levels of self-appraisal s for
Erdős–Rényi networks with edge probability p = 0.1, p = 0.5, and p = 0.9. Color shows
the size N of the networks. We have removed five outliers to improve the readability of
the figure.
Before we perform regression, we remove one outlier for p = 0.9 and three outlier for p = 0.7. Our
regression analysis suggests the following model
ln(T) = α0 + α1s + α2s3 + α3N + α4N 2 + α5s2N + α6sN 2 + α7 ln(N) + α8 ln(s) + ε .
(5.11)
==PAGE:41==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
33
For p = 0.9, we have R2 ≈0.9958 and AIC ≈−3391.7205. For p = 0.8, the regression has R2 ≈0.9764
and AIC≈−851.0286. Finally, for p = 0.7, we have R2 ≈0.9972 and AIC ≈−2097.76 .
The parameter estimates and estimate statistics are tabulated in Table A.1.
For p = 0.9, the
regression predicts that T increases with the network size until
2(α4 + α6s)N 2 + α5s2N + α7 = 0 .
(5.12)
Given the parameter values, Equation 5.12 has a single solution for N > 0 and α6s + α4 ̸= 0
N =
p
α2
5s2 −8α7(α6 + α4) −α5s2
4(α6 + α4)
.
(5.13)
Whether this solution is real or complex, depends on the level of self-appraisal. Similar arguments can
be made for p = 0.8 and p = 0.7 with slight alterations to accommodate the difference in parameter
estimates and significant terms in Table A.1.
From Equation 5.9 and Equation 5.11 , we see that the AIC-based models-selection procedure finds
that T scales similarly for the Erdős–Rényi network with p = 0.9 as for the complete network. From
Table A.1, we see that the AIC-based model-selection approach finds that T scales differently for the
various levels of p. For example, all three models show that T depends linearly on s, but with different
signs. We also see that fewer terms are significant when p decreases.
5.4.6
Two-dimensional grid networks
We explore the behavior of convergence time and the number of opinions at fixed points by simulating
the weighted median model for two-dimensional grid networks. Two-dimensional grid networks are a
classic network structure on which to study the behavior of dynamical systems of opinions [Wei+01;
MGP18]. Their regularity and simple structure make analytical arguments easier.
In Figure 5.8, we illustrate the dependencies of T and M on s and N. For s = 0.9, the simulations
only converged for two-dimensional grid networks of size N = 10 and N = 50. We see that M is
highly dependent on the size of the network and only has a slight dependency on s. To investigate this
behavior, we visualize the dependencies T and M on N in Figure 5.9. We see that T depends on the N
for N ≤500, but that the effect diminishes for larger networks. Figure 5.9 shows that the mean value
of M scales linearly with N and that the variance of M also scales with N.
Because we have no recorded simulations of the weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.9
converging before the bail-out time for two-dimensional grid networks larger than N = 50, we do not
include the observations with self-appraisal s = 0.9 in our model-selection procedure. Our AIC-based
model-selection procedure indicates the following model
ln(T) = α0 + α1s + α2s2 + α3s3 + α4s2N + α5 ln(N) + α6 ln(s) + ε ,
(5.14)
with R2 ≈0.9796 and AIC≈−1048.82.
In Table A.4, we show the parameter estimates and the
estimate statistics.
For fixed s, the regression shows that T increases with the network size until
N = −α5
α4s2 ≈
1
s2 465.77, after which T decreases as the network size increases further.
5.4.7
Complete bipartite networks
We explore the behavior of convergence time and the number of opinions at fixed points by simulating
the weighted median model for complete bipartite networks.
In Figure 5.10, we visualize how T and M depend on s. It seems that T is highly dependent on s
and has a minimum at about s ≈0.7. We observe that M is between one and three and seems to be
independent of s and N. The number of opinions that exist at the fixed point might depend on the
==PAGE:42==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
34
100
200
300
400
500
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
s
T
0
100
200
300
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
s
M
N
10
50
100
200
400
600
800
1000
Figure 5.8: Convergence time T and the number M of opinions at fixed points for different level of
self-appraisal s for two-dimensional grid networks. Color shows the size N of the networks.
100
200
300
400
500
0
250
500
750
1000
N
T
0
100
200
300
0
250
500
750
1000
N
M
s
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Figure 5.9: Convergence time T and the number M of opinions at fixed points for different network
sizes N for two-dimensional grid networks. Color shows the level of self-appraisal s.
nature of the specific initialization.
In Figure 5.11, we show the logarithm of the convergence time for complete bipartite networks. In
the left panel, we show ln(T) for the values of self-appraisal used for regression. In the right panel, we
show ln(T) for for 300 levels of self-appraisal s ∈[0.5, 0.8] for N = 600. We observe that the behavior
of T is rather intricate. Approximately, for s ∈[0.5, 0.68], we observe that two regions of attraction for
T exist. Approximately, for s ∈]0.68, 0.8], between two and three attractive regions for T exist. Given
a value of s and an initial state, we do not know how to predict which attracting region that T will be
in.
==PAGE:43==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
35
100
200
300
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
s
T
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
s
M
N
10
50
100
200
400
600
800
1000
Figure 5.10: Convergence time T and the number M of opinions at fixed points for different level of
self-appraisal s for complete bipartite networks. Color shows the size N of the networks.
4
5
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
s
ln(T)
3.5
4.0
4.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
s
ln(T)
N
10
50
100
200
400
600
800
1000
Figure 5.11: Log transform convergence time for complete bipartite network. In the left panel we
show the convergence time for several network sizes. In the right panel, we show the con-
vergence times for 300 levels of self-appraisal in the interval s ∈[0.5, 0.8] for a complete
bipartite network with N = 600 nodes.
Because multiple attracting regions for T can coexist for given values of s and N, we believe that
regression analysis is ill-suited to analyze the convergence times. Therefore, we do not present a con-
vergence time model for the complete bipartite network.
==PAGE:44==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
36
5.4.8
Cycle networks
We explore the behavior of convergence time and the number of opinions at fixed points by simulating
the weighted median model for cycle networks. We also consider networks from ensembles of cycles
with uniform randomly added edges between node pairs (without allowing parallel edges or self-edges).
Networks from such an ensemble have a larger clustering coeﬀicient and smaller diameter than regular
cycle networks [Bol88] and are related to networks generated by the Watts–Strogatz model. The pa-
rameter p ∈[0, 1] denotes the fraction of possible edges that we add to the cycle. For example, a cycle
with a p = 0 fraction of added edges is a standard cycle network, and a cycle network with a fraction
of p = 1 added edges is a complete network. We consider networks from the ensembles with p = 0.1,
p = 0.2, and p = 0.3. For each combination of N, s, and p we perform ten independent simulations
each with their own instantiation of the network model.
We observe similar behavior for the cycle network as for the grid network. For s = 0.9, the simu-
lations only converged for cycle networks of size N = 10. For cycle networks without any added edge,
T seems to have a clear minimum at s ≈0.7; it is similar to the minimum observed for the complete
bipartite network. This minimum is less pronounced p = 0.1 and p = 0.2 and it is not present for
p = 0.3. Based on our numerical computation, it seems that the number of opinions at fixed points
scales linearly with the size of the cycle and that the slope of this linear dependency is smaller when
random edges are present.
Before we perform regression, we remove three outliers convergence times for the cycle network,
three outliers convergence times for the cycle network with a fraction p = 0.1 of added edges, and
three outliers convergence times for the cycle network with a fraction p = 0.2 of added edges. Because
we have no recorded simulations of the weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.9 converging
before the bail-out time for cycle networks larger than N = 10, we do not include the observations
with self-appraisal s = 0.9 in our model-selection procedure. Our AIC-based model-selection method
resulted in the model
ln(T) = α0 + α1s + α2s2 + α3s3 + α4N 3 + α5sN + α6s2N + α7sN 2 + α8 ln(N) + α9 ln(s) + ε , (5.15)
for convergence time for cycle networks and cycle networks with randomly added edges. For the cycle
network, we obtain R2 ≈0.991 and AIC≈−1684.51.
For p = 0.1, we obtain R2 ≈0.9868 and
AIC≈−822.28. For p = 0.2, we obtain the R2 ≈0.9741 and AIC≈−945.00. Finally, for p = 0.3,
we have R2 ≈0.9582 and AIC≈−638.52. In Table A.2, we tabulate estimated parameters and the
estimate statistics where p = 0 corresponds to standard cycle networks. We see that the model finds a
similar dependency on the s, s2, s3 terms both with respect to sign and magnitude for all values of p.
5.4.9
Prism networks
We now investigate the behavior of convergence time and the number of opinions at fixed points by
simulating the weighted median model for prism networks. We also consider networks from ensembles
of prisms with uniform randomly added edges between node pairs (without allowing parallel edges or
self-edges). We again use the parameter p ∈[0, 1] to denote the fraction of the possible edges that we
add to the prism. The prism with a fraction p = 0 of added edges is equivalent to a standard prism
network and a prism with a fraction p = 1 of added edges is a complete network. We consider networks
from the ensembles with p = 0.1, p = 0.2, and p = 0.3. For each combination of parameter values N,
s, and p we perform ten independent simulations each with their own instantiation of the network model.
We observe similar behavior for the prism networks as for the grid and cycle networks. For s = 0.9,
the simulations only converged for two-dimensional grid networks of size N = 10. On prism networks
with no added edge, the convergence time T seems to have a minimum at s ≈0.7, but it is much less
pronounced compared to the minimum for the cycles and the complete bipartite networks. We do not
observe the minimum when random edges are present. Based on our simulations, it seems M scales
==PAGE:45==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
37
linearly with the size of the prism and that the slope of the dependency is smaller when random edges
are present.
Because we have no recorded simulations of the weighted median model with self-appraisal s =
0.9 converging before the bail-out time for prism networks larger than N = 10, we do not include
the observations with self-appraisal s = 0.9 in our model-selection procedure. The AIC-based model
selection yields the model
ln(T) = α0+α1s+α2s2+α3s3+α4N +α5N 2+α6sN +α7s2N +α8sN 2+α9 ln(N)+α10 ln(s)+ε , (5.16)
for the convergence time of the weighted median model with self-appraisal for prism networks and
prism networks with randomly added edges.
For the prism network, we obtain R2 ≈0.9929 and
AIC≈−1738.80. For p = 0.1, we obtain R2 ≈0.9796 and AIC≈−1118.66. For p = 0.2, we obtain
R2 ≈0.9762 and AIC≈−1081.28. Finally, for p = 0.3, we obtain R2 ≈0.9743 and AIC≈−800.11.
In Table A.3, we give the parameter estimates and estimate statistics where p = 0 corresponds to the
prism network. We again see that the model finds a similar dependency on the the s, s2, s3 terms both
with respect to sign and magnitude for all values of p.
5.4.10
Facebook friendship networks
We now explore the behavior of convergence time and the number of opinions at fixed points by sim-
ulating the weighted median model for the Facebook friendship networks that we discussed in Section
5.4.2. The simulations rarely converged for self-appraisal s ≥0.8. Because the sizes of the Facebook
friendship networks are fixed, we only investigate the dependencies of T and M on the self-appraisal s.
5.4.10.1
Caltech network
In the results of our simulations, the dependency of T and M on s for the Caltech network [TMP12] is
less clear than for the synthetic networks. For s = 0.1, we generally observe large values of T than for
larger values of s. We found no dependency of M on s. Because of the weak dependencies of T and M,
we do not visualize the results of our simulations. The simulations do not converge before the bailout
time for s = 0.9.
Our AIC-based model selection implies the model
ln(T) = α0 + α1s2 + α2s3 + α3 ln(s) + ε ,
(5.17)
with R2 ≈0.3698 and AIC≈86.02. This is a notably smaller R2 value than for the models on the
synthetic networks. Therefore, we do not believe further analysis of this model will lead to insight into
the behavior of T. We give the estimated parameters and estimate statistics in Table A.5 in Appendix
A.2.
5.4.10.2
Bowdoin network
We observe similar behavior of the convergence time and the number of opinions at fixed points for the
Bowdoin network [TMP12] that we observed for the Caltech network. In general, smaller values of s
lead to larger values of T. For self-appraisal s = 0.9, we recorded no simulations converging before the
bailout time. We find no clear dependency of M on s. The AIC-based model selection suggests the
model
ln(T) = α0 + α1s + α2s2 + ε ,
(5.18)
with R2 ≈0.4427 and AIC ≈78.59. Because of the low R2 value, we do not believe further analysis of
this model will lead to insight into the behavior of T. The parameter estimates and estimate statistics
are tabulated in Table A.6 in Appendix A.2.
==PAGE:46==
5.4 Convergence time and number of opinions at fixed points
38
5.4.10.3
Georgetown network
In Figure 5.12, we show the dependence of T and M on s for the Georgetown network [TMP12]. We
see that T depends heavily on s and that T has a minimum at s ≈0.7; the minimum is similar to the
minima that we observed in our simulations for the grid, cycle, prism, and complete bipartite networks.
For self-appraisal s = 0.9, we recorded no simulations converging before the bailout time. Visually, it
seems that there is a slight dependency of M on s, where M has a minimum at about s ≈0.5.
40
80
120
160
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
s
T
4550
4600
4650
4700
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
s
M
Figure 5.12: Convergence time T and the number M of opinions at fixed points for different level of
self-appraisal s on the Georgetown Facebook friendship network.
The AIC-based selection procedure implies the model
ln(T) = α0 + α1s + α2s2 + α3s3 + α4 ln(s) + ε ,
(5.19)
with R2 ≈0.9935 and AIC≈−229.78. The R2 value of this model is much larger than the R2 value for
the models for the Caltech and Bowdoin networks. We tabulate the parameter estimates and estimate
statistics in Table A.6 in Appendix A.2.
5.4.11
Twitter follower networks
We now explore the behavior of convergence time and the number of opinions at fixed points by simu-
lating the weighted median model for the Twitter follower networks that we discussed in Section 5.4.2.
In contrast to the simulations on the Facebook friendship networks, the simulations converged for all
levels of self-appraisals. Because the network sizes are fixed, we only investigate how T and M depend
on the level of self-appraisal s.
5.4.11.1
Abortion network
In Figure 5.13, we show the dependency of T and M on s for the abortion network [Gar+18]. We see
that T depends heavily on s. Visually, it seems that the convergence time T decreases as self-appraisal
s increases. Visually, there is no clear dependency of M on s.
The AIC-based model selection procedure results in the model
ln(T) = α0 + α1s + α2s2 + α3s3 + α4s4 + α5 ln(s) + ε ,
(5.20)
with R2 ≈0.8328 and AIC≈51.72171. In Table A.8 found in Appendix A.2, we show the parameter
estimates and estimate statistics.
==PAGE:47==
5.5 Limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
39
0
200
400
600
800
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
s
T
920
930
940
950
960
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
s
M
Figure 5.13: Convergence time T and the number M of opinions at fixed points for different level of
self-appraisal s on the abortion Twitter follower network.
5.4.11.2
Obamacare network
We observe similar behavior of the convergence time and the number of opinions at fixed points for
the Obamacare network [Gar+18] as we observed for the abortion network. However, we found that
the convergence time T has a minimum at s ≈0.8 similar to the minimum observed previously on
other networks. We have found no dependency of M on s. Our AIC-based model selection implies the
following model
ln(T) = α0 + α1s + α2s2 + α3s3 + α4s4
(5.21)
with R2 ≈0.9414 and AIC≈−59.76757. We give the parameter estimates and estimate statistics are
in Table A.9 in Appendix A.2.
5.5
Limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model
with self-appraisal
It is diﬀicult to determine the distribution of opinions at fixed points for the weighted median model with
self-appraisal for a given network, and how that distribution depends on the initial state and network
structure. Therefore, we perform a series of simulations to study the distribution of opinions at fixed
points for different initial opinion distributions and networks. We define the limit opinion distribution
to be the distribution of opinions at a fixed point of the weighted median model with self-appraisal.
Unless there is a risk of ambiguity, we do not state that the limit opinion distribution is with respect
to the weighted median model with self-appraisal.
5.5.1
Simulation specifications
We again use the condition in Equation 5.3 to determine if the system is at a fixed point and with
ε = 4.44 × 10−16 for synthetic networks and ε = 10−6 for real-world social networks. For the empirical
state distribution to give insights into the underlying continuous state distribution, we need to work
with relatively large networks. Therefore, the synthetic networks in these simulations have N = 2500
nodes. By visual inspection, we find that the limit opinion distributions were the same for larger values
of N. For each network structure and each initial-state distribution, we start by storing the network
and drawing the initial state of each node randomly from the initial distribution. We simulate the
==PAGE:48==
5.5 Limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
40
weighted median model with self-appraisal until the convergence criterion in Equation 5.3 is satisfied.
To accommodate for the fact that the true fixed point cannot be reached in finite time, all opinions are
rounded off to the 14th decimal point for synthetic networks and to the 4th decimal point for real-world
social networks. Finally, we record the state of each node for later analysis.
5.5.2
Networks used in the simulations
We investigate the limit opinion distributions for deterministic synthetic networks, synthetic networks
that we construct from stochastic models, and real-world social networks.
We include the deterministic networks from the convergence-time simulations in Section 5.4, for
which we found that the number of opinions at the fixed points scale with the network size. That
is, we work with cycle networks, prism networks, and two-dimensional grid networks. We also work
with networks that we generate with the Barabási–Albert [BA99] model and with the Watts–Strogatz
model [WS98]. We discussed these random-network models and their parameters in Chapter 2. For
the Barabási–Albert model, we use parameters m = 7 and p = 0.2. For the Watts–Strogatz model, we
use parameter c = 7. For each of the random-network models, we only work with a single realization
of the model. The limit opinion distribution of the asynchronous-update weighted median model was
investigated for networks generated using the same Watts–Strogatz and Barabási–Albert models with
the same set of parameters in [Mei+20]. We include these random-network models to compare the limit
distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal and the asynchronous weighted median
model.
We work with the same three Facebook friendship networks and two Twitter follower networks that
we discussed in Section 5.4.2.
5.5.3
Initial distributions in the simulations
To investigate how the limit opinion distribution depends on the initial opinion distribution, we intro-
duce a selection of initial distributions with different characteristics. We work with the following five
initial distributions (which were also considered in [Mei+20]):
1. Uniform distribution: the initial opinion of each node is independently sampled uniformly in the
interval [0, 1].
2. Unimodal distribution: the initial opinion of each node is independently sampled from the Beta
distribution Beta(2, 2).
3. Skewed unimodal distribution: the initial opinion of each node is independently sampled from the
Beta(2, 7) distribution.
4. Bimodal distribution: for each node, we sample X from the Beta(2, 10) distribution, and we then
let the initial opinion of that node be X and 1 −X with probability 0.5 respectively.
5. Trimodal distribution: for each node, we sample X from the Beta(2, 17) distribution and sample
Y from the Beta(12, 12) distribution, and we then let the initial opinion of that node be X, 1−X,
and Y with probability 0.33, 0.33, and 0.34 respectively.
We refer to these distributions collectively as the synthetic initial distributions. We visualize the density
functions of the synthetic initial distributions in Figure 5.14.
We also use the opinion distributions that were inferred for the Twitter follower networks [Gar+18]
as initial distributions. In [Gar+18], these opinions are called user polarity scores, but we call them
“opinions” to keep the terminology of this report simple. For each node in the networks, Garimella et
==PAGE:49==
5.5 Limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
41
Uniform
Unimodal
Skewed
Bimodal
Trimodal
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0
1
2
3
x
Density function
Figure 5.14: Density functions for synthetic initial distributions that we use in our simulation study
of the limit opinion distributions of the weighted median model with self-appraisal.
al. has inferred opinions based on the political leaning of politicians that the node follows on Twitter
[Gar+18]. The list of politicians that were used for estimation and the method of opinion estimation
have been detailed in [Bar+15]. We normalize the inferred opinions to the interval [0, 1]; such that
values below 0.5 indicate a liberal leaning and a values above 0.5 indicate a conservative leaning. When
we use the inferred opinions as initial opinion distributions, we call them the inferred initial distributions.
When initializing with the inferred opinions, the opinion of each node is assigned (not sampled).
5.5.3.1
Visualizations of the inferred opinions on the Twitter follower networks
To understand how the opinions are distributed in the inferred initial opinion distributions, we make
a series of visualizations. These will help to convey the difference between the synthetic and inferred
initial opinion distributions.
In Figure 5.15, we show histograms of the opinions that were inferred by Garimella et al. on the
abortion and Obamacare networks. We see that both of the inferred opinions are bimodal. Compared
to the bimodal synthetic initial opinion distributions, the peaks of the inferred opinion distributions
are much closer to the ends of the opinion space. The inferred opinions are asymmetric, which also
distinguishes them from the synthetic initial opinion distributions.
In Figure 5.16, we show a visualization of the abortion network; we color the nodes according to
the inferred opinions. The abortion network is divided into two opinion communities with distinct
opinions.
Between the two opinion communities, there is a thin region of nodes with intermediary
opinions. We have used the Kamada–Kawai algorithm [KK89] to determine the node layout and it is
therefore independent of the inferred opinions. We find that the Obamacare network looks qualitatively
similar when visualized in this manner.
5.5.4
The effect of self-appraisal on the limiting opinion distribution
In the results of our numerical simulations, we observed no clear dependency of the limit opinion
distribution on the self-appraisal s. Therefore, we restrict the level of self-appraisal to s = 0.7 for the
remainder of this simulation study. See Figure A.1, Figure A.2, and Figure A.4 in Appendix A.3.1
for a visual comparison of the opinion distribution at fixed points for various levels of self-appraisal
on a selection of networks. A more thorough investigation would include exploring the formation of
connected sub-networks in which all nodes have the same opinion and the size distribution of these sub-
networks for different levels of self-appraisal and networks, as in the investigations in [LAZ03; Def+00;
SM03]. However, we have not performed such explorations due to time constraints.
==PAGE:50==
5.5 Limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
42
0
200
400
600
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
State
count
Abortion network
0
250
500
750
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
State
count
Obamacare network
Figure 5.15: Histogram of inferred opinions on the abortion and Obamacare Twitter follower networks
that were considered in [Gar+18].
Figure 5.16: Inferred opinions on the abortion Twitter follower network. The Kamada-Kawai algo-
rithm was used to determine the node layout.
5.5.5
Results of our limit opinion distribution simulations
We present the results of our simulation study of the limit opinion distribution of the weighted median
model with self-appraisal for the synthetic networks, Facebook friendship networks, and Twitter follower
networks. We show histograms of the limit opinion distributions with different initializations on a selec-
tion of networks and present summary statistics for the limit opinion distribution and its opinion groups.
==PAGE:51==
5.5 Limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
43
We investigate three traits of the distributions of opinions at fixed points: the distribution of opinions,
how nodes are organized into connected sub-networks in which all nodes have the same opinion, and
the extent to which neighboring nodes have the same opinion. We call a connected sub-network where
all nodes have the same opinion an opinion group. We record the number of groups and the mean,
variance, skew, and kurtosis of the opinion-group sizes. To summarize how much neighboring nodes
agree at fixed points, we calculate the assortativity coeﬀicient with respect to the node opinions [New02].
For undirected networks, the assortativity coeﬀicient is the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient of a scalar
node attribute at either end of a uniform randomly selected edge in the network. For directed networks,
the assortativity coeﬀicient is the Pearson correlation coeﬀicient of the attribute value at the start node
and the attribute value at the end node of a uniform randomly selected edge in the network. We explore
the distribution of opinions by visual inspection of their histograms.
5.5.6
Synthetic networks
We explore the limit opinion distributions of the model with the synthetic initializations that we dis-
cussed in Section 5.5.3 for the synthetic networks that we discussed in Section 5.5.2.
In Figure 5.17, we show histograms of the limit opinion distributions for a selection of the synthetic
networks. By visual inspection, we see that limit opinion distributions for the cycle network have the
largest spread and in several cases resemble the initial opinion distributions in Figure 5.14. By contrast,
the limit opinion distributions for the two-dimensional grid network differ more from the initial opinion
distributions. The spread of opinions in the limit opinion distributions is smaller for the two-dimensional
grid network than for the cycle network. Visually, the limit opinion distributions for the prism network
are similar to those of the two-dimensional grid network. The limit opinion distribution for the network
that we generate using the Watts–Strogatz model is unimodal for all initialization and seems to have
a smaller spread than those of the prism and two-dimensional grid networks. For the network that we
generated using the Barabási–Albert model, we see that all opinions in each limit opinion distribution
are contained in a small interval. This implies that the spread of opinions is smaller for the Barabási–
Albert network than the spread of opinions in the limit opinion distributions for the other synthetic
networks.
In Table 5.2, we give the summary statistics for the opinion-group sizes for the cycle network. We
tabulate the summary statistics for the prism network in Table A.13 and for the two-dimensional grid
network in Table A.12 which can be found in Appendix A.3.3. For these networks, we find that the
number of opinion groups and the mean, variance, and kurtosis of the opinion-group sizes are similar
for the different initializations. In general, the mean sizes of the opinion groups are relatively small
compared to the network size. The variance and kurtosis of the opinion groups sizes are also small.
Therefore, we believe that the limit opinion distributions for these networks have many small opinion
groups. From Figure 5.17, we see that the opinions of these opinion groups are spread out over the
opinion space.
Opinion group statistic
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Number of groups
1019
999
986
992
988
Mean size
2.51
2.54
2.48
2.53
2.54
Size variance
0.45
0.50
0.53
0.54
0.53
Size kurtosis
0.90
1.05
1.09
1.16
1.09
Table 5.2: Summary statistics for the sizes of opinion groups in the limit opinion distribution of the
weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for the cycle network. The network has
2500 nodes.
==PAGE:52==
5.5 Limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
44
uniform
skewed
unimodal
bimodal
trimodal
Barabási−Albert
Cycle
Grid
Watts−Strogatz
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
0
100
200
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
250
500
750
State
count
Figure 5.17: Limit opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for
different initial opinion distributions and synthetic networks. Each networks has 2500
nodes.
In Table 5.3, we give the summary statistics for the opinion-group sizes for the Watts–Strogatz
network. We see that the number of opinion groups, the mean opinion group size, and the group size
variances are similar for all initializations. The mean, variance, and kurtosis of the opinion group sizes
for the Watts–Strogatz network are all larger than the corresponding values for the prism, grid, and cycle
network. The relatively large kurtosis values imply that the sets of opinion-group sizes have relatively
many and extreme outliers. Because of the low mean value, these outliers must be larger than the
mean. Therefore, from our simulations, it seems that the limit opinion distribution for Watts–Strogatz
network has opinion groups that are much larger than the average opinion group.
Opinion group statistic
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Number of groups
395
378
393
375
415
Mean size
6.32
6.61
6.36
6.67
6.02
Size variance
25.57
27.12
24.95
24.73
20.57
Size kurtosis
1.32 × 104
1.21× 104
1.52 × 104
5.70 × 103
1.14 × 104
Table 5.3: Summary statistics for the sizes of opinion groups in the limit opinion distribution of the
weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for a network that we generate using
the Watts–Strogatz model. The network has 2500 nodes.
==PAGE:53==
5.5 Limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
45
In Table 5.4, we give the summary statistics for the opinion-group sizes for the Barabási–Albert
network. We see that there are fewer opinion groups and that the mean, variance, and kurtosis of
the opinion-group sizes are larger than for the other synthetic networks. The values of the summary
statistics are similar for all initializations. The large kurtosis implies that multiple opinion groups are
much larger than the average opinion group.
Because the variance is several orders of magnitudes
smaller than the kurtosis, it seems that the limit opinion distributions for the Barabási–Albert network
have a few very large opinion groups that contain most of the network. By inspection of the opinion
distributions, we find that most of the nodes are in the same opinion group. Therefore, we conjecture
that the limit opinion distributions of the weighted median model with self-appraisal for the Barabási–
Albert network have a single opinion group that contains most of the network.
We find that the assortativity coeﬀicients for the limit opinion distribution are similar across ini-
tializations for all of the synthetic networks. Across initializations, the assortativity coeﬀicient is ap-
proximately 0.60 for the cycle network, 0.65 for the two-dimensional grid network, 0.83 for the prism
network, 0.75 for the Watts–Strogatz network, and 0.36 for the Barabási–Albert network. Therefore,
for random state initialization and for the synthetic network structures, our simulations suggest that
that the assortativity of the limit opinion distribution depends more on network structure than on the
nature of the initial opinion distribution. For the Barabási–Albert network, we have found that most
nodes have the same opinion in the limit opinion distribution. It seems counterintuitive that we observe
this, given that the assortativity coeﬀicient for the Barabási–Albert network is smaller than for the other
synthetic networks. However, we find that the linear dependency of the opinions of neighboring nodes
is less pronounced for the Barabási–Albert network than for the other synthetic networks. Therefore,
the assortativity might be a sup-optimal summary statistic for how much neighboring nodes agree at
fixed points. See Section A.3.2 in Appendix A.3 for an investigation of the dependency of neighboring
nodes opinions for the Barabási–Albert network and the two-dimensional grid. We give the assortativity
coeﬀicients of the limit opinion distributions with the synthetic initializations for all of the synthetic
networks in Table A.10 in Appendix A.3.3
5.5.7
Facebook friendship networks
We now explore the limit opinion distributions of the weighted median model with self-appraisal with
the synthetic initializations that we discussed in Section 5.5.3 for the Facebook friendship networks
that we discussed in Section 5.5.2. The Caltech network has 762 nodes, the Bowdoin network has 2250
nodes, and the Georgetown network has 9388 nodes.
In Figure 5.18, we show histograms of the limit opinion distribution for the Georgetown network
with the synthetic initializations. By visual inspection, we see that a large proportion of opinions in
the limit opinion distributions are contained in a small interval for each initialization. This is similar
to the observed limit opinion distributions for the Barabási–Albert network.
However, by further
inspection of the limit opinion distributions for the Georgetown network, we find that a small fraction
of nodes has opinions that are spread out over the opinion space. This differs from our observations in
the limit opinion distributions for the Barabási–Albert network. The histograms of the limit opinion
Opinion group statistic
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Number of groups
43
57
40
41
47
Mean size
58.14
43.86
62.50
60.98
53.19
Size variance
8.09 × 104
6.32 × 104
8.88 × 104
8.57 × 104
8.90 × 104
Size kurtosis
2.63 × 1011
2.17 × 1011
2.93 × 1011
2.81 × 1011
3.54 × 1011
Table 5.4: Summary statistics for the sizes of opinion groups in the limit opinion distribution of the
weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for a network that we generate using
the Barabási–Albert model. The network has 2500 nodes.
==PAGE:54==
5.5 Limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
46
distributions for the Caltech and Bowdoin networks are visually similar to the limit opinion distributions
for the Georgetown network; the vast majority of nodes have opinions in a small interval and the rest
are spread out over the opinion space.
uniform
skewed
unimodal
bimodal
trimodal
Georgetown
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0
2500
5000
7500
State
count
Figure 5.18: Limit opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 with
different initial opinion distributions for the Georgetown Facebook friendship network.
From the results of our simulation, we find that the opinion group size distributions at the fixed
points are similar for all three Facebook friendship networks.
In Table 5.5, we give the summary
statistics for the opinion-group sizes for the Georgetown network.
We give the summary statistics
for the opinion-group sizes for the Caltech network in Table A.14 and for the Bowdoin network in
Table A.15 in Appendix A.3.3. We find that the mean group sizes are small relative to the network
sizes. For each network, we have a large spread among the recorded variances of the opinion-group sizes.
However, for all initializations, we find that the kurtosis is much larger than the variance. Therefore, it
seems that the limit opinion distributions for the Facebook friendship networks have a few very large
opinion groups that contain most of the network. However, because of the large difference in variance
between initializations, the size distribution of the smaller opinion groups differs a lot between the
initializations. The large difference in observed variance may be an artifact of the specific realizations
of the random initializations, and perhaps we would not observe it if we repeated simulations. We have
not investigated this further.
We find that the limit opinion distributions for the Facebook friendship networks have different
assortativity coeﬀicients across the initializations. In Table A.11 found in in Appendix A.3.3, we give
the coeﬀicient values. The coeﬀicient values for the Facebook friendship networks are, with a few ex-
ceptions, smaller than those for the synthetic networks. For the Georgetown network, the recorded
assortativity coeﬀicients range from 0.12 for the skewed initialization to 0.40 for the bimodal initial ini-
tialization. An assortativity coeﬀicient of 0.40 is similar to the ones that we calculated for the network
generated by Barabási–Albert model. For the Caltech network, the coeﬀicient values are roughly 0.15
for all initializations. For the Bowdoin network, the coeﬀicient values range from 0.16 for the trimodal
initialization to 0.58 for the unimodal initialization. An assortativity coeﬀicient of 0.58 is similar to the
Opinion group statistic
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Number of groups
2516
3629
3686
5303
4151
Mean size
3.7313
2.5869
2.5469
1.7703
2.2616
Size variance
1365.86
101.26
201.77
287.42
497.17
Size kurtosis
2.20 × 109
1.43 × 109
6.24 × 108
3.83 × 108
6.07 × 108
Table 5.5: Summary statistics for the sizes of opinion groups in the limit opinion distribution of the
weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for the Georgetown network.
==PAGE:55==
5.5 Limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
47
value that we found for the grid network (see Table A.10).
5.5.8
Twitter follower networks
We explore the limit opinion distributions of the weighted median model with self-appraisal with the
initializations that we discussed in Section 5.5.3 for the Twitter follower networks that we discussed in
Section 5.5.2. The abortion network has 6114 nodes and the Obamacare network has 8006 nodes.
Recall that for the Twitter-follower networks, we have both the synthetic initial opinion distributions
and the inferred initial opinion distribution and that in the inferred initialization, node opinions are
assigned rather than sampled. In Figure 5.19, we show histograms of the limit opinion distributions
for the Obamacare network with the synthetic and inferred initializations. For the Obamacare network,
we see that the majority of opinions in the limit opinion distributions are contained in a single small
interval for the synthetic initializations. For the inferred initialization, the majority of nodes have an
opinion in one of two small intervals. For all initializations, a small fraction of nodes have opinions
spread out over the opinion space. The limit opinion distributions with synthetic initializations are
therefore similar to the observed limit opinion distributions for the Facebook friendship networks. For
each initialization, the limit opinion distributions for the abortion network is similar to the one for the
Obamacare network.
uniform
skewed
unimodal
bimodal
trimodal
inferred
Obamacare
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0.1
0.5
0.9
0
2000
4000
6000
State
count
Figure 5.19: Limit opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 with
different initial opinion distributions for the Obamacare Twitter follower network.
It seems that the opinion group size distributions at the fixed points for the Twitter follower networks
are similar to the ones found for the Facebook friendship networks. In Table 5.6, we give the summary
statistics for the opinion-group sizes for the Obamacare network. We give the summary statistics for
the abortion network in Table A.16 in Appendix A.3.3. For all of the initializations, the kurtosis is
very large compared to the mean and the variance of the opinion-group sizes. Therefore, we again
hypothesize that the limit opinion distributions have a few large opinion groups containing most of
the network. As with the Facebook friendship networks, the variance of the opinion-group sizes are
very different for the different initializations; they range from 7.39 × 104 to 3.11 for the Obamacare
network. Therefore, it seems that the size distribution of small opinion groups differs a lot between the
initializations.
In Table A.11, we give the assortativity coeﬀicients of the limit opinion distributions for the two
Twitter follower networks. We see that the initializations have a very large effect on the assortativity
coeﬀicients of the limit opinion distributions for these networks. For the synthetic initializations, the
assortativity coeﬀicients are smaller for the Twitter follower networks than for the Facebook friendship
==PAGE:56==
5.5 Limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
48
Opinion group stat
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Inferred
Number of groups
1417
3472
4414
1539
2508
135
Mean size
5.65
2.31
2.81
5.20
3.19
38.24
Size variance
1.29 × 104
53.02
3.11
3191.15
199.22
7.39 × 104
Size kurtosis
1.73 × 1012
1.81 × 107
516.61
4.90 × 1010
2.52 × 108
6.14× 1011
Table 5.6: Summary statistics for the sizes of opinion groups in the limit opinion distribution of the
weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for the Obamacare network.
networks. However, the assortativity coeﬀicients for the inferred initializations are approximately 0.9
for the Twitter follower networks. This assortativity coeﬀicient is larger than any of the values recorded
for the Facebook friendship networks and synthetic networks. Therefore, it seems that limit opinion
distribution with the inferred initialization is fundamentally different from the ones with the synthetic
initializations.
Network
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Inferred
Obamacare
0.11
0.04
0.03
0.08
0.05
0.90
Abortion
0.07
0.10
0.14
0.09
0.05
0.91
Table 5.7: Assortativity coeﬀicient of the limit opinion distribution of the weighted median model
with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for different initial opinion distributions for the Twitter follower
networks.
==PAGE:57==
CHAPTER 6
Mean-field approximation
of the weighted median
model with self-appraisal
In this chapter, we derive a mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
and investigate the accuracy of this approximation numerically. To contextualize the approximation
method derived in this chapter, we present approximate schemes for epidemiological compartment type
models and continuous-state bounded-confidence opinion models with a special focus on mean-field
approximations.
6.1
Mean-field approximations for dynamical systems on networks
As discussed in Section 1.5, mean-field approximations are a common tool for analyzing dynamical
systems on networks.
It is in general diﬀicult to derive and explain mean-field approximations for
continuous state dynamical systems.
Therefore, for pedagogical reasons, we introduce the different
approximation schemes and their derivations for compartment-type models. We present two categories
of approximation schemes for dynamical systems on networks; individuals-based (or node-based) approx-
imations and degree-based approximations. Finally, we discuss some of the approximations that exist
for continuous-state opinion models.
We first discuss individual-based approximations. Let G be a network and assume that the state of
each node i ∈V is restricted to a finite set of compartments. Let Xi(t) be the continuous-time stochas-
tic process that describes the state of node i. Then P(Xi(t) = α) is the probability that the state of
a node i is in a compartment α at time t ∈R+. The general idea of individual-based approximations
is to describe the evolution of P(Xi(t) = α) with a set of coupled differential equations [Pas+15]. One
way to derive closed-form equations for the evolution of these probabilities for all i ∈N(G) and all com-
partments α is to assume that the probabilities are independent and therefore factorize. This results in
a moment closure of the first moment, also known as a mean-field approximation [PG16]. The number
of equations will be equal to the number of nodes in the network. The solution of individual-based
mean-field approximations for compartment-type models depends in general on the spectral properties
of the adjacency matrix and in particular on the value of its largest eigenvalue [Pas+15].
Alternatively, one can model P
 Xi(t) = α and Xj(t) = β

as dynamic quantities and include their
evolution in the equations alongside P(Xi(t) = α). To write closed form equations for these probabilities,
the probability
P
 Xi(t) = α and Xj(t) = β and Xl(t) = γ

,
for node triples i, j, l needs to be factorized. This can be done in different ways. One way it so use
Baye’s Theorem to make a moment closure of the second moment [PG16; New18]. The resulting differ-
ential equations are known as an individual-based pair approximation. The accuracy of moment closures
==PAGE:58==
6.1 Mean-field approximations for dynamical systems on networks
50
depends on the underlying network structure and this specific moment closure is exact when the only
path from node j to k goes through i [New18]. Naturally, One can also include the dynamics of triplets,
quadruplets, and as many nodes as one wants by considering more general motif expansions [MK14;
TKT14].
An alternative to individual-based approximations is degree-based approximations. In such schemes,
one assumes that all nodes of similar degree are indistinguishable and that the process evolves on a
configuration network [PG16]. Therefore, we refer to all nodes of degree k as the k-degree class. Let
Y α
k (t) be a stochastic process describing the proportion of nodes in the degree-k class with state in
compartment α. The general idea is then to describe E [Y α
k (t)] for each degree class k and compartment
α using a set of differential equations. Degree-based approximations can further be divided into two
categories that are fundamentally different.
One type of degree-based approximation derives a system of coupled equations using moment clo-
sure, similar to the individual-based approximations. This can lead to mean-field approximations for
the evolution of E [Y α
k (t)], pair-approximations for the evolution of E [Y α
k (t)] and
E

Y α
k (t) Y β
s (t)

, and higher-order motifs [MK14; PG16].
Another type of degree-based approximations uses the generating function of the degree distribu-
tion to derive a universal k-independent function that governs the dynamics for all k-degree classes
[New18]. Therefore, the equations for E [Y α
k (t)] are independent of one another. In most practical cases,
no closed-form of this universal function is known, but analysis of its initial and long-term behavior is
possible and can lead to insights into the behavior of the dynamics of the system [New18].
How well individual-based and degree-based mean-field approximation, pair approximations, and
higher-order motif expansion describe the evolution of the stochastic epidemic process depends on the
network structure and the initial conditions of the system [PG16; MK14]. Degree-based mean-field
approximations can be inaccurate on sparse networks [Gle11]. Degree-based pair approximations are
very accurate on configuration networks [PG16]. Pair approximations are also very accurate on config-
uration networks because such networks are asymptotically locally tree-like [New18].
Another approximation scheme for compartment models is approximate master equations. For bi-
nary state dynamics (like the SI or the SIS model) there exist approximate master equations [Gle11].
These assume that all nodes of degree k and with m infected neighbors are indistinguishable for m ≤k
which partitions the network into (k, m)-classes. The approximate master equations describe the evo-
lution of the probability that a node in the (k, m)-class is infected at time t. The approximate master
equations are derived as rate-equations governing the probabilities of nodes in one (m, k)-class entering
a different (m, k)-classes. This approximation scheme is more accurate than mean-field approximations
and pair approximations at the cost of increased complexity [Gle11]. The number of equations in the
approximate master equations grows with the square of the maximum degree [Gle11]. The classic mean-
field approximations and pair-approximations of binary-state epidemic models can be derived from the
approximate master equations when applying simplifying arguments which reduces the number of equa-
tions [Gle13].
When the dynamical systems have discrete rather than continuous time, the differential equations
in the mean-field approximations above become finite-difference equations [GLM18].
There are few approximation methods for continuous-state opinion models on networks compared
to the number of approximations for compartment-type models. Because of the continuous state space,
the distribution of states cannot be represented as the probability of a node having a specific state
value (because that probability would be zero).
One way to represent the distribution of states in
continuous-state models is with a probability density function [BKR03; Fen+20]. The approximation
==PAGE:59==
6.2 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
51
schemes then describe how these density functions evolve over time.
A mean-field equation for the probability density of states for the Deffuant model, which we discussed
in section 1.5.3.2, on a complete network has been proposed [BKR03]. This mean-field approximation
is simple enough to investigate analytically and it was found that the its solutions undergoes a periodic
sequence of bifurcations as the initial states of nodes are spread [BKR03]. Analyzing a discretization
of the mean-field equation showed that its fixed points are sinks and saddles [BKR03]. This mean-field
approximation for the Deffuant model was extended to a degree-based and community-based mean-
field approximation [Fen+20]. The derivation of this approximation is similar to those of approximate
master equations for compartment-type models. However, the resulting equations are a set of coupled
differential equations similar to those of the first type of degree-based mean-field approximations for
the compartment-type models that we discussed above. Including either the degree distribution or the
community structure into the mean-field approximation makes the resulting equations much harder
to investigate analytically.
However, it was found that the degree based mean-field approximation
simplified to the approximation in [BKR03] for complete networks and networks generated by the
Erdös-Rényi model [Fen+20].
6.2
Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model
with self-appraisal
We derive a degree-based mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal.
Our approximation is inspired by the mean-field approximation for the Deffuant model in [Fen+20]. We
assume the existence of a set of time-dependent probability density functions that govern the probabil-
ity densities of states in each time step and derive equations for the evolution of these densities. Due
to the discrete-time nature of the system, these equations are finite-difference equations.
6.2.1
Derivation of our mean-field approximation
We seek to make a degree-based mean-field equation and therefore assume that all nodes of a given
degree are indistinguishable. We also assume that the weighted median model evolves on a configuration-
model network and the same annealed network assumption that was made by Fennel et al. in [Fen+20].
Our annealed network assumption is that at each time step the edges of the configuration-model net-
work are rewired, while the individual nodes retain their degree [DGM08]. Therefore, the network at
each time step is one of an ensemble of networks with the prescribed degree distribution.
To simplify the derivation, we disregard weights in the dynamics of the weighted median model with
self-appraisal. Therefore, the resulting mean-field equations approximate a simpler dynamical system.
The derivation can be performed for the weighted median model with self-appraisal on a certain class
of weighted networks, introduced below, at the cost of more cumbersome notation. We refrain from
doing so because it does not lead to further insights.
Because we disregard weights, at any given time t ∈N, the network in question, G = (V, E) (which is
stochastic due to the annealing network assumption), is not characterized by a row stochastic influence
matrix W, but instead by an adjacency matrix A, where Aij = 1 if {i, j} ∈E and Aij = 0 otherwise.
We need to define the mapping in the weighted median dynamics in Equation 5.1 on an adjacency
matrix. Let A be an adjacency matrix for a network G, let xi ∈R for i ∈V be the individual state, and
let x(t) = (x1(t), x2(t), . . . xN(t)) be the global state for N = |V |. Let i ∈V and index the neighboring
nodes of i such that
x1i(t) ≤x2i(t) ≤· · · ≤x|n(i)|i(t),
where ki ∈n(i) for k ∈{1, 2, . . . , |n(i)|}.
(6.1)
==PAGE:60==
6.2 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
52
If |n(i)| is odd, let 2mi + 1 = |n(i)| and define Medi(x, A) to be the median neighbor state x(mi+1). If
|n(i)| is even, let |n(i)| = 2mi and define Medi(x, A) to be xmi if
|xmi −xi| ≤
x(m+1)i −xi

(6.2)
and x(m+1)i otherwise. We assume that there are no isolated nodes in the network such that the map-
ping is well defined. Note that, if we for a given network G, which defines an adjacency matrix A, can
construct an influence matrix W such that Wij =
1
deg(i) (the weight of each edge is equal to 1 over the
degree of its incident edges) then Medi(x, W) = Medi(x, A) for all i ∈V and global states x ∈RN. It
is on this class of weighted networks that the mean-field approximation for the weighted-median model
could be derived. We refrain from doing so because it would make notation cumbersome and not lead
to further insights.
Let qk be a fixed degree distribution (that is, the probability that a uniform randomly selected node
in the network has degree k ∈N is given by qk). We know that q0 = 0 because we have assumed no
isolated nodes exist. Let D be the set of distinct degrees in the network. For each k, let Pk(x, t) be the
density function (x ∈R and t ∈N0) for the states of nodes in the degree-k class. The probability that
a node of degree k has state in the interval [x, x + ∆x[ at time t ∈N0 is therefore to first order of ∆x
Pk(x, t)∆x + O((∆x)2) .
(6.3)
We derive a system of coupled finite-difference equations for the evolution of the densities Pk(x, t)
for k ∈D. For large N = |V | and small ∆x > 0, the expected number of nodes of degree k whose state
is in the interval [x, x + ∆x[ is
Nqk Pk(x, t)∆x
(6.4)
at time t ∈N0. Therefore, the expected change from time t to time t + 1 is
Nqk Pk(x, t + 1)∆x −Nqk Pk(x, t)∆x =
Expected number of degree-k nodes that enter the interval [x, x + ∆x[ at time t + 1
(6.5)
−Expected number of degree-k nodes that leave the interval [x, x + ∆x[ at time t + 1 .
We need to derive the expected values in Equation 6.5. We structure the derivations as follows.
First, we derive the probability density function for the state of a single neighbor of a node in the
degree-k class. Then we derive the probability density function of the median state among neighbors
of a node in the degree-k class. From this, we derive the mean number of nodes in the degree-k class
that enter the interval [x, x + ∆x[ at time t + 1. Finally, we derive the mean number of nodes in the
degree-k class that leave the interval [x, x + ∆x[ at time t + 1.
6.2.1.1
Probability density function for the state of a neighboring node
We will derive the probability density function for the state of a neighbor of a node in the degree-k
class. To derive this density, we need to determine the probability that an edge that is incident with a
degree-k node connects to a degree l node. By assumption, we know that k ̸= 0 and l ̸= 0. Recall that
the underlying network is assumed to be from the configuration model and consider a stub that emerges
from a node i ∈V of degree k (see the definition of configuration model for dentition of “stubs” in
Chapter 2). Let j ∈V be of degree l. There are 2|E| stubs in the network, which is 2|E| −1 excluding
the one connected to the degree-k node. Of these, l are connected to node j. Because any stub is
equally likely to be connected to any other, the probability that our stub is connected to node j is
l
2|E|−1. This is clearly true for all nodes i of degree k and nodes j of degree l.
There are approximately ql|V | nodes of degree l in the network (for large |V |). We see that
X
d∈D
d qd |V | = 2|E|
⇔
|V | = 2
|E|
P
d∈D dqd
= 2 |E|
⟨d⟩,
(6.6)
==PAGE:61==
6.2 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
53
where D is the set of unique degrees and ⟨d⟩is the mean degree of the degree distribution qk. For any
finite network, the mean degree is well defined. However, because will make an asymptotic argument,
we assume that the mean ⟨d⟩is well defined. The probability that a stub from a degree-k node connects
to any degree-l nodes is therefore
2ql |E|
⟨d⟩
l
2|E| −1 =
l ql |E|
⟨d⟩(|E| −1) →l ql
⟨d⟩
for |E| →∞.
(6.7)
Because we sum the probabilities of connecting our stub to any of the degree l nodes, this is the expected
proportion of edges from degree-k nodes that connect to degree-l nodes. However, in the limit of large
|E|, the expected proportion and the probability become equal due to the law of large numbers [Pit93].
From Equation 6.7, we see that the probability of an edge going from a degree-k node to a degree-l
node is asymptotically independent of k for large |E|. Therefore, we denote the probability that an
edge going from any node connects to a degree l nodes as πl and write
πl = l ql
⟨d⟩.
(6.8)
We can now derive the state density of a uniformly random neighbor of a node in any degree class.
Because the edges are reassigned each time step, the probability of connecting to a node of degree l is
asymptotically independent of its state distribution. The probability of a uniform randomly selected
neighbor having state in the interval [x, x + ∆x[ is then
P(xj(t) ∈[x, x + ∆x[ ∩e = (i, j) ∈E | i, j ∈V )
=
X
l∈D
P(there exist an edge from i to node of degree l ) Pl(x, t)∆x
(6.9)
=
X
l∈D
πlPl(x, t)∆x
= ϕ(x, t)∆x ,
where ϕ(x, t) = P
l∈D πlPl(x, t) is the asymptotic state probability density of a neighbor node in the
degree-k class. Let Φ(x, t) =
R x
0 ϕ(u, t) du be the respective cumulative density function.
6.2.1.2
Probability density of the median state of neighboring nodes
Using Equation 6.9, we derive a density for the median state of neighboring nodes of a node in degree-
class k. To do this, we introduce some notation and results for order statistics.
Order statistics
Suppose X1, X2, . . . , Xn are stochastic one-dimensional independent variables with a common con-
tinuous probability density function fX and cumulative density function FX. Let X(r) be the rth order
statistic, that is the rth element if variables are ordered by size and indexed in increasing order. Then
X(r) has the probability density function
fX(r)(x) =
n!
(r −1)!(n −r)!fX(x) (FX(x))r−1 (1 −Fx(x))n−r ,
(6.10)
where fX(r) denotes the probability density function of X(r) [SD04].
Another result, which will be important in the mean-field derivation, is the conditional density of
the (r + 1)’th order statistic given the r’th order statistic. The conditional density is [SD04]
fX(r+1) | X(r)=x(y) = (n −r)
fX(y)
1 −FX(x)
1 −F(y)
1 −F(x)
n−r−1
.
(6.11)
==PAGE:62==
6.2 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
54
We now return to deriving a probability density of the median state of neighboring nodes. Let i ∈V
be in the degree-k class. We now split the argumentation into two classes: k is even and k is odd.
First, we consider k odd. Choose m ∈N such that k = 2m + 1. Because the states of the neighbors
of i asymptotically have the common density function ϕ(x, t), we can view them as independent and
identically distributed stochastic variables. The median state Medi(x, A) is then uniquely the (m+1)th
order statistic with probability density function
ϕx(m+1)i(x, t) =
k!
m!m!ϕk(x, t)Φk(x, t)m (1 −Φ(x, t))m
(6.12)
where ϕx(m+1)i(x, t) denotes the (m + 1)th order statistic of neighbor states of node i. This density is
the same for all nodes i in the degree-k class for k odd. Let θk(x, t) be the density function for the
median neighbor state of a node in the degree-k class. We can then write
θk(x, t) =
k!
m!m!ϕk(x, t)Φk(x, t)m (1 −Φ(x, t))m ,
(6.13)
for odd k.
Now consider the case where k is even and write k = 2m for some m ∈N. Then Medi(x(t) ; A) is
the mth or (m + 1)th order statistic depending on which is closer to xi(t) (and choosing the mth if
they are equally close). Let x(m)i and x(m+1)i be the mth and (m + 1)th order statistics of the set of k
neighbor states of node i. The neighbor states asymptotically have common density ϕ(x, t). We derive
an expression for the probability
P( Medi(x(t) ; A) = x(m+1)i) = P
 |xi −x(m+1)i| < |xi −x(m)i|

,
(6.14)
where xi has the probability density function Pk(x, t).
Let a be a realization of xi and b be a realization of x(m)i.
If a < b, then the probability in
Equation 6.14 is 0 because the (m+1)th order statistic is larger than b. Assume a ≥b and let c = a−b.
Then the probability in Equation 6.14 is the probability that the (m + 1)th order statistic is in the
interval [b, b + 2c[. Using the law of total probability [Pit93], we see that
P( Medi(x(t) ; A) = x(m+1)i) = P
 |xi −x(m+1)i| < |xi −x(m)i|

=
Z
a∈[0,1]
P
 |a −x(m+1)i| < |a −x(m)i|
 xi = a

Pk(a) da
=
Z
a∈[0,1]
Z
b≤a
P
 |a −x(m+1)i| ≤|a −b|
 xi = a, x(m) = b, a > b

× Pk(a, t)ϕx(m)i(b, t) db da
(6.15)
=
Z
a∈[0,1]
Z
b≤a
Z
y∈[b,−b+2a[
ϕx(m+1)i | x(m)i=b(y, t) Pk(a, t) ϕx(m)i(b, t) dy db da ,
where ϕx(m+1)i | x(m)i=b is the conditional density of the (m + 1)th order statistic conditioned on the
m’th order statistic and where we note [b, b+2c[ = [b, −b+2a[. From Equation 6.11 and Equation 6.10,
we see that
ϕx(m+1)i | x(m)i=b(y, t) = m
ϕ(y)
1 −Φ(b)
1 −Φ(y, t)
1 −Φ(b, t)
m−1
,
ϕx(m)i(b, t) =
k!
(m −1)!m!ϕ(b, t) (Φ(b, t))m−1 (1 −Φ(b, t))m ,
==PAGE:63==
6.2 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
55
for y ≥b. We can therefore write
P( Medi(x(t) ; A) = x(m+1)i) =
Z
a∈[0,1]
Z
b≤a
Z
y∈[b,−b+2a[
m
ϕ(y, t)
1 −Φ(b, t)
1 −Φ(y, t)
1 −Φ(b, t)
m−1
×
k!
(m −1)!m!ϕ(b, t) (Φ(b, t))m−1 (1 −Φ(b, t))m Pk(a, t) dy db da
(6.16)
=
k!
((m −1)!)2
Z
a∈[0,1]
Pk(a, t)
Z
b≤a
ϕ(b, t) (Φ(b, t))m−1
×
Z
y∈[b,−b+2a[
ϕ(y, t) (1 −Φ(y, t))m−1 dy db da .
We define the notation pk(t) = P( Medi(x(t) ; A) = x(m+1)i). We can now express θk using the mth
and (m + 1)th order statistics of ϕ(x, t). That is
θk(x, t) = (1 −p(t))ϕx(m)(x, t) + p(t)ϕx(m+1)(x, t)
= (1 −pk(t))
k!
(m −1)!m!ϕ(x, t)Φ(x, t)m−1 (1 −Φ(x, t))m
+ pk(t)
k!
(m −1)!m!ϕ(x, t)Φ(x, t)m (1 −Φ(x, t))m−1
(6.17)
=
k!
(m −1)!m!ϕ(x, t)
 Φ(x, t) (1 −Φ(x, t))
m−1 (1 −pk(t)) (1 −Φ(x, t)) + pk(t)Φ(x, t)

.
for even k = 2m.
We can therefore conclude that the median neighbor state of a node in the degree-k class has the
density
θk(x, t) =
(
k!
m!m!ϕk(x, t)Φk(x, t)m (1 −Φ(x, t))m , for k = 2m + 1 odd
k!
(m−1)!m!ϕ(x, t)
 Φ(x, t) (1 −Φ(x, t))
m−1 (1 −p(t)) (1 −Φ(x, t)) + p(t)Φ(x, t)

, for k = 2m even,
(6.18)
where
pk(t) =
k!
((m −1)!)2
Z
a∈[0,1]
Pk(a, t)
Z
b≤a
ϕ(b, t) (Φ(b, t))m−1
Z
y∈[b,−b+2a[
ϕ(y, t) (1 −Φ(y, t))m−1 dy db da .
(6.19)
6.2.1.3
Mean number of nodes in the degree-k class that enter the interval [x, x + ∆x[ at time
t + 1
Using the definition in Equation 6.18, we derive the expected number of nodes whose states are outside
[x, x + ∆x[ at time t ∈N but inside this interval at time t + 1. Let i ∈V be a node in the degree-k
class. Suppose that xi(t) = y /∈[x, x + ∆x[. Recall that the level of self-appraisal s ∈]0, 1[ determines
how far xi moves towards the median of its neighbor states in each time step. In other words,
xi(t + 1) = (1 −s)xi(t) + s Medi(x(t) ; A) .
(6.20)
Denote y = xi(t). For the state of node i to move inside [x, x + ∆x[, we know that
x ≤(1 −s)y + sMedi(x(t), A) < x + ∆x
⇔
x + (s −1)y
s
≤Medi(x(t), A) < x + (s −1)y
s
+ ∆x
s .
(6.21)
==PAGE:64==
6.2 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
56
Because i is of degree k, we know Medi(x(t); A) is a stochastic variable that asymptotically has
density θk(x, t). The probability that the condition in Equation 6.21 is true is therefore
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t
 ∆x
s ,
(6.22)
for any node i of degree k. The expected number of nodes in the degree-k class that have state in the
interval [y, y + dy[ outside [x, x + ∆x[ that move into the interval is then
Nqk
s
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t
 ∆x
s Pk(y, t)∆x dy.
(6.23)
This is only approximately true, because the intervals [x, x+∆x[ and [y, y+ dy[ may overlap. However,
in the limit ∆x →0 and dy →0, these overlaps disappear. Integrating over y, we find the total mean
number of degree-k nodes that enter [x, x + ∆x[ at time t + 1 is
Nqk
Z
y∈[0,1]
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t
 ∆x
s Pk(y, t) dy∆x.
(6.24)
6.2.1.4
Mean number of nodes in the degree-k class that leave the interval [x, x + ∆x[ at time
t + 1
We turn our attention to the mean number of nodes of degree k that have state in [x, x + ∆x[ at
time t ∈N but not at time t + 1.
Because the state of a node in the degree-k class has density
Pk(x, t) and the weighted median of its neighbors asymptotically has density θk(x, t), the probability
that xi(t) ∈[x, x + ∆x[ and xi(t + 1) /∈[x, x + ∆x[ is asymptotically
(1 −θk(x, t)∆x) Pk(x, t)∆x.
(6.25)
The mean number of such nodes is therefore
Nqk (1 −θk(x, t)∆x) Pk(x, t)∆x.
(6.26)
6.2.1.5
Mean change in the number of nodes in the degree-k class with states in the interval
[x, x + ∆x[ at time t + 1
Combining Equation 6.5, Equation 6.24, and Equation 6.26, we find that
Nqk Pk(x, t + 1)∆x −Nqk Pk(x, t)∆x = Nqk
Z
y∈[0,1]
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t
 ∆x
s Pk(y, t) dy∆x
−Nqk (1 −θk(x, t)∆x) Pk(x, t)∆x ,
(6.27)
which implies that
Pk(x, t + 1) = Pk(x, t) −(1 −θk(x, t)∆x) Pk(x, t) +
Z
y∈[0,1]
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t

·1
sPk(y, t) dy
= ∆x θk(x, t)Pk(x, t) + 1
s
Z
y∈[0,1]
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t

Pk(y, t) dy
(6.28)
→1
s
Z
y∈[0,1]
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t

Pk(y, t) dy ,
for ∆x →0 .
This finishes our derivation for the mean-field approximation.
==PAGE:65==
6.2 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
57
To summarize, we have assumed that the underlying network is an infinite annealing configuration
network where the degree distribution has a a well-defined mean, and that at each time, the states of
all nodes of a given degree follow the same state probability density. Under these assumption, we have
derived that the state densities evolve according to the following system of equations:
Pk(x, t + 1) = 1
s
Z
y∈[0,1]
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t

Pk(y, t) dy ,
θk(x, t) =
(
k!
m!m!ϕ(x, t)Φ(x, t)m (1 −Φ(x, t))m , for k = 2m + 1 odd ,
k!
(m−1)!m!ϕ(x, t)
 Φ(x, t) (1 −Φ(x, t))
m−1 (1 −p(t)) (1 −Φ(x, t)) + p(t)Φ(x, t)

, for k = 2m even ,
pk(t) =
k!
(m −1)!(m −1)!
Z
a∈[0,1]
Pk(a, t)
Z
b≤a
ϕ(b, t) (Φ(b, t))m−1
Z
y∈[b,−b+2a[
ϕ(y, t) (1 −Φ(y, t))m−1 dy db da ,
ϕ(x, t) =
X
l∈D
πlPl(x, t) ,
(6.29)
Φ(x, t) =
Z x
0
ϕk(u, t) du ,
given initial conditions Pk(x, 0) for all x ∈R and degree-k classes. The system in Equation 6.29 is our
mean-field approximation of the weighted median model with self-appraisal in Equation 5.1.
Once we have the densities within each degree class we obtain the global opinion density as
P(x, t) =
X
k
qkPk(x, t) .
(6.30)
6.2.2
Analytical results for the mean-field approximation of the weighted
median model with self-appraisal
Proposition 5. If Pk(x, 0) is a probability density for each degree-class k, then Pk(x, t) is a density
density function for all t ∈N
Proof. We prove that Pk(x, t) is a probability density by induction on t. The base case t = 0 is true by
assumption.
Assume that Pk(x, t) is a probability density function for each degree-k class for some time t ∈N.
We know that ϕ(x, t) is a well-defined density function because it is a linear combination of the densities
Pk(x, t) across degree classes with coeﬀicients summing to 1. This implies that Φ(x, t) is a well-defined
cumulative density function. Recall from the derivation in subsubsection 6.2.1.2, that θk(x, t) is the
probability density function of a single order statistic of ϕ (when k is odd) or a linear combination of
the probability density functions of two order statistics for ϕ (when k is even) with coeﬀicients summing
to 1. Therefore, θk(x, t) is also a probability density for all degree classes k.
We now show that Pk(x, t + 1) is a probability density. To do this, we need to prove that it is
non-negative and integrates to 1. Recall from Equation 6.29 that
Pk(x, t + 1) = 1
s
Z
y∈[0,1]
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t

Pk(y, t) dy
for x ∈[0, 1].
We know that θk

x+(s−1)y
s
, t

Pk(y, t) ≥0 for all x, y ∈[0, 1] and s ∈]0, 1[, because both functions
are probability density functions. Therefore, Pk(x, t + 1) ≥0 for all x ∈[0, 1].
==PAGE:66==
6.2 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
58
Using the substitution v = x+(s−1)y
s
( dx = s dv), we see that
Z
x∈[0,1]
Pk(x, t + 1) dx =
Z
x∈[0,1]
1
s
Z
y∈[0,1]
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t

Pk(y, t) dy dx
= 1
s
Z
y∈[0,1]
Z
x∈[0,1]
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t

Pk(y, t) dx dy
=
Z
y∈[0,1]
Pk(y, t)
Z
x∈[0,1]
θk (v, t) dv dy
=
Z
y∈[0,1]
Pk(y, t) dy
= 1 ,
because Pk(x, t) and θk(x, t) are density functions for all degree classes k.
This proves that Pk(x, t+1) is a probability density function. By the induction principle, we conclude
that if Pk(x, 0) is a probability density function, then Pk(x, t) is a probability density function for all
t ∈N.
6.2.2.1
Limits in the level of self-appraisal
The weighted median model with self-appraisal in section 5.1 assumes that the level of self-appraisal is
in the interval s ∈]0, 1[. However, the dynamics can be generalized to s = 1 and s = 0. We show that
the same is true for our mean-field approximation in Equation 6.29 and that the resulting equations
agree with the intuition of the respective limits for the weighted median model dynamics.
We first deal with the limit s →1. The dynamics of the weighted median model with self-appraisal
(see section 5.1).
xi(t + 1) = (1 −s)xi(t) + s Medi(x(t) ; W) ,
i ∈V , s ∈]0, 1[ , t ∈N .
For s →1, these dynamics become
xi(t + 1) = Medi(x(t) ; W),
i ∈V, t ∈N ,
which are the dynamics of the original weighted median (see section 4.1). In the s →1 limit of the
mean-field approximation, we therefore expect that the state density at time t + 1 is equal to the
median-neighbor state density at time t for all t ∈N.
From our mean-field approximation in Equation 6.29 and under the assumption that Pk( · , 0) is a
probability density function, we see that
lim
s→1 Pk(x, t + 1) = lim
s→1
1
s
Z
y∈[0,1]
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t

Pk(y, t) dy
=
Z
y∈[0,1]
lim
s→1 θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t

Pk(y, t) dy
=
Z
y∈[0,1]
θk (x, t) Pk(y, t) dy
(6.31)
= θk (x, t)
Z
y∈[0,1]
Pk(y, t) dy
= θk (x, t) ,
==PAGE:67==
6.2 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
59
where we have assumed that the integral and limit commute. The last equality follows from Proposition
5, which guarantees that Pk(x, t) integrates to 1 for all t ∈N given that Pk(x, 0) is a probability density.
Recall from the derivations of the mean-field approximation that θk (x, t) is the probability density
function of the median-neighbor state of a node in degree-class k at time t ∈N. Equation 6.31 states
that in the s = 1 limit, the state density for nodes of degree class k at time t + 1 is exactly equal to the
density of the median-neighbor state of nodes in the degree class, as expected.
We now turn our attention to the limit s →0. For s →0, the dynamics of the weighted median
model with self-appraisal become
xi(t + 1) = xi(t) ,
i ∈V .
(6.32)
The limit is therefore a static system. Therefore, in the s →0 limit of the mean-field approximation,
we expect the initial density to be stationary. We will prove that this is indeed the case. To do this, we
first introduce some definitions from the theory of distributions.
Distributions
A distribution (also known as a generalized function) is a bounded linear functional on a space of
smooth functions. We refer to the domain of distributions as the set of test functions. Let C∞
0 ([0, 1])
be the space of infinitely differentiable functions which equal 0 at the endpoints of the interval [0, 1].
Define D′([0, 1]) to be the space of distributions on C∞
0 ([0, 1]). For our derivation, we need to define
the derivative of a distribution and the limit of a family of distributions.
Let h ∈D′([0, 1]). We define the derivative of h as the distribution ∂h
∂h(g) = −
Z
y∈[0,1]
h(y) ∂
∂y g(y) dy,
g ∈C∞
0 ([0, 1]) .
(6.33)
We abbreviate this definition as ∂h(g) = −h (∂g). If ∂h(g) = d(g) for some d ∈D′([0, 1]), then we say
that h is the anti-derivative of d.
Let hε be a family of distributions; that is hε ∈D′([0, 1]) for ε > 0. We say that the family of
distributions hε converges to the distribution h for ε →0 if the the functional
h(g) = lim
ε→0
Z
y∈[0,1]
hε(y)g(y) dy,
g ∈C∞
0 ([0, 1]) ,
(6.34)
is well-defined. If h is the limit of the family of distributions hε, we write limε→0 hε = h.
In addition to the general definitions above, we introduce two important distributions; the Heaviside
distribution and the Dirac-delta distribution. For x ∈R we define the Heaviside distribution Hx and
the Dirac-delta distribution δx as
Hx(g) =
Z
y∈[0,1]
Hx(y)g(y) dy
=
Z
y≥x
g(y) dy,
g ∈C∞
0 ([0, 1]) ,
δx(g) = g(x),
g ∈C∞
0 ([0, 1]) ,
where Hx(y) is the Heaviside function
Hx(y) =
(
1,
y ≥x
0,
y < x
.
(6.35)
==PAGE:68==
6.2 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
60
The Dirac-delta distribution is the derivative of the Heaviside distribution [Tay11]. For an integrable
function h : R →R, we can define a distribution h ∈D′([0, 1]) as
h(g) =
Z
y∈[0,1]
h(y)g(y) dy,
for g ∈C∞
0 ([0, 1]) ,
(6.36)
which is well-defined because h · g is integrable and has compact support. Whenever we speak of the
respective distribution of a function h we write the distribution h.
We now state the proposition of the s →0 limit for the mean-field approximation:
Proposition 6. If Pk(x, t) ∈C∞
0 ([0, 1]) for all degree classes k, then
lim
s→0 Pk(x, t + 1) = P(x, t),
for x ∈R, and each degree-class k .
(6.37)
Proof. To prove this proposition, we define two families of functions and prove certain properties of
the limits of their corresponding distributions. Let θk(x, t) be defined from Equation 6.29 for each
degree-class k. Define the families of functions
f x,s
k,t (y) = 1
s θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t

,
y ∈R,
F x,s
k,t (v) =
Z
y≤v
f x,s
kt (y) dy,
v ∈R .
(6.38)
One can view the mean-field equation for Pk(x, t + 1) in Equation 6.29 with s ∈]0, 1[ as a mapping
of the test function Pk(x, t) with the distribution f x,s
k,t . That is
Pk(x, t + 1) = f x,s
k,t (Pk( · , t)) .
(6.39)
To prove the proposition, we show that the distribution f x,s
k,t becomes the Dirac-delta distribution in
the s →0 limit. To do this, we prove that the anti-derivative of the distribution f x,s
k,t is F x,s
k,t and that
F x,s
k,t becomes the Heaviside distribution in the s →0 limit. Finally, we prove that differentiation and
taking the limit with respect to s of the distribution F x,s
k,t commute. This will prove that the distribution
f x,s
k,t approaches the Dirac-delta distribution and imply that lims→0 Pk(x, t + 1) = Pk(x, t).
First, we prove that F x,s
k,t defined in Equation 6.46 is a distribution, and that it is the anti-derivative
of the distribution f x,s
k,t . Using the change of variables u = x+(s−1)y
s

dy =
s
s−1 du

, where we note
that u decreases when y increases and vice versa, we see that
F x,s
k,t (v) <
Z 1
y=0
f x,s
k,t (y) dy
= 1
s
Z 1
y=0
θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t

dy
=
1
s −1
Z 0
u=1
θk (u, t) du
(6.40)
=
1
1 −s
< ∞, when s ∈]0, 1[ .
(6.41)
The change of sign stems from switching the limits of the integral. Therefore, F x,s
k,t is bounded for all
degree classes k, x ∈[0, 1], and s ∈]0, 1[. We then see that
Z
y∈[0,1]
F x,s
k,t (y)g(y) dy ≤
1
1 −s
Z
y∈[0,1]
g(y) dy < ∞,
g ∈C∞
0 ([0, 1])
(6.42)
==PAGE:69==
6.2 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal
61
where the last inequality follows from g having compact support and s ∈]0, 1[.
This proves that
F x,s
k,t ∈D′([0, 1]).
We now prove that the distribution F x,s
k,t is the anti-derivative of the distribution f x,s
k,t . To do this,
we use integration by parts to write
∂F x,s
k,t (g) = −
Z
y∈[0,1]
F x,s
k,t (y) ∂
∂y g(y) dy
=
Z
y∈[0,1]
 ∂
∂y
Z
u≤y
f x,s
k
(u) du

g(y) dy −[f x,s
k
(y)g(y)]1
y=0
=
Z
y∈[0,1]
f x,s
k,t (y)g(y) dy
= f x,s
k,t (g) ,
g ∈C∞
0 ([0, 1]),
where
h
f x,s
k,t (y)g(y)
i1
y=0 = 0 because g(0) = g(1) = 0.
We now prove that the function F x,s
k,t converges pointwise to the Heaviside function almost every-
where when s goes to 0. To see this, we again make use of the substitution u = x+(s−1)y
s
to write
F x,s
k,t (v) =
Z
y≤v
f x,s
k,t (y) dy
=
Z
y≤v
1
s θk
x + (s −1)y
s
, t

dy
= 1
s
s
s −1
Z
x+(s−1)v
s
u=1
θk (u, t) du
(6.43)
=
1
1 −s
Z 1
u= x+(s−1)v
s
θk (u, t) du ,
where the change in sign comes from interchanging the limits of the integral. We note that
1
1−s →1
when s →0 and that
lim
s→0
x + (s −1)v
s
=





−∞,
v > x
x,
v = x
∞,
v < x
.
(6.44)
We therefore see that
lim
s→0 F x,s
k,t (v) =





1 ,
v > x
R 1
x θk(u, t) du ,
v = x
0 ,
v < x
,
(6.45)
because θk integrates to 1. From the definition of the Heaviside function in Equation 6.35, we see that
F x,s
k,t converges pointwise to the Heaviside function Hx except at the point v = x. Because a single
point on the real line has measure 0, we know that F x,s
k,t converges pointwise to the Heaviside function
almost everywhere.
==PAGE:70==
6.3 Numerical test of our mean-field approximation
62
Using the definition of limits of families of distributions and assuming the integral and limit commute,
we see that
lim
s→0 F x,s
k,t (g) = lim
s→0
Z
y∈[0,1]
F x,s
k,t (y)g(y) dy
=
Z
y∈[0,1]
lim
s→0 F x,s
k,t (y)g(y) dy
(6.46)
=
Z
y∈[0,1]
Hx(y)g(y) dy
= Hx (g) ,
g ∈C∞
0 ([0, 1]) .
We can therefore conclude that the distribution limit is well-defined and that lims→0 F x,s
k,t = Hx.
Because the derivative of the Heaviside distribution is the Dirac-delta distribution, we know that
∂

lim
s→0 F x,s
k,t

(g) = ∂Hx (g) = δx (g) ,
g ∈C∞
0 ([0, 1]) .
(6.47)
We prove that taking the derivative and the limit of these distributions with respect to s commutes.
To see this, we write
∂

lim
s→0 F x,s
k,t

(g) = −

lim
s→0 F x,s
k,t

(∂g)
= −lim
s→0
Z
y∈[0,1]
F x,s
k,t (y) ∂
∂y g(y) dy
= lim
s→0
Z
y∈[0,1]
 ∂
∂y F x,s
k,t (y)

g(y) dy
(6.48)
= lim
s→0
Z
y∈[0,1]
f x,s
k,t (y) g(y) dy
= lim
s→0 f x,s
k,t (g) ,
g ∈C∞
0 ([0, 1]) .
From Equation 6.47 and Equation 6.48, we conclude that
lim
s→0 f x,s
k,t (Pk( · , t)) = δx (Pk( · , t)) ,
g ∈C∞
0 ([0, 1]).
(6.49)
Taking the s →0 limit of Equation 6.39, we see that
lim
s→0 Pk(x, t + 1) = lim
s→0 f x,s
k,t (Pk( · , t))
= δx (Pk( · , t))
(6.50)
= Pk(x, t) ,
x ∈R .
for all degree classes k. This finishes the proof.
Note that our s →0 and s →1 limit arguments depend on the assumption that the limit and
integral commute in Equation 6.46 and Equation 6.31. One way to analyze this assumption is is to use
Lebesque’s dominated convergence theorem (see, eg. [Chr10]).
6.3
Numerical test of our mean-field approximation
Our approximation in Equation 6.29 is not easily solved. For a given network and a given initialization,
it is diﬀicult to predict how well the approximation describes the evolution of the distribution of states
for the weighted median model with self-appraisal. To investigate the accuracy of our approximation
we solve the equations numerically and compare the solutions to empirically estimated state densities
from direct simulations of the weighted median model.
==PAGE:71==
6.3 Numerical test of our mean-field approximation
63
6.3.1
Specifications of numerical solutions to mean-field equations
We solve our mean-field approximation by discretizing the opinion space into 1025 equally spaced states.
Visually, we find that the accuracy of the numerical solution is the same when a larger number of dis-
crete states are used. For discrete states x and y, and self-appraisal s, the state 1
s(x + (s −1)y), which
is the parameter of θk in the equation for Pk(x, t+1) in Equation 6.29, rarely equals any of the discrete
states. Therefore, before the integral can be calculated, we perform first-order interpolation to evaluate
θk at the appropriate discrete states.
For each network, we used the empirical degree distribution to determine the linear combination of
density functions to evaluate the global opinion density in Equation 6.30.
We found that the maximum function value of θk in our mean-field approximation in Equation 6.29
increases with k.
This results in numerical overflow in the evaluation of θk for suﬀiciently large k.
Therefore, we introduce a lumping degree and lump all the degree-k classes where k is above the lumping
degree into a single degree-class. We set the probability of a node being in this lumped class as the
sum of the probability of the node being in any of the degree classes that were lumped. For a given
network, it is diﬀicult to assess how this truncation of the degree distribution affects the accuracy of
the mean-field approximation. From our simulations, for the networks we consider, it seems that the
effects of increasing the lumping degree diminish for lumping degrees above 500. See Appendix A.4.2
for an investigation into the effect of lumping for the mean-field approximation. It is possible that a
more sophisticated lumping schemed similar to that performed in [Kyr+17] could improve the accuracy
of the numerical solutions of our mean-field approximation. Such a lumping scheme would also further
decrease the computational cost of our mean-field approximation. For all the results of this section, we
have used a lumping degree of 1000.
6.3.2
Networks used for accuracy testing
We investigate how the accuracy of our mean-field approximation evolves on different networks. The
solution of the mean-field approximation only depends on the degree distribution of the network, but
the true distribution of opinions for the weighted median model with self-appraisal depends on the
entire network structure. Therefore, we investigate the accuracy of the mean-field approximation for a
selection of synthetic and real-world social networks.
We study both deterministic and stochastic synthetic networks.
The deterministic networks we
study are complete networks, cycle networks, and prism networks. The random-network models we
study are the configuration model, the Barabási–Albert model, and the Watts–Strogatz model. Unless
otherwise stated, the synthetic networks have 2500 nodes. We study the three Facebook friendship
networks and two Twitter-follower networks that we discussed in Section 5.4.2.
As discussed in Section 5.4.2, the Twitter follower networks are directed. However, our mean-field
approximation was derived assuming that edges are undirected and that nodes therefore only have a
single type of degree. Therefore, to investigate the accuracy of the mean-field approximation of these
networks, we replace all directed edges with undirected edges. We still refer to the networks as the
abortion and Obamacare Twitter follower networks even though we have altered the networks for this
simulation study. Alternatively, we could possibly derive a similar mean-field approximation where the
degree classes are characterized by an in-degree and an out-degree.
6.3.3
Results of accuracy test for the mean-field approximation
We now explore the accuracy of our mean-field approximation in Equation 6.29 by comparing numer-
ical solutions of the governing equations with empirically estimated opinion densities found by direct
==PAGE:72==
6.3 Numerical test of our mean-field approximation
64
simulation.
We have chosen to only present the accuracy tests of the mean-field approximation for uniform state
initialization. From visual comparison of numerical solutions of the mean-field equations and empir-
ically estimated state densities, we have found, that the accuracy of the mean-field approximation is
similar for the other synthetic initial opinion distributions presented in Section 5.5.3.
We estimate the state distribution empirically from a number of simulations. For the synthetic net-
works and the Bowdoin Facebook friendship network, we estimate the distribution from 100 independent
simulations. For the simulations using random network models, each of the simulations have their own
instantiation of the model. For the Georgetown network and both the Twitter follower networks, we
estimate the opinion distributions from 25 independent simulations. For the Caltech network, we use
300 independent simulations.
We have chosen the Root-mean-square error (RMSE) as our measure of accuracy for the mean-
field approximation. For a given discretization of opinion space, x = (x1, x2, . . . , xn), a numerical
solution of the mean-field approximation ˆP(x, t), and an empirical state distribution P(x, t), we define
the Root-mean-square error (RMSE) at time t to be
RMSE(t) =
v
u
u
u
t
n
X
i=1

ˆP(xi, t) −P(x, t)
2
n
.
(6.51)
We let the choice of discretization be implicit in the notation because we only work with the discretiza-
tion consisting of 1025 equally spaced states.
6.3.3.1
The effect of self-appraisal on the accuracy of the mean-field approximation
We show the effect of self-appraisal on the accuracy of mean-field approximation for cycle networks,
the Obamacare network, and networks generated by the configuration type model. These networks
showcase the different dependencies of the RMSE on the level of self-appraisal s that we have observed.
In Figure 6.1, we show the RMSE of the mean-field approximation for a selection of self-appraisal
values s for configuration networks. We generate networks from the configuration model with two degree
classes k1 = 11 and k2 = 101 with the probabilities qk1 = 0.9 and qk2 = 0.1. We see that the RMSE
increases as time progresses and that the RMSE increases faster for higher levels of self-appraisal. We
have also observed that the RMSE of the mean-field approximation increases faster for larger levels of
self-appraisal for complete networks and for networks generated by the Barabási–Albert model.
To investigate why the RMSE error increases faster for larger levels of self-appraisal, we show the
empirical density P(x, t) and the numerical mean-field solution ˆP(x, t) for self-appraisal s = 0.1 and
s = 0.9 in Figure 6.2. We see that mean-field approximation describes the overall evolution of the state
density correctly in the first time step. For s = 0.9, the empirical density and mean-field approximation
diverge at later times as the mean-field approximation evolves towards a Dirac-delta spike, while the
empirical state density retain some spread in the opinions. For s = 0.1, the mean-field approximation
underestimates the opinion spread at later times, but to a smaller degree than for s = 0.9.
In Figure 6.3, we show the RMSE of the mean-field approximation for a selection of self-appraisal
values s for the cycle network. Contrary to the RMSE for the configuration networks, we see that the
RMSE for the cycles networks does not increase faster for higher levels of self-appraisal. We instead
see that the RMSE initially increases the fastest for s = 0.5 and the slowest for self-appraisal s = 0.1
and s = 0.9. After time t = 3, the RMSE increases at a similar rate for all levels of self-appraisals.
Analytically, we know that the solution of the mean-field equation for the cycle network at time = 1
==PAGE:73==
6.3 Numerical test of our mean-field approximation
65
−2
0
2
0
1
2
3
4
5
t
ln(RMSE)
Self−appraisal
s = 0.1
s = 0.3
s = 0.5
s = 0.7
s = 0.9
Figure 6.1: Logarithm of the root-mean-square error (RMSE) of our mean-field approximation for a
selection of self-appraisal values for configuration networks. The configuration model has
two degree classes k1 = 11 and k2 = 101 with the probabilities qk1 = 0.9 and qk2 = 0.1.
t=0
t=1
t=3
t=5
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
0.0
0.5
1.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
x
P(x,t)
s = 0.1
t=0
t=1
t=3
t=5
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
0
1
2
3
0
20
40
60
80
0
500
1000
1500
2000
x
P(x,t)
s = 0.9
Density
Empirical
MF
Figure 6.2: Visualization of the evolution of the empirical opinion density and our mean-field approx-
imation for self-appraisal s = 0.1 and s = 0.9 on configuration networks. The configura-
tions networks have two degree classes k1 = 11 and k2 = 101 with probabilities qk1 = 0.9
and qk2 = 0.1.
is symmetrical in s around s = 0.5. The details of deriving this analytical solution can be found in
Appendix A.4. We conjecture, that the solution remains symmetric in s at later times and that this is
the reason that the RMSE seems symmetric around self-appraisal s = 0.5 at later times. At each time
point, the RMSE of the mean-field approximation is the largest for s = 0.5. For the Watts–Strogatz
network we observe that the maximum RMSE for each time t is at s = 0.7. These are the only two
==PAGE:74==
6.3 Numerical test of our mean-field approximation
66
networks, where the maximum RMSE at each time point is observed at a self-appraisal value other than
s = 0.9.
−3
−2
−1
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
t
ln(RMSE)
Self−appraisal
s = 0.1
s = 0.3
s = 0.5
s = 0.7
s = 0.9
Figure 6.3: Logarithm of the root-mean-square error (RMSE) of our mean-field approximation for
cycle networks.
In Figure 6.4, we show the RMSE of the mean-field approximation for a selection of self-appraisal
values for the Obamacare Twitter follower network. We see that for s ≥0.3, the RMSE is constant in
the first time step, but then increases over time and increases faster for larger values of s. However, for
s = 0.1, the RMSE increases a lot in the first time step and only increases slowly after that. We have
observed the same behavior of the RMSE for the other real-world social networks; for small values of s,
the RMSE initially increases before stabilizing and for larger values of s, the RMSE is initially constant
and then increases. Based on our simulations, the transition between these two behaviors seems to
be smooth. See Appendix A.4.1 for an investigation into the transitional behavior of the RMSE from
s = 0.1 and s = 0.3 for the Georgetown Facebook friendship network.
−2
0
2
0
1
2
3
4
5
t
ln(RMSE)
Self−appraisal
s = 0.1
s = 0.3
s = 0.5
s = 0.7
s = 0.9
Figure 6.4: logarithm of the root-mean-square error (RMSE) of the mean-field approximation for
the Obamacare Twitter follower network where each directed edge is replaced by and
undirected edge.
==PAGE:75==
6.3 Numerical test of our mean-field approximation
67
6.3.3.2
Finite-size and annealing-network effects
In the derivations of our mean-field approximation, we make two main assumptions; the network is
infinite and the network is annealing. Each of these assumptions has some effect on the accuracy of our
approximation; we denote the effects finite-size effects and annealing-network effects respectively.
To investigate whether the inaccuracies of the mean-field approximation stems from finite-size effects
or the annealing-network effects, we show the RMSE at different time points for different network sizes
N for static and an annealing configuration networks in Figure 6.5. At time t = 1, we see that there is
a clear finite-size effect for both the annealing and the static network for all levels of self-appraisal. At
time t = 3, the finite size effect is less pronounced for the static network than for the annealing network.
Finally, at time t = 5, the finite size effect is almost not visible for the static network. For the annealing
network at time t = 5, the finite size effect seems to be more pronounced for lower levels of self-appraisal.
From these results, it seems, that even though both finite-size effects and annealing-networks effects are
present, they diminish quickly with time for most levels of self-appraisal.
Annealing
Static
t=1
t=3
t=5
2000
4000
6000
2000
4000
6000
−3.25
−3.00
−2.75
−2.50
−2.25
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
−2
0
2
N
ln(RMSE)
Self−appraisal
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
Figure 6.5: Logarithm of the root-mean-square error of the mean-field approximation on annealing
and static networks generated by the configuration model of varying size. Each network
has two the degree classes k1 = 11 and k2 = 101 with the probabilities qk1 = 0.9 and
qk2 = 0.1.
If we were to do a more thorough investigation into the finite-size effect, we would need to explore
how large a network one needs to consider for the finite-size effect to become negligible, similar to the
investigation [SFH21]. However, time constraints have prohibited us from performing such explorations.
6.3.3.3
Accuracy of mean-field approximation for fixed self-appraisal
We explore the accuracy of the mean-field approximation for a selection of networks where we keep the
level of self-appraisal fixed at s = 0.5.
==PAGE:76==
6.3 Numerical test of our mean-field approximation
68
In Figure 6.6, we show RMSE of the mean-field approximation with self-appraisal s = 0.5 for the
synthetic networks, Facebook friendship networks, and Twitter follower networks.
We see that the
initial RMSE differs for the different network structures at time t = 0. This difference in RMSE stems
from the different number of simulations used for estimating the empirical probability distributions. For
t ≥2, we see that the slope of the RMSE measurements is similar for most of the networks. However,
the RMSE evolves qualitatively differently for the cycle network. We see that the RMSE values for the
two Twitter follower networks are very similar. Based on the results of our simulations, we find that our
mean-field approximation describes the initial dynamics of the weighted median model well. However,
the accuracy of our approximation quickly decreases.
−2
−1
0
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
t
ln(RMSE)
Network
Complete
Cycle
Prism
Configuration
Watts−Strogatz
Barabási−Albert
Caltech
Bowdoin
Georgetown
Abortion
Obamacare
Figure 6.6: Comparison of the logarithm of the RMSE of the mean-field approximation with self-
appraisal s = 0.5 for the synthetic networks, Facebook friendhsip networks, and Twitter
follower networks.
==PAGE:77==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion and conclusions
We now discuss our results for the weighted median model with and without self-appraisal and compare
them to known results for other bounded confidence models of opinion dynamics. Finally, we conclude
by returning to our three research questions discussed in section 1.7.
7.1
Discussion
We defined a synchronous-update weighted median model for opinion dynamics and found that its long-
term behavior was very different from that of a recently studied asynchronous-update weighted median
model [Mei+20]. In the literature, it has been found multiple times that results for asynchronous-update
model cannot be carried over to the syncrhonous-update version of the same model. This situation arises
for Hegselmann–Krause models [EB15] and compartment-type epidemiological models [FMG16]. This
underscores that it is crucial for researchers to be clear when stating model definitions.
7.1.1
Dependencies of the convergence time on network size and the level of
self-appraisal
Our regression analysis of the convergence time resulted in a series of insights. For example, we observed
that the convergence time T has a minimum at self-appraisal of about s ≈0.7 a selection of synthetic
and real-world social networks. A similar finding was made previously for the Deffuant model [MGP18].
In the Deffuant model, the multiplier value m specifies how willing individuals are to compromise when
the distance between their opinions is below the confidence bound. The multiplier value m is therefore
akin to the self-appraisal parameter s of our weighted median model with self-appraisal. For the Def-
fuant model, the convergence time was found to have a minimum at the multiplier value m = 0.5 for a
wide variety of networks [MGP18]. For complete networks, 2-dimensional grid networks, and networks
generated with the Erdős–Rényi model, our regression analysis suggested that T initially increases ex-
ponentially with N. However, for fixed self-appraisal, we found that the convergence time regression
models for these networks each have a maximum with respect to N and that T decreases when N
is increased further than the argument of this maximum. There have been made similar conclusions
for the convergence time of the Hegselmann–Krause and Deffuant models, where convergence times
were found to scale nonlinearly with model parameter values and the number of nodes [Sla10; Lor06;
MGP18; SFH21]. However, for the complete network, the estimated parameter values in our regression
analysis imply that the network size where the regression model attains its maximum is far outside the
range of tested network sizes. Therefore, the existence of this maximum should be investigated further.
These findings have interesting implications for group decision-making processes in the real world; can
increasing the size of the group decrease the time it takes the group to make a decision?
Using a refined discretization of s, we found that T has a minimum for a complete bipartite network
with N = 600 nodes at approximately s ≈0.68. From these simulations with, we observed that the
behavior of T around its minimum with respect to s can be very complex. It seems that there can
be multiple attracting regions for T for a single value of s. We conjecture that the value that T is
attracted to for a given simulation depends on the specific opinion initialization. We did not observe
a minimum of T with respect to s for the complete network. However, from our consideration of the
==PAGE:78==
7.1 Discussion
70
weighted median model (which is equivalent to the weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 1),
we know that the weighted median model with self-appraisal does not converge for s = 1 for complete
networks with an even number of nodes and uniform opinion initialization. Therefore, we conjecture
that T has a minimum for s ∈[0.9, 1[.
We observed a minimum of T at s ≈0.7 for the Georgetown Facebook friendship network, the
Obamacare Twitter follower network, and several of the synthetic networks but not for the other real-
world social networks. It is possible that this is due to the network size. The Georgetown Facebook
friendship network and Obamacare Twitter follower network are the largest real-world social networks
that we considered. From our regression analysis for the synthetic networks, we found that N and s
have intertwined effects on T. Perhaps the dependency of T on s for real-world social networks is only
evident for networks that are suﬀiciently large. Another possible explanation is the edge density; in our
simulations for the cycle and prism networks, the minimum of T is less pronounced or entirely gone
when there are a large number of uniform randomly added edges. However, to investigate the validity
of these hypotheses, we would need to explore the dependency of T on s, N, and the edge density on a
much larger set of networks than we have done in this project.
Regression analysis for convergence times of opinion models as performed in [MGP18] is still a rather
uncommon approach for investigating their dynamics. Some convergence-time studies have only stated
that dependencies of the convergence time on network topology and parameter values were observed
without analyzing them further [LSL17; Lor06]. For the synchronuos-update Hegselmann–Krause model
with one-dimensional opinions, the convergence time has been proven to be at least O(N) and at
most O(N 3) [Bha+12] on complete networks. Our regression analysis implies that the same upper
bound does not hold for the convergence time of our weighted median model with self-appraisal on
complete networks. Instead, we observed in our numerical simulations that the convergence time scales
exponentially.
7.1.2
The number of opinions at fixed points
The increasing size and changing topology of real-world social networks have raised the question; will
large groups of people will be able to coordinate in response to national and transnational challenges
[Bak+21]? Therefore, it is important to understand what type of topologies of social networks can
lead to consensus. For the weighted median model with self-appraisal, we found that the number M of
opinions at fixed points was either M = 1 or M = 2 for all simulations with complete networks, dense
Erdős–Rényi networks, and complete bipartite networks. However, for cycles and prism networks, the
results of our simulations suggest that M scales linear with the number of nodes and that adding
uniformly random edges to the networks decreases the slope of this linear dependency. Therefore, we
conjecture that M approaches the situation for complete networks as the proportion of uniform ran-
domly added edges increases for cycles and prism networks. The same conjecture has previously been
made for the Deffuant model [MGP18]. We have not determined why M approaches the situation for
the complete network as the proportion of random edges on cycles and prism graphs increases. Perhaps
it is because the edge density increases or because the diameter of the networks decreases as uniform
randomly edges are added [Bol88].
For the weighted median model, we found that consensus has probability 0 for complete networks
given the initial opinions follow a continuous distribution. For the weighted median model with self-
appraisal, the results of our simulations suggest that M is independent of s and N for complete net-
works, dense Erdős–Rényi networks, and complete bipartite networks. However, it has been observed
empirically that the frequency of consensus in groups of individuals depends on the group size [Har52].
Therefore, it is a potentially unrealistic feature of our weighted median models that the frequency of
consensus is independent of group size for several networks. For the asynchronous-update weighted me-
dian model, it has been observed that the frequency of consensus decreases with increasing network size
==PAGE:79==
7.1 Discussion
71
for Watts–Strogatz networks [Mei+21]. However, one might argue that complete consensus of a large
population is unrealistic. Some researchers have studied what conditions are necessary for bounded-
confidence models to have limiting opinion distributions where an opinion group includes the majority
of nodes in the network [SFH21; Lor10; Lor05]. Therefore, it seems useful to perform further research
into the formation of large opinion groups to examine the potential of the weighted median model with
self-appraisal to describe the frequency of consensus in social networks.
7.1.3
The distribution of opinions and opinion-group sizes at fixed points
We gained many insights into the limiting opinion distribution of our weighted median model with
self-appraisal by investigating the distribution of opinions at fixed points of the model. We found that
the opinion group size distributions at the fixed points depend heavily on the network structure. For
2-dimensional grids, cycles, and prism networks the observed limit opinion distributions consisted of
many small opinion groups of similar size. For the real-world social networks that we consider and
the Barabási–Albert network, the observed limit opinion distributions consisted of a few large opinion
groups containing the majority of nodes in the network and a set of much smaller opinion groups. We
observed that the opinions of the large opinion groups were similar. For the Barabási–Albert network,
the opinions of the small opinion groups were close to those of the large opinion groups. By contrast for
the real-world social networks, we observed that they were scattered over the opinion space. An imme-
diate possibility for future research of our weighted median models is to investigate the distribution of
opinions of the small opinion groups in the limit opinion distribution for the social networks. This could
shed light on how extreme opinions can take hold in a population and how individuals with extreme
opinions might be positioned in social networks. How extreme opinions can spread in a population and
how extremists are positioned in social networks has already been investigated for other bounded con-
fidence models [Def+00; Mei+21; AD04] and more generally in the social sciences [PP11; Bas14; MM08].
From the results of our simulations, we see a slight indication that the presence of large-degree nodes
in a network can have a large impact on the limiting opinion distribution of the weighted median model
with self-appraisal. Among the networks we considered, we found that the limit opinion distributions
have the largest spread for cycles, prisms, and 2-dimensional grid networks. These networks have only
nodes of small degree. The limiting opinion distribution for the Watts–Strogatz network (with mean
degree 7) had a smaller spread of opinions in the limit opinion distribution. We observed the smallest
spread of opinions for the social networks and Barabási–Albert networks, which have heavy-tailed de-
gree distribution. For the asynchronous-update weighted median model, it has been observed that the
limiting opinion distributions for Watts–Strogatz and Barabási–Albert networks are similar [Mei+20].
Therefore, it seems that the asynchronous and synchronous weighted median model can have very dif-
ferent limiting opinion distributions.
To investigate how edges connect within and between opinion groups in the limiting opinion distribu-
tion of the weighted median model, we calculated assortativity with respect to opinions at fixed points
of our model. We performed simulations with random opinion initialization as in [Mei+20]. Based on
the results of these simulations, it seems that the assortativity coeﬀicient of the limiting opinion distri-
butions is small when the distributions of opinion-group sizes at fixed points have a few opinion groups
containing most of the nodes in the network. We observed the largest assortativity coeﬀicient values for
the prism network, 2-dimensional grid network, and the Watts–Strogatz network. The limiting opinion
distributions for these networks consisted mainly of many equally sized opinion groups. We recorded
the smallest assortativity coeﬀicient for the real-world social networks and the Barabási–Albert network
where the limit opinion distributions have a few very large opinion groups that include most nodes of
the network.
==PAGE:80==
7.1 Discussion
72
7.1.4
Numerical tests of our mean-field approximation
We derived a system of equations for the evolution of a degree-based opinion density function for the
weighted median model with self-appraisal and compared our numerical solution of these equations
with empirical probability densities that we estimated from simulations. The derivations of these equa-
tions are similar to those of master equations [Gle13]. However, we follow the example in Fennel et
al. [Fen+20] and call our approximation a mean-field approximation. Mean-field approximations are
useful because they are computationally more eﬀicient than direct simulations, particularly for larger
networks, and they can also be used to gain insights into the dynamics of the original system.
From our numerical results, it seems that our mean-field approximation describes the initial dynam-
ics of our weighted median model with self-appraisal well. However, the approximation quickly evolves
towards a Dirac-delta spike as time progresses. We also observed that the prevalence of high degrees
in the degree distribution and a large self-appraisal s quickened this evolution. However, the results
of our simulations show that some spread of opinions is preserved by the weighted median model with
self-appraisal. Therefore, we find that our approximation can be used to study the initial dynamics of
our weighted median model with self-appraisal. However, it is ill-suited to investigate the long-term
behavior. Solutions of other mean-field approximations for the evolution of probability densities for
opinion dynamics have also been found to approach Dirac-Deltas spikes [Fen+21; For+05; BKR03].
From our numerical simulations, we found that the accuracy of our mean-field approximation de-
pends on the levels of self-appraisal. The nature of this dependency seems to depend on the choice of
network. We observed a similar dependency for all of the real-world social networks that we considered.
We discretized the opinion space into equally sized compartments and used the root-mean-square error
for this discretization as our measure of precision. For low levels of self-appraisal, the root-mean-square
error increased in the first time step and then stabilized. For large levels of self-appraisal, the root-mean-
square error was constant in the first time step and then increased. Based on our computations, the
transition between these behaviors appears to be smooth. We have not been able to identify the reason
that we observed this feature for all of our real-world social networks and none of our synthetic networks.
One limitation of our mean-field approximation is that it was derived under the assumption that
the network is infinite. Another limitation is that the derivation assumes that the network is annealing,
that is, edges are assumed to be reassigned uniformly at random at each time step while preserving
the degree distribution. To investigate the effect of these two assumptions, we compared numerical
solutions of our mean-field equations with the results of simulating the weighted median model with
self-appraisal for static and annealing configuration networks of various sizes. For both the static and
annealing networks, we find that the short-term accuracy of our mean-field approximation is better for
larger networks. This has also previously been found for similar mean-field approximations for opinion
dynamics [Fen+20]. We also found that our mean-field approximation was more accurate for annealing
networks than for static networks. We found that the finite-size effects are more pronounced for the
annealing networks than for the static networks. However, from the results of our simulations, for large
levels of self-appraisal, it seems that the finite-size effect vanishes at later times for both the annealing
and static networks.
7.1.5
Stability analysis
We characterized and performed analytical stability analysis for the fixed points of our weighted median
models with and without self-appraisal. We found, that the asynchronous-update weighted median
model analyzed in [Mei+21] has the same fixed points with the same stability as our weighted median
model. When studying our weighted median model for the complete network, we found criteria for
the network structure and initial state that indicates that the trajectories of the system gets caught in
period-two orbits with probability 1. For the weighted median model with self-appraisal, the only long-
==PAGE:81==
7.2 Conclusion
73
term behavior that we have observed is fixed points. However, we have not been able to mathematically
derive the precise circumstances under which the system converges to a fixed point. Lorenz has found
circumstances for which the Deffuant and Hegselmann–Krause models converge to fixed points [Lor05].
It is uncertain whether these results and their derivations could be used to determine the long-term
behavior of our weighted median models.
7.1.6
Modeling considerations for the weighted median models
Many models have been proposed for how the opinions of individuals in a social network evolve over
time [Noo+20]. In this project, we studied a weighted median bounded-confidence model that is in-
spired by the work of Mei et al. [Mei+21]. Their model has its psychological grounding in the theory
of cognitive dissonance [Woo00; Fes57]. However, as with any model, theirs and ours weighted median
model makes several simplifications. For example, the perceived dissonance is modeled by the sum of
absolute differences between the individuals own opinion and their neighbors opinions. All cognitive
dissonance, therefore, stems from interactions between agents with conflicting opinions. According to
cognitive-dissonance theory, individuals can also be subject to dissonance when perceived factual state-
ments contradict one another [FC59]. One possible solution to this shortcoming is to subject agents
to a news stream. However, modeling news-streams may be cumbersome because information flows in
a complicated way on networks [LBG21; Hil+17; BM06]. Another unrealistic feature of our weighted
median model and the weighted median model by Mei et al. is that individuals can only respond to
cognitive dissonance by altering their opinion. Alternatively, one can allow individuals to change their
social relations to reduce dissonance [Li+20; ACM15] .
There is no empirical evidence that cognitive dissonance scales with the sum of absolute distances
between opinions. This is also recognized by Mei et al. [Mei+21]. Groeber et al. have proposed a
general framework to model opinion dynamics that are driven by cognitive-dissonance minimization
and allows dissonance to be modeled in different ways [GLS14]. However, a full discussion of what
traits of social influence to include and how to represent them to model opinion dynamics accurately is
beyond the scope of this project.
7.2
Conclusion
We investigated different attributes of a model for the evolution of opinions on networks. We defined
and worked with a synchronous-update version of the weighted median model introduced by Mei et al.
[Mei+21]. To avoid unrealistic trajectories, we also generalized the model to include “self-appraisal”, a
measure of how much individuals are willing to change their opinion in each time step. We have char-
acterized the fixed points of our weighted median model with and without self-appraisal and examined
their stability properties. By numerical simulation and regression analysis, we studied the dependencies
of the convergence time on parameter values and network topology. We numerically explored the distri-
butions of opinions at fixed points and the size distribution of opinion groups for a variety of networks.
Finally, we derived a mean-field approximation for the evolution of opinion densities and investigated
its accuracy.
Recall that we initially set out to answer three fundamental questions listed in Section 1.7. Our
analytical and numerical investigations have brought us a bit closer to the answers to these questions.
1. Do our models have fixed points and how are they characterized? We found that the models
have fixed points and these are characterized in Equation 4.3. The fixed points all turned out to be
stable, but none of them are asymptotically stable. However, the local behavior of our models near
these fixed points did not give much insight into the general dynamics. For example, for our weighted
median model on complete networks, most of the state space is in the basins of attraction for a family
==PAGE:82==
7.2 Conclusion
74
of period-two orbits even though fixed points exist. Therefore, it might have been more insightful to
investigate the basins of attractions for the fixed points rather than their stability.
2. How would a mean-field description of our models behave? We derived a degree-based mean-field
approximation for our weighted median models. We hoped that our mean-field approximation would
give insights into the effects of different initializations on the dynamics and into the limit opinion dis-
tributions of our models. However, the mean-field approximation only describes the evolution of our
weighted median models for a few time steps until the approximation contracts towards a Dirac-delta
spike. Possibly, a degree-based approximation that considers degree-degree correlation or community
structure of the network could lead to more insights.
3. How are the dynamics of our models different and how are they similar to the asynchronous-
update model of Mei et al.
[Mei+21]?
We found both differences and similarities between the dy-
namics of our synchronous-update weighted median models and the asynchronous-update model. The
synchronous-update and asynchronous-update models all have the same fixed points with the same sta-
bilities. However, we observed very different long-term behaviors for our synchronous-update weighted
median models compared to the long-term behavior of the asynchronous model.
In conclusion, the search to answer our questions has only served to raise new questions. Still, our
findings constitute some additional pieces of the puzzle that are opinion dynamics and complex systems.
==PAGE:83==
Bibliography
[15]
“Obamacare subsidies preserved in US Supreme Court ruling.” In: BBC news (2015). url:
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-33269991.
[ACM15]
Diego Acosta-Escorcia, Carlos Cusguen, and Eduardo Mojica-Nava. “Coevolution of opinion
dynamics in evolving networks.” In: 2015 IEEE 2nd Colombian Conference on Automatic
Control, CCAC 2015 - Conference Proceedings (December 2015). doi: 10.1109/CCAC.2015.
7345178.
[AD04]
Frédéric Amblard and Guillaume Deffuant. “The role of network topology on extremism
propagation with the relative agreement opinion dynamics.” In: Physica A: Statistical Me-
chanics and its Applications 343.1-4 (November 2004), pages 725–738. issn: 0378-4371. doi:
10.1016/J.PHYSA.2004.06.102.
[All94]
Linda J.S. Allen. “Some discrete-time SI, SIR, and SIS epidemic models.” In: Mathematical
Biosciences 124.1 (November 1994), pages 83–105. issn: 00255564. doi: 10.1016/0025-
5564(94)90025-6.
[BA99]
Albert László Barabási and Réka Albert. “Emergence of scaling in random networks.” In:
Science 286.5439 (October 1999), pages 509–512. issn: 00368075. doi: 10.1126/science.
286.5439.509. url: https://science.sciencemag.org/content/286/5439/509%
20https://science.sciencemag.org/content/286/5439/509.abstract.
[Bak+21]
Joseph B Bak-Coleman et al. “Stewardship of global collective behavior.” In: 118 (2021),
page 2025764118. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2025764118. url: https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.2025764118%7C.
[Bar+15]
Pablo Barberá et al. “Tweeting From Left to Right: Is Online Political Communication More
Than an Echo Chamber?” In: Psychological Science 26.10 (October 2015), pages 1531–1542.
issn: 14679280. doi: 10.1177/0956797615594620.
[Bas14]
Aparna Basu. “Social Network Analysis: A methodology for studying terrorism.” In: Intel-
ligent Systems Reference Library 65 (2014), pages 215–242. issn: 18684408. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-05164-2{\_}9. url: https://link-springer-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/
chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-05164-2_9.
[Bau+19]
Fabian Baumann et al. “Modeling echo chambers and polarization dynamics in social net-
works.” In: Physical Review Letters 124.4 (June 2019). doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.
048301. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.12325%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevLett.124.048301.
[BBM90]
Elisa Bienenstock, Phillip Bonacich, and Oliver Melvin. “The Effect of Network Density
and Homogeneity on Attitude Polarization.” In: Social Networks 12.2 (1990), pages 153–
172. issn: 18792111. doi: 10 . 1016 / 0378 - 8733(90 ) 90003 - R. url: https : / / www -
sciencedirect-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/science/article/pii/037887339090003R.
[Bha+12]
Arnab Bhattacharyya et al. “On the Convergence of the Hegselmann-Krause System.” In:
ITCS 2013 - Proceedings of the 2013 ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Com-
puter Science (November 2012), pages 61–65. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1211.1909v1.
==PAGE:84==
Bibliography
76
[BJ01]
Ryan K. Beasley and Mark R. Joslyn. “Cognitive dissonance and post-decision attitude
change in six presidential elections.” In: Political Psychology 22.3 (September 2001), pages 521–
540. issn: 0162895X. doi: 10.1111/0162-895X.00252. url: http://doi.wiley.com/10.
1111/0162-895X.00252.
[BKR03]
E. Ben-Naim, P. L. Krapivsky, and S. Redner. “Bifurcations and patterns in compromise
processes.” In: Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 183.3-4 (December 2003), pages 190–204.
issn: 01672789. doi: 10.1016/S0167-2789(03)00171-4. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/
cond-mat/0212313%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0167-2789(03)00171-4.
[BM06]
W. Lance Bennett and Jarol B. Manheim. “The one-step flow of communication.” In: Annals
of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 608.1 (November 2006), pages 213–
232. issn: 00027162. doi: 10.1177/0002716206292266. url: http://journals.sagepub.
com/doi/10.1177/0002716206292266.
[Bol88]
B F Bollobs-and R K Chung. THE DIAMETER OF A CYCLE PLUS A RANDOM
MATCHING*. Technical report 3. 1988.
[Bon+12]
Robert M. Bond et al. “A 61-million-person experiment in social influence and political
mobilization.” In: Nature 489.7415 (September 2012), pages 295–298. issn: 00280836. doi:
10 . 1038 / nature11421. url: https : / / www - nature - com . proxy . findit . dtu . dk /
articles/nature11421.
[Bon+20]
Angela Bonifati et al. “Graph Generators: State of the Art and Open Challenges.” In: ACM
Computing Surveys 53.2 (June 2020), pages 1–30. issn: 15577341. doi: 10.1145/3379445.
url: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3379445.
[BP16]
Albert-László Barabási and Márton Pósfai. Network science. Cambridge University Press,
2016. isbn: 9781107076266. url: https://www.worldcat.org/title/network-science/
oclc/910772793.
[Car+08]
Geoffrey Caron-Lormier et al. “Asynchronous and synchronous updating in individual-based
models.” In: Ecological Modelling 212.3-4 (April 2008), pages 522–527. issn: 03043800. doi:
10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2007.10.049.
[CF07]
Nicholas A. Christakis and James H. Fowler. “The Spread of Obesity in a Large Social
Network over 32 Years.” In: New England Journal of Medicine 357.4 (July 2007), pages 370–
379. issn: 0028-4793. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa066082. url: http://www.nejm.org/doi/abs/
10.1056/NEJMsa066082.
[CF08]
Ethan Cohen-Cole and Jason M. Fletcher. “Is obesity contagious? Social networks vs. envi-
ronmental factors in the obesity epidemic.” In: Journal of Health Economics 27.5 (September
2008), pages 1382–1387. issn: 01676296. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2008.04.005.
[CF11]
Nicholas A. Christakis and James H. Fowler. “Social Contagion Theory: Examining Dy-
namic Social Networks and Human Behavior.” In: Statistics in Medicine 32.4 (September
2011), pages 556–577. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1109.5235.
[Chr+10]
Nicholas Christakis et al. “Proceedings from the 7-week online discussion and poll following
the Problems in Social Science symposium.” In: 2010. url: https://sites.fas.harvard.
edu/~socsci/Documents/HardProbsSocSciSummaryResultsandPollText_31March2011.
pdf.
[Chr10]
Ole Christensen. Functions, Spaces, and Expansions: Mathematical Tools in Physics and
Engineering. Birkhäuser, 2010, page 257. isbn: 978-8176-4979-1.
[Coo19]
Joel Cooper. “Cognitive dissonance: Where we’ve been and where we’re going.” In: Interna-
tional Review of Social Psychology 32.1 (May 2019). issn: 23978570. doi: 10.5334/irsp.
277. url: https://doaj.org.
[CS73]
P. Clifford and A. Sudbury. “A model for spatial conflict.” In: Biometrika 60.3 (1973),
pages 581–588. issn: 00063444. doi: 10.2307/2335008.
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
77
[Def+00]
Guillaume Deffuant et al. “Mixing Beliefs Among Interacting Agents.” In: Advances in
Complex Systems 3 (January 2000), pages 87–98. doi: 10.1142/S0219525900000078.
[Deg74]
Morris H. Degroot. “Reaching a consensus.” In: Journal of the American Statistical As-
sociation 69.345 (1974), pages 118–121. issn: 1537274X. doi: 10.1080/01621459.1974.
10480137.
[DGM08]
S. N. Dorogovtsev, A. V. Goltsev, and J. F. F. Mendes. “Critical phenomena in complex
networks.” In: Reviews of Modern Physics 80.4 (October 2008), page 1275. doi: 10.1103/
RevModPhys.80.1275. url: https://journals-aps-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/rmp/
abstract/10.1103/RevModPhys.80.1275.
[DiB16]
Emmanuele DiBenedetto. Real Analysis. 2nd. Birkhäuser Advanced Texts Basler Lehrbücher.
New York, NY: Springer New York, 2016. isbn: 978-1-4939-4005-9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-
4939-4005-9. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4939-4005-9.
[DMW03]
Peter Sheridan Dodds, Roby Muhamad, and Duncan J. Watts. “An experimental study of
search in global social networks.” In: Science 301.5634 (August 2003), pages 827–829. issn:
00368075. doi: 10.1126/science.1081058. url: http://science.sciencemag.org/.
[DS14]
Norman R. Draper and Harry Smith. Applied regression analysis. wiley, January 2014,
pages 1–716. isbn: 9781118625590. doi: 10.1002/9781118625590. url: https://onlinelibrary-
wiley-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/doi/book/10.1002/9781118625590.
[DV17]
Karel Devriendt and Piet Van Mieghem. “Universal mean-field framework for SIS epidemics
on networks, based on graph partitioning and the isoperimetric inequality.” In: Physical
Review E 96.5 (June 2017). doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.96.052314. url: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1706.10132%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.96.052314.
[EB15]
Seyed Rasoul Etesami and Tamer Basar. “Game-Theoretic Analysis of the Hegselmann-
Krause Model for Opinion Dynamics in Finite Dimensions.” In: IEEE Transactions on
Automatic Control 60.7 (July 2015), pages 1886–1897. doi: 10.1109/TAC.2015.2394954.
[Edu+16]
Sergey Edunov et al. Three and a half degrees of separation. 2016. url: https://research.
fb . com / blog / 2016 / 02 / three - and - a - half - degrees - of - separation / %20https :
//research.facebook.com/blog/three-and-a-half-degrees-of-separation/.
[FB17]
Noah E. Friedkin and Francesco Bullo. “How truth wins in opinion dynamics along is-
sue sequences.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America 114.43 (October 2017), pages 11380–11385. issn: 10916490. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.1710603114. url: /pmc/articles/PMC5664530/%20/pmc/articles/PMC5664530/
?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5664530/.
[FC59]
Leon Festinger and James M. Carlsmith. “Cognitive consequences of forced compliance.”
In: Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 58.2 (1959), pages 203–210. issn: 0096851X.
doi: 10.1037/h0041593.
[Fen+20]
Susan C. Fennell et al. “A generalised mean-field approximation for the Deffuant opinion
dynamics model on networks.” In: arXiv 103.1 (2020), page 012314. issn: 23318422. doi: 10.
1103/physreve.103.012314. url: https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.103.012314.
[Fen+21]
Susan C. Fennell et al. “Generalized mean-field approximation for the Deffuant opinion
dynamics model on networks.” In: Physical Review E 103.1 (January 2021), page 012314.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.103.012314. url: https://journals-aps-org.proxy.findit.
dtu.dk/pre/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevE.103.012314.
[Fes57]
Leon Festinger. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford: Stanford University Press,
February 1957, page 291. url: http://www.sup.org/books/title/?id=3850.
[FJ99]
Noah E. Friedkin and E ￿Johnsen. “Social influence networks and opinion change.” In:
Group Processes 16.February (1999), pages 1–29. issn: 08826145. url: http://www.soc.
ucsb.edu/faculty/friedkin/Reprints/AGPSinet.pdf.
==PAGE:86==
Bibliography
78
[FMG16]
Peter G. Fennell, Sergey Melnik, and James P. Gleeson. “Limitations of discrete-time ap-
proaches to continuous-time contagion dynamics.” In: Physical Review E 94.5 (November
2016), page 52125. issn: 24700053. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.94.052125. url: https:
//journals.aps.org/pre/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevE.94.052125.
[For+05]
Santo Fortunato et al. “Vector Opinion Dynamics in a Bounded Confidence Consensus
Model.” In: International Journal of Modern Physics C 16.10 (April 2005), pages 1535–1551.
doi: 10.1142/s0129183105008126. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0504017v1.
[Fos+16]
Bailey K. Fosdick et al. “Configuring Random Graph Models with Fixed Degree Sequences.”
In: SIAM Review 60.2 (August 2016), pages 315–355. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.
00607v3.
[Fre86]
Dieter Frey. “Recent research on selective exposure to information.” In: Advances in Experi-
mental Social Psychology 19.C (January 1986), pages 41–80. issn: 00652601. doi: 10.1016/
S0065-2601(08)60212-9.
[Fri99]
Noah E Friedkin. “Choice Shift and Group Polarization.” In: American Sociological Review
64.6 (March 1999), pages 856–875. issn: 00031224. doi: 10.2307/2657407. url: http:
//www.jstor.org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/stable/2657407.
[Gal07]
Oded Galor. Discrete dynamical systems. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, pages 1–153.
doi: 10.1007/3-540-36776-4.
[Gan+10]
Yérali Gandica et al. “Continuous opinion model in small world directed networks.” In:
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 389.24 (June 2010), pages 5864–5870.
doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2010.08.025. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1006.5441%20http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2010.08.025.
[Gar+18]
Kiran Garimella et al. “Political Discourse on Social Media: Echo Chambers, Gatekeepers,
and the Price of Bipartisanship.” In: The Web Conference 2018 - Proceedings of the World
Wide Web Conference, WWW 2018 (January 2018), pages 913–922. url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1801.01665.
[GB19]
Gerrit Grossmann and Luca Bortolussi. Reducing Spreading Processes on Networks to
Markov Population Models. April 2019.
[Gil59]
E N Gilbert. “Random Graphs.” In: Source: The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 30.4
(1959), pages 1141–1144.
[Gil77]
Daniel T. Gillespie. “Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions.” In: Jour-
nal of Physical Chemistry. Volume 81. 25. American Chemical Society, 1977, pages 2340–
2361. doi: 10.1021/j100540a008. url: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/
j100540a008.
[Gle11]
James P. Gleeson. “High-accuracy approximation of binary-state dynamics on networks.”
In: Physical Review Letters 107.6 (August 2011), page 068701. issn: 00319007. doi: 10.
1103/PhysRevLett.107.068701. url: https://journals-aps-org.proxy.findit.dtu.
dk/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.107.068701.
[Gle13]
James P. Gleeson. “Binary-state dynamics on complex networks: Pair approximation and
beyond.” In: Physical Review X 3.2 (2013). issn: 21603308. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.3.
021004.
[GLM18]
Nicolas Gast, Diego Latella, and Mieke Massink. “A refined mean field approximation of
synchronous discrete-time population models.” In: Performance Evaluation 126 (October
2018), pages 1–21. issn: 0166-5316. doi: 10.1016/J.PEVA.2018.05.002.
[GLS14]
PATRICK GROEBER, JAN LORENZ, and FRANK SCHWEITZER. “Dissonance Min-
imization as a Microfoundation of Social Influence in Models of Opinion Formation.” In:
http://dx.doi.org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/10.1080/0022250X.2012.724486 38.3 (2014), pages 147–
174. doi: 10.1080/0022250X.2012.724486. url: https://www-tandfonline-com.proxy.
findit.dtu.dk/doi/abs/10.1080/0022250X.2012.724486.
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
79
[Gra78]
Mark Granovetter. “Threshold Models of Collective Behavior.” In: American Journal of
Sociology 83.6 (1978), pages 1420–1443. issn: 00029602, 15375390. url: http://www.jstor.
org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/stable/2778111.
[Gro+18]
Gerrit Grossmann et al. Lumping the approximate master equation for multistate processes
on complex networks. Volume 1. Springer International Publishing, 2018, pages 157–172.
isbn: 9783319991542. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-99154-2. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-99154-2_10.
[GW17]
Kiran Garimella and Ingmar Weber. “A Long-Term Analysis of Polarization on Twitter.”
In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Web and Social Media, ICWSM
2017 (March 2017), pages 528–531. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.02769.
[Har52]
A Paul Hare. “A Study of Interaction and Consensus in Different Sized Groups.” In: Amer-
ican Sociological Review 17.3 (March 1952), pages 261–267. issn: 00031224. doi: 10.2307/
2088071. url: http://www.jstor.org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/stable/2088071.
[Het00]
Herbert W. Hethcote. “Mathematics of infectious diseases.” In: SIAM Review 42.4 (August
2000), pages 599–653. issn: 00361445. doi: 10.1137/S0036144500371907. url: https:
//epubs.siam.org/page/terms.
[Hil+17]
Martin Hilbert et al. “One Step, Two Step, Network Step? Complementary Perspectives on
Communication Flows in Twittered Citizen Protests.” In: Social Science Computer Review
35.4 (August 2017), pages 444–461. issn: 15528286. doi: 10.1177/0894439316639561. url:
http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0894439316639561.
[HK02]
Rainer Hegselmann and Ulrich Krause. “Opinion dynamics and bounded confidence: models,
analysis and simulation.” In: JASSS 5.3 (2002). url: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/
viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.454.3597.
[HL75]
Richard A Holley and Thomas M Liggett. “Ergodic Theorems for Weakly Interacting Infi-
nite Systems and the Voter Model.” In: The Annals of Probability 3.4 (1975), pages 643–663.
issn: 00911798. url: http://www.jstor.org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/stable/2959329.
[HSS08]
Aric A. Hagberg, Daniel A. Schult, and Pieter J. Swart. “Proceedings of the Python in
Science Conference (SciPy): Exploring Network Structure, Dynamics, and Function using
NetworkX.” In: 2008, pages 11–15. url: http://conference.scipy.org/proceedings/
SciPy2008/paper_2/.
[Jia+15]
Peng Jia et al. “OPINION DYNAMICS AND THE EVOLUTION OF SOCIAL POWER
IN INFLUENCE NETWORKS *.” In: SIAM Review 57.3 (August 2015), pages 367–397.
issn: 00361445. doi: 10.1137/130913250.
[JS19]
Arkadiusz J￿drzejewski and Katarzyna Sznajd-Weron. “Statistical Physics Of Opinion For-
mation: Is it a SPOOF?” In: Comptes Rendus Physique 20.4 (May 2019), pages 244–261.
issn: 1631-0705. doi: 10.1016/J.CRHY.2019.05.002.
[KK89]
Tomihisa Kamada and Satoru Kawai. “An algorithm for drawing general undirected graphs.”
In: Information Processing Letters 31.1 (April 1989), pages 7–15. issn: 00200190. doi: 10.
1016/0020-0190(89)90102-6.
[Kue15]
Christian Kuehn. “Moment Closure - A Brief Review.” In: Understanding Complex Systems
(May 2015). Edited by Eckehard Schöll, Sabine H. L. Klapp, and Philipp Hövel. doi: 10.
1007/978-3-319-28028-8. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.02190%20http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-28028-8.
[Kyr+17]
Charalampos Kyriakopoulos et al. “Lumping of Degree-Based Mean Field and Pair Approx-
imation Equations for Multi-State Contact Processes.” In: Physical Review E 97.1 (June
2017). doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.97.012301. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.06964%
20http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.97.012301.
==PAGE:88==
Bibliography
80
[LA]
Sune Lehmann and Yong-Yeol Ahn. Complex Spreading Phenomena in Social Systems Inn
uence and Contagion in Real-World Social Networks. Technical report. url: http://www.
springer.com/series/11784.
[Laz+10]
David Lazer et al. “The Coevolution of Networks and Political Attitudes.” In: Working
Papers 27 (August 2010). doi: 10.1080/10584609.2010.500187.
[Laz01]
David Lazer. “The co-evolution of individual and network.” In: Journal of Mathematical So-
ciology 25.1 (2001), pages 69–108. issn: 0022250X. doi: 10.1080/0022250X.2001.9990245.
url: https : / / www . tandfonline . com / action / journalInformation ? journalCode =
gmas20.
[LAZ03]
M F Laguna, Guillermo Abramson, and Damián H Zanette. “Minorities in a model for
opinion formation.” In: (2003).
[Laz11]
David Lazer. “Networks in political science: Back to the future.” In: PS - Political Science
and Politics 44.1 (2011), pages 61–68. issn: 10490965. doi: 10.1017/S1049096510001873.
[LBG21]
Paul F. Lazarsfeld, Bernard Berelson, and Hazel Gaudet. The People’s Choice. How the
Voter Makes Up His Mind in a Presidential Campaign: Legacy edition. 1st. Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 2021, page 224. isbn: 9780231197953.
[Li+20]
Ke Li et al. “Opinion dynamics model based on the cognitive dissonance: An agent-based
simulation.” In: Information Fusion 56 (April 2020), pages 1–14. issn: 15662535. doi: 10.
1016/j.inffus.2019.09.006.
[Lip16]
Adam Liptak. Supreme Court Strikes Down Texas Abortion Restrictions. 2016. url: https:
//www.nytimes.com/2016/06/28/us/supreme-court-texas-abortion.html.
[Lor05]
Jan Lorenz. “A stabilization theorem for dynamics of continuous opinions.” In: Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 355.1 (September 2005), pages 217–223. issn:
0378-4371. doi: 10.1016/J.PHYSA.2005.02.086.
[Lor06]
Jan Lorenz. “Consensus Strikes Back in the Hegselmann-Krause Model of Continuous Opin-
ion Dynamics Under Bounded Confidence.” In: Journal of Artificial Societies and Social
Simulationvol 9.1 (2006). url: http://jasss.soc.surrey.ac.uk/9/1/8.html.
[Lor10]
Jan Lorenz. “Heterogeneous bounds of confidence: Meet, discuss and find consensus!” In:
Complexity 15.4 (March 2010), pages 43–52. issn: 1099-0526. doi: 10.1002/CPLX.20295.
url: https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/doi/full/10.1002/
cplx.20295%20https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/doi/abs/
10.1002/cplx.20295%20https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/
doi/10.1002/cplx.20295.
[LSL17]
An Lu, Chunhua Sun, and Yezheng Liu. “The Impact of Community Structure on the
Convergence Time of Opinion Dynamics.” In: Discrete Dynamics in Nature and Society
2017 (2017). doi: 10.1155/2017/9396824.
[LU07]
Jan Lorenz and Diemo Urbig. “About the Power to Enforce and Prevent Consensus by
Manipulating Communication Rules.” In: Advances in Complex Systems (ACS) 10 (June
2007), pages 251–269. doi: 10.1142/S0219525907000982.
[Lyo+15]
Sarah Lyons-Padilla et al. “Belonging nowhere: Marginalization & radicalization risk among
Muslim immigrants.” In: Behavioral Science & Policy 1.2 (2015), pages 1–12. issn: 2379-
4607. doi: 10.1353/bsp.2015.0019.
[Mar88]
Peter V. Marsden. “Homogeneity in confiding relations.” In: Social Networks 10.1 (1988),
pages 57–76. issn: 03788733. doi: 10.1016/0378-8733(88)90010-X.
[Mei+20]
Wenjun Mei et al. “Rethinking the Micro-Foundation of Opinion Dynamics: Rich Conse-
quences of an Inconspicuous Change. (available in published version [Mei21]).” September
2020. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.06474v6.
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
81
[Mei+21]
Wenjun Mei et al. “Rethinking the Micro-Foundation of Opinion Dynamics: Rich Conse-
quences of an Inconspicuous Change.” In: IFAC-PapersOnLine 53.5 (January 2021), pages 307–
310. issn: 2405-8963. doi: 10.1016/J.IFACOL.2021.04.187.
[Mel+11]
Sergey Melnik et al. “Multi-Stage Complex Contagions.” In: Chaos 23.1 (November 2011).
doi: 10.1063/1.4790836. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1111.1596%20http://dx.doi.
org/10.1063/1.4790836.
[MGP18]
X. Flora Meng, Robert A. Van Gorder, and Mason A. Porter. “Opinion formation and
distribution in a bounded-confidence model on various networks.” In: Physical Review E
97.2 (February 2018), page 022312. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.97.022312. url: https:
//journals-aps-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/pre/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevE.97.
022312.
[MK14]
Joel C Miller and Istvan Z Kiss. “Epidemic spread in networks: Existing methods and
current challenges.” In: Mathematical Modelling of Natural Phenomena 9.2 (March 2014),
pages 4–42. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1403.1957.
[MM08]
Clark McCauley and Sophia Moskalenko. “Mechanisms of Political Radicalization: Path-
ways Toward Terrorism.” In: Terrorism and Political Violence 20.3 (July 2008), pages 415–
433. issn: 0954-6553. doi: 10.1080/09546550802073367. url: http://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/full/10.1080/09546550802073367.
[MNP04]
Yamir Moreno, Maziar Nekovee, and Amalio Pacheco. “Dynamics of Rumor Spreading in
Complex Networks.” In: Physical review. E, Statistical, nonlinear, and soft matter physics
69 (July 2004), page 66130. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.69.066130.
[MSC01]
Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M Cook. “Birds of a feather: Homophily
in social networks.” In: Annual Review of Sociology 27 (2001), pages 415–444. issn: 03600572.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.soc.27.1.415.
[MW05]
David C. Matz and Wendy Wood. “Cognitive dissonance in groups: The consequences of dis-
agreement.” In: Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 88.1 (January 2005), pages 22–
37. issn: 00223514. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.88.1.22.
[New02]
M. E. J. Newman. “Mixing patterns in networks.” In: Physical Review E - Statistical Physics,
Plasmas, Fluids, and Related Interdisciplinary Topics 67.2 (September 2002), page 13. doi:
10.1103/PhysRevE.67.026126. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/cond- mat/0209450%
20http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.67.026126.
[New18]
M.E.J. Newman. Networks: An introduction. Oxford University Press, 2018. isbn: 9780199206650.
url: http : / / www . amazon . com / Networks - An - Introduction - Mark - Newman / dp /
0199206651/ref=sr_1_5?ie=UTF8&qid=1352896678&sr=8- 5&keywords=complex+
networks.
[Noo+20]
Hossein Noorazar et al. “From classical to modern opinion dynamics.” In: https://doi.org/10.1142/S012918312
31.7 (July 2020). doi: 10.1142/S0129183120501016.
[Pas+15]
Romualdo Pastor-Satorras et al. “Epidemic processes in complex networks.” In: Reviews
of Modern Physics 87.3 (August 2015). doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.87.925. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1408.2701%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.87.925.
[Paw13]
Yudi Pawitan. In All Likelihood : Statistical Modelling and Inference Using Likelihood. 1st.
Oxford University Press, 2013, pages 1–528. isbn: 978-0-19-967122-9.
[PCH10]
Roni Parshani, Shai Carmi, and Shlomo Havlin. “Epidemic threshold for the susceptible-
infectious-susceptible model on random networks.” In: Physical Review Letters 104.25 (June
2010), page 258701. issn: 00319007. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.104.258701. url: https:
//journals-aps-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.
104.258701.
[Per07]
Lawrence Perko. Differential Equations and Dynamical Systems. Edited by J.E Marsden,
L. Sirovich, and M Golubitsky. 3rd. Springer, 2007, page 555. isbn: 978-0-387-95116-4.
==PAGE:90==
Bibliography
82
[PG16]
Mason A Porter and James P Gleeson. Dynamical Systems on Networks: A Tutorial (Fron-
tiers in Applied Dynamical Systems: Reviews and Tutorials). 2016, page 80. isbn: 3319266403.
[Pit93]
Jim Pitman. Probability. New York, NY: Springer New York, 1993. isbn: 978-0-387-94594-1.
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4612-4374-8. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-
4612-4374-8.
[PP11]
Arie Perliger and Ami Pedahzur. “Social Network Analysis in the Study of Terrorism and
Political Violence.” In: PS: Political Science & Politics 44.1 (January 2011), pages 45–50.
issn: 1537-5935. doi: 10 . 1017 / S1049096510001848. url: https : / / www - cambridge -
org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/core/journals/ps-political-science-and-politics/
article/social-network-analysis-in-the-study-of-terrorism-and-political-
violence/6F15C96DA798447F89564011202F2E75.
[Red]
S Redner. “Reality Inspired Voter Models: A Mini-Review.” In: 1 (), pages 1–14.
[Rus05]
H. Russell Bernard. “Review: Linton C. Freeman, The Development of Social Network Anal-
ysis: A Study in the Sociology of Science, Empirical Press, Vancouver, BC, 2004. From.” In:
Social Networks 27.4 (2005), pages 377–384. issn: 03788733. doi: 10.1016/j.socnet.2005.
06.004. url: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0378873305000481.
[SC01]
Jeff Stone and Joel Cooper. “A Self-Standards Model of Cognitive Dissonance.” In: Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology 37 (May 2001), pages 228–243. doi: 10.1006/jesp.2000.
1446.
[SD04]
Carl Erik Sarndal and Herbert A. David. Order Statistics. 3rd. 339. John Wiley & Sons,
September 2004, page 717. doi: 10.2307/2284483. url: https://www.jstor.org/stable/
2284483?origin=crossref.
[SFH21]
Hendrik Schawe, Sylvain Fontaine, and Laura Hernández. “When network bridges foster
consensus. Bounded confidence models in networked societies.” In: Physical Review Re-
search 3.2 (June 2021), page 023208. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.3.023208. url:
https://journals-aps-org.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/prresearch/abstract/10.1103/
PhysRevResearch.3.023208.
[SG12]
Greg Ver Steeg and Aram Galstyan. “Statistical Tests for Contagion in Observational So-
cial Network Studies.” In: Journal of Machine Learning Research 31 (November 2012),
pages 563–571. url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1211.4889.
[Sla10]
F. Slanina. “Dynamical phase transitions in Hegselmann-Krause model of opinion dynamics
and consensus.” In: The European Physical Journal B 2010 79:1 79.1 (December 2010),
pages 99–106. issn: 1434-6036. doi: 10.1140/EPJB/E2010-10568-Y. url: https://link-
springer-com.proxy.findit.dtu.dk/article/10.1140/epjb/e2010-10568-y.
[SM03]
D. Stauffer and H. Meyer-Ortmanns. “Simulation of Consensus Model of Deffuant et al on
a Barabasi-Albert Network.” In: International Journal of Modern Physics C 15.2 (August
2003), pages 241–246. doi: 10.1142/s0129183104005644. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/
cond-mat/0308231v2.
[SS09]
Kristian Sabo and Rudolf Scitovski. “The best least absolute deviations line - Properties
and two eﬀicient methods for its derivation.” In: ANZIAM Journal 50.2 (2009), pages 185–
198. issn: 14461811. doi: 10.1017/S1446181108000345. url: https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1446181108000345.
[ST10]
Cosma Rohilla Shalizi and Andrew C. Thomas. “Homophily and Contagion Are Generi-
cally Confounded in Observational Social Network Studies.” In: Sociological Methods and
Research 40.2 (April 2010), pages 211–239. doi: 10.1177/0049124111404820. url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1004.4704%20http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0049124111404820.
[Tay11]
Michael E. Taylor. Partial Differential Equations I. Applied Mathematical Sciences. New
York, NY: Springer New York, 2011. doi: 10.1007/978- 1- 4419- 7055- 8. url: http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4419-7055-8.
==PAGE:91==
Bibliography
83
[Tea17]
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria,
2017. url: https://www.r-project.org/.
[TKT14]
Timothy J Taylor, Istvan Z Kiss, and T J Taylor. “Mathematical Biology Interdependency
and hierarchy of exact and approximate epidemic models on networks.” In: J. Math. Biol
69 (2014), pages 183–211. doi: 10.1007/s00285-013-0699-x.
[TM69]
Jeffrey Travers and Stanley Milgram. An Experimental Study of the Small World Problem.
Technical report 4. 1969, pages 425–443.
[TMP12]
Amanda L. Traud, Peter J. Mucha, and Mason A. Porter. “Social structure of Facebook net-
works.” In: Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 391.16 (2012), pages 4165–
4180. issn: 03784371. doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2011.12.021.
[Wat02]
Duncan J. Watts. “A simple model of global cascades on random networks.” In: Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99.9 (April 2002),
pages 5766–5771. issn: 00278424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.082090499. url: /pmc/articles/
PMC122850/%20/pmc/articles/PMC122850/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC122850/.
[Wei+01]
Gérard Weisbuch et al. “Meet, Discuss, and Segregate!” In: (2001). url: http://citeseerx.
ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.142.1305.
[Wic16]
Hadley Wickham. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis (Use R). 2nd. Springer, 2016.
[Woo00]
Wendy Wood. “Attitude Change: Persuasion and Social Influence.” In: Annual Review of
Psychology 51.1 (February 2000), pages 539–570. issn: 0066-4308. doi: 10.1146/annurev.
psych.51.1.539. url: http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev.psych.
51.1.539.
[WS98]
Duncan J. Watts and Steven H. Strogatz. “Collective dynamics of ’small-world’ networks.”
In: Nature 393.6684 (June 1998), pages 440–442. issn: 00280836. doi: 10.1038/30918. url:
http://us.imdb.com.
==PAGE:92==
APPENDIX A
Appendix
A.1
Behavior of the weighted median model on a complete
network
Proposition 7. Let G = (V, E) be a complete network with influence matrix Wi,j = Wj,i =
1
|V |−1 for
(i, j) ∈E. Let the initial state of each node be generated randomly from some continuous distribution
and assume N = |V | ≥2. If N is odd, then with probability 1 the resulting trajectory of the weighted
median model reaches a fix-point at time t = 2, otherwise, with probability 1 the trajectory gets caught
in a period-two orbit.
Proof. Let x(0) ∈[0, 1]|V | be the global initial state. Since each coordinate of x(0) is randomly generated
from a continuous distribution we can index them such that
x1(0) < x2(0) < · · · < xN−1(0) < xN(0) ,
(A.1)
with probability 1.
We now split the analysis into two distinct cases; N odd and N even. First, assume N even. Then
N = 2k for some integer k. Using the indexation above, we see that half the nodes have initial states
smaller than or equal to xk(0) and that the other half have initial states larger than xk(0).
Let i ∈V be a given node. If xi(0) > xk(0), then by the ordering (A.1) and since all edges have the
same weight, we see that
X
j : xj(0)<xk(0)
wij ≤1
2 ,
X
j : xj(0)>xk(0)
wij ≤1
2 .
Therefore, the weighted-median of the neighbouring states of node i will be xk(0). If xi(0) ≤xk(0), we
find that
X
j : xj(0)<xk+1(0)
wij ≤1
2 ,
X
j : xj(0)>xk+1(0)
wij ≤1
2 .
Therefore, the weighted-median of the neighbour states of node i will be xk+1(0).
Because all nodes update simultaneously, we conclude that at time t = 1, only two states remain in
the system xk(0) and xk+1(0). We know that
xi(1) =
(
xk+1(0),
if xi(0) ≤xk(0)
xk(0),
if xi(0) > xk(0)
,
for all j ∈V . Note that half the nodes at time t = 1 are in state xk+1(0) and the other half are in state
xk(0).
==PAGE:93==
A.1 Behavior of the weighted median model on a complete network
85
When the weighted-median model updates again, all the nodes with state xk(0) at time t = 1 go to
state xk+1(0) and time t = 2 and vice versa. To see this, let i ∈V and assume xi(1) = xk(0). Then
X
j : xj(1)<xk+1(0)
wij < 1
2,
X
j : xj(0)>xk+1(0)
wij < 1
2 ,
because k −1 of their neighbors hold opinion xk(0) and k neighbors hold opinion xk+1(0). Therefore
xi(2) = xk+1(0). By a similar argument, if xi(1) = xk+1(0) then xi(2) = xk+1(0). The system is now
in a period-two orbit.
Now, assume N is odd. Then N = 2k+1 for some integer k. We deduce that k nodes will have initial
state smaller than xk+1(0) and k nodes will have initial state larger then xk+1(0). Let i ∈V \{k + 1}.
Because all edges have the same weight, we see that
X
j : xj(0)<xk+1(0)
Wij ≤1
2 ,
X
j : xj(0)>xk+1(0)
Wij ≤1
2 ,
and hence xi(1) = xk+1(0). We know xk+1(1) either equals xk(0) or xk+2(0). At time t = 1 all nodes
except k + 1 have state xk+1(0), and node k + 1 has either state xk(0) or xk+2(0).
At time t = 2 we see that all neighbors of node k+1 have opinion xk+1(0). Hence xk+1(2) = xk+1(0).
For a node i ∈V \{k + 1} we see that xi(2) = xk+1(0) because all but one of their neighbors and the
node itself are in this state at time t = 1. Therefore, the system has reached the fix-point xi = xk+1(0)
for all i ∈V . This concludes the proof.
==PAGE:94==
A.2 Convergence time and the number of opinion groups at fix-points
86
A.2
Convergence time and the number of opinion groups at
fix-points
We give the estimated parameter values for the regression based convergence-time models that were not
given in subsection 5.4.3.
p
α0
α1
α2
α3
α4
0.9
2.912 × 100
4.882 × 10−1
−7.557 × 10−1
2.182 × 10−4
−2.823 × 10−7
0.8
3.619 × 100
−4.449 × 10−1
N/A
4.952 × 10−4
−5.430 × 10−7
0.7
3.723 × 100
−7.039 × 10−1
N/A
N/A
−1.433 × 10−7
p
α5
α6
α7
α8
0.9
−4.858 × 10−4
4.385 × 10−7
−7.830 × 10−3
−1.282 × 100
0.8
−1.331 × 10−3
1.004 × 10−6
−3.678 × 10−2
−1.011 × 100
0.7
−7.563 × 10−4
5.366 × 10−7
N/A
−9.450 × 10−1
Table A.1: Estimates of regression coeﬀicients for the convergence-time model in equation Equa-
tion 5.11 on Erdos-Renyi networks.
The notation N/A indicates that the given term
was not significant to a 95% confidence level on the given networks.
p
α0
α1
α2
α3
α4
0
−3.871 × 100
2.589 × 101
−4.491 × 101
2.968 × 101
Na
0.1
−3.969 × 100
2.550 × 101
−4.311 × 101
2.790 × 101
−1.177 × 10−10
0.2
−5.683 × 100
3.112 × 101
−5.052 × 101
3.155 × 101
N/A
0.3
−4.743 × 100
2.784 × 101
−4.540 × 101
2.860 × 101
N/A
p
α5
α6
α7
α8
α9
0
N/A
−7.830 × 10−5
N/A
2.968 × 10−2
−3.188 × 100
0.1
N/A
−8.652 × 10−4
5.741 × 10−7
6.876 × 10−2
−3.219 × 100
0.2
N/A
−2.479 × 10−4
N/A
6.871 × 10−2
−3.769 × 100
0.3
4.760 × 10−4
−7.873 × 10−4
N/A
6.554 × 10−2
−3.508 × 100
Table A.2: Estimates of regression coeﬀicients for convergence time regression equation Equation 5.15
on cycle networks and cycle networks with randomly added edges. The notation N/A
indicates that the given term was not significant with respect to a 95% confidence level on
the given networks.
==PAGE:95==
A.2 Convergence time and the number of opinion groups at fix-points
87
p
α0
α1
α2
α3
α4
α5
0
−4.425 × 100
2.791 × 101
−4.789 × 101
3.143 × 101
N/A
Na
0.1
−3.936 × 100
2.556 × 101
−4.321 × 101
2.779 × 101
−1.127 × 10−4
Na
0.2
−6.038 × 100
3.219 × 101
−5.201 × 101
3.224 × 101
N/A
Na
0.3
−2.391 × 100
2.035 × 101
−3.508 × 101
2.277 × 101
N/A
−1.199 × 10−7
p
α6
α7
α8
α9
α10
0
1.718 × 10−4
−2.463 × 10−4
N/A
1.874 × 10−2
3.377 × 100
0.1
7.520 × 10−4
−1.004 × 10−3
N/A
7.198 × 10−2
−3.227 × 100
0.2
N/A
−2.955 × 10−4
N/A
8.922 × 10−2
−3.864 × 100
0.3
N/A
4.501 × 10−7
5.247 × 10−7
1.067 × 10−1
−3.386 × 100
Table A.3: Estimates of regression coeﬀicients for convergence time model in Equation 5.16 on prism
networks and prism networks with randomly added edges. Note N/A indicates that the
given term was not significant with respect to a 95% confidence level on the given networks.
Estimate
Std. error
t value
Pr(>|t|)
α0
−4.054 × 100
5.878 × 10−1
−6.896 × 100
1.410 × 10−11
α1
2.584 × 101
1.879 × 100
1.375 × 101
2.132 × 10−37
α2
−4.249 × 101
2.671 × 100
−1.591 × 101
1.779 × 10−47
α3
2.651 × 101
1.495 × 100
1.773 × 101
1.922 × 10−56
α4
−1.727 × 10−4
5.680 × 10−5
−3.041 × 100
2.464 × 10−3
α5
8.044 × 10−2
3.703 × 10−3
2.173 × 101
7.314 × 10−77
α6
−3.261 × 100
1.862 × 10−1
−1.751 × 101
2.416 × 10−55
Table A.4: Estimates of regression coeﬀicients for convergence-time model in Equation Equation 5.14
on grid networks.
Estimate
Std. error
t value
Pr(>|t|)
α0
3.745 × 100
2.204 × 101
1.699 × 10−1
8.657 × 10−1
α1
−4.016 × 100
8.549 × 101
−4.697 × 10−2
9.627 × 10−1
α2
1.723 × 101
1.792 × 102
9.616 × 10−2
9.237 × 10−1
α3
−1.448 × 101
1.974 × 102
−7.338 × 10−2
9.418 × 10−1
α4
2.438 × 100
8.312 × 101
2.933 × 10−2
9.767 × 10−1
α5
−1.235 × 100
6.573 × 100
−1.879 × 10−1
8.516 × 10−1
Table A.5: Estimates of regression coeﬀicients for convergence time model in Equation 5.17 on the
Caltech Facebook friendship network.
Estimate
Std. error
t value
Pr(>|t|)
α0
6.750 × 100
1.898 × 10−1
3.556 × 101
3.212 × 10−45
α1
−5.283 × 100
1.029 × 100
−5.134 × 100
2.638 × 10−6
α2
4.488 × 100
1.203 × 100
3.730 × 100
3.960 × 10−4
Table A.6: Estimates of regression coeﬀicients for convergence time model in Equation 5.18 for the
Bowdoin Facebook friendship network.
==PAGE:96==
A.2 Convergence time and the number of opinion groups at fix-points
88
Estimate
Std. error
t value
Pr(>|t|)
α0
1.595 × 101
3.021 × 100
5.278 × 100
1.257 × 10−6
α1
−5.773 × 101
1.193 × 101
−4.841 × 100
6.894 × 10−6
α2
1.437 × 102
2.577 × 101
5.578 × 100
3.779 × 10−7
α3
−1.918 × 102
2.950 × 101
−6.502 × 100
8.223 × 10−9
α4
9.858 × 101
1.304 × 101
7.559 × 100
8.808 × 10−11
α5
2.790 × 100
8.953 × 10−1
3.116 × 100
2.612 × 10−3
Table A.7: Estimates of regression coeﬀicients for the convergence time model in Equation 5.19 for
the Georgetown Facebook friendship network.
Estimate
Std. error
t value
Pr(>|t|)
α0
7.289 × 100
3.788 × 10−1
1.924 × 101
1.017 × 10−32
α1
−1.405 × 101
4.636 × 100
−3.031 × 100
3.228 × 10−3
α2
3.357 × 101
1.754 × 101
1.913 × 100
5.909 × 10−2
α3
−4.327 × 101
2.573 × 101
−1.682 × 100
9.630 × 10−2
α4
2.108 × 101
1.280 × 101
1.647 × 100
1.033 × 10−1
Table A.8: Estimates of regression coeﬀicients for convergence time model in Equation 5.20 for the
Abortion Twitter follower network.
Estimate
Std. error
t value
Pr(>|t|)
α0
6.783 × 100
2.045 × 10−1
3.316 × 101
2.100 × 10−50
α1
−1.486 × 101
2.503 × 100
−5.937 × 100
6.140 × 10−8
α2
4.136 × 101
9.472 × 100
4.367 × 100
3.538 × 10−5
α3
−6.149 × 101
1.389 × 101
−4.427 × 100
2.824 × 10−5
α4
3.333 × 101
6.910 × 100
4.823 × 100
6.137 × 10−6
Table A.9: Estimates of regression coeﬀicients for convergence time model in Equation 5.21 for the
Obamacare Twitter follower network.
==PAGE:97==
A.3 Opinion distribution at fixed points for the weighted median model
89
A.3
Opinion distribution at fixed points for the weighted median
model
A.3.1
The effect of self-appraisal on the opinion distribution at fix-points
In Figure A.1, Figure A.2, and Figure A.4 we show the state distributions at fixed points for the weighted
median model with self-appraisal on a two-dimensional grid network, a Watts-Strogatz network, and
the Georgetown Facebook-friendship network for a selection of levels of self-appraisal. The synthetic
networks each have 2500 nodes and the Georgetown network has 9388 nodes. From visual inspection,
we observe that the distributions of opinions at the fixed points are similar for the different levels of
self-appraisal.
uniform
skewed
unimodal
bimodal
trimodal
0.01
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.8
0.9
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
100
200
300
400
0
100
200
300
400
0
100
200
300
400
0
100
200
300
400
0
100
200
300
400
0
100
200
300
400
State
count
Figure A.1: Steady-state of weighted median model for a two-dimensional grid network for various
initial distributions and levels of self-appraisal. The panels are ordered such that columns
share initial distribution (distribution denoted in the top) and rows share level of self-
appraisal (level denoted to the right).
==PAGE:98==
A.3 Opinion distribution at fixed points for the weighted median model
90
uniform
skewed
unimodal
bimodal
trimodal
0.01
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.8
0.9
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
250
500
750
0
250
500
750
0
250
500
750
0
250
500
750
0
250
500
750
0
250
500
750
State
count
Figure A.2: Steady-state of weighted median model for various initial distributions and levels of self-
appraisal for a network generated by the Watts-Strogatz model. The panels are ordered
such that columns share initial distribution (distribution denoted in the top) and rows
share level of self-appraisal (level denoted to the right).
A.3.2
Visualization of dependency of node opinions on the opinions of their
neighboring nodes opinions
We compare the correlation each nodes opinion on their neighbors opinion in the limiting opinion
distribution of the weighted median model with self-appraisal. In Figure A.4, we show a two-dimensional
histogram of the opinion of all neighboring nodes u, v ∈V in the limiting opinion distribution for the
weighted median model with self-appraisal for the Barabási–Albert network and the two-dimensional
grid network discussed in subsection 5.5.2.
The opinions were initialized using the bimodal initial
opinion distribution. We see that the linear dependency is less pronounced for the Barabási–Albert
network than for the grid network. Based on visual inspection, we make the same conclusions for the
==PAGE:99==
A.3 Opinion distribution at fixed points for the weighted median model
91
uniform
skewed
unimodal
bimodal
trimodal
0.01
0.1
0.2
0.5
0.8
0.9
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.000.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0
2500
5000
7500
0
2500
5000
7500
0
2500
5000
7500
0
2500
5000
7500
0
2500
5000
7500
0
2500
5000
7500
State
count
Figure A.3: Steady-state of weighted median model for various initial distributions and levels of self-
appraisal for the Georgetown Facebook friendship network. The panels are ordered such
that columns share initial distribution (distribution denoted in the top) and rows share
level of self-appraisal (level denoted to the right).
other initializations. This accounts for the lower observed assortativity coeﬀicients observed for the
Barabási–Albert network than for the grid network.
A.3.3
Summary statistics for the limit opinion distribution
We give the assortativity coeﬀicient values and summary statistics for the opinion group size distribu-
tions that were not given in subsection 5.5.5.
==PAGE:100==
A.3 Opinion distribution at fixed points for the weighted median model
92
0.250
0.255
0.250
0.255
u
v
5000
10000
count
Barabási−Albert
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
u
v
50
100
150
200
count
Grid
Figure A.4: Two-dimensional histogram of the opinions of all neighboring nodes u, v ∈V in the limit-
ing opinion distribution for the weighted median model with self-appraisal. Opinions have
been initialized with the bimodal initial opinion distribution discussed in subsection 5.5.3.
Left panel is for a Barabási–Albert network and the right panel is for a two-dimensional
grid; each network has 2500 nodes.
Network
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Barabasi Albert
0.35
0.36
0.37
0.36
0.36
Cycle
0.59
0.58
0.60
0.59
0.60
Grid
0.65
0.64
0.65
0.65
0.65
Prism
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.84
0.83
Watts-Strogatz
0.74
0.75
0.75
0.74
0.75
Table A.10: Assortativity coeﬀicient of the limit opinion distributions of the weighted median model
with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for various initial opinion distributions for the synthetic
networks.
Network
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Bowdoin
0.51
0.25
0.58
0.38
0.16
Caltech
0.14
0.11
0.15
0.19
0.18
Georgetown
0.13
0.12
0.19
0.40
0.16
Table A.11: Assortativity coeﬀicient of the limit opinion distributions of the weighted median model
with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for various initial opinion distributions for the Facebook
friendship networks.
Opinion group stat
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Number of groups
783
779
785
800
792
Mean size
3.19
3.21
3.18
3.13
3.16
Size variance
2.49
2.48
2.44
1.91
2.44
Size kurtosis
55.15
45.03
46.74
26.59
52.92
Table A.12: Summary statistics for the size of opinion groups in the limit opinion distributions of
the weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for two-dimensional grid network.
The network has 2500 nodes.
==PAGE:101==
A.3 Opinion distribution at fixed points for the weighted median model
93
Opinion group stat
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Number of groups
925
946
941
917
919
Mean size
2.70
2.64
2.66
2.72
2.72
Size variance
0.98
0.97
1.00
1.08
1.05
Size kurtosis
2.12
2.43
2.78
3.29
2.39
Table A.13: Summary statistics for the size of opinion groups in the limit opinion distributions of the
weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for prism network. The network has
2500 nodes.
Opinion group stat
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Number of groups
90
210
58
266
78
Mean size
8.47
3.6285
13.14
2.86
9.77
Size variance
3685.45
29.05
5117.64
11.05
3612.15
Size kurtosis
1.19 × 109
3.15 × 104
1.44 × 109
2048.04
9.11 × 108
Table A.14: Summary statistics for the size of opinion groups in the limit opinion distributions of the
weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for the Caltech Facebook friendship
network.
Opinion group stat
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Number of groups
289
248
1417
332
1185
Mean size
7.7854
9.574
1.5878
6.7771
1.8987
Size variance
6684.79
7694.07
2.3467
1253.13
79.14
Size kurtosis
1.27 × 1010
1.29 × 1010
235.37
2.55 × 107
5.40 × 106
Table A.15: Summary statistics for the size of opinion groups in the limit opinion distributions of the
weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for the Bowdoin Facebook friendship
network.
Opinion group stat
Uniform
Skewed
Unimodal
Bimodal
Trimodal
Inferred
Number of groups
1123
1044
1007
1025
1077
937
Mean size
5.44
5.86
6.07
5.96
5.68
7.12
Size variance
5594.65
9837.41
1.09 × 105
1.26 × 104
9939.84
657.22
Size kurtosis
2.06 × 1010
8.40 × 1011
8.95 × 1010
1.44 × 1011
8.56 × 1010
6.08 × 107
Table A.16: Summary statistics for the size of opinion groups in the limit opinion distributions of
the weighted median model with self-appraisal s = 0.7 for the abortion Twitter follower
network.
==PAGE:102==
A.4 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal on a two-regular network
94
A.4
Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model
with self-appraisal on a two-regular network
We find the analytic solution of the mean-field approximation for a two-regular network with uniform
state initialization. We find that the solution is piecewise linear and that the partitioning of the domain
is dependent on the self-appraisal s. Interestingly, the solution is symmetric in s around s = 0.5. That
is, the solution of the mean-field equations for two-regular networks with uniform initialization have
the same solution at at time t = 1 for s as for 1 −s.
Proposition 8. If k = 2 is the only degree class and if P2(x, 0) is a uniform density function for
x ∈[0, 1], then
P2(x, 1) =











1
s ,
1 −s ≤x < s
x
s(s−1) ,
x < 1 −s and x < s
1−x
s(1−s) ,
1 −s ≤x and s ≤x
1
1−s ,
s < x ≤1 −s
.
(A.2)
Proof. We start by deriving ϕ(x, 0) from Equation 6.29. Because k = 2 is the only degree class, we see
that q2 = 1 and we find that
ϕ(x, t) = P2(x, t) , for all t ∈N .
(A.3)
Notably, we see that ϕ(x, 0) = P2(x, 0).
From Equation 6.29, we see that because k = 2 is even, we need to evaluate p2(0).
From the
definition of pk(t) we then see
pk(0) =
k!
(m −1)!(m −1)!
Z
c∈R
P2(c, 0)
Z
z≤c
ϕ(z, 0) (Φ(z, t))m−1
Z
y∈[z,−z+2c[
ϕ(y, 0) (1 −Φ(y, 0))m−1 dy dz dc
= 2
Z
c∈[0,1]
P2(c, 0)
Z
z≤c
ϕ(z, 0)
Z
y∈[z,−z+2c[
ϕ(y, 0) dy dz dc ,
(A.4)
where m = 1
2k = 1. We evaluate the integrals one at a time, starting with the innermost integral
Z
y∈[z,−z+2c[
ϕ(y, 0) dy .
(A.5)
From the limits in the integral in Equation A.4 we know that 0 ≤c ≤z. For the remainder of this
calculation we therefore assume 0 ≤c ≤z. We cannot tell whether −z + 2c is larger than 1. There are
therefore two possible cases for the integral in Equation A.5.
Z
y∈[z,−z+2c[
ϕ(y, 0) dy =



R
y∈[z,−z+2c[ ϕ(y, 0) dy ,
−z + 2c < 1
R
y∈[z,1[ ϕ(y, 0) dy ,
−z + 2c ≥1
.
Using Equation A.3 we see that
Z
y∈[z,−z+2c[
ϕ(y, 0) dy = 2(c −z) ,
for −z + 2c < 1 which we note is equivalent to z > 2c −1. We also find that
Z
y∈[z,1[
ϕ(y, 0) dy = 1 −z .
==PAGE:103==
A.4 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal on a two-regular network
95
Therefore, we know that
Z
y∈[z,−z+2c[
ϕ(y, 0) dy =



2(c −z) ,
−z + 2c < 1
1 −z ,
−z + 2c ≥1
.
We now evaluate the second integral. Using the result for the innermost integral, we see that
Z
z≤c
ϕ(z, 0)
Z
y∈[z,−z+2c[
ϕ(y, 0) dy dz =
Z
0≤z≤c
−z+2c<1
2(c −z) dz +
Z
0≤z≤c
−z+2c≥1
1 −z dz .
For c < 1
2 we see that
Z
0≤z≤c
−z+2c≥1
1 −z dz = 0 ,
because we integrate over the empty set. Therefore, there are two possible cases for the integral
Z
z≤c
ϕ(z, 0)
Z
y∈[z,−z+2c[
ϕ(y, 0) dy dz =





R
0≤z≤c
−z+2c<1
2(c −z) dz +
R
0≤z≤c
−z+2c≥1
1 −z dz ,
c ≥1
2
R
0≤z≤c 2(c −z) dz,
c < 1
2
.
The case c ≥1
2, evaluates to
Z
0≤z≤c
−z+2c<1
2(c −z) dz +
Z
0≤z≤c
−z+2c≥1
1 −z dz =

z −1
2z2
2c−1
z=0
+

2cz −z2c
z=2c−1
= 1
2 −(1 −c)2 .
The case c < 1
2 evaluates to
Z
0≤z≤c
2(c −z) dz =

2cz −z2c
z=0
= c2 .
We now evaluate the final integral
Z
c∈[0,1]
P2(c, 0)
Z
z≤c
ϕ(z, 0)
Z
y∈[z,−z+2c[
ϕ(y, 0) dy dz dc
=
Z
c∈[0, 1
2]
c2 dc +
Z
c∈[ 1
2 ,b]
1
2 −(1 −c)2 dc
=
1
3c3
 1
2
c=0
+
2 −2c3 −3c + 6c2
6
1
c= 1
2
= 1
4 .
Returning to Equation A.4, we see that
p2(0) = 2
Z
c∈[0,1]
P2(c, 0)
Z
z≤c
ϕ(z, 0)
Z
y∈[z,−z+2c[
ϕ(y, 0) dy dz dc = 1
2 .
(A.6)
We derive θ2(x, 0). Using Equation A.6 and the definition of θ2, we see that
θ2(x, 0) =
k!
(m −1)!m!ϕ(x, 0) (Φ(x, 0)(1 −Φ(x, 0))m−1 ((1 −p2(0))(1 −Φ(x, 0) + p2(0)Φ(x, 0))
(A.7)
= 2ϕ(x, 0)
1
2(1 −Φ(x, 0) + 1
2Φ(x, 0)

(A.8)
= ϕ(x, 0) ,
(A.9)
==PAGE:104==
A.4 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal on a two-regular network
96
where m = 1. From Equation A.3, we can conclude that
θ2(x, 0) = P2(x, 0) .
(A.10)
We can now evaluate P2(x, 1). We see that
P2(x, 1) = 1
s
Z
y∈[0,1]
θ2
x + (s −1)y
s
, 0

P2(y, 0) dy
(A.11)
= 1
s
Z
y∈[0,1]
1
s (x+(s−1)y)∈[0,1]
1 dy .
(A.12)
We see that for 1
s(x + (s −1)y) ∈[0, 1] to be true, we need that
x −s
1 −s ≤y ≤
x
1 −s .
(A.13)
Now, explore how the domains y ∈[0, 1] and 1
s(x + (s −1)y) ∈[0, 1] overlap depending on the value
of s. We see that
max

a, x −s
1 −s

=
(
x−s
1−s ,
s ≤x
a ,
x < s
,
(A.14)
and that
min

b,
x
1 −s

=
(
b ,
1 −s ≤x
1 −s < x
.
(A.15)
We therefore see that there are the four possible scenarios for the integral in Equation A.11
P2(x, 1) =











1
s ,
1 −s ≤x < s
x
s(1−s)) ,
x < 1 −s , x < s
1−x
s(s−1) ,
1 −s ≤x , s ≤x
1
1−s ,
s ≤x < 1 −s
,
(A.16)
which finishes the proof.
A.4.1
Root-mean-square error of mean-field approximation
In Figure A.5, we show the dependency of the RMSE of the mean-field approximation on the Bowdoin
Facebook friendship network using a finer grid of self-appraisal levels than was used in section 6.3. We
observe that for s = 0.1, the RMSE initially increases a lot, but from t = 2 and onward, the RMSE
only increases very slowly. For s = 0.3, we see that the RMSE increases at a steady rate. From the
intermediate levels of self-appraisal s, we see that the transition between these two observed behaviors
appears smooth. We make the same conclusions for the other real-world social networks after perfoming
a similar visual analysis.
A.4.2
Effect of lumping on RMSE of mean-field approximation
We perform a visual inspection on the effect of lumping all high-degree classes in the mean-field ap-
proximation on the RMSE. We define the lumping degree as the largest permitted degree among all
degree classes; all degree classes with degree above the lumping degree are lumped into the same class.
In Figure A.6, we show the RMSE at time t = 1 and t = 4 for different lumping degrees and levels of
self-appraisal. We see that the behavior of the RMSE is dependent on the level of self-appraisal level s.
==PAGE:105==
A.4 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal on a two-regular network
97
−1.6
−1.4
−1.2
−1.0
−0.8
−0.6
0
1
2
3
4
5
t
ln(RMSE)
Self−appraisal
0.1
0.11
0.12
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.16
0.17
0.18
0.19
0.2
0.21
0.22
0.23
0.24
0.25
0.26
0.27
0.28
0.29
0.3
Figure A.5: Root mean square error of mean-field approximation on Bowdoin Facebook friendship
network.
−2
−1
0
0
250
500
750
1000
Lumping degree
ln(RMSE)
t = 1
0
2
4
0
250
500
750
1000
Lumping degree
ln(RMSE)
t = 4
Self−appraisal
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
Figure A.6: Root-mean-square error of mean-field approximation on Georgetown Facebook friendship
network at times t = 1 and t = 4 for various levels of lumping.
At time t = 4, for s = 0.1, we see that the RMSE error initially decreases with the lumping degree. For
larger values of s, however, it increases.
In Figure A.7, we show the RMSE at time t = 1 and t = 4 for different lumping degrees where we
restict the levels of self-appraisal to the interval s ∈[0.1, 0.3]. We see that the transition between the
observed behaviors at t = 4 seems smooth.
==PAGE:106==
A.4 Mean-field approximation for the weighted median model with self-appraisal on a two-regular network
98
−2.00
−1.75
−1.50
−1.25
−1.00
0
25
50
75
100
Lumping degree
ln(RMSE)
t = 1
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
0
25
50
75
100
Lumping degree
ln(RMSE)
t = 4
Figure A.7: Root-mean-square error of mean-field approximation on the Georgetown Facebook friend-
ship network at times t = 1 and t = 4 for various levels of lumping and levels of self-
appraisal.
==PAGE:107==
==PAGE:108==
