==PAGE:1==
Multi­task classification of trip mode and pur­
pose:
Leveraging transfer­learning and ar­
tificial neural networks on noisy and class­
imbalanced GPS trajectories
Master Thesis
DTU Management
Department of Management
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning
and artificial neural networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
Master Thesis
July, 2021
By
Aijie Shu
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Management, Akademivej Building 358, 2800 Kgs.
Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for about Five and half months at Transport Division, De­
partment of Management, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfill­
ment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of statistics.
Aijie Shu ­ s182190
Signature
Date
ii
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Travel mode and travel purpose are two fundamental characteristics to understand the
user’s travel pattern in the transportation system. In recent years, smartphone­based
Global Positioning System(GPS) generated trajectories have been widely used in travel
mode and trip purpose identification. However, most previous studies classify mode or
purpose separately, leaving the similarity between two tasks overlooked and the corre­
sponding benefits underexposed. One of the reasons could be, if we classify mode and
purpose simultaneously, datasets available to use are too noisy, highly class­imbalanced,
and usually limited to specific geospatial contexts. Therefore, leveraging datasets from
other sources to lower the barrier of the existing case can be an exciting exploration. To
gain more insight into that, we propose a multi­task deep learning model to classify mode
and purpose simultaneously on the GPS trajectories collected during smartphone­based
travel surveys. The performance of the model is compared with the separate classification
model under different measurement metrics. We conduct the same data preprocessing
process for all the models and obtain optimal hyperparameter configurations from the auto
hyperparameter search framework to make the comparison controllable. Furthermore, we
apply the multi­task model to another GPS dataset and transfer the learned knowledge to
our dataset to measure how much we can remedy the weakness of our dataset. The re­
sults imply that the multi­task mode and purpose classification approach can significantly
enhance computation speed and stability for the small­sized class­imbalanced dataset but
requires a dedicated choice of tasks or architecture design to achieve significant perfor­
mance improvement. Meanwhile, the transferred knowledge from other domains shows
the potential to alleviate the demand for data on the target domain but suggests further
attention to the discrepancy between data from different domains.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
My deepest gratitude goes first and foremost to my mentor, Valentino Servizi. Without his
patient guidance, I could never complete this project during a hard time of the pandemic.
He is a polite and warm­heart man. He is always an honest friend and ready to share
ideas, advice, and feelings beyond the academic area. Secondly, I would like to thank
Prof. Filipe Rodrigues for his time to check my progress and the necessary guidance
giving to me to achieve a better outcome. In the meantime, I am also thankful to all DTU
teachers, including Dr. Stefan Eriksen Mabit and Dr. Mikkel Thorhauge. They take care
of my study goal all through these semesters. They let me feel the warmth of home. I
am also thankful to my previous workmate Chen Cheng and supervisor Tan Voon Soong.
Without their inspiration and recommendation, I would never have come to this beautiful
university. Finally, My most enormous appreciation goes to my parents. All these things
become impossible without their support.
iv
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Travel Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
GPS data preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Data Source
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
travel mode detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Trip purpose imputation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Deep learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.7
Multi­task learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.8
Transfer learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.9
Performance evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Data
13
3.1
MMM dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Geolife . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4
Methods and Tools
18
4.1
Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.2
Bi­directional Recurrent Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.3
Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.4
Multi­task Architecure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.5
Transfer Knowledge from Geolife Domain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.6
Classifier evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.7
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.8
Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
5
Models
24
5.1
Single Task Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.2
Multi­task Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3
Mutli­task with Pretrained Parameter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
6
Experiments and Results
27
6.1
Experiments Settings
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
6.2
SMC, SPC and MMPC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
6.3
Mult­task Model vs. Pretrained Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
7
Discussion
35
8
Conclusion
37
Bibliography
39
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Travel mode and travel purpose are two promising features that contribute most to the
understanding of travel behavior, which is essential for developing intelligent transporta­
tion systems and personalized recommendation system. Traditional studies utilize travel
surveys to collect travel modes and purpose information, including socio­economic char­
acteristics, travel time, travel costs, and other factors that affect travelers’ personal pref­
erences. However, interviewing travelers is time­consuming and expensive due to low
response rates and high human and time costs. The development of ubiquitous location­
acquisition technologies, e.g., GPS combined with popularized cellphones, enables col­
lecting continuous and dense location and timestamp trajectories across days in a world­
wide geographic scope. Therefore, utilizing smartphones generated GPS data to detect
travel modes and trip purposes has brought much research interest.
Travel mode detection and trip purpose imputation on smartphone­based GPS trajecto­
ries shares a majority of similarity but differ to some extent. Since GPS trajectories do
not explicitly provide features about purpose or mode, data preprocessing is mandatory
in most cases. Those preprocessing stages are almost identical according to existing
literature[need literature support]. Meanwhile, they also highly correlate with some un­
derlying characteristics, e.g., stop or motion status, time of the day Servizi, Petersen, et
al. 2020. The primary difference is the additional requirement of geographic context infor­
mation for trip purpose prediction, e.g., land use or points of interest (POI) data (Oliveira
et al. 2014). Acquisition of these supplement data requires considerable human effort
and time. Moreover, the level of detail while categorizing trip purpose varies significantly
from very general (e.g., indoor vs. outdoor) to very specific (e.g., medical, socialize, and
exercise)Ermagun et al. 2017, which makes the classification extremely tricky. There­
fore, these barriers prevent researchers from investigating mode detection and purpose
classification problems jointly deeply.
However, the computation and energy resource on a mobile platform is usually limited.
The shared preprocessing process can distinctly reduce computation costs on these de­
vices and make practical applications possible, e.g., real­time travel mode and purpose
prediction. In addition, revealing and leveraging the shared characteristics between mode
and purpose could also benefit the understanding and generalization of the classification
strategy.
The multi­task learning approach has been used successfully across many applications of
machine learning because of the ability to generalize better on the original task by sharing
representations between related tasks (Ruder 2017).
Previous studies on the multi­task approach of mode and purpose identification usually
apply a rule­based algorithm or dedicated machine learning algorithms. One common
concern on the rule­based algorithm is to what extent the rules can be generalized across
different cases due to the change of context information. Besides, the model complexity
increases fast and becomes sensitive when new rules are included due to the dimen­
sionality. As an alternative, machine learning algorithms are believed to perform better
in handling such complex problems. However, many of the proposed machine learning
models still require hand­crafted features (e.g., travel speed, acceleration, jerk, and head­
ing change rate) (Zheng et al. 2008). Since in real circumstances, travel modes often act
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
1
==PAGE:10==
similarly, for example, car mode and bus mode characteristics in a traffic jam are nearly
identical.
Moreover, the travel purpose can be distinctly different even the trip ends in the same
geographic area. In this situation, if we expect to differentiate all modes and purposes,
the challenge of formulating appropriate and concise features could be insurmountable.
One way to overcome the problem mentioned above is to exploit deep learning algorithms
that can extract multiple levels of data representations automatically and handle non­linear
correlations effectively (Dabiri and Heaslip 2018).
The combination of multi­task learning and deep learning techniques also inherit the sub­
stantial requirement of data. To mitigate this weakness, a popular method is to use semi­
supervised machine learning techniques which utilize both labeled data and unlabelled
data (Song, Markos, and Yu 2020). However, the limitation is that semi­supervised meth­
ods are ineffective while unlabelled data are also not sufficient or expensive to collect.
In this situation, transfer learning which can transfer the knowledge from existing similar
datasets to our target domain of interest, becomes an attractive approach Weiss, Khosh­
goftaar, and D. D. Wang 2016.
With the dedicated techniques applied in the multi­task deep learning models, a new chal­
lenge on model performance evaluation is revealed, which is how to find optimal hyper­
parameters of each network structure, e.g., the configuration of the optimizer, learning
rate, batch size, training epochs (Servizi, Pereira, et al. 2019). The traditional manually
parameter tuning process is often time­consuming and ineffective (X. Jiang et al. 2017)
and (Dabiri and Heaslip 2018). Therefore, an auto hyperparameter optimization frame­
work is introduced to reduce the negative effects of non­optimal hyperparameter settings
(Thornton et al. 2013).
This project aims to better identify the travel mode and purpose from a realistic smartphone­
based prompted­recall travel survey in cold start conditions, which means at the beginning
of a switch between traditional and smartphone­based travel surveying processes. The
main questions that we will address are:
1) How does the travel mode interact with
trip purpose under multi­task learning architecture? In particular, will the shared char­
acteristics of each task contribute to the classification improvement or mutually restrain
with each other?
2) How does the class imbalance in the dataset affect classification
performance, and what methods can be applied to compensate? How do the multi­task
learning techniques ease or intensify the problem of class imbalance?
3) how datasets
from different geographic contexts contribute to the classification if the domain data are
small­sized.
The key contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
1) Developed an expandable multi­task model to leverage both labeled GPS trajec­
tories and GIS information for predicting transportation modes and purposes simultane­
ously. The multi­mode and purpose classification model(MMPC) contains a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) classifier and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) classifier handling
GPS and GIS input, respectively.
2) Conducting a set of experiments for performance evaluation and comparison among
single­mode classification (SMC), single­purpose classification (SPC) as well as the MMPC
on a highly class­imbalanced dataset.
3) Developing a novel transfer learning model to leverage additional GPS trajectories
from the widely recognized Geolife Dataset. The MMPC model is first pre­trained (Pre­
2
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:11==
MMPC) on the Geolife dataset, mainly containing the personal GPS trajectory in Beijing,
China. Secondly, we keep the pre­trained parameter and continue training on the different
percentages of the MMM dataset. The result shows that the positive impact from the pre­
trained parameter is not assured and needs to be assessed corresponding to the context.
We organize the rest of the paper as follows: In Section2, we refer to some literature
about the different methods of handling GPS/GIS information to do mode detection and
purpose identification. In section3, we describe the used datasets, methods, and related
processing tools. In Section 4, we detail the structure of the models. In Section 5, we
explained experiment settings, measurement metrics, and results. Finally, the results are
discussed in Section 6 and concluded in Section 7.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature Review
Travel behavior has been studied for decades to guide the development and management
of the transportation system. Despite the dissimilarity in the mobility zone covered by
individuals, there is high regularity in the human mobility behaviors, suggesting that most
individuals follow a simple and reproducible pattern Lin and Hsu 2014. Understanding the
travel pattern enables transportation planners and policymakers to measure the current
demand and performance of the transportation infrastructure to prepare for future growth
(Gonzalez et al. 2010).
2.1
Travel Survey
Since the 1950s, travel surveys are the primary process to collect data necessary to un­
derstand the travel pattern. It aims to collect data that can represent the travel behavior
of the population of a living area as accurately as possible. Travel surveys undertake as
face­to­face home interviews in the early years. The interviewers visit households to get
individuals’ demographic information and ask them to recall their travel activities daily or
across days. After that, the researcher reports them as a travel diary through paper forms
(P. Stopher, FitzGerald, and J. Zhang 2008a, Bohte and Maat 2009). After that, home
interviews have been gradually replaced by other types of surveys, such as type ques­
tionnaires sent by mail, by personal delivery/pick up or telephone only surveys. The main
reasons for development in travel survey methods have been issues with response rates,
data quality, and the costs of running the survey. For example, the data collected from
unannounced home interviews often show omission and misstatement as interviewees
did not recall their journeys accurately. In some areas, the telephone survey replaced
the mail­out/mail­back option because the response rate was higher and cost remained
relevantly low (Inbakaran and Kroen 2014). However, these methods put a significant
burden on participants mainly because it requires strong memory, judgment, the high
implementation costs to report the travel process and have a substantial impact on the
quality of collected data, e.g., up to 35% of under­reporting rate (Auld et al. 2009;Bohte
and Maat 2009). This drawback is especially non­neglected in intelligent mobility in the
smart city, which involves both environmental and economic aspects. It needs both high
technologies and travel services to create a better quality of travel experience for citizens
(Benevolo, Dameri, and D’Auria 2016).
The rapid development of new technology­mediated surveying techniques, especially
GPS­assisted methods, supplement the researcher’s demand to capture more details
of individuals’ travel behavior with less reliance on participants’ subjective consciousness
(Gonzalez et al. 2010; P. Stopher, FitzGerald, and J. Zhang 2008a). In this method, each
GPS device is handheld by each participant and continuously records the participants’
travel activities. At the end of each travel day, the collected data were labeled by the
participants with identified travel mode, purpose, duration, time of the day, etc., through a
web­based questionnaire. Then, researchers can extract dense (e.g., every 5 seconds)
information of travel times, distances, routes as well as vehicle operating characteris­
tics through the logs of GPS devices which is difficult to obtain from recall. In addition,
data collection through GPS devices does not require participants to fill out travel diaries
too frequently. Therefore, tracking of travel behavior can be more easily ran across days.
However, pure GPS logging suffers from some financial and human resources limitations.
The research agencies must purchase and distribute the GPS devices, which involves a
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
5
==PAGE:14==
significant investment. Participants are required to carry/recharge during their daily trav­
els and report travel details through a separate medium, i.e., web application (Safi et al.
2017). Examples show respondents did not carry the device all the time because it was
bulky and needed to be recharged frequently (Swann and P. Stopher 2008).
Since smartphones with GPS modules have reached an enormous market penetration
rate in a large number of countries and have a high frequency of usage in people’s daily
routine, a Smartphone­based travel survey becomes an essential supplement to tradi­
tional travel surveys. In this method, a smartphone application is installed on the smart­
phone of each participant. This application runs automatically in the background to record
the timestamp, position, environment characteristics of the participants, usually in 10­s in­
tervals considering battery saving. After that, the participants were requested to label the
collected data the same as that for pure GPS logging devices. Smartphones contain a
GPS module and a combination of sensors, e.g., GSM, Bluetooth, WiFi, accelerometers,
and magnetometer. These sensors expand pure positioning data and enable the capa­
bility to infer complex travel behavior from it.
Recently, an advanced travel logging application for smartphones are introduced, which is
known as a necessary part of the smartphone­based prompted­recall travel survey (Zhao
et al. 2015). The application integrates a series of algorithms that can detect participants’
significant movements and automatically start or stop trip recording based on the detection
results. It assists the participants in recalling their trip attributes (e.g., travel mode, travel
purpose, start time, finish time, total distance) by speculation and visualization. Therefore,
participants are only necessary to correct the mislabelled recordings instead of indepen­
dently labeling on their own. Literature shows that the smartphone­based prompted­call
travel survey had the highest ratio of reported to requested travel­days compared to pre­
vious methods since it reduced the burden of data collection on participants and providing
a better experience for them (Safi et al. 2017).
However, signal loss and noise are two main problems that affect the accuracy of GPS­
aided travel data, especially on smartphones (H. Gong et al. 2012). There are multiple
reasons cause these issues, for example, the cold start, which means the first time loading
of the GPS module every day, and hot start, which means the GPS module switch from
”sleep mode” to ”working mode” after the user idle for some hours Peter R Stopher, Q.
Jiang, FitzGerald, et al. 2005. Another reason could be the loss of satellite signals by
obstructions from buildings, tunnels, and trees, etc. (Shen and Peter R. Stopher 2014).
2.2
GPS data preparation
Travel behavior and pattern is mainly described and measured as travel mode, trip pur­
pose, origin, destination, frequency, departure/arrival time, duration, distance, trip se­
quences or complex trip­chains,and so forth (Jackson and Jucker 1982;McGuckin and
Murakami 1999; Noland 2002; Murray­Tuite and Mahmassani 2003;Scott and He 2012;
He 2013a;He 2013b;He and Hu 2015; He and Giuliano 2017). Among the several fea­
tures, the travel mode and the trip purpose specifically contribute to its better understand­
ing of travel behavior and patterns since people often commence a trip with a specific
purpose and involve various modes of transportation in their life and work. Therefore,
travel mode detection and trip purpose imputation have been continuously followed by
researchers.
GPS logs are not able to record purpose or mode information directly as the traditional
survey. Prediction based on raw GPS trajectories is not efficient. Therefore, we need a
data­processing procedure for the GPS trajectories to derive sufficient travel mode and
6
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:15==
purpose modeling information. The essential elements of a GPS point include informa­
tion about the date, time, latitude, longitude, altitude, speed, NSAT, HDOP. The number of
satellites that confirm the location of that GPS record is called NSAT. The horizontal dilu­
tion of precision, which reflects how the satellites are arranged at the time of the record, is
called HDOP (Wolf, Guensler, and Bachman 2001; P. Stopher, FitzGerald, and J. Zhang
2008b; H. Gong et al. 2012).
Trip identification and segment identification is the first challenge in GPS data preparation.
In this master thesis, some important concepts are defined as follows:
Tour
Tour is a round trip contains the complete process in which traveler commence from one
place and back to the same place. For example, a home­based tour is a tour from home
back to home.
Trip
A trip is a one­way journey that travelers start from one place and end at the destination.
For example, a work­intent trip usually starts from home and complete when reaching the
office.
Segment
A segment is a one­mode subsection of a trip. In each segment, only one type of travel
mode is used. For example, a commuter that starts from home, walks to the bus station,
takes the bus, gets off the bus, and walks to the office would contain three segments that
assign to two walk segments and one bus segment.
Dwell Time
Dwell time is defined as the duration a vehicle spends at a scheduled stop without moving
in the transportation research thesaurus.
Wolf (2000) assumed that the dwell time between activities is one of the main criteria
for segment identification. She suggested that 120 seconds of dwell time would be a
reasonable time considering the traffic signal cycle. This rule has been widely accepted
but lacks empirical and theoretical research to support it (Shen and Peter R. Stopher
2014). Shen and Peter R Stopher 2013 tested different thresholds of dwell time from
15 seconds to 120 seconds and suggest 60 seconds as the better option of dwell time
criteria. The accuracy of mode and purpose classification depends significantly on the
correctness of segment identification. Unfortunately, the noise and signal loss of GPS
trajectories can results in many issues (e.g., spurious trips, missing trips, etc.)
2.3
Data Source
Achieving high accuracy on purpose imputation is not realistic from the information pro­
vided by the GPS device except that adequate GIS databases are provided. P. Stopher,
FitzGerald, and J. Zhang 2008a listed the primary items required in addition to the GPS
data to identify mode and purpose accurately:
1) GIS of the street network (motor vs. non­motor),
2) GIS of all public transport routes, stops, stations including, rail and subway lines (Bus
vs. Train or Light Rail vs. Car),
3) Addresses of the workplace, education, shopping mall, grocery store, restaurants,
entertainment infrastructure, etc.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
7
==PAGE:16==
Researchers also explored how the time of day can affect human travel behavior. A study
conducted by M. Wang 2014 showed that human travel patterns, measured by entropy,
were involved with the time­of­day mainly indicated that people preferred to revisit previ­
ous places in the morning and evening while exploring more locations in the afternoon.
As the time of the day feature can be easily extracted from GPS logs, it can be helpful to
support the travel mode and purpose identification (Servizi, Pereira, et al. 2019).
2.4
travel mode detection
Mobile phone­based GPS data enables a wide range of travel modes detection. Reddy
et al. 2010 identified five transportation modes, including stationary, walking, running,
biking, and motorized modes from GPS and accelerometer sensor built­in smartphones;
Widhalm et al. (2012) classify eight different travel modes, including bus, car, bike, tram,
train, subway, walk, and motorcycle; Nitsche et al. (2014) distinguished up to nine modes,
including walk, bicycle, motor, car, bus, electric tramway, metro, train, and wait. Typically,
travel modes are differentiated based on estimated moving speeds with the supplement
of other features.
2.5
Trip purpose imputation
Unlike mode detection, trip purpose or activity detection has not been heavily explored
in research. Montini et al. 2014 trained random forests techniques based on GPS and
accelerometer data collected in Switzerland from 156 participants. The proportion of cor­
rect predictions was between 80% and 85%. In Ermagun et al. 2017, the researcher uses
Gooogle Place API together with a limited set of trip completion data to build a real­time
purpose prediction model. They apply nested logit and random forest to identify five trip
purposes, i.e., eat out, education, personal business, shopping, and social community
activity, excluding home, work, and drop­off/pick­up categories. The nested logit model
and random forest model achieve an overall accuracy rate of 57.69% and 64.17%, re­
spectively. Xiao, Juan, and C. Zhang 2016 developed an artificial neural network com­
bined with a particle swarm optimization framework to detect trip purposes from the GPS
data. They conduct a smartphone­based travel survey in Shanghai City by using a smart­
phone app. The surveyor­intervened prompt recall automatically validates the collected
trip characteristics. The accuracy of trip purpose detection is compared under four dif­
ferent scenarios corresponding to land­use type coding and two methods for selecting
training datasets. It achieves the accuracy of 97.22% on the training dataset and 96.53%
on the test dataset.
2.6
Deep learning
Since the complexity of actual traffic conditions, a small number of features cannot dis­
tinguish between various transportation modes. Therefore, many proposed mode detec­
tion models with phone­based GPS trajectories utilize a pool of hand­crafted attributes.
Xiao, Juan, and C. Zhang 2015 applied a Bayesian Network model on a smartphone­
based travel survey dataset conducted in Shanghai city. Six features, i.e., average speed,
95% percentile speed, Average absolute acceleration, Travel distance, Average heading
change, and Low­speed­rate are manually selected. The F1 score achieves 92.74% on
five modes, i.e., walk, bike, electric bike, car, and bus. Mäenpää, Lobov, and Martinez
Lastra 2017 implemented several different algorithms, i.e., Bayesian Classifier, Neural
Network, Random Forest, and Auto Encoder, on the compound dataset. Twelve features
are extracted to feed the model, i.e., the average/maximum/minimum/variance, skew­
ness, and kurtosis of the speed/acceleration. It achieves a 90.7% F1 score on four modes
8
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:17==
which are walk, bike, bus, and car. However, if many features are generated, the chal­
lenge of the dimensionality reduction process exposes. One way to overcome the issue
is to apply deep learning algorithms that have the advantage of extracting multiple levels
of features without any human interference automatically. Dabiri and Heaslip 2018 build
a convolutional neural network with only four features, i.e., speed, acceleration, jerk, and
bearing rate. The feature is generated from the Geolife dataset and feed to the neural
network to classify five modes, i.e., walk, bike, bus, car, and rail. It achieves 84.8% on
the F1 score. It shows the superiority of deep learning techniques on the high dimensional
auto feature extraction ability.
2.7
Multi­task learning
Using deep learning techniques to do mode detection or purpose imputation based on
GPS trajectory has attracted many researchers’ attention, and they have been deeply
investigated in isolation. However, Travel mode and travel purpose usually happen at the
same time, and a single preprocessing process on one dataset can benefit both mode
detection and purpose identification. The computational cost saved can make inference
easier on limited resource platforms. Specifically, by training two different tasks together,
the sharing representations between related jobs can enable our model to generalize
better on both tasks. This idea leads us to the approach of Multi­Task Learning (MTL).
Multi­task learning has been explored in many applications, especially for robotics and
autonomous vehicles, where there are high demands on solving multiple tasks simultane­
ously but still keep fast computation at training and inference time. In multi­task learning,
solving tasks jointly rather than independently has benefits on reducing inference time and
can improve prediction accuracy. Unfortunately, a phenomenon called negative transfer,
which means a newly added task could drop the model’s performance, is often observed
in multi­task prediction. Research reveals this may be because different tasks can be
learned at different rates, and some jobs can unexpectedly dominate others. Further­
more, the summed losses of all tasks may make the optimization more difficult because
of the interference in the gradient updating process. In other words, the gain of perfor­
mance seems to rely on the relationship between the jointly trained tasks (Standley et al.
2019).
The Deep Multitask learning algorithm is the multi­task learning technique applied to the
deep neural network architecture. It is mainly clustered into two categories, hard param­
eter sharing, and soft parameter sharing. Complex parameter sharing refers to all tasks
that share most of the parameters in the network. Soft parameter sharing refers to a
large part of the network parameter are unshared but are tied together either by infor­
mation sharing or requiring parameters to be similar. Hard parameter sharing has the
advantage of reducing the computational cost of training but may experience rapid per­
formance degradation as more tasks participate. Soft parameter sharing allows tasks to
peek at the other task’s information, reducing task interference and showing less sensi­
tivity to the unbalanced loss weights. However, soft parameter sharing cannot achieve
much inference­time speedup and training­time reduction, which is one of the primary
goals of our research. Therefore, we use the hard parameter sharing approach in our
classification model (Ruder 2017).
The performance of multi­task learning strongly relies on the relative weighting between
each task’s loss. Manually weights tuning is a sophisticated and expensive process that
restricts multi­task learning in practice. A large part of the works aims to adjust each task’s
weight on loss during training dynamically. Sener and Koltun 2018 proposed a method to
find the Pareto optimal weight of task loss by explicitly cast multi­task learning as multi­
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
9
==PAGE:18==
objective optimization. Chen et al. 2018 presented a gradient normalization (GradNorm)
algorithm that automatically balances training in deep multi­task models by dynamically
tuning gradient magnitudes. Kendall, Gal, and Cipolla 2018 proposed a principled ap­
proach to weighing multiple loss functions by considering the homoscedastic uncertainty
of each task. T. Gong et al. 2019 thoroughly tested several weighting strategies, including
simply adding task­specific cost functions together, dynamic weight average (DWA), and
uncertainty weighting methods, each with varying amounts of training data per task. They
find that a multi­task approach to user­defined tasks is not guaranteed to have better per­
formance than single­task learning regardless of weight balancing strategies, indicating a
careful selection of tasks rather than weighting strategies.
2.8
Transfer learning
Data dependency is one of the most severe problems in deep learning. Deep learning
relies on large amounts of training data to understand the underlying pattern compared
to traditional machine learning methods. The required data is usually proportional to the
scale of the model. Therefore, data insufficiency appears to be even worse after intro­
ducing multi­task learning techniques with deep neural networks.
In our current research domain, collecting the high­quality, large­scale dataset is often
complex and expensive. However, there are many similar datasets from other related
fields, for example, smartphone­generated GPS trajectories from different geographic ar­
eas like Beijing and New York. Nonetheless, for either machine learning or deep learning
model, the training dataset must be independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) as the
test set. This hypothesis does not pertain to the data from different sources. Therefore,
a technique must be applied to transfer the knowledge from source domain data to our
target domain. This technique is called transfer learning. In transfer learning, the training
data and test data are not required to be i.i.d., It is not necessary to train the model from
scratch, which has the advantage of reducing the demand of training data and training
time in the target domain (Tan et al. 2018).
Deep transfer learning, which means transfer learning with deep neural network architec­
ture, is similar to deep multi­task learning. Instead of promoting the performance of each
of the target tasks at the same priority when using multi­task learning, transfer learning
adapts to our target tasks without seeking benefits for source tasks. It is widely applied
in the field of image classification and natural language processing where training data
is insufficient (Yosinski et al. 2014, Devlin et al. 2018). However, transfer learning is not
guaranteed to bring performance improvement. Similar to multi­task learning, transfer
learning can also suffer from negative transferring of knowledge. For example, people
who have learned Spanish may experience more difficulties in learning French due to
the interference of word formation, usage, pronunciation, and conjugation (Zhuang et al.
2021).
Semi­supervised learning is another method to relax the reliance on labeled data and
mitigate insufficient data. The difference with transfer learning is that, in semi­supervised
learning, we take advantage of massive unlabelled data which haven’t been labeled but
comes from the same context as the labeled data. Many transfer learning methods also
incorporate techniques from semi­supervised learning. Unfortunately, in our case, the
unlabeled data is also limited at this early stage of the project, which imposes the ac­
quirement of semi­supervised learning techniques not compatible.
10
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:19==
2.9
Performance evaluation
Models and algorithms in GPS­based travel pattern recognition are usually corresponding
to the context of a specific GPS dataset. These lead to variation in transportation mode
and purpose, basic features, reported measurement metrics, and hyperparameter select­
ing schemes. Therefore, performance evaluation would be challenging, especially for
the multi­task learning approach and transfer learning across the dataset. In this project,
we use an automatic hyper­parameter search scheme to find the best combination of
hyper­parameters. This scheme assures that the performance of all the models is more
comparable and robust.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:21==
3
Data
This chapter introduces three primary data sources used in the following experiments,
i.e., the MMM dataset and GIS information from OSM and Geolife Dataset.
3.1
MMM dataset
MMM dataset is the commercial version dataset developed from Future Mobility Sensing
(FMS) software by the Center of Transport Analytics (CTA). CTA is also responsible for
the Danish National Transport Survey. FMS is a smartphone­based prompted­recall travel
survey system that corrects automatically inferred information by a web­based prompted­
recall interaction. In our case, the dataset we used is from the Mobile Market Monitor
(MMM), a platform for measuring and monitoring human mobility and activity through mo­
bile devices. It is based on the Future Mobility Survey (FMS) software developed by the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Zhao et al. 2015.
FMS is a smartphone­based prompted­recall travel survey system. It reduces the com­
mon problems in traditional surveys – such as under­reporting of segments and trips,
deviation of travel duration, locations, and times. The FMS data compete Household In­
terview Travel Survey (HITS) with higher resolution and better accuracy. In addition, FMS
is dedicated to collect multi­day data with a decreasing burden over time. FMS acts as a
promising technology for next­generation travel surveys.
MMM dataset is the very first dataset of smartphone­based travel surveys in Denmark.
The dataset is highly unbalanced, and analyzing this dataset is a good start to under­
standing data issues in a real case.
MMM dataset collected GPS trajectories of 12 users for about 24 user￿days (Servizi, Pe­
tersen, et al. 2020). Table 3.1 shows the labels available in MMM dataset. The latitude,
longitude, and altitude are given under the WGS84 geographic coordinate system. Ac­
curacy and speed are not used in this project. Instead, we calculate the distance of two
successive points based on their coordinates. The travel time of two successive points is
calculated from the timestamp. Then, the travel speed is calculated from travel distance
divided by corresponding travel time. The stop and motion label reveals the user is trav­
eling or stopped for some activity. Mode and purpose is labelled with 9 and 16 different
categories.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
13
==PAGE:22==
Table 3.1: Data Format of MMM Dataset
Labels
Description
1
ID
Users ID, 12 users in total
2
Timestamp
Timestamp of the GPS point, represent in date format
3
Latitude
The latitude of the GPS point, degree
4
Longitude
The longitude of the GPS point, degree
5
Altitude
The geometric altitude above Mean Sea Level , meters
6
Accuracy
The accuracy level of the position given by GPS system, m
7
Speed
The speed given by GPS system, m/s
8
Stop
Stop and motion status encoded as 1 and 2.
9
Mode
−1001, Air, Bicycle, Bus, Foot, Light Rail, Other and Vehicle.
Nine Mode encoded from 0 to 8.
10
Purpose
−1002, Accompany, Change Mode, Eat Out, Education,
Entertainment, Errands, Exercise, Home, Medical,
Second Home, Shopping, Socialize, Work, Work Related.
16 purpose encoded from 0 to 15.
Note: 1) ­100 stands for the absence of mode which means the user is doing
an activity with a purpose. 2) ­100 stands for the absence of purpose which means
the user is travelling in a transportation mode.
Figure 3.1 shows the distribution of GPS points in the MMM dataset. From the right side
of the figure, we can find that user 4 and user 9 provide over 50% of the total GPS points,
and these points concentrate on purpose with going home, change mode, education and
accompany. The default, bus, air, and bicycle travel mode also have many records from
user 4. While for other purposes and modes, the data is very insufficient. Especially
for user 8, no valid data points are available to analyze. The records for entertainment,
medical, second home, and work­related purpose are also minimal. If we compare the
data points between mode and purpose, we can find that the data with purpose label is
more imbalanced than that with mode label. This data distribution indicates very class­
imbalanced data and advises careful consideration on methods to handle the data issue.
14
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.1: User characteristics and the distribution of the GPS points
Table 3.2 describes the explanatory variables used in our models, which contains two
categories, i.e., trip­related variables and context­related variable.
Table 3.2: Description of explanatory variables.
Explanatory Variables
Description
Trip Dimension
1
Travel time
Travel time between two successive GPS points
2
Travel distance
Travel distance between two successive GPS points
3
Travel speed
Travel speed between two successive GPS points, distance divided by time
4
Travel jerk
Travel jerk between two successive GPS points, speed divided by time
5
Time of day
The time slot of the day when travel, 5 periods 1
GIS Dimension
1
Residential land
Residential land location within 90m*90m range of the last GPS point of that sequence, 9 x 9 Binary Matrix
2
Industrial land
Industrail land location within 90m*90m range of the last GPS point of that sequence, 9 x 9 Binary Matrix
3
Meadow land
Meadow land loca tion within 90m*90m range of the last GPS point of that sequence, 9 x 9 Binary Matrix
4
Commercial land
Commercial land location within 90m*90m range of the last GPS point of that sequence, 9 x 9 Binary Matrix
5
Shops
Shops and stores within 90m*90m range of the last GPS point of that sequence, 9 x 9 Binary Matrix
6­9
Railways, Metros, Stations
Rail, Metro, Stations and Bus stops within 90m*90m range of the last GPS point of that sequence, 9 x 9 Binary Matrix
10
Road
10 Major road network within 90m*90m range of the last GPS point of that sequence, 9 x 9 Binary Matrix
11
Traffic lights
Traffic lights within 90m*90m range of the last GPS point of that sequence, 9 x 9 Binary Matrix
Note: 1) Periods are defined as follows: morning peak starts from 6 am to 10 am; noon peak starts from 10 am to 14 pm, evening peak starts from 14pm to 18pm,
the peroid before morning peak is 0 am to 6 am and after evening peak is 18pm to 23:59pm.
3.2
Geolife
Geolife dataset is widely used in GPS trajectory­based transportation research. It was
collected in the (Microsoft Research Asia) Geolife project started by Dr.Yu Zheng over five
years (from April 2007 to August 2012). The Geolife Project is designed to be a location­
based social networking service that allows users to get personalized travel experiences
and recommendations. The dataset collects a wide range of user’s outdoor travel modes
such as walk, bike, car­taxi, bus, train, airplane in the form of GPS trajectories. The
majority of GPS trajectory is recorded in Beijing, China. 182 users contributed their data
for over five years. 91.5% of the trajectories are logged with a frequency of every1­5
second or 5­10 meters. However, only parts of the users are labels with their actual
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
15
==PAGE:24==
mode. Thus, our study is based on these users. There are a total of 5.38 million rows of
data, with each line represents a GPS point. The latitude ranges from 18.250 to 40.017,
longitude ranges from ­179.970 to 179.997. Most of the trajectory is located in Beijing,
China, with latitude, ranges from 39.800 to 40.100, and longitude ranges from 116.250 to
116.500. Figure ?? shows the trajectory projection on a more recent Beijing map. The
red line finely shows the trains connect with the Beijing West Train Station, which locates
on near the center of the map and the endpoint of the red line. The bus, car, taxi, and
motorcycle in green and cyan color form Beijing’s grid transport network. It is the majority
mode of Beijing travelers. The yellow lines concentrated around the summer palace and
old summer palace, which is on the upper left area of the map, show citizens of Beijing
prefer to walk and run there. The white color, which is outstanding in the upper right area,
matches the truth that there is an Olympic Forest Park there, and people enjoy biking in
that park. However, the subways which run as layers of circles around the center of Beijing
are supposed to be highlighted by red color is not shown explicitly. It may be caused by
the weak GPS signal underground. Geolife has much more data entries than the MMM
dataset and is much less imbalanced than the Geolife Dataset.
Figure 3.2: GPS Trojectories Projection
16
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:25==
3.2.1
Data Fusion
Figure 3.3: GIS fusion channel information. Figure sourced from Servizi, Petersen, et al.
2020
As stated previously, GIS is critical to the performance of purpose identification and mode
detection. Therefore, we fuse each GPS point with the surrounding geospatial context
utilizing Open Street Map features within proximity of the GPS point Servizi, Petersen,
et al. 2020. 3.3 shows the multi­dimension tensor after fusion of each GPS position with a
shape of W×H×C. W and H stand for the geospatial context in the horizontal and vertical
distance (i.e., 10 m per unit width or height) from latitude and longitude. C is the type
of geospatial context feature that exists in that area. If a specific geospatial feature, c,
locates within j, k units of distance to the point from, then Iu,i,j,k,c = 1, otherwise Iu,i,j,k,c
= 0. The corresponding GPS data point is the spatial center of the Iu,i tensor. To make
the data fusion process more efficient, Servizi, Petersen, et al. 2020 conducted an R­Tree
algorithm to build the grid with a fixed unit of 10m × 10m.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
17
==PAGE:26==
4
Methods and Tools
4.1
Convolutional Neural Network
Convolutional neural network (CNN) is a variant of deep neural networks, most commonly
applied in image and video recognition with the significant advantage of relatively little pre­
processing and automated feature extraction.
A standard CNN consists of an input layer, hidden layers, and an output layer the same
as a fully connected network. The difference is that, in part of the hidden layers, CNNs
take advantage of a mathematical operation called convolution in place of general matrix
multiplication. The layers conduct convolution operation are called Convolutional layers.
Convolutional layers are usually followed by layers such as pooling layers, normalization
layers, dropout layers, fully connected layers, and necessary activation functions.
Input Layer
A general input layer of a CNN is an ”image” with a shape of (height, width, channels)
which is abbreviated to (H, W, C). The height and width are the number of ”pixels” on the
vertical and horizontal of an ”image”. The channel is the information contained by each
pixel. For example, a colored photo with the height of 500 pixels and width of 500 pixels
has three channels, i.e., Red, Green, and Blue.
Convolutional layer
In a convolutional layer, each neuron takes an area of the previous layer as the input,
convolves the input by a matrix, and passes the result to the next layer. The area defined
by a width and height is called Receptive Field. A single matrix is called Kernel, and
multiple kernels build a Filter. The size of the area/kernel is a hyper­parameter that shall
be defined manually. Typically the area is a square, e.g., three by three neurons. A larger
receptive field of the neuron allows the more extensive range of the previous layer to be
accessed, which also means the output of the neuron may contain more global features
with a higher semantic level. On the contrary, the smaller the Kernel, the more local and
details are captured in the layer’s output. Therefore, the value of the receptive field can
also be used to roughly judge the level of abstraction at each level.
Max Pooling Layer
Max Pooling layers reduce the dimensions of neurons by choosing the maximum value
of the previous layer’s output. Pooling sizes such as 3 x 3 are commonly used. In addi­
tion, the Max Pooling layer allows the neural network to be more invariant to translation,
rotation, and scaling. For example, if we spin a dog in a photo slightly, the neural network
can still recognize it.
Batch Normalization
A deep neural network is difficult to train because there is a high correlation and coupling
between each layer of the network. During the training process, the parameters in the net­
work are constantly updated with gradient descent. A slight chance of the underlying layer
will be amplified for all following layers due to the non­linear transformation in each layer.
In addition, these changes lead to the shift in the distribution of each layer. Therefore, the
network module at the upper layer needs to constantly adapt to these distributions, which
18
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:27==
makes it difficult to train our model. This phenomenon is called the Internal Covariate
Shift.
Batch Normalization can control the distribution of the output of the former layer within a
specific range, which allows each layer to be learned independently in order to improve
the neural network learning speed.
Dropout Layer
Dropout is a regularization technique that prevents networks from over­fitting. A certain
number of neurons in the previous layer are randomly discarded in the training process.
Fully Connected Layer
Fully connected layers connect every neuron between two adjacent layers. It is also
known as a traditional multi­layer perceptron neural network (MLP).
Activation Function
Activation Function in deep learning is mostly non­linear because non­linear activation
functions enable the neural network to learn complex functions. Some common functions
are Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU), Softmax, Sigmoid, Tanh, and variants of these functions.
4.2
Bi­directional Recurrent Neural Network
The Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) model interacts continuously through hidden states
or memories. Its input can be a sentence, and the output can be a part­of­speech tag (N
to N) for each word or the speech classification of the sentence (N to 1). For another
example, the input can be a single image, and the output can be a series of words (1 to
N) that describe the image. At each time step, RNN computes a new ”memory” of hidden
states based on the current input and previous hidden states. ”Recurrent” means that
the same parameters are used at every step, and that the network performs the same
calculations based on different inputs.
Long short­term memory (LSTM) networks prevent the vanishing gradient problem in RNN
using a Memory gating mechanism. Calculating hidden states in RNN using LSTM cells
can help the network efficiently propagate gradients and learn long­range dependencies.
The Gate Recycler Unit (GRU) network is a simplified version of the LSTM with fewer
parameters. Like LSTM Cell, it uses a gating mechanism to enable the RNN to learn
long­range dependency by preventing the vanishing gradient problem effectively. The
GRU contains a reset and update gate that determines which parts of the old memory
need to be retained or updated based on the new value of the current time step.
In traditional RNN, the transmission of the state is Unidirectional from front to back. How­
ever, there are some problems where the output at the current moment is related not only
to the previous state but also to the subsequent state. For example, predicting a missing
word in a statement requires information from the following paragraph and the preceding
paragraph. Therefore, the Bidirectional Recurrent Neural Network (Bi­RNN) is formalized
to solve this kind of problem. Similarly, replacing RNN in Bi­RNN with LSTM or GRU
structure constitutes Bi­LSTM and Bi­GRU.
4.3
Techniques
Early Stopping
The training model is the process of learning and updating the parameters of the model.
Early stopping is a way to stop overfitting by truncating the number of iterations when
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
19
==PAGE:28==
necessary. The early stopping method does this by calculating validation accuracy at
the end of each epoch. An epoch is a complete traversal of all the training data. When
validation accuracy does not improve, the training process is stopped. This approach is
intuitive because once the accuracy is no longer improving, it is nonsense to continue
the training and improve the training time. One of the critical points of this approach is
how we consider stopping criteria. The practice is to record the best validation accuracy
achieved so far during the whole training process. In our project, when the model fails
to reach the documented optimal validation accuracy for ten consecutive epochs, The
model’s classification accuracy is considered to be no longer improved. At this point, we
stop iterating.
Gradient Clipping
Gradient tailoring is a technique used to prevent a gradient explosion in a network of
higher depth (usually a cyclic neural network). The exploding gradients problem refers to
the phenomenon where a significant increase in the gradient norm during training. There
are many ways to perform gradient clipping, and a common one is to normalize the gra­
dient of a parameter vector when the L2 norm of the parameter vector exceeds a specific
threshold determined by the following function: new gradient = gradient * threshold /L2
norm (gradient).
Optimizer
The gradient descent algorithm is one of the most popular algorithms to perform optimiza­
tion on neural networks. There are different variants of the gradient descent algorithm.
Adaptive Moment Estimation (Adam) is one of them that computes adaptive learning rates
for each parameter. It is based on the adaptive estimation of first­order and second­order
moments. According to Kingma and Ba 2015, the method is ”computationally efficient,
has little memory requirement, invariant to diagonal rescaling of gradients, and is well
suited for problems that are large in terms of data/parameters.”
Dataloader
DataLoader is a tool class used in Pytorch to process model input data. By using the
DataLoader, we can efficiently perform operations related to the data. For example, we
can easily set the batch size, sample the data for each epoch, use multithreading, etc.
4.4
Multi­task Architecure
Hard­sharing and soft­sharing
There are two types of multi­tasking learning methods in deep learning: hard sharing and
soft sharing of hidden layer parameters. Hard sharing of hidden layer parameters refers
to the sharing of the same hidden layers of the network between multiple tasks, but near
the output port of the network begins to branch off to do different tasks. Different tasks use
different networks for soft sharing of hidden layer parameters, but for network parameters
of different tasks, constraints are applied to encourage the parameter to be similar. In this
project, the hard sharing method is adopted, which means the mode detection and pur­
pose imputation share all the parameters except for the fully connected layer and output
layer.
Task Balancing
The weights between the SMC task’s loss function and the SPC task’s loss function are
controlled by a single parameter range from 0 to 1. If the parameter is set to be 0, the
20
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:29==
weight of the SMC task will not be counted in the training process. The whole MMPC
model degenerates to the SPC model. On the contrary, if the task balancing parameter
is set to 1, the MMPC model becomes a SMC model and the purpose identification task
will be abandoned during training.
4.5
Transfer Knowledge from Geolife Domain
Geolife dataset is slightly different from MMM dataset according to its data format. It is
necessary to do data transformation before feed it to the MMPC model. Before train­
ing, the CNN part of the MMPC model is deactivated because the GIS information is not
available for the Geolife dataset. The updating of a parameter only happens within the
RNN part. In the process of training, Optuna is used to search for the best set of hyper­
parameters. The objective function of Optuna is set to be the sum of training accuracy
and validation accuracy. After the training process is complete, the parameter of RNN is
saved and loaded to the full MMPC model. The knowledge of the geolife dataset is now
transferred to the MMPC model, and the new MMPC model is regarded as the pretrained
MMPC model. Then, we continue training the Pre­MMPC model on the MMM dataset un­
til the finish. Finally, we compare the results with the original MMPC model with different
measurement metrics to see any performance improvement.
4.6
Classifier evaluation
In the machine learning modeling process, the common practice is usually to divide the
data into a training set and a validation set. The test set is independent from the training
and is not involved in the training at all, and is used to evaluate the final model. During
the training process, the problem of overfitting often occurs. The model can match the
training data well but cannot predict the data outside the training set well. Suppose the
validation data is used to adjust the model parameters. In that case, it is equivalent to
knowing some of the test data information during training, which will affect the accuracy
of the final evaluation results. It is a common practice to separate a portion of the training
data into validation data to evaluate the training effect of the model.
The evaluation of the model is commonly done by cross­validation. It divides the orig­
inal data into K groups (K­Fold), and makes each subset of data into a validation set
separately. The rest of the K­1 subset data as the training set, so that K models will be
obtained. These K models are evaluated independently in the validation set, and the final
error MSE (Mean Squared Error) is summed and averaged to obtain the cross­validation
error. Cross­validation makes effective use of the limited data. The evaluation results are
as close as possible to the performance of the models on the test set, which can be used
as an indicator for model optimization. We set the K equals to the number of users, which
turns the K­Fold cross­validation into a leave­one­out cross­validation.
4.7
Evaluation Metrics
We evaluate classification performance using multiple metrics.
Accuracy
Accuracy is measured as the ratio of correctly identified samples to the total number of
samples in the dataset:
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + TN + FP + FN
where TP, FP, TN, FN are the number of true positives, false positives, true negatives,
and false negatives
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
21
==PAGE:30==
F1 Score
The F1 score is a metric to evaluate predictor’s performance and can be interpreted as a
weighted average of the precision and recall. The formula for the F1­score is:
precision =
TP
TP + FP
recall =
TP
TP + FN
F1Score = 2 × precision × recall
precision + recall
The different way to average the precision and recall of each class determines by the
needs of researchers. Micro f1 score calculates metrics globally by counting the total true
positives, false negatives, and false positives. In our case, the micro average f1­score
equals the accuracy as stated above. Macro F1 score finds their unweighted mean of the
F1 score of each class and does not account for class imbalance. Weighted average F1
score find the average weighted F1 score by considering the number of instances of each
class. This is the alternative to ’macro’ to account for class imbalance.
Converge Speed
The convergence speed of the training process is measured by the least number of steps
after training accuracy converges. The whole training process is regarded as converged
if the accuracy is not improved larger than 0.1% for two consecutive training iterations.
4.8
Tools
Pytorch
PyTorch is an open­source machine learning library widely used in computer vision and
natural language processing. The PyTorch and Cuda version used in this project is 1.8.1
and Cuda 10.1. To ensure the results are reproducible, we set up some hyper­parameters
to control sources of randomness that can cause the model to behave differently in mul­
tiple executions.
Neptune
Neptune is introduced in this project as the primary experiment tracking tool. We use
Neptune to log anything that happens during the model run, including:
1) Measurement
Metrics, i.e., accuracy, loss, Confusion Matrix (CM) and ROC curve,
2) Hyperparame­
ters, i.e., learning rate, weight, training epochs, batch size,
3) Learning curves which
show the accuracy and loss lively,
4) Training code and configuration files
5) Con­
sole logs and hardware logs show model running information and the CPU/GPU/Memory
consumption.
Using Neptune, we can execute experiment code anywhere while still log to the same
place. It allows us to filter, sort, and group experiments in one dashboard and do a quick
search based on metrics, parameter values, and user­defined tags. Comparing experi­
ment runs is also zero effort in Neptune because it can automatically find what changed
between experiments and show interactive overlayed learning curves.
Optuna
Optional is an open­source hyperparameter optimization framework to automate hyperpa­
rameter search Akiba et al. 2019. Hyperparameter search is one of the most cumbersome
22
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:31==
tasks in deep learning projects. In a typical deep learning model, the choice of hyperpa­
rameters is critical. Even for the same network architecture, a different combination of
hyperparameters may dramatically differ on the model’s performance. Besides, some
hyperparameters have a significant effect on the model’s output and affect the storage
space required or time of calculation.
They are some essential terms and configurations in Optuna:
1) Parameter: the hyperparameter to be optimized;
2) Trial: a single execution of the objective function;
3) Study: optimization process based on the objective function, a Study session usually
consisting of a series of Trials;
4) Objective Function: Objective function defines the goal to optimize the hyperparame­
ter. Generally, we can either maximize the accuracy of the classification tasks or minimize
the loss or error rate;
5) Sampler: We use the default Tree­structured Parzen Estimator algorithm (TPE) im­
plemented in Optuna to sample the hyperparameter for each trial. This sampler is based
on independent sampling. Compared with relative sampling that determines multiple pa­
rameters’ values simultaneously and correlated, independent sampling determines a sin­
gle parameter value without considering any relationship between parameters. As stated
in the official document of the Optuna, On each trial, for each parameter, TPE fits one
Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) l(x) to parameter values which associate with the best
objective values, and another GMM g(x) to the remaining parameter values. The param­
eter value x that maximizes the ratio l(x)/g(x) is chose.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
23
==PAGE:32==
5
Models
In this chapter, several models are proposed to show the capability of multi­task and
transfer learning techniques.
5.1
Single Task Model
We first build a model using both processed GPS trajectories and GIS information to do
mode detection only. This single task model is a modified version of the proposed in
Servizi, Pereira, et al. 2019 paper. The model accepts inputs from three sources:
1) kinematic features with four channels,
2) time of the day,
3) dummy representation of GIS information with a totally 11 features.
Figure 5.1 shows the model architecture. It includes two main modules. The first mod­
ule, a recurrent neural network, contains a bi­directional GRU network, ReLU layer, and
Dropout layer. It is dedicated to extracting the time­series characteristics of the kinematic
features derived from the GPS traces. The second module contains two convolutional
neural networks. The convolutional neural network contains a convolutional layer, batch
normalization layer, ReLU, and Dropout layer. The output of the two modules is flattened
and concatenate with a time of the day feature. The combined feature is a one dimension
tensor. It is feed to the two­layer fully connected layer. The output of the whole model
is transformed to the probability of each mode or purpose. As the classification happens
on single attributes, i.e., mode or purpose, the two models set our baseline as single­task
models.
Figure 5.1: Structures of the Single Task Model Which Classify Travel Mode or Travel
Purpose
24
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:33==
5.2
Multi­task Model
Figure 5.2 represents the model structure of the multi­task learning model. In this model,
we keep the input data, model structure the same and combine the neurons from the last
layer of mode detection and purpose identification. Therefore, the number of neurons in
the previous layer is twelve, i.e., six types of modes plus six types of purpose.
Figure 5.2: Structures of the Multi­task Model which Classify travel Mode and travel Pur­
pose Simultaneously
5.3
Mutli­task with Pretrained Parameter
Figure 5.3 shows the structure of the multi­task model with shared parameters from the
single task model of the Geolife dataset. We train the single mode detection model on the
prepared geolife dataset with the recurrent neural network module kept and the convolu­
tional neural network part dropped. The pretrained mode detection model from the Geolife
dataset contains parameters that correspond to the characteristics of GPS trajectories in
Beijing. Then we store the recurrent neural network module parameter and initialize the
same part of the recurrent neural network from the previous multi­task model.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 5.3: Structures of the Multi­task Model with Pre­trained Network Module from Ge­
olife Dataset and It Classify Travel Mode and Travel Purpose Simultaneously
26
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:35==
6
Experiments and Results
This chapter first explains how to set up the experiments and the relevant limitations we
encounter. Then, the intuition behind the experiment settings and measurement metrics
selection are described. After that, we present the useful results to compare the single
task models, multi­task models, and pretrained models.
6.1
Experiments Settings
Since our target is to find out the influence before and after applying the multi­task learning
techniques, We shall develop a reliable performance evaluation strategy to assure the
difference of architecture is highlighted instead of being embroiled by the irrelevant factor,
e.g., the stochastic algorithm used in tools, the randomness of data sequences, hardware
change as well as best hyperparameter settings.
First of all, we configured PyTorch to avoid using non­deterministic algorithms for some
operations following the instruction of Pytorch Offical Document These settings aim at
making the experiment reproducible on the same dataset.
1) random seed of PyTorch, python and numpy is fixed to keep the random number
the same each time we execute the algorithm. It ensures the results are reproducible if
parameters remain unchanged.
2) CUDA convolution benchmarking is disabled. Disabling the benchmarking feature
restricts cuDNN from deterministically selecting an algorithm when conducting convolution
operations instead of benchmarking multiple algorithms to find the fastest one that may
differentiate on subsequent runs.
3) Configure PyTorch to use deterministic algorithms instead of non­deterministic ones
because disabling CUDA convolution benchmarking ensures that CUDA selects the same
algorithm each time an application is running, but the chosen algorithm itself may be non­
deterministic. Therefore, an additional configuration is necessary.
Secondly, we forbid the data loader to reseed workers following randomness in a multi­
process data loading algorithm. Thirdly, all the experiments were run on Colab with 24
GBytes of Memory, 16 GBytes graphical memory, and Tesla P100 GPU with PyTorch
version of 1.8.1 and Cuda version of 10.1.
Then, we apply the hyperparameter search framework to find the best hyperparameters
of each model. We use the default sampler Tree­structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) algo­
rithm implemented in Optuna ?? to sample the candidate of hyperparameter combination.
This sampler is based on independent sampling. The independent sampling determines
a value of a single parameter without considering any relationship between parameters.
Target parameters of the independent sampling are the parameters not described in the
relative search space.
Table 6.1 shows the hyperparameter search space defined for Optional. Considering
the efficiency and time limitation, learning rate and batch size shall be well explored as
learning rate affects most of the performance of a model. In addition, with the limitation of
computation resources, the batch size is set up to 512 to avoid GPU memory explosion
during training.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 6.1: List of Hyperparameters and values range searched by Optuna
Optimizer
Adam
betas
(0.9, 0.999)
eps
10−8
L2 regularization Weight Decay
0
Gradient Clipping
5
Learning Rate
∈[10−3, 10−1], Step = log
Batch Size
∈[64, 512], step = 64
Epochs
∈[5, 30], step = 5
Task Weight
∈(0, 1], step = uniform
Trials
20
Table 6.2 shows the detail hyperparameter settings of the model used all through this
project without further modification.
Table 6.2: CNN + RNN architecture hyperparameters, final configuration.
Convolutional Neural Network Layers
2
Filters
Layer 1: 16
Layer 2: 8
Filter Kernel Size
3
Padding
1
Stride
1
Max Pooling Kernel
Layer 1: 3
Layer 2: 2
Max Pooling Stride
1
Batch Normalization
Layer 1: Y es
Layer 2: Y es
Activation Function
Layer 1: ReLU
Layer 2: ReLU
Dropout
Layer 1: 0.45
Layer 2: 0.45
Recurrent Neural Network Layers
4
Hidden State Size
64
Batch Normalization
Y es
Activation Function
ReLU
Dropout
0.1
Fully Connected Layers
2
Fully Connected Units
Layer 1: 512
Layer 2: 100
Activation Function
Layer 1: ReLU
Layer 2: ReLU
To find the best set of hyperparameters in each model, we fix a specific split of train,
validation, and test user. The training set contains users 4, 1, 8, 12, 11, 7, 10, 5. The
validation set contains user 9, and the test set contains user 3,2,6.
28
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:37==
Table 6.3 presents the best set of hyperparameters of each model after 20 trails of search
with the search space listed in Table 6.1. For the SMC model, the classification accu­
racy on the validation set is slightly lower than the validation set. For the SPC model, the
classification accuracy drops obviously on the validation set compared with the training
set. After integrating the SMC and SPC model into a multi­task learning architecture, the
MMPC model, the classification accuracy of mode detection task and purpose imputa­
tion accuracy slightly drop on the validation set compared with the single task model. For
example, the mode detection module of the MMPC model on the validation set has a clas­
sification accuracy of 93.09%, while the accuracy of the SMC model for mode detection
only is 93.36%, which is slightly lower.
Table 6.3: Best set of hyperparameters of the single­task model and multi­task model
given by Optuna
SMC
SPC
MMPC
Learning Rate
0.0011
0.0020
0.0010
Epochs
20
20
20
Batch Size
192
512
128
Train Accuracy ­ Mode
94.24%
­
95.03%
Validation Accuracy ­ Mode
93.36%
­
93.09%
Train Accuracy ­ Purpose
­
97.14%
96.51%
Validation Accuracy ­ Purpose
­
71.99%
71.77%
The first row of Figure 6.1 stands for the ROC­AUC curve of the single task mode detection
model and single task purpose identification model, respectively. The second row rep­
resents the ROC­AUC curve of the mode detection task and purpose identification task
of the MMPC model. All of the curves are measured on the validation set. The micro­
average ROC curve area of each model/task is larger than 0.95. However, if we conduct
a column­wise comparison for mode detection, the SMC model performs better on ”light
rail”, ”bus” and ”mix” mode. The SPC model performs worse for purpose classification on
”change mode” and ”informal” purpose. In both columns, the ROC curve area remains
the same within the same task.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 6.1: The comparasion on ROC­AUC Curve on Validation Set between SMC, SPC
and MMPC model
6.2
SMC, SPC and MMPC
Since we have searched out the best combination of hyper­parameters of each model
based on the same training, validation, and test set, the performance of each model can
be compared with the elimination of impact from hyperparameter settings.
As the first question we plan to address, our goal is to understand how the travel mode and
trip purpose tasks behave under multi­task learning architecture, especially the potential
positive and negative effects. Therefore, we propose to evaluate the performance differ­
ence between the single task model and multi­task model on the aspects of accuracy,
f1­score, convergence speed, loss, and model size.
We first employ the best hyperparameter combination presented in Table 6.3 to the cor­
responding model and then conduct the leave­one­out cross­validation on all 11 users to
do box plot visualization.
Figure 6.2 shows the boxplot on the accuracy of each classification task or model.
The left two subplots show the accuracy between MMPC and SMC model on mode de­
tection task. On the training sets, the MMPC model has the median accuracy (i.e., middle
of ranked experiments by accuracy) of 95.33% with a whisker range between 95.16%
and 95.53%. The SMC model has a median accuracy of 94.70% with a whisker range
between 95.05% and 94.63%.
On the test set, the MMPC model has the median accuracy of 66.18% with a whisker range
between 89.60% and 29.70%, and the SMC model has the median accuracy of 66.56%
with a whisker range between 90.43% and 34.54%. The data points in the MMPC model
are more variable than that of the SMC model because the IQR is larger and the MMPC
model has the worst case of accuracy, which is 29.70%. In addition, the 25% quantile,
median and 75% quantile are all lower than that of the SMC model, indicating the MMPC
model on mode detection task is less accurate than the SMC model.
The right two subplots show the comparison of accuracy between MMPC and SPC model
30
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:39==
on purpose imputation task. On the training set, the MMPC and SPC model have a me­
dian classification accuracy of 93.59% and 93.55% represented by a 20­folds of cross­
validation experiment. The interquartile range (IQR) is less than 0.5% in both cases. On
test set. The MMPC model has a median accuracy of 71.54% with a whisker range be­
tween 94.70% and 38.18%. The SPC model gives a 58.10% median accuracy with a
whisker range between 85.87% and 35.65%. Compared with the MMPC model, the SPC
model reports all­sided worse classification accuracy. In both models, the recordings re­
port an outlier for each. Remind that the whisker extends to 1.5 times of the interquartile
range and any recordings beyond the whisker line are outliers.
Figure 6.2: The comparasion on accuracy between SMC, SPC and MMPC model
Figure 6.3 presents the macro average F1­score and Weighted average F1­score, which
measures the performance of classification of each model on each task. For 20 folds of
experiments on mode detection task, MMPC model gives the median weighted average
F1­score of 73.00%. SMC gives 78.86% which is higher than that of the MMPC model. In
contrast, if considering the purpose identification task, the MMPC model has a weighted
average F1­score of 81.31% while SPC model gives 64.6%, which is much lower. If mea­
sured by the macro averaged method, the F1­scores of MMPC and SMC model are both
drops significantly to around 20%. Especially, the performance of the SMC model shows
more variants than the MMPC model. This phenomenon remains on purpose imputa­
tion task where the macro average F1­score of both MMPC and SPC model decrease
distinctly to the median of 28.32% and 22.93%.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 6.3: The comparison on f1­score between SMC, SPC and MMPC model on Test
set
Figure 6.4 shows the performance of models on other measurement metrics. The left
part describes how many epochs the training process runs before it converges, i.e., the
loss does not decrease in two successive epochs. The SMC model has a median epoch
of 16, and the SPC model has a median epoch of 13. The MMPC model is relatively
in the middle, which has 15 epochs before it converges. Considering the training loss,
MMPC is much lower than the SMC model and SPC model. In addition, the model size of
MMPC does not have a significant increase compared with SMC and SPC model individ­
ually since they are all around 7 MBytes even though the size of the MMPC model looks
obviously distinguishing compared with SMC and SPC model.
Figure 6.4: The comparison on convergence, training loss and model size between SMC,
SPC and MMPC model
32
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:41==
6.3
Mult­task Model vs. Pretrained Model
To know what extend the additonal data can promote our multi­task model on small­sized
MMM dataset, We ultilize full Geolife datset to pre­train the MMPC model. Then, we
do classificaiton on the MMM dataset use pre­trained MMPC model and non­pretrained
MMPC model respectively and compare their performance.
We then test the pre­trained MMPC model on the different percentage of MMM dataset to
figure out what the minimum requirement of domain data if sufficient additional data can
be approached. We randomly picked 20%, 60%of users as subsets of the whole 11 avail­
able users (with user 8 dropped because there is no sequence generated by that user).
However, as the dataset is in strong class imbalance, randomly pick users by percentage
will result in a dramatically different number of sequences available in a specific group of
users. For example, user 4 and user 9 allocate more than 80% of the whole dataset. If
we randomly picked 20% of the 11 users and it happens to be user 4 and user 9. It will be
non­realistic to get a representative result. Therefore, we pick users incrementally from
1 to 11 and replicate this process three times. Then, we get 33 different subsets of the
whole user group. Thereafter, we rank them by their number of training sequences and
pick up the sets close to 20%, 60% and have all 6 modes and 6 purposes in their labels as
far as possible. Table 6.4 shows the final sets of users we decided to use in the following
experiment.
Table 6.4: User groups used to compare the pre­trained and trained MMPC model
Set
Training Set
Validation Set
Test Set
Training Percentage
1
[12, 1, 10, 5, 3, 11]
[2]
[4, 9, 6]
22.2%
2
[7, 4, 6, 12, 1]
[10]
[3, 2, 9]
58.6%
Figure 6.5 shows the weighted average F1 score for both purpose classification and mode
detection tasks considering different data configurations. If using 60% or 20% of the
MMM data on a pretrained MMPC model, the weighted average F1 score indicates a
higher performance compared with the MMPC model without pretraining by Geolife data.
However, for the left side of the figure, if we use 100% MMM dataset on the pretrained
data, the performance drops significantly than the non­pretrained MMPC model. This
phenomenon applies both to the mode detection task and purpose identification task of
the MMPC model.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
33
==PAGE:42==
Figure 6.5: The comparison on F1 Score, among non­pretrained, pretrained MMPC model
on 20%, 60%, 100% of the MMM dataset
Figure 6.6 shows the comparison of two models on the part of convergence speed, training
loss, and model size. The overall convergence speed of the pretrained MMPC model is
higher than the non­pretrained MMPC model. In addition, the convergence speed tends to
slow down if the usage of the MMM dataset increases. However, the training loss reveals
that less usage of MMM data causes much higher loss, and the non­pretrained model
shows the lowest training loss. Considering the model size, pretrained MMPC models
with subsets of the MMPC model obviously save some parameters inside its model.
Figure 6.6: The comparison on Convergence speed, training loss, model size among
non­pretrained, pretrained MMPC model on 20%, 60%, 100% of the MMM dataset
34
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:43==
7
Discussion
Travel mode and travel purpose are essential features to describe travel patterns. How­
ever, the similarity between travel mode and travel purpose is not affirmatively contributing
to the improvement of classification performance. As shown in the weighted average F1
score of Figure 6.3, the performance of the single­mode detection model turns to be weak­
ened under multi­task architecture. In contrast, the performance of the single purpose im­
putation model turns to be enhanced. Considering that the multi­task learning approach
has a commendable ability to generalize across tasks, it is reasonable that characteristics
extracting from the mode detection task weigh less to fit the purpose identification better.
In this case, the multi­task learning architecture contributes to purpose classification while
restraining the overexpose of travel modes. Multiple reasons may cause the controversy.
First, the characteristics of mode and purpose may have Irreconcilable differences. Sec­
ond, the labeling of mode and purpose coming out from data reprocessing is exclusive
because if a GPS point is labeled with some mode, it means the absence of purpose and
will be labeled as not available (i.e., ­100). Third, the best hyperparameters provided by
the hyperparameter search framework are based on a fixed set of training, validation, and
test dataset, which may restrict the adaptation of the MMPC model. These issues sug­
gest we explore more on selecting tasks, the bias introduced by data preprocessing, and
hyperparameters. However, the advantages of multi­task learning techniques can not
be neglected because it remains the same level of convergence speed and model size
while still achieving the lowest training loss. Remind that if using the individual model for
mode and purpose classification simultaneously, the model size or convergence speed
will be doubled. Therefore, multi­task learning techniques can save many computation
resources with reasonable performance assurance.
MMM dataset comes from the first attempt of the Center of Transport Analytics on the
smartphone­based travel survey to complement the national travel survey running in Den­
mark. The descriptive analysis of the MMM dataset shows that it is small­sized, highly
class­imbalanced data. The impact of class imbalance has also been reflected in Figure
6.2 and Figure 6.3 that, for every single task, the macro average F1 score is dramatically
worse than accuracy (i.e., micro average F1 score). It imposes that the single task model
can describe dominating classes fairly well while a large part of classes that have small
samples have been wrongly classified. However, Among three different F1 scores, the
weighted average F1 score ranks the highest, which indicates our single task models’
superiority on handling class imbalance. Especially, the multi­task learning model also
retains this superiority as the weighted average F1 score of the MMPC model also ranks
the highest among all three different F1 scores.
In Figure 6.5 and Figure 6.6, we have seen that a subset of MMM data with the pretrained
model can remain or even achieve higher performance than the non­pretrained model with
a full set of MMM data which indicates the advantage of transferred knowledge. However,
the significant performance loss of the pretrained MMPC model on 100% of the MMM
dataset may impose a conflict between the transferred knowledge and part of the domain
knowledge. There are two potential reasons. First, it may be caused by the manual
selection of user splits. Second, it may be because the characteristics of the Geolife
dataset are similar to the MMM dataset to some degree, but they do have differences.
However, the differences cannot be revealed if the MMM dataset is not sufficient enough.
If this is true, it notices that the transferred knowledge may benefit the model at the early
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
35
==PAGE:44==
stage when domain data is insufficient. At the same time, it may not represent the truth
if more domain data is available in the future. Therefore, the model needs to be updated
on time to represent the real world instead of relying on other domain data all the time.
36
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:45==
8
Conclusion
In this project, we proposed a multi­task learning framework for travel mode detection
and purpose identification on highly class­imbalanced GPS data from the smartphone­
based prompted­recall travel survey conducted by the Center of Transport Analytics. We
also expand the multi­task learning architecture to utilize GPS data from other domains
to overcome the drawbacks of insufficient data and gain performance improvement.
The results show that the multi­task learning architecture tends to restrain the mode detec­
tion task to benefit the performance of purpose imputation task and achieve high compu­
tation efficiency, which is crucial to smartphone­based travel survey. Although the class­
imbalanced in small­sized datasets causes a strong bias on classification accuracy, the
multi­task architecture can alleviate the instability and be helpful to the accuracy improve­
ment. Furthermore, the pretrained multi­task model on additional data can lessen the
demand for data on the target domain, saving a large amount of cost on labeled data col­
lecting for small­sized data. Future research can be conducted to apply more advanced
multi­task parameter sharing structures, loss weighting algorithms, auxiliary tasks, and
more experiments on transfer learning techniques under long­term domain data.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
37
==PAGE:46==
38
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
Servizi, Valentino, Niklas Christoffer Petersen, et al. (2020). “Stop Detection for Smartphone­
based travel surveys using Geo­spatial context and Artificial Neural Networks”. In: Trans­
portation Research Part C 121.November, p. 102834. ISSN: 0968­090X. DOI: 10.1016/
j.trc.2020.102834. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2020.102834.
Oliveira, Marcelo G Simas et al. (2014). “Evaluation of two methods for identifying trip
purpose in GPS­based household travel surveys”. In: Transportation Research Record
2405.1, pp. 33–41.
Ermagun, Alireza et al. (2017). “Real­time trip purpose prediction using online location­
based search and discovery services”. In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies 77, pp. 96–112. ISSN: 0968090X. DOI: 10.1016/j.trc.2017.01.020. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2017.01.020.
Ruder, Sebastian (2017). “An Overview of Multi­Task Learning in Deep Neural Networks￿”.
In: arXiv May. arXiv: 1706.05098.
Zheng, Yu et al. (2008). “Understanding mobility based on GPS data”. In: Proceedings of
the 10th international conference on Ubiquitous computing, pp. 312–321.
Dabiri, Sina and Kevin Heaslip (2018). “Inferring transportation modes from GPS trajecto­
ries using a convolutional neural network”. In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerg­
ing Technologies 86.November 2017, pp. 360–371. ISSN: 0968090X. DOI: 10.1016/j.
trc.2017.11.021. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2017.11.021.
Song, Xiaozhuang, Christos Markos, and James J.Q. Yu (2020). “MultiMix: A Multi­Task
Deep Learning Approach for Travel Mode Identification with Few GPS Data”. In: 2020
IEEE 23rd International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, ITSC 2020,
pp. 8–13. ISBN: 9781728141497. DOI: 10.1109/ITSC45102.2020.9294272.
Weiss, Karl, Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar, and Ding Ding Wang (2016). A survey of transfer
learning. Vol. 3. 1. Springer International Publishing. ISBN: 4053701600. DOI: 10.1186/
s40537-016-0043-6.
Servizi, Valentino, Francisco C. Pereira, et al. (2019). “Mining User Behaviour from Smart­
phone data: a literature review”. In: arXiv: 1912.11259. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.
11259.
Jiang, Xiang et al. (2017). “TrajectoryNet: An Embedded GPS Trajectory Representation
for Point­based Classification Using Recurrent Neural Networks”. In: arXiv: 1705.02636.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.02636.
Thornton, Chris et al. (2013). “Auto­WEKA: Combined selection and hyperparameter op­
timization of classification algorithms”. In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGKDD inter­
national conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 847–855.
Lin, Miao and Wen­jing Hsu (2014). “Mining GPS data for mobility patterns : A survey”.
In: Pervasive and Mobile Computing 12, pp. 1–16. ISSN: 1574­1192. DOI: 10.1016/j.
pmcj.2013.06.005. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pmcj.2013.06.005.
Gonzalez, Paola A et al. (2010). “Automating mode detection for travel behaviour analysis
by using global positioning systems­enabled mobile phones and neural networks”. In:
IET Intelligent Transport Systems 4.1, pp. 37–49.
Stopher, Peter, Camden FitzGerald, and Jun Zhang (2008a). “Deducing Mode and Pur­
pose from GPS Data”. In: 87th Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board,
pp. 1–11.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
39
==PAGE:48==
Bohte, Wendy and Kees Maat (2009). “Deriving and validating trip purposes and travel
modes for multi­day GPS­based travel surveys: A large­scale application in the Nether­
lands”. In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 17.3, pp. 285–297.
ISSN: 0968090X. DOI: 10.1016/j.trc.2008.11.004. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.
2008.11.004.
Inbakaran, Christina and Annette Kroen (2014). “Travel surveys ­ Review of international
survey methods”. In: ATRF 2011 ­ 34th Australasian Transport Research Forum Septem­
ber, pp. 1–15.
Auld, Joshua et al. (2009). “An automated GPS­based prompted recall survey with learn­
ing algorithms”. In: Transportation Letters 1.1, pp. 59–79. ISSN: 19427875. DOI: 10.
3328/TL.2009.01.01.59-79.
Benevolo, Clara, Renata Paola Dameri, and Beatrice D’Auria (2016). “Smart Mobility in
Smart City”. In: Empowering Organizations. Ed. by Teresina Torre, Alessio Maria Brac­
cini, and Riccardo Spinelli. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 13–28. ISBN:
978­3­319­23784­8.
Safi, Hamid et al. (2017). “An empirical comparison of four technology­mediated travel
survey methods”. In: Journal of Traffic and Transportation Engineering (English Edition)
4.1, pp. 80–87. ISSN: 20957564. DOI: 10.1016/j.jtte.2015.12.003. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jtte.2015.12.003.
Swann, Natalie and Peter Stopher (2008). “Evaluation of a GPS survey by means of fo­
cus groups”. In: Transportation Research Board 87th Annual MeetingTransportation
Research Board.
Zhao, Fang et al. (2015). “Exploratory analysis of a smartphone­based travel survey in
Singapore”. In: Transportation Research Record 2494.March, pp. 45–56. ISSN: 03611981.
DOI: 10.3141/2494-06.
Gong, Hongmian et al. (2012). “A GPS/GIS method for travel mode detection in New
York City”. In: Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 36.2, pp. 131–139. ISSN:
01989715. DOI: 10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2011.05.003. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.compenvurbsys.2011.05.003.
Stopher, Peter R, Qingjian Jiang, Camden FitzGerald, et al. (2005). “Processing GPS data
from travel surveys”. In: 2nd international colloqium on the behavioural foundations of
integrated land­use and transportation models: frameworks, models and applications,
Toronto.
Shen, Li and Peter R. Stopher (2014). “Review of GPS Travel Survey and GPS Data­
Processing Methods”. In: Transport Reviews 34.3, pp. 316–334. ISSN: 14645327. DOI:
10.1080/01441647.2014.903530. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2014.903530.
Jackson, W. Burke and James V. Jucker (1982). “Empirical Study of Travel Time Variabil­
ity and Travel Choice Behavior.” In: Transportation Science 16.4, pp. 460–475. ISSN:
00411655. DOI: 10.1287/trsc.16.4.460.
McGuckin, N. and E. Murakami (1999). “Examining trip­chaining behavior: Comparison
of travel by men and women”. In: Transportation Research Record 1693. cited By 111,
pp. 79–85. DOI: 10.3141/1693- 12. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.
uri?eid=2- s2.0- 0033224745&doi=10.3141%5C%2f1693- 12&partnerID=40&md5=
082dbeb357f42a6a8d4d5ab6b61bcfc3.
Noland, Polak J.W. (2002). “Travel time variability: A review of theoretical and empiri­
cal issues”. In: Transport Reviews 22.1, pp. 39–54. ISSN: 01441647. DOI: 10.1080/
01441640010022456.
Murray­Tuite, Pamela M. and Hani S. Mahmassani (2003). “Model of Household Trip­
Chain Sequencing in Emergency Evacuation”. In: Transportation Research Record 1831,
pp. 21–29. ISSN: 03611981. DOI: 10.3141/1831-03.
40
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:49==
Scott, Darren M. and Sylvia Y. He (2012). “Modeling constrained destination choice for
shopping: A GIS­based, time­geographic approach”. In: Journal of Transport Geogra­
phy 23, pp. 60–71. ISSN: 09666923. DOI: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2012.03.021. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2012.03.021.
He, Sylvia Y. (2013a). “Does flexitime affect choice of departure time for morning home­
based commuting trips? Evidence from two regions in California”. In: Transport Policy
25, pp. 210–221. ISSN: 0967070X. DOI: 10.1016/j.tranpol.2012.11.003. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tranpol.2012.11.003.
– (2013b). “Will you escort your child to school? The effect of spatial and temporal con­
straints of parental employment”. In: Applied Geography 42, pp. 116–123. ISSN: 01436228.
DOI: 10.1016/j.apgeog.2013.05.003. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2013.05.
003.
He, Sylvia Y. and Lingqian Hu (2015). “Telecommuting, income, and out­of­home ac­
tivities”. In: Travel Behaviour and Society 2.3, pp. 131–147. ISSN: 2214367X. DOI:
10.1016/j.tbs.2014.12.003. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tbs.2014.12.003.
He, Sylvia Y. and Genevieve Giuliano (2017). “Factors affecting children’s journeys to
school: a joint escort­mode choice model”. In: Transportation 44.1, pp. 199–224. ISSN:
15729435. DOI: 10.1007/s11116-015-9634-x.
Wolf, Jean, Randall Guensler, and William Bachman (2001). “Elimination of the travel
diary: Experiment to derive trip purpose from Global Positioning System travel data”.
In: Transportation Research Record 1768, pp. 125–134. ISSN: 03611981. DOI: 10 .
3141/1768-15.
Stopher, Peter, Camden FitzGerald, and Jun Zhang (2008b). “Search for a global posi­
tioning system device to measure person travel”. In: Transportation Research Part C:
Emerging Technologies 16.3, pp. 350–369.
Shen, Li and Peter R Stopher (2013). “Should we change the rules for trip identification
for GPS travel records?” In: Australasian Transport Research Forum, ATRF 2013 ­ Pro­
ceedings. October, pp. 1–11.
Wang, Menglin (2014). “Understanding activity location choice with mobile phone data”.
PhD thesis.
Reddy, Sasank et al. (2010). “Using mobile phones to determine transportation modes”.
In: ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks 6.2. ISSN: 15504859. DOI: 10.1145/1689239.
1689243.
Montini, Lara et al. (2014). “Trip purpose identification from GPS tracks”. In: Transportation
Research Record 2405, pp. 16–23. ISSN: 03611981. DOI: 10.3141/2405-03.
Xiao, Guangnian, Zhicai Juan, and Chunqin Zhang (2016). “Detecting trip purposes from
smartphone­based travel surveys with artificial neural networks and particle swarm op­
timization”. In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 71, pp. 447–
463. ISSN: 0968090X. DOI: 10.1016/j.trc.2016.08.008. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.trc.2016.08.008.
– (2015). “Travel mode detection based on GPS track data and Bayesian networks”. In:
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 54, pp. 14–22. ISSN: 01989715. DOI:
10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2015.05.005. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.
2015.05.005.
Mäenpää, Heikki, Andrei Lobov, and Jose L. Martinez Lastra (2017). “Travel mode esti­
mation for multi­modal journey planner”. In: Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies 82, pp. 273–289. ISSN: 0968090X. DOI: 10.1016/j.trc.2017.06.021.
Standley, Trevor et al. (2019). “Which tasks should be learned together in multi­task learn­
ing?” In: arXiv. ISSN: 23318422. arXiv: 1905.07553.
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
41
==PAGE:50==
Sener, Ozan and Vladlen Koltun (2018). “Multi­task learning as multi­objective optimiza­
tion”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 2018­Decem.NeurIPS,
pp. 527–538. ISSN: 10495258. arXiv: 1810.04650.
Chen, Zhao et al. (2018). “GradNorm: Gradient normalization for adaptive loss balancing
in deep multitask networks”. In: 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML 2018. Vol. 2, pp. 1240–1251. ISBN: 9781510867963. arXiv: 1711.02257.
Kendall, Alex, Yarin Gal, and Roberto Cipolla (2018). “Kendall­Multi­Task­Learning­Using­
CVPR­2018­paper.pdf”. In: Cvpr, pp. 7482–7491.
Gong, Ting et al. (2019). “A Comparison of Loss Weighting Strategies for Multi task Learn­
ing in Deep Neural Networks”. In: IEEE Access 7, pp. 141627–141632. ISSN: 21693536.
DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2943604.
Tan, Chuanqi et al. (2018). “A survey on deep transfer learning”. In: Lecture Notes in Com­
puter Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics). Vol. 11141 LNCS, pp. 270–279. ISBN: 9783030014230. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-030-01424-7_27. arXiv: 1808.01974.
Yosinski, Jason et al. (2014). “How transferable are features in deep neural networks?”
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.1792.
Devlin, Jacob et al. (2018). “Bert: Pre­training of deep bidirectional transformers for lan­
guage understanding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.
Zhuang, Fuzhen et al. (2021). “A Comprehensive Survey on Transfer Learning”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the IEEE 109.1, pp. 43–76. ISSN: 15582256. DOI: 10.1109/JPROC.2020.
3004555. arXiv: 1911.02685.
Kingma, Diederik P. and Jimmy Lei Ba (2015). “Adam: A method for stochastic optimiza­
tion”. In: 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 ­ Con­
ference Track Proceedings, pp. 1–15. arXiv: 1412.6980.
Akiba, Takuya et al. (2019). “Optuna: A Next­generation Hyperparameter Optimization
Framework”. In: Proceedings of the 25rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
42
Multi­task classification of trip mode and purpose: Leveraging transfer­learning and artificial neural
networks on noisy and class­imbalanced GPS trajectories
==PAGE:51==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.man.dtu.dk
