==PAGE:1==
Explanatory environmental variables that drive the abundance
of juvenile plaice and ﬂounder (Pleuronectidae) in the west
coast fjords of Denmark
Andrea Schiavetti, S190246
Technical University of Denmark
August 1, 2021
KEYWORDS
Juvenile ﬂatﬁsh
Estuary system
Habitat suitability
Habitat association model
Generalized Linear Mixed Model
ABSTRACT
Coastal and estuarine areas are fundamental habitats for several
juvenile ﬂatﬁsh species. The understanding of the main drivers that
promote and inﬂuence the abundance of juvenile ﬂatﬁsh is crucial to
evaluate the quality and the importance of a speciﬁc area. The present
study utilizes the Habitat Association Models (HAMs) to investigate
the habitat suitability of two important recreational and commercial
ﬂatﬁsh species Pleuronectes platessa and Platichthys ﬂesus, across three
fjords of Western Denmark. During the survey, juvenile ﬂatﬁsh and en-
vironmental data were collected. The data were ﬁt using a Generalised
Linear Mixed Model (GLMM) and the predictive ability of the model
was tested using repeated random cross-validation for each species
model separately. The results demonstrated that the HAMs ﬁt the data
well.
While, the predictive abilities were considered weak, due to
large uncertainty provided by the two ﬁnal HAMs. In conclusion, the
study represents a solid base and starting point from which, through
integration of further data and knowledge, an important tool can be
developed and used for the conservation and management of marine
ecosystems and ﬁsh stocks.
1
==PAGE:2==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
Contents
Preface
2
Background
2
1
Introduction
7
2
Material and methods
8
2.1
Study area
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Data collections and species identiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Habitat association models (HAMs)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Model ﬁtting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5
Model validation and sensitivity analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Results
10
3.1
Catch data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
HAM model ﬁtting, selection and validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Discussion
12
4.1
Environmental effect on juvenile ﬂounder and plaice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Study limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.3
Future perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Conclusion
14
A
Appendix
A1
2
==PAGE:3==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
Preface
This Master’s thesis is Andrea Schiavetti’s degree
project in Aquatic Science and Technology, at the de-
partment of National Institute of Aquatic Resources DTU
Aqua. The Master’s thesis comprises 30 ects.
Supervisors have been Elliot John Brown and Mikael van
Deurs.
The knowledge I gained from my academic experience at
DTU Aqua increased even more my passion and under-
standing for every aquatic system, especially the marine
one. Moreover, I improved my modelling skills and my
ability to interpret and understand real ﬁeld data. For
this reason, I selected a project that aims to interpret
biological data of two ﬂatﬁsh species using statistical-
modelling tools.
From my personal point of view, this project is very chal-
lenging and ambitious since it combines two approaches
that I consider fundamental for my academic and per-
sonal growth.
The study is composed by two parts.
First, the back-
ground which gives a general overview on what will be
covered by the manuscript. The latter one is structured
as a scientiﬁc article, hence, composed by abstract, intro-
duction, materials and method, results, discussion, con-
clusion and references.
The ﬁnal aim is to publish this article in cooperation with
my supervisors.
Background
Danish coastal waters
Denmark is nearly totally encompassed by the sea.
The western coast by the North sea and the eastern coast
by the Baltic sea and Kattegat. Denmark’s coastline with
7,300 km of extension is considered one of the longest
coastlines in the world compared to the population of
the country (Danish Coastal Authority (2019)).
The North Sea Coast is a high energy zone and charac-
terized by tides in the southern quadrant. Kattegat and
the Baltic Sea can be seen as big estuary systems, due to
a large water exchange which produces important salin-
ity gradients between north and south of the basins.
As illustrated in The European Water Framework Direc-
tive (WFD, European Union 2000) speciﬁc hydromor-
phological and physical conditions are the main criteria
to identify the coastal water type. Salinity, tidal range,
wave exposures and substrate type are the physical con-
ditions which determine most of the biological features
of a speciﬁc coastal area.
Therefore, it is possible to
recognize coastal areas of the same type using biological
quality elements as reference (Christiansen et al. 2004).
The Danish waters included in the WFD are split into
two main types: open coastal water and estuary; high
wave, tides exposure and low runoff characterized the
ﬁrst one, while opposite conditions are found in estu-
ary systems, where low wave-tide exposure and high
freshwater runoff deﬁne these areas. This study will not
cover in detail the criteria to select and deﬁne the open
coastal waters since it will focus on estuaries. For more
details regarding the criteria for selection of open coast
water see (Christiansen et al. 2004).
Estuarine systems in Denmark
An estuary can be deﬁned as a water basin partially
enclosed, open to saline water from the ocean and to
freshwater from land and river run-off (Day et al. 1989).
Moreover, estuaries are described by speciﬁc conditions
provided by a stratiﬁcation and sensitivity index, but
also by a sluice-control (external factor). The stratiﬁ-
cation index represents the difference between bottom
and surface salinity. Consequently, the food and nutri-
ents availability in a well mixed estuary is independent
of depth, contrary to a stratiﬁed estuary where the re-
source availability is regulated by the halocline. The sen-
sitivity can be seen as the ratio between residence time
and run-off, which determines the sensitivity to freshwa-
ter inputs and hence nutrient intake. In other words, an
estuary with a large run-off and long residence time will
be more sensitive to nutrient inputs (Christiansen et al.
2004).
Two of the largest enclosed estuarine systems in Den-
mark are the Roskilde Fjord (eastern Denmark) and
the Limfjord (western Denmark) , covering 420km2 and
1,500km2 respectively.
In addition, Denmark presents
several minor estuaries, ranging from 1 to 100km2.
This Master’s project will focus on three major fjords.
Nissum Bredning (NB), (which appertains to Limfjord
complex), Nissum Fjord (NF) and Ringkøbing Fjord
(RF), located outside the Wadden Sea area and that con-
nect Denmark to the North Sea. These fjords are impor-
tant areas in terms of commercial and recreational ﬁsh-
eries, and are considered potential areas for juvenile ﬂat-
ﬁsh production supporting the North Sea stocks (Dutz
et al. 2016), although this remains untested.
NB is located in the south western quadrant of the
Limfjord complex. The fjord is connected to the North
Sea through the Thyborøn channel. The salinity levels
are generally high, due to the inﬂow of seawater from
the Thyborøn channel (Andersen et al. 2007). The max-
imum depth registered never exceeds 6 m. Oxygen de-
pletion and hypoxia events are rare, mainly due to the
combination of shallow waters and strong wind expo-
sure. Surprisingly, not even during the summer months
of 2018, when for a long period of high temperatures,
no rain events and weak winds characterized this area,
were oxygen depletion events registered.
NF covers an area of approximately 70km2 and in-
cludes 3 arms: Yder fjord, Mellem fjord and Felsted
3
==PAGE:4==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
Kog. The mean depth in the 3 basins ranges between
2.0 and 2.5 m, while is approximately 1 m in the rest
of the fjord. The northwestern area of NF is connected
to the North sea through a lock system, which regu-
lates the water level in the fjord. The entire fjord has
been recognised as Natura 2000 area, as it is a habitat
for several coastal birds and categorizes as habitat type
coastal lagoon, which is considered an endangered habi-
tat type (The Danish Environmental Protection Agency).
Unfortunately, the conditions of the fjord are dramati-
cally changing mainly because of the excessive supply of
nutrients from land, and due to large variation of salinity
over the years (Vandplaner , 2009-2015).
RF covers an area of about 300km2, the average depth
is 1.9 m and the maximum depth is 5.1 m (Håkanson &
Bryhn 2008). Despite of this, half of the fjord is only
0.5 m deep. A large inﬂow of freshwater come from the
river SKjern Å. The salinity levels are regulated by the
frequency and speed of the wind, and the inﬂow of sea
water from the opening to the North Sea. Generally, dur-
ing the summer months peaks, between 12 and 15 are
reached, while, during the rest of the year the salinity
ﬂuctuates between 6 and 15. RF, due to the wind expo-
sure and shallow waters, is generally a well oxygenated
basin (Nielsen et al. 2005).
Nursery and effective juvenile habitat concepts
The Danish estuary systems present a high primary
(Jensen et al. 1990) and secondary production (Hufnagl
et al. 2013), and support and promote many species
of ﬁsh and invertebrates. Moreover, many ﬁsh use the
estuarine habitats during one or more life stage. This
study will focus on two Pleuronectidae species ﬂounder
(Platichthys ﬂesus) and plaice (Pleuronectes platessa) in-
habit and use these waters during their juvenile phase
(between 0 and 1 year) before migrating towards deeper
waters, where they eventually will reach the adult stage
(Brown et al. 2019).
For this reason, the nearshore
marine ecosystems are often deﬁned as nursery ((Beck
et al. 2001)).
However, several studies revealed that
nurseries are not restricted to estuarine and nearshore
habitats, but can be found in open sea where impor-
tant species of ﬁsh and invertebrates are found during
the juvenile phase (Heck et al. 1995, Able et al. 1998).
The causes that can generate this variation in nursery
value are mainly biotic (larval supply, structural com-
plexity, predation, competition and food availability),
abiotic (depth, oxygen saturation and tidal regime) and
landscape related (size of the area, fragmentation, and
connectivity (Nagelkerken et al. 2015)).
In order to prevent an ambiguous use of the concept
"nursery habitat", Beck et al. (2001) provided a hypoth-
esis, which clariﬁes this concept; the authors developed
what they called "A nursery-role hypothesis" stating that:
"A habitat is a nursery for juveniles of a particular species
if its contribution per unit area to the production of in-
dividuals that recruit to adult population is greater, on
average, than production from other habitats on which
juveniles occur". This requires that the product of den-
sity, growth, survival of juveniles and eventual recruit-
ment to adult population must be higher in the nursery
habitat compared with neighbouring habitats.
The concept of nursery habitat developed by Beck
et al. (2001) helped to shed light and evaluate nurs-
ery habitats. However, in some circumstances this hy-
pothesis excludes habitats which could be considered
crucial to sustaining adult populations (Dahlgren et al.
2006). Indeed, Beck et al. (2001) through their deﬁni-
tion omit those habitats that contribute fewer individu-
als per unit area, but provide a majority of individuals
to the adult population. In order to include those habi-
tats that are not considered by the nursery habitat con-
cept,Dahlgren et al. (2006) provided another classiﬁca-
tion term called "Effective Juvenile Habitat" (EJH). Fol-
lowing the authors, an EJH can be deﬁned as " A habitat
for a particular species that contributes a greater propor-
tion of individuals to the adult population than the mean
level contributed by all habitats used by juveniles, re-
gardless of area coverage". In other words, the EJH con-
cept considers that those habitats with low densities of
juveniles but higher abundance, may support most of the
recruitment to sustain adult populations (Brown 2019).
In conclusion, the nursery habitat and EJH deﬁnitions
are very powerful tools that have to be used simultane-
ously to compliment each other for a better management
and understanding of marine resources. Mainly because
those habitats which are not considered or discarded by
Beck et al. (2001) might still have an important value
in terms of supporting adult populations and in this case
Dahlgren et al. (2006) concept helps us to take into ac-
count the whole picture.
Habitat association of ﬂounder and plaice
A great number of marine ﬁsh species have a life-
history strategy characterized by the larvae which adopt
a pelagic lifestyle while the adults occupy benthic habi-
tats. Flatﬁshes, more than any other type of ﬁsh, have
fully committed this adaptive strategy, due to an extreme
metamorphosis from a morphological, anatomical and
physical point of view (e.g.
a 90° in posture rotation
and one eye migration, moving over the top of the head)
which eventually allow the transition from the pelagic
to the benthic waters. Flatﬁsh species can perform this
transition using two different strategies: direct settle-
ment strategy (the term settlement indicates the comple-
tion of metamorphosis), e.g. ﬂatﬁsh larvae colonize the
nursery habitats during the larvae stage, or indirect set-
tlement, e.g. the colonization of the nurseries after the
settlement (therefore, the transition occurs outside the
estuary). However, it is hard to estimate which ﬂatﬁsh
4
==PAGE:5==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
species prefer one strategy to the other, because gener-
ally the settlement patterns are regulated and modiﬁed
by habitat selection and larval behaviour (Ramos et al.
2010, Sogard et al. 2001).
Speciﬁcally for plaice, Arnott & Pihl (2000) investi-
gated the settlement strategy across the Swedish Skager-
rak archipelago examining 32 nurseries. The results ex-
hibit large variations across the sampled sites, leading
us to believe that the strategy choice can be explained
by the habitat features.
Similar results are registered
for ﬂounder over the Portugues NW Atlantic coast of the
Iberian Peninsula (Amorim et al. 2016), where the main
drivers related to the ﬂounder larvae occurrence in the
estuary are sea surface temperature, chlorophyll a and
inland hydrological variables. However, it is hard to pre-
dict and conﬁrm the fate of ﬂatﬁsh larvae since most of
the studies are mainly focused on the juvenile and adult
stages (Le Pichon et al. 2014, Amara et al. 2009, Mendes
et al. 2014).
Settled larvae and/or early juvenile occupy estuary
systems for a variety of reasons, including food availabil-
ity, protection from predators, and favorable conditions
for rapid growth. Generally, the main drivers that deter-
mine the abundance and distribution during these stages
across estuaries, are abiotic and biotic factors, such as
salinity, temperature, dissolved oxygen concentration,
predator and prey abundance, as well as geographic lo-
cation.
Both species spawn during winter when the hydro-
dynamic conditions maximize the eggs dispersal (Barbut
et al. 2019). In addition, the planktonic phase has longer
duration compared to other ﬂatﬁsh species.
This is a
proxy for a prolonged period as larvae, hence, a higher
potential dispersion. Both species spawn either close to
the coast but also in deeper waters (Fox et al. 2000, Dav-
erat et al. 2012).
Adult and late juvenile ﬂatﬁsh have a wider geo-
graphical distribution than early juvenile. For this rea-
son, it is even harder to estimate which factors con-
trol the distribution of late juvenile and adult ﬂatﬁsh.
Yet, the distribution of these two categories, is assumed
to be inﬂuenced by a variety of abiotic factors which
are frequently mentioned throughout the literature(Rau
et al. 2019, Yamashita et al. 2001, Cabral et al. 2007).
Namely, temperature, depth, sediment type ﬁrst, and
oxygen concentration, salinity and turbidity secondly.
Having said that, it is hard to provide a general, de-
scription of the distribution of late juvenile and adult
ﬂatﬁsh because local and regional conditions seem to be
the main drivers controlling the distribution patterns of
these species.
Plaice and ﬂounder stock status in the North Sea re-
gion
The North Sea represents one of the most rich and
important ﬁsheries region of the world.
These wa-
ters have been heavily exploited for more than 100
years and currently, part of the ﬁsh community and
the trophic structure have dramatically changed (Probst
et al. 2013). A key study focused on these waters was
carried out by Seitz et al. (2014),summarized the most
important targeted species by commercial ﬁsheries of
ICES member countries of which Denmark is a member.
Among 59 target species, 26 were considered coastal
species because of using these region as nursery, feed-
ing, spawning or migration grounds. Moreover, 71% of
the total landings are associated to coastal species. The
authors also mentioned that plaice and ﬂounder repre-
sent an important portion of landings which can be read
as 0.99% and 0.31% which correspond to 11000 t/year.
Coastal species are heavily impacted by anthro-
pogenic activities. Indeed, 92% of the coastal species
are affected by at least one human activity (water pol-
lution, eutrophication and anoxia, invasive species, indi-
rect ﬁshing impacts and coastal structures) (Seitz et al.
2014). Juvenile plaice, provide a good example in terms
of impacts, as during this life stage, plaice are affected
by all ﬁve human related activities.
Flounder is not as economically important as plaice
and other ﬂatﬁsh. However, it is largely consumed in
Denmark and is considered one of the most popular
sport ﬁsh, because of its broad distribution in coastal
and inshore waters (Skerritt 2010). Due to its popular-
ity among Danish anglers, ﬂounder was one of the key
species used during a collaboration between local Dan-
ish ﬁshermen and DTU Aqua (Støttrup et al. 2018) to
asses the causes of the declining ﬁshing opportunities in
the coastal areas of Denmark. Flounder, as many other
"sport species", might be affected by the increasing pres-
sure by small scale and recreational ﬁsheries, especially
in the areas with restricted commercial quotas (McPhee
et al. 2002, Hyder et al. 2018).
The effect of climate change on the ocean temper-
atures and the over ﬁshing, have inﬂuenced the distri-
bution and abundance of important ﬂatﬁsh species, in-
cluding plaice and ﬂounder (Cheung & Oyinlola 2018,
van Hal et al. 2010, Hermant et al. 2010, Nicolas et al.
2011). Several surveys testiﬁed a signiﬁcant decrease
of demersal species from shallow coastal waters of the
North Sea, Kattegat and Skagerrak, Wadden Sea and
Bay of Biscay (Dutz et al. 2016). The data provided by
offshore ﬁsheries, from the same areas aforementioned,
recorded a signiﬁcant reduction of landings of adult
plaice. In addition, the southern distribution boundaries
of plaice and ﬂounder shifted towards north (Engelhard
et al. 2011, O’Farrell 2012), most likely, in relation to the
5
==PAGE:6==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
continuous increase of the temperature of the oceans.
The migration of plaice towards deeper waters (4 m per
decade) in the North Sea represents another evidence of
the effect of ocean warming on ﬂatﬁsh species (Baudron
et al. 2020). The effect of these changes in distribution
might result in a disparity between quota shares and the
real stocks abundance of these species. This will even-
tually lead to dramatic consequences on the ﬁsh stocks
and on the economy of the ﬁshing sector relying on these
species (Baudron et al. 2020). Thus, the quota shares
and the preservation of ﬂatﬁsh stocks should be adjusted
in relation to the recent ﬁndings.
Plaice and ﬂounder habitat association modelling
Ecological data (ED) often fall outside the principles
of introductory statistics. Basic statistics rely on data sets
normally distributed and for each predictor variable try
to estimate the precise effect (Bolker et al. 2009). ED
do not follow this schematic representation but, instead
of being normally distributed are often binary (Milsom
et al. 2000)(e.g. presence or absence of a species in a
certain area) and involve counts of abundance and ran-
dom effects (Harrison 2014). As just stated, ED are non-
normal distributed data and very often, many zero val-
ues can be found within a ED set. For this reason a classic
approach as ANOVA, cannot deal with ED because sta-
tistical assumptions, as homogeneity of variance across
groups, might be violated (Queen et al. 2002). More-
over, a classical ANOVA cannot handle random effects,
therefore they might be treated as ﬁxed effect misrepre-
senting their meaning (Crawley 2002). Instead of trans-
forming their data in suitable values for classic statistics,
researches started to use a different approach to deal
with ED.
Habitat association models (HAM) have been fre-
quently utilized to investigate ED in order to identify
habitat features that inﬂuence the abundance and/or
distribution of animals and to make predictions in areas
where the data is scarce or non-existent (Hijuelos et al.
2017, Brookes et al. 2013, Zucchetta et al. 2010). HAMs
depend on the correlation between environmental vari-
ables and species abundance. Ideally, to a large number
of environmental variables should correspond a more
detailed response regarding the potential species distri-
bution patterns (Blach-Overgaard et al. 2010, Araujo &
Guisan 2006). However, this is rarely true, because a
large number of predictors could easily amplify the pos-
sibility to face overﬁtting and collinearity problems (Næs
& Mevik 2001).
Therefore, in order to maximize the
performance of our model and obtained the most de-
tailed results, the choice of the most suitable environ-
mental variables is determinant (Fournier et al. 2017).
This last phase often relies on the experience and abil-
ity of the users in selecting the most suitable predictors
for the model (Blach-Overgaard et al. 2010).
Several
approaches are utilized in order to describe the distribu-
tion of species, some examples are Random Forest (RF)
(Evans et al. 2011), Generalized Linear Model (Gbur
et al. 2020, Kéry et al. 2010) (GLM), Generalized Addi-
tive Model (GAM) (Guisan et al. 2007, Pearce & Ferrier
2000) and Generalized Linear Mixed Model (GLMM)
(Bolker et al. 2009, Gbur et al. 2020).
Speciﬁcally for this study, the presence of non-normal
distributed data and the inclusion of random effect led
us to select GLMM as statistical approach. GLMMs are
largely used in ecology , this particular type of statisti-
cal approach is able to deal with ED because combining
two statistical frameworks commonly proposed in eco-
logical studies. GLMM are the result of the combination
of linear mixed models (LMMs) and generalized linear
models (GLMs) (Johnson et al. 2015); the ﬁrst type in-
cludes random effect while the second is very useful to
deal with non-normal data through a link function and
different distribution families (normal, Poisson or bino-
mial) (Bolker et al. 2009).
In conclusion, the ecological value of the areas afore-
mentioned, lead us to believe that a better understand-
ing of the main factors that drive and regulate the abun-
dance of these important recreational and commercial
species, is necessary in order to have a clearer picture on
what is driving the preference of juvenile ﬂatﬁsh for spe-
ciﬁc environments. The use of a statistical tool will help
to translate those values, obtained during the sampling
campaign, into biological interactions involving species
and environmental variables. Finally, the ﬁndings ob-
tained in this study, might be used by managers aimed
at conserve and preserve the ﬁsh population and the re-
lated habitats.
6
==PAGE:7==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
1
Introduction
Coastal zones make up only 4% of the Earth’s land
surface and 11% of the oceans, yet they accommo-
date almost half of the entire human population (FAO
The State of Fisheries and Aquaculture 2020).
This
proximity to humans make coastal marine ecosystems
highly exploited accounting for 90% of the world’s catch
from commercial ﬁsheries (Barbier 2017). The preser-
vation of these zones is a crucial element as several
ﬁsh species, both offshore and coastal, depend on high
quality, coastal, nursery-habitats (Kraufvelin et al. 2018,
Nagelkerken et al. 2015) and juvenile growth areas
(Brown et al. 2018) during early life stages.
Flatﬁsh
is considered one of the most important orders of ver-
tebrates that inhabit coastal waters during one or more
life stages (Seitz 2008). Generally, juvenile ﬂatﬁsh oc-
cupy coastal shallow waters until they have reached sex-
ual maturity and are ready to recruit the adult popula-
tion (Van der Veer et al. 2000). Consequently, the qual-
ity of shallow coastal habitats are the central element
that determines and inﬂuences the amount of juveniles
reaching the adult stage (Florin et al. 2009).
North Europe represents an important coastal region
for ﬂatﬁsh which, in turn, are considered very impor-
tant for recreational and commercial ﬁsheries in Den-
mark. The adult individuals are largely distributed in the
deep waters of the North Sea , Baltic Sea and Kattegat
(van Hal et al. 2010, Jokinen et al. 2016, Able & Fodrie
2015). The spawning and larval phases occur mainly in
these waters; at ﬁrst the eggs spawned by the females
are fertilized by the males.
Once hatched the larvae,
considered planktonic, move about in the sea amongst
the current. During the planktonic phase the organism
undergoes a metamorphosis which will eventually result
in a post metamorphic juvenile. In this phase the eye
has migrated to the dorsal mid-line and the ﬁsh swims
with an eighty to ninety degree tilt. From this phase on,
the juvenile ﬂatﬁsh move from pelagic to benthic habi-
tats occupying shallow estuarine water systems (Gibson
et al. 2014).
The necessity for a successful method to identify the
main habitats and drivers for marine organisms, ﬂatﬁsh
in this case, has lead to the use of HAMs (De Raede-
maecker et al. 2012). HAMs have been largely applied to
study species’ ecological requirements, abundance and
distribution, habitat suitability and to identify the main
biotic and abiotic factors which drive the presence or ab-
sence of certain species (Ingram & Rogan 2002, Sund-
blad et al. 2009, Lewin et al. 2004, McMillan et al.
2013). HAMs have been used to investigate the main
drivers which regulate and inﬂuence the distribution of
marine species in coastal areas (Florin et al. 2009, Brown
et al. 2019, Hijuelos et al. 2017, Rozas & Minello 2015,
Lewandoski & Bishop 2018). In order to build a HAM
it is necessary to select the most appropriate modelling
approach. Generalized linear model (GLM) and gener-
alized additive models (GAMs) are commonly used in
ecological studies to count responses of organisms in re-
lation to environmental variables using discrete or con-
tinuous variables (Antúnez et al. 2017). GLMs are based
on a link function and unlike linear models allow the
presence of non linearity and non constant variance in
the data. Moreover, GLMs can handle different families
of distributions which make the GLMs more ﬂexible and
ideal to handle ecological data. GAMs are semi paramet-
ric extension of GLMs, where a smoothed function of the
explanatory variable is added in addition to a link func-
tion (Guisan et al. 2002). In addition to the previous two
models, GLMMs are largely used to analyze ecological
data. GLMMs are particularly useful because combining
the features of GLMs (different distribution families and
link function) and the linear mixed models (that include
random effects). In this way it is possible to approach
those data characterized by non normal structures and
random effects (Bolker et al. 2009).
More than the 40 % of the total exploited marine
species and 70 % of ﬁsh landings in the North-east At-
lantic are represented by marine species (invertebrates,
ﬁsh and ﬂatﬁsh) that use coastal habitats as nursery,
feeding, spawning or migration grounds (Seitz et al.
2014). The western coast of Jylland represents an im-
portant area in terms of nature, tourism and ﬁsheries.
The presence of estuary systems, dunes, cliffs, sandy
beaches and the inﬂuence of the North Sea make west-
ern Jutland an important region from an ecological point
of view, providing ecological services to the communities
living here (Feagin et al. 2015).
In order to keep relying on the ecosystem services
provided by these regions, it is crucial to maintain a
resilient, healthy and productive ecosystem. However,
coastal conservation and ﬁsh stock management have
rarely been used together in order to achieve an ecosys-
tem based management (Thrush & Dayton 2010, Pik-
itch et al. 2004). Therefore, understanding those fac-
tors that drive the abundance of ﬁsh in coastal areas can
contribute to the conservation of coastal regions and the
management of important ﬁsh species that inhabit them
(Kraufvelin et al. 2018). For this reason, the objective of
this study was to investigate the environmental variables
that affect the abundance of an important recreational
and an important commercial ﬂatﬁsh species, European
ﬂounder (Platichthys ﬂesus) and European plaice (Pleu-
ronectes platessa), respectively, during the juvenile stage
in three speciﬁc fjords on the west coast of Denmark, us-
ing the most parsimonious HAM. Thus, it will be possible
to provide important information that could be used for
an ecosystem based management, that will look both to
coastal habitat conservation and ﬁsh stock management.
Finally, the use of the most parsimonious HAM allowed
7
==PAGE:8==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
to identify the main abiotic environmental factors which
drive the presence of these two species.
2
Material and methods
2.1
Study area
Nissum Bredning (NB) is located in the southwestern
quadrant of Limfjord (Fig. 1A) . This basin is character-
ized by high, but ﬂuctuating, salinity. Thyborøn Canal
connects Limfjord and NB to the North Sea.
Oxygen
depletion and hypoxia events are infrequent mainly be-
cause of the shallow water and mixing provided by the
exposure to wind. Finally, NB is also part of a Natura
2000 area with a bird protection area and habitat area
(Støttrup et al. 2020).
Nissum fjord (NF) (Fig. 1B) covers an area of approx-
imately 70km2 of brackish water and includes 3 arms,
namely: Yder fjord, Mellem fjord and Felsted Kog. The
water levels in the sub areas range between 2.0 m to 2.5
m, while the rest of the fjord is shallower, with an av-
erage depth of 1.0 m . The main input of freshwater is
through the river Storå discharging about 1.1km2 (Con-
ley et al. 2000). The salinity gradient across the fjord
is mainly controlled by the connection to the North Sea
through Thorsminde lock, located in the northern sector
and by the presence of inlet of freshwater. During win-
ter the salinity can reach level close to zero, while during
summer peaks of 30-33 are registered, especially close to
the North Sea entrance (Skarver og ﬁsk i Ringkøbing og
Nissum Fjorde, Faglig rapport fra DMU nr. 680, 2008).
Ringkøbing fjord (RF) covers an area of about
300km2, with a coastline of 110km of length (Fig 1C). The
average depth is 1.9 m, the deepest point is registered at
5.1 m and half of RF’s depths are below 0.5 m. More than
70% of the freshwater input comes from the river Skjern
Å and the rest is received from secondary rivers. RF is
connected to the North Sea through the Hvide Sande
lock. Salinity ranges between 12 and 15, during sum-
mer months, and from to 6 to 15 during the rest of the
year. The exposure to strong winds make the fjord well
mixed, nevertheless hypoxia events might occur during
the warm periods (Støttrup et al. 2020) (Skarver og ﬁsk
i Ringkøbing og Nissum Fjorde, Faglig rapport fra DMU
nr. 680, 2008).
2.2
Data collections and species identiﬁcation
From July 19th to August 13th 2020 a survey was
undertaken of the near-shore habitats of the three large
fjords of the Danish west coast (Fig. 1). The survey con-
sisted of 106 juvenile beam trawl sites (2m beam, 5mm
stretched mesh, single tickler chain, towed at ~1 knot,
over ~100 m). Sites were sampled in clusters, which
were limited to soft-bottom types informed by sediment
data (EMODnet- Geology, 2019) and conﬁrmed with in
situ observations. Sites at each cluster were stratiﬁed
by four depth ranges (0 -1, 1 -2, 2 -3, and 3 -4 m)
where possible. Shallow (0 -1 m) sites were trawled by
hand (two people wading ahead and wide of the trawl),
while deeper sites were trawled by boat. In addition to
the trawl start and end positions, depths and times, the
physical hydrographic conditions where also sampled at
the seaﬂoor, namely; temperature (°C), salinity (practi-
cal salinity scale) and oxygen saturation. Hydrographic
sampling was undertaken using a Multi 3620 IDS hand
held meter with FDO® 925 and TetraCon® 925 probes
(WTW). All ﬂatﬁsh under 18 cm standard length were
killed using an overdose of benzocaine dissolved in aer-
ated seawater (250 mg/L) before being individually la-
belled, bagged and stored on ice. At the end of a day of
sampling, ﬁsh samples were transferred to 18 °C freezers
until laboratory processing.
The individual ﬁsh were defrosted and their standard
length and wet mass measured, and initial identiﬁcation
to the family level was made.The next step of the pro-
cess involved counting dorsal, anal and caudal ﬁn rays
in order to identify the species level. Magnifying glasses,
binocular microscopes and clicker counter were used to
perform this task. In order to avoid ambiguities, every
ﬁn ray counting was repeated three times and species
was determined according to the counts summarised in
(Haynes 2011) and corroborated by (Munk & Nielsen
2005).
2.3
Habitat association models (HAMs)
The full model (Table 1) utilized for both species, be-
fore the processes of model ﬁtting and cross-validation,
includes the variables described below.
The response
variable corresponded to the individual species abun-
dance, taking into account the zero observations as well.
The variations in effort across sites (due to changes in
sampling effort) were reported using an offset of trawled
area, the coefﬁcient of the offset (trawled area) was set
to 1, not estimated during the model ﬁtting. Because the
linear predictor is log linked to the response, trawled
area is log transformed to maintain the expected lin-
ear relationship. The explanatory variables, sea bottom
salinity, sea bottom temperature and mean depth (ob-
tained by the mean between the start depth and ﬁnal
depth during the sampling for each observation) were
included as ﬁxed effects used to model the response vari-
able. Oxygen saturation, despite measured in the ﬁeld,
was not included due to a high correlation with the rest
of the explanatory variables mentioned above and be-
cause most the observations had a value above 90% sat-
uration. Therefore, the ﬁsh abundance is unlikely to be
limited by the oxygen saturation. Similarly, the distance
between sampling sites and the entrance to the fjord was
considered but not included in the full model since it
presented a very high correlation with the rest of the en-
8
==PAGE:9==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
vironmental variables. Together with the ﬁxed effects
listed above, a random effect was incorporated into the
model using a spatial exponential covariance structure
(Kristensen 2019) which relies on a posfactor that can
be classiﬁed as a numeric value obtained by the com-
bination of latitude and longitude at the start positions
and nested within another term (fjord in this case). This
speciﬁc posfactor value contains a combination of infor-
mation that glmmTMB uses to calculate the spatial auto-
correlation considering every point indipendetly in each
study area (three different fjords in this case).
2.4
Model ﬁtting
As indicated by Bolker et al. (2009), the GLMMs are
more suitable to ecological data and relationships anal-
ysis, and the data can assume many families of proba-
bility distributions. In this study, Poisson distribution,
zero inﬂated Poisson distribution, zero-inﬂated Poisson
distribution with a single zero inﬂation parameter (zi-
formula 1), truncated Poisson, negative binomial dis-
tribution type I (linear parameterization) and negative
binomial distribution type II (quadratic parameteriza-
tion), were applied as model assumptions respectively.
The ﬁtted models were evaluated using the standardised
residuals calculated using the package DHARMa (Har-
tig 2021) and interrogated for the appropriate ﬁts us-
ing QQ-plots and residual against predicted plots. A vi-
sual inspection of QQ plots and residuals against pre-
dicted plots guided to the selection of the best distri-
bution family. Once the most appropriate response dis-
tribution was selected, drop-1 model selection was car-
ried out using the corrected Akaike information criterion
(AICc) where ∆AICc of six was used as selection limit.
The "corrected" form of the AIC is appropriate because
the sample size of this study is not orders of magnitude
larger than the number of parameters estimated in our
models (Cavanaugh 1997).
2.5
Model validation and sensitivity analysis
The penultimate models, chosen via the aforemen-
tioned selection criteria, were validated using the whole
data set, from where 10% of the data were retained ran-
domly and used as "test data" and the remaining 90%
used as "training data", this process was carried out for
50 times, obtaining different training and test data sets.
Then, the model is reﬁtted to the training data in order
to predict the test data (which are novel data for the
model). Bias, root mean squared error (RMSE), mean
absolute error (MAE) and the coefﬁcient of determina-
tion between predicted and observed values (Rsq), were
utilized to estimate the predictive power of the models
and to select the ﬁnal model, for each species.
In addition, sensitivity analysis was carried out keep-
ing all the variables in the model ﬁxed except one, then
predicting across that range.
The examined variables
were depth and salinity. Furthermore, in order to sim-
ulate the environmental conditions in the three fjords,
the prediction at varying salinity was performed for four
different depths and the prediction at varying depth was
performed at four different salinity, keeping the remain-
ing variables always ﬁxed.
The entire data were analyzed using the statisti-
cal software R (RStudio Team 2021).
The package
glmmTMB (Brooks et al. 2017) was used for models ﬁt-
ting. The correct distribution (KS test), dispersion, out-
liers and visual inspection of QQplots and residuals plots
were carried out using DHARMa package (Hartig 2019).
The models have been validated using the components
of the package caret (Kuhn et al. 2020). Finally the ﬁg-
ures are produced using the package ggplot2 (Wickham
et al. 2016).
9
==PAGE:10==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
Fig. 1: Top panel: Location of the study areas within Denmark. A: Nissum Bredning. B: Nissum Fjord. C: Ringkøbing
Fjord. The black circles (⃝) represent the sampling sites.
Model
Term
(Fish abundance) ~
Response variable
Depth +
Explanatory variable
Salinity +
Explanatory variable
Temperature +
Explanatory variable
exp(posfactor + 0| Fjord) +
Random effect
offset(log(TrawlDist)
Lat-Lon effect
Table 1: Full habitat association model (HAM) referring to both species. In the study the ﬁsh abundance term is replaced
by the abundance of plaice (in the plaice model) and abundance of ﬂounder (in the ﬂounder model).
3
Results
3.1
Catch data
Flounder and plaice were caught in all of the three
fjords. Speciﬁcally, ﬂounder were recorded in 23 sites
and plaice in 75 sites out of a total of 106 samples. A
total of 64 ﬂounder and 824 plaice were captured. A to-
tal of 3 ﬂounder and 364 plaice were caught in NB (54
sites), 45 ﬂounder and 342 plaice were caught in NF (23
sites), ﬁnally 16 ﬂounder and 118 plaice were caught in
RF (29 sites).
Both species displayed unimodal length distributions
in the length range expected for young-of-the-year ﬁsh,
therefore, they were classiﬁed as year zero (y0) (which
represent the ﬁrst year of life of the organism (Brown
et al. 2019)) . Respectively, the mean and standard de-
10
==PAGE:11==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
viation were 63.3 and ±14.09 for ﬂounder and 57.7 and
±11.97 for plaice.
The relationships between the abundance and envi-
ronmental variables are shown in Fig. 2. Plaice are dis-
tributed across the range temperature going from 14 to
21 ◦C partially segregated into two thermal groups, go-
ing from 14 to 16◦C and from 20 to 21◦C (Fig. 2A). As
illustrated in Figs. 2B. and 2C. plaice are mainly dis-
tributed at salinity between 20 and 30 and at depth be-
tween 0.5 and 3.5 m. Flounder are distributed between
16 ◦C and 21 ◦C (Fig 2D). Flounder were mainly found at
salinity between 0 and 20 (Fig. 2E). Flounder is mainly
observed between 0.5 and 1.5 m and between 2.5 and 4
m, only 3 observations are registered between 1.5 to 2.5
m (Fig. 2F).
3.2
HAM model ﬁtting, selection and validation
The data were best represented, for both species, by a
zero-inﬂated Poisson distribution with a single zero inﬂa-
tion parameter. The QQ plot for plaice (Fig. A1) showed
a light, non-signiﬁcant, underdispersion in our model
which indicates that the model has over-estimated er-
rors and hence is conservative in reporting uncertainty.
The residuals against predicted (Fig. A1) exhibited the
residuals randomly distributed therefore not signiﬁcant
problems were identiﬁed. In addition two outliers were
detected, which are very likely related to two observa-
tions where the number of plaice is very high. Specif-
ically for ﬂounder model, a minor, non signiﬁcant in-
dication of model overdispersion was observed and the
residuals are randomly distributed (Fig. A2). Figs A1.
and A2. can be found in the appendix.
Two penultimate models, for each species, were se-
lected during the model ﬁtting phase using the ∆AICc
selection limit of six (Richards 2008). For both species,
a penultimate model was represented by the full model
(Table 1) and the second one by the full model without
temperature.
Fig. 2: Raw data analysis of ﬂounder and plaice in the three study areas in relation to recorded temperature, salinity and
depth. A, B and C: plaice abundance in relation to the relative environmental variables. D, E and F ﬂounder abundance in
relation to the relative environmental variables.
During the model ﬁtting stage, referring to the best
bias, MAE, RMSE and Rsq, a ﬁnal model was selected
both for plaice and ﬂounder. For ﬂounder the environ-
mental variable temperature was discarded from the full
model (Table 1) while it was kept for plaice model. The
model validation showed relatively weak bias for both
species, yet evident outliers are highlighted in both mod-
els (Fig.
3).
A larger MAE was registered for plaice
model, on the other hand, a larger RMSE was detected
for ﬂounder model. In both cases, the Rsq was ranging
across nearly all possible values in both models, indicat-
ing that the models are unreliable for predicting.
On
the other hand, the Rsq registered for the observed data
for both species were close to one, indicating that the
11
==PAGE:12==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
models ﬁt the data very well. The sensitivity analysis
(Fig. 4) revealed that at four different salinities across
a range of depths plaice showed a higher abundance at
low depth and high salinity (Fig. 4A), while, Fig. 4B.
illustrates that ﬂounder are more abundant in deeper
and less saline water.
These trends are conﬁrmed in
Figs. 4C. and 4D., where the relationship deep water-
low salinity (ﬂounder) and shallow water-high salinity
(plaice) is maintained. Despite these results, this sensi-
tivity analysis relies on the same models selected during
the model validation process, therefore, the uncertainty
of these predictions is quite high.
Fig. 3: Model validation metrics for the selected Habitat Association Models for ﬂounder and plaice. The box and whiskers
are obtained by 50 iterations of random repeated sub-sampling, training on 90% of the data set and testing on the
remaining 10%.
The metric regarding the model trained and calculated on the whole data set is represented by the
asterisks (∗).
4
Discussion
The principal purpose of the work described in this
study was to use HAMs to determine whether observed
patterns of abundance of y0 group of juvenile plaice and
ﬂounder could be related to possible gradients of salin-
ity, depth and temperature.
The observations carried
out during a single growing season combined to the re-
sults provided by the HAMs, revealed that ﬂounder pre-
fer deep and low saline waters while plaice are mainly
distributed at salinity levels> 15 with a preference for
shallow waters.
The raw data investigation indicated
an even distribution of both species across mainly all
recorded temperature. Surprisingly, the effect of temper-
ature was retained only for plaice. In addition, the pre-
dictive ability of the HAMs were tested using repeated
random cross-validation. The large spread of Rsq across
almost all values indicated that the models are poor at
predicting novel data. These results indicate that sam-
ple sizes are too small, consequently, when only 90% of
data utilized to predict novel data, the models start to
lose power leading to incorrect predictions. Similar low
predictive power of HAMs is also registered by other au-
thors (Brown et al. 2019, Turner et al. 2016, Brookes
et al. 2013, Vasconcelos et al. 2013). Despite a negative
outcome in terms of predictions, the models ﬁtted the
data very well, showing very good patterns except for
very little deviation in the residuals, suggesting that the
integration of data might help to increase the predictive
power of the HAM.
4.1
Environmental effect on juvenile ﬂounder and
plaice
The distribution of juvenile ﬂounder across coastal
and estuarine systems is often related to very low saline
and shallow waters (<5 m) (Brown et al. 2019, Souza
et al. 2013, Morais et al. 2011, Freitas et al. 2009, Thiel
et al. 2003). The ﬁndings of this study conﬁrmed the
negative response of ﬂounder to high saline waters, but
also detected a preference to an increased depth, in
contradiction to most of the literature.
However, the
abundance of ﬂounder in deeper water could be re-
lated to higher prey abundance.
Indeed, it is widely
accepted that juvenile ﬂatﬁsh are mainly generalist and
12
==PAGE:13==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
opportunistic species (Vinagre et al. 2005, Mendes et al.
2014), therefore this might indicate a greater prey abun-
dance in deep waters. The relationship ﬂounder salinity
is conﬁrmed in the raw data investigation, in fact the
highest abundance of ﬂounder were registered in the
low saline waters of NF. A medium abundance and a
very low abundance was registered respectively in RF
and NB, which present higher salinity levels. Although,
many evidence in literature conﬁrmed the strong asso-
ciation of juvenile ﬂounder to brackish water, the report
issued by Støttrup et al. (2020) indicated a higher pres-
ence of juvenile and adult ﬂounder in the more saline
RF, while very low values were registered in NF. This in-
dication led to believe that the presence of external vari-
ables, that were not included in the study, might drive
the abundance of ﬂounder in these areas. This is testi-
ﬁed by O’Neill et al. (2011) that demonstrated how dif-
ferences in salinity, ranging from 0 to 30, did not affect
the somatic growth of ﬂounder indicating a large toler-
ance to salinity variations (Zucchetta et al. 2010, Florin
et al. 2009, Andersen et al. 2005). Therefore, a deeper
understanding of the environmental and anthropogenic
variables role is crucial to obtain more information about
the distribution of juvenile ﬂounder across these areas
and to comprehend the fate of juvenile ﬂounder in NF,
which, apparently, is not contributing to the recruitment
in adult population.
The highest abundance of plaice were registered both
in NF and NB, these results at ﬁrst appear counterintu-
itive, because the study areas showed opposite values of
salinity, while the depth ranges are quite similar. How-
ever, looking closer at the results for NF can be seen that
320 out of 342 observed plaice were sampled in waters
with salinity >15. This result suggested that this species
prefers saline waters ranging between 15 up to 30/35.
This intrinsic preference of plaice is mentioned by other
authors in previous works (Power et al. 2000, Augley
et al. 2008). However, it is hard to establishin which
direction salinity acts due to the conﬂicting results pro-
vided in literature. The results of the sensitivity analysis
in relation to depth-abundance revealed a slightly nega-
tive effect. Looking at the distribution of juvenile plaice
across the three fjords, it was clear that this species was
evenly distributed across most of all recorded depths.
This characteristic is called "length-depth relationship"
and is quite common in juvenile plaice y0, as suggested
by (Gibson et al. 2011). Still, as shown in Fig. A3. (ap-
pendix), this relationship is not conﬁrmed in this study,
suggesting that the preferred depth is probably inﬂu-
enced by the other factors. The possible causes may be
related to the intraspeciﬁc competition and prey abun-
dance, which might drive part of the population to other
areas where maximum growth can be achieved (Ciotti
2012). Although included in the HAM, the role of tem-
perature in relation to plaice distribution was quite com-
plex to fully comprehend, especially due to the segrega-
tion of plaice across different temperature ranges (Fig
2A). This could be an artifact introduced by the sam-
pling strategy across the three study areas with differ-
ent predominant conditions in combination to important
factors such as prey abundance, predators and intraspe-
ciﬁc competition which were not included in the study.
However, the inclusion of random effect in the model
should account for these patterns in variation (differ-
ent predominant conditions) in responses across fjords.
A similar context is found for salinity, where 3 main
groups are found at 3 distinct ranges of salinity. A valu-
able hypothesis with respect to these ﬁndings is the high
motile ability of plaice that can migrate in relation to the
needs and settle in the best area in terms of maximum
growth and low predation (Gibson et al. 2002). How-
ever, the migration patterns can frequently change due
to complex relationships created by the combination of
food availability, high growth rate and low predation,
which generate a complex concatenated effect between
the habitat and organisms. Kneib (1994) indicated that
the migration of juvenile ﬁsh from a favorable area, can
be partially associated to higher food depletion (due to a
higher growth rate) and an increasing interspeciﬁc and
intraspeciﬁc competition. For these reasons, part of the
population is pushed towards deeper waters, where prey
abundance is higher in relation to an increased predation
risk.
This study indicated that salinity appeared to be the
main driver, within the considered factors of ﬁsh abun-
dance, matching other studies results. However, depth
and temperature seem to be highly connected to other
factors, therefore the integration of external factors,
such as predation and prey abundance, might help to
obtain better results. In conclusion, the results provided
by HAM for plaice and ﬂounder are partially consistent
with others ﬁndings, contributing to the knowledge of
how these species respond to the environment in differ-
ent contexts.
4.2
Study limitations
The current study showed a model that ﬁt the data
well and the results were partially consistent with others
ﬁndings. The main limitation was related to the predic-
tive ability of the two HAMs related to different factors
that were not considered or available. First of all, the
low sample sizes (especially for ﬂounder), had a strong
inﬂuence on the prediction outputs, driving the test data
outside the data-space that was used to re-ﬁt/train the
models in cross-validation, resulting in a low predictive
power. In addition, the temporal snapshot was limited
to one single year observation during the end of grow-
ing season of juvenile ﬂatﬁsh. The absence of further
temporal data increased the level of uncertainty during
interpretation of the distribution patterns of the juvenile
13
==PAGE:14==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
ﬂatﬁsh in response to the environmental variables. Fur-
thermore, non-fjord coastal systems were not considered
in this study, excluding the possibility to compare the in-
vestigated study areas with different habitats. Finally,
the absence of biological factors, such as competition,
growth and predation, limited the interpretation of ﬁsh
abundance only in relation to a reduced number of phys-
ical variables.
4.3
Future perspectives
As aforementioned, the combination of a richer
dataset (in terms of space, time and number of ﬁsh) and
the integration of a second modelling approach centered
on the relationship habitat-ﬁsh growth, could help to
produce solid results. In addition, a future study should
include the temporal, physical and biotic factors that
regulate and drive the distribution and supply of larvae
from the spawning areas to juvenile habitats (Hufnagl
et al. 2013).
This factor could partially help to esti-
mate the contribution of several spawning populations
to juvenile habitats and increment our knowledge about
the connectivity in the life cycle of ﬂatﬁsh. In order to
achieve this, it will be necessary to better understand the
connectivity of juvenile habitats to adult habitats and the
related recruitment.
However, the connectivity across
life cycles is considered a very complex topic, which re-
quires a lot time and effort to be solved (Lacroix et al.
2013).
The current model, in combination to a richer dataset
and solid results, could be utilized to produce maps
of juvenile ﬁsh habitat suitability across Danish fjords.
Consequently, these maps can be applied for ﬁsheries
and ecosystem management, securing from intense ﬁsh-
eries, pollution and other human activities those regions
that represent the main hotspot for the development
of juvenile ﬂatﬁsh and recruitment to adult population.
This approach, combined to a conservation plan of the
spawning grounds, could eventually lead to an increase
of the ﬂatﬁsh stock.
Fig. 4: Sensitivity analysis was carried out keeping all the variables ﬁxed except depth and salinity. A (plaice), B(ﬂounder):
variation in depth at 4 different ﬁxed salinity. C (plaice), D (ﬂounder): variation in salinity at 4 different ﬁxed depth.
5
Conclusion
The environmental variables that inﬂuence the abun-
dance of juvenile ﬂounder and plaice across the three
fjords were identiﬁed in this study. The models demon-
strated to ﬁt very well the investigated data, however,
the need to consider further environmental variables is
an aspect to take into account in order to obtain stronger
predictive results. Despite the weak predictive ability,
the current study represents a very reliable starting point
from which a more complex and accurate model can be
build up, especially using a more abundant dataset in
terms of ﬁsh observations and physical and biological
drivers.
14
==PAGE:15==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
References
Able, K. W., Fahay, M. P. et al. (1998), The ﬁrst year in the
life of estuarine ﬁshes in the Middle Atlantic Bight, Vol.
342, Rutgers University Press New Brunswick, New
Jersey.
Able, K. W. & Fodrie, F. J. (2015), ‘Distribution and dy-
namics of habitat use by juvenile and adult ﬂatﬁshes’,
Flatﬁsh: Biology and Exploitation pp. 242–282.
Amara, R., Selleslagh, J., Billon, G. & Minier, C. (2009),
‘Growth and condition of 0-group european ﬂoun-
der, platichthys ﬂesus as indicator of estuarine habitat
quality’, Hydrobiologia 627(1), 87–98.
Amorim, E., Ramos, S., Elliott, M. & Bordalo, A. A.
(2016), ‘Immigration and early life stages recruitment
of the european ﬂounder (platichthys ﬂesus) to an es-
tuarine nursery: The inﬂuence of environmental fac-
tors’, Journal of Sea Research 107, 56–66.
Andersen, A., Schou, J., Sparrevohn, C. R., Nicolajsen,
H. & Støttrup, J. (2005), ‘The quality of release habi-
tat for reared juvenile ﬂounder, platichthys ﬂesus, with
respect to salinity and depth’, Fisheries Management
and Ecology 12(3), 211–219.
Andersen, S. M., Teilmann, J., Harders, P. B., Hansen,
E. H. & Hjøllund, D. (2007), ‘Diet of harbour seals and
great cormorants in limfjord, denmark: interspeciﬁc
competition and interaction with ﬁshery’, ICES Jour-
nal of Marine Science 64(6), 1235–1245.
Antúnez, P., Hernández-Díaz, J. C., Wehenkel, C. &
Clark-Tapia, R. (2017), ‘Generalized models: an ap-
plication to identify environmental variables that sig-
niﬁcantly affect the abundance of three tree species’,
Forests 8(3), 59.
Araujo, M. B. & Guisan, A. (2006), ‘Five (or so) chal-
lenges for species distribution modelling’, Journal of
biogeography 33(10), 1677–1688.
Arnott, S. A. & Pihl, L. (2000), ‘Selection of prey size and
prey species by 1-group cod gadus morhua: effects of
satiation level and prey handling times’, Marine Ecol-
ogy Progress Series 198, 225–238.
Augley, J., Huxham, M., Fernandes, T. F. & Lyndon, A. R.
(2008), ‘The effect of salinity on growth and weight
loss of juvenile plaice (pleuronectes platessa, l): An
experimental test’, Journal of Sea Research 60(4), 292–
296.
Barbier, E. B. (2017), ‘Marine ecosystem services’, Cur-
rent Biology 27(11), R507–R510.
Barbut, L., Groot Crego, C., Delerue-Ricard, S., Van-
damme, S., Volckaert, F. A. & Lacroix, G. (2019), ‘How
larval traits of six ﬂatﬁsh species impact connectivity’,
Limnology and Oceanography 64(3), 1150–1171.
Baudron, A. R., Brunel, T., Blanchet, M.-A., Hidalgo,
M., Chust, G., Brown, E. J., Kleisner, K. M., Mil-
lar, C., MacKenzie, B. R., Nikolioudakis, N. et al.
(2020), ‘Changing ﬁsh distributions challenge the ef-
fective management of european ﬁsheries’, Ecography
43(4), 494–505.
Beck, M. W., Heck, K. L., Able, K. W., Childers, D. L.,
Eggleston, D. B., Gillanders, B. M., Halpern, B., Hays,
C. G., Hoshino, K., Minello, T. J. et al. (2001), ‘The
identiﬁcation, conservation, and management of estu-
arine and marine nurseries for ﬁsh and invertebrates:
a better understanding of the habitats that serve as
nurseries for marine species and the factors that cre-
ate site-speciﬁc variability in nursery quality will im-
prove conservation and management of these areas’,
Bioscience 51(8), 633–641.
Blach-Overgaard, A., Svenning, J.-C., Dransﬁeld, J.,
Greve, M. & Balslev, H. (2010), ‘Determinants of palm
species distributions across africa: the relative roles of
climate, non-climatic environmental factors, and spa-
tial constraints’, Ecography 33(2), 380–391.
Bolker, B. M., Brooks, M. E., Clark, C. J., Geange, S. W.,
Poulsen, J. R., Stevens, M. H. H. & White, J.-S. S.
(2009), ‘Generalized linear mixed models: a practi-
cal guide for ecology and evolution’, Trends in ecology
& evolution 24(3), 127–135.
Brookes, K. L., Bailey, H. & Thompson, P. M. (2013),
‘Predictions from harbor porpoise habitat association
models are conﬁrmed by long-term passive acoustic
monitoring’, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 134(3), 2523–2533.
Brooks, M. E., Kristensen, K., Van Benthem, K. J., Mag-
nusson, A., Berg, C. W., Nielsen, A., Skaug, H. J.,
Machler, M. & Bolker, B. M. (2017), ‘glmmtmb bal-
ances speed and ﬂexibility among packages for zero-
inﬂated generalized linear mixed modeling’, The R
journal 9(2), 378–400.
Brown, E. J. (2019), ‘Habitat suitability for juvenile ﬂat-
ﬁsh of the inner danish waters: Section for ecosystem
based marine management’.
Brown, E. J., Kokkalis, A. & Støttrup, J. G. (2019),
‘Juvenile ﬁsh habitat across the inner danish waters:
habitat association models and habitat growth mod-
els for european plaice, ﬂounder and common sole in-
formed by a targeted survey’, Journal of Sea Research
155, 101795.
15
==PAGE:16==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
Brown,
E. J.,
Vasconcelos,
R. P.,
Wennhage,
H.,
Bergström, U., Støttrup, J. G., van de Wolfshaar, K.,
Millisenda, G., Colloca, F. & Le Pape, O. (2018), ‘Con-
ﬂicts in the coastal zone: human impacts on commer-
cially important ﬁsh species utilizing coastal habitat’,
ICES Journal of Marine Science 75(4), 1203–1213.
Cabral, H. N., Vasconcelos, R., Vinagre, C., França, S.,
Fonseca, V., Maia, A., Reis-Santos, P., Lopes, M., Ru-
ano, M., Campos, J. et al. (2007), ‘Relative importance
of estuarine ﬂatﬁsh nurseries along the portuguese
coast’, Journal of Sea Research 57(2-3), 209–217.
Cavanaugh, J. E. (1997), ‘Unifying the derivations for
the akaike and corrected akaike information criteria’,
Statistics & Probability Letters 33(2), 201–208.
Cheung, W. W. & Oyinlola, M. A. (2018), ‘Vulnerability
of ﬂatﬁsh and their ﬁsheries to climate change’, Jour-
nal of Sea Research 140, 1–10.
Christiansen, T., Andersen, J. & Jensen, J. B. (2004),
‘Deﬁning a typology for danish coastal waters’, Baltic
Sea Typology. Coastline Reports 4, 49–54.
Ciotti, B. J. (2012), Patterns and causes of spatial and
temporal variation in growth rates of early juvenile
European plaice Pleuronectes platessa, University of
Delaware.
Conley, D. J., Kaas, H., Møhlenberg, F., Rasmussen, B. &
Windolf, J. (2000), ‘Characteristics of danish estuar-
ies’, Estuaries 23(6), 820–837.
Crawley, M. J. (2002), Statistical computingan introduc-
tion to data analysis using S-Plus, number 001.6424
C73.
Dahlgren, C. P., Kellison, G. T., Adams, A. J., Gillanders,
B. M., Kendall, M. S., Layman, C. A., Ley, J. A., Nagelk-
erken, I. & Serafy, J. E. (2006), ‘Marine nurseries and
effective juvenile habitats: concepts and applications’,
Marine Ecology Progress Series 312, 291–295.
Danish Coastal Authority, D. C. A. (2019), ‘Welcome to
the danish coastal authority’.
Daverat, F., Morais, P., Dias, E., Babaluk, J., Martin,
J., Eon, M., Fablet, R., Pécheyran, C. & Antunes, C.
(2012), ‘Plasticity of european ﬂounder life history
patterns discloses alternatives to catadromy’, Marine
Ecology Progress Series 465, 267–280.
Day, J., Hall, C. & Kemp, W. (1989), ‘Yañez–arancibia, a.
estuarine ecology’.
De Raedemaecker, F., Brophy, D., O’Connor, I. & Com-
erford, S. (2012), ‘Habitat characteristics promoting
high density and condition of juvenile ﬂatﬁsh at nurs-
ery grounds on the west coast of ireland’, Journal of
Sea Research 73, 7–17.
Dutz, J., Støttrup, J. G., Stenberg, C. & Munk, P. (2016),
‘Recent trends in the abundance of plaice pleuronectes
platessa and cod gadus morhua in shallow coastal wa-
ters of the northeastern atlantic continental shelf–a re-
view’, Marine Biology Research 12(8), 785–796.
Engelhard, G. H., Pinnegar, J. K., Kell, L. T. & Rijns-
dorp, A. D. (2011), ‘Nine decades of north sea sole
and plaice distribution’, ICES Journal of Marine Science
68(6), 1090–1104.
Evans, J. S., Murphy, M. A., Holden, Z. A. & Cush-
man, S. A. (2011), Modeling species distribution and
change using random forest, in ‘Predictive species
and habitat modeling in landscape ecology’, Springer,
pp. 139–159.
Feagin, R. A., Figlus, J., Zinnert, J. C., Sigren, J.,
Martínez, M. L., Silva, R., Smith, W. K., Cox, D.,
Young, D. R. & Carter, G. (2015), ‘Going with the
ﬂow or against the grain?
the promise of vegeta-
tion for protecting beaches, dunes, and barrier islands
from erosion’, Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment
13(4), 203–210.
Florin, A.-B., Sundblad, G. & Bergström, U. (2009),
‘Characterisation of juvenile ﬂatﬁsh habitats in the
baltic
sea’,
Estuarine,
Coastal
and
Shelf
Science
82(2), 294–300.
Fournier, A., Barbet-Massin, M., Rome, Q. & Courchamp,
F. (2017), ‘Predicting species distribution combining
multi-scale drivers’, Global Ecology and Conservation
12, 215–226.
Fox, C., Planque, B. & Darby, C. (2000), ‘Synchrony
in the recruitment time-series of plaice (pleuronectes
platessa l) around the united kingdom and the inﬂu-
ence of sea temperature’, Journal of Sea Research 44(1-
2), 159–168.
Freitas, V., Costa-Dias, S., Campos, J., Bio, A., Santos,
P. & Antunes, C. (2009), ‘Patterns in abundance and
distribution of juvenile ﬂounder, platichthys ﬂesus, in
minho estuary (nw iberian peninsula)’, Aquatic Ecol-
ogy 43(4), 1143–1153.
Gbur, E. E., Stroup, W. W., McCarter, K. S., Durham,
S., Young, L. J., Christman, M., West, M. & Kramer,
M. (2020), Analysis of generalized linear mixed models
in the agricultural and natural resources sciences, Vol.
156, John Wiley & Sons.
16
==PAGE:17==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
Gibson, R. N., Burrows, M. & Robb, L. (2011), ‘Field
experiments on depth selection by juvenile plaice
pleuronectes platessa’, Marine Ecology Progress Series
430, 197–205.
Gibson, R. N., Nash, R. D., Geffen, A. J. & Van der Veer,
H. W. (2014), Flatﬁshes: biology and exploitation, John
Wiley & Sons.
Gibson, R. N., Robb, L., Wennhage, H. & Burrows, M.
(2002), ‘Ontogenetic changes in depth distribution of
juvenile ﬂatﬁshes in relation to predation risk and
temperature on a shallow-water nursery ground’, Ma-
rine Ecology Progress Series 229, 233–244.
Guisan, A., Edwards Jr, T. C. & Hastie, T. (2002), ‘Gener-
alized linear and generalized additive models in stud-
ies of species distributions: setting the scene’, Ecologi-
cal modelling 157(2-3), 89–100.
Guisan, A., Graham, C. H., Elith, J., Huettmann, F. &
Group, N. S. D. M. (2007), ‘Sensitivity of predictive
species distribution models to change in grain size’,
Diversity and distributions 13(3), 332–340.
Håkanson, L. & Bryhn, A. C. (2008), ‘Goals and reme-
dial strategies for water quality and wildlife manage-
ment in a coastal lagoon—a case-study of ringkøbing
fjord, denmark’, Journal of environmental management
86(3), 498–519.
Harrison, X. A. (2014), ‘Using observation-level random
effects to model overdispersion in count data in ecol-
ogy and evolution’, PeerJ 2, e616.
Hartig, F. (2019), ‘Dharma: residual diagnostics for hi-
erarchical (multi-level/mixed) regression models’, R
package version 0.2 4.
Hartig, F. (2021), ‘Dharma: Residual diagnostics for hi-
erarchical (multi-level / mixed) regression models’. R
package version 0.4.3.
URL: http://ﬂorianhartig.github.io/DHARMa/
Haynes, P. S. (2011), ‘Biology and ecology of ﬂatﬁsh
species on west of ireland nursery grounds’.
Heck, K., Able, K., Roman, C. & Fahay, M. (1995),
‘Composition, abundance, biomass, and production of
macrofauna in a new england estuary: comparisons
among eelgrass meadows and other nursery habitats’,
Estuaries 18(2), 379–389.
Hermant, M., Lobry, J., Bonhommeau, S., Poulard, J.-C.
& Le Pape, O. (2010), ‘Impact of warming on abun-
dance and occurrence of ﬂatﬁsh populations in the
bay of biscay (france)’, Journal of Sea Research 64(1-
2), 45–53.
Hijuelos, A. C., Sable, S. E., O’Connell, A. M., Geaghan,
J. P., Lindquist, D. C. & White, E. D. (2017), ‘Applica-
tion of species distribution models to identify estuar-
ine hot spots for juvenile nekton’, Estuaries and coasts
40(4), 1183–1194.
Hufnagl, M., Peck, M. A., Nash, R. D., Pohlmann, T. & Ri-
jnsdorp, A. D. (2013), ‘Changes in potential north sea
spawning grounds of plaice (pleuronectes platessa l.)
based on early life stage connectivity to nursery habi-
tats’, Journal of Sea Research 84, 26–39.
Hyder, K., Weltersbach, M. S., Armstrong, M., Ferter, K.,
Townhill, B., Ahvonen, A., Arlinghaus, R., Baikov, A.,
Bellanger, M., Birzaks, J. et al. (2018), ‘Recreational
sea ﬁshing in europe in a global context—participation
rates, ﬁshing effort, expenditure, and implications
for monitoring and assessment’, Fish and Fisheries
19(2), 225–243.
Ingram, S. N. & Rogan, E. (2002), ‘Identifying criti-
cal areas and habitat preferences of bottlenose dol-
phins tursiops truncatus’, Marine Ecology Progress Se-
ries 244, 247–255.
Jensen, L. M., Sand-Jensen, K., Marcher, S. & Hansen,
M. (1990), ‘Plankton community respiration along a
nutrient gradient in a shallow danish estuary.’, Marine
ecology progress series. Oldendorf 61(1), 75–85.
Johnson, P. C., Barry, S. J., Ferguson, H. M. & Müller, P.
(2015), ‘Power analysis for generalized linear mixed
models in ecology and evolution’, Methods in ecology
and evolution 6(2), 133–142.
Jokinen, H., Wennhage, H., Ollus, V., Aro, E. & Norkko,
A. (2016), ‘Juvenile ﬂatﬁsh in the northern baltic
sea—long-term decline and potential links to habitat
characteristics’, Journal of Sea Research 107, 67–75.
Kéry, M., Gardner, B. & Monnerat, C. (2010), ‘Pre-
dicting species distributions from checklist data us-
ing site-occupancy models’, Journal of Biogeography
37(10), 1851–1862.
Kneib, R. (1994), ‘Spatial pattern, spatial scale, and
feeding in ﬁshes.’.
Kraufvelin, P., Pekcan-Hekim, Z., Bergström, U., Florin,
A.-B., Lehikoinen, A., Mattila, J., Arula, T., Briekmane,
L., Brown, E. J., Celmer, Z. et al. (2018), ‘Essential
coastal habitats for ﬁsh in the baltic sea’, Estuarine,
Coastal and Shelf Science 204, 14–30.
Kristensen,
K.
(2019),
‘Covariance
structures
with
glmmtmb’,
URL:
https://cran.
rproject.
org/web/packages/glmmTMB/vignettes/covstruct.
html .
17
==PAGE:18==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
Kuhn, M., Wing, J., Weston, S., Williams, A., Keefer,
C., Engelhardt, A., Cooper, T., Mayer, Z., Kenkel, B.,
Team, R. C. et al. (2020), ‘Package ‘caret”, The R Jour-
nal p. 223.
Lacroix, G., Maes, G. E., Bolle, L. J. & Volckaert, F. A.
(2013), ‘Modelling dispersal dynamics of the early life
stages of a marine ﬂatﬁsh (solea solea l.)’, Journal of
Sea Research 84, 13–25.
Le Pichon, C., Trancart, T., Lambert, P., Daverat, F. &
Rochard, E. (2014), ‘Summer habitat use and move-
ments of late juvenile european ﬂounder (platichthys
ﬂesus) in tidal freshwaters: results from an acoustic
telemetry study’, Journal of experimental marine biol-
ogy and ecology 461, 441–448.
Lewandoski, S. & Bishop, M. A. (2018), ‘Distribution
of juvenile paciﬁc herring relative to environmental
and geospatial factors in prince william sound, alaska’,
Deep Sea Research Part II: Topical Studies in Oceanog-
raphy 147, 98–107.
Lewin, W.-C., Okun, N. & Mehner, T. (2004), ‘Determi-
nants of the distribution of juvenile ﬁsh in the littoral
area of a shallow lake’, Freshwater Biology 49(4), 410–
424.
McMillan, J. R., Liermann, M. C., Starr, J., Pess, G. R. &
Augerot, X. (2013), ‘Using a stream network census of
ﬁsh and habitat to assess models of juvenile salmonid
distribution’, Transactions of the American Fisheries So-
ciety 142(4), 942–956.
McPhee, D. P., Leadbitter, D. & Skilleter, G. A. (2002),
‘Swallowing the bait: is recreational ﬁshing in aus-
tralia ecologically sustainable?’, Paciﬁc conservation bi-
ology 8(1), 40–51.
Mendes, C., Ramos, S. & Bordalo, A. (2014), ‘Feeding
ecology of juvenile ﬂounder platichthys ﬂesus in an es-
tuarine nursery habitat: Inﬂuence of prey–predator in-
teractions’, Journal of experimental marine biology and
ecology 461, 458–468.
Milsom, T., Langton, S., Parkin, W., Peel, S., Bishop,
J., Hart, J. & Moore, N. (2000), ‘Habitat models of
bird species’ distribution: an aid to the management
of coastal grazing marshes’, Journal of Applied Ecology
37(5), 706–727.
Morais,
P.,
Dias,
E.,
Babaluk,
J. & Antunes,
C.
(2011), ‘The migration patterns of the european ﬂoun-
der platichthys ﬂesus (linnaeus, 1758)(pleuronecti-
dae, pisces) at the southern limit of its distribution
range: ecological implications and ﬁshery manage-
ment’, Journal of Sea Research 65(2), 235–246.
Munk, P. & Nielsen, J. G. (2005), Eggs and larvae of North
Sea ﬁshes, Biofolia.
Næs, T. & Mevik, B.-H. (2001), ‘Understanding the
collinearity problem in regression and discriminant
analysis’, Journal of Chemometrics: A Journal of the
Chemometrics Society 15(4), 413–426.
Nagelkerken, I., Sheaves, M., Baker, R. & Connolly, R. M.
(2015), ‘The seascape nursery: a novel spatial ap-
proach to identify and manage nurseries for coastal
marine fauna’, Fish and Fisheries 16(2), 362–371.
Nicolas, D., Chaalali, A., Drouineau, H., Lobry, J., Uri-
arte, A., Borja, A. & Boët, P. (2011), ‘Impact of global
warming on european tidal estuaries: some evidence
of northward migration of estuarine ﬁsh species’, Re-
gional Environmental Change 11(3), 639–649.
Nielsen, M. H., Rasmussen, B. & Gertz, F. (2005), ‘A
simple model for water level and stratiﬁcation in
ringkøbing fjord, a shallow, artiﬁcial estuary’, Estuar-
ine, Coastal and Shelf Science 63(1-2), 235–248.
O’Farrell, D. P. (2012), Range expansion of European
ﬂounder Platichthys ﬂesus to Icelandic waters:
a
threat to native salmonids?, PhD thesis.
O’Neill, B., De Raedemaecker, F., McGrath, D. & Brophy,
D. (2011), ‘An experimental investigation of salinity
effects on growth, development and condition in the
european ﬂounder (platichthys ﬂesus. l.)’, Journal of
Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 410, 39–44.
Pearce, J. & Ferrier, S. (2000), ‘An evaluation of alterna-
tive algorithms for ﬁtting species distribution models
using logistic regression’, Ecological modelling 128(2-
3), 127–147.
Pikitch, E. K., Santora, C., Babcock, E. A., Bakun, A.,
Bonﬁl, R., Conover, D. O., Dayton, P., Doukakis, P.,
Fluharty, D., Heneman, B. et al. (2004), ‘Ecosystem-
based ﬁshery management’.
Power, M., Attrill, M. & Thomas, R. (2000), ‘Environ-
mental factors and interactions affecting the temporal
abundance of juvenile ﬂatﬁsh in the thames estuary’,
Journal of Sea Research 43(2), 135–149.
Probst, W. N., Kloppmann, M. & Kraus, G. (2013),
‘Indicator-based status assessment of commercial ﬁsh
species in the north sea according to the eu marine
strategy framework directive (msfd)’, ICES Journal of
Marine Science 70(3), 694–706.
Queen, J. P., Quinn, G. P. & Keough, M. J. (2002), Exper-
imental design and data analysis for biologists, Cam-
bridge university press.
18
==PAGE:19==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
Ramos, S., Ré, P. & Bordalo, A. A. (2010), ‘Recruit-
ment of ﬂatﬁsh species to an estuarine nursery habitat
(lima estuary, nw iberian peninsula)’, Journal of Sea
Research 64(4), 473–486.
Rau, A., Lewin, W.-C., Zettler, M. L., Gogina, M. & von
Dorrien, C. (2019), ‘Abiotic and biotic drivers of ﬂat-
ﬁsh abundance within distinct demersal ﬁsh assem-
blages in a brackish ecosystem (western baltic sea)’,
Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 220, 38–47.
Richards, S. A. (2008), ‘Dealing with overdispersed
count data in applied ecology’, Journal of Applied Ecol-
ogy 45(1), 218–227.
Rozas, L. P. & Minello, T. J. (2015), ‘Small-scale nekton
density and growth patterns across a saltmarsh land-
scape in barataria bay, louisiana’, Estuaries and coasts
38(6), 2000–2018.
RStudio Team (2021), RStudio: Integrated Development
Environment for R, RStudio, PBC, Boston, MA.
URL: http://www.rstudio.com/
Seitz, A. C. (2008), ‘Robin n. gibson (ed.), ﬂatﬁshes: bi-
ology and exploitation’, Reviews in Fish Biology and
Fisheries 18(2), 249.
Seitz, R. D., Wennhage, H., Bergström, U., Lipcius, R. N.
& Ysebaert, T. (2014), ‘Ecological value of coastal
habitats for commercially and ecologically important
species’, ICES Journal of Marine Science 71(3), 648–
665.
Skerritt, D. (2010), ‘A review of the european ﬂounder
platichthys ﬂesus–biology, life history and trends in
population’, Eastern Sea Fisheries Joint Committee Re-
port. Newcastle University .
Sogard, S. M., Able, K. W. & Hagan, S. M. (2001), ‘Long-
term assessment of settlement and growth of juvenile
winter ﬂounder (pseudopleuronectes americanus) in
new jersey estuaries’, Journal of Sea Research 45(3-
4), 189–204.
Souza, A. T., Dias, E., Nogueira, A., Campos, J.,
Marques, J. C. & Martins, I. (2013), ‘Population
ecology and habitat preferences of juvenile ﬂounder
platichthys ﬂesus (actinopterygii: Pleuronectidae) in
a temperate estuary’, Journal of Sea Research 79, 60–
69.
Støttrup, J. G., Kokkalis, A., Brown, E. J., Olsen, J.,
Andersen, S. K. & Pedersen, E. M. (2018), ‘Har-
vesting geo-spatial data on coastal ﬁsh assemblages
through coordinated citizen science’, Fisheries Re-
search 208, 86–96.
Støttrup, J. G., Kokkalis, A., Christoffersen, M., Pedersen,
E. M., Pedersen, M. I. & Olsen, J. (2020), Registrering
af fangster med standardredskaber i de danske kystom-
råder: Nøgleﬁskerrapport for 2017-2019, DTU Aqua.
Sundblad, G., Härmä, M., Lappalainen, A., Urho, L. &
Bergström, U. (2009), ‘Transferability of predictive
ﬁsh distribution models in two coastal systems’, Estu-
arine, coastal and shelf science 83(1), 90–96.
Thiel, R., Cabral, H. & Costa, M. (2003), ‘Composition,
temporal changes and ecological guild classiﬁcation of
the ichthyofaunas of large european estuaries–a com-
parison between the tagus (portugal) and the elbe
(germany)’, Journal of Applied Ichthyology 19(5), 330–
342.
Thrush, S. F. & Dayton, P. K. (2010), ‘What can ecology
contribute to ecosystem-based management?’, Annual
Review of Marine Science 2, 419–441.
Turner, S. M., Manderson, J. P., Richardson, D. E., Hoey,
J. J. & Hare, J. A. (2016), ‘Using habitat association
models to predict alewife and blueback herring marine
distributions and overlap with atlantic herring and at-
lantic mackerel: can incidental catches be reduced?’,
ICES Journal of Marine Science 73(7), 1912–1924.
Van der Veer, H. W., Berghahn, R., Miller, J. M. & Ri-
jnsdorp, A. D. (2000), ‘Recruitment in ﬂatﬁsh, with
special emphasis on north atlantic species: progress
made by the ﬂatﬁsh symposia’, ICES Journal of Marine
Science 57(2), 202–215.
van Hal, R., Smits, K. & Rijnsdorp, A. D. (2010), ‘How
climate warming impacts the distribution and abun-
dance of two small ﬂatﬁsh species in the north sea’,
Journal of Sea Research 64(1-2), 76–84.
Vasconcelos, R., Le Pape, O., Costa, M. & Cabral, H.
(2013), ‘Predicting estuarine use patterns of juvenile
ﬁsh with generalized linear models’, Estuarine, Coastal
and Shelf Science 120, 64–74.
Vinagre, C., França, S., Costa, M. & Cabral, H. (2005),
‘Niche overlap between juvenile ﬂatﬁshes, platichthys
ﬂesus and solea solea, in a southern european estuary
and adjacent coastal waters’, Journal of Applied Ichthy-
ology 21(2), 114–120.
Wickham, H., Chang, W. & Wickham, M. H. (2016),
‘Package ‘ggplot2”, Create Elegant Data Visualisations
Using the Grammar of Graphics. Version 2(1), 1–189.
Yamashita, Y., Tanaka, M. & Miller, J. M. (2001), ‘Eco-
physiology of juvenile ﬂatﬁsh in nursery grounds’,
Journal of Sea Research 45(3-4), 205–218.
Zucchetta, M., Franco, A., Torricelli, P. & Franzoi,
P. (2010), ‘Habitat distribution model for european
ﬂounder juveniles in the venice lagoon’, Journal of Sea
Research 64(1-2), 133–144.
19
==PAGE:20==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
A
Appendix
Fig. A.1: Plaice ﬁnal model QQ plot and residuals for Poisson distribution with a single zero inﬂation parameter.
Fig. A.2: Flounder ﬁnal model QQ plot and residuals for Poisson distribution with a single zero inﬂation parameter.
A1
==PAGE:21==
Andrea Schiavetti
DTU Aqua, Master Thesis, 2021
Fig. A.3: Plaice length against depth registered across all sites.
A2
